CASSANDRA: THE FAMED ROMANCE: THE Whole Work: In Five PARTS; Written
Originally in FRENCH, AND Now Elegantly rendered into ENGLISH.

By a PERSON of QUALITY.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, at the Princes Arms in St. Paul's Church
yard; William Bentley, and Thomas Heath, in Covent Garden. M.DC.LII.

TO THE READER.
SInce this Translation of Cassandra was put into the Press, the beginning of
another by an accurat Pen has been published to the world; which had given a
stop to this, if it had still been in the power of him that did it, though a
good part of it was already Printed, and though many took upon them to affirm
that the other was not likely to proceed any farther. This comes not therefore
to stand in competition with it, but to acknowledge that as it appeared first,
so it deserves the priority in all things else; yet they in whom it has raised
an appetite (which are I dare say, as many as have tasted it) may perchance be
contented to make up their meal with a dish of the same meat, though not so
skilfully seasoned, nor so neatly garnished. He that is taken with the charms
of a Mistress presented to his first embraces in the costly ornaments of her
Bridal attire, will not certainly reject her conversation afterward in an
ordinary dress of meaner apparel. Such is this of CASSANDRA here, hastily and
carelessly thrown about her, which makes her suffer a greater disguise by
uncourtly Language, then by the plain Country garments wherein she was so long
concealed; The former it is confessed has decked her with an habit befitting
both her person and quality, this is only suitable to her name and her
misfortunes. Her ten years story is so artificially contrived, and with such
exact decorum, that the truth whereon it is grounded, appears the greater
fiction; yet neither can the strange success of the Grecian Conqueror, the
fatal destruction of the Persian Monarchy, the deplorable end of unfortunate
Darius, the afflicted estate of his Royal Family in exile and Captivity, the
easy compliance of his sub^ects with the prevailing Party, nor any other
passage in it seem improbable to us, whose eyes have in as short a space, been
witnesses of such Revolutions, as hardly any Romance, but sure no History can
parallel. She has been received in France, and many Forain Countries with too
general an esteem to confine her self within the limits of a particular
address to any single person now in England; therefore she presents her self
to all that understood her not before, who having need of an Interpreter, may
perhaps excuse the errors of an ill one. Let others delight themselves with the
beauties of the Original, as viewing some curious piece of Tapistry, rarely
designed in lively colors and perfect Symetry; without prying into the
imperfections of the wrong side, where the left handed Figures lose the
gracefulness of their natural Postures, and where the multitude of thrumbs and
knots makes the work course, and the story it self but barely discernable.

THE AUTHOR TO CALISTA.
YOu have been pleased Calista, to command that my last follies should be made
public, and have given that to the diversion of the world, which I had
destined only to your own; sure it is a want of goodness, to a person that never
wanted zeal or respect to you, and who by this last proof of his obedience has
testified with what submission, he has resigned himself unto your will. If you
had esteemed this Work, you would have been more covetous of it; and if you had
considered it, as the issue of his fancy, who will never be but yours, you
would not thus have lavished it to the people, who truly have no share in the
intention, that made me write it. Besides, the success of it is very uncertain
amongst them, and one shall very hardly find charity enough there to hope for
the pardon of many faults, which you have favorably excused, or which self-love
made you not perceive in a thing that was so absolutely your own. But why do I
pretend you should take any care of the reputation of my writings, since you
never took any for the conservation of my life, and that you have shown your
self more sensible of the fortunes of strangers, the^ of one which has ever been
of your own making? I have seen you as it were marry your self to the passions
of my Hero, and enter into his thoughts with such marks of tenderness and
pity, as my real sufferings have never been able to draw from you. I have seen
your fair eyes, those eyes which the Court has, and does yet look upon with
dazzling and idolatry; shed tears at the recital of some adventures, which are
either feigned or which happened very long ago; and I a thousand times have at
your feet vainly implored that pity, which you so easily granted to imaginary
miseries; Yes, at your feet have I a thousand times set forth the violence of
my passion in terms both more express, and more touching then those that did
so mollify you; and (if I may be permitted to speak of my self in such a
phrase) I have not been less eloquent in declaring my real thoughts to you,
then in describing those of a Macedonian, or a Scythian; and yet the same
words, which represented their mishaps to you, with so much success, have not
found in you the least sense of my own misfortunes. You will tell me I have
painted these illustrious persons in colors which give them a very
advantageous splendour, and that their admirable qualities made you embrace
their interests, by an esteem which introduced that compassion into your heart.
I know, Calista, that J am very far from that sublime degree of perfection,
which makes my Heroes worthy of your tears and friendship; but if they have
advantages above me, by the qualities of their minds and bodies, and by the
glorious marks of their births and actions, I have above them the glory of
having served Calista, nay of having served her with respects and adoratio^s
worthy of her, and of having through the whole course of my passion,
acknowledged with so much justice the disproportion there is between Calista
and my self, that in that proud elevation of my soul, Calista, as severe as she
is, could not condemn thoughts so full of zeal and submission, nor find
occasion to threaten me with a fall which probably I ought to have apprehended.
Behold my glory, Calista, behold my advantages and if you pardon a little
presumption in him, who has had so much as to lift up his eyes to you, I will
take the liberty to tell you, that by my manner of expressing it in another, you
may judge virtue is not unknown to me* and that many only fail to practice it,
because fortune refuses the^ the occasions; of this you see an example
remarkable enough in 2 Princes, whom I make to live in the same times, and
whose fortunes are very different, though their births and virtues be equal;
and that by your own judgment the most unhappy, and the least known has very
considerable advantages above the other, who was most favored by the
destinies, and who by the help of fortune, has in his glory, eclipsed the fame
of all that followed him, as well as of all that went before him. You being
generous as you are, have taken the part of the more unfortunate, and if I dare
reproach you with it, after your own confession of it to me, you have been even
in love with him; blush not, Calista, he was a Prince worthy of you, and
without doubt the fates should either have reserved him till your Age, or made
you to be born in his. But the Gods took care that his reputation should come
unspotted to our times, and that his life should be preserved from a blemish,
which you would infallibly have cast upon it; his Princess deserved his
affection wholly, and only you were capable, to withdraw him from that
fidelity, which renders him so dear to you, and so recommendable to all the
world.

Hitherto J have spoken to you, as to Calista, that is to say, as to the
Sovereign Mistress of my life, and of all my thoughts; now I speak to you, as
to her that is to read this unworthy Piece again, and to whom J consecrate it
with my whole heart, and all my affections. Besides the consideration of my
love, J find in you all that can be desired in persons, to whom works of this
nature are dedicated. Your quality is most eminent, too eminent for my hopes;
it has hitherto made a part of my misfortunes, and it is that which has made me
pass many years in your service, without any other advantage then that of
being yours* and of being sufferd by you. An interessed lover (or rather a
captive, who is your idolater) might seem suspected in praising the beauties
both of your mind and body; but the eyes and hearts of all France take my
part, and bear witness generally, that you are the most accomplished of all
creatures. It Is therefore under your protection, that Cassandra coms to put her
self; she boasts of having some resemblance of you, and it is with you alone, she
seeks for sanctuary in the various changes of her fortune; you will not know
her a great while, though she keep you very constant company, and will wonder
to see her give the name to adventures in which she seems to have no part at
all; but you shall see her come out of the dark, when you hope least for it,
and will know her again, by lineaments that are not common; You in her face may
find a part of that which shines most visiblie in yours, and in her carriage
you shall neither see any thing that can injure you, nor any thing you can
disavow. If this First Part divert you, the design I have to mind nothing but
you alone, as the mark of all my thoughts, will oblige me to give you quickly
the continuation of her Story; and though I be neither Doctor, nor a passablie
Learned man, I am certain you will never inspire me with mean, low fancies,
since you have inspired into me the resolution of living, and dying, Your, etc.

CASSANDRA. The First Part.
BOOK I.
UPON the Bank of the River Euphrates, not many Furlongs from Babylon, two
Strangers alighted from their Horses, under certain Trees, whose thick
Leavinesse cast a very pleasing shade: He of the two, who by the richness of
his arms, and the respect the other bore him, appeared to be the Master;
unbuckled his Headpiece, and lying down upon the Grass, buried all the
disquiets that troubled him, in a profound sleep: But scarce had he tasted the
first sweetness of it, when by the other that accompanied him, and by a sudden
noise, interrupted in his repose, presently starting up, he took his Horse and
Cask again, and advanced upon the side of the great Highway, whence he was
newly come, to know the cause of it. He soon perceived it by the first object
that presented it self, which was a Combat of two Cavaliers, in whom, he
instantly observed all the marks of an unusual valor, and great animosity:
their Javelins shivered in an hundred pieces under their Horses feet, had given
place unto their swords, which they made use of with so much rage, and so
little caution, that he quickly judged the design of assaulting each other,
had in those two Warriors, quite extinguished the care of defending
themselves; and that to each, the loss of his Enemies life was much more dear,
or much more important, then the conservation of his own. Till then the fight
had balanced in the uncertainty of any advantage on either side, when one of
them, whose black arms and plume of the same color, witnessed the grief that
was in his heart, rushed upon his Enemy with such fury, that by giving him two
or three great wounds, he made him doubt of his safety; and pressing him the
more eagerly as he found him grow weaker, had then without question finished a
Combat, which seemed too tedious to his revenge, if he who was the Spectatour
of it, had not cast himself between to part them, praying them to hold their
hands, with the most civil entreaties he thought he could use in that
encounter. But he in the black arms, whom powerful reasons made to desire the
destruction of his Enemy, and whom the hope of Victory had already made
confident, cried out with a terrible voice; Whosoever thou art, unless thou be
a Protector of crimes, and an Enemy to virtue, and unless thou will draw upon
thy self the hatred both of the Gods and Men, oppose not the destruction of the
most cruel and disloyal man that ever was. And seeing him persist in the
design of parting them, he charged him with so much readiness and force, that
the Stranger, finding by those first strokes the valor of that new Enemy, lost
the care of another safety, to think of his own preservation. True it is, that
the shame of offending a man, who had already an Enemy to fight with, made him
for some time stand upon the defensive, but seeing himself pressed with so much
vehemence by one whom he had not injured; and seeing the danger into which he
did precipitate himself, by sparing an adversary against whom he stood in need
of all his force, he had almost forgotten all considerations; when he saw ten
or twelve Horse men, who coming up to them full speed, and having known the
Combatants, took the part of him that was wounded, whom his weakness had
already made but a looker on; and two of the Company having drawn him aside, to
carry him off to Babylon, all the rest fell furiously upon him in the black
arms, killing his Horse with seven or eight wounds, which made him fall upon
the place. Yet was he not so surprised, but that he dis-engaged himself from
his Stirrups, and having an invincible courage, he set himself in a readiness
to dispute his life generously against them: When the Stranger seeing the
inequality of the Combat, and detesting such excessive odds; cried out, Thy
incivility shall not make me fail to do what becomes me; and since thou have
more valor then courtesy, I for thee will hazard that life, which thou
would have taken from me: And at these words, falling in with a mavelous
readiness among those that were newly come, he laid two of them at his feet,
with the two first blows he made, and gave him that was dismounted leisure to
leap upon one of their Horses, and to come up to him, which he did with a
wonderful dexterity. This Cavalier seeing himself relieved with so much
generosity, by a man whom he had used so ill, at first admired his virtue; but
he became an Idolater of it, when he saw him lay two more of his Enemies dead
upon the ground, and charge the rest with so mavelous a courage, that he
seemed not to have any need of his help to defeat them all; but in conclusion,
having vigorously seconded him, and he that accompanied the Stranger being
joined to his Master, they fought all three with so great valor, and so good
fortune, that in a short time, they forced those who could escape, to seek
their safety in the speed of their Horses.

They staid upon the place without pursuing them, and the Stranger feeling his
Horse fail, by reason of some wound he had received, forsook his back, and
leapt lightly to the ground; which he whom he had relieved perceiving, he
alighted also from his, and putting up the Beaver of his Helmet, went to salute
him with a civility very different from his first reception. The Stranger was
much taken with his graceful fashion, and when he saw his face at a nearer
distance, observed something in it that was not utterly unknown to him; so
forgetting all manner of enmity, he embraced him with a very great affection.
Generous Stranger, (said the other) or rather the most virtuous of men, if my
life were dear to me, I should be obliged to him that had preserved it; but how
great occasion soever I have to hate it, and what design soever I had to lose
it, I will forget both to satisfy my engagment, and will no more dispose of a
thing, which you have so gloriously acquired, and which I ought to employ only
for your service. My love to your virtue ties me much more strongly then the
obligation I have to you, and the knowledge you have given me of it, makes me
hope for pardon of an incivility, to which my just anger and despair
transported me; You will without doubt excuse it, when you shall hear the
cause, and will judge you have not more obliged me by mine own safety, then you
have injured me in that of the Traitor Perdiccas. The Stanger by this
Discourse, and by the name of Perdiccas, judging of that persons quality,
repaid his civilities with interest, and striving to recall the old Idea's,
which time had almost blotted out of his remembrance, he showed so much the
desire he had to know him, that the other marking his impatience: I should be
ungrateful; (said he) If I should hide his name, whose heart shall never be
hidden from you; I am the unfortunate Lysimachus, and now more unfortunate then
ever, since I am constrained to prolong my miserable life, to acquit my self of
what I owe to you. This name of Lysimachus did absolutely open the Strangers
eyes, and looking intentively upon him, he no longer doubted but that he was
the same, whom he had seen appear with so much splendour in the Court of
Alexander the Great; he praised the Gods in his heart, for the opportunity they
had given him, to serve so virtuous a person; but not being willing to discover
himself yet unto him, he only replied, The name of Lysimachus is so famous, as
that of Alexander the Great is hardly more, and one must never have heard speak
of his life to be ignoran^ of the wonders of yours: I did not expect unto my
self so glorious an event of this encounter, and the satisfaction I receive
thereby, makes me forget the rest of my misfortunes. Lysimachus answered so
obliging words, with all the kindness that can be used in a most perfect
friendship; whereof having made reciprocal promises, and confirming their
promises with an infinite number of protestations, Lysimachus considered that
Stranger with the same admiration, he had done during the fight, and truly his
astonishment was not without a very just cause, since the Gods had endowed him
with all the most excellent parts, that can render a person accomplished; his
face was marvellously handsome, and through a beauty which had nothing of
effeminate, one might observe something so Martial, so sparkling, and so
Majestic, as might in all hearts make an impression of Love, Fear, and Respect
at once; his stature exceeded that of the tallest men, but the proportion of it
was wonderfully exact, and all the motions of his body had a grace, and liberty
that was nothing common: his age seemed to be then about six or seven and
twenty; the Sun-burn and toil of a long Journey, had a little taken off the
luster of his former beauty, and the length and negligence of his hair,
sufficiently testified the little care he had to preserve himself: But this
forgetfulness of a thing, which the importance of his affairs, and the
accidents of his life had constrained him to despise, hindered not Lysimachus
from observing so fair remainders of beauty, that he considered him as an
extraordinary person, and the union of so many excellent parts, added to the
obligation he had to him, imprinted so true an affection in his heart, as
neither length of years, nor the accidents which after happened to them, were
ever able to diminish. All things contributed unto it, they were alike in age;
the graceful behavior of Lysimachus yielded little to that of the Stranger,
and if an exceeding deep sadness had not something impaired it, there would
have been but little difference. The Stranger who by common fame, and by what
he had seen of it himself, was already well acquainted with his virtue,
discovering with more heedfulnesse, as with more interest then before, so many
rare qualities in him, conceived a very high esteem of his person, and made no
resistance against the powerful inclination which he felt take birth in him,
toward a man so considerable. After their astonishment was past over, and that
they were come to themselves out of the ecstasy, in which the merits of each
other had mutually held them: the Stranger beginning to speak, If I feared not
(said he to Lysimachus) that my curiosity might displease you, I would ask the
cause of that hatred, which you show you bear against Perdiccas, since knowing
the reputation of you both, I never heard but that you lived in the Court of
Alexander the Great, with very good correspondence; and I but now saw you so
furiously exasperated against him, that the knowledge I have of your
moderation, makes me judge, so great an animosity is caused by greater reasons.
Here it was that Lysimachus constancy vanished, and his tears over-flowed with
so much violence, that it was a long time before he could answer him; and
as soon as he was able to speak again, lifting his eyes up mournfully to Heaven:
Great Gods, (cried he) since you have permitted me to survive the greatest
perfection you ever sent into this world; If you destine me not to revenge
those illustrious persons, add not one minute to this life, which I do but
languish in with horror, and which I can draw out no longer without shame. You
oblige me, (continued he with an infinite number of sighs) by believing I have
so much moderation, as not to precipitate my self with so blind a rage, into a
Combat, the cause whereof were slight or common; but I have so weighty an one,
that it is impossible for me to express the least part of it, and it shall
satisfy me to tell you, I prosecute that infamous Perdiccas, as the murderer,
or rather the butcherer of the fair Queen Statyra, Widow to Alexander the
Great, and of the Divine Parisatis her sister, Widow to her dear Hephestion. He
accompanied these few words, with so many tears, and doleful lamentations, that
any other heart except that Strangers, would thereby have been touched with
compassion but his being too sensible for it self, to take heed to the actions
of Lysimachus, he only changed color twice or thrice, and looking upon him
with a wandering eye, Lysimachus, (said he) I conjure you by all the Gods, tell
me true, is Queen Statira dead? It is but too true, she is, (replied
Lysimachus) and if you will hear her end in a few words: know, That as soon as
Alexander the Great, was dead, pittylesse Roxana, who during the life of that
great Prince, had been racked with an horrible jealousy of her, giving Order
that that poor Princess (who was at that time retired with her sister to the
Castle of Calcis) should not be advertised of his death: wrote Letters in the
name of the deceased King, earnestly persuading her to come with speed to
Babylon and to give a better foundation to that treachery, she, and Perdiccas
sealed them with the Ring which that great Prince as he lay dying had put into
the hands of that disloyal man, and which he should have made use of to another
purpose, then the destruction of that which was dearest to him. Thus were these
innocent Ladies drawn into the snare, which had been set for them, and that
very day this cruel Woman, and that horrible Murderer, causing them to be
killed in their presence, cast their fair bodies into two Wells, and covered
them with a great number of stones. The Stranger staid not for the end of this
Relation, but lifting up his eyes to Heaven, Great Gods, (said he, (with a tone
quite different from his ordinary voice) to day it is that I receive the
effects of your promises, and that after a ten years persecution, you grant me
the Repose you have made me hope for in these Countries. And at these words,
after having looked upon Lysimachus, with an affrighted countenance, in which
death was already naturally painted, he drew his Sword, and setting the point
of it where the defect of his arms gave way, threw himself so suddenly upon it,
that neither Lysimachus, nor his Squire, had means to hinder him, and fell at
their feet weltring in a River of his own blood.

At the noise he made in his fall, and at the cry of his Squire, Lysimachus
start out of the deep study, in which the renewing of his griefs had buried
him, and helping the Squire, who in despair of that accident, dis-armed his
poor Master with cries of a man besides himself, mingled his tears with his,
with so great testimony of grief, as made him judge, that his friendship was
already exceeding strong, even in its very birth. When he was unarmed, they
found he breathed still, and observing his wound as heedfully, as the trouble
they were in could permit, they saw that the Sword (not having seconded his
design) had slipped along his Cuirasse, and had only passed slanting between
his Ribs: this making them conceive some hope of him, caused them to apply all
their cares to stanch his blood, the loss whereof had already so weakened him,
that he had almost no longer strength to move: while they were busied about
this necssary office, the Gods sent them two good honest Country men, who
seeing them in that condition, and touched with compassion at so sad an object,
charitably offered them their assistance. Lysimachus praised the Heavens for
that happy chance, and having learnt from them that their House was in a Wood,
not above two or three hundred paces distant from thence, he resolved to have
him carried thither, not thinking in that change of affairs, that there was
much safety for either of them in Babylon: the Squire moreover having told him,
there were powerful considerations, which should hinder his Master from retiring
thither. This Resolution being taken, they put him upon the Squires Horse, he
getting behind to keep him up, and holding an Handkerchief upon his wound, they
began to follow the two Country men. But before they arrived at their House,
Lysimachus speaking to the elder: Friend, (said he) it is for thy good fortune,
if thou know how to make use of it, that the Gods have sent the^ this
encounter; and if thou keep that fidelity to us, which we hope for from
thee, thou have found an opportunity to enrich thy self. The Country man having
made protestations to him in very handsome Language, Lysimachus saw he was an
understanding man, and having also drawn Oaths from him, that he would not
betray them, he commanded him to go to Babylon, and having furnished him with
all the directions and instructions that were necessary, he gave him also two
Rings, bidding him keep one of them for himself, and give the other as a token
to his Physician Amyntas, and some others of his servants, which he thought he
should need in that retirement, with Order to come presently along with him,
and bring all things that were needful for them, as well to cure the Stranger,
as to defray their expenses. Then having above all things enjoined him secrecy,
he sent him away, and being guided by the other, who was his son, came at last
to the House, where presently they were well received by Women they found
there, who being informed by the young man concerning the liberality and
quality of their guests, offered themselves to serve them with all manner of
diligence; after which, they laid the poor wounded Stranger in bed, loss of
blood having already deprived him of all strength and knowledge.

Though Lysimachus misfortunes gave him matter of despair, and that being not
to be comforted himself, he was little capable of comforting or helping
another; yet his obligation to that Stranger, and the interest he believed he
had in a mischief which he had occasioned by his Discourse, added to the
inclinations he had already toward him, and to the incitements of his own
virtue, made him resolve not to forsake him, but to suspend the remembrance of
his own unhappiness, that he might give him assistance to the uttermost.
Afterward coming to make reflection upon the cause of that accident, and how
powerfully the Stranger was concerned in the death of the Princesses of Persia,
he could not divine the cause of it, and expecting till he could learn it
either from himself, or from his Squire, he confirmed himself in the friendship
he had vowed to him, guessing by the proofs he had, that they were companions
in fortune, and that the despair of both proceeded from the same cause.

He was taken off from these thoughts by the return of old Polemon, and his
Physician Amyntas, accompanied with some Chirurgians, and other servants he
^had sent for; Lysimachus praised their diligence, and having recommended the
Strangers health to his Physician, would needs see his wound searched: as soon
as Amyntas had proab'd it, he judged it not dangerous, and assuring his Master
of his recovery, filled him with as much joy as he was capable to receive. The
faithful Squire was quite transported at it, and waited upon those that
endeavored his Masters cure, with such a zeal as did visibly demonstrate his
affection toward him. The Chirurgians having applied the first remedies to his
wound, poured a certain cordial into his mouth, which within a while after made
him recover his spirits, sight, and knowledge. When he was come out of his
swoun, he fixed his eyes upon the first objects that presented themselves unto
him, and seeing himself encompassed by Lysimachus his Squire, and those that
had dressed him, he for some time considered both the place where he was, and
the persons that were present; and doubting of the truth of the business, he
turned his eyes slowly upon those that were nearest him, and having looked upon
them awhile without speaking, Cruel Enemies, (said he, with a weak voice) what
I have done to you, that you should persecute me with so much inhumanity? Then
feeling the pain of his wound, he laid his hands upon it, and would have torn
off the Swathes, if Lysimachus knowing his design had not seized upon them,
easily holding him by reason of his weakness. The Stranger seeing himself
hindered from his Resolution, looked first upon him with a threatening eye, and
then finding himself too weak to execute what he had in his mind, he strove to
move him by some tears, which ran down his cheeks, and might have obtained any
thing else of him, except what they demanded. Lysimachus nearly touched with
compassion, alleged all the Reasons that might dissuade him from his despair,
and seeing he vouchsafed not to hear them, and that in the end it would be
impossible to force him to live, he resolved to try if point of Honor could
work him to his own preservation. Sir, (said he, with a more resolute voice
then before) till now I believed you virtuous, but at last you force me to tell
you, you injur^ the proofs you have given of it, by a manifest unworthiness;
and I conjure you by all the Gods, (continued he) and by the memory of the
Princesses of Persia (if it be true, that you did love them) to assist me in
the revenge I must take of their deaths; desiring you to live but so long, as
to tear away the lives of their Murderers, for whom I find my self too weak
without your help: both they, and I do beg it of you, and if you be as much
concerned in their loss, as you would have it believed, know, that you cannot
die but ignominiously, if you do not at least endeavor it, as well for your
own honor, as their satisfaction: I have as much cause to die, as you can
have* and since in this extremity it is no longer time to conceal it, know,
that I would not have outlived the Princess Parisatis, if I had not believed
my self obliged to satisfy her Ghost by the blood of those that ravished her
from me. This Discourse had so much power over the mind of this desperate
Stranger, that having maturely weighed it, he was ashamed of the desire he had
before to die, without revenge, and witnessed his repentance to LYSIMACHVS by
these words. You have overcome, LYSIMACHVS, but remember the time you have
demanded, and never desire me to lengthen it: In the interim, Araxes shall tell
you the cause of my despair, and neither conceal from you the name, nor life of
the miserable companion of your misfortunes. After these words, he no longer
opposed the will of the Chirurgions, and being forbidden to speak for some few
days, LYSIMACHVS resolved to spend that time in learning the whole History of a
Life, which he judged to be full of very remarkable accidents: But because the
night was already a good way advanced, after having taken a light supper, and
recommended the hurt Stranger to those that had the care of him, he went to
bed, and till it was day rested, as much as his griefs would suffer him.

The next morning as soon as he was up, he enquired after the health of the
wounded Stranger, and being told he was asleep, he led his Squire into a
Garden, which the Master of the House kept trimmed with very great care; the
beauty whereof was extraordinary for one of his condition, being fitted with
all things that could make a place delightful: When they were come into it,
they walked a while in the shade of a pleasant Alley, and after they had taken
a few turns, LYSIMACHVS through a Hedge which parted two Walks, heard the voice
of two persons discoursing together, and having lent an ear with some
attention, he discerned that of old Polemon their Landlord, who spoke on this
manner: I am not able to clear your doubts, CASSANDRA, but time, and the abode
you will make in this place, may easily resolve them; for my part I will labor
in it all that I can possibly, and protest to you by all the Gods, I will spare
neither my endeavors, no, nor my life it self for your contentment. In the
mean time, strive to settle your mind, both from your frights and your
afflictions, and believe that CASSANDRA'S virtue is too considerable to the
Gods, to let it lie any longer under those misfortunes that persecute it.
Polemon making a stop at these words, the other with whom he talked, after two
or three sighs, which were overheard by LYSIMACHVS, was in probability ready
to make answer, when both being come to the ends of their several Allies, met
at the entry into another, which went cross them. This encounter made
Lysimachus see, that it was a Woman of very fair stature, clothed almost in a
mere Country habit, who was discoursing with Polemon; This was all he could
discern, and she who desired no witnesses of her conversation, seeing her self
surprised by that Company, turned her back to him as suddenly as well she
could, and walking hastily away, went out of the Garden at a little door that
led into an high Wood, which grew close by the wall. LYSIMACHVS in whom the
consideration of his own mishaps, had extinguished that curiosity which is
natural to mankind, sought no deeper into that adventure, nor enquired into a
secret to which he was not called; only he lifted up his eyes to Heaven, in a
reflection upon his own misfortunes, occasioned by the remembrance of another,
and taking Araxes by the hand, led him to a pleasing Fountain, upon the edge
whereof being sat down, and making him sit by him, he put him in mind of his
Masters command, and prayed him very civilly to recount unto him all the
particulars of his life. The Squire who had received such Order from his
Master, and who of himself was willing to obey him, after having bethought
himself a while, began on this manner.

THE HISTORY OF OROONDATES.
IN the Relation I am to make you Sir, you will see the true picture of the
inconstancies of Fortune, and since my Lords command, and the desire I have to
satisfy you, engage me to the recital of a life through the whole course of it
full of wonders, I will endeavor to acquit my self as well as possibly I can.
And because it were very strange, if length of time, and the variety of our
troubles, should not have made part of the accidents that make it up, escape my
memory, I will endeavor to recall to mind, the most remarkable ones: and since
I have the liberty to do it, I will discover to you things that are miraculous,
and unknown to all the rest of mankind.

Although my Masters inability to perform it himself, had not constrained him
to give this Commission to me, he would have had very great reason howsoever so
to do, since that in the miracles of his life, there have so many things passed
to his advantage and glory, that his modesty would never have suffered him to
relate them to the full. Besides, I am so well instructed in them, having been
present at the greatest part, and having learnt those from his own mouth, of
which I could not be an eyewitness, that even to the smallest
particularities, I am not less knowing in them then himself.

His name is Oroondates, which without doubt would be more known to you then it
is, if the necessity of his affairs had not obliged him almost ever to conceal
it. His birth is of the most illustrious in the world, being the only son and
lawful heir of the Great King of Scythia: so powerful, and so terrible to his
Neighbors, that even Alexander the Great himself, to whom almost the whole
Earth submitted, never made attempt against him, (as yourself can tell better
then I) but to his loss and confusion.

As for the qualities of his Mind, you will know them, when you have a little
frequented his company; and for his Person, you see what it is: yet I may tell
you, that how graceful an outside soever you observe in him, his Griefs, and
the toilsomenesse of his Voiages, have taken off a great part of its
excellency, having appeared with so much luster, while Fortune smiled upon him,
that even those who were most insensible, never beheld him with an indifferent
eye. The King his Father finding in him from his very Infancy, the most
excellent nature he could wish, and in a body marvellously handsome, a soul
capable of all gallant impressions, resolved to nourish both with so great
care, that none should be able to reproach him, for not having contributed all
that lay in him, to second Nature who had so liberally obliged him. It was
about that time that I, with many others of my age, was given him for a
witness and companion of his exercises: but as he surpassed us all in birth,
so did he likewise quickly outstrip us in the profit he made under his Masters,
which was such, as I believe I may tell you without falsehood, that when he was
but fourteen years old, he excelled in skilfulnesse, vigor, grace, and
dexterity, either to ride a Horse, dart a Javelin, and use all kind of arms; or
in dancing, singing, and playing upon the Lyre, both all those of his own time,
and likewise all of former ages. Besides, the graces of his body, they that
were near him, observed much more advantageous ones, in his manners, and
conversation: His discourse, and all his actions made appear the vivacity, and
excellency of his wit; his sweetness and goodness were adored by the whole
world, and indeed he sought for nothing with so much care, as the occasions of
obliging virtuous persons, and when he met with them, he did it so handsomely,
that his manner of obliging, engaged them a great deal more then the obligation
it self. His liberality was such, that he kept nothing for himself, and from
his earliest youth, he distributed all the Revenue allotted him for his sports
and pleasures, among young Gentlemen of his own age, with so much nobleness
and freedom, as made known sufficiently, he took as great delight in giving,
as the most covetous persons do in receiving. In short, all his actions, and
all his thoughts, were truly Royal, and all Scythia with her King, looked upon
this rising Sun, as the honor of his Country, and the prop of its future glory
and greatness. To say the truth, their hopes were not ill grounded, and you
will give me leave to tell you by the way, that his manner of education was
more then ordinary; and without doubt you will think it strange among
Scythians, whom you Grecians, Macedonians, and other more remote Provinces,
have always held for barbarous, cruel, uncivil, and such as lived only
according to the Law of Nature; and I will confess to you, our forefathers
were so, and that there are still some far distant places, where they yet
retain something of their ancient manners, and where they live with much less
politenesse then amongst us. But in the Courts of our Kings, in the Houses of
persons of quality, and in our good Towns, they live with as much pomp as the
Persians, are as much civilized as the Athenians, and have the same Government
that is among the Lacedaemonians. Thomiris was one of the first that reduced our
straggling Scythians, within the compass of walled Towns; and those that
succeeded her, labored in it with so great industry, that within a while, they
brought that free, warlike people, void of all craft, under the same Laws with
the rest of Europe; so that I can assure you with truth, our great King
Mattheus, does at this day possess one of the greatest, most flourishing, and
best governed Empires of the world.

But to return to my Prince, whose infancy I will forget, to pass on to an
entertainment more worthy of you: At fifteen years old, he was of the stature
of the tallest men, and endowed (besides the dexterity I have already spoke of)
with so extraordinary a strength, that all the world admired the effects of it:
he was of a very healthful constitution, patient of cold, heat, and all other
incommodities, indefatigable on foot, or on horseback; nay, to such a degree,
that at that age, he had many times continued whole days, and nights completely
armed, and had already given many proofs of an undaunted courage. He wanted no
opportunities to show them, for the implacable War which was between the King
his Father, and the King of Persia, gave him a thousand occasions to exercise
that matchless valor, wherewith the Gods had particularly blessed him. Not
but that you have heard speak of a War, the beginnings whereof are as ancient
as those of this Empire. Cyrus the first Monarch of the Persians, laid the
Foundations of it, and promising himself the same facility in subduing that
Warlike Nation, he had found in conquering the cowardly, and effeminate
Lydians, perished in the enterprise with his whole Army. Darius, first of that
name, desiring to repair that loss, and the dishonor of the Persians, lost an
Army there of 100000 men; and if this cruel War had any respit during the
Reigns of their Successors, it was their mutual weakness, or the multiplicity
of their other affairs, rather then any end of their discord, which gave them
that intermission. But this old hatred being renewed in the hearts of the late
King Darius, and of the King my Sovereign, those two exasperated Monarchs,
solemnized it by the death of so many thousand men, that the Land of the
Massagetes, will look white yet for many ages, with the bones of Persians and
Scythians, which there ended unfortunately their days.

It was in these occasions that young Oroondates passed his apprentiship, and
that being scarcely out of his Infancy, he made himself famous in so many
encounters, by a thousand actions of courage and discretion, that the King his
Father considering him as a man sent miraculously from Heaven: the more to
animate, and improve him, did not think much, before he was full seventeen, to
give him the command of some part of his Cavalry. We had repulsed Darius to the
hither side of the Araxis, (who a while before was entered in person into our
Countries, where he had lost fifty thousand men) and we lay upon the Bank of
that River encamped, and entrenched almost within sight of one another, and
fixed in the eternal design of doing each other mischief. There passed few days
without some light skirmishes, encounters, or single combats; but no occasion
in which Prince Oroondates made not himself remarkable by some glorious action.
One day (a day alas most fatal to our quiet, and which so many other unhappy
ones have succeeded,) the King was advertised that the enemies Army, either
through the negligence of their Commanders, or some other reasons unknown to
us, kept not so strict Guards, as the Neighborhood of so terrible an Enemy,
seemed to require. This intelligence made the King resolve to assault them by
night in their Trenches, knowing well that for actions of that nature, the
Scythians have the advantage above all other people of the Earth. The Council
of War having been held, and all Orders given for that design, as soon as it was
night the Forces destined for the execution of it, began to march, leaving in
our Camp only such as were necessary for its defense. The Enemies Scouts
having discovered us; ran to give the Alarm to their Camp; yet their diligence
could not prevent us so far, but that having forced their Out-Guards, we were
already upon the edge of their Entrenchments, e're they had notice of us. Their
Works were but of small defense, and their little Trenches being filled up with
brush Faggots, which we carried for that purpose, our Cavalry entered in a
manner without resistance. The horrible noise of our Martial Instruments,
together with so unexpected a Surprise, struck such a terrible fright into the
Persians, that before they could recover their fear, part of their Army was
already defeated: Indeed this way of making War, was so different from theirs,
that I do not think it strange, if in the horror of the dark, an assault so
little foreseen, did cause some confusion among Soldiers that were fast asleep.
There was a great number slain in the first onset, but in the end Mazeus, one
of Darius his principal Commanders, Rallying some Forces as well as possibly he
could, held part of ours in play, and gave Darius leisure to draw up the rest
into some form of Battle. But being desirous to confine my Discourse to
Oroondates actions, and speaking of others only inasmuch as they are necessary
to my Relation, I will tell you, that having charged at the head of three
thousand Horse, he beat down all that endeavored to make any resistance,
disdaining through generosity, to embrue his own, or his Soldiers Swords in the
blood of men asleep, and without defense. He was easy to be known, though in
the dark, by a great white plume of Feathers, that waved over the Buttock of an
Horse whiter then Snow, and by a Stone extremely precious among the Persians,
which they call a Pyrope, and which fastened on the top of his Headpiece, cast
such a flaming light, as was deservedly to be wondered at. How many actions did
he in that obscurity, worthy of the brightest day, and of the whole world to be
Spectators. His Soldiers taking courage by his example, strove all to follow
him, and imitating that spirit which thrust him on among the thickest blows,
were by that consideration enabled to do actions which surpassed the ability
of men: I was then with my Master, and to speak truth, one of the nearest to
his person, which makes me the more knowing in those things that happened that
fatal night. To be brief, his courage transported him so far, that he
discovered Darius Tents, and knew them by the number of the Guards that
defended them: two thousand Athenians (besides the Persians of the ordinary
Guard) had taken that charge that night by Darius Order, under the command of
one Patro, who was also an Athenian, and had been some little time under his
pay. This sight stirred up a violent desire in the mind of our Prince, of
winning honor, and in that of his Soldiers, of gaining so remarkable a Booty,
as the Equipage of the Richest and most Luxurious King in the whole world.
These two different considerations carried them on to this assault, with so
much eagerness, and resolution, that after a long and sharp resistance, in
which we lost the better part of our men, and wherein all the Athenians fell
with most honorable wounds, we at last remained Conquerours, and were ready to
break into the Tents with a confused throng, if the Prince who strove to hinder
that disorder, and desired to pay Darius what was due unto his quality, had not
stopped us by entreaties and threatenings. The profound respect which every one
bore him, as to a divine person, caused an obedience without murmuring, and
then alighting from his Horse, accompanied only by fifty of us which he chose,
whereof I had the honor to be one, he entered, with his Sword in his hand,
into the Tents, making all the rest stay in good order at the going in. But, O
Gods, what an astonishment was his, when in stead of Enemies which he sought
for, he by the light of an hundred tapers, saw a troop of Ladies, who instantly
sent forth most lamentable cries, and sufficiently testified the fright and
terror which the sight of us had occasioned in them. They were (as we have
known since, and as we guessed then, by the respect the others showed them) the
old Queen Sysigambis, Mother to Darius, the Queen his wife, and the two
Princesses, Statira, and Parisatis his Daughters.

You will not think this relation strange, since you know that during all our
Wars they never forsook him, and that the great number of their Chariots, and
the good order of their Equipage made their abode in the Army, almost as
commodious as if they had been in Persepolis. Darius was gone out of the tents,
at the beginning of the alarm, hasting to those places, where he thought his
presence was most necessary; he had (as I told you) left the charge of the
Princesses to them that were of the Ordinary Guard, and to those Athenians, who
all died fighting obstinately upon the place. Judge if these Ladies were
affrighted, seeing my Prince all smeared with blood, his sword in his hand, and
accompanied with so many of us in the same posture, enter into a place of
Conquest, with a fierceness which even in the midst of blood would have had
something very pleasing, if the trouble in which they were would have permitted
them to consider it. The young Princesses more dead then living, shrunk close
to their Mother, and to old Sisigambis, thinking themselves in some safety near
so venerable a person. That great Queen, to whom the Gods had given a heart
equal to her quality, blamed their despair, and waited for her destiny with
patience, when the Prince surprised at so unlooked for an object, which made
him stand for awhile stricken in a confused amazement, at last recovered
himself, and made his address to her with so humble a respect, that she quickly
banished all manner of fear, and praised the Gods, for having made Darius
Family fall into the hands of so civil an Enemy.

He had taken off his headpiece, and let the point of his sword fall to the
ground, which moved the Princesses, being a little settled again, to look upon
him with a heedfull consideration. The heat of the fight, and the astonishment
of that encounter, had added a luster to his natural beauty, which in the
opinion of those Ladies, made him at first pass for a God, but their esteem
grew yet to a greater height, when bowing down to the ground, and directing his
discourse to Sisigambis, he said in the Persian Language, which he speaks with
as much facility, as if he had been born in Persepolis: I should not be
pardonable, Madam, in the error which night has made me to commit, if its
darkness did not plead for my excuse, and if I did not protest to you before
all the Gods, that had I known the sex, and quality of those persons I have so
mortally offended, I would rather have been mine own destruction, than have
disturbed their quiet, or have offered to come in among them so unreverently; if
my Crime could be repaired, I should not think my blood, no nor my life too
dear for its expiation; but since that is not in my power, be pleased to give
me leave, Madam, to conjure you, and these Ladies also, to cast away that
apprehension, which so uncivil an entrance has undoubtedly caused in you;
Those that are with me, obey my Orders, and neither they, nor I, pretend any
greater advantage here, then the honor to serve you as Guards till the return
of your own, and to have the opportunity of lessening by some small service, the
ill opinion this rudeness has made you conceive of us. While he spoke on this
manner, the Ladies were in such suspense between joy and admiration, that
Sysigambis could not of a long time find words to answer the Civility of so
generous a Conqueror: from a Prisoner which she believed her self, she saw she
was not only free, but still reigning and absolute over those, to whom she
thought she had been captive: Before she would have accounted her condition
most happy, if she could but have hoped to obtain the liberty of her self, and
her daughters, by a part of Darius Dominions: and this glorious enemy, not only
gives up all kind of rights, and pretensions to them, but even offers himself
to be their defense against his own Soldiers, and to do the same offices they
could have expected from those, the Gods had made to be born their Subjects.
The Consideration of this happiness, and the admiration of so great a virtue,
held her for some time in a suspended silence: but at last not to appear
uncivil, she answered him with all the humility her present condition could
require. Whosoever you are, Sir, whether you be born amongst men, or rather (as
your actions testify) you spring from the blood of the Gods; neither I have
words to praise you, nor Darius Empires to acquit himself of what he owes you,
no nor heaven it self graces enough to recompense your virtue; the proofs you
give of it, both to our cost, and to our advantage, strike us with so much
admiration of your valor, and so great a sense of your goodness, that we are
doubly your prisoners; yonr modesty hinders you from giving us that title, but
our knowledge of the rights of war, makes us take it, and that of your virtue
will enable us to bear it with much patience. She afterward said many other
things to which he lent but little attention, having by misfortune fixed his eye
upon the face of the Princess Statira; from whence he never withdrew it, till
he left her his heart in exchange: A wonderful thing! who would have believed
that this young Prince, should find his own loss, in his first Conquest; and
that he who had with an indifferent eye, seen all the beauties af Scythia die
for him, should in fight, in blood, and in horror, meet that which he had
avoided in the midst of ease, pleasures, and delights? And yet it is too true,
he yielded himself at that one only sight, and that was the first moment of his
misfortunes, or rather the womb from whence all his others have taken birth. I
shall not need to tell you that the Princess Statira, who was then but fifteen
years old, was the most perfect workmanship of the Gods, you have seen her
sufficiently to bear faithful witness of it; I will only say that the trouble,
and fear she had been in, giving some addition to her beauty, made her appear
such in the eyes of my Prince, that he considered her not as a mortal person.
His eyes and heart were so intentively fixed on her, that he neither thought on
Sysigambis, nor himself; and we heard a strange noise of arms, and an infinite
number of cries without the tent, before he could get out of that deep ecstasy
in which her beauty had as it were entranced him. At last one of our Soldiers
entering the tent in haste, To horse, to horse, Sir, (cried he) unless you will
be surprised by Darius, who is coming here in person with the greatest part of
his forces. This was a most sensible blow unto the Prince, seeing himself
constrained to depart from her, whom he had seen but too much already, and whom
he had so little hope to see again; yet making a virtue of necessity, and
dissembling his trouble: Ladies (said he) I shall withdraw my self if you
please, since by the presence of your own servants, I can be no longer useful
to you, and that you will believe your selves safer under their protection,
then in the guard of persons, in whom you have yet but little confidence; At
these words he made them a low obeisance, and putting on his headpiece, was
going out of the tent, when the Queen, Darius his wife, who had not yet spoken
to him, taking from her neck an Incarnadine Skarf, all Embroidred with flames
of Gold, interwoven with the Letters of her name, and that of Darius together,
put it over his shoulder, saying; The Gods forbid, that having preserved the
honor and liberty of Darius his mother, wife, and daughters, you should go
away from them without carrying some mark of their acknowledgement along with
you, keep therefore this poor testimony of it which I give you, and with it the
remembrance of them who are too powerfully engaged to you, to be ever guilty of
oblivion. The Prince received these Words, and the Present upon his knee, and
prouder of that spoil, then of all he had so generously despised, after having
taken his latest leave, separated himself at last, though extremely against his
will, from that Illustrious Company, leaving them a very sensible trouble for
his departure, and carrying away with him a fire in his heart, which he has
ever since conserved, and which can never be extinguished, but with his life.

The alarm that had been given us, was a very true one, and to return to the
fight, I will tell you in a few words, that Darius, and Artabasus, having drawn
up the Army in Battalia, while Mazeus kept our men in play as well as possibly
he could, charged our Troops with such a vigor, that being much more powerful
in number, they quickly recovered their affairs, and our men were beginning
already to retire, when Darius, by some of his Soldiers, was told the defeat
of the Athenians, and the danger of the Princesses. His love to them, made him
forget all other things, and leaving the body of the Army to Artabasus, he
hasted with a strong party to fall upon us. Oroondates was scarce on Horseback
when he came, and judging himself not strong enough, caused a Retreat to be
sounded, and retired in very good Order, yet with the loss of two or three
hundred Horse. It began to be break of day, and our King, who feared lest that
should discover his weakness, made his last Divisions file off, and causing
Artabasus to be resisted by the best mounted of his Cavalry, he retired with
the rest of the Army, not without a considerable loss by some Charges the
Enemy made upon the Rear.

But admire Oroondates Fortune, and observe how all things contributed to his
engagement in an affection that has been so ruinous to him. It was already
broad day, and we were come a good way from the Enemies entrenchments,
endeavoring to overtake the body of our Army, which was Retreating, when by
the side of a little Wood that was hard by us, we perceived a Combat of some
twenty Horsemen: At first we believed, (as it was true) that some of the
Enemies having engaged themselves too far in the pursuit of those that retired,
had found so brisk an opposition, as made them obstinate in the fight. Yet
Oroondates, to know the truth of it, galloped directly toward them; we
followed, and were witnesses of a sight that filled us all with admiration: It
was a Persian Cavalier, whose arms were all covered with precious stones, who
surrounded by a score of ours, defended himself with so wonderful a courage,
that he was not far from making them all despair of the Victory: He had made a
Rampart of dead bodies and horses; but besides those which we judged he had
slain, we saw thirty or forty more lying under foot, as well Scythians as
Persians, which made us know, he had not been alone at the beginning of that
action, and that those who accompanied him being killed in his defense, he was
left alone, to dispute his life still against so great a number of enemies; we
all considered his valor as a mavelous thing, and if that of our Prince had
not equalled it, and made us often see such Prodigies, we should not easily
have believed the testimony of our eyes; Our arrival daunted him not, and being
resolved to perish, rather then yield, he resolved also to sell his life as
dearly as he could, and rushing in amongst the Scythians, with greater fury
then before, made two more of them tumble breathless at his feet; then feeling
that his horse wounded in many places, began to fail between his legs, he
sprung lightly to the ground, and endeavored to prolong his destiny by a more
then human resistance, when our Prince already passionately in love with his
virtue, and considering the danger in which he was, spurred on his horse, into
the midst of them, and making himself known to the Scythians, caused them to
retire with respect, and shame at the inequality of the combat: Cowards, (cried
he) have you so little sense of virtue, as not to be moved by that of this
gallant Enemy, rather to seek his conservation, then his ruin? Then judging by
the richness of his arms, that he was of exceeding high quality, he alighted
from his horse, and unbuckling his Cask, went to embrace him with all
testimonies of affection. Invincible Warrior, (said he to him) pardon the
brutishness of these men, who cannot reverence in you, what they never
possessed in themselves; and if you think I do you any small service, in
causing you to be Convoyed into your own Camp, with all manner of safety, grant
me for all the rights I can pretend, but the honor of your friendship, and I
shall believe my self most gloriously recompensed. The Persian was infinitely
surprised at an usage so little ordinary, and judging by the behavior of our
Prince, and by the respect we bore him, that he was a man of quality, he
unbuckled his Helmet also, and let us see so rare a handsome face, that we
began to lose the opinion we had, that no man's beauty could equal that of
Oroondates. They were in age alike, their stature little different, and we
believed with some appearance of reason, that the Gods had by so unexpected an
encounter, brought together the two most accomplished Persons of the Earth.
They beheld one another with admiration, but the Persian highly obliged by the
magnanimity, and civility of the other, took his Sword at the point, and
presenting it to him with much submission, Generous Sir, (said he) hitherto I
have disputed my life and liberty; but now since I can lose neither of them,
for one more virtuous then your self, I render my self your prisoner, with this
satisfaction, that I yielded only to the bravest of all men living. Oroondates
stepping back with much respect: The Gods forbid, (said he) that I should
pretend any other advantage from this encounter, save the friendship I have
desired of you; you are free, unless you be engaged to bear some little good
will to a Prince that has a most real passion for you; and invincible, unless
you will suffer your self to be overcome by my services. The Persian
confounded, and excessively in love with the virtue of Oroondates, embraced him
a second time, with extreme tenderness, and said with much affection: Now it
is that I am truly unhappy, since the Gods suffer me to be conquered so many
several ways, and that they can never grant me the means to acquit my self of
the best part of what I owe you; though if the Heavens had made me fall into
the power of another, I might have offered him Treasures, and Provinces for my
Ransom, since I am Artaxerxes, Darius his only son, and lawful heir of all his
Empires; for I think I should commit a crime (continued he) if I should longer
conceal from you the name and quality of a Prince, who is indebted to you for
his life, and whom the usage he receives from you, together with the strong
inclination he has to love and honor you for your merit, have made entirely
yours. Judge, I beseech you of my Masters joy, and astonishment, and whither he
did not believe the Gods had taken care of his happiness, and that they were
guiding him to it by ways quite extraordinary. Certainly of all the joys he
ever felt, that was the greatest, and that which surprised him most; he desired
nevertheless to hide the occasion of it, and to pay Prince Artaxerxes as
Darius his son, the respects he owed him as Statira's Brother. After this
knowledge of him, he renewed his protestations with more respect and submission
then before, and the young Prince of Persia returned them with such usury, that
besides the interest Oroondates had in his affection, the conformity of their
persons and manners, joined to the esteem they had naturally of one another,
inflamed them really with a most ardent friendship. They could never have been
weary of giving each other testimonies of it; but Oroondates seeing Prince
Artaxerxes blood run down from many places of his body, began to be extremely
afflicted at it, and persuading him to get upon his horse, which he forced him
to accept of, being the handsomest in all Scythia; he called for another for
himself, and getting him to take the way toward his Camp; notwithstanding all
Artaxerxes could do to dissuade him from it, he never would forsake him till
he was within sight of his Entrenchments. This separation was very unwelcome to
them both; and giving each other the last farewell, with much trouble, the
Prince of Persia begged of Oroondates, with the most civil entreaties in the
world, to tell him his name, unless he had some reason to conceal it. But my
Prince not judging that convenient for the design he had, thought fit to tell
him he was Orontes Prince of the Massagetes, a vassal and near kinsman of the
King of Scythia's. Artaxerxes satisfied with this knowledge, threw his arm once
more about his neck, and departed from him with a most sensible grief.
Oroondates was not less afflicted at it, then he; but on the other side, he was
so joyful for his happiness, in having done that service to the Brother of
her, for whom he had already so strong a passion, that he had much ado to
dissemble it. When we were returned to our Camp, the King who had been in care
for his son, and who was informed of part of his mavelous actions, received
him with an excess of joy; and causing his arms to be taken off in his
presence, he with much trouble perceived he had two or three small wounds, but
they were such light ones, that the Prince hardly ever kept his bed for them.

In the rest of that Summers service, there passed nothing memorable, and the
cold beginning to incommode the two Armies, they both began to think of drawing
away to their Winter Quarters, till the Season should be convenient to take the
Field again: That of the Persians dislodged first, and in its Retreat there
were some skirmishes, in which it received much loss; but being as I told you
pressed by the Weather, and in great scarcity of provisions and forage, we did
not engage our selves in their pursuit. And the King seeing the Prince
perfectly cured, after having given out his Orders, and disposed of his Army
into several Garrisons, returned with his Court to Issedon, or Serica, a Town in
Scythia, where he makes his most ordinary Residence.

But though the Prince were in a good condition for the wounds of his body,
those of his mind were really grown so much worse, that he had lost all hope of
recovery; He strove by a thousand means to drive away an affection, in which he
foresaw much mischief, and hoped for little satisfaction; he proposed to
himself all the difficulties he had to break through, and all the dangers to
which he was visibly going to expose himself; and the result of all his
considerations, ended in a full acknowledgement of his fault, but in no hope at
all of amendment. Unfortunate Oroondates, (said he to himself) by what
extraordinary means the Gods have resolved to destroy thee, and of how great
importance does thy misery seem to be to them, since they lead thee on to it
by so uncommon ways: was it not enough to make thee love with so much violence,
unless they also made thee love with so much impossibility of success? For in
short, Wretched man that thou art, what do thou hope for? What will thou
do? And what will become of thee? Think thou the King of Persia will give
his daughter to the son of his mortal and irreconcilable Enemy? Do thou
believe he will purchase the losses he has sustained by thy Fathers Subjects,
with so dear a price, and with such an ingratitude for the death of so many
thousand men who have lost their lives for his particular quarrel? Know thou
not that the War between these two Kings, is not of the nature of other Wars;
and that neither the interests of their States, nor the desire of glory and
greatness, laid the foundations of it, but that it is fixed to the persons of
the Kings, and of the Royal families; and that Matheus would willingly
sacrifice his Dominions for Darius his destruction, and Darius would but smile
at the loss of all his friends, so he might but overwhelm Matheus in their
Ruins? Hope no more therefore for his alliance, by ways of gentleness, and
thoughts of a reconciliation, which thou ought not to expect during the
lives of these two Kings; since neither Darius will ever grant his daughter to
Matheus son, nor Matheus ever suffer his son to mary Darius daughter: What
can thou then pretend to, since these ways are forbidden thee? Can thou
think to win her by the Sword, and constrain Darius, the greatest and most
puissant Monarch of the world, to yield thee that by violence, which thou
ought to obtain by services and submissions? But though thou should
surmount that difficulty, (which is not in the power of man) could thou
overcome Matheus his spirit, and tear that from him by force, which thou must
never hope for with his consent? And though by miracle thou had broke through
all these obstacles, should thou not still have a more dangerous Enemy to
combat? And do thou believe that Princess, who has sucked this hatred with
her milk, who has always been bred up in the Court of the King her Father, with
a horror and detestation of the family of the King of Scythia; can ever divest
her self of her natural inclinations, to love the hereditary enemy of all her
kindred? Oroondates argued with himself on this manner, upon all the crosses he
foresaw in his affection; and these considerations tormented him so violently,
that a less courage then his, would infallibly have sunk under them; but he
having one invincible, and capable of the greatest enterprises, passed over the
top of all opposition; and grounding himself upon his most fortunate
beginnings, upon the friendship of Artaxerxes, whom he had so highly and so
handsomely obliged, upon the esteem of the two Queens, and of the Princess her
self, (all whom he had defended from the violence of his soldiers, and used
with such civilitie, though they were his lawful prisoners by the right of
War) and upon the probability that Darius himself whose mind and birth were
Royal, would not perchance be insensible of such obligations, as happily he
had never received from his best friends: he began to dissipate his former
fears, and to these last considerations adding the necessity of his love, and
the impossibility of being cured of it, he imbarqued himself more and more upon
that sea, the Tempests whereof he has endured for the space of ten whole years.
In sum, seeing them dis-encamp, and that the King his father prepared himself
to repasse the Araxis the next morning; after having long disputed with
himself, he at last took one of the strangest resolutions, that ever fell into
the mind of a Prince, and sending for me at night, and calling me to his
bedside, when he had commanded all those that were in his Tent to withdraw, he
said to me with a voice a little troubled: Araxes, If among all my servants, I
had not particularly observed your courage, understanding and affection to me,
I would not have made choice of you, to trust you with the secret of my life,
and to make use of you alone in a design, upon which all my happiness and the
sett^^ng of the whole remainder of my days, does absolutely depend; but after
having carefully considered both your Person, and all your former Actions, I
believed you would have judgment enough to serve me in my Affairs, valor
enough to accompany me in dangers, and fidelity enough, never to deceive me.
These words obliged me to cast my self at his feet, and make earnest
protestations of my loyalty to him; in which, he observed so much affection,
that raising me up, and embracing me a thousand times, he discovered his
passion to me, and the design he had newly taken, which was such as you shall
hear by the rest of this Discourse; then having given me his Orders, he
commanded me to go instantly about the execution of them, which I did with
much joy at the honor he did me, and astonishment at his strange resolution: I
chose the four best horses of his Stable, one for him, one for my self, and two
more for two servants, whose fidelity was well known to me, and whose
attendance only he meant to make use of in the Voyage he intended to take.
After I had fitted this small Train, and set things in a readiness to depart
before day, I went to wait upon the Prince in his Tent, who instead of
sleeping, had in the interim employed the time, in writing a Letter to his
Father, whereof as I remember these were the very words.

PRINCE OROONDATES. TO THE KING OF SCYTHIA.
SIR,
I Should not have left your Majesty, if you had not resolved to draw into
Garrison for this colder part of the year. I beseech you by all the affection,
which hitherto you have honored me with, to pardon me the liberty I take, to
make a little Journey during this time of rest and idleness; a youthful desire
draws me from your Court, together with a design to mould my self in strange
Countries, and gain instruction in all things necessary to be known, that I may
become a worthy Son of such a Father; my Voyage shall not be longer then the
Winter, and as soon as your Majesty shall take the Field again, you shall see me
with you, to render you those services you ought to expect from your Son

OROONDATES.


Having ended this Letter, he wrote another to his Sister the Princess
Berenice, of whom I have not yet spoken to you, and who nevertheless deserved
a particular commendations as well as her brother, since in the excellency of
her wit and virtue, she equals not only all the Ladies of her own, but even
of all former ages. The King after the death of his Queen, whom he had lost
many years before, had taken care to have her bred up according to her birth,
and the rare endowments that were seen in her: and the Prince her brother, who
loved her infinitely, would not depart, without giving her proof of his
remembrance by a Letter; having folded them up, he gave them to one of his
servants, commanding him not to deliver them till four days after. When he had
done so, causing all those to go out of the Tent, which were suspected to him,
he took his richest jewels, and the most portable money he had, to supply our
necessities, and giving it all into my custody, he furnished himself also with
admirable good arms, and having passed a great part of the night in these
employments, we took horse a little before day, riding the way toward
Persepolis, and following the track of the Persian Army, which had dislodged
some few days before.

I will not tell you the Kings grief for his sons departure, nor that of the
Princess Berenice, to whom he was extremely dear: you may guess at that as
well as I, and you know it is of no importance to the rest of my Discourse; nor
will I spend time in telling you the particulars of our Voyage, since we had in
it but very ordinary adventures, and that the tediousness of them, would
without question tire you: besides, I have so many things of moment to relate,
that they have caused a great many of those of lesser consequence to slip out
of my memory. It is enough therefore if I tell you, that the next day after our
going away, we clothed our selves in Persian habits, which we had before
provided, and having that Language reasonable perfect, we passed without
difficulty, both through the Towns of Persia, and amongst their scatt'red
Forces which we overtook in our way, as they were marching to their Garrisons.
We traveled at a good rate, and riding whole days, without other stay then
what necessity compelled us to, at last after a long Journey, we arrived at
Persepolis, whither the King and his household were come some days before us,
and where they made their most ordinary abode, as indeed it was the fairest
City of all Asia; and if your Great Alexander can be blamed for any of his
actions, it is for having consented to its destruction, and to the firing of
the bravest and most stately Palace in the world. My Prince was overjoyed to
see himself at the end of his Voyage, and took a Lodging in the Town, where we
rested a few days, framing our selves in the mean time to the manners and
customs of the Country, and informing our selves of what was most necessary
for us, till the Heavens should offer my Master some fair occasion of
discovering himself to Prince Artaxerxes. It presented it self within a short
while, and the most honorable that could be wished, for our Landlord told us
news, that contented him extremely, in the design he had not to make himself
known, but in a handsome manner, and to the purpose. We learned of him, that
within less then a week, the Kings birth day was to be celebrated, according
to the custom of the Persians, and of many other Nations: and to divert the
Ladies from objects of War, and give them proof of their gallantry and
dexterity, Artaxerxes and other young Lords, had obtained leave of the King to
make a Match for Courses and Combats on horsback, to which every body should be
admitted, and whereof the Princess Statira her self should give the prize:
This kind of Combating has been used a long time amongst the Persians, and of
late amongst us, and is on this manner. Two Cavaliers armed at all points, with
strong Javelins, whose heads are blunted, run against each other full speed,
and meeting in the midst of the Carriere, rush with their Shields and Javelins,
so impetuously at one another, that if their darts break not, one of them must
of necessity fall to the ground: the Conqueror is obliged to bear the shock of
the second, third, and all the rest, till such time as he be beaten down, or
that he have no more enemies to encounter. If he be overcome, he that has had
the better of him, is tied to the same conditions, till the last; having got
the Victory of all the rest, goes to receive the prize with a great deal of
pomp and ceremony. Oroondates, who knew the conditions of Combats of this
nature, and who in that exercise and all others, is one of the ablest and most
vigorous men in the world; praised the Gods for that fair opportunity they
afforded him, to make his coming to that Court remarkable, and to let the
Princess whom he adored, know, with how many graces the Gods had favored him:
So being resolved not to lose that happy occasion, he gave me order to provide
what was necessary, and prepared himself for that day with all the diligence
that was possible.

Scarce did the day so much desired begin to appear, when he was already up,
and called for his Arms: but our Landlord told us, the Courses were not till
after the King had dined, which yet would be hastened, that so much more of the
day might be bestowed in that diversion. Why should I detain you any longer,
and protract the time of which my Master was extreme impatient? The wished for
hour comes, Oroondates completely armed, mounts on horseback, and goes into
the place appointed, being accompanied by none but me. The magnificence and
state of that gallant Assembly, took his eyes up for a while; but seeing the
King, the Queens, and the Princesses arrive, he despised all other objects, to
fix his sight upon the most noble ones, and instantly sought out her with his
bodily eyes, who was always present to those of his mind. The extraordinary
richness of her Apparel, did not disguise her from his knowledge, and she who
in a slight Field habit, by the light of a few Torches, in the terrors of
fight, and the apprehension of her Captivity, showed so charming: Now amidst
all her Jewels in broad day light, and upon a stately Throne, appeared to him
so glorious and triumphant, that his wounds opened afresh, and his flames were
more then doubled. He was quite at a loss in the consideration of her; and if
the sound of the Trumpets had not roused him out of the deep ecstasy he was in,
to make him think of the design that brought him thither, he would have spent
the whole day in that delightful contemplation.

The Princess Parisatis was close by her, little different from her elder
sister, either in the bravery of her dress, her outward beauties, or inward
virtues. The Queens sat a little above them, and the King accompanied by his
brother Oxyartes, and attended by Artabasus, Mazeus, and a great many of his
chief Officers, whose age excused them from those violent exercises, was under
another cloth of State, not far from that of the Ladies. When Oroondates had
looked upon them a little, he turned to behold Prince Artaxerxes, who at the
head of all the young Cavaliers, was mounted upon the same horse he had given
him at their parting, armed all in bright Arms, without any device. After they
had by lot decided who should run first, they began the Courses at the sound of
many Trumpets, to the great contentment of the Spectators, and to the praise of
many young Gallants, who in them gave great proofs of their force and
activenesse. I will not tell you the particulars of all, but only touch them
that concern my Masters affairs, and the thread of my Discourse. You shall know
then that after many brave Carieres, the honor yet belonged to Cambises, Mazeus
his son, when my Master having no longer patience, came into play among the
rest; instantly the whole Assembly cast their eyes upon him, and truly the
habit he was in at that time, pleased me so much, that I must needs describe it
to you in two words. All his Armor was made of little scales of silver, edged
with gold, and in the most remarkable places, stones of great life and value,
the bottom of his Cassack (which appearing under the lower parts of his
Curasse, covered his thighs to the upper part of his knee) was purple,
imbroidered with flames of gold very rare and artificial; his sleeve (which
coming out of an antique work in gold, made like a Lions mouth, covered his arm
unto the elbow) was of the same; his buskins were leather silvered like scales
edged with gold, as his Curasse, fastened at the mid-leg with golden muzzles,
like those of his sleeves, and buckles of rubies set with excellent
workmanship; his headpiece made also of scales, was covered with a silver
Dragon, whose crest, wings and claws, were gold; and instead of flames,
vomiting so great a number of feathers near that color, that my Masters head
and shoulders were all covered with them: Yet not so much, but that one might
easily see the skarf he had received from Darius his Queen, which suited
wonderfully well with the rest of his attire, and in which hung a rich Sword,
the blade whereof crooked as a Cymiter, was of the best in Syria, and the hilt
of the most curious work. His horse was black as Ebony, with only a little
star in his forehead, and of so perfect a shape, so full of spirit, and of so
proud a carriage, in all his airs, that he did not ill accompany the grace and
skill of his Master; and he on the other side rode him with so much expertnesse
and vigor, and put him on into the Lists with so Majestic a fashion, that he
presently drew the eyes, and I believe the hearts of the whole Assembly.
Cambises not disdaining an enemy of so brave a presence, came to receive him in
the midst of the Course with more courage, then good fortune, for he not only
made him reel, but threw him out of his Saddle, with such force, that flying
over the crupper of his horse, he made the print of his whole body upon the
sand. There was a great cry among the whole company at Cambises fall, and
Oroondates finished his Carriere exceeding gracefully. He had overturned two or
three others with the same facility, when Hydaspes, Artabasus son, impatient
and jealous of his glory, presented himself at the end of the List. My Prince
received him with joy, and seeing him set forth at the sound of the Trumpets,
did the same, and ran upon him like lightning; the course indeed was very fair
on both sides; Oroondates roughly shaken by Hydaspes blow, lost both his
stirrups, but he encountered Hydaspes with such violence, that he threw him a
good way from his horse; and having ended his carreer with the same
gracefulness, he also unhors'd Bessus and Narbasanes; I say, that Bessus and
that Narbasanes, Monsters of our Age, who have since basely imbrued their hands
in the blood of their Prince. My Master having dismounted them, did the like to
Mythranes, Megabises, Oxydates, Ariobarsanes, Phradates, Oriobates, and
Cohortanus; and proud of so good success, set himself in order to receive the
Valiant Memnon, who burning with Love for Barsina, Artabasus daughter, prepared
himself to repair her Brothers dishonor. You since have known them both,
Barsina afterward being Memnon's Widow, merited the Affections of Alexander;
and that great Memnon did such remarkable things against Alexander, that his
memory will never dye amongst the Persians. The Prince of Scythia knowing the
reputation of this Man, who was already at that time highly advanced, gathered
together his utmost force to preserv that honor against him, which he had
gotten against Hydaspes; and therefore when he saw him move, he came to meet
him in the midst of his Course. The violence of this encounter was so great,
that their Javelins broke in a thousand pieces, and their Horses not being able
to bear so unusual a shock, staggered backward, and could not recover
themselves without the help of the Spur, with which their Masters having
wakened them, got them again upon their Feet with much ado, and made an end of
their Carreer, so that one could not observe any advantage on either side. A
general Shout solemnized the excellency of that Course, and they that were
acquainted with Memnon's Valor, already considered my Prince with admiration,
while he alone despised himself; and vexed with Grief and Shame, took another
Dart, by the example of Memnon who had done the like, and rushing against each
other more impetuously then before, they made the whole Assembly admire a
Carriere more furious then the former, but of a different success. Oroondates
was soundly shaken, and the valiant Memnon, after having tottered a while, fell
at last under his horses feet. His fall caused great acclamations of wonder,
which redoubling my Prince's courage, did at the same time work a contrary
effect in some of those that yet remained. But Prince Artaxerxes already
passionately in love with my Masters valor, would have made trial of it
himself, and was advancing with that design, when he saw Rhesaces in the
Carreer, and Spithridates at one end, to take the place of him that should be
overthrown. These two famous Soldiers were they that made Alexander the Great,
run so much hazard at the passage of the Granicus, and who were both slain in
that battle, one by Alexander himself, and the other by the hand of Clytus;
being both of them truly valiant, they put my Master to some trouble, but
having been dis-mounted at the first Course, they gave way to the impatience of
the Prince of Persia, who at last turned his horse to take his Carriere against
Oroondates. Then it was that the whole place resounded with an Universal shout,
and that all the Assembly admiring the valor of this Stranger, and grounding
their last hopes on their Princes courage, were in suspense expecting the
success, and beheld intentively the Course of those two Warriors. They set out
at the third signal of the Trumpets, but being ready to meet, my Master
unwilling to offend the Prince of Persia, threw his Javeline to the ground, and
covering himself with his shield, sat firm in his saddle, to receive the blow
of so redoubted an hand: Artaxerxes dart was shivered in a thousand pieces, and
if it had not slipped upon Oroondates shield, he had run an exceeding great
hazard in that encounter; his horse was so astonished with it, that he flew back
five or six steps, ready to set his hinder quarters on the ground; but my
Master reviving him with the spur, thrust him forward, and settling himself in
his seat, ended his Carriere, almost without seeming to have been at all
discomposed. All the world observed this action, and the King himself having
considered it, witnessed by the clapping of his hands, both the notice he had
taken of it, and the mavelous esteem he had of that noble Stranger.

But Prince Artaxerxes, who had perceived it as well as the rest, and who by
reason of his surprise, and the swiftness of his courser had not been able to
show the same consideration of him; turned his horse, quite astonished, and
coming softly to him, said, being half netled at this action: I know not why
you spared me so, unless it were in contempt; yet I think not my self so
inconsiderable, but that he with whomsoever I have to do, may stand in need of
all his Forces; however, if it be out of any consideration of friendship, I
remain much obliged to you for it, and ask you pardon for the vain attempt of
my arms against you. My Prince who could not desire a better occasion to
discover himself, took his hand, and bowing in respect to his very saddle,
answered with a reasonable loud voice. He that would only bear arms for you,
will never make use of them against you; and is not come so far to seek you,
that he might give you proofs so contrary to the desire he has never to be but
yours. I cannot contemn a virtue, of which I have already had so many
testimonies; but since it has absolutely wonn me, disdain not also the zeal of
him, who has dedicated the rest of his life unto your service. Artaxerxes more
confounded then before, cast his arm about his neck, and embracing him
lovingly; Whosoever you are ( said he) though it were the King of Scythia
himself, I am already wholly yours, and the knowledge of your virtue, and my
obligation to you, engages me so powerfully to be so, that nothing shall ever
be able to separate me from that resolution. But I beseech you ( continued he,
untying the straps of his headpiece) conceal no longer from me the face, nor
name of him that has so fully gained my heart, and to whom I have vowed my
self with all my affections. I will obey you, replied Oroondates, and though
neither of them are much known to you, perhaps they may recall into your mind
the Idea of a person, to whom out of mere goodness, you have promised some part
in the honor of your remembrance. At these words he unbuckled his helmet, and
the beauty of his face, and youth, producing their ordinary effect, instantly
drew the eyes, and the astonishment of the whole Assembly. Artaxerxes dazzled as
well as the rest, knew him not at first, but having looked awhile upon him, and
easily recalling to mind both the tone of his voice, and the features of his
countenance, was so surprised with joy, and with amazement, that not being able
to express either by word, or action, he remained a long time silent, and
unmovable. When his wonder was overpast, and that joy had gotten the sole
place in his heart, it broke forth with a cry of gladness, and tears which he
could not possibly retain, and then lifting up his hands, and eyes to Heaven;
Great Gods ( cried he) moderate your mercy to me, if you will not either have
me die, or be unthankful; and having ended those few words, he threw himself
into Oroondates arms, and hugged him between his with so much vehemence, that
my Master found he truly and ardently loved him: My dear Orontes (said he,
kissing him a thousand times) is it possible that it is you your self, and that
really I see you, and embrace you? Good Gods if it be a dream, grant that it
may last eternally; and interrupting these words with infinite expressions of
kindness, he would not have given them over of a long time, if the King who saw
their actions from his state, but could not hear their words, had not sent
Bagoas, to let him know he desired to share with him in his contentment, and in
the sight of that gallant Stranger.

Artaxerxes had no sooner received this command, but taking Oroondates by the
hand, he led him to his father, showing in his face so excessive a joy, that
every body judged he had some powerful cause to love him. Both of them having
alighted, went up the steps of the Scaffold, and being come to the King, my
Prince kneeling to salute him after the Persian manner, Artaxerxes at the same
time said, Sir, to oblige you to pay this Stranger the honor that is due to
him, I shall only need to tell you he is the Prince of the Massagetes. Darius
having learned by his son, the usage he had received from that Prince, appeared
no less surprised then he, and rising with a sudden joy, took him up, and
embraced him with much love, and tenderness; he began his kindnesses often
times afresh, and observing things in him which were far above ordinary men,
could not be content to make an end of them. My son (said he) ( for so it is I
may with just title call him, by whom I yet possess this other which the Gods
have given me) what design soever may have brought you to this Court, know
that you are here extremely welcome, and that affording me the sight of one of
those two admirable persons, whom I have so ardently desired to behold, you
make me no less happy, then when you preserved, and regave me my only son. If
the Gods who have granted me Empires in subjection, had not given you virtue
enough to disdain them, I would offer you part of mine, but since all that I
possess, is below your merit, I can only offer you our hearts, and an eternal
desire to requite your generositie, by all that shall ever come within our
power. My Prince answered so obliging a discourse, with all manner of respect,
and submission, considering the person of the greatest King in the world, the
kindness he expressed to him, and the advantage he pretended by it. Darius
having moreover kissed his cheek, (a remarkable favor among the Persians)
would himself present him to the Ladies, and having led him to their Scaffold;
Ladies (said he, coming up to them) give the Prize unto this Prince, not only
of the Courses, but of the life and liberty of Artaxerxes. Before they could
answer, Artaxerxes told them the pretended name of my Master, and those great
Princesses, seized with so unexpected a contentment, received him with
testimonies of favor, which cannot be expressed; the Queens embraced him, and
the Princesses more reserved, saluted him very civilly. After all the
particularities of this reception, the Princess Statira, by the Kings command,
gave my Master the Prize of the Courses, which was a Bracele^ of Diamonds, the
fairest, and the best set that could be found in Asia. There was a civil
contestation, between him, and Prince Artaxerxes, to whom he would have yeiled
that honor, which being ended, he kneeled down to receive it, and then it was
that all the Ladies considering him more nearly, thought they saw the same
person from whom they had received so great a service, and of whom they yet
dearly preserved the remembrance. Whilst they were yet in doubt of it, the
Queen cast her eyes upon the Skarf she had given him, where observing the
Letters of her own name, and that of Darius. It is too much (cried she) Great
Gods! it is too much; and showing the Skarf to Sysigambis, and the Princesses,
made them see clearly who it was: then instantly they all together sent forth
cries of wonder which confounded the King, and the whole Company, and they so
perfectly remembered all the lineaments of his face, that they were astonished
at themselves for having been so long before they knew him. It Is he, (cried
Sysigambis) it is he. Yes Madam, (replied the Prince) I am he who having
committed against you an irreverence unworthy of forgiveness, come now to
present my self at your feet, rather to expect punishments, then receive
recompenses from you. They were ready to have answered him, if the King, and
his son already instructed in the cause of their admiration, and transported
more then can be imagined, had not interrupted them, to do him honors which it
is impossible for me to relate. Oxyartes, Artabasus, Nazeus, and all those that
were near Darius, saluted him with great expressions of friendship and respect:
Even Memnon himself, Hydaspes, and the rest of those he had dismounted, passed
many Complements with him, and showed much joy to have yielded only to that
hand, which in one night had preserved Darius his whole family. The King openly
called him the Angel Guardian of his House; and I remember, that at that time,
he brake forth into these Prophetic words to those that were about him: It
cannot possibly be (said he) but that so great, and unexpected a happiness,
must needs threaten me some very strange misfortune. He stuck but a while upon
this thought, and getting up into his Chariot again, made Oroondates accompany
him to his Palace, where he caused Lodgings to be appointed him, though he
used great endeavors to avoid that honor: when they were come thither, the
King entered into his Closset, whither calling only Artaxerxes, and my Master,
he made the door be shut, and seeing himself alone with them, It is impossible
(said he to my Prince) that being a Vassal and Kinsman to the King of Scythia,
you should have left his Court, to retire to that of his mortal and
irreconcilable Enemy, without very strong and pressing considerations; I
beseech you hide them not from me, and believe that what cause soever can have
brought you hither, you in my Court shall have both all manner of power, and a
most assured retreat. The Prince of Scythia, after having with all humility
given the King thanks for his most obliging offers, made him this answer, which
he had contrived beforehand.

The Gods are my witnesses, that in the two small services I had the honor to
do your Majesty's Family, I had no other aim but that of my duty, and the
respect I thought my self obliged to bear to persons of so high a quality; and
that I never proposed unto my self, the glorious recompense I receive for them,
without having merited the least part of it; Yet those whom I had most
frequented, and who had least cause to suspect me, made not the same judgment
of them; for as soon as I was returned unto the King, I was slandered for those
two actions, by those very men that had accompanied me in them: whether it were
that their brutishness disapproved things so contrary to their nature; or that
they envied me the favors the Gods had granted me; or (as it is most probable)
that they conceived this spleen against me, for having hindered them of the
spoil they pretended to in prizes of such inestimable value; whatsoever it
were, they accused me of treason, and of holding intelligence with your
Majesty; and by their practices so stirred up the King against me, that he
resolved to put me to death; I received diverse advertisements of it, from many
of my friends, but I despised them all, trusting to mine own innocence, till
walking one day with the Prince of Scythia, that young Prince who ever loved
me, and with whom I was brought up; having led me aside to a by-place where his
action could not be observed by any body, wrote upon the ground with the point
of a Javeline he had in his hand, these few words which I read as fast as he
wrote them; Fly Orontes, or thou art but dead; but fly to day, if thou will
not die to morrow: and having put out the writing with his foot, as soon as he
saw that I had read it, he left me quite confounded, and went back to the rest
of the Company. This advertisement had more power with me then all the rest,
and made me believe, that that young Prince being bound by Oath not to tell his
Fathers secrets, had made use of that device to save me, without exasperating
the Gods against himself: I then saw plainly it was a truth, and considering
the danger that threatened me, I departed that very night with as small a
retinue as possibly I could, without having any other design, then that of
flying from the Kings anger. The next day being already got a great way from
our Camp, I remembered the Prince of Persia's goodness, and the promise he had
made me, after the slight service I had done him. I also called to mind the
good fortune I had had in the Encounter of the Queens, and persuaded my self,
that being in disgrace only for th^se two occasions, I should not at all do
unhandsomly, in making your Majesty my Sanctuary, and that you would be so
gracious as to protect an innocent Prince, banished from his Country by the
calumny of his Enemies.

He added many other words to this discourse, at the end of which, the King
said to him, If we did not receive a great advantage by your Disgrace, we
should condole it with you; but how great soever our Obligations to you are,
we cannot utterly lay aside the affection we bear our self: though the King of
Scythia were not mine Enemy, I am bound by so many considerations to protect
you, that I will hazard my Empires, and my life it self for your defense; and
because it were not just you should be uuhappie only for having obliged us with
so much generositie, believe that you shall find as advantageous conditions
here, as among the Scythians; and that for the Province of the Massagetes which
you lose, I will give you choice of the best of mine, without pretending to
engage you, either to reveal the secrets of your Prince, or to bear arms
against him. Oroondates casting himself at the Kings feet, kissed his hand in a
thankful acknowledgement of his favors, and retiring to his quarter, found
order was already given to settle him a household. Presently they provided him
an Equipage worthy of his true quality, and so great Pensions were allowed to
entertain him, that he could not have been better fitted with all things, in
the Court of the King his Father.

See in what manner my Prince was received, and staid by Darius with so much
satisfaction, for his happy beginnings, that he lost the remembrance of all the
dangers to which he exposed himself, and of all the difficulties he had yet to
overcome. I had forgot to tell you, that the name of Orontes Prince of the
Massagetes, was not an imaginary one; the Massagetes had really had a Prince of
that name; of Oroondates age, and bred up with him, but they had lost him at
the first passage of the Araxis, by the fall of a bridge of boats, which sunk
unfortunately under him, and many others that perished with him; this reason
persuaded my Master, to take the same name again, he had already given himself,
at the encounter of Artaxerxes, believing that if the news thereof should come
into Scythia, he might pass there for the true Orontes, who might be thought to
have escaped drowning; knowing also, that notwithstanding all the diligence
that could be used, they never by any means could find his body.

In the mean time the King of Persia, who truly was one of the best, and most
generous Princes in the world, seeing himself so highly obliged to my Master,
desired to requite the services he had received from him, by such proofs of
love, and such remarkable favors, as might serve for an example to Posterity,
and a spur to those that were coldest in his service. And indeed he heaped so
many preferments upon him, honored him with so many offices, and assured him
of his good will by so many tokens, that within a short time neither Memnon,
Mazeus, Artabasus, nor Oxiartes himself were more considerable in the Court
then he. Many persons, especially such as knew his obliging nature, made their
applications to this new favourit, and to say truth, (he had unresistable
charms to attract hearts withal, and wonderful strong chains to hold those he
had attracted.) All the riches he received from Darius, he shared among those
that were in most necessity, and straitened himself in his Domestic expenses,
to follow his liberal inclination. All suitors for offices, or pensions,
addressed themselves only to him; and though he carried himself very modestly
toward the King, and never asked any thing of him but with bashfulness, yet did
he proceed so handsomely, and with so much moderation, that without being
accounted troublesome, he afforded part of his favor to all those that would
acknowledge it. This manner of carriage, wrought an effect very extraordinary in
the minds of the Courtiers, who suppressing their envious nature, beheld his
fortune with gladness, and never gave us any knowledge that he had gained
himself one enemy, for a thousand admirers; whether it were that they knew him
void of ambition, or that the mavelous ascendent he has upon all hearts
exempted him; or that (as it is also probable) he tied them to him by good
turns, wherewith he obliged all the world. The Queens and Princesses moved by
gratitude, and the inclination they had to virtue, together with the Kings
command, strove who should favor him most, and divested themselves of that
gravity, which in Persia is usual among Ladies of their quality, to give him
proofs of their good opinion. In all Companies they let him see the particular
esteem they had of him; contrary to the custom he had free access, and entrance
into their Lodgings, and conversations, and by the Kings will and command, he
lived with them, in the same freedom as Prince Artaxerxes. But all the
demonstrations of love he received from the King, the Ladies, and the whole
Kingdom, were weak in comparison of those that were shown him by that Prince.
He gave his heart so absolutely to my Master, and my Master engaged himself in
so strict a friendship with him, that never were two Lovers linked with a more
violent passion; whether it were a hunting, or at other exercises, or in
visiting Ladies, they were never seen asunder; At first Oroondates pressed
Artaxerxes to receive what was due to him from the Prince of the Massagetes;
but he so often testified he was not pleased with those respects, and conjured
him so ardently to forbear them, that my Master, after much resistance, was at
last constrained to let himself be overcome, and to live with him almost in the
same fashion, as he should have done if his true quality had been known. This
freedom absolutely conquered Oroondates, and plunged him into that friendship,
for which he has since received such sencible afflictions; And truly I must
confess to you, that the Sun never beheld any thing more lovely then
Artaxerxes, and that I have not attributed any qualities to my Master, which
that Prince possessed not as advantageously as he: You already know something
of his valor, his handsomness was admirable, his goodness went beyond it, and
in all his actions he had a grace so little common, that it was impossible to
know him, and not to love him. I wonder not if my Master was bound to him with
so strong a chain, since I my self have felt the effects of his merits, with a
passion which shall for ever make me reverence his memory.

This remembrance made some tears fall from Araxes eyes, and Lysimachus who
till then had heark'ned without interrupting him, coming as it were out of a
trance, in which his astonishment and attention to the recital of those
extraordinary things, had buried him; I bear a part with you ( said he) in your
grief whatsoever it be; but you have told me such strange adventures, and
wherein I perceive I shall have a very great share, that it is impossible for
me to express the confusion you have put me in: Yet proceed I pray you, and
fear not that I will interrupt you.

The Prince of Scythia (continued Araxes) did indeed receive some satisfaction
in the kindness of Artaxerxes, in the favor of Darius, and in the love of his
whole Family, and constrained himself as much as was possible for him, to
testify his acknowledgement; But his passion which was infinitely augmented by
conversing with the Princess, could not be satisfied with those contentments;
and those favors wherewith he was in a manner overwhelmed, how dear soever
they were to him, began to be but troublesome, when he turned his thoughts upon
those, whereon he had fixed his whole desires. He saw the Princess daily,
entertained her with much liberty, and was looked upon with a very favorable
eye, that great and virtuous Lady thinking her self obliged, to take off much
of her severity for his sake, and at least to afford a good^look, to the
preserver of the whole Royal Family; besides, my Masters rare endowments,
already producing in her, some of their usual effects; had made no light
impression in a mind already prepossessed with powerful obligations. This
conversation perfected the undoing of my poor Prince, and discovering charms in
the mind and manners of that divine Princess, which were more attractive then
those he had observed in her face, he gave himself so over to his passion, that
by it, he lost not only part of his invincible courage, but also the whole
remainder of his quiet. The liberty he had with her, made him but the more sad,
and all he could do for himself in his present condition, was to be patient and
wait the pleasure of the Gods, without attempting any other remedy. To express
love to her as Orontes, he saw but little reason, and less hope of being
favorably received; and to discover himself, was the utter ruin of all his
projects, and too evident a danger of his life, which yet he would have
hazarded without difficulty, if he had seen but never so little probability in
his design; These considerations which he often did me the honor to
communicate to me, made him resolve to keep himself still undiscovered; And in
the interim endeavor to win the Princesses favor under the name of Orontes;
till being assured of it by some proofs, and having made himself yet more
powerful with the King by some important service, he might see more
encouragement, and less danger to declare himself.

In the mean time he continued his visits, but he entertained the Princess with
so much respect, and wariness, and with discourses so far from the inclinations
he had to her, that unless by his ardent sighs he gave some knowledge of his
passion, it was no easy matter for her to perceive it. Not but that he sought
all occasions to please her, and to do her all kind of little services with
such care and watchfulness as is not to be found in one indifferent; his looks
also spoke sufficiently to make him be understood by an interessed person: but
his mouth was always silent, and his tongue tied up by so profound a respect,
that it left it is whole business to his eyes, and to his heart all the pain it
suffered for the temerity he accused it of. He continued upon these terms two
or three days, and his disquiets so charged his humor, that growing daily more
melancholique, and less sociable, he at last was hardly to be known. When I
undertook to comfort him, and to condemn the weakness he showed, he answered me
with nothing but sighs and sobs, which piercing my very soul with grief, made
me detest his ruinous passion: His body grew quickly sencible of his minds
affliction, and his former good looks gave place to a fallow complexion, which
left almost no mark of that excelling comelyness, that was wont to work an
astonishment in the Persians. Artaxerxes who from day to day, observed so
wonderful an alteration, took a great deal of pains to find the cause, but
Oroondates still put him off with some feigned excuse, and disguised the truth
from him by all the pretenses he could invent. He tried to divert him by all
manner of passe-times, and exercises, but seeing all his cares were vain, he
bore a part of his trouble with very much discontent, and was so excessively
grieved, that my Master knowing his affection by those visible proofs,
constrained himself in his presence, and forced his countenance to express a
pleasantness, of which his heart was utterly incapable. The King, who loved him
dearly, used his endeavors to infuse mirth into him, nor did the Queens and
Princesses forget any kind of divertisement to withdraw him from a sadness,
which infected the whole Court.

One Evening the King being with the Queen his Mother, where the Queen his
wife, the Princesses his daughters, and the fairest Ladies of the Court were
likewise; the Company having long entertained it self with the change of my
Masters looks and humor, and every one diversely alleging the cause, the King
giving his opinion: Without doubt, it is Love, ( said he) that has robbed us of
the Prince of the Massagetes, and he has infallibly left some beauty in
Scythia, which persecutes him here in Persia, and so revenges her Country for
the injury we do it, in depriving it of a Prince, who is one of its chiefest
ornaments. Artabasus, who was near the King, replied: Do you think, Sir, that
among so many Ladies as are here, there may not one be found, whose beauty
might have produced an effect so disadvantageous to our contentment? For my
part, I believe it is among the Persians, Orontes has lost that liberty he
preserved among the Scythians, since he has left that pleasing humor, and
those fresh looks here, which he brought with him out of his own Country. If it
be so, (cried the King) and that among our Ladies there be any one so cruel, as
to let him continue longer in a condition so worthy of pity, I declare my self
her mortal enemy, and swear by the Sun, I will receive all the harsh usage she
shall show him, as done to mine own person. Artaxerxes to second the King his
Father, conjured all the Ladies one after another, to have compassion of his
dear Orontes; and the Queen his Mother added, I do not believe that among all
our Ladies, there is any so flinty as to reject Orontes affections, nor that
the credit of a King, or intercession of a friend can obtain much, where his
merits have been able to do nothing. Oroondates, who was touched to the heart
with all these discourses, would often have answered such obliging speeches,
but fearing he should not have power enough over his passion, to keep himself
from giving some knowledge of it, either by his words, or action, he went to
join Discourse with the Princess Roxana, Barsina, and Memnon, who were
conversing together near a window, and left them not till the King retired: but
during their entertainment, he had his eyes so fixed upon the Princess, and
showed so much distraction in all his talk, that Roxana was like to have
suspected something of the truth.

After that time, seeing how concerned the whole Court was in his sad or
pleasing humor, and in what manner his least actions were observed, he strove
to dissemble part of his discontent, and to give those that were most curious,
less occasion of inquiry after the cause of it, not being willing to discover
that by his imprudence, which he hid with so much care, even to the loss of all
his repose and quietness. But alas! the disease was already too violent, and
his soul was too full of passion, to afford a room for any other thing. This
constraint made him still grow worse, and he would have wasted away insensibly
to nothing, if that which happened to him shortly after, had not made some
change, or rather alteration in his fortune.

The fairness of a day extraordinary clear, and temperate for the season it
then was, invited the Princesses, to walk in the Gardens of the Palace, the
greatest Gallants waited on them thither, and at their alighting out of their
Chariots, Oroondates took Statira by the hand, Hydaspes Parisatis, Artaxerxes
Roxana, and Memnon his dear Barsina; Rhesaces, Ariobarsanes, Orsines, and some
others, led Arsinoe, Cleone, and other fair Ladies, whereof the Persian Court
was exceedingly well stored: It is not necessary for me to describe the beauty
of those Gardens to you, you have seen them in their greatest glory, before the
insolency of some loose women, carried on your Great King to the ruin of the
bravest Palace, and fairest City of the world. After that the whole Company had
walked together awhile, it divided it self according to the several
inclinations of the Ladies, one part ran to the Fountains, another sought for
shade in Arbours; some sat down upon the grass, and the rest visited the fair
and sp^cious Allies. Statira being her self alone with Oroondates, in a
by-walk, twenty or thirty paces from all the Company, resolved to take that
time to discover his trouble; and when she thought no body could over-hear her,
having looked a while earnestly upon him; Orontes (said she) after the proofs
we have had of your nobleness and civility, have I not reason to believe you
have also a readiness to comply with Ladies, and particularly with them that
esteem you so much as I do: I say, who unfeignedly acknowledge your generosity
more, then all those you have obliged? My Prince astonished at the beginning of
this Discourse, was a while without answering; but in the end, that he might
not continue silent, Madam, (said he, with a very low humility) there is so
much glory in pleasing and obeying you, that though I were not engaged, both by
duty and inclination to that compliance, and obedience, I find too high
recompenses thereby, ever to forsake either of them so long as I live. I
expected no less, (replied the Princess) from a civility so well known to me;
but if I be not satisfied with words, and that the interest I take in your good
will, makes me desire proofs thereof: will you not fall off from that
obedience you promise me, and leave me the trouble and shame of a refusal,
which mine indiscretion has perchance deserved? Oroondates not knowing whither
this Discourse would tend, answered her trembling with love and respect; No,
Madam, I will never fall back from the vow I have made to obey you eternally,
and should I in that honor meet the certain loss of my life, it is too
advantageous to me, not to embrace it, as my most glorious fortune. That Is too
much, (replied Statira) I have sense enough of my obligations to you, never to
buy the greatest good I could wish for, at such a price; and indeed it is
nothing but the desire of its preservation that makes me curious, and perhaps
indiscreet, in urging you to things which it may be are both against your
humor, and against your resolution: In short, Orontes, that which I desire of
you, (both by the remembrance of your promise, and by the consideration of that
which you love best in the world) is nothing else but a confession of the true
cause of your affliction. I conjure you to it, Orontes, as much as it is
possible for me, and I protest to you it is not out of any curiosity in my
humor, that I entreat this of you; but out of the real compassion I have of
your trouble, and a desire to procure its redress, by all the means that shall
depend upon my assistance, and the credit of the King my Father. If my Prince
had been struck with thunder, he could not have been more suddenly deprived of
all sens then he was at the hearing of these words; he was not able to keep
himself from stepping back, and changing color two or three times, with
actions of a man quite beside himself; and was so inwardly touched, that the
Princess who considered all his carriage with astonishment, repented her self
of having pressed him so far: but much more, when lifting up his eyes, (from
which he could not withhold some tears) and fixing them upon hers; Ah! Madam,
(said he, with the tone of his voice quite altered) What is it you ask me? He
repeated these words twice, and then walking about twenty paces with her,
before he spoke, being entranced like a man in the agony of death, he had a
thousand designs in his head, all which in the end gave place to his last
resolution; that being taken he made a stand, and turning toward the Princess,
so changed, that she was much troubled at it: Yes, Madam, (said he) I will obey
you, and though I see my death inevitable in what you desire of me, I remember
that in the offers I made you, I exempted it not from the proofs of my
obedience. The Princess as much surprised as he, and perhaps beginning to doubt
the truth, was very sorry she had gone so far, and interrupting him, said, No,
no, Orontes, I will have none from you of that nature; I thought I had asked
something of smaller moment; but since it is of so great importance, I, if you
please, will dis-engage you of all you have promised me. My Master, who after a
strong conflict, had already taken his resolution, and who without doubt, would
have been sorry to lose an opportunity, which perchance he might not find
again in his whole life time, resolved to break through that dangerous passage,
and said to her with a voice a little more confident; No, no, Madam, it is now
too late to free me from a thing, to which I am already engaged, both by my
promise, and by other too powerful considerations; and that charitable care you
express for the conservation of my life, will not be unuseful to me, when you
shall know it depends only upon your self; the Gods are my witnesses,
(continued he, lifting up his eyes and hands to Heaven) that nothing but your
command alone, could have drawn from my mouth, a confession which will be most
fatal to me, and which without your express injunction, I would have carried
with me secret and undiscovered to my grave: Yes, doubtless, I should rather
have chosen to die in silence, then incur your displeasure by so presumptuous a
Declaration: but since that besides the obligation to which your will has
engaged me, I see my destruction evident on all sides however, I shall think it
both more glorious, and more justifiable, when by your own command, I shall
have told you, that you your self are the cause of it: Let not this insolent
confession surprise you, Madam, nor do not turn away your eyes through
horror, or indignation, from this unfortunate man: It Is true, Madam, I have
said it, and if at the last extremity of my life, I may be permitted to say it
again, I die for you; and if one death be too poor to satisfy you, accuse the
gods for having given me but one life, to make reparation for an offense, the
expiation whereof would require a thousand. The Prince would have said more, if
the Princess touched to the quick with so free a Declaration, and who knowing
her self to be daughter to the greatest King upon Earth, thought no Prince in
the world ought to speak to her in such terms as those, had not pulled her
hand away from him, and sat down upon a green Bank, looking on him with eyes
full of disdain, while this poor Prince leaning against a Tree, waited
trembling, for the sentence of his condemnation. She bethought her self awhile
what she should answer, wavering between anger, and compassion; she had
already some good will toward him, and though she thought her self highly
offended, she also remembered what he had done for her and hers; which indeed
were services considerable enough, to blot a light offense out of the mind of
one so nearly obliged: this reflection softened her a little, but hindered her not
from making this answer, with much coldness and moderation. Orontes, if the
obligations I have to you for my Brothers life, and the liberty of our family,
were not as great as the fault you are guilty of, I should not want means to
make you understand the nature of an offense, which without doubt, your good
reception in this Court, has encouraged you to commit: but since whether I
will or no, I am much indebted to you, and that by mine impertinent curiosity,
I have some share in your fault my self, I will conceal't, upon condition you
shall never entertain me again with such like follies, and that you will
utterly lose all thought of them, on pain of my everlasting hatred. These words
went so near to Oroondates, that depriving him of speech and sense, they made
him fall down at her feet, without any sign of life. The Princess touched at
that object, with compassion, astonishment, and perhaps with an affection then
taking birth, cast forth a great cry, at which two of her maids who were not
far off came running, and after them Barsina, and Memnon, and a while after
Artaxerxes, and the whole company; their grief was very violent, but not long,
and my Master coming to himself within a while, drew them out of that
apprehension, into which his swouning had put them. He was much ashamed to find
himself, in the midst of all that company, and in the arms of Artaxerxes, who
bedewed his face with tears; but when he had well recovered his sense and
reason, he feared he had by that accident discovered, what he so much desired
to conceal; and rising up, begged pardon of the Company, for the trouble his
indisposition had given them; so taking his leave of them, and of his Princess
by a look that had something of fatal in it, he retired with Prince Artaxerxes,
who by no means would forsake him, and with many others who accompanied him to
his Lodging.

Araxes would have gone on with his Discourse, and Lysimachus hearkened to him
with so much attention, that he never thought of dining, and would have past
the rest of the day, before it had ever come into his mind, if Amyntas, and
Polemon had not come to interrupt them for that purpose: They returned into the
house, and Lysimachus having made such a meal as the disquietnesse of his
thoughts would suffer him, went to visit Oroondates, whom he no longer could
behold without admiration; he found him taking his rest, and not being willing
to disturb it, he took Araxes by the hand, and brought him to the same place
where they had passed the morning, sufficiently expressing by that action what
he desired of him. That faithful servant, who knew his meaning, and who was
never so well satisfied, as when he was talking of his Master, without making
himself to be entreated, began to continue his Relation on this manner.

The End of the First Book.
CASSANDRA BOOK II.
THE accident that had happened to my Master, passed in the opinion of the
whole Court, for an effect of his bodily indisposition, and of all them that
had been present, perhaps there was not one who guessed at the true cause of
it. As Soon as he was in his Chamber, Prince Artaxerxes would needs have him go
to bed, and take his rest the remainder of that day, without being disturbed by
any body; he did so to obey him, and was no sooner said, but the Prince after
having closely embraced him, and conjured him to be cheerful, retired, and
carried with him all the company that waited on him: As Soon as Oroondates saw
himself at liberty, his sighs and tears broke forth with so much violence, that
I thought his soul would have gone out with them: I drew near to comfort him,
and to take that part I was wont to bear in his affliction; but I no sooner
began to open my mouth, when, Let me alone Araxes, ( said he) and give this
miserable wretch leave to die in peace; tie not thy self any longer to the
fortune of the most unhappy man upon the face of the whole Earth* take all the
Money and Jewels I have left, return to thy friends and mine, and lose both the
sight and the remembrance of him that would overwhelm thee in his ruins, if
thou should still be so obstinate as to keep him company: I endured thy
assistance as long as I was suffered to live, but now that is forbidden me, and
that I have received the cruel sentence of my death, leave this unfortunate man
for ever, and go tell the King of Scythia the fatal adventure of his son; tell
him I am dead, by a Sovereign Decree, but a Decree pronounced by the fairest
mouth in the world; tell him, That Darius takes revenge by his Daughter, for
the Defeat of his Armies, and that I satisfy for the blood of so many thousand
Persians, slain by him cruelly in the Wars. He said many other things, which
pierced my very heart with compassion, and made me answer with a deluge of
tears, which I poured forth at his bed side; I would nevertheless have
alleged some reasons, to settle him in better temper, but he stopped my mouth,
saying, It is enough, Araxes, let us talk no more on it, Satira will have me die,
and I am fully resolved to obey her; oppose my intention no longer, since thou
know I am not ignorant of the means. Yes fair Princess, ( continued he,
lifting up his eyes and crossing his arms upon his breast) you shall be served
your own way, and you shall not at all stand in need of any bodies assistance,
to punish me for the offense I have committed against you: you forbid me to
speak, nay, you forbid me to think of my affection; but then you should have
forbidden me to come into your Tent that fatal night, in which I preserved both
you and yours, from the insolency of the Scythians. That small service for
which you confess your self indebted to me whither you will or no, makes you
conceal my crime; but that which you call crime, ought to be a thousand times
more considerable to you then that service. In serving you in that encounter, I
did but an action of a Prince; but in forsaking all my friends, and devesting
my self of all the bonds of nature, to receive an inevitable destruction at
your feet, I have done an action of a Prince that loves you, and of a Prince
that dies for you; it is true, you are ignorant of these obligations, but those
that are known to you, are considerable enough, to make me expect the same
success in those that are unknown.

You threaten me with your eternal hatred; Ah! Cruel, and what have I done to
you worthy of it? Examine the nature of mine offense, and you will see I am
not so guilty, but that my death may free me from part of that severity; shall
your hatred last longer then my life; And can you detest a soul that forsakes
its body only to obey you? No, no, dear Princess, you are not so hard hearted,
that satisfaction will without doubt content you, and when I shall cease to be,
surely I shall cease to be odious to you.

He said a thousand other things to this purpose, and though I used all my
endeavors to make him take something to refresh him, he still obstinately
refused, and passed the whole night in complaints, that would have touched the
most insensible hearts with pity.

When I came to his bedside in the morning, I found him in a burning Fever;
Prince Artaxerxes who came into his Chamber as soon as it was day, was
exceedingly grieved at it, and sending for his Physicians, forced him by my
entreaty, to take something in his presence; without his help I should never
have brought him to it, but for fear he should visibly show him his despair, he
obeyed: yet as soon as he was gone, he refused all things, and mocked at all the
Physicians prescriptions. The King came that day to visit him, and expressed so
much trouble for his sickness, that his grief was redoubled by knowing he had
so many partakers in it. The Queens came thither also, and the Princess
Parisatis for the Princess Statira, fearing that her presence or countenance
might discover something, feigned an indisposition to exempt her self from that
visit. My poor sick Master, who made not so favorable an interpretation of her
absence, was so touched with that inhumanity, that his Fever grew thereby much
more violent. He passed the second night as he had done the first, and it was
no sooner day, but he presently called for his clothes; he was in so unfit a
condition to rise, that it was long e're he could persuade me to obey him; but
in the end seeing he would have no denial, and that he began to be angry with
the Grooms of his Chamber, I was fain to be patient, and expect what would be
the issue of his design: when he was ready, he went with much ado into his
Closet, commanding me to let in no body but Prince Artaxerxes: he had scarcely
shut himself in, but the Prince entered the Chamber, and coming softly to his
bed, he admired when he found him not there, but more when I told him in how
weak estate he was gotten up, and what charge he had given me. Before he saw
him, I begged that he would employ his power to persuade him to have more care
of himself, wherein he promised me to use his utmost endeavors.

As Soon as he was gone in to him, and had bidden him good morrow, he ran with
open arms to embrace him; but my Master putting him back as well as his
weakness would suffer him, No, no Artaxerxes, (said he) it is not to me these
kindnesses are any longer due; you must now change your manner of living with
me, and with your error lose a friendship which I have not reserved, and which
I can no longer keep without deceiving you. Though the advantages I receive
thereby are exceeding great, I cannot suffer my self to be guilty of abusing
you, and having nothing more to fear, I have now no more need to dissemble.
Artaxerxes amazed at this discourse, expected the end of it with trouble, and
astonishment, while Oroondates forcing himself beyond the strength his present
indisposition had left him, continued on this manner: Be not so soon
transported with wonder Artaxerxes, and since you have so much desired to know
the cause of my discontent, learn with it the crime, the name, and the quality
of him you have honored with your friendship; But rather ( pursued he, taking
a Daggar which lay upon the Table, and presenting the handle of it to him) take
this steel for a revenger of my crimes, and as soon as I have spoke the word,
strike through the heart of this disloyal man, who has repaid your open
freedom with dissimulation; let not our friendship dissuade you from it, for
though I dearly preserve it is memory, 'twill quickly be at an end on your part;
think not you shall infringe the remainder of it by this action, since it is
safe for your Estate, pleasing to all your friends, and since by sending me out
of this world, you will free your self of an enemy, who were not to be despised
if his hatred were hereditary; to conclude, consider me no longer as Orontes,
Prince of the Massagetes, who had the happiness to do you some small service,
but as Oroondates Prince of Scythia, and lawful Successor to him that has so
often dyed the Fields red in the blood of your Subjects, and whom (to make him
completely guilty) the Beauty of the Princess Statira your Sister drew unto
this Court, where her hatred has reduced him to that miserable condition in
which you see him: why do you delay still, now you know all this? you will not
be to be blamed for destroying him, whom you have so much cause to hate, the
King your Father will thank you, and your Sister, who before she knew me, was
taught to hate me from her Cradle, will think herself extremely obliged to you
for it.

Artaxerxes whom so unexpected a discovery had made more unmovable then a
Statue, knew not whether he were awake, or in a sleep, and not being able to
imagine such strange things could be other then a dream; he was absolutely like
a dead body, save that the tears which ran down his face, gave some testimony
that he was alive. In the mean time Oroondates persisted in his design, and
angry to see him so slow to take revenge; these tears ( said he) injure your
courage, and this irresolution wrongs the generosity of Artaxerxes; let not
this occasion escape, to revenge your self of a powerful enemy, and to oblige
a faithful friend: my death will be more glorious, and more welcome from your
hand, then from mine own, and though both should refuse to give it me; Love,
Grief, and Sickness will shortly satisfy my desires. Artaxerxes who till then
had hearkened to him with attention, wakened at last as out of a deep sleep,
and knowing that all he saw was most assuredly true, after having considered
awhile, he threw himself suddenly upon him, his heart being so pressed between
a mixture of grief and joy, that he was a long time before he could get out one
word. Though Oroondates loved him more then his own self, (the condition he was
in rendering him incapable to taste any happiness) he at first received his
kindness very coldly, but then coming to consider, with what affection, the
Prince embraced him, after a Declaration, that seemed justly to exempt him from
it, he was ashamed to let himself be overcome in generosity, and hugging him in
his arms, as close as his weakness could permit, he made him quickly know, he
had not put of the affection of Orontes, though he had laid aside his name, and
quality: They held one another a good while in such strait embraces, that they
seemed to be become one body; but at last the time they spent in them having
something dissipated Artaxerxes astonishment, and given him leisure to recover
his spirits, he said to Oroondates, with a more settled countenance; Great
Prince, the error your disguise has made me live in, causes in me as much
trouble, as the honor of seeing you in this place does joy for so unexpected a
happiness. I have failed infinitlie in my behavior toward you, and if I were
not assured of your goodness, I should have no hope of pardon; as you ( if I
may say such a thing) shall be a good while before you obtain it, for an
opinion that has mortally offended me. Cruel Oroondates, could you believe
that the change of your condition, and the hatred of our Families, could change
my affection to you, and that Artaxerxes was so cowardly to lay hold of such a
base occasion, to revenge himself of an Enemy, from whom he has received both
his life, and liberty? No, no generous Prince, Posterity shall not blush for
a crime, the stain whereof would remain eternally in the blood Royal of
Persia, and it shall never be reproached to me, that the knowledge of
Oroondates, blotted out my remembrance of our Obligations to Orontes; I loved
you as Orontes, but I will honor you as Oroondates; and if the alteration of
your quality allow me any remainder of your former liberty, I will love you
always more then my self, since it is impossible for me to live without your
affection; receive great Prince, these new assurances I give you of mine, and
refuse me not the confirmation of those I have received from you. If Statira
(who is too much honored by your love) have not the same inclinations, and
same sense of the pains you have taken for her, I will disown her, and declare
my self her most most bitter enemy; I hope nevertheless that the knowledge of
your merits, and of your birth, added to the force of my persuasions, will be
able to do much with her, against whom I take your part with so strong a
passion, that you shall soon perceive, how dear your interests are to me. All
the recompense I pretend to by it, is nothing but to change your discontented
manner of life, since I can take no pleasure in mine, while you are so
afflicted, and that from henceforth you ought to rely upon my care, in
whatsoever shall concern you.

It is not possible for me to relate Oroondates joy and wonder, his hope
raising it self by such sweet promises, he became quite changed in a moment,
and these testimonies of a friendship which was so dear, and so advantageous to
him, produced very sudden and marvelous effects, both in regard of the health
of his body, and of the quiet of his mind; and indeed, he so forgot his
sickness to answer Artaxerxes freedom, and engaged himself so far in
protestations of service and friendship, that he would not have given over of a
long time, if that Prince who forsook not the care of his health, had not in a
manner by force made him go to bed, refusing to hear any more till he was there
again. When he had yielded to his desires, Artaxerxes sat down by his bed
side; and there being no body but I left in the Chamber, he commanded me to
recount to him my Masters adventures, which till that day he was ignorant of.
My Prince, notwithstanding all Artaxerxes endeavors to hinder him by reason of
his fever, would needs make the recital of them himself, not thinking any
body else was able to express the least part of his passion; he took up the
Story therefore from the beginning of his love, not hiding from him the
smallest particularities, even to the Princesses last words which had caused
his falling into the swoune, the occasion whereof Artaxerxes till then was
ignorant of; and he related it so feelingly, that the very remembrance of it
would have put him into the same condition, if the Prince who had hearkn'd to
him without interruption, had not comforted him with these words. Though your
distrust, and obstinacy in concealing your self, from the most faithful Friend
you ever had, touches me very sensibly, I will not call to mind that injury,
since you have forgotten greater, and of more importance, and without
considering the offense I commit against him by whom I came into this world, I
will employ my endeavors for you with such care that they shall not be
unprofitable. Statira loves me exceedingly, and you are exceeding lovely, these
two points make me hope for all manner of good fortune, if yours depend only
upon her, since while I entreat her as your friend, I will counsel her as her
brother: I assure my self she will hearken to us, and I already believe she
hates you not considering that besides the obligations for which she is
indebted to you, I dare swear there are few Ladies in the Court that have not
some inclination to you; lose not this opinion for the words she spoke, they
are no sign of aversion; and it were very strange if so unexpected an
encounter with a discourse so unlooked for from a man whom she ever thought her
inferior, should not have extremely surprised her: you know the customs of her
sex, and especially of those of her quality: consider them I beseech you, and
instead of casting your self into a despair unworthy of your courage recover
your former health, your former humor, and expect all manner of satisfaction,
from your own merit and my assistance. And do you, (replied Oroondates) expect
from me all that you ought to look for from a Prince, whom you have drawn out
of the grave, and who will not with less passion embrace the occasions of
sacrificing himself for you, then he would that excess of happiness you promise
him.

After these passages and some others, Artaxerxes took leave of him to go
labor for his contentment, and to give him liberty to take a little rest. I
say rest, since indeed he now began to taste some in such sweet hopes, and that
he forsook the desire of death, upon which he had so firmly fixed his
resolution; though the disorder he had committed in rising that day, had
something moved him, yet was not his fever the more violent for it* and within
two hours after the Prince of Persia's departure, the Physicians found less
distemper in his pulse, and more signs of recovery in his voice and
countenance.

In the mean time Prince Artaxerxes giving the Gods thanks for their favor, in
affording him the means to requite part of his engagements to my Master,
resolved to lay hold of the occasion with so much care that he might never be
accused of ingratitude; and not being willing to delay it longer, as soon as he
was out of my Masters Chamber, he went (as I have learned since) from
Oroondates, to Princess Statira's Lodging. He found her without any other
company but her maids, and not desiring witnesses of what he had to say, he
prayed her to go into her Closset. When they were there together and had shut
the door, the Prince making her sit down by him, after he had a while looked
silently upon her, took her hands, and pressing them gently between his:
Sister, ( said he, with a voice less confident then at other times) is it not
true that you love me well? Brother (answered the Princess) I know not to what
end you ask assurances from me, of a thing which I believe you do not doubt.
But I mean ( replied he) that it is with a friendship more then ordinary, and
that you will not refuse to give me proofs of it, when I shall desire them from
you, They must needs be very difficult ones if I do (said the Princess) since
it is not truer that I am Statira, then it is that I love Artaxerxes more then
all the world. I ask not so much ( replied he) and I will never envy another
that which he has deserved better then I; wonder not Sister ( continued he) if
I ask you questions, which your manner of living does without doubt make you
think strange; I did really believe you loved me, and upon that belief, I have
laid a foundation for my life; but see well to the confirmation you give me of
it, and remember, that if you have the heart to repent you, when I shall desire
proofs, you ought no longer to hold Artaxerxes for your brother; but for the
man whom you have the most mortally offended in the whole world, and for him,
whom you will most infallibly send unto his grave. Till then the Princess was
not moved at his discourse, but seeing with how much earnestness he spoke, she
answered him more seriously; The Prince of Persia has so much affection to his
Sister, that he will never desire any thing from her, unworthy of either of
them, neither will she refuse him her very life, if he ask it of her, for a
proof of hers. I will ever be ready to lay down mine, for the conservation of
yours, ( replied the Prince) and will rather consent to mine own ruin, then to
your disadvantage; you have reason to believe it dearest sister, and I also
will believe that desiring only things which are easy, and which you ought to
do, you will not refuse them, when your brothers safety is concerned. In short,
dear sister, not to detain you longer, it is mine own life I beg of you, in
that of my dear Orontes, both of them depending absolutely upon you, and you
ought not to judge otherwise of the condition I am in, then by that to which
you have reduced him. If he die it is impossible I should live, if he live, I
shall be indebted to you for my preservation; and it is rather me, then him you
make to suffer the punishments of that presumption whereof you do accuse him.
Wonder not, Sister, it is in the last extremity of his life, that he has
discovered to me what passed between you; and it is in the same extremity he
has made himself known, but known to be such an one, that I may without injury
to the Crown of Persia, beg that of you for him, which you might refuse
Orontes.

Stick not therefore upon his quality, for it is equal to ours, and we have
found him too powerful to have any reason to despise him: I must not keep you
longer in suspense, besides your obligation to him, and your love to me, you
have also discretion enough to deserve to be trusted with a secret of this
consequence, and to persuade me to discover to you, that it is no longer to
Orontes, Prince of the Massagetes, you are so much indebted, but to the valiant
Oroondates Son to the Great Emperor of Scythia, and lawful Successor of the
most Potent Empire of all Europe. Be not amazed, dear Sister, but take this I
tell you for a thing as true, as to you it appears strange. He is no longer a
Fugitive Prince, who to fly the anger of his King, has sought for Sanctuary
in our Court: but a Prince, who burning for love of you ever since that first
sight, which-was so fatal to him, and so advantageous to our family, has
abandoned the tender affection of his Father, and the Countries over which
Heaven made him to be born a Sovereign, has traveled thus far into his
Enemies Territories, and has exposed himself to so many evident dangers to see
you, and to dedicate a life unto you, which he would not preserve but for your
sake. He would have gone on still, when the Princess who had hearkened to him
with much attention and more astonishment, not suffering him to proceed
farther, cried out, O Gods! Brother do you abuse me, or must I give credit to
what you say? You ought to do so, ( replied he) since I tell it you seriou^ly,
and conjure you to receive him as his birth, his merit, and the services he
has done you, oblige you to do. What, would you have me love the Son of our
sworn Enemy, ( said Statira?) Sure if you consider how highly it will offend
him to whom we owe our being, you will not think it strange if I disobey you. I
shall think it a greater cruelty then death it self ( answered Artaxerxes)
having vowed such a friendship to the Prince of Scythia, that our fortunes
henceforth are inseparable: If you will not save his life, I beseech you detain
me here no longer, and believe you never shall see Artaxerxes more, but at his
Funeral.

Is it possible, ( replied the Princess) you should be so passionately
concerned for him that has so often shed the blood of your Nation, and with
whom you can hope for no peace, so long as his Father and yours are living? But
is it possible cruel Sister ( said he) you should conserve the memory of that,
after so many obligations, which ought to have wiped it clean out of your
remembrance? Are your interests in it greater then mine? And can you look upon
him as Oroondates, who has made his valor appear to our loss, when he knew
us not, and that his duty obliged him to it; without considering him at the
same time, as the man that saved the honor, the liberty, and the life of you
and yours, and who to see you, and serve you, has made no difficulty to forsake
his party, his kingdom, his father, and his life it self, which he is come to
deliver into the hands of his most mortal Enemies? Shall a pretended injury,
make you forget such real services? And can it so prepossesse you, as to keep
you from knowing what you owe to the pains and hazards to which he has exposed
himself for your sake? It is impossible ( Statira) that ever you should be able
to requite them; and should you do much more in favor of him then I demand,
you would scarce dis-engage your self of a part of your own debt, besides what
is due to his interests and mine. Let us consider yours, Sister, since I
protested I would never desire any thing to your disadvantage; can you wish for
a greater Prince, or a match more suitable to your birth? Would you have a
handsomer man; or rather is it possible so many excellent qualities, and that
comeliness able to charm the rockiest hearts, should have suffered you to
remain unsensible? No, no, dear Sister, if you have been so hitherto, it is now
time to let your self be conquered; you have defended your self too long
against his merits, against the obligations you have to him, and against the
earnest intercession of a brother, that loves you far more then his own self.

To these words he added many others, able to soften a more savage heart then
Statira's; in which, finding some inclination, they in the end forced her to
yield to so many powerful motives. She was a long time in these reflections,
without answering her brother, who sometimes embracing her with much
tenderness, and sometimes falling on his knees, forgot neither prayers nor
tears, to move her to compassion* At last lifting up her head, and coming out
of a deep study, she looked upon him with something a kinder eye, and casting
her arm about his neck, said, Well then, brother, what must I do to satisfy
you? The Prince transported with joy, after he had straightly embraced her, You
must cure poor Oroondates (answered he) by an usage contrary to that, which put
him into the condition you shall see him in, and by a disavowing of the words
you spoke to him. Will that suffice for your satisfaction, replied the
Princess? No, no, sister, (said Artaxerxes) when you have raised him again from
the place where you have laid him, you must acknowledge his services, by giving
him leave to hope for a friendship, which he has so well deserved. Well (
answered Statira) I grant you all you desire, since you force me to it, and
that it is impossible for me to resist any thing wherein you take so deep an
interest; For your sake, I will give him leave to love me. That Is not enough,
(cried Artaxerxes) his affection requires more then so, and deserves that his
own consideration should oblige you to it; add but that word (dear sister) if
you would have me the most happy of all men living. You are very troublesome
(answered Statira smiling) yet since I have done so much, I will refuse you
nothing more; but will leave to you the whole care and management of an
affection, into which you are going to engage me, and wherein I foresee an
infinite number of obstacles; your prudence shall make way through them if it
can, and remember I have but a small share in the fault which you make me to
commit. The Prince extremely overjoyed, after a multitude of thanks, and dear
expressions, strove to make her cast away all the fears that assaulted her, and
telling her the particulars of my Masters life, left her not till he found she
had a great deal of good will toward him, and as much desire to hasten his
recovery.

That it might not be delayed longer, Artaxerxes persuaded the Queen his Mother
to go see him that same Evening; the Princesses her daughters accompanied her,
and he himself would needs make one, in a visit of his own motioning. The
Princess Statira entered into his chamber trembling; and considering what she
was going to do, and what repugnancy she found in her self against those things
which her brother exacted from her, she drew near my Masters bed, with so much
confusion, that whosoever would have observed her, might easily have found it
in her countenance. Nevertheless having already some small kindness toward him,
and seeing him reduced to that sad condition, only by the love he bore to her,
pity completed the introducing of affection, and made her resolve to break
through all difficulties, to satisfy her brother, to requite her obligations
to my Master; and also to follow the incitements of an inclination which
already began to gather strength in her. After the Queen had asked him how he
did, and talked a while with him, the Prince her son, as if he had something to
say to her, took her with one hand, and the Princess Parisatis with the other,
and led them to a Window, where he amused them with some Discourse which he
invented for that purpose.

Then it was that Princess Statira was in so strange a confusion, that she had
very much ado to get out of it, and to remember her last resolutions. My Prince
trembling with love and fear, durst hardly lift up his eyes unto her, and quite
ashamed that he was yet alive, seemed to ask her pardon for it by his silence,
and by some tears which utterly overcame her, and were like to have made her
show signs of her compassion; which without question would have discovered the
cause of it. But she resisted stoutly, and coming near my Master, she said so
low that she could not be heard by any body but him, What, will Orontes die
then? Yes, Madam, (answered he) he will die, as he ought to do; and if he
has so long deferr^d to give you that proof of his care to please you, do not
accuse him for it, since he has done both what he could, and what he should to
satisfy you. Let Orontes die if he will, (replied the Princess) so Oroondates
live. Oroondates quite lost in that sudden surprise of joy and astonishment,
was so stricken for a time, that he could not find words to make reply; yet
seeing that the Queen was ready to come back to him, he spoke these few unto
the Princess. Oroondates would live, Madam, if she for whom he both will and
ought to die, did but consent unto his life. The Princess answered him in
have, She not only consents to it, but also entreats, and if she have any
power commands it.

The Queen, and the Princess Parisatis, who drew near, hindered them from
saying more: but Prince Artaxerxes knew easily by my Masters face, that that
short time had been happily employed for him; he could not dissemble the joy he
felt, and as soon as the Queen and the Princesses were gone, he learned the
success from my Master, with so many marks of satisfaction, that I thereby
knew the ardency of his friendship to him better then before. It is not
possible for me to express in the least degree, how my Master was transported,
what he did, what he said to the Prince of Persia, how often he called him his
God, and his protecting Angel, and how many protestations he made to him of an
eternal fidelity. It shall suffice me to tell you, that the next day his Fever
was gone, and that this change of his life made such an a^teration in his
health, that within two days he was out of bed, and within two more out of his
Chamber.

Those that were concerned in his sickness, heard of his recovery with much
joy; and I may truly say, it was almost a public gladness, Oroondates virtue
having in that short abode, gained him as many friends, as there were persons
capable to understand it. As Soon as he went abroad, he repayed his visits
carefully, and when he had seen the King, and the Queens, he went to the two
Princesses Lodgings, where he found them together, and their Cousin Roxana with
them. He made his addresses with the same fear, which of late did ever
accompany him in Statira's presence; but Artaxerxes who came thither almost as
soon as he, holding Parisatis and Roxana in talk to oblige him, gave him as
free liberty to entertain the Princess as he could desire. He was not willing
to lose the opportunity, and having looked a while silently upon her, he said
at last with an inward trembling, I know not, Madam, whither in giving me leave
to live, you have also given me leave to speak, but though I were forbidden it
for all things else, yet ought it at least to be allowed me, that I may return
her thanks who has preserved my life.

The Princess to these words made answer: Our whole family has obligations
to you of the same nature, and I should have had little gratitude, if I had not
contributed all that depended on me, toward the health of a person to whom we
are all so much indebted. Those small obligations ( replied the Prince) carry
their recompense along with them, and all the services I shall be able to do
you, while I have breath, are too gloriously paid already, if the charity you
had to a dying man, be not extinct to one whom you see in better health. I did
too good a work (answered the Princess smiling) when I assisted your
recoverie, ever to repent me of it while I live; and besides my knowledge of
your quality, your merits, and our engagements, my brothers satisfaction is so
dear to me, that I to it will always sacrifice the better part of mine
inclinations. Oroondates with a deep sigh replied, Since the Gods have not been
liberal enough of their favors to me, to make me worthy of my self to serve
you, I receive the fortune they send me as proceeding from them, and if by the
most holy zeal and the most respective passion that ever was, I cannot merit
the honor of being yours, I shall esteem my self too happy, if for the
consideration of that dear brother, you will exempt me from the hatred of our
families, and if laying it aside, you permit me to live as a person not
indifferent to him that is so dear to you.

The Princess who truly loved him, and desired to favor him as much as she
believed she might, answered but with some violence to her reserved humor, I
forbid you not to make more favourble interpretations of what concerns you, and
I shall not take it ill, if you believe you are considerable enough of your
self; true it is, I was moved by my brothers solicitation, to the action which
you call charitable, but I will confess to you, that if I had believed I might
and ought, I should have done that of my own accord, which I did by his
persuasion. My Master was so over-joyed at these obliging words, that he was
ready to cast himself at her feet, and make known the nature of their discourse
by his action; but of a sudde^ coming to himself, he preserved judgment enough
to consider the place where he was, and the persons that were present, which
made him restrain himself as much as possibly he could, so that he only said
with a countenance which discovered the excess of his contenment; I perceived
well, Madam, from the happy moment which first gave me to you, that something
Divine forced me to reverence you in a quite extraordinary manner, and I
receive proofs of that Divinity in the absolute power you have over our lives;
you took mine away, by a sentence which my temerity extorted justly from your
fair mouth, you restored it me again by words which your compassion produced;
and now you bless it with so undeserved a mercy, that I have much ado to know
my self, being drawn out of an abyss of misery, and raised to a glory that
ought to be envied by the Gods themselves. The rapture he was in, would have
made him say more, if the Princess had not interrupted him on this manner.
Oroondates, I without question do more then I ought, if I consider who I am;
but if I likewise consider who you are, and what you have done for us, and
particularly for my self, me thinks I should be most ungrateful, if I did not
show some acknowledgement of that affection, whereof you give me so great and
so dangerous proofs. Indeed I was not pleased that Orontes should dare to love
me, but since my brother thinks fit that Oroondates should, and that I should
suffer him, and that he being a Prince of quality equal to me, exposes himself
to so manifest perils for my service, I should think I committed a fault both
against friendship and against duty it self, if I abated not something of my
first severity: abus^ it not I pray you, but live in such a manner both for
your own sake and mine, that the Prince of Scythia, and the Princess of
Persia, may never be suspected to hold intelligence. The reflecting upon this
thought makes me tremble, and when those obstacles which frighted not you, come
into my consideration, I am so confounded at your design, that I can only leave
the conduct of it to the Gods, to your own prudence, and my brothers
assistance. Oroondates already receiving marks of affection from his Princess,
which were beyond his expectation, made her this answer: The mercy of the Gods,
and Prince Artaxerxes goodness, which have given way to the birth of a most
perfect affection, will without doubt favor the success of it; and that
hereditary hatred which makes my greatest hindrances, will yield, I hope, to
juster considerations: for my part, Madam, since you do me the honor to
command it me, I will carry my self in a such a manner, that a fortune I have
never deserved, shall never be suspected; and though the Prince of Scythia
should be discovered in the Court of Persia, the Princess Statira shall not at
all appear more faulty then the Princess Parisatis.

The remainder of their discourse was cut off by the Princess Roxana, who being
something concerned in it, came maliciously to interrupt them. Artaxerxes and
Parisatis joined company with them, and they all together passed the rest of
the day in an indifferent conversation. After that meeting, Oroondates employed
his time so well with his Princess, that he made a mavelous progress in his
affairs, and press^d her with so much discretion, that at last he received
assurances both by her words and actions, that he was really beloved of her.
This knowledge restored him to his former health and humor, and made him such
in the eyes of the whole Court, that he drew the hearts and admiration of all
afresh; Prince Artaxerxes being resolved to oblige him to the uttermost, did
him all the good offices that might be, but he within a short time was but
little necessary to him for the gaining of his sister; for that Princess
observing from day to day so many admirable qualities in the Prince who lived
only for her sake, suffered her self to be insensibly won to so strong an
affection to my Master, that his passion had the advantage but little over
hers. She carried her self nevertheless with so much reservedness, that the
severest of the age, no nor Diogenes himself, of whom your King had so great an
esteem, could not have told how to condemn any of her actions, though they had
been published to them. My Prince never imbolden'd himself so far as to take
the smallest favors of her, and accounted himself more happy in a kind look,
or an obliging word, then in the possession of an Empire. Nor can I forbear to
tell you by the by, (though perchance you know more of it then I) that as I do
not believe ever woman was adorned with a more excellent beauty then that
Princess, so neither do I think that ever beauty was accompanied with a more
rare and eminent virtue; her wit was marvellously quick and apprehensive; her
humor always equal, and so full of sweetness, that all the world found
themselves charmed with it; her courage (as you know) without being much
shaken, has resisted the roughest assaults of fortune; her discretion and
modesty, were wonderful; and her reservedness such, that though she had a most
true and real affection, she was always enough Mistress of it, never to be
carried to the smallest action, that was against the severest rules of duty,
though the time and opportunities she had, might have sufficiently excused her.

Oroondates seeing this abstract of perfection, was even besides himself when
he considered his own happiness; and though he were infinitely taken with the
beauty of her body, that of her mind had so captivated him, that not being
able to love a lesser virtue, nor make account of a more easy conquest, he
found sweetness in the very difficulties he met with in his design. His access
to her was very open; for the King and the Queens, thought they could do no
less to him that had preserved their daughters, then to allow him their
conversation; neither did he abuse that liberty, and to give no matter of
suspicion, he entertained the Princ^s^s Parisatis as often as her sister, and
seemed not to tie himself more to her, then to Roxana, Barsina, and other
Princesses which he saw every day, and by whom he was looked upon with a very
favorable eye. Artaxerxes was extremely joyed, seeing so good success in the
purpose he had not to appear ungrateful, and took so good order to make him
still pass for Orontes, that he was never suspected by any body. This happy
change of his fortune restoring him his former looks, and humor, with more
advantage then before, returned him the affections of the whole Court, and
especially of the Ladies, who seeing him excel in all things with a mavelous
grace, had some trouble to dissemble the inclinations which so extraordinary a
man produced in their hearts; and if his passion to the Princess, had left him
in a condition to be sencible of that good fortune, he had wherewithal to
satisfy himself in the testimonies of affection he received from the fairest
Ladies of all Persia. You have without doubt known many of them that were not
exempt; but because that Discourse would be too long, and not important to my
Masters life, I will only tell you what I cannot omit without concealing from
you his most remarkable accidents.

It was at the Wedding of Memnon and Barsina, that my Master discovered an
effect of his merit, which has since been very prejudicial to him. The gallant
Memnon having made himself considerable by a thousand noble actions, after a
long suit obtained the fair Barsina, with the general consent of her Father
Artabasus, the King, and the whole Court, who thought themselves much concerned
in that alliance. The high esteem of the Persons, made it a Solemnity to all
Persia, and their quality obliged the King, the Queens, and the whole Royal
Family, to honor Artabasus house with their presence. My Prince, who for his
virtue, had contracted a near friendship with Memnon, was one in all the
Meetings that were made to celebrate his Marriage, and appear^d every where
with so much dexterity and magnificence, that he shared the whole honor with
the Prince of Persia, who likewise gave a thousand proofs there of his
gallantry, and activeness. When the Pomps of the day were ended, there was a
very stately ball, and the Queens^ the Princesses, with all the fairest Ladies,
and of the chiefest quality, were present at it with so extraordinary a luster,
and improved their natural beauties, with so many ornaments, and with the
sparkling of so many jewels, that truly my eyes were hardly able to behold such
glittering objects. My Master was seated near the Princess Roxana, who was
indeed exceeding handsome, and very sumptuously apparelled: you already know
the rank she held in the Court, as daughter to Cohortatus, Darius his Cosen
German, and Governor of the Sacans. I will say nothing of her face, nor wit,
you know much more of them then I; and we have so much cause to detest her,
that it is hard for me to preserve any remembrance of them to her advantage.

When Oroondates h^d talked a while with her of the beauty of the Persian
Ladies, wherewith he confessed himself to be dazzled; Roxana after she had
looked earnestly upon him* and by the diverse changes of her countenance
testified the inward trouble of her mind: But is it possible (said she, so low
that she could not be overheard) you should have still conserved the coldness
of your Clymate among so many beauties, and that the sight of all these wonders
(as you term them) should not have made you lose a little of that indifferency
which has displeased them all? They have too much of that themselves to one so
unfortunate as I am (answered Oroondates) to be touched with the inclinations I
may have; yet I am not so unsencible but I have such to them, as one ought to
have to the fairest creatures of the whole world. But, Madam, I do not want
respect, and I know how to conceal, what I could not declare without temerity;
besides that, indeed I use my utmost endeavors to defend my self from a wound,
whereof I could not, without much presumption, hope for any cure. You are a
dissembler (replied the Princess) and you understand your self well enough,
and us too, to have thoughts quite contrary to your discourse; the Ladies here
know how to value persons like Orontes, as well as in other places; and if I
did not believe I should be the Author of too much vanity in you, I would
assure you there were few of them but would receive your affection as a very
happy fortune. She blushed so as she made an end of these words, that my Master
was almost out of countenance for her; and answered with a low submission, You
may make your self sport, Madam, at the cost of an unfortunate man, but can
never draw him by such a kind of jesting, from the opinion he has of himself.
When you have such a one as you should have, (said Roxana, interrupting him)
you will hope for all you shall desire. I think she would have absolutely
discovered her self, if Prince Artaxerxes who was destined ever to do my Master
good offices, had not come to take her out to dance; or if when he brought her
back to her place, he had not sat discoursing with them all the rest of that
Evening.

When Oroondates was come home, calling to mind Roxana's words, and many of her
former actions which he had not been concerned enough to take notice of before,
he began to find that indeed she loved him, and by some secret instinct
foreseeing the crosses that affection has caused him since, he looked upon the
birth of it with a great deal of trouble. He resolved nevertheless if she
persevered in that humor, to use her as civilly as he possibly could, as well
to render what was due to her person and quality, as not to exasperate a mind
which he knew to be very active and unquiet; and likewise that he might not
give her any suspicion of his love to the Princess of Persia. After that time
he received many other testimonies of it, and Roxana who thought she had
already broke through the greatest difficulty, past by no occasion to let her
looks, and her discourse give him tokens of her inclination toward him.
Oroondates dissembled all very cunningly, and feigning not to perceive it,
carried himself to her, as he believed her birth, and her favorable usage did
much oblige him; but she not being satisfied with ordinary civilities, and her
good opinion of her self being strong enough to persuade her, he only avoided
the knowledge of her affection, out of a fear that he was unworthy of it,
resolved to free him of that apprehension; and after some difficulties she
found in her haughty humor, she forced the laws of decency, and one day slipped
a paper into his sleeve, which he found there when he was retired to his
Chamber; he suspected not the truth at first, but having opened it, he saw
these words which he read before me, and which made him sufficiently know the
person that had written them.

Roxana's Letter to Orontes.
IS it possible, Orontes, that my past actions should not have discovered my
inclinations to you; and that contrary to decency and modesty, you force me to
declare I love you? It Is true Orontes, you do force me to it, but make not a
wrong use of it I pray you, and uudervalue not her, who has sufficiently
uudervalued her self, in doing that for you, which she ought to have expected
from you.


My Master who did me the honor to acquaint me with his most secret affairs,
did not conceal Roxana's affection from me, and was pleased I should use the
liberty to give him my advice he resosv'd to take no notice of that paper, but,
if that Princess asked him concerning it, to feign that it was lost, as it was
probable it might have been; hereupon he began to see her seldomer then he was
wont; and to avoid the occasions of being alone with her, seeking as much as he
could, without show of a particular design, the oportunities of entertaining
Statira, to whom nevertheless out of descretion he would never say any thing of
her Couzens passion, hiding that for her, which he thought she should have
concealed her ^ self. In the mean time he received so many proofs of friendship
from his Princess, as he had never wished for greater, and then it was, that he
was truly happy, both by Artaxerxes assistance, and by Statira's inclination;
but Fortune that makes her pastime of our Destinies, had only raised him to
that hight of bliss, to hurl him with more violence, into that bottomless sea
of miseries, in which he has been tossed the remainder of his days.

O Gods (continued Araxes, his face all wet with tears) can I not without
blasphemy accuse you of injustice, since you have consented to the greatest
loss that Asia could ever suffer, and that for the glory of one man, you have
permitted the destruction of the chiefest House in all the world? It is well
(pursued he) that Oroondates is absent, for at this fatal relation you should
have seen him transported with the most furious storms of grief, that any soul
is capable to feel, and indeed he has so just a cause that I should never
blame him for it, since I think that I my self shall not have courage enough to
recount a misfortune to you, which will infallibly draw tears from your eyes;
yet will I do my utmost endeavor for your sake, and having had courage enough
to bear it, perchance I shall also have enough to make the recital of it

Although the cruel Wars between Persia and Scythia, seemed almost quite
extinguished by the deaths of so many thousand men, who had unhappily ended
their days in them, yet were they but a little smothered, and those two Kings
whose hatred was irreconcilable, still keeping in their hearts a greedy desire
of destroying one another, watched carefully for all occasions that might bring
their designs to an effect. The Scythian who the year before had been invaded
by the Persian, resolved to prevent him the year following, and to carry the
War home to his own doors. To that intent he took the field with an Army of two
hundred thousand men, and passing the Araxis entered Persia, where he did all
acts of hostility. The Siege of Selena a Town upon the Frontiers of this
Kingdom, having put a stop to the progress of his Arms, the rumor of it came
presently after to Persepolis. Darius who already had his Army on foot to have
assaulted him if he had not been prevented, was not much surprised at the
news, and giving the Governors of his Province such Orders as were necessary,
prepared himself to go drive him out in person; but this design was thwarted
by the news he received at the same time of Alexanders marching into his
Countries. Alexander had already made himself famous by the defeat of the
Triballians, and by the taking of Thebes; and though Darius the most Potent
Prince in the world, despised that young Conqueror, and threatened him with the
rod as a child, all his Counselors not making the same judgment of him, gave
advice that he should oppose him in person, and in the interim send one of his
Lievtenants against the Scythians. The persuasions of his friends carried it
from his first resolution, and in the Counsel whither my Master was called, it
was determined, that an Army of two hundred thousand men should be sent against
the Scythians, under the Conduct of Artabasus, and that to give him more credit
and Authority, Prince Artaxerxes should go along with him in person; he having
by reason of his youth, refused the Command of the Army, referring it to the
prudence of an old renowned Captain.

This was the resolution taken in the Counsel; Judge I beseech you of my
Masters perplexity, seeing himself constrained either to fight against those of
his own Nation, or by retiring to them, ruin his whole design that was so
fairly advanced, or stay at home with shame among the Ladies, whilst his dear
Artaxerxes was exposed to dangers, and to the fury of the Scythians. These
considerations held him for some time in uncertainty; but in the end, paternall
duty, and the protection of his Country, yielded to the love of Statira, and
to the friendship of Artaxerxes, and made him resolve not to forsake a friend,
to whom he was indebted for all his contentment, and all his fortune. Having
heard he was alone in his Closset, he went to see him, being attended only by
me; and found him as much afflicted as himself, for the despair of a peace
which he had so ardently wished for. Being ignorant of my Masters intentions,
he knew not yet what he should look for from him, though he was fully
determined never to be his Enemy, and rather to disoblige him that had given
him his being, then him to whom he had vowed so perfect a friendship. Their
mutual trouble was the cause they walked a while together without speaking, but
in the end Oroondates broke silence with these words. You do not doubt brother
( for now they called each other by that name alone) but that in this confusion
of affairs (which I think Fortune manages on this fashion purposely to ruin
me) my astonishment is very great, since that indeed I should have no sense of
humanity, if the tie of blood did not work naturally in me; and if seeing the
sharp afflictions which the Gods now send me, instead of the happiness which
you raised me to, I had constancy enough not to be touched with that
alteration: No, I confess to you my courage cannot bear this stroke, with an
equal countenance, nor without yiedling something to the sorrows I foresee,
knowing what Enemies Fortune gives me to fight against, and that I must
necessarily commit one crime, to avoid a greater: yet believe not dear brother,
that this accident changes me, though it trouble me: for although I am
Oroondates, son to Matheus King of Scythia, I am also Orontes, Statira's
faithful Captive, and Artaxerxes most faithful Friend: I shall not fear to
become an unnatural son, that I may be a Loyal Lover, and a Friend without
reproach; nor shall I make a conscience to fight against a Father, who comes to
overthrow that Fortune which my Friend has established me. That which I desire
of you, and which I shall most ardently beg, is, that the new ca^se you have
to hate the Father, may not make your enmity descend unto the son, who ought
not to bear any blame for his designs, since he not only is innocent of them,
but does even detest them, and prepares himself to ruin them.

Artaxerxes having hearkened to him patiently, answered; Brother, I had proofs
enough of your friendship before, not to believe that any accident could shake
it, and I wish the Gods may never look favorably upon me, if it be not
infinitely more dear to me then all the rest of the world; or if I desire to
live for any other reason then to be Oroondates Friend, and to merit his
affection by the testimonies of mine. I confess I was extremely troubled to
hear of the King your Father's entry into the Territories of Persia, as well
out of the fear I had to lose you, as because I could not hinder my self from
honoring him that has given the world so lovely a Prince, and one so
perfectly beloved by Artaxerxes; but that this consideration should have been
able to diminish the friendship I bear to Oroondates, you are cruel if ever you
have harbored such a thought: No, no, dear Brother, my friendship is of such a
nature, that neither time nor accidents can alter it. I have indeed considered
as well as you, all the difficulties that present themselves, I have balanced
the duty of a friend, against that of an obedient son, but in the end your
skale proving the more weighty, I have taken a resolution to refuse the
employment the King my Father gives me, to keep you company; if you forsake us
to return into Scythia, I conjure you to suffer me with you, instead of making
one consent to see you fight against your own Country. My crime will certainly
be less then yours, my engagements to you being greater, and no body can blame
me for laying down my life for him that was the preserver of it. O Gods!
replied Oroondates, can you without dissembling prefer the small service I have
done you, before obligations that never can be valued? and do you think that
pretense will excuse you for refusing me a request that was made before yours?
Your Friendship to me is strong enough alone, to make you give me proofs of
this high consequence, and do you not know that besides the same consideration,
I have also my affection to your sister, which is a motive you cannot allege?
do not therefore any longer oppose a desire so full of Justice, unless you will
ruin the fortune I hold from you, since howsoever, reason and my obstinacy
must carry it. What will you constrain me to in the end (said Artaxerxes) and
what will you say of me, if I suffer my self to be overcome by your
persuasions, to consent to a thing of so little equity? I will say (answered
Oroondates) that having perfectly obliged me hitherto, you were not willing to
do the contrary, by the refusal of a thing which I so earnestly begged, and
that you resolved to do, what you could by no means avoid. At least (replied
Artaxerxes) do not commit a crime without any necessity, and since you will not
suffer me to accompany you into Scythia, stir not from this Court at all, nor
go to fight with Enemies, that ought to be so considerable to you; though your
company be infinitely dear to me, I love my sister well enough, to yield her
the satisfaction I reap by it; and do not you hate her so much, as not to be
able to pass your time with her til our return. Leave her not I conjure you,
give her this testimony of the love you bear her, and me of the friendship I
require of you.

If your other Proposition displeased me (said Oroondates) this offends me past
expression, for besides my friendship to you, which will never suffer you to
run into any danger, in which I do not participate, I love glory, and hate
infamy sufficiently, not to stay among the Ladies, while you are fighting
Battles. If you seek matter for your valor to work upon (answered Artaxerxes)
you shall have enough here quickly, Alexander is already near the Granicus, and
you may better employ that courage the Gods have given you, against him, then
against the King your Father. To these reasons he added many others, which were
all but vain, to remove my Master from the firm resolution he had taken to
accompany him; and the friendship he had vowed to that most deserving Prince,
made him not only forget the nearest engagements of kindred, but also what he
owed unto himself, and to the consideration of Statira, from whom he could not
absent himself without most violent sorrows.

But she poor Princess was not to be comforted, for seeing the two persons
that were dearer to her then the whole world, ready to depart from her, to
expose themselves to howerly dangers, she had not strength of mind enough to
dissemble her affliction. In the mean time the besieged pressing the King to
send them relief. He commanded Artabasus to march away with the body of the
Army, but the Princes, who needed not to move so slowly, staid some days behind
him, to take their leaves; they made almost all their visits together, and
especially that to Roxana, to whom my Master would not pay that ceremony
alone, least he should afford her an occasion, and conveniencie to prosecute
what she had begun. She was very sensibly troubled to find how industriously
he shunned what she desired, and expressed so much grief to him at that
separation, that he could not hinder himself from bearing part of it. The night
before they went away, after having taken their leave of the Queens, and the
Princess Parisatis, they went to Princess Statira's lodgings, whom they found
in her Closset, so extraordinarily grieved that they despaired of comforting
her, yet did they their endeavors, though she gave but little ear unto them,
and presaging some sinister accident by her tears, they were forced to shed
some with her, both to give their sorrows vent, and to bear her company in her
affliction. Artaxerxes to oblige my Master went out of the Closset, and going
into the Chamber, passed the time with his sisters women, while Oroondates
kneeling upon a cushion which was at his Princesses feet, and taking her fair
hands, whereon he passionatly imprinted many lasting kisses: Madam (said he)
you would do me wrong, if you were not most assured that your griefs are at
least as sensible to me, as to your self; but if in the unhappiness which
separates me from you, I might yet hope for any good fortune, O Gods, how
infinite a one it would be to me, if I could pretend to any share in the tears I
see you shed, and if the departure of a brother, whom next to you I love above
all the world, were not the sole occasion of them. You were ungrateful (
answered the Princess) if you should any way doubt of my friendship, after the
proofs I have given you of it, and but dim-sighted if you did not perceive,
that your going away does very sensibly afflict me; it is true, I love
Artaxerxes better then my self; but my affection to Oroondates does not at all
give place to that I bear to him; the tears I shed at your departure, are
indeed for both, but if they can suffer a difference without injuring my
kindness to my brother, you may make a judgment of them to your advantage,
and draw comfort from it in our common affliction, if you can take any in so
small a matter. But is it possible (replied Oroondates) that this disturbance
your quietness receives from those so near me, should not in some sort alter
your first intentions, and dispense with you for the promise you made to the
Prince your brother? No Madam, I see your noble soul has more regard to a most
sacred affection, then to the troubles our enemies are preparing for us; I say
our enemies, since I will never acknowledge them but for such, and that the
consideration of blood is too weak a thing, to oppose a passion like this of
mine. This excess of goodness would win my heart extremely, if it could be
more yours then it is already; but if I can yet obtain any thing more of you,
give some respit to those tears that kill me, and make me not die by your
sorrow, since mine own is enough of it self to take away my life, and that the
cruel separation I am constrained to resolve upon, puts me rather in a
condition to beg comfort from you, then to give you any; all which I can
receive, consists in the hope I have, this absence will never be able to do any
thing to my prejudice, and that you will preserve some remembrance of him, who
adores you with all the Zeal the Gods themselves can desire from you. Dear
Princess, may I keep this belief without presumption? true it is, if I consider
you, and then cast mine eyes upon my self, this hope is strangled in it is very
birth, and turns to a fear that some more worthy person -- Cruel Oroondates,
(said she, interrupting him) the grief I feel already, should have been
sufficient to content you, without giving it any new increase by your
disobliging suspicions, your own thoughts must needs tell you, these jealousies
are but feigned, and yet the afflictions they cause in me are real; Ah!
Orontes, or rather now Oroondates, how much more reason have I to fear that
absence will wipe these light Idea's out of your memory, and make you repent
the pains you have taken for one, whom you had only seen by night, and in a
sudden passage; and in whom since, time and long frequentation have made you
observe defects, which that darkness had concealed from you. There is so little
probability in that (answered he coldly) that I will not make you any new
protestations, to put you out of an opinion, which I am confident you are very
far from believing: and then having paused a while, Well Madam (continued he)
since your fair mouth assures me of a happiness, which I never ought to have
hoped for, I beseech the Gods to keep you still in the same mind, and that
they would never open your eyes, to let you find how little I deserve so great
a blessing. And I ( added the Princess) beseech them to preserve you from all
dangers, and command you with all the power I have, not to hazard that, but to
very good purpose, which is no longer yours, unless you will revoke the gift
you have made me of it; and if you love my life, have so much care of yours,
that you may be able to give me an account of it when I please. Nothing engages
you to rush headlong into dangers, and though your friendship to my brother,
and that you bear to me have persuaded you to take our party, you have no
animositie that can incite you to seek your ruin in that of your own Nation. I
have vowed you so much obedience (replied he) that I will never err from your
commands, and will preserve my self in hope to see you again, with as great a
desire as I would have forborne this voyage, if mine honor, and the departure
of Artaxerxes, whom I neither can, nor ought to leave, could have suffered me.
But O Gods! (pursued he, kissing her hand again with incredible ecstasies) What
do not I ow to the care you have of fortunate Orontes, and what can he do to
acknowledge the smallest part of it? Keep what he has promised me ( replied
the Princess) and in his disobedience foresee the utter ruin of his happiness,
if so be he ground it upon Statira's friendship. But alas! ( continued she
weeping, and raising her voice a little) I know not what it is that my sadness
presages, and though I strive to put it off, because I see you participate in
it, yet can I not overcome my self so far as to forbear it. At these words
Artaxerxes being come in again, and seeing her all in tears. Sister (said he)
you should be ashamed to show so little courage to them, whom your grief
touches infinitely; what could you do more if you saw one of us carried in a
Coffin, to receive the last duties of affection from you? Ah! cruel Brother,
(cried Statira) with what do you threaten me, and with what unfortunate
presages do you redouble my sorrows; will you not pardon these small
testimonies of them, to the friendship I bear you, and to that you have given
birth to? I am very much obliged to you for both, (replied the Prince) but I
should be glad to see you bear this parting with more moderation; so excessive
a sadness, besides that it increases ours, may make it be believed, that in
this separation, you lament more then a Brother; not but that the proofs of
affection you give my Oroondates, are as pleasing to me, as to himself; but
dear sister, these tears were more excusable, if you were deprived of all hope
to see him again, and if they were not prejudicial to what we have hitherto so
carefully concealed. Well then, (answered she) I will endeavor to bear, what it
is impossible for me to shun; but however, Oroondates, I recommend Artaxerxes
to you, and you brother have a care of Oroondates, since you have commanded me
to love him.

After this Discourse and many others, seeing the day draw near, they took
their last leave of her; when she had given my Master a bracelet of her hair,
which she tied about his arm, and which he wore there a long time after,
notwithstanding all the accidents that happened to him.

At break of day they went to receive the Kings commands, who embraced them a
thousand times, and could not let them depart without much trouble; then
getting on horseback, we marched after the track of the Army, which we
overtook within three days. During the whole Voyage, they were inseparable; yet
Prince Artaxerxes who undertook it against his will, was commonly so sad, that
he had but very little of his good humor left: and Oroondates considering to
what extremities his passion had carried him, and against what enemies he had
taken arms, was sometimes little less then desperate; but the remembrance of
Statira coming again into his mind, blotted out all these considerations, and
overwhelmed all his griefs in those which her absence caused in him.

The Reasons I have already alleged, will hinder me from entertaining you with
the particulars of this Expedition, and from drawing out a War in length, which
was quickly brought to a conclusion. I will content my self with telling you
that the Inhabitants of Selena, being advertised of our coming to relieve them,
armed themselves with a valiant resolution, and defended themselves so stoutly,
that they gave us as much time as was necessary for us to come up to their
Relief, and it was very lucky, that that Siege amused so potent an Army, which
without that obstacle would doubtlesly have much indamaged Persia. In the mean
time we advanced with great diligence, and being within a days march of Selena,
a Council of War was called, and there was a long debate what resolution should
be taken; but in the end the general opinion was, that they should attempt to
raise the Siege, though with the hazard of a Battle, which they thought they
might the better venture, since the courage of their Soldiers was not yet
abated, but that with loud cries they still called to be led on straight unto
the Enemy. Artabasus encouraged by their eagerness, and persuaded by the
advice of all the Commanders, prepared his Forces for that bloody day, and
dividing the Army into three Bodies, he gave the Van to his Brother Tiribasus,
a very valiant man, and one who by the long exercise of arms, was grown to
great experience. He left the Rere-guard to Narbazanes, and kept the Battle for
himself, having besides these three given his son Hydaspes the command of five
hundred Chariots of War, armed with sharp Sithes, and filled with Median
Archers, who that day did much mischief to the Enemy; and to Prince Artaxerxes
four thousand horse, which being loose from the rest of the Army, were to
succor those that should have most need of it, this was all the employment he
would take, though Artabasus with much submission offered to resign what he
thought due to his birth, and courage, Oroondates who desired to be free from
care, and to be as little faulty as was possible for him, refused all command,
and placed himself with the Prince that he might fight near his person This
order having been taken in our Camp, we advanced into a great Plain some thirty
or forty Furlongs from Selena, free from all kind of Trees, and very proper for
a place of Battle. The Enemy advertised of our coming, was already encamped,
and expected us in very good order, for this praise must be given to King
Matheus, that there are few Princes in the world, but must yield to him in
experience and conduct. Night being near when we came thither, Artabasus gave
it wholly to the Army to take their rest, and to prepare for the day that was
to follow; and in the mean time we encamped within sight of the Scythians,
whose fires we discovered in great abundance: but not being ignorant of their
custom, we set forth strong out-guards, that we might not be surprised, and
passed almost the whole night in arms.

As Soon as day appeared, and that the two Armies faced one another, they cast
forth terrible shouts, which witnessing their mavelous desire to fight, joyed
the Commanders with the hope of Victory: yet Artabasus having adored the Sun,
and causing sacrifices to be made through the whole Camp, himself viewed most
part of the beasts that were offered, whose intrails were all found defective,
either in the liver or the heart, and the fire they were burnt with, looked all
bluish, accompanied with a black thick smoke, and which instead of rising up
straight to heaven, spread it self in great Clouds through the whole Army. Some
Victims having received the stroke, escaped out of the Priests hands, and ran
through the Camp with horrible roarings, which was the cause of a very great
disorder: Besides these unlucky Omens, which Artabasus and the other Commanders
understood very well, and which not to strike a terror into the Soldier, they
yet feigned not to take any notice of, the day was so extraordinarily dark,
that we had much ado to see one another, and seemed all ready to have put on
mourning for the death of so many thousand men, to whom it was to be their
last. This hindered not the Armies from drawing near together in very good
order, nor from showing much impatiency to join Battle. I make you judge of my
Masters thoughts, who with his eye had already found out the place where the
King his Father was to be, and felt strong remorse of a crime, for which he
expected a near punishment from the Gods. I did not doubt, for my part but that
my nearest friends, which are of some note among the Scythians, were in their
Army; yet having given over all thought but of my Masters interests, I forgot
the remembrance of my own, and was afflicted only with his discontents. But
Prince Artaxerxes trouble was incomparably beyond ours. His countenance was
wonderfully sad, and there being no cause to attribute the change of it to any
want of courage; one might yet read in his looks an unwillingnesse to go upon
that action; He came close up to my Master, and said to him in his ear,
Brother, You shall know it is by mere force, I march against your Nation, and
you shall see I had rather die, then injure Oroondates in the person of those
he is obliged to love. The throng of those that encompassed them, hindered my
Prince from answering him, and in the mean time the Commanders passing through
the Ranks, and showing themselves to those that were farthest off, did with
their words and gestures encourage the most backward; and finding in them as
much spirit as they could wish, they gave the last Orders, and the Trumpets the
last Signal to begin the Battle: Then it was that the faint Light of the day,
of it self but very gloomy, was even quite darkened with a Cloud of Arrows, shot
from both Armies, and that the Earth became covered with an infinite number of
dead and wounded men, by whose fall the first Ranks grew thin already. But that
fighting at a distance, not satisfying the eagerness of those that were most
fiery, they gave over the use of their Bows, and the first Bodies joining close
together, began to fight terribly at handy-blows. This first shock was given
with so much fury, that it quickly made the Earth change color, and the
Scythian and Persian Squadrons mingled together pell-mell, showed an horrible
face of cruelty, disorder, and confusion. The Scythians had some advantage in
this first encounter, but the rest of the Forces came up to them that were more
advanced, and Hydaspes with his armed Chariots falling in among the Scythians,
made a wonderful slaughter of their Infantry, and by his arrival recovered the
disadvantage of the Persians. It is impossible for me to describe the
particularities of this Battle, for besides that the tediousness of the
Relation would weary you, I could not be present in all places, not witness of
an infinite number of memorable actions, which were done that fatal day;
therefore I will only tell you, that in this general mixture of Forces, that
little order, and obedience, which remained among the Soldiers, was in the end
quite lost; and the Commanders of both sides being no longer distinguished in
so strange a confusion, contented themselves with fighting in their own
persons. Artaxerxes stirred not from his place, but restraining the impatience
of the party under his command, feigned to stay still in expectation of the
success, and to observe the weakest places, that he might succor his own side
to better purpose; though in effect, he did it to defer, as much as he could
possibly, the fighting against those, whom the consideration of Oroondates made
him love; and while he stood thus delaying the time, he was charged himself by
a Body of Horse, which thundering in upon us with much fury, forced us in the
end to defend our selves. He spared them yet as much as he could, and had
already received two wounds, before his Sword had drawn one drop of Enemies
blood. Oroondates who perceived it, and saw how much that strange temper, and
moderation, might endanger him; riding up close to him, Artaxerxes (said he) if
your friendship to me, makes you suffer your self to be killed, my death shall
quickly free you from that consideration. He had not ended these few words,
when seeing him receive a third wound, he flew so fiercely upon him that gave
it, that he instantly laid him dead under his feet, and striking down another
with the same readiness, he rushed in among the Scythians with an incredible
fury. Artaxerxes, whom neither his own blood, nor the care of his own life
could move, seeing him in that danger, would not forsake him, but fighting for
the safety of his friend, quickly showed us proofs of an incomparable valor. I
did my utmost endeavors to second them, and keeping as close to them as I
could, I saw the Persians, animated by their glorious example, fight with so
much courage, that the first Squadrons began to shrink, when a new Reserve
which came up to back them, compast us in on every side. There it was (O
misfortune, which Asia can never recover!) there it was that poor Artaxerxes
being no longer withheld by any consideration, but fighting for the life of his
dear Oroondates, whom he saw in extreme danger, after his Sword had made a
great heap of dead bodies, fell in the end himself, losing his life by an
infinite number of most honorable wounds; the last testimony of his affection,
was an attempt he made to turn his dying breath into a farewell to my Master,
striving to say, Adieu, Oroon -- He was only able to speak the first syllables,
and sinking among the horses feet, gave us a sad assurance, that he had
breathed his last.

Though Araxes did all he could to forbear weeping at this sorrowful
remembrance, yet fell the tears in such abundance from his eyes, that he was
constrained to allow them a free course, while Lysimachus most sensibly touched
with this fatal Relation and having his heart pressed with grief and
compassion, witnessed the greatness of his trouble by a stream of tears, and
by very doleful lamentations. These expressions of pity having held them a
quarter of an hour, Lysimachus in the end speaking first. This gallant man
(said he) whom you have so well described, and whom your recital has made me
perfectly in love with, died only for the glory of Alexander; and the Gods who
had destined that great King to so many glorious conquests, facilitated his way
to them, by the loss of a Prince, who would without doubt have retarded them,
if they had suffered Persia to enjoy him still. The beginnings of so brave a
life did wonderfully take me; and the end of it moves me so exceedingly, that
it is impossible for me to express it. But proceed I beseech you, for you have
so engaged me with your story, that I am not less interessed in the passages
of your Princes life, then in those that nearliest concern mine own. Araxes
having settled himself a little during these words, and wiping his eyes, O
Gods! continued he, what do you think became of poor Oroondates at this woeful
sight? Imagine to your self, Sir, all that rage and despair can produce in a
heart like his, and then you may fancy some small part of what he did. Seeing
him he had so ardently loved, trampled under foot, by the insolent Soldiers, he
made such a slaughter of them in a short time, that the blood wherewith he was
presently besmeared all over, made him look dreadfully in a moment; he fought
no longer for his life, but having resolved to lose it, he meant to accompany
it with so many others, that his friends ghost should be thereby fully
satisfied. At that time me thought he appeared bigger then he was wont to be,
and the horror that attended him which way soever he turned, and the blood
wherewith he was died all over, making him hard to be known, struck some terror
even into me. Grief had quite taken away the use of his voice, but it had so
augmented his strength, that seeming immortal and invulnerable, he made way on
every side, and carried infallible death whither soever he went. The Gods know,
that I used all the force I had, and though they left me my life, it was not
because of any care I took to preserve it: But finding the way opened, and
without resistance wheresoever he led* I had no great difficulty to follow; yet
in the end we must of necessity have lien by it, and my Master in the points of
a thousand Swords, had found that death he so earnestly sought for, if the
flight of a great number of our men engaging us in the midst of them, had not
carried us away also, in spite of us. Oroondates strikes indifferently at all,
but his endeavors were in vain, and the crowd lifting him out of his Saddle,
drew him quite out of the Ranks, do what he could in the world to hinder it.
As Soon as he was gotten free from that thronging multitude, his loss of blood
had brought him to such a weakness, that he fell down without all sense or
sign of life. Though I was extremely wounded, I sat down by him, resolved that
whatsoever became of me, I would neither forsake him dead nor living; but
seeing that our men by little and little left the Field, I determined to look
to his security, in case he should yet have any remainder of life in him; and
making him be carried a little out of the Battle, by three soldiers who offered
themselves to do that Office, I mounted the first Horse I could light upon, and
followed them in a great deal of pain. It was just about the time when the Sun
was ready to set, and that the two Armies having fought most obstinately, were
both of them in a manner utterly defeated. That of the Persians, quitted the
Field a little, by the cowardice of Narbazanes (since, the horrible murderer
of his King) who that day appeared unworthy of the Charge he had, and
shamefully turning his back, put the whole Rere-guard which he commanded, in
disorder. But the Scythians were so weakened, by as great a loss as that of the
Persians, that they were not in a condition to pursue them.

Judge in the interim of the woeful condition I was in, by that to which I saw
my poor Master reduced; when we were at a little distance from the remnants of
the Armies, causing him to be set down upon the ground, I unbuckled his
Headpiece, the fresh air made him come to himself; but scarce had he opened
his eyes, when turning them wildly upon those that stood about him, he cried
out weakly, Ah! Artaxerxes! and presently shut them again, with all the signs
of a man drawing to his end. There is no doubt but that I should instantly have
employed the small strength I had left, to make an end of my self, and keep him
company, if I had not been withheld by the Soldiers who had assisted me, and
who telling me that I could not without infidelity, leave him in an estate
which did so necessarily require my service, made me take some heart and
conceive some hope of life in him. We were but two hours riding from Brisa, a
little Town, where my Master had left his Baggage, and some few servants before
the Battle: The remembrance of the convenience I might have there, and the
knowledge that that Town, though but a little one, was not ill provided of
things necessary for his succor, made me resolve to carry him thither as well
as possibly I could, causing him therefore to be set upon an horse, and a good
strong man behind him to keep him up, we went a reasonable good pace, though my
wounds had made me so weak, that I could hardly sit upon my Saddle. But my
ardent affection to my Prince, putting spirits in me, and being favored by the
Moon, which seemed pretty clear, coming after so clowdy a day, and guided by
those charitable Soldiers, who knew the Country, and were perfect in the ways,
we arrived at the gates of Brisa about two hours within night. We had much
ado to get them opened, but in the end having told who we were, after the
accustomed Orders at such times, and upon such occasions, the Governor caused
us to be admitted in. We went to the house where my Masters servants were, and
having gotten him to bed, the Physicians, and Chirurgians of the Town were sent
for to look to him; though I was extremely hurt, yet would I not go to bed,
till I had seen his wounds searched, and had heard the Physicians opinion
concerning them; after a long dispute among them, they at last agreed, that he
might possibly live if he were diligently looked to, and that no ill accident
happened to him. Having received this assurance, and seen the first remedies
applied to eight or ten wounds he had, I went to bed in his Chamber, meaning
not to leave him, though he had very careful Servants, especially those two we
had brought out of Scythia, who in that necessity gave him very faithful
attendance.

I had five or six dangerous hurts, which yet the Physicians thought not
mortal, and dressing them in the same manner as they had done my Masters, they
tried their endeavors to get him out of his swoun; but notwithstanding all the
care they could use, it was day before he ever opened his eyes; As Soon as he
was come to himself, he appeared wonderfully astonished to see that he was yet
alive, and cried out as loud as his weakness would suffer him; O Gods! do you
force me to live still? he then held his peace, and after he had looked
earnestly upon all those that were about him, imagining the truth of the
condition he was in; Barbarous people (continued he) you strive but in vain to
preserve my life, and the Gods who have permitted you thus far to prolong it,
have not deprived me of the means to take it away. He would have made an
attempt to rise out of bed, but he was so faint, that he was hardly able to
lift up his head, considering himself in that estate, and putting his hands
where he felt the pain of his wounds, he light upon the plasters and rollers
that had been bound about them, and thinking that to be the means to execute
what his weakness would not suffer him, he began to undo them, as he would have
done yesterday in your presence, when they that tended him perceiving his
design, hindered him from going any further: What will you do, Sir, said the
Governor of the Town who was come to visit him, Defend my self from your
cruelty; answered he sharply, and looking with anger upon him; But do you not
think (replied the Governor) that this despair, offends the Gods in the highest
degree, and that it is from them you ought to expect the end of a life you have
received from their hands? Since they have taken away that of Artaxerxes (said
my Prince) they have given over all care of mine, and having deprived me of the
comfort, have deprived me likewise of the desire of living. But Sir (added the
Governor) what have you done with that great courage, which made you be
esteemed so much through the whole world? It is that ( answered Oroondates)
makes me run unto this death, which will deliver me from thousand others; and I
give you notice that all your cares are to no purpose, for you cannot alter my
resolution, and that you may well augment my misery, by making me defer the
remedy of it, but cannot hinder me from fasting till I have executed what my
weakness and your cruelty deny me.

My bed was so near to his, that I could easily hear all he said, and indeed I
could not utterly condemn him, knowing well that a friendship like that of his
with Prince Artaxerxes, cimented by such strong obligations, could not suffer
so cruel a separation, without exceeding great violence; and to say truth, the
merits of that poor Prince, had imprinted so deep a sorrow in my heart for his
loss, that I accompanied all my Masters words with a flood of tears, and knew
not what consolation to give him, in so fresh, and so lawful a grief; yet did
I strive to dissuade him from that obstinate desire of death, and his life
being dearer to me without comparison then mine own, I did all that was
possible for me to preserve it. Sir, (said I, withholding my tears as well as I
could) Is not your judgment yet come sufficiently to you to consider what you
do? As Soon as ever I spoke endeavoring to turn his head to that side whence he
heard my voice come: Is it thou Araxis? said he, Yes Sir, (answered I) I am
Araxis: Oh! praised be the Gods ( replied he) and if thou art still my
faithful Araxes, can thou suffer the inhumanitie of these that persecute me?
Sir (said I) I am as much wounded, and as weak as you are, and if I be able to
do any thing, it is to advertise you, that you will make the Gods your enemies,
if you persist thus in your obstinacy. And thou make thy self mine (replied
he) if thou persist in thine, and if thou be still my dear Araxes, my
contentment ought to be more pleasing to thee, then the griefs to which from
hence forward thou will for ever see me exposed, and for pity ( continued he
with tears in his eyes; seeing that his faithful servants stirred not from him,
but watched to hinder him from his design) for pity, favor him whom thou
have made profession to love, and if thy good will to him be not utterly lost,
be not so cruel as to oppose this sweet end of all his afflictions now it is
that I have need of thy assistance, and that I by my death, demand of thee a
proof of that fidelity which thou have so often vowed me.

I was so plunged in sorrow, that I could only answer him with tears, while he
made such doleful lamentations, as cleft the hearts of all that heard him with
compassion. Dear Artaxerxes! (said he, all drowned in tears) if thou have yet
any remembrance left thee of him that loved thee beyond himself, deliver me
from the Tyranny of those that hinder me from following thee; and if the memory
of our past friendship be not quite blotted out of thy heart, comfort him by
thy sight at least, whom thy loss makes to live in torments, much more
intolerable then that death which has so cruelly parted us; I have not had
the happiness to give thee the last farewell, and if my memory fail me not,
thy last care was, to let me see thy friendship forsook thee not with thy life:
I had not so much as the means to close thine eyes; and mine alas are open
still, but open only for tears, and for all dreadful objects. Unjust and cruel
Gods, if you were thirsty of man's blood, and that your cruelty could not be
glutted by that of so many thousands, whom the anger of the King of Scythia
has sacrificed to you, why did you not pour out the poor remainder, that
which yet runs in the veins of his wretched Son, and preserve that of
Artaxerxes, though even at the cost of all his own; Yes, monster of hatred! yes
unnatural Father! I wish that the loss of thy life, could restore me my dear
brothers, and to recover it at that price, I would lay aside all sense of
humanity, as thou have divested thy self of all manner of pity. The
obstacles of thy Guards, and these of my wounds, should be but weak to save
thee, and I would fly to this revenge as eagerly as thou to thine, and to the
satisfying of thine ambition. Unfortunate Statira (continued he) how ill have I
performed the charge thou gave me; and how much ashamed should I be to appear
before thee, whom my cowardice has so mortally offended! what should I answer
thee, when thou should demand a brother from me, whom thou had so strictly
recommended to my care, nay a brother that had built my Fortune, and a brother
to whom I was indebted for all my happiness? He brought forth these words with
so many sobs, that the most insencible persons must needs have been touched
with them: For my part, not being able absolutely to blame them, I thought fit
to let pass that first extremity of his sorrow, without exasperating him any
further, believing one might better help that with time, which in its first
violence appeared incurable, then by persisting to argue him out of it so
presently. By good fortune the Governor was gone, and they that tended him, not
being too quick witted, ascribed this talk (which was enough to have discovered
him) to a light headedness which they thought his fever might have caused. It
was to small purpose to tell him that the making of those vehement lamentations
did prejudice his health; he was deaf to all such persuasions; and if he made
them any answer at all, it was only entreaties that they would suffer him to
die, or to let him be quiet: He spent the greatest part of the day in these
first passions without taking any thing, and without heark'ning to any thing;
if I opened my mouth, he rebuked me as well as the rest, and I should have
despaired at last of doing any good, if I had not bethought my self to bury the
remembrances of his friendship, in the considerations of his love; and to make
use of Statira's power, to preserve her him, who lived only for her; when he
had tormented himself a great while on this manner, his weakness made him give
some respit to those furious fits; and seeing him with his eyes lift up to
heaven, sigh and sob every moment without speaking a word; Sir, ( said I) I
will not persuade you to receive this affliction, with an unmoved countenance;
but like a man that is a little master of his passions; I cannot condemn such
lawful tears, but neither can I approve your despair, your weeping shows that
you are a man, and that as such you resent the crosses wherewith it pleases
heaven to afflict you; but your wilfulness to destroy your self, would prove
you to be none, since you have so little reason at this time when it is most
necessary for you; now since all these considerations can do nothing with you,
and that one must no longer strive to comfort you, either by reasoning or by
the fear of the Gods which you have forgotten; suffer me I beseech you Sir, to
represent unto your eyes, that Princess to whom you had dedicated the remainder
of a life, which you will now make away without her consent: Consider I pray
you whether you can justly do it, and whether this obstinacy to dispose of
your self without her leave, must not needs mortally offend her; remember your
self of the vows you made her of an absolute resignation, and do not overwhelm
her with so many losses, since that she has already, is enough to send her to
her grave, unless she preserve her self for your sake; yes Sir, it is for you
that she will certainly preserve her self; but she has need of your
assistance, and you ought not to abandon her in an affliction, in which the
consolation of a person so dear to her as your self, will be so necessary.
Think upon it Sir, I beseech you, and believe that if this consideration has
no power with you, she will have just cause to think you never loved her. To
these words I added diverse others with all possible earnestness, which wrought
a very great effect in the mind of my despairing Master he answered nothing for
the present, but musing deeply upon them, gave me liberty to urge many others
of the same nature, and though the Physicians gave me order to hold my peace
for my own health'sake, yet would I never give over, till I saw he was a little
settled. At last he began to complain with less violence, and suffered his
wounds to be opened and dressed, and took something that was given him; but
still with so many sighs and groans, that I was not without some fear his
sorrow alone would be enough to kill him. Seeing him in a way to permit the
endeavors that were used for his recovery, I began to think of mine own, and
to obey the Physicians, who enjoined me silence. My Master also in the end,
disposed himself to follow their directions, and to prolong his life to see
Statira again, that he might beg leave of her to lose it.

The third day after the battle, we heard by the Governor, that the Scythians
seeing themselves too weak to stay longer in Persia, were drawing off their
broken Forces, and that part of them had already passed the Araxis; but that
before their departure, to the end they might not leave the dead bodies of
their Countrymen to the mercy of wild beasts, they had made a huge fire in
the Camp, and burned all that great number of Carcasses, both friends and
enemies, which was a new surcharge of affliction to us, losing by that means
all hope of paying the last offices to the Corpse of Artaxerxes. Within two days
after we learned that Artabasus, having in the battle lost his son Hydaspes,
and his brother Tiribasus; had encamped with the remainder of the Army between
Brisa and Selena; but that seeing the Scythians dislodge, and having received
Letters from Darius, which called him back to serve against Alexander, who was
already come into his Territories, he began to march away toward Persepolis,
when he had left such Orders as were necessary upon the Frontier.

I will not tell you Darius his grief, nor that of the Queens and Princesses
for the death of a son, and of a brother, to whom it was so due, we were too
far off to be witnesses of it; but we have known since, that the King bore that
loss with less patience then that of his Dominions, and that the Princesses by
whom he was so ardently beloved, being weary of their lives when he was gone,
were like to have followed him to his grave; and one may truly say, that never
Prince was so generally bewailed in Asia, though it were already much burdened
with your Forces, and that the consideration of men's private losses, might have
taken away their sense of those of the Royal Family. For us, I may tell you
that being in a place, where we were attended with much care, and looked to by
men that were skillful enough in their art, we were within a short time out of
danger; but our wounds, especially my Masters, were so great and many, that we
were forced to stay above six months for the cure of them. Do but guess at my
Princes impatiency, who having given himself over to grief, had deferred his
design of dying only to see Statira, and by those troublesome wounds, saw
himself retarded from that sight, in a season when both his honor and his love
called him away to her. He had her name eternally in his mouth, and a thousand
times a day kissed the bracelet of her hair, which she had given him at his
departure. As Soon as he saw some probability of my being cured, he resolved to
send me to the Court, that he might hear from her, and let her know what was
become of him; but scarce had he begun to give me my instructions, when I was
taken with a cruel rel^ps, and brought to such extremity, that I was fain to
keep my bed longer then he: this accident was like to have killed him with
grief, and not daring to trust a Message of that consequence to any of his
other servants, he resolved to take patience, and wait till we were both
recovered, which he did, though with such disquiets as you are not able to
imagine.

We were visited every day by the Governor of the Town, a good old man, whose
conversation was very pleasing, and who made us partakers of all the news he
heard. One day we saw him com into the chamber extraordinarily sad, and my
Master having asked the cause. Ah! Sir, (said he) now it is that the Gods
indeed forsake us, and that the Royal Family of Persia is threatened with its
ruin, and this Empire with a general desolation. These words having stirred up
a desire in my Master to press him farther, he sat down by his bedside, and
said,

Know, Sir, that this young Conqueror Alexander, whose fame is already so far
spread, has passed the Granicus, and with an handful of men routed all the
Forces the King had sent to hinder his passage. The wonders he has done, make
him now pass almost for a God; the obstacle of a deep, swift River, the Banks
whereof were of an inaccessible height, and covered with an infinite number of
Persian Squadrons, have not been able to abate his courage, nor retard a
Victory which he has most gloriously obtained; but leaping himself first into
the water, and by his example, teaching his soldiers to despise a danger, which
he braved with so much assurance, he waded through, and gained the shore in
spite of our opposition; so fighting first with his Javelin, and then with his
Sword, he with his own hand flew Rhesaces and Spithridates, two valiant
Commanders, whom without question you have known.

The Macedonians imitating the valor of their King, did prodigious actions,
and to be brief, for thirty or forty men they lost, they killed thirty thousand
of ours, and put all the rest to flight, remaining Masters of the Field, and of
all the Persian Baggage. But that is not all, this Victory has made so great an
alteration of affairs, and imprinted such a terror of his name among the
Persians, that even Sardis it self, the capital City of the lower Provinces
near the Sea, has yielded to him without resistance; and all the rest have
followed it with the same facility, except Miletum and Halicarnassus, which
made some defense; yet he forced them in a short time: and making himself
Master of all the Neighboring Country, with little trouble, his heart was so
puffed up with that prosperity, and the little resistance he met, that he
overran all the Coast of Pamphilia in a few days: but that which is thought
strangest of all, and which makes the Persians believe, the Gods take a
particular care of his Conquests, is, that that shore, which was never wont to
be without storms, and which in its greatest calm, is as much troubled, as
other Seas are in the most furious Tempests, nay, which besides is hardly
Navigable by reason of the many Rocks that lie hid, all along the Coast in
great abundance, submitted it self voluntarily to him, and during his Voyage,
was so smooth and quiet, that the like was never known before. He embarked at
Phaselide, and passed the place commonly called the Scale, then assaulting the
Pysidians, he overcame them, and conquered all Phrygia, in a very short space.
Now he turns his arms toward Paphlagonia, and Cappadocia, to take his March
into the higher Provinces of Asia. The King whose courage is not lessened with
all these changes, is now near Susa, where he is recruiting his Army, to stop
the course of this impetuous torrent, that lays waste his Territories with so
swift a fury. It Is thought it will grow to three hundred thousand fighting men,
against whom this Alexander, how valiant and invincible soever he appear, will
not be able to stand with but thirty thousand Foot, and five thousand Horse,
which are all the Forces his Army is composed of. True it is, they tell wonders
of the goodness of his Forces, and of the order that is observed among them;
almost all his men are old soldiers, and most part of them bore arms under King
Philip, where Alexander knew them, and chose them all himself for this
Expedition: they all seem to be Captains, all their Captains Kings, and they
that have seen them, make very advantageous reports of a great number of
Princes that are near his person, and say that one would take them all for
Alexanders.

This was the Relation the Governor made unto my Master, who accompanied it
with an infinite number of sighs, and with words which sufficiently testified
the sorrow that oppressed him, seeing himself forced to keep his bed, while
poor Darius and that family which was so dear to him, were upon the very brink
of ruin; Great Gods! cried he, are you so much concerned in the glory of one
man, that to raise him up, you will destroy the image which comes nearest to
your greatness? Ah! how justly do you punish the meannesse of my spirit, and
how dearly do you make me buy this life, which I so wretchedly languish out
since the death of Artaxerxes! Then complaining to the Physicians of their
tediousness, he promised them excessive recompenses, if they hastened his
cure, and I know not whither his desire to be well, contributed any thing
toward it, or that indeed he was more carefully looked to, but one might
discern a visible amendment in him; and to make short, within one month after,
we were upon our legs, and like to be quickly in a condition, to endure the
hardship of a Voyage, for which my Prince prepared himself.

Before our departure, we heard that Alexander was Master of Paphlagonia, and
that he within a few days, expected the same success in Cappadocia, with the
same facility. Oroondates who besides the interest of Darius, was already
pricked with emulation of Alexander's glory, being jealous of the Victories he
obtained so gloriously, was no sooner able to get on horseback, but he left
Brisa with his retinue, after he had taken his leave of the Governor, from
whom he had received great testimonies of affection, and to whom he gave very
rich Presents at his departure. If my Master had not known the hatred of the
King his Father to the King of Persia, he would have turned short into
Scythia, and begged supplies there to assist him with; but being well assured
that King Matheus would contribute all that lay in him to advance Darius his
ruin, he lost all hopes on that side, and resolved while the Gods should make
some change in their affairs, to go see Statira again, and serve the King her
Father with his own person, as long as the fates should please to continue his
life. With this design having taken guides, we traveled great days journeys
toward Susa, where the King was recruiting his Army: but scarce had we ridden
three or four, when we learned that having gotten it up to the number, the
Governor of Brisa had made him hope for, he was marching toward Cylicia, to
meet Alexander, who being already Conqueror in Cappadocia, was coming toward
Syria to encounter him. This intelligence made us change our Road, and caused
us to come later to the King, then else we should have done. Before we arrived
there, my Master received news, whereat he was exceedingly grieved, which was
the death of the valiant Memnon, the bravest of all Darius his Commanders, and
him that Alexander apprehended most, as indeed the hearing of his death, was
that which confirmed him in his resolution of invading the higher Asia, seeing
it was no longer defended by so redoubted a Warrior. Oroondates gave some
tears unto his memory, and to the affliction of his fair Barsina, but his soul
was yet so full of mourning for the loss of his dear Artaxerxes, that he was
much the less sensible of all others.

Araxes would have continued his Discourse, if the night which was very near,
had not made them retire, referring the continuation of it till the next day:
Lysimachus had hearkened to him with so much delight, and grew to have so much
interest in the wonders of the life he related, that he very unwillingly
yielded to that intermission, but being constrained to it by many
considerations, he returned into the house, and ran to the Chamber of
Oroondates, whom he found in a condition good enough for the hope of his
recovery; but his mind was in so sad an estate, that one less concerned in it
then he, would have been deeply touched with compassion; he would not make him
speak that Evening, knowing how much it might do him hurt; and fearing to give
him occasion to talk, he wished him good rest, and withdrew into his Chamber,
where after a light supper he went to bed, and passed the night, as he had done
that before.

The End of the Second Book.
CASSANDRA. BOOK III.
BUt sorrowful Oroondates, more nearly touched with the loss of his Princess,
instead of taking any repose in a place which seemed to have been created
purposely for it, did there linger out the hours of his condemnation (for so
he called the necessity that constrained him to live) in pains more sharp, and
insupportable then death it self. Night with it is darkness bringing back
horror and silence into his Chamber, brought back also most dismal objects
into his mind, and represented to him the wretchedness of his present
condition, in so many, and such terrible forms, that he was like to lose his
life, with very grief that he was forced to keep it. Then it was that all the
passages thereof, as well the most pleasing as the most fatal came into his
memory, and that he saw himself most cruelly assaulted, both with a remembrance
of the blessings he had lost, and a sense of the miseries in which he was
overwhelmed.

He made reflection upon the strange birth, the marvelous progress, and the
tragical success of his affection, and from all three, he conjectured that the
Gods had never engaged themselves with so much interest through the whole
course of his misfortunes, but to show in his life a dreadful example of their
wrath, and of the afflictions into which those men precipitate themselves, whom
they have forsaken; He embarked again upon that tempestuous sea, which had
tossed him for the space of ten whole years, and recalling to mind all the
most memorable accidents of that time, where there was any matter of trouble,
he afflicted himself really, but if there were any occasion of joy or comfort,
he was so little sensible of that, that he easily found, his soul being
prepossessed with impressions of grief, had no entrance at all left for any
thing else, nor sense of any other touches then those of despair. But when
having overrun all, he arrived at the bloody Catastrophe of his love, and that
after the cruelties, absences, imprisonments, jealousies, quarrels, and
rigorous commands of his Princess, he came to imagine her death, nay a most
certain bloody and inhuman death; then it was that his constancy utterly
forsook him, and that courage which had not yielded to the rest of his mishaps,
sunk under the burden of an affliction of so high a nature. He fancied before
his eyes that fair and magnanimous Queen, remainder of the Illustrious blood of
Persia, and widow to the greatest man that ever was, holding forth her naked
throat to the sword of Perdiccas, and to the bloody executioners of pittiless
Roxana; he represents her to himself all bloody, and disfigured with a
multitude of wounds, which make that fair body hideous, and scarcely to be
known: he then seeks her in the bottom of a well, under a heap of stones that
buried her, and his imagination working very strongly, made him behold her in
the strangest and most ghastly shapes his mind could possibly conceive. Then it
was that he plunged himself headlong into his grief, and forgetting his
resolution of being cured, he sent forth cries of lamentation, and gave himself
quite over to sighs and groans, swimming as it were in a river of tears, which
streamed from his eyes as two eternal sources. He broke the silence that was
enjoined him for his recovery, and the absence of Lysimachus, Araxes and the
Physicians, gave his tongue liberty to ease his heart of some part of it is
sorrow. Fair Queen (cried he with an interrupted speech) if your soul be not
utterly unloosed from all earthly thoughts, and if you still conserve any
remembrance of your faithful Orontes; Fair Queen, beautiful Statira, divine
spirit, look yet upon this miserable man, and if you be the same Statira so
religiously adored by poor Orontes, see that I am still the same Orontes, by
whom the divine Statira has been so religiously adored: Yes I am still the
same, I declare it to my own shame and confusion, I am the same, unless I be
changed by that meannesse of spirit which I have showed in surviving you; yes,
dear Princess, I live still, though you, alas! are dead; but if you know my
affection well, you cannot doubt but I will shortly follow you; this cowardice
of which I accuse my self, is only a cowardice in appearance, but is indeed an
effect of my courage, and of my love to you. I do resolve to die Statira,
as soon as you are revenged, and the numberless deaths I suffer in expectation
of my last, ought to satisfy you better then one alone, whereby you have
outgon me. One death great Queen was enough for you; but this unhappie wretch
that was the occasion of it, this unfortunate cause of Roxana's hatred, ought
to suffer ten thousand, to recompense that one life he made you lose. He stopped
at these words, to turn over a thousand furious resolutions in his mind, and
to invent as many kinds of revenge, which all seemed too light to his
indignation, fire and sword seemed too gentle for his satisfaction, and Roxana,
and Perdiccas too mean, too feeble subjects to wreak his anger; he wished the
Gods would resuscitate an Alexander to defend them, or that the whole world
would take up arms for their protection. Nay, he who in the whole former course
of his life, had ever appeared moderate, and most religious, fell now to
contest with the Gods, as if he meant to force them to take the part of his
enemies. Great Gods (said he) you who to raise an Alexander to that pitch of
glory, which never any man before attained, have destroyed the Royal Family of
Persia, and beaten down the pride of so many mighty Kings; you who have
submitted so many Empires, and sacrificed so many thousand lives to his
ambition; and who on the contrary have made me linger out my miserable youth
in love, in irons, in unknown Countries, without name, without glory, and
without fortune, though you had given me both as eminent a quality as his, as
high a spirit, and perhaps a Soul capable of as great designs: If you abhorred
her for being loved by me whom you have ever frowned on, why did you not at
least protect her for being so dear to that great man upon whom you showred
down all your Favors? Was it so great a crime in Princess Statira, to have bin
loved by Oroondates, that the glory of having married Alexander could not blot
it out? Were you not satisfied with having tormented, afflicted, and persecuted
me from my childhood, by the violence of my passion, by the death of my dear
Artaxerxes, by long and insupportable absences, by the captivity of my
Princess, by an infinite number of wounds, by long imprisonments, by the loss
of Darius and his Empires, by the marriage of Statira, by her anger, by the
persecutions of Roxana, by my banishment, by such toilsome and dangerous
voiages, and briefly by so many hazards, by so many pains, and by so many
crosses as the courage of your Alexander would infallibly have fainted under;
unless with my life you also robbed me in the very haven, of that Prize which
I was upon the point of receiving, and which I had so gloriously deserved?
Blind Divinities! by what offenses have I drawn your hatred so visibly upon me?
He spoke many other things of this nature, till at last with tormenting himself
so extremely, his senses were a little dulled, which made him fall into a
slumber, burying the thoughts that afflicted him, in some repose: But she that
was eternally in his imagination while awake, appeared to him likewise in his
sleep, and having entertained himself with her the rest of the night, at break
of day he verily thought he heard her voice at his beds head, which having
often pronounced his name; went on, saying, Ah! it is he, Orontes; my dear
Orontes! These words which he did effectually believe he heard, wakened him in
a start, and drawing the Curtain of his Bed, which was a little open, he
fancied that he saw in his Chamber the very face of his dear Statira. This
belief having marvelously surprised him, made him cast forth a loud cry, and
thrusting his head out of bed to see her more distinctly, her image suddenly
vanished from his eyes. The poor Prince troubled with this vision, and not
being able to distinguish whether the force of his imagination, had represented
a shape unto his fancy, which had not appeared indeed; or whether the Ghost of
his dear Princess had really presented it self unto his sight, remained in a
strange perplexity; but the last persuasion being the stronger, he absolutely
believed that Statira came either to comfort him in his affliction, or to
animate him by her presence, to the vengeance she desired of him. In this
conceit he cried out, Whether fly you fair Princess, whether fly you? vanish
not so soon from him that dies for you; dead as you are, you appear no less
charming to me then when you were alive, and I ought not to be more hateful to
you now, then when I was your dear Orontes. He had said more, but that he saw
Lysimachus enter, who coming to his bed side to bid him good morrow, and seeing
him all in a cold sweat, asked him the cause of that distemper; The Prince
extremely moved, and crossing his arms upon his breast, said to him with a very
deep sigh, Ah! Lysimachus, what have I seen? Ah! what have I seen, Lysimachus?
and stopping at those few words, appeared so much amazed, that Lysimachus his
desire increased to learn what was the cause of it, and having conjured him to
tell him; Why do we delay, Lysimachus (replied the Prince) why do we longer
defer this revenge, to which we have obliged our selves? Our Princesses come to
summon us to it themselves, and at the very moment you came in, Statira
vanished from my eyes; my eyes, my own eyes have seen her without illusion, and
my ears heard that same voice, which while she lived, was wont to pronounce my
Oracles; I tell you seriously, and in my right senses, I saw her, fairer,
taller, and more animal then ever, and though I saw her but as a flash of
lightning, yet had I no difficulty to know the features, which I have so
deeply engraven in my heart. Lysimachus at this discourse joining his hands
together, and shrinking up his shoulders; Great Gods (said he) since you have
bin pleased our destinies should be linked together, never separate them, but
give an end quickly, to these miseries, which have lasted too long already. I
do not doubt at all (continued he turning toward the Prince) of the truth of
what you say, since I my self had just such another adventure, for passing
through a long Entry near this Chamber, the Ghost of the Princess Parisatis
appeared to me, she had her very fashion, and her very countenance, I would
have cast my self at her feet, but she vanished away so suddenly, that were it
not for what you tell me happened to you also, I should believe my fancy abused
me, and that I had only seen in imagination, what I indeed saw really, and
without deceit. Oroondates hearing Lysimachus his confidence; Let Us doubt no
more on it Lysimachus (said he) Let Us doubt no more on it: Our Princesses did
without question come to visit us, to comfort us, and to solicit us to that
revenge which we have promised them; perchance they likewise demand the last
duties of us, and that their fair bodies which have yet had no other Tomb but a
heap of stones, expect Funeral honors from us, more suitable to their
quality: that is it which makes their spirits wander still amongst us, and
makes the churlish Ferriman deny them passage, as long as they are deprived of
the Rites of Burial. Come Lysimachus, let us go make them a gallant Monument of
the ruins of Babylon, and appease their Ghosts by the Sacrifices we owe unto
them; we know the obligations they require, let us go and offer them, and mingle
our own innocent blood, with that of those barbarous people that ravished them
from us. Lysimachus answered him coldly: As Soon as you are in a better
condition to execute your just resolutions, I Will bear you company in all
things, and will instruct you in what estate are the affairs of Perdiccas,
Roxana, and of all the successors of Alexander. In the mean time I will employ
this day in some particular sacrifices, and in visiting a Temple of Apollo,
which is but a little distant from this house: there I may pay some part of
what we owe to the memory of our Princesses, and there I may consult the
pleasure of the Gods, both for you, and for my self, our fortunes being so
chained together, that we have need but of one Oracle for us both. At my return
I will entreat Araxes, to continue the relation of your Adventures, and after
that, I will acquaint you with mine, and with some particulars of your own,
which without doubt you are ignorant of, so shall you see what shave I have in
them, and know the mixture of our Interests, which from henceforward can never
more be separated. If my Fortunes were better then they are (replied
Oroondates) I should be overjoyed to have such a Companion in them as your self:
but being such as by this time you partly find them to be, I cannot but be
extremely troubled, by learning that my unhappinesses are common to you: I Will
wait for your return, and (since you will have it so) for the health likewise
which is wanting to this miserable body, that I may second you in our just
designs: but after that, what answer soever you receive from the Gods, I am
fully resolved not to languish always in a life which I cannot spin out longer
without shame and horror. I do not at all love mine better (answered
Lysimachus) then you do yours, and if I still leave the disposing of it to the
Gods, it is to obtain facility in our revenge, and to pay the duty I truly owe
them, according to the precepts of Phylosophie which I have learned, and to the
lessons of that good Philosopher Callisthenes. They had yet some other
discourses, after which Lysimachus took leave of Oroondates, and went out of
the house, attended only by his squire, and the son of their Landlord, who was
to be his guide.

They took their way toward the Temple Lysimachus meant to visit, and because
it was not far off, and that they went a reasonable good pace, they arrived at
the Gate of it in less then an hour: 'Twas contrary to the ordinary custom of
the Territories subject to the King of Persia, that that Temple had been built
in that Country, for in almost all the other Provinces, they made their
sacrifices in the open air, and upon the tops of mountains: but King
Artaxerxes, one of Darius his Predecessors, out of some particular devotion,
had caused this to be built, within forty or fifty furlongs of Babylon, and not
above five or six from the River Euphrates: he had also taken care to enrich it
with a great number of Presents, and the Oracles that were delivered there,
made it quickly very famous through all Asia: the Platform of it was a
Pentagone, and the Frontispiece appeared in Perspective, between two rows of
trees of an extraordinary height, which made a long Walk, whose other end
reached to the bank of the River. This Front was marvelously high, beautified
with many Statues, and particularly with two Marble Pillars of an excessive
height, upon which the God Apollo, and the Goddess his Sister, were placed in
their Chariots. The Gates were Cedar standing on the top of five or six Steps,
of the fairest Parian Marble that was ever seen: the Floor of the Temple was
Paved with the same, and the Walls were all adorned with Pictures which
represented the most famous actions of that God: There was his birth in the
Floting Island, with the punishment of those that were turned into frogs, the
Victory of Python, the Metamorphosis of Daphne, whom the Gods seemed still to
embrace most ardently, insensible as she was, the death of Coronis, and the
transformation of the fatal Crow, the Loves of Clytiae, and of the daughter of
Orchamus, who being half buried, implored the assistance of the God that loved
her, the Destiny of fair Hyacinthus, and that of poor Cyparissus; and in short,
all the most remarkable Stories the Poets had sung of that God, were painted
there by an excellent hand, and enchaced in Cornishes whose materials were very
precious. The Access to the Alter was hindered by a Baluster of Brass, which
reached unto the Arch of the Temple, the form of it was round, and upon it
stood the God of the Stature of a man, his head environed with rays, and so
glittering with Gold Diamonds, and other Stones of great value, that human eyes
were hardly able to endure the luster of them. Behind the Altar was the hole of
the sacred passage or Tunnel whence the Priests drew that fury which made them
pronounce the Oracles: but the coming to it was not permitted to any but them
alone, who came thither through a Vault under ground, which led from their
quarter to the Altar.

Lysimachus came into the long Alley, at the same time when a stranger who had
newly alighted there, was walking near the Gate, and expecting when it would be
opened: scarce had he left his horse, but he came up to him, and saluted him
most courteously: although he desired not to be known, yet was he not willing
to appear unmannerly, and seeing that he had put up the beaver of his
headpiece, he discovered his face also, and returned his salute with all manner
of civility. Besides the decency that obliged him, he was likewise moved to it
by the strangers handsome fashion, and considering him more nearly, he observed
so much Beauty and Majesty in his face, and stature, that though he had been
bred near Alexander the Great, in a Court, out of which so many Kings had
issued, yet did he not believe he had ever beheld any thing that could equal
it. He thought nevertheless that he had seen the like features in some face or
other; yet he spent no time to strengthen that conceit, but followed the
inclination which already moved him to some kind of respect, and affection to
him; The Stranger also who saw something extreme graceful, sprightly, and
martial in his carriage, considered him with admiration, and began to speak to
him in the Persian Language, with so sweet and so obliging a countenance, that
Lysimachus looked upon him, and hearkened to him, as an extraordinary man. I
believe Sir (said the stranger) that the same design leads us both hither, but
I pray the Gods, you be not brought by so ill a Fortune as I am.

The goodness you express to me, ( replied Lysimachus) and the esteem I have
already for a person of so winning a behavior, make me beg of the same Gods,
to send you rather any other fortune, then one like mine. I would to heaven
(answered the stranger with a deep sigh) I were as surely equal to you in the
good qualities which doubtless you possess, as I go beyond both you, and all
men living, in misfortunes. If to have no more hope, but in the grave ( said
Lysimachus) and to have lost by a cruel, and unusual death, the person a man
loved, or rather the only thing for which he lived, be a condition that can
suffer any parallel: I confess there may be found very miserable ones; but if
all those to whom misfortunes of the like nature have happened, have not had
passions as ardent as mine, and for as lovely objects as that I bewail, they
must needs yield a prize to me, which I, in spite of me, carry away from all
the rest of the world.

May the Gods be pleased to comfort you (replied the stranger) since I suffer
some addition to my griefs by the knowledge of yours, for I am very far from
that humor, which makes unfortunate men find some sweetness in meeting with
others as unhappie as themselves: For my part, I who hope no more almost for
any but in death, and who besides miseries of the same nature with yours, have
also suffered many others, under the burden whereof I should have sunk, but
for the particular assistance of heaven will wait its pleasure with the same
heart, which has made me bear a thousand losses without murmuring, the least
of which ought to have sent me to my grave. This courageous resignation ( added
Lysimachus) is a most perfect mark of your virtue, and accuses those Gods, to
whom you so voluntarily submit your self, or cruelty and injustice; they will
pardon me this liberty of speech, which neither comes from a want of respect to
them, nor from an impious humor inclined to blasphemy; but if I may continue
without offending them ( said he walking under the trees) and if we may be
permitted to reason of things that are above us, methinks those cruel scourges
wherewith they have afflicted you, should rather have been destined to the
punishment of Parricides, and of many other crimes, which ambition, or other
motives, daily make the monsters of the present, and past ages to commit; and
yet we see them fortunate, and come to extreme old age, without being crossed
by any accident to trouble the repose of their prosperity. We have seen an
Occhus, predecessor to Darius, bloody with the murder of fifty of his brothers,
his father Artaxerxes the murderer of his own, of his eldest son; and many
other Princes who for reasons of State, have not forborne any kind of crime,
reign and live peaceably to their hundredth year, without any trouble, and
without any sensible cross; and we see poor Darius, a good and a generous
Prince, with all his illustrious Family, the mirror of virtue, constancy and
generosity, persecuted by heaven and fortune, and breathing out their lives at
last by strange, and cruel ways, which seem to accuse this Sovereign
providence. We see an Alexander, known enough through the whole world, taken
away in the flower of his age, and almost in the birth of his hopes, and with
these a great number of other persons truly virtuous, who seem to have come
into the world for nothing else, but to make sport for the inconstancy of
Fortune, or to serve for the Butt of her persecutions.

The stranger who hearkened quietly to him, after he had wiped away some tears
which this discourse drew from his eyes, answered with much moderation. Truly I
have made the same observation with you, and in the diversity of things which I
have seen, have sometimes fastened upon considerations like to yours; I have
indeed known many very vicious persons, who have lived to a very great age, and
very happily, at least in appearance, and I have seen many virtuous men,
harshly used by fortune, and given over to all manner of infelicities; but this
has never made me accuse the Gods of injustice, nor of want of providence in
human affairs; and if you will give me leave to tell you my opinion, I have
always believed that there were as many different kinds of happiness, as
there are several kinds of humors, and that as the true sovereign good consists
only in the contentment of the mind, the very variety of inclinations may
make the difference. So we may often deceive our selves, by accounting a man
happy when we see him possess treasures, which perchance he disdains, to
desire the possession of a person whom he loves; and likewise make very false
judgments of the Fortune of another, seeing him enjoy a Mistress, whom he
would willingly forsake for those treasures that are denied him; On this manner
may we abuse our selves in the opinion we have of the happiness of vicious
men, who though they should obtain that felicity which consists in the
satisfaction of the mind, and the fulfilling of the desire, the remorse of
their guilty conscience makes a war within them unknown to us, and troubling
their quiet by continual assaults, renders them incapable of tasting that
sweetness which they propose to themselves in the fruition of things desired,
or in the being freed from those they hate, or apprehend. Do you think that
Occhus could feel any pleasure in his Victory over the Armenians, or find any
tranquillity in those Estates which he had secured by so many murders, when he
set before his eyes the death of so many brothers, with whose blood he had
cemented that greatness wherein he lived the space of many years? and do you
not believe that Artaxerxes detested the length of his life, when to secure it
he saw himself constrained to sacrifice that of a son whom he had dearly loved?
Certainly if you make reflection upon them, you will judge that the number of
evils, these persons (happy in appearance) feel, is much greater then that of
the goods, which make us believe them to be so; but though I should grant you
that these cruel men, these Parricides, and these monsters, did taste a real
happiness, and that enjoying all they could wish for, they were neither
troubled with ambition, love, nor remorse of conscience; may we not believe
that the Gods have preserved them so many years, to make use of them as
Instruments of their Justice, and scourges wherewith they have punished others,
as faulty, and as wicked as themselves? What do we know, whether they gave
Occhus so long a life for his own happiness, or for the destiny of his
brothers; and whether it were rather their love to him, that made them preserve
him, to destroy them, then their hatred to them, whose inclinations perchance
were worse then his? Ought we not also to believe that they suffered Artaxerxes
to live to his hundredth year, only to use him for the punishment of a son, that
was to attempt against his life? This is my opinion for what concerns the
prosperity of evil men, and the adversity of good, though truly it be an
affliction to all that have any virtue, yet me thinks also it no way shocks
Divine Providence; perhaps those that seemed most innocent to us, were not so
before the Gods, whose Judgments are very different from ours, and are punished
by the miseries to which we see them exposed for some crimes that are concealed
from us: but if they be free of them, it is without question to make trial of
their virtue, and to give it the brighter luster, that they send them such
afflictions, The example of those you allege to me.

The stranger stopped short at these words, and as he was about to have gone on
with his discourse, he seemed prevented by some so pressing remembrance, that
it would not suffer him to proceed further. Lysimachus who had hearkened to him
with much attention, and who admired his gracefulness, both in his discourse,
and in all his actions, would have begun their conversation again, if at the
same time the Gates of the Temple had not been opened, giving them liberty to
go in to their Devotions.

They entered both together, and staying but little to observe the Pictures, and
other beauties of the Temple, they kneeled down near the Baluster, and after
they had prayed softly a while, the stranger raising his voice, and addressing
himself to the God to whom the Temple was dedicated, prayed on this manner:

Powerful Divinity, who do not only dispense thy light to mortals, but also
do truly give being unto all things; Thou independent Being, upon whom all
others do depend: if the prayers of a miserable man may yet be heard, behold,
(thou Father of the Day) the most unfortunate one living, prostrate at the foot
of thine Altar, one who forsaking all hope of human succor or consolation,
expects neither but from thy Divine goodness. Thou know all my misery, thou
know my losses, and thou know great God in what a sea I have floated the
space of many years. If thy Justice be satisfied with so many losses, and if
after having taken so much from me, thou yet preservest that in the world,
which I seek with so much diligence: Enlighten me thou Author of light, and
guide my steps in the track of what I have lost: I part with all things else
untroubled, but great God restore me that I love, restore me that which makes
me live, or at least restore me a hope, which has already forsaken me.

Thus the stranger ended his Prayer, and Lysimachus who had hearkened to it very
attentively, and with as much compassion for his distresses, as the remembrance
of his own would permit, seeing that he had done, and that the Priest being gone
behind the Altar, waited at the hole of the sacred Tunnel, for the answer of
the God, he prostrated himself with all humility, and made his Prayer unto him
in these words.

BRight Star of the day, thou Gi^ that beholdest all things, and by whom all
things subsist, Two miserable wretches who have but one Destiny, cast
themselves down at thy feet, to render what they owe thee, rather then to beg
relief or alteration of a Fortune, in which they are void of all manner of
hope, save that of death: they have lost all that they could lose, and all that
they desired to keep, and can expect no help from thee, unless thou in favor
of them should once again use that power, which thou did communicate to thy
Aesculapius.
Son, and unless thou should restore the lives of those Illustrious persons,
to whom they'rs were wholly dedicated. Assist them only in a most just revenge,
and in the design they have to pay what is due to the Spirits of them they
have so perfectly loved.

Lysimachus ended these words with bowing himself to the very ground; and a
while after the Priest came back before the Altar, so changed that one had much
ado to know him, he seemed taller then ordinary, he had a wild affrighted
look, and being transported with the God that possessed him, he in his rapture
pronounced these words with a dreadful voice.

The ORACLE.
LEt the Dead wait for the Duties of the Living, and let the Living hope for
the assistance of the Dead; the Dead shall build the Fortunes of the Living,
and the Living shall establish the repose of the Dead. In the mean time I will
have the living live, and the dead rest; and both the living and the dead,
expect my pleasure upon the banks of Euphrates.

After that the Priest had pronounced these words, he came by little and little
to himself again, and though at the entreaty of Lysimachus, and the stranger,
he went back to the Hole again, yet would the God give no other answer, and
left them in an uncertainty both of the sense of the Oracle, and to which of
them it was addressed. Each took it to himself, but not being able to
comprehend any thing by it, they resolved to wait for the fulfilling of it,
without informing themselves any further: and after they had offered some small
sacrifices, according to the Custom, and to the intention which obliged them to
it, they took leave of the Priest, and went out of the Temple as ignorant of
their Destinies, as they were before.

If the Affairs of Lysimachus, and those of the stranger, or rather the
sorrowful condition of both could have suffered them to endure company, they
would not have parted so soon, for they had already conceived so high an
esteem, and so much good will for one another, that they could not bid
farewell, without some trouble; but being called otherwhere by urging
considerations, they both got on horseback, and the stranger departing his way,
Lysimachus likewise took his toward Polemons house where he had left
Oroondates.

He rode that short way without speaking a word, seeming to be buried in so
deep a study, that they that accompanied him, durst not put him out of it;
when he was within two or three hundred paces of the house, he saw upon the
right hand, near the River, an exceeding high wood, which appeared to him so
desert, and solitary, that he thought it a fit place to pass some of his
melancholique hours, and to entertain his sad and dying thoughts; with this
intent alighting from his horse, and commanding his Squire to lead him back to
Polemons house, he thanked his son for having guided him, and dismissed him
also, entering alone, and on foot into the wood, where he walked up and down in
the most gloomy shades he could find, and such as were most retired from the
company of men. There he revolved the words of the Oracle in his mind a
hundred times, and after having as often examined them, he understood so
little, that he gave over all care of finding out any more of the meaning of
it. In this solitude his tears had liberty to break forth, and being not seen
by any body that could accuse him of weakness, he made lamentations and
complaints, able to have moved the very trees to pity: The remembrance of the
vision he had seen that morning, coming then into his mind, made him conjure
the spirit of his Princess to appear once more to him, and that with the most
ardent prayers, and the most tender moving words his passion could suggest.

Divine Parisatis (said he walking very softly with his eyes lift up to heaven,
and his arms a cross upon his breast) if notwithstanding your Divinity, you
have already vouchsafed to comfort this unfortunate man by your sight, and to
lay aside the splendour that invirons you, to make your self a fit object for
the weakness of his eyes, do not now refuse him the same favor, since he is
still the same, and that in so solitary a place you may with more liberty,
honor him with the commands he waits for from you. Discoursing with himself on
this manner, he continued his walk under the trees, till coming near a great
Oak, he saw words cut into the bark of it, and then looking about upon the
other trees which were nearest to it he saw they were almost all marked with
the same Characters; he drew near without design and lifting up his head
toward the nearest, he perceived the names of CASSANDRA and EVRIDICE, engraven
upon the bark in great Letters, and in diverse places: After this fight, being
at the foot of the great Oak, and casting his eye upon the writing which
reached down almost to the very root of the tree, he read these words
distinctly which he found there.

Whosoever thou art, whom Chance or Design shall bring into these solitary
places, bewail the misfortunes of desolate Cassandra: here it is that unhappy
She weeps and will weep the remainder of her days, both for what she has lost
by her own fault, and for what she has lost by the anger of the Gods: by her
tears she will deplore what the Gods have taken from her, and by her tears she
will testify to those same Gods, and to the memory of that which was so dear
to her, the full repentance of her crime: She loved that which she ought to
love, she still loves that which is now no more, and to her grave will conserve
both her first and last affections, pure and inviolable. Lysimachus was touched
with compassion at the reading of these words, and lifting up his eyes to
heaven; Great Gods (said he) it is not upon me alone you pour forth your
wrath; and the number of the unfortunate is almost as great as that of men;
then going on yet a few steps further, he saw a little Rock standing upon the
edge of a pleasing brook, all covered over with the like Characters; he there
saw the names of CASSANDRA and EVRIDICE. Interwoven a hundred several ways, and
underneath these words graven with the same hand of the former. Strive not O
Charitable Euridice, to assuage my miseries by the consolations thou give me,
that which I loved and which I ought to love, either is no longer in this
world, or is no longer in it for me, contest no more therefore with me about an
advantage which thou have injustly disputed for; though thy losses be of the
same nature with mine, thou have defended thy self better then I from that
violent passion, which makes mine so sensible to me, and it is only the
consideration of my misfortunes, which makes the greatest part of thine.

Lysimachus his own afflictions hindered him not from bearing a great share in
those of this unknown Cassandra, but he was yet more deeply touched with them,
when being set down upon the bank of that little stream, he saw these words
also at the foot of the Rock, in the same manner of writing. Fair remainders of
what I have so dearly loved, whether part of you be placed in the rank of the
Gods, or that part of you wanders still amongst men, since this heart which was
open to you as long as it could, and as it ought, leaves you still an entry,
which shall never be open but to you, behold with how many tears I solemnize
your memory, and content your self with the last duties I pay, both to the
ashes and remembrance of that which was the better part of my self, the thought
of my other losses has no part in my afflictions, and as all my felicities
were bounded only in you, so your loss alone has settled this sorrow in my
soul, which can never be separted from it.

Lysimachus could not make an end of reading these words without letting fall
some tears, and the knowledge of others misfortunes, calling to mind the
remembrance of his own, afflicted him so deeply that he remained almost without
sense or motion; when he was come a little to himself again, he took off his
Cask, and stretched himself all along by the side of the brook which running
upon small stones made a very pleasing murmr. There it was that his eyes
after having shed abundance of tears, were closed by a gentle slumber, caused
both by his weariness, and waking the nights before; and that his body as
overburthen'd as it was with the passions of his mind, let it self be sweetly
lulled into a quieter repose, then his present condition seemed capable of. And
indeed he made a mends for his former want of sleep by such a sound one, that
night was already well advanced before it left him; neither perchance would he
have waked so soon, but for the noise which two men made, who were talking
together very near him. When he had roused up himself, he wondered to find that
he was in a place from whence darkness had already driven away the day, yet
lifting up his eyes toward heaven, he perceived through the boughs which robbed
him of part of it, a pale faint light, by favor whereof he resolved to seek
out his way to Polemons house, not doubting but his servants were already in
pain for his long stay; yet as he was upon the very point of rising, he heard
the same voice that had wakned him, and though he was loose from all other
thoughts save those of death, yet some remaining spark of curiosity made him
desire to learn what the discourse of those persons might be, in such a place,
and at such an hour. They that talked, were set close by him, and making use
of the delightful coolness the evening afforded, entertained themselves freely
without fear of being heard. Lysimachus lending an ear, heard that one of them
said? But Astiages, would you not hold me for the most wicked of all men
living, if I should follow such pernicious advice, I believe your friendship
only oblige^ you to give it me; but consider also who I am, and against whom
you counsel; such an action besides that it would be shameful, and horrible
to the remembrance of all the world, would also draw the vengeance of the Gods
upon one, and would never leave my miserable conscience any quiet.

Those that are much in love (replied the other) will never stick upon these
slight considerations, and though in other matters the fear of the Gods be to
be commended, in an enterprise of this nature it can pass for nothing but
weakness; a violent passion may excuse all, and those that are overborne by
such an one, commit no crimes but such as are very pardonable: shut up your
eyes, Sir, against all that may dissuade you from your design, and call that
no longer virtue, which is indeed a fainthearted and an unreasonable patience.
But is it possible (said the first) that they who love perfectly can ever bring
themselves to do actions that displease the party whom they love; and that you
have ever been capable of that noble flame, you I say who give counsel so
contrary to the maxims of all those that are touched with it?

I have loved most perfectly (answered Actiages) but not as these speculative
Lovers that content themselves with a glance, or with a sigh, who discover
their affections, and Idolize a face ten years together, without pretending to
any other fruit by their adoration, but the sight and entertainment of their
Mistress. My Love, as it is more real, demands also more real and sollid
favors, and cannot feed upon those Chimera's which satisfy the imagination of
these empty melancholy wits. Will you have me set the difference? know Sir,
that among those thave love, some love simply out of an affection to the thing
beloved, and others out of love unto themselves* the first have no other aim
but the perfection of their object, and ground their happiness only upon their
own passion; they love (or believe they love) a beauty, not to be repaid with
an affection by the person that possesses it, but merely because they judge it
lovely, and these, Sir, me thinks are void of common sense: The latter, to
whose maxims I have always stiffely adhered, seek after a real good, and their
own contentment, as having only reasonable opinions, and such as natural
instinct is able to furnish them withal. They love, upon hope that they shall
be equally repaid, and that they shall taste that happiness in the enjoyment
of the thing beloved, which they proposed unto themselves, before they embarked
into their passion; and these engage not themselves so deeply, as to continue
their love when they have lost their hope: but let us leave both in their
opinions, and let us stick only upon what concerns you; you think, that by a
sweet, pleasing violence, you shall offend her you love; had you that
consideration, when you pulled her out of the arms of her friends? or did you
think you should displease her less by that action, then by this which would
make her entirely your own?

Ah! Astiages ( interrupted the other) this (...) alone makes me tremble; and
consider I pray you, that my Princess is not only daughter to one of the
greatest Kings in the world, but she is the daughter of mine own King, and that
the very attempt you propose, would deserve a thousand thunder bolts.

You should have had this thought ( replied Astiages) before you came to the
terms you are now upon; but in the state your affairs are at present, your
condition cannot be worse, and losing no hope but what you have already lost,
you shall labor your own satisfaction, and enjoy a contentment for which you
have forsaken all others.

But after all, (said the first) what happiness can one taste by forcing the
possession of a thing, in which the will alone gives all the sweetness, and
with what delight can one make much of the body, if the mind do not lend its
consent to welcome it? They that love, for the love of themselves, ( answered
Astiages) make no difference in that, and favors are still favors, which way
soever they are obtained; think upon it therefore, Sir, since it is high time,
and that all things are favorable to you; make use of the power you have in
this place, and consider how great your grief will be, if you let slip a prey
out of your hands, which would never fall into them again. I promise you, that
after this action, you shall be possessor both of the body and mind together,
for all that is past will vanish out of their memory, and she will do that by
necessity, which she would not do by inclination. He made a stop at these
words, and seeing that the other answered him not, he continued on this manner:
Set before your eyes, Sir, the little hope you have to enjoy her any other way;
remember how many vain prayers you have spent; how many unprofitable tears you
have shed, let your past submissions make you ashamed, and blush for having
subjected your self so much, to her whose insolent disdains make her almost
unworthy of your affection; talk no longer to her as a slave, but as a Master,
and instead of beseeching her as you have done hitherto, say boldly, I will,
and if she resist after that knowledge of your desire, make use fearlesly of
that power which the Heavens have given you, and never apprehend the anger of
the Gods, for a fault whereof they themselves have so often been your example.

After that the other had hearkened some time to this Discourse* coming of a
sudden as it were out of a deep sleep; Astiages ( said he) thou have overcome,
thy reasons are so strong, that it is impossible to defend ones self against
them; and notwithstanding all the resistance I can make, I feel my self so
gently forced to consent to what flatters me so pleasingly, that it is very
difficult for me not to yield. I Will follow thy advice, and if the first means
(which I will try yet for a while) prevail not, I Will have recourse to thine,
and whatsoever comes on it, will accuse none but thee, of a fault I shall
commit by thy persuasions. The Gods be thanked, (replied Astiages) who have at
last given you thoughts worthy of you; follow my counsel, Sir, follow it
boldly, and spare not to lay all the fault, and all the punishment you fear,
upon me. But, Sir, ( continued he, after he had held his peace awhile) we may
perchance stay here too long, it is already late, and the Moon which begins to
shine, will now discove^ to us the ways, which are not unknown to me; let us
get out of this Wood, and return to those in whom our stay may have bred some
apprehensions.

At these words they arose, and Lysimachus who believed so by the end of their
discourse, and by the noise they made in going away, rose up also; The
conclusion of their entertainment had informed him of the ill design they had,
and although his affliction was able to smother all other thoughts in him, his
horror of wicked actions made him resolve to cross their intention, and as
much as possibly he could to hinder it. The night being reasonable clear, he
followed them for some time, eying them still before him; but in the end
notwithstanding all his care, he lost sight of them among the Trees: he
endeavored a good while to find them again, but after he had gone up and down
the Wood to no purpose, he came to the bank of the River, and knew the great
Road to Babylon, and the path which led to Polemons house. Scarce had he gone
fifty paces in it, but he met some of his own servants, who were come out to
seek him; he quickly put them out of the trouble they had been in, and returned
with them and Polemon, who was their Guide to the house, which was not far from
thence.

Though it was late when he came in, he would not go to bed, nor sup, without
seeing Oroondates, when he knew by Araxes that he was not asleep, but would be
extreme glad to see him, having expressed much trouble for his absence since it
was night. After he was entered into his Chamber, and that being come to his
bedside, they had embraced one another; Well, Lysimachus, (said Oroondates to
him) what do the Gods ordain us? They have explained themselves very ill,
(answered Lysimachus) for their will is exceeding difficult to be understood: I
know not whither you will be a better interpreter then I; and whither you can
penetrate into the meaning of the most obscure Oracle that ever was. At these
words, after having recounted his Journey, and his Encounter with the Stranger,
he told him the words of the Oracle which he had most carefully remembered.
Oroondates considered a while what explication might be given them, and after
he had mused a little, I know not (said he) what obscurity you find in it,
but me thinks there was never a clearer one pronounced, and that the Gods never
discovered their wills more openly, nor more intelligibly. Let the dead (says
the Oracle) wait for the duties of the living: These words are all expounded of
themselves; the sense without question is, that those fair souls expect the
last duties from us, and that the Gods reproach us for our slacknesse and
delay. And let the living hope for the assistance of the dead: There is no
doubt but that in what we have yet to do for the satisfaction of those dear
spirits, their assistance is necessary for us, and if we be weak against such
powerful enemies, the remembrance of those we loved, will infallibly redouble
our Forces: This is that they come to offer us, and is certainly the cause of
the Visions we saw this morning. It is by this assistance, that the dead shall
build the fortunes of the living, and the living shall establish the r^pose of
the dead. All our fortune from henceforth consists in the death we seek, and
the revenge we hope for* and by this revenge, and by the duties of burial, we
shall establish the repose of these poor spirits, which wander yet about while
their bodies are deprived of Funeral rites. In the mean time I will have the
living live, and the dead rest; and both the living and the dead, expect my
pleasure upon the banks of Euphrates. I see more impossibility in the execution
of this command, then difficulty in the interpretation of it: If the Gods will
have me to live, they must restore me my Princess; as for the dead, they may
easily rest, and expect their pleasure, either upon the Banks of Euphrates, or
those of Cocytus: and see dear Lysimacbus, how these poor souls obey them, and
how, though divested of their bodies, they dare not forsake this place,
carefully rendering to the Divinity, that duty which it yet exacteth from them.
Lysimachus confirmed him in this belief, and after some discourse they had upon
that subject, he told him the several encounters he had in the Wood. He
repeated part of the words, which with the name of Cassandra, were engraven
upon the Trees, and upon the Rock, and then he related the conference of the
two persons, whom he had not been able to hinder from their evil design. They
detested their wickedness together; and Lysimachus seeing it was very late,
wished good rest to Oroondates, and retired into his Chamber, where after
having eaten moderately, he went to bed, passing the rest of the night as he
was accustomed to do.

The next morning Araxes came to give him the good morrow, and Lysimachus after
having enquired how his Master did; I fear he is yet so ill, (added he) that I
shall not dare to beg the Continuation of that Recital from him, which you
began to me; such a long-winded Discourse would do him a great deal of harm:
but if you have still the same desire to oblige me you have expressed, I
beseech you to go on with it, and to tell me the rest of a life, which is more
dear to me, and more considerable then mine own. Araxes expected not to be more
entreated, but sittting down in a chair, which was near his bed, after having
thought a little what he had to say, he began to pursue his Relation on this
manner.

THE CONTINUATION OF THE HISTORY OF OROONDATES AND STATIRA.
IF you were touched by the beginning of my Discourse, I doubt not but you will
be so much more, by that which yet remains to be told you: we are now going to
launch into the open sea, and you will judge by the rest of this recital, that
the small misfortunes wherewith my Master had hitherto been assaulted, were but
the Lightnings of that Thunder which threatened him, and the mists which
fore-ran that storm which was to fall upon his head. You might spare me part
of the things I have to tell you, since without doubt you know them already,
but I will pass them slightly over, and will tell those more at length which
are unknown to you.

As Soon as my Prince with the death of valiant Memnon, and the other ill news
told you, had heard also of the diligence the two Kings used to meet, that they
might decide the Empire of Asia by a second battle, he was much afraid he
should not be present at that memorable day, and showed his impatience so much
by straining his horses, and making them travel such long Journeys, that he
killed them* within a few days; but having gotten others for money, and others
again after them, we hasted on with so much speed, resting almost neither
night nor day, that we came up to Darius his Army, the Evening before that
Bloody battle of Issus. My Master nevertheless resolved not to make himself
known till after the fight, and to do Darius such service first, as might make
his Discovery more dear and welcome to him.

We arrived in a great Plain near the River Pindarus, time enough to see the
Army pass by in Battalia, and because their order in marching, appeared to me
extraordinary and magnificent, I observed it very heedfully, and will tell it
you in a few words, if you have not heard it already from some body else.
Darius his Army was composed of the most part of those several Nations that
were under his subjection, at least of those that were nearest to him; for
the more remote as the Arrachosians, Zogdians and Indians, were not summoned,
because of the haste wherewith the King raised his Forces in that pressing
necessity. Of natural Persians he had thirty thousand horse, and threescore and
ten thousand foot, all proper handsome men, gallantly mounted and richly armed.
The Medes had brought ten thousand horse, and fifty thousand foot; The
Bactrians two thousand horse, armed with Battleaxes, and little light
bucklers, and ten thousand foot armed in the same manner. The Armenians forty
thousand foot, followed by seven thousand Hircanian horse, the bravest of the
whole Army. The Dervices, a barbarous people, subject also to the King of
Persia, had no more then two thousand horse, but forty thousand foot, the
greatest part whereof, by reason of the scarcity of Iron in their Country, were
armed only with Pikes and Javelins all of wood, having hardened the points of
them in the fire. From the Caspian Sea, and other Provinces of Asia, there were
come four or five thousand horse, and ten thousand foot. Besides the Forces
which he had drawn out of the Nations under his obedience, the King had also
thirty thousand Greeks in pay, young valiant men, in whom he had a more perfect
confidence then in all the rest. Thus have I briefly numbered the men whereof
the Army was composed, their order in marching was this. Before all the Forces
passed the sacred fire, (which among the Persians is held in particular
veneration) carried upon silver Altars, and followed by three hundred three
score and five Magi, who sung after their usual manner, and as many young men
clothed in purple robes, this number being ordained, because it is the same of
the days that make up the year, according to the ancient ceremonies of Persia.
These Altars were followed by Jupiters Carre, drawn by twelve white horses, led
by men in white robes, with golden switches in their hands. After the Carre
came the largest and most beautiful horse that could be found, which they
called the horse of the Sun, not ridden, but led by men in the same habit as
the former. Then came the Kings ten armed Chariots, all glittering with gold,
and stones of price, much fitter for ornament then service. The Cavalry of the
several Nations, quite different in their arms, customs and language, marched
next, divided into many Squadrons, whose number I need neither tell you, nor
the names of those that commanded them: I will only let you know, that the
first were those the Persians call Immortals, a selected body, composed of ten
thousand men, clothed in Cassacks edged with gold, over which they had arms
all gilt, and above them great rich chains, wherewith they adorn themselves to
go to fight, as if they went to some Assembly of joy and triumph. A little
after them we saw the Doriphores appear, ('it is by that name they call the
Kings kinsmen) being fifteen thousand in number, more fit to adorn then to
defend a Camp, the riot of their apparel, and the sleightnesse of their arms,
making them almost incapable to do service. My Master seeing them tricked like
women, looked upon them with scorn, and quickly turned his eyes from them, to
fix them upon Darius, whom he saw pass by, elevated high upon a Carre, with
much Pomp and Majesty.

This Chariot was so sparkling with Gold and Jewels, that it could not be
beheld without dazzling, the sides of it were enriched with many images of the
Gods, imboss'd in massive Gold, in a most rare and excellent form; the Seat was
covered with an Eagle of the same metal, stretching out his wings to shelter
the King from the Rain, the Sun, and other inconveniences of Weather. His
habit was purple, imbroidered with little Suns of Gold, over which was a
Mantle that reached to the very ground, of Cloth of Gold, very light, buckled
before with two Hawks made of Gold, who fighting together seemed to hold each
other fast by the beak; in an extreme rich Girdle, hung a crooked Cymeter,
whose Scabberd was of an entire precious stone; the Cidaris (as the Persians
call it) which he wore upon his head was of pure white Linen, rowed with blew,
but there appeared very little of that, by reason of the great number of
Diamonds, and Pyropes wherewith it was beset. The Chariot was encompassed with
two hundred young Persian Lords of the nearest to the Crown, and of the most
eminent Families of the Kingdom, who being exempted from all command, because
of their youth, were to fight near the Kings person; their Arms were
wonderfully rich, and their Javelins headed with Gold instead of Steel; these
were followed by ten thousand Pike-men of the Kings Guard, whose Pike heads
were all of silver, and by four hundred of the Kings horses, led in men's hands,
after which followed the rest of the Infantry.

About the distance of a Furlong from the Rere of them, appeared Queen
Sysigambis in her Chariot, and Queen Statira her daughter in law in hers, and
the two Princesses likewise in theirs, accompanied with above forty others,
which carried their Ladies of Honor, and the chief Women that attended them in
that War, the rest were on horseback, and in other Chariots which they call
Armamaxa, wherein ordinarily are the Governors of the Kings children, and the
Eunuchs of his house, who are not despised among the Persians, as in other
Nations: The Kings money came after these, drawn or carried by six hundred
Mules, and three hundred Camels, guarded by fifteen thousand Archers, and some
Squadrons of Cavalry. Then came without order a great number of Women, who
accompanied their Husbands, or their Sons in that Voyage; and after all an
infinite many servants and boys, and all the Baggage, wherewith your Soldiers
enriched themselves within a few days after. I could not much observe these
last things that passed before us, being obliged to follow my Master, who had
not daign'd to consider the rest, when once his Princess was past; he
accompanied her with his eye, till he saw her alight with the Queens to go
into the Pavillion, which was already prepared to receive them, and easily to
be known by a Sun made with mavelous Art, which was set upon the top of
it within a Crystal.

Though my Prince had very much ado to conceal himself longer from her, for
whom alone he had conserved his life; yet having taken a resolution (as I told
you) to make himself considerable once again to Darius, before he discovered
himself; he persisted in his design of expecting first the issue of the Battle,
and seeing the night approach, that he might be the farther from the King, and
from those that might know him, he thought best to Quarter among the Athenians,
who were under the Kings pay, and whom Patro their Commander, had recruited
since that fatal night, wherein my Prince had defeated them, while they so
gallantly defended Darius his tents. Oroondates discovered himself only to
Patro, and took of him a horse of service, fit for the occasion he thought he
should have; but within a little after, we dis-encamped, and while it was
night, poor Darius ill counseled, and impatient of a Victory, which he held
for certain, fearing lest Alexander should escape him, advanced forwarder, and
engaged himself in narrow places, which caused him the loss of the battle. My
Master knew well the fault he committed, and advertised Patro of the
disadvantage that ground would bring him; for indeed, if in the Plain he
quitted, he had imbatteled that infinite number of men and horses, whereof his
Army was composed, and had expected you in good order, without precipitating
himself as he did between the Sea, the Mountain, and the River Pindarus, he
might commodiously have made use of all his Forces: whereas having engaged
himself in those strait, uneven passages, your advantage was equal to his, and
your men came up in Front against the first of ours, who could be but very
little succored by the bodies that followed them* besides that, the Infantry
whereof your Army chiefly consisted, fought with less confusion in those
narrow places, then our Cavalry could do.

Darius, Artabasus, and Mazeus, found the Error as soon as it was break of day,
when they saw Alexander nearer then they believed him. They would have retired
to give themselves more room, but 'twas too late, and the Armies were already so
close together, that there was no more possibility of going back, nor of
prolonging the destiny of so many Persians, as perished in that bloody day.

I will not tell you the particularities of a Battle, in which you without
doubt were one of the first, you know both the beginning, and the success of
it, you shall only hear from me, that in the first skirmishes, my Prince
having left the Athenians, went and put himself among the young Persian
Nobility, who fought without any command, either near the Kings person, or in
other places where they thought there was more danger to be hazarded, and more
glory to be acquired. He was mounted upon Patro's horse, which was a wonderful
brave, and fiery one, his Armor was black, his Coat of Arms, his Plumes, and
the Horse Tail that served him for a Crest, were all of the same color, for
since the death of Artaxerxes, he would never wear any other: I never stirred
one step from him, and I saw him do things, which to say truth, surpass belief.
Good King Darius did very gallantly in his own person, insomuch that you know
he closed up to Alexander himself, and that they had fought some time without
advantage, when they were parted with the throng of their Forces; but in that
separation Darius was thrown out of his Chariot, and surrounded with a great
number of Macedonians, who would certainly have slain him, if he had not been
rescued by my Master, who fought hard by him, and hearing the report of that
great Kings danger, which came from one to another, turned his horse furiously
against those that were about him, and encountering Philotas, the first, and the
most eager to have taken him, he rushed upon him so violently, that he sent him
among the horses feet, he also; overturned Clytus with his, and making room
which way soever he moved, scattered that crowd so well, that he got Darius
from amongst them; and making me stop Philotas his horse, he gave him leisure
to mount him again; scarce had he done him that service, when Alexander fierce
in the pursuit, returned himself to the same place; My Prince knowing the
danger the King might run, secured him in a Squadron of his men, and turning
about to Alexander, went to receive that famous Conqueror with an incredible
joy.

That was the first time ever I saw him, and if I remember well, his headpiece,
and the rest of his armor were of such bright and polished steel, that the
Sunbeams striking directly upon them, made it almost impossible for ones eyes
to endure to behold him. He was all enriched with Jewels, and his Coat of Arms
embrodered with Dyamonds; his Cask was covered with great white Feathers, with
a horsetail in the midst of them as white as snow, and which reached almost to
the Crupper of that he rode. This great Prince did not disdain an Enemy like my
Master, and knowing that it was he who had dismounted Clytus, and Philotas, and
saved Darius from the attempts of the Macedonians, he clave the press of his
own forces, to make way to him. Their shock indeed was very strange, and their
horses having met head to head, Bucephalus had the advantage of my Masters, and
thrust him back upon his gaskins, but Oroondates spurring him up again, and
rushing close to Alexanders right side, ran him into the thigh with his
Javelin, and coming up to him again cut the straps of his Cask, with a ^lash of
his sword, and showed his head bare to all that were about him; 'twas then
indeed that Alexander was in great danger, but he was quickly relieved by his
own Soldiers, who got before him, and all together charged Oroondates, and
those that were with him.

Here Lysimachus interrupting Araxes; O Gods! ( said he) What Is this I hear
from you! that Cavalier in black armor who wounded Alexander, and did so many
gallant things in that battle, was he your Prince then? 'It was even he,
answered Araxes. I am witness, ( added Lysimachus) of some of his actions, and
I was one of those that were nearest to Alexander when he was wounded. I was
likewise one of them that first opposed his fury, nor did I escape some of his
blows, he beat down also Craterus and Neoptolemus, in our sight, and I must
tell you true, that Ptolemeus, Seleuchus and my self, were much taken with his
courage, and would not suffer him to be prosecuted so eagerly as without doubt
he would have been, but for our hindrance. Our King who without knowing him,
gave him very great praises, showed himself pleased with us for that action,
and talked not of him but as a prodigy, or a man sent by the Gods for the
defense of the Persians. My Prince (replied Araxes) has more obligations to
you that you know not; 'twas thereby you were to knit this friendship, which
ought to last as long as your lives, and 'twas only your own virtue that gave
you a love to his, which was so profitable to him.

True it is that I perceived the Macedonians pursued us but coldly, and my
Master in his retreat took notice of their remissness, which he imputed not
unto that cause: He retired, but he retired like a Lion, and knowing that the
King was in a place of safety, after many warnings and signals to come off, he
yielded to the number of Conquerors, and to the darkness which began to
overspread the earth, and rob the Macedonians of a part of their Victory. Yet
was it so great an one that Darius lost a hundred and ten thousand men, his
Chariot of War, and all his equipage, except what he had left at Damascus,
which after the taking of that Town fell all likewise into your hands. My
Master oppressed with grief for the unhappiness of Persia, of its King, and of
the whole Royal Family, which was reduced unto so sad a condition, would not
forsake them in their misfortune, but resolved to perish with them, since Love,
Friendship, and Honor obliged him to accompany them unto the utmost. In this
design he commanded me to follow him, and not so much as enquiring after his
own baggage, which we had left some days journeys off, he crossed over the
Camp, into which your Soldiers already came thronging, and informing himself of
those that fled, which way the King had taken, he followed the track of him
till the obscurity of the night would no longer suffer him to have the least
sight of it. The darkness stopped him not, nor the weariness of his horse,
wounded with some light hurts; he had also received a few himself, but such
inconsiderable ones that for the present he was but little troubled with them.
We continued our way, committing our selves to the tuition of the Gods, from
whom my Prince implored no other favor but to see his Princess again, and that
poor King oppressed with so many losses. His grief kept him from speaking, and
his courage from making lamentations unworthy of him, but by sighs drawn from
the bottom of his heart, he expressed the nature of his affliction so movingly,
that all the night long I durst not open my mouth to interrupt him. You your
self may judge what his thoughts were, and in what manner he bore the ruin of
a Family he had so dearly loved. The Country through which we rod was very
rough and uneven, and the trouble of the dark, together with that of the way,
would perchance have made us fall into some precipice, if we had not often been
overtaken by runaways, after whom we still went enquiring news of the King,
Queens, and Princesses. At break of day we saw a body of horse appear, which
retired before us, and straining our horses to get up to them, we reached them
within a little while. It was Prince Oxyartes, Darius his brother, with
Mithranes, the Eunuch Bagoas, and Patro, he to whom alone my Master had made
himself known before the battle. They were followed by two or three hundred
horse, among which we mixed our selves without showing our faces, or discovering
who we were, till Patro observing my Masters arms, and the horse he had given
him, after he had looked a while upon him, doubted not at all but that 'twas
he. As Soon as he believed it certain, he cried out with some kind of joy, and
riding up to Prince Oxyartes, Ha! Sir, (said he) See here the protecting Angel
of the Royal Family, he who yesterday preserved our King, and did things that
surpass man's belief, those are his very arms, and that the very horse I gave
him before the battle, and which he made use of so gloriously for himself, and
so fortunately for us. With these words drawing near my Master, he himself
discovered his face to him, and filled Oxyartes, and all the rest with joy and
astonishment. He had already learned from him that that gallant man to whom
Persia was so much indebted for the safety of its King, and for so many brave
actions as he had done in favor of it, was the noble Orontes, for whom the
whole Court had wore mourning, and who had been absolutely thought buried with
Artaxerxes This sight surprised them so, that the remembrance of their present
fortune could not hinder them from mixing a great deal of joy, among the
thoughts of their sorrowful condition. Oxyartes embraced him a long time with
demonstrations of friendship, which drew some tears from both. I always hoped
most brave Orontes, (said Oxyartes to him) that if you were alive, you would
not forsake us in the misfortunes which the heavens have precipitated us into;
come, come see a King yet once again, who as well as his whole Family, is
indebted to you for his life, which the Gods have preserved only to serve for
matter of your glory, your sight will comfort him in his losses, and your
presence will raise his hopes again, which were ready utterly to forsake him.

My Master answered with all the expressions which the sense of so much
kindness could furnish him with, and after the first civilities, and embraces
of the chief men of that Troop, Oroondates with impatiency asked news of
Darius, and of his Family. Oxyartes answered him, as they still rod on their
way, the Kings considence of an infallible Victory, persuaded him to take the
Princesses along with him in his army, without providing for their security;
but as soon as he began to doubt of it, by reason of the disorder he perceived
among his Forces, he called Megabises, and the Eunuch Tyreus, and commanded
them to fetch them out of their Tents, and to conduct them secretly, and
speedily toward Damascus, whether most part of the Court Ladies were retired;
and giving them three thousand horse for their Convoy, he recommended them to
the great Orosmades, and then taking care of the battle again, he engaged
himself among the Enemies, where he had undoubtedly been lost, if you had not
rescued him by effects of more then human valor; Afterward being forced to
yield to his ill fortune, and to the prayers of those about him, he sent me
word by Bagoas; that he was going toward Vncha a little Town upon the bank of
Pindarus; some four hours riding from this place, and that he would expect
news of us, and of the Ladies, in a little wood we know, and which is not
above ten or twelve furlongs from thence, but so private and retired from the
abode of men, that he could not have chosen a more convenient one to avoid the
pursuit of his enemies, and to fit himself at that town with fresh horses, and
things necessary for his retreat; this is known but to very few, and I discover
it only to them whose friendship and fidelity I am well acquainted with; after
this discourse they redoubled their pace, but my Master by hearing of this
news, was put into great perplexity, his love persuaded him to leave the way
toward Darius, and run that which led unto the Princesses, and to that purpose
he was often ready to go from Oxyartes, that he might follow the incitements
of his passion; but the consideration of his honor quickly banished that
thought, and made him sacrifice his Interests to the care of his reputation,
and to the remembrance of Darius his misfortunes; besides, he called to mind
that whether Oxyartes and those that accompanied him, interpreted his departure
according to the truth, or according to other appearances, the judgment they
should make of it either way, could not but be hurtful to his repose, and
disadvantageous to his glory. With this last resolution he pursued the way in
which Bagoas, and some guides conducted us: and to be brief, we came before it
was noon to the wood, where the King was retired two hours before. Our Guides
who knew the secretest paths, after many turnings, brought us into the
thickest part of all, close by a fountain, upon the side whereof we found the
King, attended only by Mazeus, Artabasus, Cohortanus Roxana's Father, and about
a score of his most trusty Officers, and such as had been most diligent in
following him. That great Prince was set at the foot of a tree, upon the
mantles of some of his servants, leaning his cheeks upon both his hands, along
which one might perceive some tears fall to the ground: those that were with
him stood waiting round about, seconding his sorrow with a profound silence,
and such an unmoveableness, as made them seem so many Statues. Though the King
was deeply buried in his thoughts, he was raised out of them by the noise of
our horses, and being surprised with a kind of fear, start up from the place
where he sat; but as soon as he knew his brother, and some of the rest, his
apprehension vanished, and he came a few steps forward to receive him, but with
so sad a countenance, that I easily found his heart as Royal and as generous as
it was, could not hold out against such violent assaults of fortune. After a
salute intermingled with sighs, and with some tears, the King embracing the
chief of our Company, cast his eyes upon Oroondates, and observing his arms
rather then his face, O Gods (cried he, stepping back a little) Is not that the
man, or rather the God, that saved me so miraculously, and did actions for my
relief, that surpass the ability of men? It is the same ( answered Oxyartes)
and moreover he is a person very dear to you for many obligations of the like
nature. At these words my Master having pulled off his headpiece, cast himself
at his feet, and taking his hand kissed it with much reverence and affection.

Darius at last opening his eyes, and looking more earnestly upon him, knew him
to be the same Orontes to whose loss he had given some of those tears, which he
shed for Artaxerxes; nay that Orontes, who not content to have preserved his
wife, his mother, his son, and his daughters by so many acts of a transcendent
virtue, was come as it were out of the lower world to save him likewise, out of
a danger whence nothing but the protecting God of his Family could have
delivered him. Ask me not how astonished he was, you may conceive that
sufficiently your self, and 'twill be enough for me to tell you, that if he had
not been upheld by a tree close by him, he was already dejected enough, not to
bear so strange a surprise without falling backward; and truly he was longer
before he recovered his spirits, in that unexpected encounter, then in all the
former accidents of his life; but in the end coming out of his deep amazement,
and lifting his hands and eyes to heaven: Great Orosmaides (cried he) since
thou have restored me the savior of my house, all Alexanders success does no
longer terriie me, and I by thy goodness find that hope to revive in me,
which but even now was quite extinguished; and then turning toward my Prince
who was still upon his knees before him, and bedewing his face with
intermingled tears of grief and joy. My Angel Guardian (said he to him) who
never forsakest us in those extremities, wherein we have need of thy
assistance; My Son, my dear Orontes, or rather my dear Artaxerxes, since the
Gods taking him away from me, have in thee left me the better part of him, and
also of my self, come take again the same place in my affection, and likewise
in my Court, which I had given thee, and which cannot without injustice be
possessed by any man but thee alone. Though these words pronounced with an
excess of affection, and an infinite number of embraces, were able to have
drawn the envy of all the bystanders, and particularly of Oxyartes, yet was he
so generally beloved, and his virtue so perfectly known, that neither he, nor
any of the rest* made the least show that those kindnesses had displeased them,
and I know not whether they gave my Master the boldness to do what he did, or
that he had so resolved before, but I saw him do an action, and heard him bring
forth words, which either his despair, or his confidence in the Kings affection
drew from his mouth, when I least expected it.

The King still embracing him with much tenderness, and again calling him his
dear Artaxerxes, endeavored to raise him from the ground, but my Prince
continuing still upon his knees, No Sir ( said he with a louder voice then
ordinary) do not so lightly give that name to him you know not yet, and who
must lose it presently, as also that he has hitherto taken upon him, together
with his life, and your affection: That which he has done for you, ought to
have been done by any Prince, and by all virtuous persons: but that which his
friends have done against you, cannot be repaired but by the loss of that which
is dearest to them: In short Sir, I come not hitherto demand recompense for
what I have done for you, but to receive punishment for what they have done
against you, and to ease your present and past afflictions, by the satisfaction
you may receive in revenging Artaxerxes, and so many thousand men as waited
upon him to his grave. The King of Scythia has robbed you of a son that was
perfectly worthy to be loved: do you take a son from him whom he loves most
perfectly: and by a lawful exchange, punish in the person of his son, the
murderer of yours. In the false Orontes, you behold the true Oroondates,
Oroondates Son to the King of Scythia, your mortal enemy: Oroondates who
burning with love for the Princess Statira, ever since that fatal night that
gave him entry into your tents, changed both his name and quality to serve her,
though utterly unworthy; and under that deceit has abused your real affection.
In fine, Oroondates (who has perfectly honored both you and yours; but has
not been able to save you and yours from the damage you have received by his
friends) did believe while your losses were equal, that without crime he might
avoid the punishment of those he had innocently committed: but since the King
of Scythia has bereaft you of a son whom you loved, who loved him, and whom he
loved above himself: he thinks he ought no longer to shelter his from your just
indignation, and hide him under the name of a person whom you have honored
with your affection.

He would have spoken longer, if the King more astonished then if he had been
in another world, had not retired a step or two folding his arms upon his
breast, and considering him twice or thrice from head to foot, with eyes and
with a countenance which sufficiently testified the alterations of his mind,
and the several thoughts wherewith he was assaulted. All that were present were
as much surprised as he, and looking upon one another with admiration, expected
the event with doubt and impatience. When the King after having a while
balanced his hatred to Matheus with the love he bore Orontes, and the injuries
he had received from the former in the death of his son, and so many thousands
of his subjects; with the services the latter had done him in his own
preservation, and that of all his Family; and besides considering with what a
grace, and what a greatness of courage he came to submit himself to him, at a
time when nothing could make him seek his friendship nor alliance, but his mere
generosity, he yielded in the end to so many motives, to his own inclinations
to Orontes, and to the incitements of his own virtue; and coming toward him
again, he raised him up by the arm, and after having kissed his cheek, he said
to him with much gravity, accompanied with a certain sweetness, which was very
natural to him. The Gods* Prince Oroondates, send an addition to my
afflictions, by giving me the knowledge of you, at a time, wherein I cannot, as
I could have wished, express how considerable it is to me; and if you judge
not of my heart by the generosity of your own, you will without doubt believe
that the necessity of his affairs, his weakness, and the fear of his enemies,
make a conquered King, divested of the best part of his estates, abandoned by
his friends, and ready to fall himself into the power of his adversaries,
receive a friendship now, which the hatred of our families, and the loss of a
dear son, might perchance have made him reject in his prosperity; but if with
the Royal dignity, which the Gods have not yet taken from me, they have also
left any credit to the word of a King, I swear to you by Orosmades, that
knowing you as I do, in what condition soever I had been, the losses I have
sustained by your Father, should never have extinguished mine inclinations to
your self; nor should the injuries I have received from him, ever have blotted
out the obligations I have to you.

This is all I can protest to you, in the state you now behold me, and if you
can yet desire the alliance of a Prince, reduced to such pitiful terms, I
offer it to you with protestation, that by my consent, that daughter of mine,
which you honor with your affection, shall never be but yours, and that I will
no longer esteem you but as my son, and as the person that is dearest to me in
the whole world.

My Prince more over-joyed then one can imagine, at such obliging words, and
such advantageous promises, cast himself at his feet again, and embraced his
knees with transports of an incredible affection: but the King having helped
him up, embraced him tenderly, and then Oxyartes followed his example, and all
the rest were preparing themselves to do him honor, and to rejoice at their
knowledge of him, as much as their present sorrow would permit, when they saw a
Troop of horsemen come toward them, whom they presently knew to be Megabises,
and some of those that had accompanied him to convoy the Queens and Princesses.
This sight made the King to startle, and going toward him without staying till
he came up; Well Megabises, (cried he to him) Where are the Ladies? Megabises
casting down his eyes, answered him with a trembling voice, Alas! Sir, They are
no longer ours. How! (replied the King, very much troubled) Are they no longer
ours? No, Sir, (said Megabises) They are Alexanders prisoners. Alexanders
prisoners? cried the King again. Yes, Sir, (answered Megabises) for scarce had
I gotten them five hundred paces from the Camp, to conduct them to Damascus, as
your Majesty had commanded me, but I was followed by Parmenio with part of
Alexanders Cavalry; we could not make our retreat from them by reason of the
Ladies, and of the encumbrance of their Chariots, so that we were constrained
to sustain the Shock of the valiantest Macedonians: they fought like gallant
men, and the Doriphores your Majesty gave me, like fearful women, who after a
faint resistance faced shamefully about, and Parmenio not troubling himself to
pursue them, ran to the fair prize they had abandoned: The Gods are my
Witnesses, I would have perished there, if my death could have done the Queens
any service; but seeing my self alone, and wounded in five or six places, I
thought fit to employ the life I had left, in telling you what perchance you
might have heard from some other body with less certainty.

The King hearkened not to these last words, but being too sensible of this new
assault of fortune, he threw himself upon the ground, and muffling his face
with his mantle, began to lament with sighs and groans, which would have rent
the most stony hearts with pity.

My Prince lea^^ng against an Oak, and crossing his arms, lifted his eyes
pitifully to Heaven, and in his thoughts accusing it for that sudden alteration
of his fortune, expressed his gri^ more truly by his looks, and by his silence,
then he could have done by all the words in the world. Oxyartes, Cohortanus,
and Artabasus, accompanied his sorrow with theirs, and all there present were
so stricken and confounded, that woe and desolation never appeared in a more
perfect form. The King after having continued some time in the posture I have
told you, discovered his face, and sitting upright: It is too much, O fortune!
( cried he) it is too much; though thou did persecute me as a King, thou
ought to have spared me as a private man, and to have contented thy self
with the loss of my estates, without burthening me also with the loss of my
family: It was enough that Alexander triumphed over my Empires, thou neededst
not have made him triumph also over the honor of my daughters, and over mine
own too, and thou should have been satisfied with bringing him into my
Throne, without bringing him likewise into my very bed!

This thought violently tormenting him, made him do things mis-becoming the
gravity and dignity of so great a Personage, he tore his hair and his clothes,
and jealousy made him utter such desperate words, that all that were present
trembled for fear, and wept for compassion When he was a little settled, he
made Megabises begin his Relation again; but not having patience to hear the
end of it, Ah! Coward, (cried he to him) have thou then preferred a shameful,
infamous life, before a brave and glorious death, and when thou might have
fallen so honorably at the feet of thy Queen, could thou desire to prolong
thy days, only to shorten mine, by so fatal a news, and so prejudicial to my
honor and quiet? With these words darting a furious look at him, he put his
hand upon the hilt of his Sword, but Megabises quite beside himself with fear,
got out of his presence, and by that second flight escaped the danger that
threatened him.

I could not in this accident, but admire my Masters courage, and the power he
had over himself: I doubted not, having so much knowledge of his love, but that
his grief was at least equal to that of Darius, yet how violent soever it was,
his constancy of mind was so great, that he never let slip one word that could
accuse him of weakness, or increase the affliction of a King, who being both
Husband, Son and Father, seemed utterly to give himself over to it. When he saw
the first brunt of his sorrow a little past, he came up to him with a
wonderful temper, and said with a fashion which discovered the greatness of
his courage; Sir, although my passion for the Princess your daughter, and the
favor your Majesty has lately granted me, had not made me so highly concerned
in this your last, and greatest loss, the Gods can tell how large a share I
should take in your affliction, and with what pleasure I should lay down my
life to recover the repose of yours. The Truth of this, and the Honor I hope
your Majesty will do me in believing it, give me the boldness to represent unto
you, that it is no longer with tears you must remedy your misfortunes; they are
not perchance so great as your apprehension imagines them: though Alexander be
a Conqueror, and young, yet is he a Prince and virtuous; he in the person of
the Queens and Princesses, will without doubt consider the Royal dignity, and
the care of his own reputation. In the mean time your Majesty may redemand them
of him, and offer him Treasures and Provinces for their ransom: I will
accompany your Ambassadors, and visit them unknown, to whom your interests and
my passion make me fly; if your offers cannot move him, and if by my careful
endeavors I cannot release those Illustrious Prisoners out of his power, I Will
either kill that Conqueror with this hand, which he has already felt, and
restore a Calm to your Estates; or die gloriously, disputing with him to the
last drop of my blood, the price of my services, and the fruit of that infinite
favor your Majesty has granted me.

The King hearkened attentively to him, and casting his arm about his neck; I
do not doubt Son, ( said he) but that you love us very much, and that you
would cast your self into any danger for persons that are so dear to you;
neither did I expect any thing from you, but such effects as are ordinary with
you; and I should rather hope to regaine my quiet by your assistance, then by
the help of all my Forces; but how great a change soever your valor might
bring unto my fortune, I cannot resolve to let you go away from me, in a
season wherein your sight is so dear, and your consolation so pleasing to me:
We may use some other remedies, and how low soever I seem, I have yet powerful
means to rise again* for though Alexander has seized on a part of my
Dominions, I have still ten times as much as ever his Ancestors possessed; I am
going toward the Euphrates, where I can yet raise a Million of men, and will
cover the Fields of his new Conquest, with such vast numbers, that in spite of
all his fortune, I Will make him know the difference there is between the Persian
Monarch, and a petty King of Macedon.

While you are making those Levies (replied Oroondates) I Will labor for the
deliverance of the Princesses, and if Alexander restore them willingly to your
Ambassadors, I Will wait upon them to your Majesty; not that I can leave you in
this condition, without a very sensible grief, nor that my passion could draw
me from you, if my misfortune, and the King my Fathers obstinacy, had not made
me unable to serve your Majesty with more then mine own person; for the King of
Scythia's hatred, and my knowledge of his nature, hinder me from offering you
his assistance; since then I can be no other ways useful here, then as a single
person, be pleased to give me leave to go to Alexander, where I may serve you
with much more efficacy. Your Majesty shall give no Battle, wherein if I am
alive, I will not fight by your side, and possibly before you are in those
terms, I may have made an end of all your Wars alone.

They had yet some other contestations, which the hazard the King might run if
he should have staid longer so near his Enemies, made them put an end to, and
my Master having at last obtained his permission to go to Alexanders Camp,
persuaded the King to get upon fresh horses which were brought him, and having
taken his leave of him, of Oxyartes, and the whole company, with many tears, he
saw them take their way toward the Euphrates, staying behind with Mithranes,
and those that were to accompany him in his Embassy. We followed the poor King
with our eyes and thoughts, and my Master having lost sight of him, appeared so
sad, and so afflicted, that if his grief had not been abated by the hope of
seeing his Princess quickly, he had been utterly incapable of any comfort.

After this parting, I began to think upon our vvounds, not judging that my
Prince ought in that condition to engage himself among the Enemies, where
perchance he might not find that help and that repose which were necessary for
his cure; he gave ear unto my reasons, and riding with Mythranes toward that
little Town, which was not far off, we got thither within an hour: There we
had our wounds dressed, and rested the remainder of that day, and the day
following. The morning after, we received a Letter which Darius had written to
Alexander, and another to the Queens, to give the more credence to my Master;
that good King knowing they would not be unprofitable for him, and believing
he would be glad to carry them himself; but the next day Alexanders Forces
under the command of Craterus, came and summoned that little Town, which
finding it self too weak to sustain so much as their approaches, cast it self
into the arms of the Conquerours.

We had liberty to march away, and going out in the same Equipage we came in,
we bethought our selves of another retreat, where we might stay the cure of our
wounds, which were not great, but grown much worse by our want of care to get
them looked to in time. We learned of the Macedonians, that Alexander was gone
toward Marathon, which he already caused to be beleaguered, with an intent to
be at the Siege in person, though he was very much troubled with the wound in
his thigh, and that he had sent Parmenio with part of the Army to Damascus,
where all the remaining wealth of Darius his Army, with the Wives of the
Princes, and Satrapes of Persia, were under the charge of Artaban the Governor
of that Town. My Master being yet very unfit to perform his Embassy to
Alexander, was by this news persuaded to put himself into Damascus, which was
not above a days Journey and an half from us, with an intention to stay there
till his wounds were cured, to see the fair Barsina, Widow to the valiant
Memnon, and many other Ladies of his acquaintance, to whom his assistance might
perchance be necessary in such an encounter; but his last and chiefest motive
was a design to use his utmost endeavors to do Darius some service in the
conservation of that place, which was of so high consequence, and though strong
enough to endure a Siege, yet he feared in some danger of being lost; for
having formerly known Artaban in the Court, he who could very well judge of men,
had observed something in his carriage, which made him believe so great a trust
might have been put into better hands.

These considerations made him take the resolution of going thither, yet being
unwilling that the solicitation of the Princesses liberties should be so long
neglected, he delivered Darius his Letter to Alexander unto Mithranes, whom he
persuaded to go directly to Marathon, after he had earnestly desired his
secrecy in whatsoevet concerned him, and made an appointment to meet him at
Alexanders Army, whither he intended to come to him, in case he should stay
there any time: so taking a Passport from Craterus, and a small Convoy which he
gave us to Damascus, we set forward that way, and arrived there the day
following before the Sun was set. We had a very favorable encounter in this
Retreat, for we found our baggage, which having joined with some part of Darius
his, was with it gotten into that Town, and the first we met as we entered, were
my Princes two faithful servants. He was very glad of that convenience, but
though his wounds troubled him much, yet would he not go to bed till he had
visited the fair Barsina, and rendered to that noble Widow, what he thought
himself engaged to pay her merits, and the memory of gallant Memnon.

I have not time to tell you the ceremonies of this meeting, the reception he
had from her, in a visit she so little expected, and the tears on both sides in
the remembrance of their mutual losses: It will suffice if I tell you that my
Master received all the kindest welcome he could look for from a virtuous Lady,
who had ever had a great inclination to his desert. But the satisfaction of
this visit was moderated by the vexation of hearing that the Princess Roxana
(whom he believed to have been taken with the Queens) was in the Town, and that
Prince Cohortanus her brother, who was ready to retire among the Sacans, whose
Governor he was, had sent her into Damascus, with his mother, and many other
Princesses, among which were the daughters of King Occhus, Darius his
Predecessor, the wife of Pharnabasus, who had succeeded Memnon in all his
Offices, the daughters of Mentor; and in a word all the principal Ladies of
Persia. Although he was exceeding sorry for the encounter of a person, in whose
love he foresaw many crosses and incommodities would befall him, yet would he
not omit to pay her all that the quality of such a Princess, and her near
alliance to his, could require from his civility, and from that very moment he
resolved not to deceive her any longer; but if she persevered in the same
humor, to let her know his mind in terms as little dis-obliging as he could
possibly. He went to visit her as he came from Barsina, but she was so
surprised at the sight of him, and showed him such extraordinary kindness, and
so little suitable to her quality and modesty, that Oroondates easily saw his
long absence had not at all diminished her passion: She had bewailed him as
dead, or at least as dead to her, and this so unhoped recovery of him, filled
her with such an excessive joy, that she lost the remembrance of all her
losses, and of the general misfortune of her Country.

It was so late when my Prince came from her, and besides he was so troubled
with his wounds, that he could by no means make any other visits, wherefore he
commanded me to go make his excuses, and went home to the Lodging that was
appointed for him, where he found Physicians and Chirurgions, who making him
get to bed, began to fall to work about his cure. The next day he was visited
by the Governor, of whom his ill opinion was not causless; for that Traitor who
in his heart had already sold his Country, did by the coldness of his Discourse
sufficiently express the little contentment he received at his arrival in a
Town which he was upon the point of delivering into the enemies hands. This
behavior increased my Princes former dislike of him, to some doubt of his
fidelity, and made him resolve that as soon as he was in a better condition, he
would openly oppose all the designs he feared he might have against the
service of his King. Yet did he dissemble his thoughts for the present, and
waited for a fitter opportunity to declare himself. As Soon as Artaban was gone,
his Chamber was full of Ladies, Roxana, Barsina, and her mother Artabasus his
wife, the Princesses Occhus his daughters, and all the rest I named came to
congratulate his return, and to testify unto him the confidence they had in
his virtue, at a time wherein it was so necessary to them: after having staid
awhile, they went away all but Roxana, who for that purpose came last, and
meant to stay alone* f^er the rest, that she might entertain him with more
liberty. After the company was gone, seeing none in the Chamber but her Women,
and some of my Prince his servants, but both these, and those far enough from
the bed, she took that time to speak more clearly to him, then she had
formerly, and to draw a knowledge from his mouth, which she had not yet been
able to draw from any of his actions. Her face spoke a great while for her,
and the diverse changes of her color which fore-ran her dicours, prepared my
Master for a combat, which he could no longer avoid; she began with assurances
of her joy for his return, of the sorrow his long absence had caused in her,
and of the fear she had, she should have lost him in those dangers, out of
which the prayers she had made unto the Gods, had perchance delivered him. My
Prince answered her with his ordinary civility, and expressed his
acknowledgements in the most obliging terms one could make use of in such an
encounter. But Roxana, who was not satisfied with his civility, requiring from
him marks of such a passion, as he was not capable of for her, fell into her
discourse again, with a great sigh, and some tears, which it was impossible
for her to retain

I would it had pleased the Gods, Orontes, (said she to him) that the first
moment I ever saw you, had been the last of my life, and that the same shaft
which wounded my heart for you, had sent my body to the grave. I should not
then have been in that extremity, to which my misfortune, and your
insensibility have now reduced me, neither should I at this time have done a
thing so unworthy of the Bloud-Royal of Persia, of a little beauty wherewith
some have hitherto flattered my belief, and of that virtue whereof I have
always made so severe a profession: It is needless, Orontes, for me to tell
you again that I love you, my past actions have showed it you, a writing of my
own hand has confirmed it to you, and it is for you in short, I utterly lose
that bashfulnesse, which so well becomes young Ladies of my quality, and which
ought never to have forsaken me but with my life. I have wrestled long with my
self, before I could make this Declaration to you, and I long expected that
from you, which I received from a thousand others, and which my vanity made me
hope for, from a person less insensible then I find you are; but since you
alone have undeceived me, I ought with the false opinion of my beauty, to lose
also some part of my pride; and to tell you once again to my confusion, that it
is true I love you, and that it will be very hard for me to live, unless I be
beloved by you again. Yet is it likewise true, that this passion which deserves
the terms of decency, does not withdraw me from those of virtue; and that if I
had still as much power over my tongue and countenance, as I have pureness in
mine intentions; I should not be blameable for my affection to you: I have
always regulated my desires to modest and lawful pretensions, and I have
prevented my Fathers choice only in the reservations I owe him, and after my
knowledge of his great esteem of you. If my affection be not odious to you, I
beseech you to have that opinion of it, and do not hate a Princess, who
commits faults only for your sake, yet such as it is in your power to make
very lawful ones.

She ended these words stammering, and casting down her eyes with an action,
which did enough express her shame, and confusion, for having said so much. My
Master more in disorder then she, remained a great while unable to answer her,
tumbling over a thousand several designs in his head: but at last they all
ended in the resolution he had taken to undeceive her, and not to repay a true
affection with dissimulation, and with a feigning which would quickly be
discovered, and which his heart was not capable of, especially with such a
person as Roxana, who was not of a quality to be abused: besides that, the
overture he had made to Darius in the presence of Cohortanus himself, would not
suffer him to use disguise any longer; not doubting but that Roxana would
quickly be advertised of a love, whereof he had already made so manifest a
Declaration; he thought fit therefore to prevent all others, and by a free
ingenuous confession, oblige her to be content with what he could do for her,
and by those proofs of trust, make her to change the nature of her affection.
It is true, that he was long searching out terms to sweeten what he had to
say to her, and that not finding any but such as were hard enough to be
digested, that demurre and irresolution put her into a very strange perplexity;
but she was much more dashed, when after so long a silence she heard these
words.

Wonder not, Madam, at the confusion in which you see me, and let the trouble
of my mind excuse my incivility. I confess, that I am more then confounded,
both at the honor you do me, and at the part I am forced to play; if your
quality and desert were meaner, and that I had weaker inclinations to honor you
really, and unfeignedly, I should be less uncivil with you, and speak to you
with less freedom: but since my respect to you, and my obligations to your
goodness, forbid me all manner of dissimulation, I must break through a
passage that is very difficult for me, and discover unto you the obstacle which
the Heavens have put in a fortune whereof I acknowledge my self most unworthy.
The Gods are my witnesses, Madam, that the proofs I have hitherto received of
the honor of your affection, (though the knowledge I have of my self hindered
me from taking them otherwise then as effects of your goodness) would without
question have made me raise my thoughts to the service of so divine a person as
your self, and that I should have been the proudest of all men living, to have
lived and died for a Princess, that makes all the Princes of Asia to sigh for
her: but, Madam, before I had the happiness to see you, this heart which is
capable of all thoughts of honor and respect to you, was so no longer of any
impression of love, and that destiny which brought me by night into Darius his
Tents, made me leave that liberty at Statira's feet, which else should have
been due to you, and which a soul less prepossessed, or prepossessed with any
other object, would without doubt have dedicated to you; it is for her I have
burned ever since; it is for her I have left my Country, and that I have
disguised both my name and quality, to expose my self unto my enemies; and in
short, it is she alone that caused me the honor of your sight, and does now
cause so much trouble in me, that I cannot otherwise then by my respects,
acknowledge that friendship wherewith you vouchsafe to honor me. At last the
Masque is taken off, Darius himself has heard both my name and my design,
from mine own mouth, he has learnt the one, and approved the other in the
presence of Prince Cohortanus your Father; and by his Royal word, has made me
raise my pretensions to the glorious possession of the Princess his daughter:
Judge whether this engagement be not powerful, and whether besides the
considerations of love, these latter are not very strong ones; the Gods know
with how much sorrow I make this Declaration to you, with what a sense of
acknowledgement I receive the grace you do me, and at how a dear a price I
would buy the occasions of sacrificing my self for your service. But, Madam,
this is all that my want of power, and my engagement will suffer me to do, and
if you have not as much goodness to consider it, as you have showed in your
good wishes to me; I shall die in appearance the most ungrateful, and in effect
the most unfortunate of all men in the world.

He ended these words with tears, which the compassion of Roxana, and the
remembrance of his afflictions drew from his eyes; and looking upon that
Princess, to find by her countenance which way she had received them, he saw
in it all the marks of grief and despair; and indeed she was so touched with
them, that but for the extreme force she used in striving to contain her self,
her grief would certainly have broken out with violence; she was almost half an
hour e're she could speak a word, sighing and sobbing, with so much vehemence,
that her Women thinking she had been sick, ran presently to give her their
assistance; but making them retire, and recovering her self a little, she with
much ado got out these words as she was rising up.

Orontes, Statira, I confess, is more worthy then I; but she is not for you,
she is Alexanders Captive, he will shortly be hers, and he is now her Master;
Neither Darius nor Statira can do any thing for you now; for she is utterly
lost unto you both. The Gods (replied my Prince) may ordain what they please
concerning it; but if after that loss, I can conserve my life, I shall do it
only for your sake. If you give me that assurance ( answered R^xana) I shall
be half comforted, and for my particular interest shall make prayers contrary
to the good of my Country, and of the house from whence I am descended.

After this discourse having taken leave of him, she went away so sad, that it
was easy in her face to read all the marks of a most powerful affliction, and
left him so touched with her grief, and so stricken with her threatening
prediction, that it was impossible to settle him all the rest of the day. After
that time she saw him almost daily and entertained him with her passion, as
much as her mothers absence would give leave; he always answered her with the
same civility, and constrained himself so much not to disoblige her with unkind
looks, that she lost not the hope of being beloved by him, at least in default
of Statira, who in all appearance was not like to escape easily out of
Alexanders hands.

He was often visited also by the Princesses, Occhus his daughters, by the
wives of Pharnabasus and Artabasus, and by the fair Barsina, whose virtue and
rare qualities, wonn all the inclination which his fidelity and the remembrance
of Statira could allow: she (as you are not ignorant) was of a very pleasing
conversation, very knowing in many Sciences, and particularly in the Greek
Tongue, but above all she was endowed with a marvelous discretion, and modest
freedom.

This knowledge of her moved my Master to discover himself particularly to her,
and to tell her all the accidents of his life, except the love of Roxana, which
his discretion, or rather his misfortune made him ever conceal from her with
much care. His wounds had suffered so much by his neglect of them at first,
that he was forced still to keep his bed, and while he was in that condition,
he received so sensible a grief, that since the death of Artaxerxes I had never
seen him fall into so great a passion^ It was for the loss of the bracelet
which Statira gave him at his departure from Persepolis, and which in all his
unhappiness he had dearly preserved as his only consolation. he was wont to
kiss it a thousand times a day, and in the delicate hair whereof it was woven,
seeing something of the person he adored, and that wrought with her own fair
hands, he received an exceeding great satisfaction by it in all his
discontents; but one morning putting one of his hands to the arm about which he
commonly wore it, he missed that precious favor which he valued at so high a
rate; instantly all his servants were employed to seek it, but when he saw
their diligence was vain, and that he believed it absolutely lost, he made such
pitiful complaints, that all that heard him were deeply touched with a sense
of his lamentations; he wept, he tormented himself, he threatened his servants,
and uttered words misbeseeming the greatness of his courage, taking it as an
Omen of despair, and interpreting the loss of that gift, as a presage of that
of the giver; all that day he was not to be comforted but in the end, that
heart which had resisted so many crosses of another nature, was fain to pass
over that likewise, or at least dissemble it, to think of affairs of more
importance.

He was advertised by Barsina that Artaban was ready to deliver up the Town,
and so many persons of eminent quality as had taken refuge there, into the
enemies hands, and that to that intent he had dispatched one Mardus to
Parmenio, who was encamped within a small days journey of Damascus. This
information confirming his own jealousy, made him leave his bed to oppose as
much as he was able, the design of that disloyal man; but if by his
persuasions he could not bring him back into the path of virtue and fidelity
to his Prince, he saw no possibility of doing good any other way, being all
alone in a great Town where he was known to none but Ladies, and where all the
Soldiers and the Inhabitants themselves were at the Governors Devotion,
besides, they had all taken such a terror, that they trembled at the very name
of Alexander, and made no resistance against the design of that Traitor, who
had destined to him so considerable a prey. He resolved nevertheless not to
spare himself in the business, and to give poor Darius in his adversity, all
the proofs he ought to hope for from his friendship* for that purpose causing
himself to be made ready, and resting upon a staff by reason of a little wound
he had received in his thigh, he went to the Governors Lodging, whither he took
no body with him but me, I being already nearer cured then he was. Artaban
received him with a feigned demonstration of joy for his being so well
recovered, but my Prince having desired him to go into his Closset, and entering
with him, after having been awhile silent: Artaban (said he) I know you, and
the obligations you have to your good King too well, to believe you have any
intention to dis-serve him; it is a rumor which your enemies spread abroad,
and which you should do well to take some order in, that you may make appear to
the whole world, the faithful resolution you have for the service of your
Prince.

Though the Governor was a little moved at this advice, yet being upon the
point of pulling off his vizor, he dissembled his thoughts, and answered
coldly. They that make such a report of me, Orontes, are little acquainted with
my designs, which shall ever tend to what they ought, while no more is exacted
from me then I may perform. You may ( replied Oroondates) do Darius a most
remarkable service in the conservation of this Town, and so many persons of
quality as he has deposited in your charge; the place is strong enough to
endure the siege of a more potent army then that of Alexander, and those under
your command are zealous enough for his service, not to forsake you in so
commendable a resolution, which you are obliged to by your birth, by your Oath,
and by the consideration of your honor.

The Governor who began to be angry at this remonstrance, answered my Master
sharply: Do not inform your self concerning my designs, Orontes, nor teach me
my duty in a place which had not been trusted into my hands, but that I was
known capable of commanding in it; you are yet too young to give me my Lesson,
and I am but little obliged to receive it where I my self am Master. At these
words he rose up without staying for my Prince's answer, and going out of the
Closset, left him so ill satisfied, that without taking other leave he
presently went away to Barsina's house, and told her all the discourse that had
passed between them, assuring her of the loss of Damascus and of their Liberty,
unless the Gods relieved them by extraordinary ways. He spent the rest of that
day in getting some to sound the affections of the Inhabitants, and to waken
their souls to some remembrance of Loyalty, and courage against the Garrison
which sold them basely to their Enemies; but they answered those that
solicited them, so faintly, that my Master could do nothing more for that time
but detest the poorness of their spirits, and deplore Darius his misfortune,
and the Captivity of so many noble persons as would be involved in the taking
of that Town.

The next day at sunrising all the Forces were in arms by the Governors order,
who setting Guards upon the spoil, that he might deliver it entire into
Alexanders hand, caused the Gates to be opened that he might go out to meet
Parmenio who was not above ten or twelve furlongs from the Town; then it was
that my Prince seeing all lost, resolved to hazard all, and making his arms be
put on, and mine likewise, he got on horseback, and being followed by me alone,
went to the great Marketplace, where the Assembly was made, and whether by the
Governors command the Ladies were already brought; as he passed through the
streets he cried out to those he met, Ah! Syrians heretofore the prop and
honor of the Crown of Persia: Giddy people! whither run you? consider what a
Prince you forsake, and to what Tyranny you submit your selves: He said
something else to them in passing by, but those faint-hearted and affrighted
souls, gave no ear to his incitements, but ran on blindly to their captivity,
as the only means to avoid death, the fear whereof had wholly seized them; when
he was come into the Marketplace which he found full of armed men, and that by
the meeting of the Ladies (already prisoners) his anger was raised to the
extremity^ People of Damascus (cried he) poor people, blinded by the
persuasions of a Traitor, stay, hearken to the son of a King that speaks to
you, and will die with you; what terror has seized you? what losses have
weakened you? are not your Walls still as strong as ever? are not your Forces
still on foot? see whither you precipitate your selves, and by what baseness
you are going to prostitute your wives and daughters to the insolency of the
Macedonians; you go to fetch them in your selves, those happy Conquerours, and
without costing them one drop of blood you will bring them into your houses,
and into your beds, never considering what you owe unto your King, what you owe
unto your Families, and what unto your selves: you go to offer your hands to
the shackles that are already prepared for you, but will not vouchsafe to
emyloy them for the conservation of your Honor, of your Liberties, and
perchance also of your lives. And you ( said he to those whom he judged the
most considerable) you men of Honor, whom the cowardice of these miserable
wretches would buri^ in their ruins, think yet upon your selves, and resolve
either to die with me, who will die for your defense, or oppose the treachery
of those that have so unworthily sold you.

These exhortations did but very little good, and of all that great number of
men, there was none but young Ilioneus, Artabasus his son, Aristogiton,
Dropides, and Levertes, Athenians; Persippus, Onomastorides, Omaius, and
Callicratides, Lacedaemonians; who preferring a glorious death before a
shameful captivity, joined themselves unto my Master, with those few men he
went to meet the Governor, who advertised of the endeavors he used against
him, came to oppose them with all his Troops. As soon as Oroondates saw him;
What? Artaban (cried he) is it then in good earnest that thou betrayest thy
Prince, thy friends, and thine own honor, and that no consideration can
dissuade thee from that infamous resolution? Artaban looking scornfully upon
him: Scythian (said he) retire, and do not longer exasperate my goodness which
permits thee this retreat, unless thou will die for the quarrel of the King of
Persia, having quitted the service of thine own.

Ah! disloyal wretch (replied my Prince) I must die once, and I will never
receive favor from a Traitor. At these words, his eyes sparkling fire through
the beaver of his Helmet, he took a dart out of Aristogitons hand, and raising
himself upon his stirrups, flung it with all his force at Artaban: that
treacherous man by ducking down his head, avoided the blow, and the dart thrown
by so powerful a hand, struck through two men, who fell instantly among the
horses feet. Oroondates mad that he had mist his aim, draws out his sword and
falls in after Artaban, who had already crowded himself amongst his men, to
escape the death that threatened him, and while he fiercely persisted to make a
passage to him, his horse was killed with an infinite number of blows, and fell
so suddenly, that my Master having neither had the leisure, nor the thought to
disengage himself from his stirrups, lay under him oppressed with his weight,
and at the mercy of his enemies: I would have run in to him, but that I had the
very same mischance, and then it was that my Prince had certainly lost his life
with a thousand wounds, if Artaban thinking he should better his conditions, by
delivering him alive to Alexander, had not forbidden to kill him, but made him
be disarmed and tied, with those that had accompanied him, who indeed resisted
gallantly, but were at last fain to yield to numbers, and followed my Princes
condition as they had done his brave resolution.

Oroondates when he saw himself bound, turned his eyes on all sides, and seeing
Roxana and Barsina near him, Ladies (cried he) we run the same fortune, and we
all yield to that of Alexander; he could say but those few words to them in the
Choler that transported him, fearing he might do something misbeseeming his
ordinary moderation; the Ladies looked upon him with a very sensible grief, yet
mingled with some kind of joy, for seeing him out of a danger, wherein they
had despaired of his life, Artaban causing him to be set upon a horse, with his
legs tied under the belly, and his hands bound behind him, cleft the hearts of
all that beheld him with pity, and putting the spoil, and the Garrison into
the order which your soldiers found them in, went with us in this equipage unto
Parmenio.

I will say nothing of his reception, nor of the order that Parmenio took about
the spoil, you know those passages better then I do, and not being willing to
entertain you with any thing but my Masters life, I will only tell you that
Parmenio having received the Ladies, and the more considerable prisoners very
civilly, and put both under strong Guards, Artaban presented my Master to him.
Parmenio considered him intentively, and much taken with his graceful fashion,
asked the Governor for what crime he had so tied that handsome young man; my
Prince preventing Artaban's answer; Let him tell you the Traitor that he is
(said he to Parmenio) and by a true relation, oblige you to give me the
punishments that are due to me, and him the recompense he deserves.

Parmenio who truly was very generous, was exceedingly pleased with my Masters
confidence, and hearing all that had passed from Artaban's own mouth, he no
sooner knew the truth, but looking upon the Governor with contempt; I do not
wonder (said he to him) that you punish actions which are so contrary to your
humor; and I no longer think it strange that Darius with so many millions of
men, defends his Estates so ill, since virtue is so unworthily handled in them;
but the Macedonians who are your Masters, do reverence it in another manner,
and instead of Fetters which you give it, present it with Crowns which it
better deserves: At these words turning toward my Prince, he commanded him to
be unbound, declaring him free, and giving him power to choose which party he
liked best. My Master received that favor without pride, or meanness of
spirit, and having asked the same for me, with great civility received arms
which Parmenio caused to be given him.

But Artaban extremely vexed at his liberty, and frustrated of the recompense
which he expected from Alexander for delivering him, or rather running to meet
his destiny. Sir ( said he, addressing himself to Parmenio) think well what you
do, it is not Darius his friend whom you set at liberty; but Alexanders mortal
Enemy, he that wounded him at the battle of Issus, and who by a solemn Oath
has engaged himself to carry his head unto Darius: My Master looking upon him
with an eye of indignation, Ah! perfideous fellow (cried he) is it possible
thou should open thy mouth in the presence of a generous man, and that
having branded thy self by an infidelity without example, thou should before
him condemn such actions as his virtue makes him to approve? Artaban emboldened
by Parmenio's presence, near whom he believed himself in safety, made this
reply. In preferring the party of Alexander before that of Darius. I only yield
unto the Conqueror, and follow the pleasure of the Gods, who will have all the
earth submit it self to that great man; but thou in forsaking before me, and
without necessity, thine own party, and the service of thine own King, did
commit a treason without excuse, and in contracting a feigned friendship with
Prince Artaxerxes to sacrifice him, and carry him to the slaughter among thine
own Countrymen, where thy self gave him his last wounds, thou art guilty of a
double perfidiousnesse, which never any former age could parallel.

I am not able, Sir, to represent to you my Princes fury, you may guess it when
I tell you, that the remembrance of Artaxerxes wakened it self so powerfully in
him, and made him so sensible of these reproaches, that he lost the use both of
speech and reason, and transported with rage, never considered that he was
before Parmenio whose prisoner he was, nor that he was without all hope of any
assistance that could secure him; but drawing out his sword, flew instantly at
Artaban, not being able to bring forth one distinct word. The Traitor grew
straightway pale at that object, and casting himself behind Parmenio, and the
rest there present, strove to avoid that death which he saw before his eyes.
But Oroondates even besides himself with grief and rage, and not finding any
obstacle able to stop so just a fury, made himself way among all those that
opposed him, and with his sword clearing his passage to that disloyal man, ran
him twice through the body, in the face of twenty thousand men, who had not the
power to hinder him, the villain fell upon the earth, and with his blood
vomited out his base and faithless soul.

After this execution, Oroondates laying aside all anger, and recovering his
former temper, turned toward Parmenio, and putting up his sword into the
scabbord, said to him with a settled countenance, Great Parmenio, now that
Darius and I are both revenged, dispose of my destiny with the Gods, I refuse
not your shackles, being free from those of this Traitor, and I without
trouble, offer these hands to you, which have punished his perfidiousnesse, and
which were instruments in the want of respect I have showed you. Parmenio more
astonished then I can express, eyed him often from head to foot, with an
admiring look, and with inward motions full of irresolution: this action of my
Prince's, wherein he had shown so little regard or consideration of him, after
so late and so high an obligation, exasperated him infinitely against him, and
made him incline to his destruction: and on the other side, that rare
generosity which he had in one day testified by so many gallant effects,
together with the grace wherewith he accompanied and authorized all he did,
stifled his first resentments, and made his interests yield insensibly to the
affection and esteem that he had for him: but withal making reflection upon
Artabans words concerning his oath against the life of Alexander, and judging
by so bold an execution, what such a person was capable of, he feared he should
fail in duty to his King, if he should preserve him so considerable an Enemy*
in the end his perplexity being a little over, Whosoever thou art (said he)
thou deservest either death or liberty; but the Gods forbid I should give death
to so valiant a man, or liberty to so dangerous an enemy of Alexanders; if the
Gods had raised him up but two more such, he might give over the hope of his
Conquests, and Darius might recover that of getting up again into the Throne of
his Predecessors. At these words he gave him into the custody of his most
trusty soldiers, charging them to use him well, and to be answerable for him,
upon peril of their lives.

Disloyal Artaban was punished on this manner, his body remaining a prey to
Vultures, and his head (as we have learnt since) was cut off by a Persian, and
sent to Darius, who by that fight received some ease in his misfortunes.
Parmenio after having put a Garrison into Damascus, and given such orders as
were necessary for the Province, took his way toward Marathon, which Alexander
had besieged, and where he knew he should find him yet. We arrived there in
four days, and Parmenio leaving the prisoners under strong guards, went to
present his duty to his King.

After he had given him an account of the stately spoils he brought him, he
made mention of my Master, and extolled his generocity in such terms, as made
him better satisfied with the taking of him, then with that of Damascus, and
all Darius his wealth; and advertising him of the design he had against his
life, according to what he had heard from Artaban, and what he had testified
himself in the last Battle, whereof Alexander yet bore the marks, he gave him a
greater apprehension of him alone, then he had of all the Persian Armies. All
these considerations made him desire to see him, but, Sir, it is not necessary
to repeat that to you which passed between them, you were without question
present, and that encounter was memorable enough for you to have still
preserved the remembrance of it.

Lysimachus seeing that Araxes made a stop, said to him, I was at that time
absent from the King, and Meleager, Polypercon, and my self, were by his
command gone toward the Isle of Arada, which put it self into our hands without
resistance: and though I have since been told something of it, 'twas with so
much confusion and uncertainty, that you will oblige me very much, by pursuing
your recital without interruption.

Since you desire it (replied Araxes) I Will tell you that Parmenio, knowing the
Kings pleasure, caused my Master to be brought into his presence; he was not
bound, but without arms, and so well guarded, that it was impossible for him to
make escape; As Soon as ever he was before Alexander, the gracefulness of his
person produced its usual effects, and as we judged by the actions of that
King, drew his admiration, and more respect then the greatness of his fortune,
suffered him to show to other men: whether it were the Majesty of his
countenance, or the relation he had heard of him, or that which he had felt
himself in the Battle, which caused him to set that value on him.

My Prince was then but in the twentieth year of his age; yet his stature was
already so advantageous, that he was taller then Alexander by almost the
head, and it was formed with so exact proportion, and accompanied with so
great a vivacity in his eyes, and so mavelous a grace in his behavior, and
in all his actions, that he was considered by those that were present as a
very extraordinary person; and his outside easily persuaded them to give belief
to the report that already ran of his virtue, and the greatness of his
courage. Oroondates did not salute Alexander with that low submission which
he afterward exacted, nor with a fawning humility which might have seemed to
beg favor from him that had an absolute power* neither did he affect an
uncivil and unseasonable pride; but keeping himself in a just moderation, he
paid him what he believed he owed, in perfect liberty, to a man of his
quality, famous by the consideration of so many Victories.

Alexander received him courteously; and having looked twice or thrice
attentively upon him: Is it possible (said he) that you are that valiant man,
that did so many exploits in the Battle of Issus, and whom I encountered with so
little advantage to my self, that I yet bear very troublesome marks of it?
Oroondates obliged to Alexander for the praises he gave him, answered very
modestly, I did so small a matter in that Battle, that but for the cowardice of
those of my party, my actions would not have been taken notice of, and the
glory I received by them, is only that I turned not my back, till I had tried
the valor of a man who had put three hundred thousand to flight.

Alexander was extremely pleased with this modest, confident answer, and
looking upon Hephestion and Ptolomeus, he by his approbation of it, obliged
them to express the like, and then turning toward my Master; But is it true,
(said he) that you have a particular design upon my life, and that you are one
of those whom the hope of a thousand talents has made to promise my head unto
Darius? Though my Prince seemed offended at that question, as I found by the
color that came up into his face, he replied without being moved, The hope
of a thousand Talents, nor that of a thousand Empires, shall never make me
undertake any thing but what honor and virtue shall command; but the
consideration of what I owe unto Darius, shall make me always attempt both
against you, and against all his enemies, whatsoever a virtuous King can desire
from a friend, against the Usurpers of his Dominions, and the Persecutors of
his life.

This answer netled Alexander; but it also filled him with admiration and
esteem of my Prince, and caused him to reply, If Darius had had many friends
like you, I should perchance have been still on the far side of the Granicus;
but if he had any one of mine in his power, and that he should hear such a
Declaration from his mouth, I believe he would put him to death, and assure
his life by the loss of so dangerous an enemy. If you have the same fear,
(answered Oroondates, without being daunted) you have the same power and I have
still the same intention. Alexander more surprised then before, remained a long
time e're he spoke again, showing an unresolvednesse in his countenance, while
all that stood by, waited impatiently for the success of this adventure; and I
assure my self, that the most virtuous of his friends, though they would have
been very glad to secure the life of their Prince by the death of one of his
enemies, had already so much inclination to him, that they could not have seen
his without discontent; for my part I confess I was afraid for him, and
trembled in the expectation of so uncertain an event.

But in the end, Alexander after he had long held his eyes fixed upon the
ground, turned them on a sudden upon my Masters face, and rising from a chair,
where he had still continued sitting, because of the wound in his thigh, he
said, touching him with his hand; Whosoever thou art, Greek or Persian, Prince,
or private man, I know thee to be too generous, and too gallant, to attempt
against my life by ways contrary to virtue, and I account my self strong enough
to defend it whenever thou shall assault it as a man of honor; I will not
secure it by the loss of thine, but will endeavor to make thee share the
danger, when the advantage shall be shared between us. I therefore leave thee
thy life, and thy liberty, which from henceforward thou may employ for
Darius. I fear thee not enough, to endeavor to win thee to us, after such a
Declaration as thou have made; neither do I despise thee so much, but that if I
could now with honor, I would prefer thy friendship before the best Province
of Asia. Go thy way when thou please, and if thou be at the Battle, make
thy self known, and remember thy brave resolution, there it is that we will
fight for my head, and there, (more handsomely, then I should now) I may
endeavor to take satisfaction for the wound thou gave me.

If my Masters magnanimity pleased Alexander, that of Alexander so deeply
wrought upon my Princes heart, that it took away all the hatred he had against
him; or if there yet remained any resentment in him, 'twas less for Darius his
losses, and for the Captivity of his Mistress, then for the grief he suffered
by seeing himself overcome in generosity. And indeed he has since confessed to
me, that he had seldom received a more sensible one; and at that time, he by
the discontent that appeared in his face, did visibly enough express the
trouble he felt for that occasion; answering Alexander only with these words,
in a sadder tone then he was commonly wont to speak: It Is now that I deplore
Darius his fortune, and that I hold his Empire lost, by the anger of the Gods,
since they have raised him up an enemy, that wins hearts as well as battles. He
said no more, but taking leave of Alexander, he refused all the Presents he
offered him, except Horses and Arms for himself and me, which he received at
last in exchange of those that had been taken from him. He also took his
Equipage again, which Alexander caused to be restored to him entire, and
contented himself with the safe conduct he gave him, refusing the Convoy which
he offered, to bring him in safety to any of the Towns that were yet in Darius
his possession. Thus parted those two gallant men, keeping in their hearts such
an esteem for one another, as by these passages you may well imagine.

Araxes was in this part of his Relation, when he was entreated by Lysimachus,
to go into Oroondates his Chamber, to make his excuses, if he saw him not that
morning, and to allege unto him the impatiency he had to learn the remainder
of his life. Araxes did as he desired, and seeing his Master was reasonably
well, he came back to Lysimachus, and sitting down again in his chair, at his
request, he continued his Relation on this manner.

The End of the Third Book.
CASSANDRA. BOOK IV.
OROONDATES having parted thus from Alexander, carried away with him so high an
esteem of his virtue, and conceived so true an affection to his magnanimity,
that he gave over all designs against his life, or at least took a strong
resolution never to assault him, but at the head of his Army, and when he
should be forced to it, either by the consideration of his honor, or by that
of the safety of Darius, and of his Princess; nor was it without a most
sensible displeasure, to see himself crossed in his intentions by obligations
of such a nature. But that high virtue which he loved, and reverenced even in
his very enemies, would not suffer him still to continue them, and would have
made him more willingly consent to his own destruction, then to that of so
generous an adversary.

Then it was that he wished the possession of his Fathers Crown, to dispute
with him upon equal terms, both for Empire and Virtue; but neither did the
humor of his Father permit him such a hope during his life, nor his affection
to Statira suffer him to forsake Persia, no nor so much as to leave the Camp
where she was detained. When we were out of sight of Alexanders Tents, my
Prince turning toward me, Araxes, ( said he) now it is that all our industry
will be necessary, and though we be habituated in Persia to live amongst our
Enemies, we have need now of a more then ordinary wariness: we must change
both our names and habits; and the better to avoid the knowledge of those that
may have observed my face, you must pass for my Master, and study to act that
part skilfully; by that means we may live among the Macedonians with more
safety, and perchance the Gods will facilitate me some way to see my Princess,
and to procure her deliverance.

After these words, having given me some other instructions, we were come
quite through the Camp of the Macedonians, and finding a Wood very commodious
for our purpose, he commanded Clothes of the Macedonian fashion to be taken out
of his Sumpter, which he had caused to be made expressly at Damascus; for before
Artaban's treachery broke out, believing that Siege would keep him so long,
that he should not be able to meet Mythranes in Alexanders Camp, according to
appointment, he furnished himself with those habits, with a design, if Darius
his Embassy should take no effect, to disguise himself with them as he now
intended, and attempt some way to procure his Princesses liberty. We having put
them on, he commanded me to take such Jewels and Money, as were of easiest
carriage, and keeping only his two Scythian servants, who were apparelled in
the same fashion to attend us, he gave order to the rest to go with all his
other things to Babylon or Persepolis, and to expect news of him near Darius,
to whom he wrote Letters, which he delivered to them with Alexanders
Passport, that they might make use of it, in case it should be necessary for
them, to pass with the more assurance: having dispatched them with full
directions, we got on horseback again, and returned to the Camp, where we
arrived just when Marathon had newly surrendered it self, and that the King was
making his entry into it; we retired to a quarter as private, and as far from
the King's, as we could conveniently find; and my Master having showed me a
place where I should come to him again, sent me into the Camp to hearken after
Darius his Ambassador. But having sought him long in vain, I learned that he
had had his audience, and was gone away very well satisfied, having obtained
nothing from Alexander, but very sharp Letters, which he had written to Darius.

I afterward informed my self cunningly, and without seeming to have any
design, concerning the Queens, the Princesses, and the other Ladies that were
prisoners, and I learnt they were all under the custody of Philotas, and
Nicanor, Parmenio's sons, that they were waited on with all manner of respect
and civility, and that of all the things befitting their quality, they wanted
not any else but liberty; they were guarded with so much care, that it was
almost impossible to see them, and that those that had been taken at Damascus,
as Roxana, Barsina, the daughters of King Occhus, and the rest, were not yet
with the first, as the King had commanded; but that they all were kept so
retired from the commerce, or frequentation of men, whether Persians or
Macedonians, that they were not so much as seen, except by very few.

I brought back this news unto my Prince, who was exceedingly well satisfied at
the usage they received, and very much troubled at the difficulty of seeing
them; he resolved nevertheless not to leave the Army, hoping that the Heavens
would suffer him some favorable occasion.

The next day the Army marched from Marathon, and entered into Phenicia; we
followed them all that Journey, my Master making me still go first, and doing
me such services before company, as hindered such as saw us from taking notice
of him. Our stay among the Macedonians was much facilitated by the liberty
which Alexander gave to all persons to retire amongst them, and the welcome
that both Persians and other Nations received, who came in daily, and of whom
his Army was already in great part composed. The very first days march, we saw
the Queens and the Princesses pass by in their Chariots, they were all in
black, and wearing a habit suitable to their present condition, drew tears from
the eyes of all that considered them; but the access to their Chariots was
forbidden by so great a number of Guards, that it was necessary to be satisfied
with looking on them, without expecting any other advantage.

My Master was ready to die for being limited only to the sight, and almost
losing the remembrance of his resolution, was even upon the point to make
himself known, and ruin himself. The second day we saw Hephestion, Perdiccas,
and your self, Sir, riding by the Chariots, and entertaining the Queens and
Princesses; you were I remember upon a white Horse, which you made go so
gracefully before the Ladies, that it moved us to ask your name, and those of
the two other Lords. The third day we had no more favorable success, nor in
all the rest of the March, till we came to Sydon, where Alexander resolved to
make some stay, as well by reason of the fairness of the Town, as to depose
Strato, and put another in his place.

My Master dying with impatiency, passed all the nights near the Queens Tents
or Lodgings, to watch some opportunity to see them, and to make himself known
to them, but it was impossible for him to find any: I indeed had observed the
Eunuch Tyreus, but we could never find an opportunity to speak with him in
private. The fifth day after our arrival at Sydon, we saw them go out of the
Town, and with their Guards, take the way toward the Garden of Abdolominus,
that name is sufficiently known to you, and the beauty of that Garden, which
that good Man, (whose fortune within a few days after was so strange) kept
trimmed with an extraordinary care. Those illustrious prisoners found so much
delight in walking there, as they got leave to be desired of the King, that
they might go thither again sometimes, during the abode they were to make in
Sydon; which being granted, and the Princesses passing almost no day without
seeking that diversion there, which they were then capable of: Oroondates
thought he might by that means obtain what was with so much strictness
forbidden him.

To that end he went very early one morning to Abdolominus, and being
instructed in his poverty, he at first coming presented him with Gold, and
Jewels, and conjured him by the most ardent prayers his passion could invent,
to give him admittance into his Garden, and that if he could possibly he would
not suffer him to be put out of it all that day. Abdolominus having considered
the grace, and winning fashion wherewith he made his suit, let himself be
overcome with his entreaties; and refusing his Presents, Whosoever you are (
said he) you know me but little, if you believed your riches could do any
thing with me; my Trees are dearer to me, then all treasures, and my Garden
furnishes me with enough to satisfy my ambition; but if you assure me that
you have no ill intent, as your countenance would easily persuade me, I Will grant
you your desire, though it be most expressly forbidden; neither shall I believe
I offend the Gods, in disobeying those to whom they have not made me be born a
subject, to oblige a man of so good presence, and who makes his request with so
handsome a grace.

My Prince protested to him that his intention was no other, then to see (if he
could possibly) one of his sisters, who had been taken with the Princess
Statira, to whom she had the honor to belong, and that if he might obtain that
contentment by his favor, he would endeavor to requite it by his services,
since he saw his virtue made him despise the Gold and Jewels which he presented
to him. The good man touched with that winning carriage which gained the heart
of all the world, and approving so commendable a design, did not only grant
what he demanded, but also offered him his house, the retreat whereof might be
commodious for him during the stay Alexander should make in Sidon; and having
forced him to accept that courtesy, he brought us himself into the Garden,
where he left us, after having showed us private Walks, Grots, and secret Arbors
where we might hide our selves in time of need.

It is not necessary for me to describe the beauty of a place which you have
often seen; for my part I was of opinion, that the Gardens of Ecbatana, though
they were more costly, and artificially adorned, were but little more
delightful: yet my Master not so much as regarding the pleasantness of it,
waited there for the arrival of the Ladies, with an unspeakable impatience, and
passed part of the day in an unquietness that cannot be imagined. In the end we
were not deceived of our expectation, and when he began almost to despair of
it, we saw the so much longed for persons appear. Alexander had always had that
respect for them, that he suffered not any body to come into their Chambers,
nor into their conversations, without being introduced by their own pleasure,
leaving them those marks of Royalty, even in their servitude. This privilege
was very convenient for us, for as soon as they were come in with the Ladies of
their Train, and some Eunuchs of their House, the door was shut again; the
Guards contented themselves with incompassing the Garden, and hindering all
kind of persons from going in or out, without order from Nicanor, who had that
charge that day. It is very difficult for me to express unto you the inward
motions of Oroondates at the sight of his Princess, he trembled with love and
joy, and was upon the point to have gone and cast himself instantly at her
feet, and have discovered himself to all the Ladies; but upon better
consideration, he desired to do it with less surprise, and watched for some
occasion to show himself to Statira alone, rather then to them altogether;
which presented it self within a little while, and as lucky a one as he could
have wished. We were in a very close Arbor, yet from it we might see the gate
of the Garden, and know all that was done in it, without being perceived. We
saw the Ladies part several ways, according to their different inclinations:
the Queens began to walk in a broad Alley, which went along the side of a
little Stream. The Princess Parisatis, with Apamia and Arsinoe, Artabasus his
daughters; and sisters to Barsina, withdrew into an Arbor, and the Princess
Statira, making a great Cushion to be carried by Cleone the dearest of her
Maids of Honor, walked toward a Grot where there was a pleasing Fountain. My
Prince having seen her pass by, gave her the leisure to retire as she
intended, and a while after slipped through a covered Ally, which led unseen unto
that Grot. He gave me leave to follow him, and going softly, and without
noise, we came unto the entry of it. My Master trembling with love and respect,
was even like a lost man, but he was much more so when drawing near his
Princess, he saw her laid along by the edge of the Fountain, and already fallen
asleep upon the Cushion which Cleone had brought her. Cleone to let her take
her rest, was gone out of the Grot, and walked gathering flowers in places from
whence she could not discover us. Oroondates drew near Statira so transported,
that he hardly knew where he was, and seeing her fast asleep, he kneeled on the
ground, and began to look upon her in such an ecstasy as cannot be expressed to
you but by him that felt it. Then it was that numberless different thoughts
assaulted him, and that he was seized with a greater apprehension then ever he
had had in any battle: he feared that his Mistress by so long an absence, might
have blotted him out of her remembrance; that her mind might have received
some impression disadvantageous to him, and favorable to some other; that
having only loved him to obey her brother, she might believe her self
dis-engaged by his death from continuing those proofs of her obedience; or that
after the misfortune of so great a loss, it might be thought a crime in him,
to appear alive before her whose last parting words had imposed so strict a
command upon him, to be careful of that charge: these apprehensions tormented
him in such a manner, that they were easily to be read in his eyes and
countenance, and made him fear to waken her, lest perchance her mouth should
give him proofs of a misfortune, which he was come to seek so far, and with so
much pains and hazard. His Princess was laid upon her side, leaning her head
upon one of her arms, and the other negligently stretched out upon her thigh.
Her beauty, though grief had abated something of her flesh, and of the vivacity
of her color, was already come to perfection; her neck was half uncovered, and
her sleeve being a little turned up, showed part of an arm, to whose whiteness
snow was but a mean comparison; the blackness of her habit did set it off with
the greater luster; and her hair which was of the same color, playing by the
help of a gentle wind upon so much of her cheeks as appeared unto our sight,
discovered the delicateness of her complexion so well by that opposition, that
Ivory and Ebony were never better matched together. Her eyes though closed, had
left free passage to some tears, which stealing along her cheek, ran down to
her mouth, where they ended their cours^, as the only place that was able to
equal the beauty of the sources from whence they flowed.

I could not forbear making this little Description to you, (though
unseasonable, and no way proper in our affliction) when I remembered the time my
Master spent in considering her, which was indeed so long, that I feared, he by
his own fault, would lose the fair opportunity the Gods had sent him. He took
notice of it himself at last, and recovering a little courage, after two or
three deep sighs, which he could not possibly retain, he bowed his head gently
down to steal a kiss of those tempting rubies, but the first touch of them
struck him into such a rapture, that not considering what he did, he fastened
his lips upon them with so much ardour, that his very so^^ was all at his
mouth, and had like to have stolen from him in that excess of love and
contentment. The Princess wakened by so close and passionate a touch, and
seeing her self in a man's arms, she, who though a Captive, had never seen any
approach her but with such respects as are paid unto Divinities, was seized in
such a manner, that she could not express how much she was surprised and
frighted any other way then by a loud crying out; but when she started up to
defend her self against the violence of that enemy, and that she had fixed her
eyes upon Oroondates his face, whose memory was always present with her, and to
whose supposed death she gave those tears, wherewith her cheeks were then
bedewed, her astonishment turned into a cold shievering, which deprived all
her senses of their function, and made her after a second cry, fall stretched
out in his arms, without any sign of life. My Master quite besides himself, and
transported with his passion, pressed her between his arms, bent her forward,
and wetting her face with his tears, took kisses which had never been permitted
him with so much liberty, nor had he ever ventured on them with so much
boldness. In the mean time I stepping to the Fountain, and seeing how little
help she received from my Master, cast water several times upon her face; but
she was in so deep a swoun, that she came not to her self, and we were in an
affliction hard to be expressed, when Cleone drawn by the Princesses cry, came
running frighted to us; and at the same time through another Ally the Princess
Parisatis, Apamia, Arsinoe, and many other Ladies. I make you judge, Sir, of
their astonishment and fear, both for the Princess whom they saw in a swoun, or
dead in the arms of two strange men, and for themselves whom the condition of
their present fortune made apprehensive of every thing: they began already to
send forth cries, which would in the end have been overheard by their Guards,
when I rising up, and leaving my Master intent about an employment which their
coming made him not forsake, addressed my self unto them, and discovering my
face which was not unknown to them, Ladies, (said I) you may destroy us; but in
ruining Orontes* you lose the man who of all the world is most affectionate to
your service, and who comes to die here, for no other end, but to give you
proof of it by the loss of a life which he lays down for your sakes.

These Ladies though they were more dead then living at this accident, ceased
their cries at these words, and remaining immovable, expected the issue of so
strange an adventure. In this interim Cleone kneeling to Statira, unbuckled her
robe, and threw so much water in her face, that at last she opened her eyes:
As Soon as she began to come unto her self, she cried out, Ah! Orontes, and
seeing him still present, she was like to have fainted away a second time. My
Prince kneeld down before her, and while Cleone, more courageous then the rest
held her in her arms, he kissed her hands, and bathed them in his tears with so
many sobs, and broken sighs, that she being a little recovered, ventured at
last to look upon him, and the rest becoming confident by her example, began to
come all round about him. When she saw her self fortified by the presence of so
many, her fear began to pass away, and fixing her eyes upon my Prince's, after
having looked awhile without speaking, Are you alive (said she) Orontes, or do
you come after your death, to visit Prisoners, to whom you were so dear during
your life? My Prince reassumed by those words, and embracing her knees with
sudden raptures of affection, which cannot be related, made answer: Yes, Madam,
I am alive, and being only born to live, and to die for you, I come to live,
and die here at your feet, and render to you, and yours, the service I owe to
both till the last moment of my life.

After these words, the Princess Parisatis, and the Ladies being a little
settled, came nearer to him, and my Prince kneeling to Parisatis, and saluting
all the other Ladies with infinite civility, drew them by degrees out of the
fright they had been in, and filled them all with as much joy as they could
receive in their Captivity. Statira was sorry my Prince had given so many
proofs of his passion before those Ladies; but he who knew Darius his pleasure,
and who was upon the point of making a more ample Declaration to them, was not
troubled at it. In the mean time Arsinoe went to find out the Queens, to
prepare them for this news, and free them from being as much surprised at it,
as they themselves had been. The amazement of those good Princesses was not to
be equalled, and not being able to credit what Arsinoe said, nor to stay for my
Masters coming to them, they were going to the Grot, but as they went they met
him, who with the whole company was coming toward them; as soon as he was near
them, he fell upon his knee, and those good Queens having lifted him up,
embraced him a thousand times, with tears of joy and affection, and expressed
all the kindness to him, which they could have showed to Prince Artaxerxes, if
the Gods had raised him from the dead again? Are you alive then, Orontes? (said
Queen Sysigambis to him) and have the Gods preserved you to be a witness of
our misfortunes, and of the ruin of poor Darius? It Is now indeed, you see us
truly prisoners, and prisoners of a Conqueror less generous then you were, who
from the first minute of our being taken, offered us that liberty of your own
accord, which Alexander refuses both to the prayers and presents of Darius.
Madam, (replied my Prince) the Gods have saved my life, after a loss that made
me hate it, because they had resolved, that I should neither keep it, nor lose
it, but for your family. I willingly obey them, and the powerful inclination
that has forced me from Darius, to come and die in your presence, or to employ
my self in your service, to the last drop of blood that I have left.

Darius his Queen learning by my Masters words, that we had seen the King her
husband, after having expressed new favors to him, began to enquire after that
good Prince, and Oroondates drawing the Letter he had sent him, out of his
pocket, presented it to them, meaning by the reading thereof to prepare them
for the Discourse he had to make. Sysigambis took it, and after she had looked
upon the seal, which she knew to be the King her Sons, she broke it open, and
read these words, as near as I can remember,

King Darius to Queen Sisigambis his most honored Mother, and to Queen Statira
his dearest Wife; HEALTH.
HE that comes from saving my life, goes to save the rest of my Family;
Orontes, whom the Gods have raised again for my safety, goes to labor for
yours, and to employ himself for your liberties, with that mavelous
affection, which makes him to forget his own Interests to think of ours. But
receive him no more as Orontes, and repair by your submissions the faults you
have committed. Honor in the person of a Prince, that has so perfectly obliged
you, that of Oroondates Prince of Scythia, who has drowned the hatred of his
house, in a friendship which is so advantageous to you, and which amidst all
our losses, ought to serve for our consolation. Our daughter Statira, whom the
Gods have given us for our happiness, is his, both by the merit of his
services, and by the word of her Father, and of her King. Use him therefore as
our Savior, and as our Son, and since that after so many losses, his
generosity is so great, as still to desire our alliance, endeavor to make it
clear to him, both by your acknowledgement, and by the testimonies of your
affection.

DARIUS.


The Queens finished the reading of this Letter with an incredible
astonishment, in which the Princesses kept them company, and particularly
Statira, whose discretion was to be admired, in dissembling her joy in so
sudden and happy an encounter; their knowing of the Seal, and of Darius his own
hand, hindered them from doubting in the least manner of the truth of the
Letter, but their experience of my Princes nature, gave them yet a stronger
belief. They began to use him with more respect then ordinary, and making
appear that they expected a greater light into his affairs, by his own
discourse, they went together into a close arbor, and being set down upon
seats of green turf, they desired him to declare the truth of his life unto
them; he yielded obedience to their commands, and in a few words made them an
abridgment of what I have told you, excepting only the love of Roxana, and the
proofs of affection he had received from Statira. That Princess was extremely
satisfied with his discretion, and all the rest amazed at the last adventures
you heard, as well in the battle of Issus, and the rescue of Darius, as the
generous passages with Artaban, Parmenio, and Alexander. When he had ended his
story to the perfect contentment of the Queens, and to their great admiration
of his virtue, they rendered him such honors and civilities as almost
confounded him, and expressed their joy both for the knowledge of him, and of
his design, by such advantageous proofs, that he thought himself gloriously
recompensed, both for all the pains he had undergon, and for those which in
appearance the Gods had still reserved for him to suffer.

After many discourses, Queen Statira turning toward the Princess her daughter:
Daughter ( said she) though you were not moved to the acknowledgement of what
you owe Prince Oroondates by the remembrance of our obligations to him, and by
an inclination from which I believe you not exempt, and for which no body can
lawfully blame you; the Command of the King your Father is so express, and
that of the Queen my Mother, and mine own likewise so just, that it is
impossible for you to disobey them, without drawing the continuance of these
misfortunes that persecute us, most deservedly upon your head. Dispose your
self therefore, to execute (as soon as it shall please the Gods to make an
alteration in our Fortune) your Fathers will, and ours, since with the
permission of the Queen my Mother, I declare that it is conformable to his.

My Prince at so obliging words cast himself at the Queens feet, and Princess
Statira, making a low obeisance received the command, without answering
otherwise then by a modest blush, wherewith her cheeks were overspread. They
then began to think of the means of meeting again, and of deceiving the
vigilance of so many guards; whereupon Oroondates told the Queens the discourse
he had had with Abdolominus, and the offers that good man had made him of his
house, which was within the enclosure of the Garden; it was resolved he should
still make use of that retreat, and that he might do it with the less danger,
he should quit his present habit, to take one more rustic, and less
suspicious, wherein we might pass for workmen employed to dress the Garden; and
they on the other side promised him, that during their abode at Sidon, they
would not let pass one day, without taking their walk there, since that liberty
was permitted them.

After having taken his resolution, seeing it began to grow late, and fearing
somebody might come in, and surprise them together; the good Princesses bad him
farewell, and getting up into their Chariots, were carried back unto their
Lodgings. We returned into Abdolominus his house, and my Master having embraced
him a thousand times, conjured him more ardently then before, to assist him,
and excuse him if he trespassed so far upon his goodness, as to accept the
offers he had made him, and seeing the good man disposed to help him in his
desires, he discovered to him, the design he had to disguise his condition
under the habit of a Gardener, and begged so earnestly of him for that
employment, that he consented to his request, and furnished us with such
clothes as we demanded, laying ours up for us, and allowing us to continue in
his house while Alexander, or the Princesses should stay at Sidon. Toxaris, and
Loncates our two Scythian servants kept our arms, and horses at the Town, and
took care to bring us meat, though Abdolominus would not have suffered it, but
my Master to whom his poverty was not unknown, would not put him to any
expense, and did all he could to persuade him to take his presents, which he
still refused with so much generosity and greatness of courage, that we often
judged him worthy of the fortune which befell him within a little after.

The next day Oroondates expected the Ladies arrival in the Garden, with an
impatience equal to that of the day before, true it is that his mind was much
more quiet, and that having nothing more to overcome but Alexanders fortune, he
thought himself in a high degree of felicity; they came at the accustomed
hour, and found him apparelled in a plain gray suit, yet not unhandsom, and
such as did not much diminish the graceful fashion he had in his ordinary
habit. Their first discourse was of their affairs, and of the means that might
be found for their deliverance; but after they had studied for that in vain,
and considered the impossibilities that thwarted it at that present, they
resolved to wait still for the occasions that heaven might offer them, and not
to use an unseasonable haste that would but ruin their designs, and take away
all the facility that might be found for the future: their conversation was
long upon that point, but the Queens judging of my Masters impatience by their
knowledge of his Love; and not doubting but that after so long an absence, he
desired ardently to entertain his Princess, were willing to leave him alone
with her, and taking their walk in these pleasant allies, they obliged
Parisatis and the other Ladies to do the like; only Cleone remained with
Statira, but I taking her by the hand, walked at a little distance with her,
who not opposing my Princes happiness, was content to afford him an entire
liberty.

Then it was that this passionate Prince, threw himself before his Princesses
feet, and that cementing his lips to her fair hands, he entertained her with
the violence of his affection, in terms which it would be hard for me to
repeat, though I have learned part of them from his own mouth. There by a
deluge of tears they solemnized the death of Artaxerxes, and endeavored to
comfort one another, for a loss which was equally sensible to them. After they
had given some time to that remembrance, Oroondates wiping his eyes, Madam (
said he) I should certainly have died, to keep company with a person whom I
loved better then my self, if my faithful Araxes, being less possessed with
grief, had not put me in mind of what I owed to you; I confess Madam I yielded
to that consideration, and my friendship to Artaxerxes, not being to be
overcome but by my love to you, my love got the victory of my friendship, and
made me preserve that for you, which I had resolved to lose with him, and which
I ought to have lost for him, in acquitting my self better then I did of the
charge you gave me.

The Princess who had a mind to divert him from so sorrowful a remembrance;
You have put that life ( said she) but in too much hazard, which I so dearly
recommended to you; yet since you disobeyed me so soon, I beseech you do so no
more; if I have the power of it, I command it you, and since it is impossible
for us to fetch back my poor brother to life again, let us take care that he
never die in our remembrance, where we will raise him an everlasting monument:
and in the mean time revive your spirits as much as you can, and as our present
condition will give you leave, and knowing that all your griefs are as sensible
to me as to your self, recover your former looks, if you will have me find
those features in your face, that made me love it.

She pronounced these last words with so obliging a tone, and looked upon my
Prince with such a piercing eye, that he fell out of one extreme into another,
and passing from grief to joy in a moment, suffered himself to be so
transported with his passion, that it made him lose part of his respect, and
drawing nearer his Princess, he surprised her lips with his, and sealed them
with so much ferventness, or rather forgot himself with so much sweetness, that
he seemed as if he never would have parted from them, if the Princess had not
gently thrust him back, saying, It is enough Oroondates, abuse not the
privilege so soon which Darius his consent has given you, and stir not up the
Gods yet more against us, by seeking pleasures while our Family is afflicted
with so many losses, you will not be less satisfied when you shall know I love
you by other proofs, nor shall I love you less, though I urge you still to
continue that respect which always pleased me, and which becomes you so
extremely well: My Prince alittle ashamed to see himself so reproved, answered
her, Madam your goodness will pardon these transports, in consideration of
their cause which pleads excuse for them, and I hope you will not think it
strange that I pay my self in one moment, for the pains of a whole year, nor
that a man grown insolent by the approbation of the King and of the Queens,
emboldens himself to a liberty which their consent seems to authorize. Not that
I will make use of it if my Princess be displeased, for I fear much more to
offend her, then that I shall stir up the Gods against us, by the effects of my
passion, and by my most innocent intentions. But Madam, ought I to trust my
fortune, and may I with some appearance of reason believe that your favor to
me will continue ever firm? ought I not to tremble at the remembrance of
Alexander, and fear that that Conqueror of men may prevail also with the other
sex, and overcome your mind, either by his fortune, by his merit, or by the
power he now has over you? That question disobliges me (replied the Princess)
and if you think me fickle enough to yield to any of those considerations, you
esteem me but little, and by consequence cannot love me much, if it be true
that perfect love is grounded upon the esteem of the person beloved; I love you
Oroondates, both because you deserve it very well, and because I believe you
love me, and my affection cannot cease, so long as those two causes continue,
and though they should both fail, I know not whether I should have reason
enough left to wean my self from it: Fear not Alexander therefore any longer,
since neither that fortune, nor that merit which you alledg, no nor the power
he has over me, will ever be able to shake the resolution I have taken, and
the promise I make to be never but yours, unless you change your humor first,
and unless you repent your having loved a Captive, the Daughter of a Prince
dispossessed of his Estates; and one who has nothing of her former quality
left, except her courage. My Prince ravished with the beginning, and deeply
touched with the end of her discourse: Ah! Madam ( said he) do not accuse me of
a baseness which I never can be guilty of; he that feared not the difficulties
that opposed his first design of serving you, will never consider the changes
of fortune, and if for mine own Interest I might have been permitted to make
prayers that were prejudicial to you, I should always have wished that the Gods
had made you be born without that greatness, which I would have raised you to,
that I might not have obliged you to abase your self to me, nor to believe that
the height of your quality gave the least increase to a passion, which I
conceived for your person alone; but since that notwithstanding you are all
divine, you yet vouchsafe to stoop so low as to me, and that this great
disproportion hinders you not from giving me such lofty hopes, the Gods are my
witnesses that I envy not their condition, and that I would not change my
fortune with Alexander, no nor with the Gods themselves.

Besides these discourses they had many others, whose length keeps me from
repeating them, and when they were fully satisfied by the mutual assurances
they gave of an eternal affection, they thought it time to return unto the
Queens: So they went out of the Arbor where they were, and having called us,
joined company with them again in one of the Alleys, and continued with them
till they departed. After that day they passed many others in the same
tranquillity, and my Master for that time was so satisfied with the condition of
his love, that it almost made him forget that of Darius his affairs, and of his
Princesses Captivity: but within a very little after, that calm of Fortune was
something troubled, and it was by the arrival of the Ladies that had been
taken at Damascus, who being brought to Sidon were put among the rest. My
Prince was glad indeed at the coming of Barsina, and in show for that of
Roxana, and that Princess to whom then both the true affection, and true
quality of Oroondates were no longer unknown, for some days forbore her
importunities, but she fell into them again a while after in such a manner,
that she made him lose much of the good will, and esteem he had for her, yet
did he conceal her love with so much care, as well to follow the incitements of
his own virtue, which obliged him to hide the faults of a person who committed
them only for his sake, as because he knew her wit was able to cross him in his
affection, and percance utterly to ruin it, if he should absolutely have
offended her.

In the mean time Alexander fell in love with Barsina, and as you know that new
passion made him see the Ladies often, whom before he visited not at all,
through an affected continence; which many times had made him say, that the
Persian Ladies troubled the eyesight. One day when they were in our Garden, and
my Prince with them in his ordinary entertainment, the desire of seeing Barsina
brought him thither; your self was with him, and Hephestion, Perdiccas,
Leonatus, and diverse others. As Soon as ever my Prince saw him come in, he slunk
away from the Ladies, and retired into a corner of the Garden, where he feigned
to busy himself in a Trade wherein he was not very skillful, not giving over
that employment, of all the time the King continued in the Garden, and every
time he took the like walks, he hid himself so carefully that he suspected not
any body could observe him. In all other occasions we kept our selves exactly
upon our guards, but within a few days after we had a terrible fright, whereof
you know the cause well enough, though I believe not the effect it wrought in
us.

We were with Abdolominus in his house two or three days after the King had
been there, when we saw a great number of his Guards come in, and a man at the
head of them who seemed their Captain, I began presently to tremble, but my
fear was infinitely increased when Abdolominus advancing toward them, and asking
them the cause that brought them thither; he that was the chief of them made
answer, we come to seek for a Prince that lies hid here, disguised in a habit
nothing suitable to his quality, he must come before Alexander to whom he is
not unknown, and receive from so just a King the recompense that is due to him.
Judge Sir, of my Masters astonishment; then it was that he thought himself
absolutely lost, and no longer doubting but that some of Alexanders attendants
had discovered him in the Garden, his mind was pestered with several
thoughts, suitable to the condition in which he was; but he was quickly eased
of his apprehension by the same man who had already spoken, and who addressing
himself still to Abdolominus; Prince Abdolominus (said he) be not struck with
wonder, but come and receive from Alexander the Crown of your Country, your
virtue cannot continue longer hid, and great Hephestion to whom the King has
left the desposing of it, chooses you among all the Sydonians, to command a
people that gives an universal testimony of your wisdom and integrity; Leave
off therefore these clothes unworthy of your present condition, and putting on
those that are appointed for you, come and give thanks to Alexander and
Hephestion, for the present which they make you and for the esteem they have of
your merit.

Our astonishment was dissipated by these words, but that of Abdolominus was
such as you may imagine, he could not believe of a long time but that they
mocked him, and when he saw them persevere, he received that change of his
condition as a misfortune sent him from heaven, and behaved himself before
them, and before Alexander as you know, and as all Asia (to whom this Story is
so well know) has highly published.

Lysimachus interrupting Araxes at these words, I was with Alexander (said he)
when he was brought before him, and the King after having considered him
awhile, Let us hear (said he) since we destine thee to a Crown, in what manner
thou have supported thy poverty. I beseech the Gods ( replied Abdolominus
without being moved) that I may support the Crown with the very same mind. This
answer pleased the King so much, and he found it so conformable to the relation
he had heard of him, that he confirmed Hepestions choice, and added to the
Territories which Stato was wont to possess, some other neighboring Provinces,
of which that good man remained peaceable King with a general approbation. My
Prince (replied Araxes) was extreme glad of his good fortune, and praised the
Gods for a success so marvelous, and so full of Justice. This new King
expressed great kindness to us, and made us many advantageous offers, favoring
us in our design, as much as he could possibly; but within a few days after
Alexander resolved to remove from Sydon, to go unto the siege of Tire. My
Prince was much troubled at that resolution which put him besides all his
conveniences, and reduced him to a necessity of seeking new intentions to see
his Princess. The day before they were to go away, he consulted a long time
with the Queens, and their last conclusion was, to make use of Barsina's
friendship, and of the power she had over Alexander to obtain from him, that
during the Siege of Tire, he would leave them in that Town, which was but a
small days Journeys from thence. Barsina was glad of that occasion to serve
them, and to free her self from the discommodities of the Army, and that very
Evening being visited by the King, she so well represented to him, how the
tenderness of the Queens and Princesses, and her own likewise was such, that
they were not able to endure the want of accommodation which they must suffer
necessarily in that Siege; besides how the unwholesomeness of the air (it
being a Sea-Town) might prejudice their healths, especially that of Darius his
Queen, who was not very well already, and of Sisigambis, whose constitution was
weakened with years, that the King who truly loved her, and who likewise
considered, how their being there would incommode his Army, granted all she
desired, and gave them all permission to remain at Sidon, during the Siege,
leaving a strong party there to guard them. The joy of the Princesses was
incredible at this news, but my Masters was far greater, seeing his happiness
continue, when he expected nothing but the end of it.

Alexander departed on this manner, and Oroondates remained in his former
satisfaction, and to complete his good fortune, the Ladies having desired to
lodge at Abdolominus his house, that they might with more liberty make use of
the Garden, it was willingly granted them by Nicanor and Seleucus, in whose
custody they were left: Thus my Master, who under the habit that disguised him,
had free entrance thither, was for the most part with them, and then he was in
an high degree of contentment; the proofs he daily received of Statira's
affection, having raised him to such a point of felicity, that except the
liberty of his Princess, and the satisfaction of Darius, he had nothing more to
wish for; true it is, that he often blushed for shame, to see himself idle,
and obscured in a habit so unworthy of his birth, while all Asia was in arms;
and considering himself in that estate, Araxes (said he often to me) art thou
not sorry for my miserable condition, and for that hard necessity which forces
me to act a part so contrary to my courage, and to the beginnings of my life?
must I remain with my arms acrosse, and languish under this mean apparel, using
nothing but a pruning hook, while Alexander sweats under his Curasse, and wins
Empires with the edge of his Sword? O Gods, what a shame, or rather what an
unjust constraint is this! and yet Araxes (pursued he) it is impossible for me
to conquer it, and these considerations of mine honor, cannot draw me from a
place, where those of mine affection have tied me fast.

He often made these reflections, and was most sensibly afflicted with them; all
his designs were for the liberty of the Ladies, but though he attempted many,
not any of them could be effected, and they were so carefully guarded, that he
lost all hope of delivering them any other way, then by Darius his getting some
Victory, or by the generosity of Alexander.

In that time he was exceedingly persecuted by Roxana, and that Princess not
being taken off by the little success she saw in her love, pressed him with so
much obstinacy, that in the end she forced him to an aversion: true it is, that
she brought him to it by a thousand malicious tricks, and by as many little
inventions she strove to make some breach between him and his Princess, and yet
though he thereby felt most killing discontents, his discretion was always
such, that he would never discover the cause of them, and that at the price of
his own repose, he preserved a consideration of her, which afterward proved
very hurtful to him. He often saw the fair Barsina, and lived with her in a
modest liberty, having found so much virtue in that Lady, and so much freedom
to him, that he thought himself obliged to honor the one, and to acknowledge
the other by all manner of proofs of his good will: It was upon these
foundations, that Roxana built her treachery; she first (cunningly, and without
seeming to have any design) made the Princess take notice of their familiarity;
she made her observe the care he took to entertain her particularly, their kind
looking at one another, and that confidence which they had not in others, and
bethought her self of so many little subtilties, all grounded upon some
probability, that in the end she made some impression in Statira's mind, and
began to persuade her, that she who at first sight had captivated the heart of
Alexander the Great, might by a long frequentation have gained something upon
that of Oroondates. To these thoughts she added the remembrance of the Journey
he had made to Damascus, whither he had been careful to retire, to no other
purpose but to see Barsina, and from whence he would not have stirred, if he
had not been forced, having been carried to Alexanders Camp with her, and
having staid there only for her consideration.

All these things which malicious Roxana blew into Statira's ears, whenever
she found opportunities, began to move her, and touched her in the end so
sensibly, that the grief of her soul appeared quickly in her face; she received
my Prince more coldly then she was wont, and by little and little, grew to live
with him in such a way, that not knowing what to impute that change unto, he
was even ready to die with excess of sorrow; and desiring to find what it
was, as soon as might be, he laid hold of the first occasion that offered it
self; nor was it hard for him to find one, for the liberty he had to entertain
his Princess every day, did facilitate the means unto him. To that purpose,
having met her one day in the same Grot, where he had found her asleep, there
being no body with her but Cleone, to whom their love was not unknown, he
kneeled down before her, and seeing that she kept her eyes fixed upon the ground
without regarding him, he said to her with strange inward motions, accompanied
by a deep sigh, It is exceeding hard for me, Madam, to imagine the cause of
your coldness toward me, but it is much harder for me to bear it without
dying; pardon me I beseech you, if I take the liberty to tell you, that I think
this alteration very strange, and that the manner of your carriage to me for
some few days of late, has put me into torments which I cannot possibly
express; if I have trangressed, sentence me to death, since the least faults I
can commit against you, deserve not any lighter punishment; if you have found
in this miserable man, any new defects that were unknown to you, discover them
to me for charities sake, to the end I may either correct them, or for ever
banish from your sight, a person too defective to be loved by you: but if I be
neither more guilty, nor more defective, then I was before this fatal change,
make me not die with so much injustice, and so little knowledge of my crime.

He spoke these words with much action and vehemence, and the Princess
answering only by some tears, which it was not possible for her to withhold,
after having in vain expected her reply; What, Madam, ( continued he) are these
then the tears you give unto my death, after having resolved upon it? Have you
charity enough to bewail my loss, and yet not goodness enough to let me know
the cause?

The Princess at last lifting up her head, and looking upon him with an eye,
which though full of tears, inflamed him more then ever; made answer without
being moved, Orontes, Orontes, neither I am capable of change, nor you of
transgressing; your inconstancy is not to be blamed, since it makes you forsake
a Captive, for the Mistress of her Conqueror, and of her Master. My Prince
understood not the meaning of these words, and replied in great distraction; I
beseech you, Madam, explain your self better, and draw a man that is already
besides himself, out of the confusion into which you have put him; whatsoever
you intend to accuse me of, the Gods know that I am most innocent, and I expose
my head to their loudest thunder, if I be guilty to you in the least thought.
To love Barsina (answered she) is not to be guilty, she is truly fair and
lovely, yet all her good qualities cannot give you a dispensation for your
Oaths to me, nor absolve you from the infidelity you commit against the
daughter of Darius, and the sister of Artaxerxes, for one of their subjects.
Do not change your countenance, Orontes, (continued she, turning toward my
Master, who was quite surprised, and confounded at so unexpected a Discourse)
the truth is discovered at last, the cause of your Journey to Damascus, and of
your stay amongst us is no longer hid, and I have found at last, against my
will, that I served for nothing but a pretense, and cloak of your new
affection: but well, (pursued she with tears in her eyes) follow this last
inclination, I oppose not the advantage you find in this your change, and
though I cannot see it without grief unto my self, yet will I see it without
any resentment that may be prejudicial to you.

My Prince quite amazed at this adventure, and not knowing where to find words
that could justify the constancy of his affection, was able to do nothing at
first but embrace her knees, and shed so many tears upon them, that by his
sighs, and the vehemence of his action, she began already to believe him partly
innocent* and to lose something of her former opinion. But when he lift up his
head, and that showing her a face all drowned in tears wherein his real passion
was too lively painted, he was preparing to say something in his own defense; he
saw Barsina all alone passing close by the Grot, and of a sudden, without
considering that his action might displease his Princess, he ran distractedly
to her, and drawing her by the robe unto the entry of the Grot, he fell down
upon his knees before her, and taking her hands with an action that
marvellously surprised her; Barsina, (said he) I conjure you by the light of
the Sun, and by the power of Orosmades, and of all the Gods that hear us, by
the head of Darius, and by the memory of Memnon, to draw me out of the Gulf,
into which you have precipitated me; and to declare before the face of Heaven,
and of those Gods I have invoked, if ever by any of my words, or by any of my
actions, I have expressed any affection to you, and if ever either here, or at
Damascus, or at Persepolis, I have lived with you in any other fashion, then I
might have done with mine own sister.

These words pronounced with a tone quite extraordinary, did so surprise
Barsina, that of a long time she could not answer, and when she had a little
recovered that deep astonishmennt, Prince Oroondates, (said she) I know not why
you require such a declaration from me; but whatsoever you may suffer for my
consideration, I protest to you by the same Gods you mentioned, that I am most
innocent, and declare before the Princess, that I never received, nor pretended
to any of those things from you, which are due to her alone, and which I desire
to yield her while I live.

Although Statira by her countenance, witnessed the amazement this action
caused in her, yet was she very well satisfied with it, and not being able to
attribute that indiscretion (in a man whom she had always known most discreet)
to any thing but the violence of his passion; she began to fall a little from
her jealousy, and to suffer Oroondates, who was now a little settled, to
perfect the undeceiving of her, by the assistance of Barsina, who representing
unto her the little probability there was in her suspicions, and the advantages
the Gods had given her, above her, as well in beauty, as in descent, left not
any mark at all of the impressions she had received, and when she found she was
cured of them, and that she learned from her mouth, how much Roxana had
contributed to them, It must necessarily be (continued she) that this malicious
woman either loves Oroondates, or hates us; but, Madam, lend her your ear no
more, and believe that it is not without some interest she takes so great care
to make a difference between you.

My Master blushed at those words, but he discovered nothing of Roxana 's
affection, and importunities; and addressing himself to Statira, Madam, ( said
he) the Gods without doubt have raised her up, to keep me from losing the
knowledge of my self, in the happiness to which I am exalted, by the favor
you have done me; but since by another of the same nature, you draw me out of
the grave, which she had prepared for me, I conjure you not to hearken to her
any more, to my disadvantage, and never to suspect him of infidelity, who can
never possibly be guilty of it. And I (added Barsina) for my part, if I were
handsome enough to give you just cause of jealousy, I protest to you, that
as soon as ever I had my liberty, I would retire, and deprive my self for ever
of Oroondates his sight, though I value both his company, and his person very
much.

The Princess ashamed of what had happened, asked pardon of them both, and
casting her arm about Barsina's neck, conjured her earnestly to forget it. In
this manner they were reconciled, and my Prince grew thereby more satisfied
then before, in the assurance of being loved by his Princess. This little
accident served to make him distrust Roxana; and from thence forward, he
avoided her as much as possibly he could; and lived with Statira, in better
intelligence then ever, she having opened her eyes, and considered the little
reason she had had in her suspicions.

But some few days after, Alexander wearied with the length of the Siege of
Tire, came to refresh himself a little at Sidon; it was believed to be for
Barsina's sake, and perchance that was his first intention: but in effect that
day he spoke to Princess Statira, and which is more, spoke to her of love. The
Princess who had ever been made to fear that misfortune, answered him with much
modesty, and considered the condition she was reduced to, without forgetting
the quality of her birth. The next day he entertained her with the same
Discourse, and before they parted, he made her know, that he was really in love
with her. She concealed not the truth of their conversation from the Queen her
mother, nor from Sysigambis, Parisatis, and her companions: But she discovered
nothing of it at that time unto my Prince, believing that the knowledge thereof
would afflict him, and that Alexander's passion might vanish as suddenly as it
was come, without my Masters hearing any thing, of what could not choose but be
most unpleasing to him. But Roxana did not the same; and contriving new kinds
of malice upon this occasion, two days after Alexander was gone back, she came
to my Master in an Ally of the Garden, and took her time so well, that
notwithstanding all the care he used to avoid her, yet was it impossible for
him to get away. You fly from me, Oroondates, (said she, coming nearer to him)
and you follow those that fly you, or at least those that deceive you, and
despise you. See what it is not to know how to take your aim better, a Lady of
meaner quality then the Princess of Persia is unworthy of your affection; but
also a Prince of less power then Alexander is unworthy of the Princess of
Persia's. I always told you that Statira was not for you; but that pride you
have ever had, made you mock at my predictions. I am now a little satisfied,
since I am revenged; and if generosity would suffer me to make sport with
another unhappiness, I should now have a fair occasion to be even with you.

Oroondates heard these reproaches patiently, and waited the end of them with a
mavelous coldness, though he was already touched with a deadly apprehension;
and when she had done speaking, Well, Roxana, ( said he) whither do all these
reproaches tend* and with what new misfortunes, or what new afflictions do you
mock me? Ah the insensible man! ( replied Roxana cunningly) Oh the Philosopher!
how well he knows which way to take a resolution in his crosses, and to bear
the assaults of Fortune with an equal countenance! do not dissemble,
Oroondates, nor do not fain a constancy, of which I judge you not to be capable;
you are mortally stricken, and if you have loved as truly, as you desired I
should believe, you will have much ado to bear this loss.

Though my Prince knew that young Lady was full of subtilty, yet was he
troubled at this Discourse, and crossing his arms upon his breast; But, Roxana,
( said he to her) will you tell me nothing else? What, ( replied Roxana) would
you have me then believe, that you alone are ignorant of what is unknown to no
body else, and that you only have not heard of Statira's fortune; you I say,
that have more interest in it, then all they that know it? I have indeed so
much interest in it, (answered my Prince) that it shall ever be the maker of
mine; but I have heard nothing yet to persuade me she is changed. How? ( said
Roxana) do you not think her happy then, in having effected her design, as she
has done, to make Alexander in love with her, and in having won the heart of
that great man so much, by the industry, which she, and the Queens have used
for that purpose, that he is disposed to marry her within a few days, and by
that alliance to restore peace unto Persia, and that splendour unto the family
of Darius which it has lost?

My Master at first knew the malice of Roxana, but when he made reflection upon
Alexanders Journey to Sidon, and that he remembered he had seen him speak often
to Statira, which he had never done before, he began to fear part of what she
said, and answered her with an un-assured voice, Madam, by your malicious talk,
you have already been like to ruin me; I know not what your design is, and
though you should send me to my grave, I am ignorant what satisfaction you can
draw from my death: this you say is not only unknown to me, but you must pardon
me if I tell you, it is your own invention, and that Statira will never use any
industry to make any body love her, she who is so generally beloved by all
those that know her, and who can win the heart, not only of Alexander, but of
all men living without trouble, and without using any artifice. Though Roxana
felt her self stung with those words, yet did she answer without being moved;
You may believe what you please of it; but be it as it will, you should never
have heard this news from my mouth, if those affairs were in terms of being
concealed; you may learn the truth of the first you meet, and of Statira her
self, who will not be able to dissemble it much longer from you.

At these words she left him in such a confusion of thoughts, that he knew not
where he was, he sat down upon a seat hard by him, and calling to mind all
those things that could confirm, what Roxana had said, he fell into a mortal
agony* true it is, that his knowledge of her malice, and the late proofs she
had given of it in a business of the same nature, kept him a little from the
despair which threatened him; he past the rest of that day in strange disquiets,
and the next appeared so sad, and looked so ill, that he was scarcely to be
known; he walked in the most retired Alleys, and Statira who was troubled to be
so long without seeing him, sought him at last her self, being attended by none
but Cl^one, and having gone over almost all the Garden, she found him laid
along, close by a stream that ran through it, his belly toward the ground, and
his head leaning upon both his hands, down which ran tears that fell into the
water. The Princess seeing him in that condition, hearing him sigh two or three
times, made a stop uncertain what to do, while my Master, not thinking himself
overheard by anybody, and not being able to retain his thoughts. It is too
much, great Gods, (said he) it is too much; and if my misfortune be true, you
ought not to have prolonged my life by such extraordinary ways, to tear it away
from me now by one more extraordinary; but (continued he) he shall not long
enjoy this glorious conquest, and that generosity which diverted the anger of
an enemy, shall not stop the fury of a rival. He had said more if his
restlesness would have suffered him to continue long in the same posture, and
if turning upon one side, he had not perceived the Princess, who h^arken'd to
him; he was ashamed to have been surprised in that manner, and wiping his eyes,
he arose, and bowed to the Princess with so sad a face, that she read part of
his sorrow in it, but not desiring to be free from any that he felt, How now
Orontes, (said she to him) what new disaster afflicts you, and what ought I to
fear by those tears I see you shed, by that sadness I observe in your looks,
and by those words I heard you speak?

My Prince constraining himself exceedingly, to make answer, Madam, (said he)
that Alexander loves you, is an effect of the same merit that forced me to do
so; but that by your care you should win him to it, and that to gain his heart,
you should use an industry unworthy of your self, is a thing which destroys the
protestations you have made me, and takes away a life which you were once
pleased to desire I should preserve. The Princess surprised at this Discourse,
and touched with pity, replied in offering him her hand, That Alexander loves
me is a thing most difficult for me to hinder, but that I should seek his love,
or ever consent to it while I live, is a thing you cannot say without offending
me, and which you cannot have from any body but Roxana. It is true, (answered
Oroondates) Roxana gave me the first hint of it, but since so many things have
confirmed it, that I am but too well instructed in it, to have any quiet, or
rather to have any life.

Statira looking upon him with a more cheerful countenance, and with an eye
able to drive away all fear replied, I ever doubted, that that malicious
creature would take occasion from what is past, to trouble our contentment, but
dear Oroondates, I wish the Gods you invoked the other day for your
justification, would make me perish before your eyes, if ever you had more
cause, then at this very time to be satisfied with my affection. I confess
Alexander has talked to me of love, whether it were to divert himself, or that
perhaps he be truly in love with me; but if his Courtship has wrought any
effect upon me, and if I received it from him any otherwise, then as from the
destroyer of our family, I desire to suffer all the torments which Orosmades
inflicts upon the (...) perjured souls; true it is, I concealed it from you
alone, as the person whose quiet was m^st considerable to me, and to whose
quiet I thought it most prejudicial; but dear Oroondates, do not fear this
rival, and receive yet once again the promise I make you, that so long as I
believe I have your affection, neither Alexander, nor any other man but your
self, shall have the least part of mine; and that no reason of State* shall
ever make me violate the faith I give you, and which I will preserve unto my
grave. O Gods! what a strange condition is that of lovers, and how subject it
is to sudden and mavelous vicissitudes. A minute before these words, my
Prince desired nothing but death, and now he falls out of an excess of grief,
into an excess of joy, which is not imaginable, he instantly recovers his
former liveliness, and detesting the malice of Roxana, imprinted a thousand
kisses upon the fair hands of his admired Princess, with transports, and
raptures, that are incredible.

Thus was his mind quickly cured again, and Roxana deceived in the project she
had to advance her own affairs by that means. From that time forward, they both
began to hate her, and resolved not only never to give credit to her words any
more, but not so much as to have any communication with her* they did according
to this determination, and four or five days after, my Prince having met her,
and desiring utterly to break with her; Madam, (said he) your plot has not
taken effect, and the Gods have hitherto preserved us from your malice; but if
you think to win a heart by such extraordinary ways, and so contrary to those
that ar^ commonly practiced to gain affection, I give you notice that you are
infinitely deceived; and as I opened my miade to you at Damascus, with all
manner of freedom, I do so now again, with the very same, and tell you
plainly, whether I will or no, that it is impossible for me to love you; it is
not without constraining my humor very much, that I tell you this truth; and
that I conjnre you to let him be quiet, whom you have been already like to send
unto his grave. He staid not to hear her answer, but going away, with a low
respect, left her in such a confusion as you may imagine, and from that day
avoided her conversation so diligently, that he was no more importuned by her.

Two days after the Princess meeting him, and taking him into an Arbor,
Oroondates, said she, I will let you see how exact I am in my promises, and how
carefully I will labor for your contentment; my new servant is not cooled
since his departure; I have just now received a Letter from him, which here I
bring you, and to which I desire that you your self would make the Answer, if
you think fit I should write any; saying so, she gave him a paper, and my
Prince having opened it, found these words.

King ALEXANDER to the Princess STATIRA.
THe Conqueror of your Kingdom, lets himself be conquered by you alone, and
you alone have been able to do, what all Asia has attempted in vain. I
deliver up my Arms fair Princess; and take more glory in my defeat, then I
have taken in all my victories; but use not that with cruelty, which you have
obtained with justice, and deal not with him as an Enemy, who declares himself
your Captive,

ALEXANDER.


My Prince was exceedingly troubled at this perseverance of Alexander's, and
from the very beginning foresaw those misfortunes, which have since befaln him;
he judged it not convenient for her to exasperate him, in the condition she was
in, lest she should bring upon her self the indignation of a Conqueror, and of
a Master; and that therefore she was obliged to return an answer; she would have
had him dictate her Letter; but he excused himself, and remitted that care to
her own discretion, and the prudence of the Queens, so having asked their
advice and agreed with them, she answered him in these terms.

The Princess STATIRA to King ALEXANDER.
THE quality you give me, suits so little with the condition I am reduced to,
that it is almost impossible for me to keep them both; you are still
unconquered, and shall ever be invincible, unless you be overcome with other
arms then mine; the fortune of our house having confined my eyes to no other
employment, but only to weep for the desolation of it, will not suffer me to
make use of them, to any other purpose, nor to acknowledge you for other then
my Conqueror, and my Master, since I am really your prisoner,

STATIRA.


The Princess sent this Letter by him, that had brought Alexanders, and within
two days after she received another, whereof as I remember these are the words.

King ALEXANDER to the Princess STATIRA.
THE Maxims of Love, are so different from those of War, that the condition
of a prisoner, and that of the Mistress of my heart, are not incompatible, you
need not keep them long together, but may quickly loose the former, if you
please to accept the latter: If you consent, we will make an exchange, and if
you disdain not the passion of a King that dies for love of you, I Will quickly
pay the ransom of your liberty by that of

ALEXANDER.


The Princess by the advice of the Queens returned him this second answer.

The Princess STATIRA to King ALEXANDER.
IT IS but to divert your self from the toils of War, that you spend time in
entertaining your Captives, I will still preserve that title, acknowledging my
self unworthy of that which my misfortune forbids me to accept, and I shall
never desire my liberty, but with the freedom of the Queens, and the happiness
of Darius; the honor you do me shall not make me forget my miseries, nor take
from me the remembrance of what is due to Alexander the Great, from the
unfortunate

STATIRA.


I know not whether Alexanders ambition was at that time stronger then his
love, and that he would not engage himself further by Letters to restore the
prisoners to liberty, and peace to Darius his Estates; or whether some other
reason dissuaded him, but the Princess received no mo^e of them while we stand
at Sidon; and my Master very well satisfied with his silence and coldness, did
yet for some time freely enjoy all the contentments whereof his soul was
capable.

But fortune grew weary of favoring him so long, and the taking of Tire,
quickly robbed him of those delights, which he tasted unseasonably, while all
Asia was in mourning. That stately Town was taken, as you know, after a seven
months siege, and Alexanders Forces which he left at Sidon, received order to
come to join with the rest, and bring up the prisoners. Judge Sir, of my poor
Princes trouble, and imagine that he was infinitely sensible of it, though he
had already prepared himself for that change. He bewailed those good
Princesses, who were going to suffer the incommodities of an Army, true it is
that they were accustomed to them with Darius, and that with Alexander they
were but little worse accommodated; for indeed the King had taken care to have
them used like Queens, continuing their household servants about them, and
endeavoring to make them bear the misfortune of their condition, by the noble
usage they received; they never heard a rude or unbeseeming word, nor ever saw
any body but such as rendered them all the respects they could have required
from Darius his own Subjects; but Sir, I forgot to whom I spoke, you know more
of this then I do, and I am confident were not ignorant of many things I have
related to you.

To proceed, I will tell you that my Prince was in a strange irresolution, he
could not resolve to forsake his Princess, and to leave her a prey to
Alexanders passion; but on the other side he knew no means to see her as he had
done, and though the Gods should have offered him a second opportunity as
favorable as the former, his knowledge of Roxana's malice, would not suffer
him longer to hope for any safety so near Alexander: and he feared with some
appearance of reason, that her unquiet spirit, infinitely exasperated against
him, would in the end discover all his practices to the King, and fly to all
extremities, rather then suffer any calm in that happiness, which she often had
openly disturbed. Besides (and that reason was indeed the strongest) the noise
of arms awakened him, and as Achilles beheld himself with shame among the
daughters of Lycomedes, while all Greece was running to the Siege of Troy, he
contemned the life he led, while all the world was fighting, and while Darius
was already in the Field, to recover what he had lost, or to decide the Empire
of Asia by a final battle. This last consideration made him resolve upon a
cruel parting, and knowing that Darius was near Babylon, with the Army he had
set on foot, he purposed to go back to him again, and to run his fortune in
what part of the world soever he should fight; having at last concluded it,
after a very sore conflict with himself, he communicated his intention to the
Queens and Princesses, they did all they possibly could to keep him longer with
them, but having alleged to them the considerations that forced him to depart,
and particularly that of his honor, and of the service he owed unto Darius, he
in the end made them consent to it. It is impossible for me to tell you their
sad Adieus; imagine to your self all that sorrow can produce in hearts like
theyrs, for so cruel a separation, and you may conceive a small part of what
they felt* the Queens embraced him a thousand times, Parisatis and Barsina gave
him a thousand testimonies of their trouble, and of their affection: but his
Princess was like to die indeed when he took his last leave of her. She held
him a great while in her arms, drowning him in tears, which flowed from her
eyes as two ever-streaming sources, she spoke the kindest, tender'st words to
him, that Love and grief could put into her mouth, and brought him into such a
condition, that nothing but his tears bore witness that there was still some
little life in him. When she was upon the point to get up into her Chariot, to
obey the cruel Ordinance of the Conqueror, embracing him, and kissing him for
the last time, Farewell Oroondates (said she) remember always this poor
Prisoner, and be as exact in the observing of your promises, as all the world
shall see me resolute to die, rather then break that which I have given you:
And you Madam (replied my Prince) never forget your faithful Oroondates, and
to save his life, which he will employ only in your service, resist Alexanders
affection, and defend him from Roxana's malice.

They departed in this manner to go to Tire, and from thence to Gaza, which
Alexander was preparing to besiege; Good King Abdolominus was very sorry for
their going away, but he would needs detain my Master two days longer, as well
to enjoy his company, as to stay for a Passport from Alexander, without which
he would have found it very difficult to get to Babylon Abdolominus procured it
as for a friend of his, and till it came, expressed all the endearments to my
Prince, he could any way invent, giving him so many proofs of his affection,
that being extremely obliged to his kind freedom, and most assured of his
sincerity, he in part discovered to him his quality, and the passages of his
life: but he was strangely surprised when at the return of him that had been
sent to Alexander, he saw with him a page whom he knew to be Roxana's, he was a
little troubled at it* but not to appear utterly uncivil he heard his Message,
and received a Letter which she writ to him; having opened it, he found in it a
Bracelet of hair delicately wrought, and folded up; and drawing an evil omen
from that Present, he read also words to this effect.

The Princess ROXANA To the Prince of Scythia.
HOw great soever the rigor you have showed me is, I cannot imagine your heart
so hard, and savage as you dissemble it; the wildness of your Country may
well have contributed something toward that harshnesse you express, but I
assure my self, your desire to please another, is almost the only cause of it.
Give it over from henceforth Oroondates, and with it the hope of possessing one
who already thinks no more of you, and to whom the Gods have destined a higher
fortune. For my part, I think it not handsome in you to disdain that I have
already offered you, and my belief that you will acknowledge your fault at
last, makes me still continue the remembrance of you, and persuades me to send
you this Bracelet of my hair, which you will keep tenderly if you be wise, and
if you think your self worthy of the favors of

ROXANA.


Oroondates was so amazed at this liberty, or rather at this impudency of
Roxana, that he knew not what judgment to make of it: O Gods! said he, has
this woman lost her wits, or if she persist still in the design of gaining an
affection, does she so little understand the way? See here Araxes (continued
he, showing me the Letter) in what terms she writes, and do but mark if they
seem not chosen purposely to abuse me, and to make her self be hated; but she
shall receive small satisfaction by it, and if she will force a Letter from me,
to play me some new trick with Statira, she shall be sure to see nothing in it
to her own advantage: in this humor he called for paper, and following his
first inclinations, he wrote to her to this purpose.

OROONDATES To ROXANA.
IF you were of opinion that I dissembled, you were not at all deceived; I did
dissemble I confess in my compliance to you, but I dissemble not in my passion
for one more lovely then you are; you have indeed made me forsake a place,
which your importunities made me hate. I leave you therefore, but I leave you
without any trouble, and without any design to advantage my self, either by
your remembrance, or by your favors; I obtained them with too much ease to
value them, and because the Presents of Enemies are always fatal, I send you
back your Bracelet, and retain nothing of you, that can trouble the repose of*

OROONDATES.


My Prince wrote this Letter against his humor, and against the respect he had
ever born to Ladies; but being much displeased with Roxana, and judging that
she had written to him in such disobliging terms, with some malicious design,
he meant to thwart her intentions by an answer, from which she might not be
able to draw any advantage in case she would make use of it against him; that
was it that made him write on that manner, though he has since repented
himself sufficiently, and having sealed up the Bracelet with his Letter, in
another paper he delivered it to the Page, and sent him back to his Lady. The
next day he took leave of Abdolominus, and that good man at his departure, made
him all the kind profefessions, and all the obliging offers he could hope for
from a perfect friend; my Prince returned him thanks with much civilitie, and
great acknowledgement of his favors, and could not part from him without some
addition to the sorrow, which oppressed him already for his separation from
Statira.

Thus it w^^ that we went from Sidon, and taking our way toward Babylon, we
hasted on with great days Journeys, staying as little any where as we could
possibly: Our Macedonian habits, and Alexanders Passport favored us much in
the Territories of his Conquest; but as soon as we had passed them, we put on
our Persian ones again, and traveled with the more facility in those
Countries that were yet under Darius his obedience. I should lose time, if I
should tell you the particulars of our Voyage in which we had no memorable
encounter, besides, we made so little stay in the places where we passed, that
we observed not the diversities of them; at last we arrived near to Babylon,
and having passed the Tygris, we found the whole field between that River and
the other of Euphrates covered with so many thousand men, that we were in a
greater admiration then ever of Darius his power, who after so great losses,
was able yet to raise so great recruits.

True it is that he used his utmost endeavors to make these latest Levies, and
that besides the Bactrians, the Zogdians, and the Indians, he had likewise
drawn into his pay some of the Scythians, that inhabit in Asia on this side of
Mount Imaus, who notwithstanding the enmity of their Kings, had offered to
serve him against the Common Enemy of Asia: My Master having passed through all
these Forces, came to the Gates of Babylon, and to make short, entered into the
Palace where the King at that time made his abode: all those to whom he made
himself known as he went by, welcomed him with gladness, rendering him such
honors as they thought due unto his merit, and the news of his arrival which
ran from one to another, being at last brought unto Darius, the good King
surprised with a joy that cannot be imagined came out to meet him with all the
Lords that were then about him: He found him on the top of the Stairs, and my
Prince kneeling upon one knee to salute him, the King, raised him up with so
many dear and tender expressions, that his affection to him discovered it self
most visibly by those proofs, and by the tears which fell down his cheeks for
joy. My son (said he holding him in his arms) may I believe my eyes, that I see
you again, and can it be that fortune having forsaken me, should still leave me
the consolation I look for from you? Great Orosmades (pursued he, looking up to
heaven) if the ruin of my house be inevitable, hasten it not so fast but that
I may have leisure to satisfy some part of what I owe this Prince.

Sir ( replied my Master) I am too gloriously satisfied by the honor you do
me, and though I should die at your feet, I could never acquit my self of those
favors I have received of your Majesty, I come hither to seek the occasions
of it, and I forsake the glory to which your goodness had raised me, for that
of running the same fortune with you. After some other passages of the like
nature, the King gave time to the Princes and Lords of his attendance, to
welcome him in their turns; they did it with excess of civilitie, and Prince
Oxyartes, Maze^s Governor of that Country and Lieutenant General of the Kings
Army, Arriobarzanes, Oriobates, and many others whose names and persons have
been known to you since, strove who should honor him most, and in a manner
confounded him with their Complements and testimonies of respect and affection.

This first reception being past, the King appointed him a lodging in his
Palace, and from that time forward used him as his son, and as the only man
upon whom he grounded the remainder of his hopes. Our Equipage had been there a
long time before, and Darius having by those that came with it, and by the
Letters they had brought him, learned all that had happened to my Master before
their departure, he himself told him whatsoever had befallen him since, except
those things which his discretion made him to conceal. Darius who could no
longer contemn Alexander, was troubled at the proofs of his virtue, which he
received by my Princes relation: and believed it would be very difficult for
him to conquer so generous a person, and one who by so many virtuous actions,
drew both the Gods and men unto his party; but yet he also received some
contentment, in the hope he had that the good usage of the Queens, and
Princesses should still continue. My Master heard from him that he had made a
Truce for two years with the King of Scythia his Father; who had yielded to it,
by reason of some troubles that arose in his Dominions, and of the threats he
himself received from Alexander, against whom he made preparations with a
courageous resolution to dies upon his Frontiers, rather then endure the Yoke
to which all Asia submitted; he also was very glad to see the Scythians that
were under Darius his pay, and having made much of their Commanders that came
to wait upon him* he promised to fight at the head of them himself; and being
very well pleased that he was able now to do Darius better service then
formerly he had done, he dispatched two of the principal Officers with Orders,
money and Commissions, to make more Leavies in their Country.

We were four or five months in these preparations for the War, and my Master
laboring in them with much diligence, and easing Darius as much as he could,
made him, Mazeus, Artabasus, and all the old Commanders, wonder both at his
vivacity in all his actions, and at his experience in so green years, as seemed
almost incapable of it. Darius who admired those excellent qualities the
heavens had given him, was extremely satisfied with his daughters happiness,
and seemed to lament her captivity only because it retarded the means of his
gaining so accomplished a son in Law. When we had staid at Babylon as long as I
have told you, news came to Darius that Alexander being returned from the
Temple of Jupiter Hammon, and having already crossed through Egypt, was
marching directly toward us with all his Forces, being resolved to prosecute
him, into what part of his Dominions soever he should retire. This Intelligence
made him hasten his preparations the more, and when he saw his Army in the
condition he desired, he went from Babylon with an intention to meet Alexander,
upon the way he heard he was coming.

I tell you all these things succinctly, as not concerning my Masters History
particularly, and to go on with my recital as briefly as I can: I will tell you
that Darius made a general review of his Army, where there were so many
different sorts of Nations, Arms, Habits, and Languages, that it is very
difficult to reckon them, neither is it necessary, and besides, you have heard
enough of them since to ease me of that trouble. About that time my Prince's
Levies which he had sent to raise upon the Frontiers of Scythia, came up also,
they were above thirty thousand men, in so good order* that the King grounded
part of his hopes upon them, and provided for their pay and quarter more
carefully, then he did for the natural Persians.

With these Forces he passed the Tygris, and learning by Spies he had in your
Camp, That Alexander was not far off, he sent forth Stratopaces with a thousand
commanded horse to discover, and dispatched Mazeus with six thousand more, to
cut off passages, and spoil the Country where your Army was to encamp,
believing with reason that by that means he should incommodate your Forces, who
received their subsistence only from the field: you felt the effects of it, and
I assure my self that within a while after you found the Corn destroyed, and
the Villages burned, and yet smoking with the fire he had set them on by the
Kings command: the victual of our Army was brought part by land in wagons, and
part by help of the river: we quartered at Arbela a Village till then of very
small note, but since famous by our defeat, and having with a Bridge of Boats
passed the River Lycus in five days time, we went to encamp near the Bomele
another River, where the fertility of the Country, and the vast extent of the
Plain, gave the King as much convenience as he could desire, to range the great
number of his Battalions at liberty; he likewise caused all uneven places to be
levelled, the Trees to be felled, and all things beaten down that could take
away any part of his advantages; but while he was carefully busied in that
employment, he received ill news by Mazeus, who returned into the Camp, being
repulsed by your Forces, and not having been able to keep the Pass of the
River, where Stratopaces with his thousand horse had been cut in pieces by
Arriston Commander of the Paeonians: Upon this, and the Intelligence he gave us
that Alexander was not above a hundred and fifty furlongs from us, we began to
dispose our selves in good earnest to the battle.

For this purpose the King visited all his Squadrons in person, caused Arms to
be delivered to such as wanted, and made his Chariots to be armed with sharp
sithes, and heads of Javelins, but while he was taken up with these businesses,
and that with a mavelous diligence, he gave those Orders that were necessary,
a man was brought unto him, whom his Sentinels had taken as he was coming over
from Alexanders Camp, to ours: His eyes were full of tears, and when he was
near enough to be observed, the King, my Master, and many others knew him to be
Tyreus the Eunuch who having been taken with the Queens, had continued with
them ever from that time: The sight of him, and the sadness that appeared in
his countenance wrought so upon the King, that fearing some misfortune, he
durst hardly inform himself of the occasion of his coming, and yet wanted
patience to expect what he would say, foreseeing he had brought some fatal
news. In the end, after having looked long upon the Eunuch trembling, Thy face
(said he) presages something mortal, but I prithee disguise not the truth from
me, and flatter not him, whom custom has made ready to receive all manner of
disasters. Do thou not come, Tyreus, to tell me the dishonor of my house,
and to afflict a husband, or a father, with the ignominy of his wife, or
daughter?

Tyreus answering with much ado, and lifting up his eyes, which till then had
been fixed upon the ground: I weep not Sir ( said he) for the dishonor of your
Family, it has suffered none, but that of Captivity, and truly, has received
from the Conqueror, all those respects, and marks of honor, which it was wont
to have while with your Majesty; but Sir, I weep, ( continued he redoubling his
sighs) I weep for the death of an Illustrious Queen your dear Consort, and my
good Mistress, who has lately breathed out her soul in the arms of your
daughters and of the Queen your mother.

Although Darius had taken a strong resolution to resign himself wholly to the
will of the Gods, and with a Royal courage to bear all the miseries they sent
him, yet could he not at this so new, and so sensible affliction, remember that
brave determination, but receiving this loss, as an arrow that had struck him
to the heart, he sunk almost without sign of life, in the arms of those that
were about him, and when he recovered his sense and speech, he made such woeful
lamentations, as touched them all most deeply with compassion; and the whole
Camp learning this misfortune of one another, was filled in a moment with
groans, and Funeral cries. My Prince bewailed that Queen, as her virtue, the
proofs she had given him of her love, the interest of his Princess, and that of
Darius, together with his own good nature obliged him; But seeing the King in
such a mortal grief, he dissembled part of his own, to give him that
consolation, which he received more willingly from him then from any other.
Darius was a long hour, sighing and tormenting himself, not able to speak one
word with a settled judgment, and when by the assistance of my Master, of
Oxyartes, and the rest, his passion was brought to a little less violence, he
reflected upon his loss and still doubting (though what Tyreus had said might
have made him hope the contrary) that his virtuous Queen died for the defense
of her honor; O Alexander! (cried he) what have I done against thee or thine,
that should make thee use me with so much inhumanity? was I one of the
Murderers of King Philip, or of any other person that was dear to thee? thou
hate and persecutest me, though I have given thee no cause to do either; But
though thou do assault me in a fair War, what glory can thou draw from this
defeat, and what trophyes of honor can thou acquire, by the death of a poor
woman, who never injured thee, and who only defended that by duty, which thou
perhaps did attempt by violence?

The Eunuch hearing these words, addressed himself unto the King, and said,
Sir, I beseech you use not Alexanders virtue, with so much indignity, and do
not so ill requite those honors he has paid to the deceased Queen, and to the
rest of your Majesty's family yet remaining with him, he has served them all
with great respect, and for her death shed not many fewer tears then your
Majesty; I protest to you Sir, before all the Gods, Alexander received this
news, as you have done, and was as much afflicted at it, as for his brother or
for his own son, he rendered the same duties to her corpse, which the Queen his
mother could have expected from him, and for his grief one could hardly have
discerned a difference 'twixt yours and his. The King looked earnestly upon the
Eunuch while he spoke, and having hearkened to him attententively, he fell in a
moment out of one supicion into another, and his jealousy joining it self unto
his grief, began to torment him with exceeding violence. He rose up from the
bed he lay upon, and taking the Eunuch by the hand, led him into an inward
chamber, where seeing himself alone with him; Now it is Tyreus (said he) that I
require proofs of thee, both of the fidelity thou owe me, and of the zeal
thou have had for the service of my Family, behold the face of thy King, and if
thou yet find'st any Majesty in it, or any cause of reverence, which the change
of my fortune cannot exempt thee from, speak to me with the truth thou owe
both to thy past oaths, and to the presence of the Gods that hear us. I do not
threaten thee with torments to force it from thee, for if the misfortune of the
Persians, have not made thee turn Macedonian, the command of thy natural King,
will sooner draw it from thee, then fear of torture; I conjure thee therefore
by the power of Orosmades, by the light of the Snn which we adore, and by all
that thou do acknowledge to be most holy, and most sacred, to discover unto
me the true cause of Alexanders lamentations, and of the sorrow he expressed
for the death of the Queen thy Mistress; for what so moving pity can he have
for the wife of his enemy, who has not the least spark of it, for the deaths
of so many thousand men, as he sacrifices to his ambition, without having been
at all offended by them? how can her loss so deeply touch him, whom my
misfortunes, my entreaties, and my offers could not move at all? and in short,
what chaste friendship can a young Conqueror have, with the wife of a man whom
he uses with so much cruelty?

Tyreus who understood the Kings meaning by these words, cast himself instantly
at his feet, and shedding tears upon them, Ah! Sir, (cried he) deal better with
the memory of the most virtuous Queen that ever was, and dishonor not her
after her death, who honored you so perfectly during her life: She was an
example of virtue, chastity, and conjugall affection, and Alexander is one of
generosity, continence, and moderation: neither the Queens, nor the Princesses
your daughters have ever felt their captivity, but by your Majesty's absence;
and your enemy has never used them otherwise, then as he would Olimpias, or
you Queen Sysigambis. I protest this to you Sir, by the Veneration I owe your
sacred Majesty, and by the power of the Gods whom you invoked, and if in all
that I have said, I have swerved any thing from the truth, I conjure the Great
Orosmades to strike me dead with thunder at your feet.

The Eunuch accompanied these words with many oaths and tears, which cleared
the Kings mind of the suspicion that harbored in it. When he knew the
innocence of his dear wife, he began to be at a little better quiet, and having
nothing to perplex him but his grief alone, he gave way to that, and sitting
down wept for some time with his face covered; but when he was a little settled,
he arose from his seat, and came back into the great chamber where he had left
all the Princes, then lifting up his eyes to heaven, and clasping his hands
together; Great Gods ( said he) if the prayers of him whom you have abandoned
may yet be heard, be so merciful unto me as to restore success to Persia, and
set me again by your assistance in the Throne to which your goodness raised me,
to the end that in my Victory and re-establishment in my Dominions, I may be
able to acquit my self of the obligation I have to Alexander, for the noble
usage my Family has received from him; but if in your divine Ordinances, whose
decrees are irrevocable it be determined that I must fall, and that I must make
room for more happy successors, grant O great Gods, that never any other of
mine enemies except Alexander, may sit after me upon the Throne of Cyrus.

He spoke these words with such an action, and such a tone, as made all that
were present know, they came from the botton of his heart, and having taken a
little rest, at the entreaty of his friends, he suffered himself to be spoken
to, and gave them leave to alledg all those reasons that could bring him any
consolation.

The next day, though he believed himself much more powerful then Alexander,
and that according to probability, he might hope for the victory over him, he
was so sensible of his great humanity and virtue, that it made him think still
of peace, which Alexander had refused twice already, upon the conditions he had
proposed to him; To this effect he sent ten Ambassadors, of the most
considerable persons of his Court, with ample power to treat with him, and to
offer him thirty thousand talents for the Ransom of the prisoners, and his
daughter Parisatis in marriage, with all the Territories in Dowry, that lie
between Euphrates, and the Hellespont. I need not tell you who know so well,
how Alexander received them, but at their return, they brought answer to Darius
from him. That heaven could not suffer two Suns, nor earth two Sovereign
Emperors, that if he would yield him the first place, and be contented with
the second, he would grant him the peace he desired, but if he would not submit
to that condition, he should prepare himself to battle.

Darius hereupon despairing of Peace, turned his thoughts wholly upon war, and
disposed himself in good earnest to the encounter. To this end having made a
general Rendezvous of all his Forces, in the great Plain where they were
encamped, he divided them into two bodies. At the point of the left wing, he
placed a thousand Bactrian horse, a thousand Dahaes four thousand Arrachosians
and Susians, these first Squadrons were followed by a hundred Chariots armed
with Sithes, after which marched Bessus, with eight thousand Bactrian horse,
seconded by two thousand Massagetes; then stood the infantry of several
Countries, separated according to their Nations, and Commanded by Officers of
their own Provinces; Next these appeared the Persians, Mardes, and Zogdians
Commanded by Ariobarzanes, and Oriobates, with many other mingled Troops (whose
names I neither know nor their Officers) and fifty Chariots under the charge of
Cradates, Commander of the Caspians, Indians, and people near to the Red Sea,
useless in fight, and who were rather to make up number then do Service; these
were followed by fifty other Chariots armed with Sithes, and sharp cutting
blades, and by part of the Foreign supplies that were under the Kings pay;
After them marched those of the lower Armenia* the Babylonians; Bellites, and
those that inhabit the mountains of Cossa, and then the Gortuans a people of
Eubea, the Phrygians, the Cataonians, and last of all the Parthians: These were
the Forces whereof the left wing was composed: Upon the right were the Syrians,
the Medes, and those of the greater Armenia, the Caducians, and the
Cappadocians, with fifty Chariots as the former: All the Army consisted of
fifty thousand horse, and two hundred thousand foot. After it was imbattelled
in this Order, the King made it march about ten furlongs forward, and finding
the plain very commodious for his design, he commanded it to make a stand, and
resolved there to expect the Enemy in good order, and with a good desire to
fight.

The next day Mazeus being gone out of the Camp again, with four or five
thousand horse to make discovery, came back within a short time after, with
certain intelligence that Alexanders Army was very near, and that they were
already upon the top of a hill whence he was newly come: This news made the
Persians stand to their Arms all the rest of the day, and of the night
following; Darius who believed that Alexander by reason of the disproportion of
their Forces, would rather fall upon him in the night, then discover his
weakness in open day, and in a Plain where he could receive no advantage from
mountains and rivers, as he had done in Cylicia, set forth very strong
out-guards, caused an abundance of fires to be lighted, and used all necessary
circumspection to avoid a surprise. The night was spent on this manner, and
as soon as day appeared, we discovered your Army encamped close by ours; both of
them began to shout most terribly, and the sight of one another wrought several
effects, and stirred up very different thoughts in the hearts of the Soldiers:
My Master entering into the Kings Tent gave him the good morrow, and found some
of the Commanders already with him. Darius expressed much favor to each of
them in particular, and testifying the confidence he had in their valor,
obliged them by the honors he did them, to employ their utmost forces, not to
contradict his good opinion of them; but addressing himself especially to my
Prince, after having embraced him a thousand times, he asked him what command
he pleased to accept of, and at the head of what Troops he would fight;
Oroondates having communicated to him a design he had and left a Commander in
chief, over the Body of Scythians in his stead, chose out only a thousand from
among them, and the most valliant Persians, to make use of them, as soon as he
should find an opportunity.

The Counsel of War having been held, Orders given, and Sacrifices offered,
the King put on his Arms, and with him my Prince, Oxyartes, Artabazus, and the
Principal Officers of the Army, and when they thought it time they got all on
horseback, except Darius, who having seated himself in his Chariot, went up and
down the ranks every where, to animate with his voice and presence, the most
faint-hearted, and raise them to a contempt of danger; his countenance had an
extraordinary Majesty, his voice was louder and clearer then it was wont, and
because I was very near his Chariot, I heard him speak to his Soldiers, in
these or such like words.

DARIUS his Speech unto his Army.
WE have been Masters heretofore of all that the Ocean washes, and of all the
Hellespont environs, but we have lost it all, and sight no longer now for the
recovery of those Countries, nor for glory which is more Considerable then our
estates, but for our safety, and for our Liberty, which is dearer to us then
our lives: Heretofore we had new supplies, and places of refuge, we could
recover in Cylicia, what we had lost near the Granicus, we could retire into
Syria, when we were beaten in Cylicia, but now we are reduced to such
extremity, that our places of retreat, our supplies, our Goods, our Cities,
and all our latest hopes, are shut up within the circuit of this Camp; here
therefore it is, that we must either Conquer to save what remains, or lay our
bones in the presence of your wives and children, who have no other security
but that of your defense. This is the fatal day, that must either establish, or
utterly destroy this Empire, which for this two hundred and thirty years has
been terrible to the whole world. The Gods are witnesses that I have done my
part for its conservation; I have raised Forces, I have armed them, I have
brought them to face the enemy, and now the rest depends on you: do but dare to
conquer, and never be frighted at a vain reputation, which can make no
impression in men of conrage. It is but rashness, which hitherto you have
feared, mistaking it for true valor, having vented its first fury, like
Serpents that have lost their stings, you shall see it faint and languish. This
plain discovers that weakness, which the Mountains of Cylicia concealed,
behold the thinness of their ranks, and mark how their wings stretched out to
the uttermost length, have left their battle empty, and without defense: as
valiant as you count them, we easily may trample them under our horses feet,
and if we win this battle, the War is ended. They have no way to escape, being
shut up between two Rivers, and their Camp burdened with our spoils, is
cumbersome, and disabled to retreat; what they have taken from us, will
facilitate our victory, in which you will both find your safety, and recover
all that you have lost.

This Alexander, whose name strikes such a terror in the fearful, is a man as
well as the worst of you, happy rather by our cowardice, then his own valor.
Though fortune has given success to his temerity, her favors will not last
for ever, whereas reason alone makes our felicity durable. Perhaps the Gods
have thus afflicted Persia, only to make this Empire, (proud of an universal
command) acknowledge a Sovereign power, and think upon the frailty of humane
affairs, which in prosperity does often escape our memories. We have formerly
made War against the Greeks, upon their Territories, now we repel it in our
own; these are the vicissitudes of fortune, but if you be assaulted with them,
your King has felt them much more heavily; for besides the public calamities,
the miseries of my family, ought to move you to compassion.

My Mother, and my Daughters, your Queen and your Princesses are in the bondage
of your enemy, who brings them along in triumph that should command you; and
but that I still reserve my self for you, I should say, that I my self were a
Captive in my better part. Deliver my bowels out of slavery, and restore me my
children for whom I refuse not death. My Wife your Queen, has already expired
in bonds, and all that remains of her and me, stretch out their hands to you,
and conjure you by the Gods of your Country, and by the love you bear your own,
to free them from chains, and from a Captivity, which is shameful both to you,
and to them that were born for you. I conjure you to the same my self, and pray
you by your household Gods, by the eternal fire we carry upon our Altar, by the
light of the Sun which rises within the limits of my Empire, and by the memory
of Cyrus, who added that of the Medes and Lydians unto it, that you would save
both the name and Nation of the Persians, from its utter ruin, and from its
utter infamy, and leave that glory to your posterity, which you received so
entire from your Ancestors. You carry in your own hands, your goods, your
lives, your liberties, and your future hopes, and in your faces a most assured
Victory, I read it in your eyes, and in your March; he that despises death,
avoids it best, and it soonest catches the fearful that fly from it; Let Us on
therefore, (fellow soldiers) whither so many considerations call us, I see the
Enemies Army move go and receive them courageously, or rather follow me, for I
refuse not to lead you on, and to be your example either of valor or cowardice.

The King spoke these words with a great deal of vehemence, and the soldiers
answered them with a shout, that pierced the very clouds, from which he drew a
good omen of the Victory. But the two Armies being so near, that they were upon
the point of joining battle, all the Commanders ran to their charges, and my
Master parting from the King, who gave him his last embrace, Sir, (said he) I
will either die generously to day, or restore unto your Majesty some part of
what you have lost. Go Son, (said the King) may the Gods take as great care of
thy safety, as of mine own, and be so gracious, that I may see you again with
as much joy, as I part from you with sorrow. We left him on this manner, and my
Prince placing himself at the head of a thousand horse which he had chosen,
went aside from the rest of the Army, while the Signal being given on both
sides, they presently closed battle, with great terror, and slaughter. I will
omit to tell you any thing concerning it, you know the beginning, progress,
and event of it, much better then I can tell you, besides that I going along
with my Master, could only be a witness of the meeting of the two Armies.

After we had beheld their first encounter at a distance, my Prince made
himself be conducted by Guides, whither he had a design to go; He, by Tyreus,
and by spies he had in your Camp, had learned both the place where the
prisoners were kept, and the number of those that guarded them, and taking a
great compass, that he might not be discovered by your Army, he went almost
quite round both the Camps, and passing under the favor of a little Valley, he
came at last within sight of the Tents, where the Princesses were^ True it is,
that by the way he wavered often full of irresolution, and remembering the last
words Alexander had said to him, he feared his absence might be censured a kind
of cowardice, and as an avoiding the combat, to which he had challenged him:
This thought was like to have made him turn short about, to seek him in the
midst of all his Troops, and decide all differences with him by an encounter,
to which he believed himself obliged by honor, and by interest; but in the end
the consideration of his love strangled this thought, and made him take that
opportunity to deliver his Princess, not doubting but he should find occasions
enough to fight with Alexander, whereas perchance he might never light of such
another, of giving that relief to her he loved, which he assured himself she
expected from him: This consideration having carried it from his former, he
turned toward those that accompanied him, and looking upon them with an eye,
able to have infused courage into them, if they had wanted it; My friends,
(said he) to day it is, that we shall gain a reputation, which will never die
in the memory of men, and that we shall do a service to Darius, which will be
more considerable to him, then the conservation of his Dominions; I should not
have undertaken this exploit, with so small a number, if I were not well
acquainted with your valor, and with the interest that most of you have in the
success of this enterprise. Some of you must fight to day for the deliverance
of your Queen, and Princesses, and some for the liberty of your fathers, wives
and children, who are prisoners with them; but all for your own honors, and
the service of your King; Let us fall on therefore (my dear companions) with
confidence, and fight gallantly, or else die gloriously with me, who will not
refuse to lose my life in your quarrel.

After these few words, he flew like an Eagle, upon those that guarded the
prisoners, closely seconded by his party with cries which struck a terror in
them, and gave us much facility in the victory. They that accompanied us, were
indeed the flower of the whole Army, and that day they showed so remarkable
proofs of it, that my Prince repented not the choice he had made of them, and
redoubling his hopes by the brave actions he saw them do, he forced the first
guards without difficulty, and breaking through those that made any resistance,
with a suddenness that is not to be imagined, he in a moment covered the whole
Field with dead and dying bodies. As Soon as there began to be a confusion among
the Macedonians, the prisoners rose up with a great shout, and crying liberty,
came and offered themselves to our men, who taking off their bonds armed them
with the weapons of their enemies, and stirring them up by their example to
fight for their own liberty, increased our party by almost the half; this
addition of strength absolutely defeated the Macedonians, and my Master
charging the firmest Squadrons with an extraordinary fury, put them all to the
Sword, and in a short time made himself a free passage to the Tents of the
Queen and Princesses.

Here Lysimachus interrupting Araxes, you had time enough (said he) to do it,
and the Kings refusal to succor those you had defeated, gave you all the
leisure and convenience you could desire; He had already made Darius his first
Battalions face about, and was eager in the prosecution of his Victory, when
Polydamas came to him from Parmenio, to tell him those that guarded the
prisoners, and the baggage were routed, and to advertise him of the danger of
losing them, unless he sent some speedy relief.

The King turning toward us that were about him, Parmenio (said he) has lost
his wits to day, and does not consider that if we conquer, we shall not only
recover our own baggage, whose loss he fears, but also make our selves Masters
of the Enemies, and that if we die, we shall stand in need of neither. With
this answer he sent back Polydamas, and would not suffer any body to stir, till
the battle was absolutely won, and that having long pursued Darius, he had lost
all hope of overtaking him; Then he began to think of Parmenio's message, and
to march against you, but it was so long first, that I have often admired, why
you made so little use of your Victory, and employed the time so ill, whereof
you had as much as you could wish.

Learn then the cause of it, (said Araxes, going on with his relation) and with
it the sad adventure of my poor Master; as soon as he had forced the passage he
desired, and that having no more enemies to oppose him, he came covered with
dust and blood unto Sysigambises Tent, he alighted from his horse, and entered
with his Sword in his hand, attended by a few of us, leaving the rest round
about in a condition to make defense, against the relief that might be sent.
When the Ladies saw him come in, looking almost in the same manner he did the
first time they saw him, they were a little troubled, but seeing him address
himself to them with respect, they began to be re-assured, especially when my
Master turning toward the Queen, Madam, (said he) you are free, by the
assistance of the Gods, let us not lose time in talk, but if you pleas, make
have to lay hold of this good fortune; having said so, he took off his Cask,
and made himself known to the whole company.

The Queen who had received his words with a moderation worthy of her, and had
showed no sign of joy unbeseeming her gravity, looked also more coldly upon him
then she was wont: My Prince not being able to divine the cause, and ascribing
it only to the surprisal of her mind, after having made an obeisance suitable
to her quality, went to cast himself at his Princesses feet, and embraced her
knees in an inconceivable ecstasy; But she having beheld him a while with an
eye of displeasure and indignation, turned away her face from him of a sudden,
and freeing her self roughly out of his hands, broke away to the other side of
the Tent, leaving him in a confusion that can hardly be imagined, much less
expressed; yet the necessity of the time made him rise up, and looking round
about, he saw all their countenances so cold to him, that he himself became
more cold then marble, and not being able to guess the reason of his
misfortune O Gods, (cried he) what strange adventure is this? then considering
his Princess, who sat in a Chair not daigning to regard him and the rest of
the Ladies in a profound silence, he was as much amazed, as if he had been fallen
from the Clouds; yet taking a little courage, and kneeling down again before
his Princess; Madam, (said he) have you quite forgotten me, or do you in your
present trouble, take me for a Macedonian? The Princess at this broke silence,
and not so much as turning her eyes toward him, No, (answered she) but for a
Scythian, and by consequence for a more cruel Enemy then any Macedonian. Though
this word was as a thunderbolt to my poor Prince, yet did he strive to keep up
his courage, in the need he had of it, and looking upon her with an eye, able
to have banished all her anger, if she had vouchsafed to consider him; Madam,
(said he) this is not a fit season to make trial of me, I think the reality of
my affection, is not unknown to you, and though you should have just occasion
to reproach me, you ought to take a more convenient time, and employ this, in
perfecting that liberty, which the favor of the Gods, and the assistance of
your servants have procured you: Statira then, darting an angry look at him,
and repressing some sighs, which would not suffer her words to come smoothly
forth; It is not by thy assistance (said she) that I will be free, and I shall
always prefer Captivity, nay, death it self, before a liberty I should receive
from thee. If Darius be Conquer or, I shall be free without thee, and if he be
conquered, I had rather follow his fortune, then be beholding to the relief of
our most mortal enemy.

My Prince hearkened to these words more then half dead; and the Princess not
stirring from her Chair, after she had wiped away some tears which fell,
whither she would or no, continued on this manner: Art thou returned then
perjured man? and has the Truce between our Fathers, made thee take up those
thoughts again, which thou had lost? nay, rather being but half satisfied,
thou come back to complete thy Treachery, and to overwhelm a family by thy
last perfidiousness, which is already too near its ruin; but go thy way
disloyal man, leave her now at quiet, whom the change of her condition, and the
misfortunes of her house, have made thee basely to forsake; I am not so
abandoned by the Gods, but that I may find as good a fortune; Alexander loves
me, and though I cannot love him, I will give my self to him, to punish this
heart of the fault, which thou made it to commit. Get thee gone from before
me for ever, and free me for ever from the sight of an enemy, that has so
mortally offended me, and used me so unworthily.

My Prince who was still upon his knee, and hearkened to her quite besides
himself, could not forbear interrupting her at these words. I, Madam? (cried
he) have I mortally offended you, and used you unworthily? Yes, perfidious man,
(replied the Princess) thou thy self, and for Gods sake speak not one word in a
justification which is deadly to me, and indifferent to thee; I have proofs of
it, which thou neither can, nor would gainsay, and thy guilty conscience
does sufficiently reproach thy crime; but if the memory of Artax^rxes had ever
any power with thee, I conjure thee by the remembrance of him, and by those
Gods whom thou have so often invoked, in the falsehood of those Oaths that have
abused me, leave me to bewail my fault in quiet, forsake this hated Country for
ever, where thou have been but too long to my unhappiness, and never present
thy self again before her, who cannot behold thee but as a dreadful object.

When she had said thus, she rose up from her feat, and notwithstanding all my
Master would have alleged for his justification, she would neither hear him,
nor so much as look upon him. He was so deeply touched with so unexpected an
accident, and with so unforeseen a change, that he was like instantly to have
died with grief, and seeing that death was not quick enough in seconding his
desire, he turned the point of his Sword against his breast, but then
considering the undeservednesse of that usage, he received from a person to
whom he had given so many, and so gallant proofs of his love, for whom he had
done so many remarkable actions, and whom he had so often obliged, with the
hazard of his own life, and the lives of his Fathers subjects which he had
sacrificed for her sake, he resolved to fall more nobly, and rising up of a
sudden, after he had looked a while upon her with an eye that sparkled with
love and indignation both together, It is true, ( said he) Madam, I am
treacherous, unworthy, and disloyal, but if I be, it is to my Father, and my
King, to my Kindred and my Country, whom I have betrayed, and forsaken for you
and yours, and it is by these treacheries, and these disloyalties, that I have
often saved both you, and all your family from Captivity, from death, and from
dishonor; it is by these treacheries I have often emptied all the blood of this
miserable body, and briefly it is by these treacheries, that I have ruined my
self alone, while you, and all your friends have profited by them. These are
all the reproaches I can fear; but this unworthiness you accuse me of, is
truly to be found in your self, you feign that I forsake you in your
misfortunes, that you may thereby take a pretense to forsake me, when I had
already delivered you out of the hands of that Enemy, whom you unworthily
prefer before me: That Is the true baseness indeed, it is this Conqueror has
made you forget him, who forgot his kindred, his estates, and himself, to do
s^rvices to you and yours, which neither you nor yours, will ever be able to
requite: I leave you therefore for ever, both to make place for one more happy,
and to free you, not from a dreadful object, but from an object that would make
you blufh for the falsenesse of your Oaths, and would for ever reproach your
ingratitude and infidelity. Think no more of unfortunate Oroondates, if you
would have your conscience be at rest, and I will keep my self from thinking of
you by my death which is very near, but a death, which I will strive to
accompany with that of the rival, for whom you have forsaken me.

At these words putting on his Cask again, so furious that none of us durst
look him in the face, he went out of the Tent without saluting any body, just
upon the time when we heard the noise of your Troops, and that Amyntas with
part of your Cavalry was already hard by. He leapt upon his horse, and
commanding the Trumpets to found a Charge, he ran to meet him with a
fierceness, I know not which way to express. Amyntas sustained his first blows
a while, but after he had received two or three wounds, seeing his Troops cut
in pieces by the valor of my Master, and those that accompanied him, he turned
his back, with those he had left, and ran to seek a new supply. My Prince
guided by his despair, pursued him till he saw the body of the Army appear, and
Alexander himself at the head of all his Forces. Oroondates who knew him by his
horse, the richness of his arms, and by the rank he held among the rest, ran up
to him with a terrible cry, and advancing above an hundred paces before us all,
Alexander (said he, with a loud voice) I am he that come from defeating thy
Troops, I am he that wounded thee at the battle of Issus, and I am he to whom
thou since gave a life, which I come to lose here by thy hands: Pardon me
this ingratitude, I have loved thee as an enemy, but as a rival I cannot suffer
thee to live, unless thou take away my life, as thou have taken Statira from
me.

At these words he flew upon him like lightning, and the Troops being joined,
the ground was quickly covered with dead bodies on both sides. Alexander forbad
his men to touch my Prince, desiring to have the glory to conquer him without
assistance; but they soon found the difficulty he would have, and therefore
many of them falling upon him, parted them whether they would or no; and
delivered the King from the danger which certainly threatened him in my Masters
fury. When he saw himself in spite of him, separated from Alexander, he fell
upon the first of those that opposed him, and with his Sword opened a way large
enough to have saved himself, if he would have fled; but being resolved to die,
he rushed in among the valiantest of the Macedonians, with so much rage, and so
little circumspection, that in the end he received so many wounds, as made him
tumble among the horses feet, without any appearance of life in him. I saw well
that Alexander was displeased at this action, but I not desiring to live after
my dear Master, crowded in so far among the enemies, that after having received
many wounds, I fell close by him, and did all I could to embrace him dying, and
to give him that last testimony of my affection, in the last moment of a life
which I thought was at an end. But, Sir, the Thread of my Discourse has misled
me without question, and made me tell you in a few words, a passage which was
not unknown to you before. It is true, (said Lysimachus) I was a witness of
that action, where I saw the King in as violent grief for him, as he had ever
felt; and certainly your Master, who was not known to any body, did actions
that surpass the power of man; besides the number of those he slew, he ran
Hephestion through the right arm, hurt Perdiccas in two several places, and
overthrew Coenos, and Menidas dangerously wounded; Menidas as he fell, killed
his horse under him, and he was surrounded by so many others, that in the end
he kept company with those he had beaten down. After the Field was cleared, and
all the Persians defeated, the King commanded Eumenes to make the body of that
valiant Warrior be sought, and to render him the honor of burial as the
greatness of his virtue deserved; he shed many tears for his loss, and spoke
of him after, with expressions that showed he esteemed him as a miraculous
person; but when my turn comes, I will tell you more of it.

Araxes would have proceeded in the relation of his Masters story, when Amyntas
the Physician came into the Chamber, giving Lysimachus notice, that it was very
late, and that Oroondates desired very much to see him and to dine with him.
Lysimachus who adored him for the knowledge, which Araxes Discourse had given
him of his virtue, got up, and having made himself ready, went into his
Chamber, where he gave him the good morrow, and enquired after his health, with
perfect testimonies of affection. Oroondates returned his kind endearments in a
most obliging way, and a while after they had dined, Lysimachus who was in
great impatiency, entreated him to allow him also that afternoon to learn the
rest of the wonders of his life, and retiring with Araxes into the Garden, they
sat down together, and the faithful Squire beginning again where he had left,
continued his recital in these terms.

The End of the Fourth Book.
CASSANDRA. BOOK V.
AFter the defeat of our party, the Macedonians disarmed and stripped the dead
bodies; I believe it was that which made me come to my self, for when they had
taken of my Headpiece, the fresh air revived my spirits restored me my
understanding: I no sooner opened mine eyes, but I thought of my poor Master,
and raising my self up with a great deal of pain, I sat looking on all sides,
and saw him still lie close by me without any sign of life. I cast my arm yet
once more about him, and grovelling upon his face I began to bewail his
misfortune, as much as my weakness would permit me; while I was thus employed,
I saw Cumenes come and a great many others with him; he sought my Masters body
among the dead, according to the order he had received from Alexander: and in
the end, being in the place where it was, and seeing me alive, Can thou not
tell me (said he) which is the body of the valiant man that commanded you, and
who to day charged the King single so courageously? That question made me
redouble my lamentations, and hanging down my head again over his face, I cried
out, Ah! my Prince, my Prince: These words were observed by Eumenes, and having
asked me the same question again, Sir, (said I) he whom you seek for is my
Master: I have never forsaken him yet, nor will I leave him now, if you have
charity enough to make me be carried away with him: I have waited on him duriug
his life, and I conjure you by all the Gods, not to separate me from him, but
suffer me to follow him also to his grave. Thy fidelity (said Eumenes) deserves
an exceeding great reward: so causing my Prince to be laid upon a hand-barrow,
he made me be put upon another, and both of us to be taken from among the
dead. As they were going, one of those that carried my Master, perceived him
stir a little, he presently told Eumenes, who coming to the body, and finding
yet some warmth in it, This man (said he to them that accompanied him) is not
quite dead, and I should think I committed a great offense, if I neglected the
safety of so considerable a person: Do but judge, Sir, if these words were
vvelcome to me, I lifted up my head with joy, and addressing my speech to
Eumenes, Sir, (said I) if my Master have yet any life in him, save I beseech
you, for mere generosity, both the most virtuous man, and one of the greatest
Princes in the world.

Eumenes having given ear to what I said, commanded us to be carried into his
Tent, and making us be gotten to bed, caused our vvounds to be looked to with
much care. The Physicians with many several experiments, brought my Master at
last unto himself, and considering his vvounds very attentively, they were
long in doubt, whether there was any hope of good success; they believed that
mine were curable, and began to use their endeavors for both with a great
deal of charity. My Prince could hardly speak all that day, nor the night
following.

The next morning, Eumenes being obliged to go after the King, who was already
a great way off, in pursuit of Darius, gave order to have us carried to Arbela;
his servants obeyed him carefully* and having removed us gently to that little
Town, put us into a good house, and recommending us unto the Master of it, gave
him money to get us looked to according to the command they had received from
Eumenes. After their departure, our Host seeing me in a better condition then
my Prince, came and asked me his name; but scarce had he learned it was the
Prince of Scythia, whom he had seen pass by two days before with Darius, when
lifting up his hands to heaven, he praised the Gods for the occasion they
offered him, of doing his King yet some service, in the help he might give to
one that was so dear to him, and from that time, moved by a hearty zeal, he ran
to the Physicians, and Chirurgions of the Town; and besought them to take care
of my Princes safety, with words full of tenderness and affection. Those good
men wrought upon by his prayers, and the knowledge they had of us, employed all
their art for our recovery, and not being ignorant in their profession, after
having long consulted, they agreed in opinion, that if without incision they
could get out the head of a Javelin which was in my Masters body, their
remedies with the assistance of the Gods, might save his life; Thereupon they
presently fell to work about it, and by the help of their Instruments which
they handled very skilfully, they in the end drew it out without any incision;
but with such excessive pain, that my Prince swouned many times, and was like
to have died immediately. As Soon as the Chirurgions had got it out, they
dressed us with more satisfaction then before, and enjoined us rest, and
silence for many days. I was so much obliged to my Master, that as soon as he
could speak he enquired after me, and being told that I was in the same Chamber
with him, and that I was in better health then he, he expressed much joy at it:
But as soon as his memory was come to him again, and that he called to mind the
cause of his wounds, and the cruel usage he had received from Statira; this
grief assaulted him with so much violence, that that remembrance was like to
have made him lose a life, whose preservation was labored with so much
diligence; yet did he appear more moderate then after the death of Artaxerxes;
whether it were that his heart accustomed to misfortunes had learned at last to
support them with more patience, or that with more age, he had gotten more
strength of reason, and firmness of mind, or that in effect, he in a generous
and just despite, thought he ought not to die for one, who after having
received such remarkable services from him, had used him so ingratefully and so
unworthily.

True it is indeed, he complained in terms able to have cleft the most rocky
hearts with pity, and showed a wonderful contempt of his life, but he was not
so obstinately bent to lose it as the other time, he tore not off the plasters
from his wounds, nor did he oppose the industry the Physicians used for his
recovery. It is certain that spite fortified him very much, and that making
reflection upon all his services, and upon Statira's ingratitude, his resentment
stifled part of his sorrow, and of his love; and made him almost repent of what
he had done for her, and of the design he had had to die for so ungrateful a
person* for in the end after having examined all the actions of his life, he
found them so full of innocence, and of the proofs of a real affection, that he
could not attribute her change to any thing, but the inconstancy of her humor,
and to a meannesse unworthy of her birth, which made her prefer an enemy,
because great and victorious, before a Prince who had so faithfully served her,
and to whom she was engaged by so many oaths, and so many obligations; He
repassed in his thoughts all the progress of his love, full of so many
memorable events, and of so many brave effects of his passion, and seeing all
conclude (against all the likelihood in the world) in a perpetual banishment,
he stood in need of all his courage indeed, not to sink under so powerful an
affliction; sometimes when he was more sharply tormented with these cruel
remembrances, and that he called to mind the last words of Statira, which were
too deeply settled there to be forgotten: Is it possible said he, Statira, that
it should be you your self, who pronounced this cruel sentence of my
banishment? you, I say, who had so many ways testified unto me that you loved
me, and had by so many protestations engaged your self that you would love me
eternally: you who had sworn a thousand times that you would never be but mine,
and who by a thousand proofs of my affection were most assured that I would
never be but yours? Are not you that same Statira, whom I saved from the
violence of the Scythians, the same whose most deserving brother I preserved
from death and imprisonment; she for whom I forsook my Father and my Country,
for whom I disguised my quality, and exposed my self to numberless dangers, in
the midst of my greatest enemies; she for whom I fought against mine own
Father, and my King, and received wounds that brought me so near unto my grave;
she whose Father I rescued from so great danger, with the peril of my life; she
for whom I suffered the captivity of Artaban, Parmenio, and Alexander, for whom
I resisted the affections of the fair Roxana, for whom I laid aside all
consideration that I was the son of a great King, to become a poor contemptible
Gardner, and she, that very she, whom but a moment before my ruin I with the
price of my blood had ransomed from the bondage of Alexander? Yes, you are the
same, nay, more you are also the very same who after such powerful obligations,
has had the heart to say, Get thee gone from before me disloyal man, and
deliver me for ever from the sight of my most mortal enemy: Yes, Statira, I am
your enemy, and all these actions which I now reproach you with, are indeed the
actions of an enemy; but if you give that name to me, whom will you call your
friends? From which of your best and nearest friends, have you received better
offices, then from this enemy? Is it from that Alexander whom you prefer before
me, and for whom you forsake me? Has he left his Estates to serve you? has he
often saved the life, the honor, and the liberty of both you and yours?
Outrages then, and mortal injuries pass with you instead of obligations, and
services of the nature of mine, are accounted unpardonable offenses. He that
has destroyed your Country, burnt your Towns, slain your subjects, dispossessed
your Father of his Dominions, and perchance by this time of his life, he that
has kept, and does yet keep your self and all your family in a cruel
Captivity, has without question both used you very well, and done you very good
service, and I am he that has used you unworthily and mortally offended you.
Alexander loves me, say you, and I will give my self to him; you make him a
present, which he has highly deserved indeed, it is a recompense due to the
infinite services he has rendered you, and you know his affection to you by
many gallant proofs, and by a number of great obligatigations; nay, rather say
with more truth, Alexander is Master of all Asia, and of a good part of
Europe, and I am basely ambitious and inconstant, which makes me change with
the face of fortune, and scorn any thing under the Conqueror of the world.
Oroondates loves me indeed, Oroondates has done me service: but Oroondates is
without power in his Fathers Dominions, and perchance is hated and cast off by
him for having loved me: I will therefore follow the better of these two
conditions, and forsake him that loves me, since he is unfortunate, for him
that loves me not, since he is great, happy and victorious. It Is thus you
reason with your self, Statira, and it is thus that from hence forward I will
reason with my self; I will forsake Statira, not because she is unfortunate,
not because her Father is dispossessed of his Dominions, not because she is
Alexanders Captive, but because she has not an heart worthy of her birth,
because she is base, because she is faithless. You may well pardon me these
words, Statira, since you have so easily pardoned him whom you now love, all
the miseries you have suffered by him, and that you can so quickly forget both
injuries and services.

He would often say many other things, which all ended in the design of
forgetting so ungrateful and so unconstant a woman, and of leaving Persia for
ever, to return into his own Country, and there to recover that repose, which
he had voluntarily lost, for so many years. As Soon as I saw him in that mind,
I endeavored to confirm him in it, by all the reasons I could allege:
sometimes he would seem absolutely resolved upon it; but within an hour
after, Statira appearing to his fancy more fair, and more charming then ever,
took away all those former resolutions: and I perceived against my will, that
he would have a mighty difficulty to free himself of a passion, that was like
to last as long as his life; Yet he having a wonderful great courage, his
indignation wrought powerfully upon him, and seeing himself driven away with so
much disdain, by a person whom he thought he had so dearly bought, and so well
deserved, he made a conquest over his passion, worthy of him, and disposed
himself in the end not to love her no more, for he was not able to pull up a so
deeply rooted affection; but at least to obey her, in depriving himself for
ever of her sight* In the mean time the Chirurgions labored effectually in our
cure, and within a little time they no longer doubted of my Masters recovery.
But the usage he had received from Darius his daughter, hindered him not from
thinking upon her father whom he truly loved, and whose misfortunes he lamented
with as much sorrow as his own; when he had often inquired news of him, he
heard that he passed through Arbela the same night after his defeat, yet that
he staid there but a very little while and that since he was gone into Media,
with a design still to levy new Forces, and to fight as long as he had a man,
or a drop of blood in his body: that Alexander had pursued him, with a
resolution to seek him, in what corner soever of his Territories he could
retire to, judging that the end or the continuance of the War consisted in his
person alone; and that so long as Darius was alive or at liberty, he must not
hope for any calm in the States he had usurped from him; and this was all we
could learn at that time. I will not trouble you with telling how we passed
all the time that our wounds forced us to stay at Arbela, it would be but
tedious, and to no purpose, let it suffice if I tell you that they were so
great, that notwithstanding all the care that was had of them, we could not
be in a condition to get on horseback in four whole months: true it is, that
my Master's grief did much retard his cure, and made him relapse twice or
thrice, very dangerously in the apprehension of those that had us in hand: yet
at last he mended reasonably well, and though his afflictions rather then his
wounds, had made his face hardly to be known, he in the end grew able to endure
a Journey. But when we were preparing to depart, we heard very doleful cries
through the whole Town, and saw our Host come in with tears in his eyes, and
gestures of a man in very great sorrow. Ah! Sir, (said he to my Prince, as he
entered into the Chamber) what woeful news do I bring you? Poor Darius our good
King has ended his life by the treachery of his own subjects, and had no other
comfort in his death, but what his spirit may receive by having been bewailed
of Alexander.

These words were like a thunder-stroak unto my Master, and though his own
disasters, had in probability left him but small sense of another misfortune,
yet was he so deeply touched to hear this loss, that our Host, and all that
were present, thought he would have died with grief. I will not repeat all
his complaints, he made no fewer for him, then for Artaxerxes, and for two
whole days he would not suffer any body to speak that came to comfort him, the
third day being a little settled by the remembrance of his own miseries, he
permitted our Host to make him the relation in a few words, of what he had
heard concerning the death of that poor Prince, which he did on this manner.

Sir, (said he) our good King being come to Ecbatana, the Capital City of
Media, where he was often wont to make his abode in the Summer time, found
himself destitute of all his Forces except thirty thousand Foot, whereof four
thousand were Grecians under the command of Patro; and three or four thousand
Bactrian horse commanded by the disloyal Bessus, having made some stay in that
Town, he heard there how Alexander had already made himself Master of Babylon,
by the means of Mazaeus who delivered that place, the Province, his children,
and himself into his hands without resistance; that Abulites Governor of Susa,
and Tyridates Governor of Persepolis, had followed Mazaeus his example, and
that without drawing Sword, he had gotten all that Country in less time, then
he could well have seen it; and that he was coming with very long Marches
toward him, being not very far off already. The King at this news resolved to
fly no farther, but to try his fortune for the last time, and to die honorably
if he were Conquered: with this design he took the Field again to meet him,
and holding a Counsel with Artabazus, Bessus, Narbazanes, and those other
Commanders that yet remained with him, concerning what was best for him to do,
Narbazanes had the impudence to advise him to deposite the Empire for some time
into Bessus his hands, under whom Fortune would perhaps change her countenance.

The King was so offended at this motion, that drawing his Sword, he would have
killed that insolent fellow, if he had not been hindered by those that were
present: The Conspirators seeing their evil design discovered, resolved to put
it in execution, and for that purpose secretly seducing the hearts of the
Soldiers already weary with so long sufferings, they drew them all unto their
party. Patro who commanded the Grecians, had some information of what was
plotting, and being truly generous and faithful he earnestly beseech'd the King
to receive him and his men for the guard of his person, and in a few words
laid open to him the conspiracy of the Traitors; the good King hoping no more
for any safety after so many losses, or not desiring to live any longer, after
he was forsaken by all his soldiers, gave him kind thanks for his advertisement
and offer, but made no use of either, and being that night retired into his
Tent, with his ordinary Guards, he saw himself abandoned by all except only
Artabazus, and some few Eunuchs. As Soon as he plainly perceived his misfortune,
he gave Artabazus a parting embrace, and praying the Gods to recompense his
fidelity, he conjured him with the most prevailing words he could devise, to
go away from him, and from thenceforth follow a better fortune: but when he saw
Artabazus would not obey him, he made him be pulled away by force, and
constrained him whether he would or no to take his way toward Parthia; After
his departure he dismissed his Eunuchs, rewarding them as well as he was able
in his present condition. Go, (said he to them) think of your safety, and tie
your selves no longer to the fortune of a Master that must die very shortly,
but had rather die by the crime of another, then by his own.

Presently after Bessus, and Narbazanes came in, and without any respect
shackling him in manacles of Gold, they made him be put by force into an
ill-favored Chariot covered with skins, drawn by unknown horses, and driven by
men in an unknown livery, carrying him many days in that manner, so that no
body knew what was become of him; but when they heard that Alexander was at
their heels, they ran to the Chariot and commanded the King to get on
horseback, to save himself with them out of Alexanders hands; but the good
Prince preferring any other condition before the company of those Traitors,
refused what they would have had him do, with so much constancy and
resolution, that those Monsters exasperated by his resistance, and frustrated
of all hope of making good conditions with Alexander by delivering him up,
wounded him mortally in diverse places, and cutting the hamstrings of the
Chariot horses, saved themselves by flight. Within a little while after, a
Macedonian named Polystratus running to a Fountain, found the good King in the
pangs of death, and having known him by his own discovery, he gave him water at
his entreaty, and good Darius taking it very kindly from him, This (said he) is
the last of my misfortunes, that having received this courtesy, I have not the
ability to requite it; but Alexander shall recompense thee for it, and the Gods
him for his noble usage of my mother, wife, and children.

At these words he took him by the hand, and desiring him that he would give it
unto Alexander on his behalf, he yielded up the last breath of a life which
deserved a more fortunate end. Presently after, Alexander himself came thither,
and Polystratus having told him what he had said, he shed many tears upon his
body, and covering it with his own Cloak, sent it to Queen Sysigambis, to
render him the honors of burial.

This sad Relation did so strongly renew my Masters grief, that he was much
harder to be comforted then before, and for five or six days he gave us cause to
fear he would fall back into a worse condition then that he had newly
recovered; but in the end being a little settled, we took leave of our Host,
and though we had lost all our baggage, I had yet some few Jewels sowed up in
that remainder of my clothes the Macedonians had left me, by this means my
Master recompensed those that had done him service, and having bought arms and
horses we departed from Arbela just four months after the battle.

When we were on our way, he thought all objects in Persia brought Statira
into his remembrance, and desiring to free himself from those persecutions, he
resolved to get out of it as soon as possibly he could, and for ever to forsake
a Country, wherein he had been overwhelmed with all manner of losses and
afflictions. This reflection made him believe that all the miseries he had felt,
had been sent him from Heaven as a punishment of the crime he had committed in
leaving his Fathers party, for a foolish consideration of love; and serving in
his own person, his most mortal enemies against him, which fault he repented as
much as the violence of his affection would suffer him; and being willing to
repair the trouble which he doubted not but his absence had caused in his
friends, he determined to return to them again, hoping that his abode in
Persia, and what he had done for Darius, was yet unknown to them: Ask me not
whether I confirmed him in this desire, and whether I was joyful to go
receive the vvelcomes of my kindred, and to retire with him from those
continual disasters which had persecuted us in Persia. This resolution being
taken, we traveled through Media, and then entered into Bactria, after that we
went into Hircania, and having passed, the Araxis came into the Asiatique
Scythia, through the Province of the Massagetes.

You know that Scythia is divided into two parts, one whereof is in Europe, and
the other in Asia, they are separated by the Mountain Imaus and are both
subject to King Matheus, who makes his abode at Issedon in Europe. You will
dispense with me, if (as I could) I relate not the particularities of our
Voyage, in which we had no considerable encounter; and besides the recital of
them would be so long, that I had better tell you only matters of more
importance, and not trouble you with accidents of so little consequence. I will
only say, that my Prince was ordinarily so sad, and so weakened, and altered
with his afflictions, that I my self should hardly have known him, and I was
almost out of hope of being able to bring him so far as Issedon. After we had
crossed throug the Asiatique Scythia, we passed Mount Imaus, and entered into
Europe, where in the first Village we came at, my Prince desired to inform
himself a little of the state of the Kingdom, and enquiring of our Host, as a
stranger moved with curiosity, he got him to tell him all he knew concerning
the King his Father, and the whole State.

Our Kingdom (said the Host) thanks be to the Gods, is in very great
tranquillity, except some Provinces far remote, which having risen up in arms
not long since, forced the King to send an Army against them under the Command
of Arsaces, who has already defeated them in two great battles. As for Forain
Wars, we have not been molested with any since the Truce with Persia, and our
King keeps his neighbors in such a fear of his power, that they are content to
enjoy their own Territories peaceably, without attempting any thing against
his. Some two years since he married a second wife, whose name was Stratonice a
Princess, but his subject, and sister to Arsacomes Prince of the Issedons. All
the Kingdom blamed this Marriage, so unequal both for age and quality, and the
least passionate were of opinion, that the King hearing no news of our Prince,
and having besides him no other child by his former wife but the Princess
Bernice, had a desire to get a successor to his Empires. True it is, that the
King seems to dote in his affection, and to please his new Queen has as it
were forgot the care of his Dominions, reposing all the charge of them upon
his brother in Law Arsacomes, who governs with more liberty now that Arsaces
is absent.

My Prince interrupting our Host at these words, I know Arsacomes well, (said
he) but I cannot tell who that Arsaces is, of whom you have now made mention to
me twice. It is he (replied the Host) who stands in competition with Arsacomes
for the first place in our Kings favor, but he disputes it only by virtue,
the other by the power of the Queen his sister. Not but that Arsacomes is truly
valiant and liberal, but they that know Arsaces do publish wonders of him
which I am not able to relate; he is either a Bactrian, or a Parthian by birth,
and of some late years has been in the Court; he came thither at first as a
private man, and served without name or office in our Armies, but since his
virtue having made it self known in many several encounters, he was advanced in
the Court by Theodates: he at his first coming in, did the King some remarkable
service, and being taken notice of as an extraordinary man, he followed his
affairs so well, that from step to step he is risen to such a height of favor,
that he has no equal in credit but Arsacomes. It is true indeed that all the
world is pleased with his good fortune, and that it is by his good counsels we
have been eased of many burdens which oppressed us before. At this time he is
absent, as I have already told you, and is gone to chastise the Tauro Scythian,
and Agatirsian Rebels, whom since his departure he has beaten in two set
battles, and this is all I am able to tell you concerning Arsaces. Arsacomes is
now with the King, and it is believed that his favor has so blinded him, that
by the assistance he receives from the Queen his sister, he has not only
raised his thoughts to the Princess Berenice, but does also pretend unto her
openly. These are the passages we can hear by those that come from Court, when
you come nearer to it you will learn other news above my capacity, and
wherewith it would neither be easy nor seemly for me to entertain you.

This was all we learned of our host, and my Prince who in another season,
would perhaps have impatiently born the marriage of his Father, was hardly so
much as moved at it then, so far had the interest of his love swallowed all
others, and rendered him unsensible of any other care; we prosecuted our voyage,
and after many days journeys we in the end arrived at Issedon, where the King
was at that time; we passed through the streets without being known of any
body, and entering into the Palace, my Prince went to do his duty to the King,
who was of easy access to al kind of persons. He found him in the Garden, with
the Queen, the Princess his sister, Arsacomes, and many others of the chief of
Scythia, and kneeling upon one knee before him, he kissed his hand with an
exceeding great respect; the King knew him not at first, and asking his name
many times, What Sir (said my Prince, does not your Majesty then know him to
whom you gave his being; and is the face of your son Oroondates so altered that
you have lost all the features of it? These words, and the tone of his voice,
opened the eyes of all the company, and they all having considered him with
more attention then before, knew all the lineaments of his face, though his
sorrows had very much disguised them.

I was also observed by my friends, and the sight of me facilitated the knowing
of my Master; so unexpected a return, produced very different effects, and the
King being retired three or four steps extremely surprised and astonished, the
Princess Berenice's respect to him, could not keep her from falling about her
brothers neck, with so many tears of real joy, that he by them received a great
testimony of her affection toward him; he repaid her embraces with the same
tenderness, and being in the end got loose from her, to receive those he
expected from his Father; he was in a great amaze to see him change color
twice or thrice, and instead of affectionate welcoms, to hear him speak these
words; What (said he, darting a furious look at him) are you then Oroondates,
not my son Oroondates, but Oroondates the cruelest of all my enemies? art thou
that unnatural son; who basely forsook the Party of his Father and his King,
and who going over to the Enemy, fought with his own hand against an Army where
I was in person, killed my most faithful Subjects almost before mine own eyes,
and perchance sought out me my self to embrew his Parricide hands in the blood
of him to whom he owes his birth? He that has spent whole years in the Court,
and in the Service of my irr^concileable Enemy, while I was oppressed with
Domestic Wars, and who has sought his alliance with abasements unworthy of
his quality, while he in the interim labored my destruction?

My Prince was so confounded at these reproaches, that he was not able to speak
to him of a long time; he was not at all prepared for that reception, not
believing his Father so well instructed in the passages of his life; and having
nothing to reply against the truth of what he said, he was a great while
studying what answer he should make; but in the end lifting up his head, and
looking upon him with an eye able to have made him relent, Sir (said he) it is
true, Love has made me to commit follies, which one that were not a Father,
and a very good Father, would not easily pardon; but Sir, besides my repentance
of them which I come to testify at your feet, and the submission wherewith I
came to expose my self to all the punishments I have deserved, I have suffered
so cruel a penance, that your just anger would not have enjoined me so sharp
an one.

The King no way mollifyed by these words: No, persidious wretch, ( said he)
think not to soften me by a forced submission, thou did not believe I had
been so well acquainted with thy crimes, but thou shall receive a punishment
for them, which shall serve from hence forth for an example to all unnatural
children, and Parricides like thy self; take away this ungrateful son from
before me ( continued he, turning toward the Captain of his Guard) and let him
be carried to the Castle of Serey, we will first take order for his security,
and then consider what kind of punishment is due to him. At this sentence my
Prince arose from before him, and believing he had satisfied what he owed unto
his Father, he was so displeased with him for so inhuman an usage after so long
an absence, that he daigned not to say one word to him in his justification;
but followed the Captain of the Guard, after he had only demanded that I might
not be taken from him.

We were brought to the Castle of Serey, not far distant from the Town, it is a
very strong place, destined for the imprisonment of Princes, and furnished with
all things necessary for recreation, as a fine Garden, a fair Park, and all
other ornaments that can befit a Royal Palace. We were shut up and kept there
two whole years, without being able to pacify the Kings anger. He was served
according to his quality, but so strictly guarded, that all hope of liberty was
forbidden him: True it is he labored not at all for it, nor ever made any
attempt to escape, or so much as ever got the King to be spoken to for his
enlargement. I believe the Princess his Sister, and all virtuous persons
solicited it with much industry, but the power of the Queen his Mother in Law,
to whom his death, or at least his captivity was very important, was so great
over the Kings will, that her consideration alone, strangled all the good
motions which nature, and the counsel of impartial friends could work in him;
we believed indeed that the impression she gave him, made him persist still in
that displeasure, and that as long as she had credit with the King, she would
oppose my Masters liberty, but besides that, we knew his nature slow to be
angered, but much slower to be reconciled. As long as Darius was alive (said he
to those that spoke in favor of him) we saw him not, nor should we see him now
if his Fortune were yet on foot, and I will make him know, that we could have
spared the sight of him still.

In the mean time my Master, to whom neither his liberty, nor the pleasures he
might have enjoyed in the Court were at all considerable, endured his
Imprisonment very patiently, and found a much greater quiet in it, then he had
done in the throng of affairs, and in the conversation of the world: his mind
was now become so out of love with ordinary diversions, that nothing but
solitarinsse alone could please him: and in that humor, Araxes (would he say
to me sometimes) if the King knew how gentle a punishment this restraint is, he
would without question set me at liberty, and would not suffer me to enjoy a
tranquillity wherein I taste some sweetness, but rather would precipitate me
into those innumerable misfortunes which I have but too much felt already. It
were of great importance to me to see some Scythian faces, after having so long
seen, and lost the sight of my fair, and faithless Statira, and I might by
their help recover, what her infidelity has made me lose. That which is most
lovely among them, has some resemblance of what is most imperfect in her, and
the conversation of Scythians would be wonderful delightful to me after that
of Darius and Artaxerxes. Invent thou King of Scythia, another kind of
chastisement for him who is no longer in an estate to receive any addition to
his griefs by all thy cruelties; Fortune has done what she could against me,
and my soul has no free place left for thee to afflict.

He often entertained me with these and the like discourses, and led a life
that made me wonder a thousand times how he could outlast so many days: but the
Gods whose wrath was not appeased, and who destined him yet to sharper sorrows*
and to his last losses, were pleased to prolong the course of them, least they
should lose the ordinary subject of their cruelties. No body was suffered to
come into the Castle to us, and of all that begged it of the King, only the
Princess Berenice obtained permission to see her brother twice in two years of
his imprisonment; but both times with such vigilant witnesses which were set on
purpose, that she could never speak one word to him alone, though she expressed
a wonderful desire of it, and requested it with great importunity. The Prince
her brother who loved her dearly, was extremely troubled at it, and entreated
her to procure a greater liberty to visit him if it were possible. In the mean
time he wasted himself daily by his sadness, and withdrawing into the most
remote and solitary places of the Park, plunged himself into fits of melancholy
in which he sometimes spent whole days. Then the Image of Statira representing
it self unto the eyes of his mind more beautiful, and more attractive then
ever, made all the resolutions vanish which he had taken to forget her:
sometimes he fancied her in the same condition he had seen her in; when he
received the first testimonies of her affection, he found the same sweetness
in her eyes, and heard the same words wherewith she drew him back almost from
his grave; he tasted some pleasure as long as this thought possessed him, but
as soon as it made way for another, and that instead of that gentle, sweet,
obliging Statira, he saw a Statira armed with wrath and thunder against him, he
yet trembled with fear and was ready to die with sorrow: and in both
imaginations he sighed, as well for the miseries he felt, as for the felicities
he had lost. Behold (would he say sometimes) a youth extremely well spent, and
gallant hopes brought into a very fair haven; behold a happy success of so
many labors, and a fortunate conclusion of a love grounded upon such
mavelous beginnings; it was exceeding necessary to expose my self so to many
crosses, and to so many disasters, as this miserable life has been perpetually
tossed withal, to reap this brave, this glorious recompense. O Statira, the
best beloved, and the most faithless of all womankind, how generously you
have dealt with me, and in how fit a season, and how handsomely you have again
taken up the thoughts of that ancient hatred of our Families, certainly you
have gained an infinite glory by this last action, and have fairly revenged the
Persians of those losses they had heretofore received by the Scythians. O how
happy art thou Alexander, to have attained unto the end which I aspired to by
ways so contrary to those I practiced, and to have wonn that by blood, by
imprisonments, and by outrages, which I have lost by so much love, by so much
fidelity, and by so many services; and how well satisfied art thou Roxana, to
see thy Predictions accomplished, and this ungrateful, this brutish, and this
uncivil man, punished according to thy wish, with a chastisement that was most
justly due to him.

Thoughts of this nature were his ordinary entertainments, and sometimes lying
along by the side of a Fountain whose source he often augmented with his tears,
when the water of it was a little settled from the trouble which their falling
into it had caused, and that he could read the marks of his affliction in the
alteration of his face; Were it possible (would he say) that Statira could see
me in this condition, touched with pity, and that she could behold the change
of my countenance and not have some remorse for that of her own heart.

These were all his pastimes, and if he went sometimes a hunting in the Park,
where there was great store of game, he was so insensible of the pleasures
which were wont formerly to divert him, that we judged in the end, his disease
was utterly incurable. He never enquired after the affairs of the State, and
had so given over all kind of other cares, except that of his grief, that he
seemed no longer to have any interest in the world. I stirred not out of the
Castle no more then he, and though that leave was offered me, upon condition I
would come in no more, I would not accept it, but persever'd in the resolution
I had taken, to fix my self inseparably to the good or evil fortune of my
Master; he lamented my condition, and often said to me, Araxes, be no longer
obstinate to accompany my destiny, it is so unfortunate that 'twill entangle
thee in my destruction, and I am so sorry to see thee spend thy youth in so
unhappy an estate, that my griefs do thereby receive a most sensible addition,
retire from me I prithee, and if I be not able as I ought, and as I could wish,
to requite the good services I have received from thee, satisfy thy self with
my good desires, and expect thy reward from the Gods, who without doubt will
not suffer thy fidelity to go without a recompense. These words drew tears out
of my eyes, but not the design out of my heart, which I had settled in it
never to forsake him while I lived.

A year was already run out since the beginning of our imprisonment, when we
learned by our Keepers that the Macedonians were entered Scythia under the
command of Arimbas, and my Prince asked the Captain of our Guards what order
the King took about it; Sir ( answered he) it is but very few days since
Arimbas Governor of Pontus for Alexander, is come into our Frontiers with an
Army of forty thousand men, he has done no great matters yet, and as the King
was thinking to raise Forces to send, or lead thither himself for the defense
of his Country; he heard that the valiant Arsaces was coming home victorious
with his, after having done such actions of courage, and good conduct against
his rebel Subjects, as surpass belief; The News made him change his Design,
and instantly he dispatched a Messenger with all speed unto Arsaces, sending
him Order to march with his whole strength against the Macedonians, while he
raised more to come, and join with him under the command of Arsacomes; every
body hopes for a happy success of this War by the valor, and good fortune of
Arsaces, and all the Kingdom prepares cheerfully, to oppose this enemy of the
whole earth.

Do but see Sir, how love, and grief, those two fatal and ruinous passions,
had changed my Masters mind as well as his body, and how they had divested him
of all his former inclinations, to leave no access for any but themselves. In
former times he would have been extremely moved at such an occasion, and would
not have been able to endure his imprisonment, when it was needful to take up
arms for the defense of his Country, and that the King his Father was fain to
ground his hopes, and the protection of his Dominions, upon the valor and
fidelity of a stranger, of mean and obscure birth; but then he received this
news as the relation of a Story in which he was not at al concerned, and made
no show in the world either of sorrow for the troubles of his Country, or of
envy to the glory of that Arsaces who possessed his place, and rendered those
services to his father, which in all likelihood he should rather have expected
from him; he only said to him that had made him that relation; If I were not so
criminal as I am, and that the King would honor me with this enterprise, I
would serve him in it, perhaps with less prudence, and less valor, but at
least with as much fidelity as Arsaces. Two months after the advancing of
these Forces, news came to Court, and to us also, that Arsaces had given
battle to the Macedonians, that he had killed their General Arimbas, and had
gotten so absolute a victory, that scarce a man escaped.

All Scythia made bonfires for this good success, and they of Issedon prepared
to receive Arsaces, who all covered with Laurels, was returning into a Country
which he had restored to quiet by many victories gloriously obtained; within a
few days after we heard that he was come, and that the King, the whole Court,
and all the people had rendered him honors worthy of his virtue and services;
but within a week more we were told how the King without any consideration of
his deserts, had caused him to be put in prison, the reason of his disgrace
being known but to very few. My Prince was sorry for his Fathers ingratitude,
and would wilingly have disposed himself to help that gallant man, if he had
had any power to help himself: To what purpose Sir, shoul I^tire you longer
with so tedious a thing, and tell you the particulars of our imprisonment, which
are not of any consequence: I will therefore pass by these small matters, and
let you know that two years were almost expired since our restraint, when my
Master heard by some of those that waited on him, that the King his Father was
at the Castle gate, and that he was coming in to see him with a small Train.
Oroondates was surprised with so unexpected a visit, from him who seemed to
have laid aside the name of Father, to take up that of his most mortal Enemy,
and not losing time to consider what might be the cause that brought him, he
went out of his Chamber to receive him; he met him in the Court of the Castle,
attended by some of the Principal of his Officers, and having saluted him with
an humble respect and submission, the King used him in a very different manner,
from the reception he had given him at his arrival in Scythia, and having
raised him up with a kind embrace. Son (said he) you have suffered enough for
a fault, which to say truth, deserved some punishment, but now I come my self
to release you out of an imprisonment, which the inveterate hatred of our
Family against that of Persia has perchance made to last too long. The Prince
without expressing any joy at this news of his enlargement, replied, Your
Majesty next to the Gods, may dispose of my Destiny, and either hasten or
retard my liberty, according to the greatness of my fault, and according to
your Royal pleasure. Well son (answered the King) let us blot what is past, out
of our remembrance, and endeavor both of us to make amends by actions contrary
to those that made this difference between us.

After this discourse, those that attended the King, saluted my Prince with
tears of joy, and such expressions as visibly testified, that the affection
which his rare virtues had kindled in the hearts of his friends, was not yet
extinguished, and that all Scythia which mourned for his captivity, would
receive his Freedom as the best fortune that could befall it; when he had
returned their embraces, the King leaving the company in the Hall, entered into
an inward room whether he called only his son, and Arsacomes, and having walked
a turn or two, he began to speak thus unto my Prince.

You must needs confess Oroondates, that you have infinitely failed in what
you owe to me, in what you owe unto your Country, and in what you owe unto
your self: and I will confess too, that I perchance have likewise proceeded
against you with a rigor very contrary to the former testimonies of my
affection, and to what you might have hoped for from a father who had not seen
you of many years: we have bin both of us to blame, but the knowledge of our
mutual faults, can neither wipe out of our minds the engagements of nature,
nor those of virtue; and as I find that the remembrance of yours, hinders me
not from considering you still as my son, nor from giving you proofs of my
former love by the confidence* will have in you: So I hope also that the
remembrance of the usage you have received from me, will not hinder you from
considering me still as your Father, nor from giving me proofs of your former
obedience and fidelity, by using that confidence I have in you as you ought to
do. This assurance (Son) together with the belief I have that you have lost
nothing of that virtue, whereof from your first years you gave such pregnant
hopes, encourages me to put you again into employment; you have now a brave
occasion to make your self remarkable, and I should think I did you a mortal
injury if I should trust that command unto another, which by right is due only
unto you. Know then that since the defeat of Armibas, Zopirio his brother,
Governor of Thracia for Alexander, has past the Bosphorus at Byzantium with an
Army of fifty thousand men, and is entered into our Territories, where he does
all acts of hostility, his coming has wrought such an effect among the people
whom the name of Alexander has struck with terror, that most part of the
Towns upon the shore of the Euxine Sea, and upon the banks of the River
Boristhenes, deliver themselves up to him already, and stay not for the coming
of Alexander, who with a much more puissant Army, is advancing himself as a
deluge to overflow our Dominions; you have here a gallant occasion to defend
your Country against the Usurper of the whole Earth, and to decide your old
quarrels with your particular Enemy: My Age which makes me now unable to bear
the toyls of War, will not suffer me to oppose this Conqueror in mine own
person, nor to go and fight with him upon those limits which never any body yet
invaded, but to their loss and confusion; I have protected them against his
Father, and you my son shall go and defend them against himself. Some of my
Counselors opposed the choice I made of you, and represented to me that my
rigorous usage of you, did in part dispense you from the fidelity you owe me,
and forbad me to trust you with an Army, upon which I have grounded our support
and conservation; but my knowledge of your good nature, of your love to glory,
and of the emulation you ought to have against Alexander, has drowned all
these suspicions, and I have moreover considered that you will fight also for
your self, and that in deceiving me, you would but deliver up unto the Enemy
those people that must hereafter obey you, and those Estates you must hereafter
possess. I have drawn those Forces out of Garrison, that returned home with
Arsaces, and have already made them begin their march toward the Euxine Sea
where Zopirio makes his progress; you shall go forth from hence, and overtake
them, to command them while I make new Levies, which shall follow you as soon
as they are in a readiness, and by which addition you may increase your Army
before the arrival of Alexander: but I mean you shall away to morrow morning,
without making any longer stay, without coming into Issedon, and without seeing
any of your friends, but those that shall make the Voyage with you; I have
particular reasons to dispatch you with this diligence, and to morrow you shall
find at this Castle gate, all your Equipage in Order, and all those that must
attend you in this Expedition.

The Prince answered this long Discourse of his Fathers, no otherwise but with
a low reverence, and some protestations of his desire to do him the service he
was obliged to. Yet though he was almost absolutely taken off from all thought
of State Affairs, that desire of glory which still remained in him, and the
love of noble actions, which his sorrow had not extinguished, made him with
joy receive, not the news of his liberty, but of an occasion to bear arms
again, and to dispute of valor with Alexander, at the head of an Army, which
happiness he yet had never had, though he always had most ardently desired
it. He demanded leave of the King to see the Princess Berenice his sister, but
it was refused him, and the King commanded him not to enquire the cause that
made him send him away so suddenly, and so secretly. The Prince resigned
himself to his Fathers pleasure, without murmuring, and spent the rest of the
day with him in receiving Orders and Instructions for that War.

The next morning as soon as it was day, the King himself led him out of the
Castle, where my Prince found a very brave retinue, and among the Officers
appointed for his house, he knew Toxaris and Loncates, those two faithful
servants which he had lost at the battle of Arbela, and who a while before were
returned into Scythia, after having run through an infinite number of dangers,
and endured a long captivity among the Macedonians. My Master was extremely
glad to see them, and having used them with great kindness, as the faithful
companions of his fortune, he with much civility embraced all those who by his
Fathers election were to attend him. The King saw him get on horseback, and
having taken his leave of him, returned to Issedon, as soon as we were gone.

My Prince being accompanied by Arsacomes, Theodates, my Father whose name is
Cleorestes, and two or three hundred of the chief men of all Scythia, followed
the Army, which was two or three days march before us, and took the way toward
that part of Scythia which is called Sendica; and which is situate between the
Euxin Sea, and the River Boristhenes. The fourth day after our departure, we
got up to our Forces, and upon the banks of the River Hypanis, my Prince made a
general muster of them; he found them very weak, and admired the King his
Father would send him with so poor a strength against the Conquerors of the
whole world. The Issedons had armed six thousand horse, the Sarmates four
thousand, the Massagetes 5000, the Agatirsians 3000, the Tauroscythians 3000,
the Agripeans 2000, the Nomadians three thousand, the Hyleans, the Basilides,
and all those that are near the Lake of Buges six thousand* and the Satarchians
two thousand; he had no Infantry at all, for you know the Scythians never make
use of any but in great Expeditions, and where they are constrained to bring up
all their Forces.

The Prince having found by his Muster Rolls, that his whole Army consisted of
no more then five and thirty thousand horse, divided it into three bodies, he
gave the first of ten thousand to Arsacomes, the second of a like number to
Theodates Prince of the Sarmates, and kept a third of twelve thousand for
himself, making my Father Cleorestes his Lieutenant, and giving him the command
of that body in his place, whenever he should be forced to go to any other
part of the Army where his presence was necessary. There yet remained three
thousand horse, and my Prince was pleased that I should have the honor to
command them as a loose reserve, to give relief to those that should first
stand in need of assistance.

This being ordered, the Army marched strait to the Boristhenes, and having
passed it over a Bridge of Boats, advanced toward the City of Olbiopolis, which
was then besieged by Zopirio, being the only place that had had the courage to
make a generous defense. I believe, Sir, you will be content I should cut off
as much of the discourse of this War, as I can possibly. I will tell you
therefore, (omitting many particularities of small importance) that the same
day we passed the Boristhenes, we received intelligence, that Zopirio
advertised of our hasty advance toward him, had raised his Siege from the place
which he had blocked up before, and was coming to meet us with Colors flying.

Oroondates gave the Gods thanks for his brave resolution, and though he knew
the weakness of his Forces, yet would he not stay for the Supplies the King his
Father had made him hope for, but thought he would encourage those he had, so
well by his example, that he should infallibly obtain the Victory: with this
confidence he marched strait toward him, and to shorten this relation, the
third night after, we discovered the fires of his Army in a great Plain which
is between the Cities of Olbiopolis, and Miletopolis, and the Boristhenes, and
the Danube. This sight put courage into the Scythians, who indeed are the most
Warlick of all men living, especially for the defense of their Territories.

My Prince had much ado to keep them in that night, and as soon as ever the Sun
began to restore his light unto the world, the two Armies saluted one another
with such dreadful shouts, that the Banks of the Danube ecchoed with them, and
many birds astonished with the loud shrilness of that noise, fell down afrighted
among the soldiers feet. Oroondates at the very first peep of day, had caused
the signal of the battle to be set up on the top of his Tent, which was in a
field Gules, two cross Javelins proper. The Scythians no sooner saw it appear,
but they sent forth a second shout, full of joy, and eagerness to fight, from
whence my Prince drew a good presage of the Victory. When he was gotten up, he
offered sacrifices in company of all the Commanders to Jupiter, to Apollo, and
to the Goddess Tellus, and to Mars the fairest horses of the Army; and having
given out Orders to the principal Officers, he sent them away unto their
charges. A while after he put on all his arms except his headpiece, which
Toxaris carried after him, and mounting on horseback, he visited all the Troops
one after another, observing, and carefully correcting the defects, giving all
instructions necessary for the winning of the battle, and exhorting them to do
gallantly, by the most pressing words, the desire of Victory could put into his
mouth, My friends ( said he to them) these you have now to fight withal are not
the Persians, your ancient enemies whom you always conquered more easily then
you could meet with them; I will not flatter you, nor make any scruple to tell
you that which might strike terror into cowards, but will only add vigor to
that noble courage which always accompanies you upon service, and which
hitherto has made you victorious over all those that have dared to encounter
you. They are Macedonians, they are Thracians, two valiant, warlike people, and
to be plain they are part of those Forces that have made their King the Emperor
of the world: They are the Usurpers of all the earth, who not being satisfied
with that Tyrannous domination they have got by violence over all Asia, Africa,
and the better part of Europe, would yet extend their Empire over your
liberties and your lives: Let this difference of your enemies raise you to
extraordinary achievements; you cannot conquer them without difficulty but
neither can you conquer them without glory, nor without fruit; upon the winning
or losing of this day, depends the repose or utter ruin of the Scythians. If
they prevail, Alexander will without question, have a free entrance into our
possessions, and that mighty Army wherewith he marches already against us,
will advance without resistance into the remotest parts of Scythia, and into
the secretest places of your abodes, and families; but on the contrary by their
defeat, he will give over the design of invading you, or if he should persevere
in it, you will howsoever gain an infinite advantage, by having learned to
conquer those that were never conquered.

He said many other things to this purpose, and finding they had produced the
effect he desired, he made the Army march in Battalia straight unto the
Enemies, who advanced likewise in very good order. Then it was that I observed
a cheerfulness in his countenance, I had never seen there, since the unhappy
accidents of his life, which had quite taken away his lively humor: I had
never seen him before at the head of an Army under his own command, and I
considered him there with so much pleasure, that it is hard for me to pass
over in silence, his gracefulness, both in commanding, and in all the other
Functions of his charge. He had so noble, and yet so lovely a fierceness in his
arms, that he moved both love, and fear in all that looked upon him; when the
Armies were drawn near to one another, he put on his Cask, all covered with
plumes, and stones of value, and setting himself at the head of the Battle, he
commanded Arsacomes who led the Vanguard, to begin the Charge. Scarce had the
Trumpets given the Signal, when the first Squadrons closed with a fury hard to
be expressed; the Thracians had not the leisure to make use of their Arrows,
for the Scythians falling in pell-mell forced them to fight at handy-blows:
This first encounter was very bloody, but after having long contested for the
better, our Cavalry began to put^ their Foot into disorder, when Zopirio
perceiving it, came up with the main Body of the Army, and thundering in upon
our men made a terrible slaughter of them, before they could be relieved by
Oroondates. I kept upon the right Wing, with my three thousand horse, and
observing the disadvantage of our side, I rushed into the midst of the Enemies,
and recovered our affairs a little again; while my Prince moving forward with
his Battalion made the fight something less unequal. Zopirio who, as well as my
Master, had parted his Army into three Bodies, made his last advance, and
Theodates by his example, and by the Princes command, led on the Rere-guard to
oppose him. Then it was that the two whole Armies being engaged, fought with
mavelous courage and obstinacy, each having taken a resolution to conquer, or
perish upon the Field; and I may well assure you with truth, that of so many
thousand men as fell that day, there was hardly so much as one that received
his death in running away; The Thracian and Macedonian Infantry, seeing
themselves trampled under foot by the Scythian Cavalry, killed their horses
with Javelins, and keeping close together, covered themselves with their
shields, and bore up stiffely against them to hinder their being utterly
routed. Our Enemies surpassed us in number, and they were much better armed
then we, but the valor of our General, and his wonderful readiness in giving
seasonable relief where there was most need, made them lose all the advantage,
which their number, and the difference of arms gave them over us. He had
already done miraculous things, and by reason of the blood that was all over
him, could hardly be known but by his stature, and the blows he gave; when
Zopirio seeing the day incline already to our party, observed him among all the
rest, and considering that the greatest part of the Victory consisted in the
death of that Commander, he broke through his own men, and having a strong
Javelin in his hand, after he had desied him with a loud cry, he rushed upon
him; and striking him while he was otherwise employed, the point of his Javelin
passed between the mailes that defended his arm, and gave him a slight hurt in
the hinder part of his shoulder. Zopirio seeing his Javelin engaged in my
Masters arms, let it go, and was already lifting up his sword, to second his
first blow, but my Prince turned about to him with so great a fury, and so
admirable a readiness, that Zopirio frozen with fear, began to repent his
boldness, when the blade that seldom failed of making a mortal wound, finding
passage through the defect of his Curass, under the arm which he had heaved up,
ran him quite through the body, and made him drop down dead among the horses
feet. The death of their General did much abate their courage, and the
Scythians who saw him fall, sent forth a fierce cry, which struck yet a greater
terror into them, and without doubt hastened their defeat. Certain it is, that
we found not so much resistance among them as before, and that in the end the
Victory declared it self openly for us. To what purpose is it, Sir, to keep you
in a tedious Relation, the Enemies were defeated, as without question you have
heard, but their obstinacy was so great, that not one of them ever turned his
back, or asked quarter; and our Victory was so absolute, that after the heat of
the Fight, my Prince had much ado to save a small number, though miserably
hacked by the cruelty of the Scythians. Six thousand of ours were slain upon
the place, and more then ten thousand wounded: After this notable Victory, my
Prince having given thanks unto the Gods, retired into his Tent, and would not
suffer his wounds to be dressed, till the bodies of the principal Officers were
sought, and particularly Zopirio's, which he commanded to be honorably buried,
as if he had been the best of his friends. Of fifty thousand fighting men that
had followed him, not one as I told you avoided the fury of our arms by flight,
and all the rest died most gallantly upon the place, except those few prisoners
which my Prince saved from the like destiny, whose ransom he paid himself to
those that had taken them* and set them at liberty, giving leave to those that
would to stay in his Camp till their wounds were healed, allowing them
wherewithal to pay for their cure, and showing them as much kindness as they
could have hoped for from their own kindred. He also gave order to have the
wounded men of his own Army carefully dressed, to have those that had fought
well recompensed according to their deserts, and to have the spoil distributed
with justice, and without confusion* He had three hurts himself, yet but light
ones, and such as kept him only three or four days in bed. As Soon as he was
well enough to ride on horseback again, he made his Army dis-incamp, and
sending his sick and wounded men to Olbiopolis, in Wagons, he marched with his
Forces toward Miletopolis, and the other Towns which had shamefully deserted
their Kings party, to receive the yoke of the Macedonians. Miletopolis was the
first he laid siege to, and that City which had not had the courage to oppose
their Enemies with honor and justice, had yet the stubbornness to stand out
against their lawful Prince, and to refuse him entrance, whether it were
because they were disaffected to their King, or that the knowledge of their
fault, putting them out of hope of pardon, made them resolve to expect relief
from Alexander, or bury themselves in their own ruins.

The place was very strong, and kept us a month without the walls; but in the
end after the loss of some of our men, our Prince having stormed it vigorously
on all sides, carried it by assault, and his mercy was so great, that as soon as
he saw himself Master of it, he stopped the execution, and being satisfied with
the death of those that were slain upon the breach, he generously pardoned all
the rest, though they had not so much as a hope of it, and placing a reasonable
Garrison in the Town, suffered the Inhabitants to enjoy all their former
Immunities and Privileges. This Act of Clemency was blamed by many of his
party, who could not approve his so great gentleness, to a place so obstinately
rebellious, and who maintained that to terrify such as were guilty of the same
crime, and were yet to be subdued, he should have utterly destroyed it.

But my Prince smiled at their Maxims, and following the inclinations of his
own generous nature, attained by that moderation, to the end which they would
have had him tend to by contrary mean; for within a few days after, the report
of his mildne^s being spread through that revolted Province, all the Country
submitted it self voluntarily unto him; and within less then three months,
fourteen Towns that had declared for Alexander, returned again to their
obedience, and put themselves into his hands. Tagus, Caliorbia, and
Orchilachia, seated upon the Frontiers of Tau^^a Cherchonesus stood out the
destiny of Miletopolis, and having resisted to the last extremity, were taken
by force like it, and received almost the like favorable usage.

I pass lightly over these things, to shorten the Relation of matters not much
important, that I may come to the conclusion of my Princes loves: I will tell
you therefore, that while we lay before Orchilachia, my Prince saw two or three
of his Guard come into his Tent, who presented a man unto him. Oroondates
having asked them why they brought him before him, Sir, ( answered they) he is
newly come out of the Town, and being fallen into the hands of our men, he
prayed them to bring him unto you, to whom he would tell something of great
consequence; we neglected not to do so, and though he speaks the Scythian
Tongue so ill, that we had much ado to understand him, and made us easily see
that he is not of this Country, we believed yet, that your knowledge in Forain
Languages, would assist you to draw that benefit, which you may hope for from
his Intelligence.

Oroondates who while they were saying thus, had considered the Stranger,
observed features in his face that were not unknown to him, and having called
me, to require help from my memory, the man after he had saluted him upon his
knee, said to him in the Persian Tongue, I see you have forgot me, Sir, but if
you please to call to mind those persons I have served, you will remember,
that I have had the honor to do you some service also.

These words, and the tone of his voice, put us out of doubt, and made us know
him presently, to be the Eunuch Tyreus, that faithful servant to the Princesses
of Persia, who had been taken with them by Alexander, and had never left them,
but to carry the news to Darius of the death of the Queen his wife, and who had
led us himself to Sysigambis his Tents, where he had continued after my Masters
fatal adventure. This knowledge of him infinitely surprised my Prince, who
rising up from his Chair, embraced the Eunuch with great kindness, and with
tears which he could not refrain, at the remembrance which his sight awakened
in him. O Tyreus, (said he) is it possible that I see you, and that you have
been able to forsake the Ladies you served, to come into Scythia? Sir, (replied
the Eunuch) if my being in this Country has surprised you, the cause of it will
surprise you a great deal more; I Will tell it you when you please to give me the
liberty, and will give you a faithful account of the charge that has been
trusted to me.

The Prince startled at this Discourse, and was assaulted with so many several
inward motions, that the changes of his countenance witnessed the disturbance
of his mind* his mouth was open twice or thrice to speak; But in the end he
came to himself, and considered that without question the Eunuch had things to
tell him, which required not so many witnesses. That was it that made him
resolve to stay some few hours, that he might discourse with him, and hear
what he had to say at better liberty; with this thought, Well, Tyreus, (said
he) we will talk together anon at night with more leisure and convenience, in
the mean time I will assure you, that what business soever brings you hither,
you are very welcome into a place where I have some power, and where I will
endeavor to requite part of the courtesies I received from you in your Country.

After these words he afforded me the liberty to embrace him, and to renew the
acquaintance which we had made together in Persia. I took care to give him
accommodation to rest himself, to welcome him with all the good intertainment I
could give him, and to divert him the remainder of the day, while my Master
thought of the affairs belonging to the Siege as much as his new impatience
would permit him. When it was night, and that my Prince after supper had gotten
free from the Commanders, and other Officers that had business with him, he
retired into his Chamber, and as soon as he was in bed, he sent me to call in
Tyreus, and causing stools to be set by his bedside, he commanded us to sit
down, and to make every body else go forth. We were no sooner left alone, but
addressing himself to the Eunuch; Tyreus, (said he) now we are at liberty, or
rather I am now ready, to receive by your Discourse, most sensible renewings of
my grief, and perhaps some change in my present condition: Speak without
flattery I pray you, to him who can neither have any addition to his sorrows,
nor hope for any kind of joy. The Eunuch being sat down by his command, and
having bethought himself a little of what he had to say, began his Relation on
this manner.

The History of STATIRA.
THE Discourse I am to make unto you, Sir, will satisfy you, and afflict you
both together, and I think that never any news was so equally divided between
joy and grief, as that I bring is like to be to you. I shall tell you some
things which I could not be present at my self, but I learned the truth of them
from Cleone, and from the Princesses own mouth, and instructed my self very
well in them, before I undertook took the business that was imposed upon me.

After that by Alexanders command, the Queens and Princesses were gone from
Sidon; and that with a most sensible sorrow, they were separated from you by
the orders of the Conqueror, they removed to Gaza, which he had already caused
to be blocked up; during that Siege they were lodged in an house near the Town,
where Alexander visited them often, and where he renewed his persecutions of
Statira. That generous Princess remembering her obligations to you, and the
promises she had made you, resisted all his importunities with a wonderful
courage, and yet with so much civility and gracefulness, that Alexander
instead of being taken off, was rather the more inflamed by her coldness, and
finding by conversation the beauties of her mind, as he had already observed
those of her body, he gave himself absolutely to her, and forgot all the
passion he had formerly had for Barsina. The Princess was extremely troubled
at it, but having an admirable discretion, she dissembled part of her thoughts,
and discovering the rest, behaved her self in such a manner, that without
exasperating a young Conqueror whose power was absolute over her, she gently
extinguished those hopes, which her civility, and favorable usage might make
him to conceive. True it is, that Alexander had so many employments, that she
had much respite by them, and during that time of quiet, her entertainment was
only concerning you; Cleone has given me assurance of it, and told me that
the knowledge the Queens whole family had of your affection, allowing her the
liberty to discourse of it with the Princess her sister, Barsina, and those
other Ladies that were dearest to her; the sweetest consolation she had in her
misfortunes, was to speak incessantly of you, and to hear the praises those
Ladies gave you in her presence, as well to bear witness of the truth, as
because they knew the satisfaction she received thereby. After the taking of
Gaza, we were fain to go from thence into Egypt, and the King giving order to
have the Princesses brought upon the Nile, to Memphis, came thither the same
way also himself. There it was that rest made him fall into his old
professions, and he spent all his abode in that Town in prosecuting his love:
The Princess used him as she had done before, and carried her self to him with
so much moderation and virtue, that she increased his esteem of her the more,
and was commended by the Queens and by all those that observed her deportment
and discreet behavior. But that great Prince not being able to continue idle,
and not suffering the thoughts of Love to bury those of War, which had ever
been predominant in his mind, departed from Memphis, where he left the
Princesses, and in the mean time overran all Egypt, which he brought under his
obedience, and having taken a sudden resolution, went to visit the Temple of
Jupiter Hammon. I will not entertain you with his Voyage, but will only tell
you that after his departure, one day, (a day alas! fatal to the repose of the
whole remainder of her life, and most contrary to yours as we have sufficiently
known) the Princess being alone in her Chamber, was told that a servant of
yours was come, who desired to speak with her from you. She trembling with joy,
commanded him presently to be brought in, but not having patience to stay his
coming, she ran out to meet him, and presently knew him to be Arbates, one of
the Officers of your house, whom you had taken in the Court of Persia.

My Prince interrupting Tyreus at these words; It is true, (said he) we left
him at Sidon, with money to go whither he would, he having excused himself to
me, that he^ could not wait upon me in my Journey, by reason of some
indisposition he had. As Soon as he was come in to her Chamber with her, (said
Tyreus, going on with his Relation) the Princess enquired news of you with
great impatiency: I left him in Hyrcania, (answered Arbates) ready to pass the
Araxis to retire into Scythia, and from thence he sent me back into this
Country, to bring you this Letter: The Princess who thought you had been with
the King her Father, was infinitely troubled at what she heard, and taking the
Letter she brake it open with such an aching heart, as presaged those
afflictions which she since has suffered by it; as soon as she had taken off the
paper in which it was folded up, the first object that presented it self unto
her eyes, was a Bracelet of hair, which sight made her tremble, and took away
her courage, so that she was hardly able to read the Letter; yet striving to
recollect her spirits, she read these words with all the difficulty in the
world.

IF you were of opinion that I dissembled, you were not at all deceived, I did
dissemble I confess in my compliance to you, but I dissemble not in my passion
for one more lovely then your self; you have indeed made me forsake a place
which your importunities made me to hate, I leave you therefore, but I leave
you without any trouble, and without any design to advantage my self, either
by your remembrance, or by your favors; I obtained them with too much ease to
value them, and because the Presents of Enemies are always fatal, I send you
back your Bracelet, and retain nothing of you that can trouble the repose of

OROONDATES.


When Oroondates heard the words of this Letter, not permitting the Eunuch to
proceed, O Oods! (said he) Tyreus, what is this you tell me? what, was that
Letter then which I wrote unto Roxana, carried unto my Princess, as being
addressed to her, and did her Bracelet which I sent back fall into the hands of
Statira? Not that you sent her back, replied the Eunuch, but another, which (if
you remember) you lost at Damascus, and which the Princess as soon as ever she
saw it, knew to be the very same which she had given you, when you went away
with Artaxerxes to fight against the Scythians; but hear the rest I beseech
you, and your wonder will be sufficiently cleared.

Judge, Sir, of the Princesse's astonishment, at the reading of this Letter,
the hand whereof was so well known to her, and at the sight of that Bracelet,
whereof she had neither forgotten the work, the hair, nor the fashion, having
received both by a man, who she knew belonged to you, and was of some account
in your family; she made him often repeat what he had said, that she might not
be deceived, she often looked earnestly upon every part of the Bracelet, and
often with a settled eye, read over and examined every word of the Letter. She
saw so little probability in this adventure, that she could neither give credit
to her eyes, her ears, nor her memory; she believed she was either asleep, or
besides her self, and strove either to get awake, or recover her senses; but
when she was assured of her misfortune, by proofs which it was impossible for
her to contradict, her courage, and her strength forsook her, her spirits
failed, and letting both the Letter and Bracelet drop out of her hand, she fell
into a swoun, and sunk backward in the Chair she sat upon. Cleone who only
was present at that accident, ran to her Mistress, and unclasping her robe, did
all she could to bring her to her self, but finding she was too weak to do it
alone, she called her companions to her assistance; when she was come to life
again by their endeavors, she looked upon them all with a dying eye, and
commanding Cleone softly, to bid them all withdraw, she made her stay still
with her, being as you know more trusted by her then all the rest. Then it was
that she gave her self over to her grief, and that she uttered complaints of
your supposed infidelity, which Cleone could never repeat to me, without tears;
she wept all that day, and would not hear one word of consolation, neither
would she be seen by Barsina, nor Parisatis, no, nor by the Queens themselves;
she passed the whole night in lamentations, and the next morning Cleone, who
truly ever honored you most perfectly, going about to allege something for
your justification; Hold thy peace, (said she) thou fool, against thine own
opinion, and against common sense, open not thy mouth to defend that
treacherous man; can he deny his own hand in this Letter? Is it not sealed with
his own seal? Can he disavow his servant that brought it? And can we mistake
this Bracelet which we wrought with our own hands, the hair whereof thou did
cut off thy self? Is there any matter of doubt? Is there any trick of Roxana's,
or any shadow of hope, that we may be deceived? Do but speak now, Cleone, and
believe I shall be most perfectly obliged to thee, if thou can find any
invention to disguise my misfortune, or if by any reason thou can persuade me
that I am out of my wits, or that I am asleep.

Cleone was dumb at this Discourse, and having nothing to answer against such
visible testimonies of your falsehood, she could neither excuse you, nor condemn
the resentment of her Mistress. Since her swouning, she had not seen Arbates,
to ask him more particulars of his Masters infidelity, (you will pardon me,
Sir, if I use that word, so it was she called your change, and all the names
she could give it were pardonable enough, to so just an anger, as hers was in
appearance) and the force of her sorrowful displeasure wrought so powerfully
upon her, that she fell exceeding sick. Although she had taken a strong
resolution to conceal the cause of it, from those persons that were dearest to
her, yet was it absolutely impossible; and as soon as she was visited by
Barsina, the Princess Parisatis, and by the Queens, she could not forbear
breaking out into a flood of tears, and showing them the fatal Letter which
had brought her into that pitiful condition, she confessed unto them the strong
inclination she had had to you of a long time, and asked pardon for the fault
she had committed, in giving way, by Artaxerxes his persuasions, to that
affection without their consent, expressing her thoughts in such sad and moving
terms, that she quickly filled them all with compassion of her, and
detestation of you; they all condemned your proceeding as most contrary to
generosity, to the sanctity of your oaths, and to civility it self, and most
unworthy of a Prince of your quality, or of a man touched with any sense of
virtue. Nay, even Bars^na, who till then had borne a wonderful great friendship
to you, was one of the readiest to condemn you, and taking the part of that
afflicted Princess, she showed a horror against the usage she had suffered
from you.

Roxana visited her sometimes as she was obliged, and at first spoke more
moderatly of it then the rest, avoiding all occasions of discovering by any of
her actions, the interest she had in the business; but when she saw her fully
confirmed in the belief of your infidelity, and that she found the time proper
to strike her blow, she neglected not the opportunity; Madam, ( would she
often say to her) the Gods have at last been pleased, that you should be
disabused, and that the sincerity of my intentions should be made manifest
unto you; I gave you notice sufficiently of the humor of that disloial man;
but my faithful advertisements were suspected, and you rejected that with
scorn, which I spoke out of a real affection; but you are not the only one he
has deceived, he made show here to sigh for many others* Barsina though she
dissembles it, is not exempt from his perfidiousness, and since we are no
longer in terms to disguise any thing from you, suffer me now to confess unto
you, that I my self have been deceived by him, and that that false man, has a
thousand times in your absence, taken the same Oaths, and made the same
Protestations to me, which I doubt not but you received from him: but the Gods
were at least so merciful to me, that I never gave much credit to them, nor
ever granted him any favor, which he can brag of among our Enemies.

She used to say many things to her of this nature; and though the Princess
neither loved her, nor had any great faith in her, yet being in a condition fit
to believe any thing, that confirmed your infidelity, she would give her the
hearing with sighs, and answer her only with tears and sobs; but as soon as she
was alone, or none but Cleone with her, she would pour forth her resentments in
words able to make the roughest natures melt into grief and pity. Is it
possible, (would she say) that Oroondates the son of a King, and one whose
virtue in appearance was equal to his quality, he that forsook his Country and
Friends, to serve me, and who testified his love to me by such gallant proofs,
should be capable of a baseness so unworthy of his birth, and so contrary to
that virtue, and to those proofs of his passion? But is it possible that I
should doubt of it, after the assurances he has given me of it with his own
hand? Or rather is it possible I should live, after such unquestionable marks
of my unhappiness? No, Statira, credulous Statira, facile Statira, amorous
Statira, and unfortunate Statira by thy credulity, by thy facility, and by thy
amorousness; thou ought to die for the expiation of so many faults, for the
reparation which thou owe to the illustrious blood of Persia and inseparably
to tie revenging furies to the heart of that disloial man, whom thou have
believed, whom thou have suffered, and whom thou have loved. Die then,
miserable Statira, linger not out a life full of so many disaster, full of so
much shame, and full of so much repentance; do not survive the scorn of that
insolent Enemy, but by a favorable death, prevent the last misfortunes of thy
family* thou may yet die like a Princess, and like the daughter of a King,
and if thou stay a few days longer, thou may perchance see the ruin of him,
and all his friends, and die divested of all the marks of thy former quality;
Go thy way to that dear Brother, who innocently precipitatted thee into those
miseries that are the cause of thy destruction; reproach him with the
infidelity of his friend, and show him thy repentance for having outlived a
brother, whom thou lovedst so dearly, though his friendship has proved most
fatal to thee.

She would continue for some time in this design of dying, and then of a sudden
changing her resolution, and discourse, What, (would she say) shall I die for
that Traitor, who uses me with an indignity which is beyond example, and which
was never practiced against Maids of the most vile and mean condition? Shall I
die for that ungrateful man, who after having received a thousand proofs of my
affection, is not ashamed to tell me that he dissembled with me out of
compliance, that he sighs for one more lovely, that he leaves our company only
to shun my importunities, that he forsakes me without trouble, that he slights
my favors because he had obtained them too easily, who sends me back my hair, as
a fatal present of his most cruel enemies, and who will retain nothing of me
that can trouble his repose, and his new, or real affections? No, no I scorn to
die for him, I have done enough without dying, and that would be my utmost
shame, and his utmost vanity, he would be too proud of that, the Traitor, and
would brag with too much insolence, that he had made the Princess of Persia,
and the daughter of his Fathers Enemy, die for love: I will rather live to hate
him, and to despise him, and though I begin too late, and am only wise to my
own cost, and to my own confusion, it is no matter, though I change last, I
change at least with justice, and have the satisfaction to do that without a
crime, which he has done with a baseness detested both by the Gods and Men.

She many times would fall into these and such like speeches, which it would be
hard for me to repeat; and in the end with time, and the consolation of the
Queens, of her sister, and of her other friends, she armed her self so strongly
with despite, and resentment of the injury she had received from you, that if
she could not resolve to hate you, she resolved at least to use all her
endeavors to do so, and to blot out of her mind as much as she could possibly,
a remembrance that could not but be most fatal to her. This resolution made her
receive those remedies that were given her for the curing of her sickness, and
it was labored with so much care, that within a while after she recovered, and
left her bed, healthful in all appearance, but in effect so ill, and so much
changed, that she moved compassion in all them that frequented her, and by her
conversation, engaged themselves in that affection, which none that ever knew
her could avoid. She then strove to banish you quite out of her mind, forbad
Cleone ever to name you to her, tore all your Letters, and prayed her Sister
and her Friends, not to bring any thing into her mind, by any of their actions
or discourses, that might make her so much as think of you; yet was it not
without strange violences, nor without feeling those bitter pangs, which you
may well imagine, if you have truly loved her.

During our stay at Memphis, Alexander's absence sheltred her from his
persecutions; but after his return from the Temple of Jupiter Hammon, he found
her so much altered, that he was extremely sensible of it; he tried all the ways
he could possibly to learn the cause, and not being able to discover any thing,
he believed that her Captivity, and the misfortunes of her house, were the only
reasons; this consideration obliged him for some time to importune her less
then he was wont, and in the interim he made her and the Queens also be served
with respects and honors, able to have partly abated the unhappiness of their
condition. About that time he gave order for the building of the new City of
Alexandria, and leaving Peucestas, and Eschilus to command in Egypt, he caused
us to depart from Memphis, to go toward Babylon, whither he had heard Darius
was retired; and his diligence was so great, that within eleven days, we
encamped upon the Bank of the Euphrates, and having passed it with a Bridge of
Boats, within four days after we came unto the Tygris. The courage of the King,
was indeed to be admired, in the passing of that River, he entered into the
water first himself, and inviting all his soldiers by his example, made his
whole Army wade through that Current, which is the most rapid and impetuous in
the whole world. From thence, after having defeated Stratopaces, and some other
of Darius his Troops, he came up to him within an hundred Furlongs. In the mean
time Darius his Queen, worn out with toilsome Journeys, and her ordinary
a^flictions, fell sick, and died within a few days after. You may Judge, Sir,
by your knowledge of the nature of the Princesses, how sensible they were of so
great a loss, and with how many tears they deplored the death of a most
virtuous Princess, and a mother that had always most dearly loved them; I will
not enlarge my self upon that subject, for besides that the Discourse would be
troublesome to you, you have already heard the particularities of it, and
likewise you know that then I left them, to bring the sorrowful news unto
Darius; I saw in what manner you received it, and within a few days after, I
with you saw the issue of the bloody Battle of Arbela; I also conducted you if
you remember, unto the Queens Tents, and having been witness of the wonders
you did for their deliverance, I was witness also of the usage you received
from the Princess; I at that time thought it very strange, but having continued
with them, after you went out, I since learned the cause of that unlooked for
reception, and wondered no more, as I had done, at a fault which could not be
excused by a lesser cause then that which I have faithfully related.

Tyreus having made a little stop at these words, I do not marvel, ( said my
Prince, wiping some tears which that remembrance drew from his eyes) if that
poor Princess so maliciously abused, could not endure the sight of him, who
with so much probability, ought to pass in her opinion, for the basest of all
men living. Alas! how just was her displeasure, and how cunningly, and
artificially was that plot contrived! but proceed, Tyreus, for I well imagine
this is not the last of my misfortunes.

After the Battle of Arbela (pursued Tyreus) I remained as I was before, in the
service of Sysigambis, and the Princesses, and the day after that bloody
defeat, I departed with them, and passing through Arbela we arrived at Memnium
in three days, and from thence marched with Alexander directly to Babylon. But
scarce were we upon our way, when Mazeus the Governor of that Province, came
to meet him with his children, all his friends, and the principal Inhabitants
of that City; and presenting him the keys of it brought him in, and accompanied
him himself within the Walls. Bagistanes, Governor of the Citadel, and Keeper
of all the Treasure, delivered up both into his hands, and the Citizens having
hung the Streets with rich hangings, adorned the Walls of their Houses, with
their most costly Furniture, and strewed the ground all over with Flowers,
received him as a God, rather then as a Man, and submitted unto the yoke with
an Universal applause. Alexander used Mazeus Bagistanes* and all the
Inhabitants, with much gentleness, and entering into the Town at the head of his
Forces, he took possession, of what the cowardice of his new subjects gave up
to him.

In this interim, it would be a hard matter for me to represent the several
inclinations, which the Princess had toward you, after your coming into the
Tent; how much soever she strove to hate you, she could not be contented with
your death, and believing you were slain in the Battle, she was certainly like
to die with grief; but being come to Babylon, she heard Alexander speak of you,
and heard from him, that the valiant man, who had done so many wonders for her
liberty, was not killed, and that Eumenes having by his command taken him from
among the dead bodies, had caused him to be carried to Arbela, where they had
left him alive, and with hope of recovery. The nobleness of her heart, rather
then her love, made her rejoice at this news, and remembering out of how many
dangers the Gods had delivered you, she believed you might escape that as well
as the rest, and though she no longer had any design upon you, yet did she make
some prayers for your conservation, and begged of the Gods to bring you back
happily into Scythia, for a recompense of the services you had done her family,
out of your mere generosity, it was to that virtue alone she did ascribe them
all, and though Cleone put her in mind of the last you would have done her, and
that Barsina remembered her of your last words, so contrary to those of your
Letter, and to the report of Arbates, who said he had left you in Hyrcania,
ready to pass the Araxis, whereas she had seen you with Darius, fighting for
her safety to the last drop of your blood; she answered that in those words,
You had dissembled, as well as in your former professions, that being upon the
point of entering into Scythia, the anger of the King your Father (who perhaps
had been advertised of your abode in the Court of his Enemy) had without doubt
made you return to Darius, where your Valor had made you fight, with your
ordinary success. And when Barsina pressed her upon that consideration, and
said to her; But Madam; how valiant soever he be, or how strictly soever
banished from his Country, what could those passionate words he spoke to you
serve him for, and to what purpose was that despair which he so visibly
testified, if really he did not love you?

But Barsina (replied the Princess) what could the sending back of my bracelet
serve him for, and to what purpose was that Letter so sharp, and so full of
injuries and indignities, if really he had loved me? Do you think these latter
signs of his love, clearer then those former proofs of his hatred and
contempt? Or can you imagine any thing that should have obliged him to it, or
any dazeling of our eyes, that should have made us mistake his Letter, and my
Bracelet? besides ( pursued she) if you took notice, he never spoke one word to
pacify me, and after he had contented himself, with telling me, instead of a
justification, that if I had any thing to reproach him with, I might take a
convenient season, he arrogantly upbraided me with his services, and went out
of the Tent, without so much as vouchsafing to give me a salute. Do you not
judge Barsina, that in permitting me to make reproaches other where, he
confessed I had cause to do so, and that in not daigning to bend his spirit to
some word of justification, he had lost all the respect he had, or had feigned
to have heretofore unto me? Though the Princess discoursed on this manner, yet
did she not cease often to make reflection upon your last words, and upon your
last actions, and in the uncertainty they caused in her, she remained in such
supence between her first inclinations, and the resolution she had taken to
love you no more, that if you had returned at that time, you might without
question have blotted out much of those impressions; but not hearing any news
at all of you, she in the end absolutely believed, that you had utterly
forgotten her.

In the mean while Alexander expressed his love to her by an infinite number of
proofs, and during the stay he made at Babylon, she hardly passed one day
without visiting her: One time when he was in her company with Ptolomeus, and
Lysimachus, falling with them upon the discourse of the battle of Arbela, and
of the diverse encounters he had had with you, he desired the Princess very
earnestly to tell him your name and quality, and she having answered that she
knew you not; Whosoever he be ( replied the King) if his birth be equal to his
virtue and graceful fashion, he is exceeding worthy to be loved, but though
his valor was able alone to make me esteem him, the declaration he made in
coming up to me, of his love to you, made me take a more express care either
of his safety, or of the honor of his burial. It Is by this Madam ( continued
he) you may know the nature of the love I bear you, since he who by his own
confession had so great a thirst to take away my life, finds the preservation
of his own, in the care of his very rival; and since I lose the remembrance
both of mine own interest, and of mine own safety, to serve a person who loves
you to the prejudice of my happiness and of my life it self. This is to have
an affection very pure, and very free frm common considerations, and if you
consider it as you ought, you will certainly lose much of that humor, which
makes you disdain a Prince who is dying for you.

The Princess answered him very modestly: Sir, I disdain not so illustrious a
person, neither do I receive the honors you do me, any other way then as the
state of my present condition may permit me, I confess I have great
obligations to you, and by their greatness, I strive as much as I can
possible, to counterballance the evils you have done us; but Sir, what
particular marks soever you give me of your affection, which way would you have
me to receive the proofs and expressions of your love, while you persecute my
Father with so much cruelty, and that not being satisfied with the usurpation
of his dominions, you aim so eagerly at his life, and refuse him the retreat of
a little corner, which is all he has left of so many Countries he formerly
possessed? Which way would you have me receive the offers you make me of your
liberty, so long as I am deprived of mine own? and how will you have me believe
my self your Queen and your Mistress, so long as I know I am really your
prisoner, and your Captive? Alexander was ashamed at this discourse, and with
his hand hiding the blush which came into his face, Your reproaches Madam (said
he) have much reason hitherto, but the cause of them shall quickly cease with
the War; which if I have made against Darius, it has been for Empire, and for
glory, and if I be firm in the prosecution of my Victory, it is less to have
the honor of Conquering him, then to have the means of using him generously;
it is that I may my self restore that to him, which I have gloriously taken
from him, and to make you Mistress of Asia by the gift you shall receive of it
from me, rather then by succession.

When we shall see these effects ( replied the Princess) of your goodness,
and of the affection you profess to me, neither Darius will be so ungrateful
as not to acknowledge that obligation as he ought, nor I so disobedient as not
to submit unto the command he shall lay upon me, to honor you, and to esteem
your person, both according to the greatness of your actions, and to the
favors you shall do us. Though Alexander was not satisfied with this answer,
he feigned nevertheless to be so, and from that time forward he labored to
win her love, by all the actions which he thought might be pleasing to her.

After we had staid a month at Babylon, we were to remove from thence to Susa.
Abulites the Governor of that Town, did as Mazeus had done, and coming to meet
Alexander upon the bank of the River Hydaspes, delivered it up into his hands,
with infinite store of spoil, and fifty thousand talents. That Town put an end
to the Princesses voyages, and Alexander finding by Statira's countenance and
discourse, how much she was troubled to run after all his expeditions, and to
endure the incommodities of his Army, gave them leave to recide in that City,
from whence they have never stirred since that time, having left the charge of
them to Archelaus, Xenophilus, and Callicrates, with three thousand selected
Macedonians for their Guard, and for the Garrison of the Town. Before his
departure he went to take his leave of them, and talking with Statira, while
Hephestion who was in love with Parisatis, and favored by the King in his
affection was entertaining her. Madam (said he) I am forced to leave you, but
though I go from hence, my thoughts shall not be separated from you; perhaps I
shall come back one day to lay all my Victories at your feet, and I pray the
Gods to grant that I may be able to conquer your mind, as they make me able to
conquer Kingdoms, and that I may find you as much softened at my return, as I
leave you obdurate at my departure.

The Princess replied, You shall always find me most ready to acknowledge
both your worth, and the favors you do me, and I will never rule my actions
otherwise then by the will of my Parents, and the usage they shall receive from
you. If the Princess had followed her own inclinations; she would have
repulsed him with less obliging terms, but being extremely discreet she would
not exasperate a young Victorious Prince by her disdains, nor give him occasion
by her deportment, to cast off that respect which he had ever showed her. He
departed on this manner from Susa, and left them by his absence in a very great
tranquillity: it lasted for some time without interruption, but within a while
after the Queen was earnestly solicited by Madates her Nephew, and Governor of
the Province of the Vxians, who having incensed Alexander by his resistance,
and not being able to obtain pardon, implored her credit with him from a Town
where he was besieged, and reduced to extremity. Sysigambis suffered her self
to be urged a great while before she could find in her heart to make any
request to Alexander, but in the end being forced to it by the importunities of
Madates, who had stirred up that displeasure only by his fidelity, she wrote to
him in his favor, and besought him to grant her only the life of her Nephew. I
was dispatched to the King with her Letter, and I obtained not only Madates his
safety, but also his re-establishment in all his Commands, and the conservation
of the Privileges of his people, with the same immunities and advantages they
enjoyed under Darius. He sent back some of his servants with me, who brought a
Letter to the Queen, and another to the Princess, that to the Queen contained
only Civilities, and the other to the Princess was as near as I can remember
in these words.

ALEXANDER to the Princess STATIRA.
I Give Madates his life to the Queen who asked it of me, and I give the whole
Province to my Princess who asked me nothing; I would it pleased the Gods that
she were as easy to be entreated, and that she would lose all her rigor to me
as quickly as the remembrance of her has dissipated all my anger against those
that have relation to her. It is only of you fair Statira that I implore the
same mercy which these vanquished people have obtained, since it is for you
alone that I suffer much sharper pains, then those which they apprehended; use
me but as I use them, and do not dishonor your Conquest by showing cruelty in
his destruction, who has rendered himself without any resistance, I hope for
this effect from your generosity, and only from your goodness for the safety of

ALEXANDER.


The Princess Parisatis received one also from Hephestion, but I having no
interest in it, never desired to learn what it was: The Princess Statira by
the Queens advice answered Alexander to this purpose.

The Princess STATIRA to King ALEXANDER.
BOth in the safety of Madates, and in all your actions, we receive proofs of
your virtue, I shall always have a most justly deserved value of it, and for
the favor our friends have received from you, desires full of acknowledgement
and esteem; this is all that a Captive can do for her Lord, and all that Great
Alexander can expect from the unfortunate

STATIRA


She received yet some other Letters, which it is not necessary for me to
repeat, and after these Messages, O Gods! can I have the heart to tell it you?
these poor Princesses received the fatal news of the death of poor Darius, and
within a few days the body of that great Prince which Alexander sent them, to
bestow upon it the honors of Burial. Be pleased Sir, to give me leave to be
brief in this sad Story, and (as the industrious Painter) to cover that sorrow
with a Vail which I am not able to represent: It will suffice me to tell you
that all the most doleful and lamentable expressions of grief and despair,
appeared then to the full in the actions of those Princesses, and that being
overwhelmed with such a bloody surcharge of affliction, they with all hope of
consolation, lost all their remainder of courage and resolution; they lay many
days prostrate upon the ground, veiled and separated from all conversation, and
solemnized this last loss with so many tears, that we doubted their lives
would find a passage through their eyes. I will not weary you with reckoning
up the ceremonies which were observed at the funeral of that great King, they
were too deeply afflicted to affect any extraordinary pomp in so sorrowful an
action; and Darius was too deeply buried in their hearts, to suffer them to
employ their cares in the Fabric of a Monument, less sensible, and less
worthy of the ashes of that great Prince. Upon his Tomb they offered tears of
blood, locks of their hair, and made imprecations against Alexander, but scarce
had they allowed any respit to their first transports of grief; when he arrived
at Susa, whether the design of visiting them, and giving them some consolation,
had brought him with some of his friends Among those that accompanied him was
Prince Oxiartes the deceased Kings brother, who had bin found among the
prisoners, and whom the King after he had favored him as his quality and
virtue deserved, had received into the number of his friends, and settled again
in all his dignities: he would needs wait upon him in a visit to persons that
were so near and dear to him; and indeed the sight of him gave them all the
comfort which this last blow of Fortune had left them capable to receive. He
sadly mingled his tears with theirs, and for Darius his death expressed all the
resentments of a good Brother, and of a virtuous Prince.

Alexander found those poor afflicted Ladies in a chamber the windows whereof
were close shut up, and scarce could he perceive them in so gloomy and
mournful an obscurity. By the light of certain great Tapers, he saw so many
tears fall from the eyes of his Princess, that his heart was nearly touched
with compassion. That first day he did nothing but weep with them, the next he
endeavored to give them some consolation, he spent many others likewise in
that employment, and never desisted from that care till he saw their grief a
little abated, when he found they were something in better condition, and that
he judged the Princess capable of other discourse, he fell again into
professions of love, and renewed his protestations with so much ardour, that
she thereby understood the violence of his passion better then she had ever
done before. Her grief was very sensibly redoubled by it, and having suffered
him some time with patience, when she saw he persevered with obstinacy, she
could no longer kee^ ^n her indignation, nor hide the resentment she had
against him who had destroyed their house; and one day when he had urged her
extraordinarily, after having looked upon him with an eye inflamed with anger,
Sir ( said she) you are yet dyed with the blood of Darius, and by those winning
marks of your affection, you would oblige his Daughter to love you; the Queen
my Mother lately expired under the pains she suffered in her Captivity, and you
would have me look with a loving eye upon him that has sent her to her grave,
the fields are yet covered with the carcasses of a million of our Subjects, and
of the most eminent of our kindred, the ruins of our fairest Cities are yet
smoking with the fire that has devoured them, and all the Countries which
heretofore obeyed the King my Father, are at this present objects only of
terror and desolation, and you would have me give my self to him who has laid
them waste, to the murderer of my nearest friends, and to the cruel destroyer
of the Kingdom and Family of Persia. No, no Sir, it is not by such like
obligations, it is not by the blood of her friends, nor by the ruin of her
Estates, that the heart of a Princess is to be wonn, how great virtue soever
shines visibly in you, and what marks of greatness soever I acknowledge, I
cannot consider you otherwise then as the murderer of my mother, and the
murderer of my father. Give at least some truce to her whom you have deprived
of a father that was the greatest of all the Kings of the Earth, of a mother
who most tenderly loved her, and of the hope of the most flourishing Empire in
the world. Enjoy that peaceably which they and I resign to you, I neither
envy you your victories, nor your Kingdoms, envy not me therefore the repose
I beg, and suffer that all that remains of Darius, may spend the remnant of her
life in tranquillity, in some little corner of those Territories which were
formerly his. It is not till the extremity Sir, and after the loss of the hope
you had given me of Darius his safety, and re-establishment, that I make this
request to you, and this declaration. I have carried my self toward you
hitherto as a Princess, who though she had a thousand causes to hate you, had
yet a father to preserve, and I suffered an affection which the death of the
Queen my Mother, and that of so many thousands of our Subjects, ought to have
made me reject with horror, only to make use of it, to the advantage of a
Father, whom the Gods had yet been pleased to leave me. You have deprived me of
him since, both contrary to pity, which is natural to men, contrary to the
veneration due to sacred persons, and contrary to the promises you had made me
your self; you have prosecuted him to the last moment of his life, and never
gave him over, till you had seen him breath out his soul by so cruel a death,
that your self, and all that wear a Crown, ought to tremble at it with horror.
Now that I have suffered all, and lost all, I have nothing more left to
apprehend, nor nothing to desire, and I need no longer dissemble with a person,
whom I no longer fear, and from whom I no longer hope for any thing. I am not
ignorant, Sir, of the power which Victory, and Usurpation have given you over
me, but neither am I ignorant of the means to free my self from it, as soon as I
shall see you endeavor to abuse it, and the Gods who have caused me to be born
a Princess, have taught me the way to die also like a Princess.

These words struck Alexander with a very great astonishment, and she had
hardly ended them, when rising from before him, she went into another Chamber,
and would neither see him, nor hear him any more, notwithstanding all the
entreaties that were used to her, and all the commands she received from the
Queen. Alexander admiring the greatness of her courage, and not being able to
contradict the truth of her reproaches, was yet so stung with them, that he
protested before Sysigambis, he would never importune her more while he lived,
and that he would change the design he had had for her advantage, unto the
favor of some other Mistress. So without making any longer stay at Susa, he
took horse with those that had attended him, and carrying back Oxiartes with
him, he returned unto his Army, which was in the same place where he had left
it a few days before.

Before he went away, he gave order that the Queen and the Princesses, with all
the companions of their fortune, should be no longer kept as prisoners, knowing
well that after the death of Darius, and the loss of all they had, their
surest retreat was under his protection; he therefore settled great allowances
to maintain them, and left them in a perfect liberty. Hereupon many of the
Ladies whose husbands, and Fathers had continued still at their own houses, or
had been re-established in them, and their commands by Alexander, went home
again unto them, Rox^^a's Mother was one of that number, being sent for by her
husband, who having retired into his Government, had not yet felt the power of
Alexander. She departed from Susa, when she had taken her leave of the Queen
and Princesses, and took her daughter Roxana along with her. Statira who loved
her not, was not sorry for her going away, and though cunning Roxana shed some
dissembling tears at that separation, the Princess to whom her malice was well
enough known, showed but very little trouble for parting with her.

The daughters of King Occhus, fair, and virtuous Princesses, and the daughters
of Mentor, remained still at Susa. Barsina would not forsake Statira, with whom
she^ was knit in a most constant friendship, though she heard within a while
after that her Father Artabazus with the rest of his Family, had been
courteously received by Alexander, and placed in the number of his dearest, and
most considerable friends, and certainly his virtue deserved that usage, for
having preserved so inviolable a fidelity to his deceased King, that the
changes of his fortune, had never made him capable of change.

The Court of Susa would at that time have been reasonable fair, if it had not
been composed of persons, whose faces were the true pictures of sorrow and
desolation; the situation of that Town is very pleasant, and the convenience of
the Walks invited the Princesses often to divert part of their melancholy in
them. They spent a whole year there without being troubled with any new
disquiet, and hearing every day the mavelous progress of Alexanders Forces,
they learned how he had vanquished the Mardes, and conquered all Hyrcania, how
he had subdued the Draches, the Evergetes, the Hydaspians, and all the people
that inhabit near Mount Caucasus, how he had also made the Bactrians and
Zogdians submit unto him, and how all the Territories that heretofore were
under Darius, had already received the Macedonian yoke, and lived under them in
a still calm, and a very perfect obedience: The most pleasing news they heard,
was that of the punishment of Bessus, whom after he had seized upon Bactria,
Alexander had taken, by his own cowardice, and the conspiracy of his friends;
and that great King, detesting so wicked a fellow stained with the murder of
his Prince, had delivered him into Oxiartes hands, who to revenge the death of
his brother, had caused that Paricide to be put to death, by an extraordinary
kind of execution; he made four Trees to be bended down by a great number of
men, and causing the legs and the arms of that disloyal man to be fast tied
unto the branches of them, they being all let slip with violence, tore every
one its quarter, and dismembered that miserable wretch, with mavelous
suddenness. Alexander pardoned Narbazanes at the intercession of the Eunuch
Bagoas, who was in greater favor with him, then he had been with Darius.

After this news, they heard another, at which they were very much surprised,
and that was the Marriage of Alexander to Roxana, which by the hastiness of it,
filled his whole Court, and all Asia, with astonishment. At these words, my
Prince interrupting the Eunuch, What, (said he) has Alexander then married the
wicked Roxana? Yes, Sir, (answered the Eunuch) and learn but in two words how
that adventure was related to us. Alexander being come into the Province of the
Sa^ans, Roxana's father who was Governor of it, after he had delivered up all
the Towns, and the whole Country into his hands, made him a very stately
reception, and a most magnificent entertainment. His fairest ornament in the
Kings eye, was his daughter Roxana, who accompanied by thirty other Ladies,
chosen among the most beautiful of all that Province, waited upon the King all
the while he was at meat, and that Prince who had formerly seen her near the
Queens, with an indifferent eye, thought her at that time so attractive, that
he became passionately in love with her, and having by long absence, by his
great imploiments, and partly by disdain quenched the affection he had borne
Statira, he resolved to make Roxana his wife, and not deferring longer to
effect it, he declared his intention to his friends, and to the Father of that
Princess, and having the consent of all, either through fear, or through
compliance, he consummated the marriage the same day, and raised that proud,
malicious woman, to a fortune which she had never pretended to.

The Queen, and the Princesses were amazed at this news, and though they did
not at all envy her advancement, their knowledge of her humor made them
apprehend her power, and fear some part of those misfortunes which have since
befallen them. Yet Statira was exceeding glad that she was by that marriage
delivered from Alexanders importunities, and began to live with more
tranquillity, then she had done since the loss of Darius, and the belief of
your supposed infidelity: In the mean time notwithstanding all the care she had
taken to blot you out of her remembrance, yet could she not utterly do it, but
you returned into it in so many, and so different forms, that she hardly knew
you any more.

Scarce did you begin to appear unto her imagination, as that brave Oroondates
by whom she had been so perfectly loved, and from whom she had received so many
services but presently a new fancy represented you, as that faithless, and
dis-obliging Prince of Scythia, who had so cruelly forsaken her, and so
mortally injured her: She spent the most part of her life in these different
thoughts, and seemed so loosned from all other cares, and all other
divertisements, that the Queen, the Princess her sister, and her best friends,
had with the hope, given over also the endeavor of making her forget her
sadness.

It is not necessary for me, Sir, to tell you all the less important
particulars of her life; during Alexanders absence there happened nothing
remarkable at Susa, but in the end two years after his departure, we heard he
was returning thither, having subdued the Indies, and all the people that
inhabit on this side of the River Ganges. The Princesses received this news,
with their ordinary moderation, and to shorten this Discourse, within some days
after they saw him come back with a Triumphant Army, laden with the Spoils of
the greater part of the world. As Soon as he was arrived, he went to visit
them, and rendered them all the civilities and honors they could have expected
from those whom the Gods had made to be born their subjects. He entertained the
Princess with Discourses full of respect, and remembering the resolution he had
taken at his departure, and the affection he had promised to his Queen Roxana,
he continued a few days in a very great coldness, and conversed with her in
terms full of indifferency. But in the end the sight of her wakened his passion
which was but laid asleep, and the charms of that fair Princess working their
usual effects, wiped out of his mind both all his resolutions, and all the
impressions which the beauty, and subtilty of Roxana had made in it.

That new Queen had staid behind at Pasargada, by reason of a sickness that
hindered her from accompanying the King to Susa, and it was her absence that
gave him a fuller liberty to fall again into his old affection. He began his
Courtship afresh with more earnestness then before, and confirming himself by
the custom of Persia, which permits the marrying of many wives, he returned
unto the service of Statira with that design, and labored to gain her consent,
by all the proofs it was possible to give her of his love. He found her the
same he had left her when he went away, and received answers from her, that
would a thousand times have repulsed, or a thousand times made desperate
another man, whose courage had been less firm and constant. But that great
Prince being invincible in all things, persevered with so (...) a resolution,
and combated her mind with so much patience, that the Princess considering
with what submission, and respect he served her, being in a condition that gave
him all manner of authority over her, began to lose some part of her aversion,
or of the resentment she had against him; and accustomed her self to receive
him, and suffer him with more mildness, and compliance then she was wont
before; not that she could dispose her self to love him, and sway her mind
into a second passion, after having been so unhappy in the former; for having
been so ill dealt withal by the first man she had ever loved, she had conceived
a general indignation against all others; but at least she brought her self to
look upon him as the greatest Prince in the world, and as he, who of all men
living, did at that time express most affection to her. Alexander was contented
for a while with this alteration, which he thought very advantageous to him,
hoping that he might win her insensibly, and that having obliged her to some
compliance and esteem, he might at last engage her in the affection he so much
desired; but when he found that all his hopes were vain, and that she continued
still in the same terms, he thought best to beg the assistance of her friends,
and of those that had any authority over her, and having vainly employed the
credit of Cleone, Apamia, and of the Princess Parisatis her self, he addressed
himself to Queen Sysigambis, and discovered his heart, and passion unto her, in
such moving, and obliging words, that meeting with a mind already full of
esteem of him, he wrought in it also a great willingness, and desire to procure
his satisfaction in that design. When she was retired, she sent for the
Princess into her Chamber, and having commanded all to withdraw, she spoke to
her Grandchild to this purpose, I always believed (my Statira) that this
resistance you have shown against Alexanders affection, had been an effect of
that great courage, which you drew from the illustriousnesse of your birth,
from the example of your Ancestors, and from the resentment you still had for
the losses of our Family, against him that is the Author of them; and truly I
have hitherto found so much justice in those thoughts, that I have not
condemned you for them. But n^w that fortune has wholly rejected us, and
absolutely submitted us to him, who submits himself absolutely to us, me thinks
we should part with a little of our severer resolutions, for him that parts
with much of the rights he has over us, and no longer seek our own utter
ruin, in an unseemly, and unseasonable generosity. Alexander our Conqueror,
and our Master, wooes you with the submissions of a slave, to a thing whereof
all the glory, and all the advantage will be yours, and he who by all manner of
rights, may obtain all that he can desire of you, upon terms that are most
shameful, and very different from those he offers you; devests himself of all
his power, to present you the Empire of the whole world, with respects, and
humilities which are very extraordinary.

Consider it, ( Statira) and do not still persist in a rigor, which would prove
destructive to you, and which is no longer consistent with reason, no, nor with
generosity it self; if some of his actions have given us cause of tears, and of
complaints against him, let us believe that the Gods who had destined him to an
universal Monarchy, and to the ruin of our family, could not have made the
Relics of it fall into the hands of a more gentle and indulgent Conqueror;
and let us consider that the evils he has done us, and which by the will of the
Gods, he was decreed to do us, if they can be counterpoised by obligations, are
so by those he voluntarily has laid upon us. In short, Statira, fear, or
rather let us all fear, he may change his humor, and grow weary at last of
entreating her whom without punishment he may constrain: This is the counsel I
give you, both for your own interest and ours; and since that by the death of
my dear children, there remains none but my self, who has any lawful power
over you, I command you as much as I can do now, not to resist his affection
any more, so long as he shall sue for yours by means that are so glorious to
you, and by offers of a Crown which raises our house again to a much greater
splendour then that from whence it is fallen.

Having ended these words, she left the Princess alone, with liberty to digest
them: she at first thought it extreme difficult, and defended her self a long
time against the consideration of her obedience to the Queen, against the
dangers wherewith she threatened her, and against the advantages she proposed
unto her; but being some few days after urged again, with the like, or more
pressing arguments, and seeing her self persecuted by those friends she
esteemed most, she opened her eyes to the truth of those reasons they alleged,
and looking upon Alexander, whom till then she had beheld only with disdain,
she saw nothing in his person that was not truly great, and truly amiable. He
is (as you know) a very handsome Prince, in the flower of his age, and endowed
(besides that valor which has made him the greatest of all men living) with all
the qualities that can render a person most complete. The Princess considering
these things, without that animosity, which before had hidden all the luster of
them from her, and remembering that by your infidelity, she was more then
dispensed with, for the promise which she had made to you, and of which she
believed you would never exact the performance, suffered her self in the end,
(though with very much ado) to be overcome by so many appearances of reason,
and by the persuasions of all those that had any credit with her.

Oroondates could not forbear interrupting the Eunuch in this part of his
Relation with so many sobs, and such lamentable complaints, that he forced him
to break off the thread of his Discourse, and melt into tears of compassion.
His fire was kindled again by this recital, and so much of his affection as was
smothered by the belief of his Princesses infidelity, broke forth again into
such a violent flame, by the knowledge of her innocence, that he became more
ardent, and more passionate then ever; He was a great while before he could
settle again, and when Tyreus saw him a little recovered, he went on with his
story on this manner.

I will not relate unto you, Sir, the joy of Alexander, nor the sumptuous
preparations for the Wedding, but will only tell you, that within a few days
after he had her consent, he married her publicly at Susa, with all the pomp,
and all the magnificence, which the high quality of two such eminent persons
could require, and crowned her Queen of all the people that lived under his
obedience. That Wedding was not celebrated alone, for with the liking of the
King, Sysigambis, Artabasus, and of all those that had interest in them,
Hephestion married the Princess Parisatis, and shortly after Ptolomeus, and
Eumenes, Apamia and Arsinoe, Artabasus his two younger daughters, and many
other Princes, and Lords of the Court, were wedded to the Princesses, and
Ladies of Persia. The King then seeing himself peaceable possessor of that
beauty, for which he had sighed so long, desired to stifle the remembrance of
all past misfortunes in an universal joy, and restored those happy days to
Persia, which had so long been banished thence. Sysigambis took the same place
with him, she had enjoyed with Darius, and really gave him the affection, she
had born unto that dear son. Oxiartes and Artabasus, were in greater splendour
and authority then they had been under him, and all the Persians began
generally under the mildness of his Reign, to recover breath after that tedious
burden of their miseries, and hope of that quiet peace which had forsaken them.
The King having got so rich a prize of Beauties* took his revenge upon them,
for all the disquiets they had made him suffer, and made much of his fair
Queen, with so dear a tenderness, that she began to approve that out of
affection, which she had yielded to only out of reason of State; she began to
condemn that obstinacy, which had so long made her fly from her own happiness,
and by the strength of her virtue, banishing all those remembrances, that could
withdraw her from the love she owed unto the husband which the Gods had given
her, she gave her self to love him in good earnest, as her duty, and the
proofs of his affection obliged her. Then it was that to please him, she drove
away all those sorrows which were wont to appear in her troubled countenance,
and by a compliance worthy to be esteemed, she set forth her beauties with all
the ornaments, which the misfortunes of her house had caused her to lay aside.

But scarce had she begun to taste the sweetness which this change of her
condition might have brought her, when Queen Roxana came to Susa; she had not
yet fully recovered the sickness that had retained her at Pasargada, but
having got a hint of the Kings relaps into his old passion, and of his design
for a second marriage, she resolved to break it by the means she had in a
readiness; but being advertised of it too late, she arrived not at Susa till
eight days after the wedding. I can very hardly tell you the greatness of her
displeasure at it, and the words which jealousy, and the competition of a
rival so much advantaged above her, made her to bring forth. It being no longer
in her power to hinder a thing already done, she took a resolution at least to
alienate their minds as much as possible she could, and to put Statira again
into her first affection, thereby to withdraw her from what she owed to a
husband, whom she desired to possess alone. With this determination she went
to visit her the next day after her arrival, and after a salute full of
civility and dissimulation, and an hour of indifferent discourse, she prayed
her to withdraw into her Closset, for she had something to say to her in
private; The Queen did as she desired, and shutting the door, when they were
alone, Roxana broke silence in these words; It is hard for me Madam, longer to
conceal the obligation which you have to me; and the desire I have to be better
beloved of you, then I have been heretofore, forces me to declare that it is to
me alone you owe this establishment, and this greatness to which you are now
raised.

The Princess astonished at this beginning, would have replied, when Rouana
perceiving her amazement, pursued on this manner, Let not this discourse
surprise you Madam, I say nothing but truth, and I will quickly make you see it
by infallible proofs; yet to speak unfainedly, when I labored for your
happiness, I did not pretend to that I now possess; for perchance I should
not have been so good a friend as to procure that Fortune for you to my own
prejudice, which since that time the Gods have granted to my self; but having
always believed, that only the Daughter of Darius was worthy to be the wife of
Alexander the Great, I used all my endeavors to dispose her to love him, and
to drive out of her mind all those thoughts that might withdraw her from a
felicity which she rejected out of considerations that were justly to be
blamed. That was it which made me often go about to make a difference between
you and Oroondates, and which made me at last find a means to banish him out
of your heart, and to introduce an affection that would be more advantageous to
you. True it is Madam, that my knowledge how firmly you were fixed upon a person
as unhappy as your self, made me take recourse to all kind of inventions that I
might, to give you inclinations more prifitable to your self; I feigned to love
him, thereby to win him from you; and though I labored but in vain, and that
he ever preferred his fidelity to you inviolable, I fortunately drew the means
from that dissemulation, to make him utterly lose your favor, and to make him
pass in your opinion, for guilty and disloyal, though he were in effect the
most faithful, and the most innocent of all men living.

Statira interrupting her at these words, Ah! Madam (said she) what is this you
tell me? Was Oroondates innocent after the proofs he gave me of his infidelity,
which are so clear and visible, that it is not possible for him to disavow them
himself if he be yet alive? He was so ( replied Roxana coldly) and I would not
confess unto you the treachery I used, if my design had not been very good,
and the success very advantageous for you: and to make it appear to you Madam
( continued she) all the knowledge you ever had of his inconstancy, comes only
from the sending back of the Bracelet you gave him, and from a Letter which you
received by one of his servants; as for the Bracelet it never was in his hands
after the time he was at Damascus, where I made it to be stolen from him by
the same Arbates, who brought it to you, and whom I by gifts corrupted to
deceive his Master, and afterward to forsake him to serve me in the design I
had against him. Then for the Letter it was not intended to you, and if you
have it still you may observe it has no Superscription upon it, but that by
which it was directed to you, was written upon another paper, in which both the
Letter and Bracelet were folded up. Besides, there is no great probability,
those words should have been written to one for whom he had taken so much
pains; if their sense had some reference to your condition, it agreed much more
with mine, and indeed I was the person to whom it was addressed, being the
Answer of a Letter I writ to him to Sidon, by a Page that went along with the
man, who came from Abdolominus to fetch a Passport for him; the Bracelet he
sent me back was one of my own hair, and the Letter I wrote, was in the most
dis-obliging terms I could invent, to draw such an Answer from him as I
desired: by good fortune he returned me such an one as I could have wished for
my design, and to let you see I have not forgotten them, these were the very
words of both. With that she repeated first her own, and then that she had
received from Oroondates, without omitting a syllable, and then continued;
Seeing it so proper and in terms that suited so well with my intention, I put
his true Bracelet within it, and having sent for Arbates, whom I had gotten to
leave his Master at his departure from Sidon, he readily undertook the carriage
of it, and did not only fold it up in a loose cover just as it was before, but
counterfeiting Oroondates his hand exactly, directed it to you, and furnished
me also with a trick to take the perfect impression of his Seal. I have heard
since that he acquitted himself likewise in the delivering of it as well as I
could have desired, and assured you that he had left his Master in Hyrcania,
though you may have learned since that at that time he had not stirred from
Darius.

After these words she laid open unto her all the rest of her treachery, and
made it so clear and visible to that poor Queen, that there remained not the
least doubt either of her wickedness, or of your innocence. This discovery
touched her heart so deeply with grief and repentance, that all her blood
retiring thither, left her fair body pale, cold, without motion stretched upon
the bed where they were sitting. Wicked Roxana, who would have been gladder to
have seen her dead then in a swoun, going to the door called in only Cleone,
and showing her her Mistress in that case, could do no less though against her
will then assist her endeavors to bring her to life again, and having thrown
cold water in her face, they at last saw her open her eyes, and being set up by
their assistance, she looked round about her with so sorrowful an eye, that
without doubt she moved compassion even in her, who had put her into that
estate.

Roxana coming with a feigned officiousness to comfort her, Madam, (said the
Queen to her) let me alone I pray you, you by your wicked inventions may well
give me my death, but shall never by Oroondates his innocence, make me fail
against what I owe unto the King my Lord and Husband. I know how to die for the
expiation of the crime I have committed in forsaking and making desperate a
Prince to whom I was so highly obliged; but I shall also know how to defend my
self as I ought from a remembrance which I can no longer lawfully preserve. Be
satisfied, Madam you shall quickly possess Alexander alone, but he alone shall
possess my heart and all my affections, during the short remainuer of my life.

At these words Roxana going away, left that poor Princess, with no body but
Cleone, in such an excess of grief, that I want words to represent it to you.
And certainly all that a most passionat sorrow, and the remorse of such a crime
could produce in an afflicted soul, tormented hers so cruelly, that Cleone was
destitute of all hope, of her ever being able to hear that last assault of
fortune, though she had supported all her former ones with so much courage.
Then it was that your last words, and your last actions came all into her
memory, and making a just reflection upon them, she found so many marks of your
love and innocence, that she could not imagine by what charm she had been
bewitched to believe a thing so far from all appearances of truth. I cannot
tell you, Sir, what a Flood of tears she shed at this remembrance, nor what
complaints she made for a loss, which she had caused unto her self by her own
credulity. Cleone got her to bed, where she presently fell into a violent
Fever, within two hours after she was visited by the Princess her sister, now
wife to Hephestion, and by the fair Barsina. As Soon as she saw them come in,
she could not forbear sending forth a loud cry, whereat they were extremely
surprised. Ah! my dear sister; Ah! my dear Barsina, said she to them, and
stopping at those first words, left them to judge by her silence, of the
confusion of her soul. These two Princesses astonished at that reception, drew
near unto her bed, and Cleone causing all the rest that were in the Chamber to
go out, gave them liberty to ask her the cause of her affliction, in a time
when she seemed to have buried all the remainders of her discontent, and the
Queen opportunity to discover the ground of her sorrow to them; and so she did,
but with so many sighs and tears, that those two Ladies who were well
acquainted with all the particulars of her life, and who had ever been much
concerned in all the accidents of it, by that she came to the end of her
relation, appeared in a condition little different from hers, and accompanied
her with a deluge of tears, which her present grief and the remembrance of your
misfortune, made to gush abundantly out of their fair eyes. Well now, (pursued
the poor Queen, when she had told them the treachery of Roxana) to what do you
condemn this credulous, or rather this faithless, this ungrateful Woman? and by
what expiation do you believe she may repair a fault of the nature of hers? Who
can restore her that dear Oroondates, which she has lost by her inconstancy? Or
rather though she should recover him, who can give her the power to love him
without a crime, whom she hated without a cause, and who had loved her without
any reservation? Poor Prince, how well thy fidelity has been requited! And what
an happy conclusion of so brave a passion as thine, was this last usage of this
unthankful woman, which made thee fly from her, and from a life that was much
less dear to thee then she! How fortunatly have thou employed those years,
which thou have spent in serving, and loving her more then thy self! And how
justly the loss of thy youth, of thy Estates, of thy Kindred, of thy repose,
of thy blood, and peradventure of thy life has been recompensed!

She made many such like complaints, nor could the consolation of those dear
friends diminish any thing of her affliction, and indeed they appeared so
deeply touched with it themselves, that they were but little able to comfort
her, by their Discourse. After she had a long time accused her self of her
fault, she gave way to another thought, and justifying her self to you as if
you had been there; But dear Oroondates (continued she, if at least my present
condition may permit me without offense, to speak to you still by that name)
how guilty soever I am, yet am I not without some excuse; and as you were most
sharply stung by your knowledge of my change, so was it very hard for me to be
insensible of so many appearances of yours; and though I loved you, I was a
vveak, simple woman, and too innocent to dive into a treachery, so maliciously
contrived, and so cunningly managed; I have lost you, but believe rather that I
have lost my self, and if I have caused some discontent to you, I have made my
self a hell of torments, for the remainder of my miserable life. I have given
my self unto another, thinking that you no longer desired to have me; but
though the present I have made to him of an unhappy creature, give him the
entire possession both of my body and of my mind, he shall not enjoy them
long, and my duty which will not suffer me to give Oroondates that which ought
only to belong to Alexander, permits me to give that unto my grave, which it
forbids me to take from Alexander, and which my inclination forbids me to
refuse Oroondates.

After these she spoke many other such like words, and would not have put an
end to her lamentations, if the King advertised of her being ill, had not
entered into her Chamber. He came close to her bedside, and expressing his
affliction by the disquietness into which that sudden alteration of her health
had put him, he made her presently repent all the kind motions she had had to
you, and fortified her strongly in the resolution she had taken to keep her
affections entire for so worthy a husband, of whom she was so perfectly beloved.

She concealed the cause of her indisposition from him, as well as possibly
she could, and the King having kissed her very ardently; Madam, ( said he) if I
could deserv to have my life, and my health dear to you, I would conjure you to
preserve both of them in your own, since it is impossible, you should feel any
sickness, but that I shall be at least as sensible of it as your self.

The honor you do me, Sir, (replied the Queen) in cherishing my life, shall
make me endeavor to preserve it for you, and your consideration, shall always
make it dearer to me then mine own. The King answered her with those kindnesses
that were permitted him, but they were such as had little conformity with the
humor in which the Princess was at that time, and he would perchance have
staid a great while with her, if her sister Parisatis, who easily judged in
what a constraint she was, in the presence of a great many who had
accompanied him, had not desired her husband Hephestion to get him away. That
Favorit whose power with the King is absolute, put him in mind how
incommodious so long a visit might be unto the Queen; which consideration
instantly moved him to retire. As Soon as ever he was gone, Poor Oroondates,
(cried the Queen) I now am able to do nothing for thee, content thy self with
the tears I give thee, and contest no longer for my heart, against the lawful
possessor of it; the Gods who will not suffer me to do any thing but vveep
for thee, have given me entirely to him, and if thou have loved me perfectly,
thou ought never to wish that I for thy sake should abate any of that virtue
that obliged thee to love me.

She held her peace, because Sysigambis came in, to whom, out of respect, she
said nothing at that time of what had happened to her, and having passed the
rest of the day in the company of those dear friends, she spent the night in
disquiets and conflicts which it is impossible for me to represent. Love and
duty, fought a long time in her breast, but in the end duty got the mastery,
and made her resolve rather to suffer death, then any blemish in so pure, and
so unspotted a life. Nevertheless she thought she was obliged to justify her
self some way to you, and since your innocence was known to her, she purposed
likewise to give you assurance of hers, and to take away that impression you
might have of an infidelity, which were not pardonable after so great
obligations as hers to you. Within a while after the news came to Susa, of
Zopirio's defeat, and it was assured at Court that the Prince of Scythia had
killed him with his own hand, and that he in person commanded the Army of the
King his Father. Alexander was troubled for the loss of Zopirio, and of his
Army, and thereupon gave order that his whole Court should wear mourning for
three days; but he did not prepare himself to take revenge, though there was a
strong rumor spread abroad, that he would come in person into this Country; for
indeed Zopirio had not undertaken that War by his Orders, but unknown to him,
and out of an unjust desire to make himself great.

The Queen was infinitely pleased to hear news both of your life, and of the
place where you were, and when she had long consulted with Cleone what means
she should use to give you some satisfaction, and whom she should employ in
the business, at last they cast their eyes upon me, in whom they had found
fidelity enough to be trusted with a matter of that importance; and as soon as
the Queen was able to leave her bed, where her indisposition kept her for some
days she sent for me into her Closet, whither she admitted no body but Cleone,
and after having looked awhile upon me; Tyreus, (said she) I have known nothing
by you hitherto, that should give me occasion to doubt of your fidelity, but
the service I desire from you now, is of such a nature, that it forces me to
exact new Oaths from you of it, and Protestations, that you will not deceive me
in a business which I will trust to none but you alone.

At these words, I cast my self at her feet, and kissing the hem of her robe;
Madam, (said I) I protest unto your Majesty, by all the duty I owe to great
Orosmades, by the memory of King Darius my Sovereign Lord, and by the head of
Alexander the Great, that to my grave, I will preserve the fidelity I have ever
had unto your Family, and that I will lay down my life with joy, if your
Majesty can draw any service, or advantage from the loss of it.

I expected no less from you, ( replied the Queen) and that is it that obliges
me to make choice of you among all my servants, to give you a Commission, not
of so much danger, as importance. Cleone will instruct you fully in it, and
when you have learned from her, what I have given her charge to tell you, you
shall know the rest from my own mouth.

Having said so, she returned into her Chamber, and left me with Cleone, who
informed me at large of all the passages I have now related to you, and added
many particulars of the Kings Loves, which the fear of being tedious, has made
me forbear to repeat; and when she had made an end of instructing me, That
which the Queen desires of you, (continued she) is, that you should go and
find out the Prince, and deliver him a Letter, which she writes to him for her
justification, and for the peace of her own conscience. To this end, you must
go into that part of Scythia, where he has defeated Zopirio; and if it please
the Gods you meet him, you must make him the recital of these things I have
told you, and represent unto him the Queens innocence, in the same manner you
have heard it.

When she had thus taught me my lesson, she went unto the Queen, who coming
back with her, gave me the Letter, which she had written to you, and charged me
to be secret, and diligent in my Voyage, she furnished me with Gold and
Jewels, to supply those necessities that might befall me, and dismissed me
with a command to set forward as soon as I could possibly.

I departed from Susa the next morning, and having informed my self of the
way, I thought I should get more easily into this part of Scythia, where we
are, through Thracia, and by the Bosphorus, then by Hyrcania, Bactria, and the
Mount Imaus; and with this design, being after a reasonable long Journey
arrived at Bizantium, I embarked in a Vessel that was bound for this Country
and going to set Sail, there being already a free commerce among those people,
since the time that your subjects had put themselves under the dominion of the
Macedonians. Being Landed at the nearest Port unto this place, I came straight
unto this Town, and the next day after my arrival, you began to lay siege unto
it; this morning having received new assurances that you commanded the Army in
person, I asked leave of the Governor to come forth, which was easily granted
me, and by that means I obtained the happiness to see you once again, and to
acquit my self of the Commission that had been given me.

The End of the Fifth Book.
CASSANDRA. BOOK VI.
THE Eunuch ended his Relation on this manner, and my Prince who had hearkened
to all the latter part of it in a mortal agony, and had accompanied every word
with a stream of tears, having heard the conclusion, gave himself so over to
his lamentations, that it was not possible for him to settle himself at all, in
above an hour. In the beginning he had prepared himself for the worst events
he could apprehend, and though in Statira's marriage he had learnt nothing but
what he had ever expected, the assurance he received of his Princesses
innocence and repentance, reviving all those flames, which his despite, and an
absence of three years had almost extinguished, plunged him into his first
passion with more violence then ever, and the knowledge of her engagement and
of her virtue, forbade him ever to hope for any relief from her, who was no
longer in a condition to requite, nor perhaps to suffer his affection.

In these deadly thoughts, he received her Letter which the Eunuch presented
him, and having opened it trembling, he knew the Writing of that fair hand,
which he had kissed with so much ardor* and which he despaired ever to kiss
again while he lived; he joined his lips to those lovely Characters, and
bedewed them with so many tears, that he was almost like to have washed them
out, this fear made him take them away, and casting his eyes upon them, after
having begun with a deep sigh, he read these words. Queen STATIRA To Prince
OROONDATES.
I Know not generous Prince* how you will look upon the Letter of this guilty,
or rather of this unfortunat creature that writes to you. If you turn away your
eyes through aversion or resentment, cast them yet upon it, through compassion
and generosity; and refuse not to see these sorrowful, and these last marks of
my grief, and of my repentance: They are all that I now can give you, nay, I
make my self faulty in still conserving a remembrance, which I can no longer
conserve without a crime, and which I lost when I could not lose it without
ingratitude. But how great soever that severity of virtue is, which ties my
affection to a Husband whom I love, as I ought to love him; I think my self
obliged to satisfy a person, by some protestations of my innocence, to whom
besides my life, my honor, and my liberty, I owe much more. You will learn
part of it from the mouth of Tyreus, and if you yet consider with some spark of
goodness, the weakness of a woman maliciously abused, and the force of those
appearances that deceived me, you will have more pity for my misfortune, then
indignation for my change; and judging of my heart by the greatness of your
own, you will yet do me the favor to believe, that all the Empires of the
Earth, could never have been able to work any thing upon me, if I had thought I
had still had any part in you. Give credit to this truth out of compassion, and
cease to hate her, who loved you more then her self, while she could, and
believed she might, and who now that she can no longer, loves you still more
then she ought; this remainder of an affection which was heretofore most just,
continues with me to torment me for my crime; but if I cannot blot it out of my
soul, I will keep it there only for my punishment, and convert it to an use
which shall not injure that I owe unto the husband whom the gods have given me,
I shall always remember you, as him, to whom of all men living, my affections
were most lawfully due, and from whom the Gods have taken them, only because
they knew me unworthy of his: I will consider you, as the protecting Genius of
our Family; I will make prayers for your prosperity, and will beg of Heaven
to recompense what you have done for us. This is all I am able to render you,
for so many great obligations, and it is all you could now hope for from this
unhappy creature, if you should yet afford any moment of your life to the
remembrance of the unfortunate

STATIRA.




I know not how to express into what a miserable condition this Letter put my
poor sad Prince, he let it fall upon his bed with a great cry, and began to
sigh with so much violence, that I feared his sorrow would instantly have
deprived him of his life; he was a long time before he was able to speak one
word that could be understood, then of a sudden crying out like a man beside
himself; Ah! Statira, (said he) how unseasonably your repentance comes! And how
much too late are you undeceived! Why do you acknowledge me for innocent, when
you will no longer acknowledge me for yours? And why do you cease to hate me,
now you cannot love me without a crime, since you ceased to love me, when
without a crime you could not hate me? Why do you kindle those flames again,
which you will never be able to extinguish while you live? And why do you force
me to love you still, since out of duty, you force your self to love me no more?

He remained a while in this thought, then falling presently into another; No,
no, Statira, (pursued he) you shall not get free at so cheap a rate, I am not
so easily to be shaken off, nor can such losses as I have suffered, be so
lightly repaired; your prayers for my prosperity cannot content me, and it is in
vain you believe to satisfy me by making requests unto the Gods for my
happiness, and for my repose; you who are the only creature that has destroyed
my happiness and my repose, and who have cast me headlong from that high degree
of felicity, to which I was risen by my services, into that depth of misery, in
which you would have me spend all the remnant of my days; ask therefore of
those Gods to whom you recommend me, that they would annihilate what is past,
that they would revoke your marriage, and that they would restore you again to
the condition in which you were when you forsook me; behold the means to
satisfy me, but since you hope not for it, no, nor so much as desire it, and
that the affection you bear your husband, permits you not to make wishes in my
favor, and to his disadvantage, resolve Statira, to suffer that punishment, you
propose unto your self, not only a remembrance of Oroondates, not a faint
remainder of the love you gave him heretofore, but Oroondates himself from whom
you have not yet escaped, you shall yet see him again at your feet, you shall
yet hear his reproaches, and perchance he yet may have the happiness, to breath
out a life in your presence, which cannot possibly be but yours.

After these and some other passionate Discourses full of love and despair, he
commanded us to retire, and while I carried the Eunuch to take his rest, and
that I my self endeavored to get as much as my sense of his misfortune would
suffer me, he languish'd out the night in disquiets a great deal more
insupportable then death it self. It was no sooner day but he sent to call us,
and as soon as we were alone by his bedside, Araxes, (said he to me) we must
abroad again, and since the Heavens have made thee unhappy in my friendship to
thee, thou must keep my misery company unto the end; I was infinitely troubled
to hear this resolution, but being steadfast in my design of running his fortune
throughout, and never to leave his service while I had one moment of life, Sir,
(replied I) I never will forsake you, and into what Corner of the world soever
you go, Araxes will not part from you, nor will ever die but at your feet.

My Prince having tenderly embraced me, at that answer; Dear friend, ( said
he) the Gods will give thee the recompense thy fidelity deserves, and if by
their mercy there happen any change in my condition, thou shall have such a
share in my fortune, that thou shall not perhaps bewail thy youth, which thou
losest in company of this miserable man; since therefore thou still perseverest
in thy first affection, I give the same Order for my departure, that I gave for
my first Voyage into Persia, I will have but the same Equipage, and the same
persons that went with us, but we shall need a Barque to pass over to
Byzantium, that is the way I mean to take my Journey, endeavor therefore to
procure me one, and to set our businesses in such a forwardness, that we may
depart within two days.

When I had received this command, I went instantly from him, and was no sooner
out of his presence, but I remembered, that in the Army we had a man of
Miletopolis, nearly obliged unto my Prince, who might easily accommodate us
with a Bark, and carry us himself unto Byzantium, where he had a great deal of
acquaintance; I had made a particular friendship with him, having known him to
be a very honest man, and going immediately to seek him, I disposed him to all I
desired; and sent him away presently to the Port of Hypoleon, to set the Vessel
in a readiness that was to carry us: I spoke not a word concerning my Master,
but promised that I would be with him within three days.

My Prince was overjoyed at this happy success, and by good fortune the Town we
besieged, was surrendered that very day, and left almost no more matter to
continue the War in that Province. Oroondates being resolved to depart the
next day at night, settled some necessary Orders in the Army, and provided
himself of what he thought most useful for his Journey; two hours before he
went away, he wrote this Letter to Arsacomes, commanding one of his Officers
to give it him after his departure.

Prince OROONDATES to ARSACOMES.
MY cruel destiny forces me away from you, without having the time or means to
bid you farewell; you will command the Army which I leave you, and which I could
not commit into better hands then yours; enquire not after the cause of my
departure, nor the place of my abode, and let the King my Father know, I
forsook not the Army he had given me, while this Country had any need of my
presence, and he of the service of

OROONDATES.


We took horse two hours within night, and being followed only by Tyreus,
Toxaris, and Loncates, we traveled the way toward Hypoleon, which is a very
noted Haven upon the Euxin Sea, and riding by Moonlight, we arrived there by
break of day. We found our Barque in the best readiness we could have wished,
and the wind very right for our design: My Prince commended the diligence of
him I had employed, and promising him great recompenses, went a Shipboard,
then making the Mariners hoist Sail, we lanch'd out straight toward Byzantium.

Now, Sir, make a little reflection upon my Masters fortunes, call to mind the
first actions of his life, remember the beginnings of his love, the mavelous
continuation of it, and think upon the end which the Gods seemed to have put
unto it; and from this consideration, draw a knowledge of the persecutions of
Heaven, and of the inconstancy of Fortune: He in the course of his affection,
had suffered all that the courage of man was capable to endure, and when
Fortune after having taken all from him, made show to promise him some shadow
of quiet, yet but a false one, and bought with the loss of his true quiet, and
of all his hopes, that unstable Goddess envied him, even that appearance of
repose which she had granted but by force, and took that also from him, which
he enjoyed against her will.

Behold my poor Master, yet once again in the wide world; behold him more
passionate then ever, and behold him burning and flaming, even in the midst of
the waves that carried him; his Barque though it cut them with a wonderful
swiftness, seemed too slow by half to his desires, and though the wind carried
us with a stiff and favorable gale directly toward Byzantium, yet did it not
swel our Sails sufficiently to satisfy the eagerness of his love, nor blow
impetuously enough to second the impatiency that transported him; he discovered
it by a thousand actions contrary to his former moderation, and by a thousand
sayings which retained but little of the solidity of his wonted Discourse:
sometimes he seemed to us reasonably cheerful, and some glimpse of hope which
shined yet into his soul through the midst of so many obstacles, put him for a
few moments into something a more pleasing humor: he then revolved the
passages of his Princesses Letter in his thoughts, and calling to mind those
words wherein she expressed the remainder of her affection most to the life, he
laid new foundations for his happiness upon them, and found matter to raise
his dejected hopes which had been buried so many years.

Who forbids me to hope ( said he) but that this Princess may again take up
her affection, with the knowledge of my love, and of mine innocence? but what
should make me doubt it, since she assures me of it her self? does she not
confess that she loves me still, and that she will conserve her affection for
a punishment of her crime? I am certain then she loves me, and by consequence I
am most assured that I am happy; and that I am contented, since it is upon her
love alone that I have ever grounded my happiness and my contentment; be
satisfied therefore Oroondates, since thy Princess loves thee, and that
moreover she would see thee, for to what other end did she cause thee to be
sought out with so much care, and so much hazard of her reputation and
quietness; and to what intent should she yet write so passionate a Letter to
thee, if she did not desire to draw thee to her once again? She loves thee
then, and she would see thee, comfort thy self therefore, and obey her, since
by that consolation and obedience, thou recoverest all that thou have lost, and
go to live in a happier condition then thou could hope for.

This thought would keep him for some time reasonable well pleased, but then of
a sudden the marriage of his Princess coming again into his memory, together
with the consideration of her virtue, and of what she owed, and would
undoubtedly pay to such a husband as Alexander, she whom he knew to be of an
humor to hold her self to the severity of her duty, though to a man much
less considerable then so great, and so gallant a person, thinking also upon
the protestation which she made to him of it her self, and the assurances
wherewith the Eunuch had confirmed it, all his hopes vanished, and he became
more sad, and melancholy then before. It Is true (said he) Statira loves me, but
she loves me for her punishment, and not for my satisfaction; this is but a new
matter of grief for me; if I were still hated by her, I should only suffer my
own torment, but now seeing her languish in an affection, which by her own
confession, must only serve to make her unfortunate, I shall be unhappy both
through her miseries, and through mine own; her Letter is only a mark of her
acknowledgement, and a duty she renders to him whom she had used so ill, and
by whom she had been so faithfully served; she had been very cruel if so many
expressions of my love, and the knowledge she has lately had of mine innocence,
had not extorted from her at least as obliging words as those of her Letter; it
is a great deal less then she owes me after all that I have done for her, and
though she had asked council of Alexander himself, he would not have taken it
ill that she should give me this slight satisfaction, so long as she gives her
self entirely to him.

This last thought cast him down again so extremely, that as often as it came
into his mind* he would lie immovable, and stretched out upon the deck with
very little appearance of life in him; then of a sudden coming out of a deep
study in which that remembrance had buried him, O Gods ( cried he) perchance
at this very moment while Oroondates weeps and sighs, Alexander is taking
kisses from the inviting lips of my dear Princess, and perhaps that face which
I have so much adored, is at this instant cemented to his, who has been the
murderer of her Father and Mother, and the destroyer of her whole Family; that
fair body, that excellent mind, that admired All is now his own; that glorious,
that happy rival peaceably possesses both, and disdaining what I after so many
services got only now and then by stealth, he with authority reaps those
favors, which my respect scarce ever suffered me so much as to have a thought
of. In this and such like entertainments he spent whole days and nights, and
having had no other employment, we entered the Haven of Byzantium, with a very
favorable wind, which had continued during all our passage thither.

My Prince would not go into Byzantium till it was night, and the next day
keeping within doors, in a by-lodging, which he that provided us our ship, had
taken for him, he made Tyreus and Toxaris, buy Persian habits, with such other
things as were most necessary for our Voyage, and the morning after, we took
horse to travel by land directly to Susa. The way was long, and all the while
we were going it, my Prince passed his time only in such thoughts as those that
had taken him up while he was at sea; and for the most part was in so profound
a muse, that to please him, we let him ride whole days without interruption:
after we had spent many in our Journey, and had encounters which I will omit
because they were not of any moment, we at last discovered the great City of
Susa. At sight of it my Master could not retain his sighs, nor forbear to utter
such words* as though they were addressed to things insensible, did not the
less feelingly express the persecution he suffered by his thoughts.

Alexander and those of his Court had never had but one hour to take notice of
his face, and since that time, his three years absence, and the greatness of
his sorrows, had made such an alteration in it, that 'twould have been almost
impossible for persons by whom he was so little known, to observe any features
that could have discovered him; yet would he not put himself in hazard, but as
little as possible he could* and judging what caution was necessary for the
importance of what he undertook, he staid till day had given place unto the
night, and entering the Town when it was dark, he took a lodging by Tyreus his
direction, in one of the least noted, and the least frequented places, and very
near the Gates of the City. There he commanded me again to take the personage
of his Master, before company, and desired Tyreus to keep the house for a few
days, and not show he was returned, that in the interim he might watch an
opportunity to discover himself unto his Princess, as he intended.

He was tormented all the night by the most cruel thoughts, that a soul can be
afflicted with, and considering Alexanders felicity, and the difference of
their present conditions, though they were both shut up within the compass of
the same Walls: Is it possible (said he) that that Princess of whom I was
heretofore so much beloved, should now have buried all the remembrance of poor
Oroondates, in the embraces of that happy husband, and that she should not at
least interrupt his endearments, by some sigh in favor of him? But is it
possible poor-spirited Oroondates, that while he hugs her in his arms, thou
should lie still with thine acrosse, and let that unjust Usurper possess
her quietly, who ought only to be thine, and whom thou had bought with so
much blood, and so many sufferings? No, no, Oroondates, waken thy self, to make
him sleep eternally, he must not live, that injurious ravisher of thy
happiness, that tormentor of thy soul, and that irreconcilable enemy of thy
repose: He Is not immortal whatever Divinity he has vainly affected, and the
blood thou have drawn already from his veins, tells thee at least he is not
invulnerable: he must die therefore, and thou by his death must recover her,
who cannot be thine while he has life, and who while the Gods leave thee any,
cannot, nor ought not to be his. Scarce had he taken this resolution, but the
remembrance of Alexanders verture altered it: That glorious Enemy had twice
given him a life, which he might lawfully have deprived him of, and which the
conservation of his own obliged him to destroy: Those two generous actions had
so wonn his heart, that it was no longer able to hate him, nor to have any
other inclinations but those of love and esteem. If my Interest (said he)
obliges me to take away his life, was he less interessed in the loss of mine,
by his knowledge that I had designs against his, and by the proofs he had
already that I was not an Enemy to be despised? But if I were insensible of the
motives of virtue and acknowledgement, have I forgot what I owe unto my
Princess? He is her husband, and moreover she loves him: I could not attempt
any thing against his life, without offending hers, nor without making her an
accomplice of the death of a husband, who is most worthy of her and of her
affection; let us therefore preserve our respects to him for ever, let us
reverence what she loves, and what she ought to love; and if our life have
already reached the term the Gods had appointed, let us not endeavor to
prolong it by the loss of the most glorious one that ever was.

He argued thus with himself in Alexanders defense, and continued a long while
in these virtuous motions, but the violence of his love beginning again to
torment him, drove away part of those considerations, and the day which began
to appear while he was in these debates, found him still unresolved what he
should do; he seemed nevertheless to incline a little to revenge, and his
passion not leaving him the free use of reason, thrust him whether he would or
no upon thoughts, which it is most difficult for humane nature totally to avoid.

Not long after he was up, Loncates who had been walking abroad near the
Palace, brought him home word, that Queen Statira was to take the air after
dinner, along the river side, which as you know, runs close by that Town. This
news made a sudden alteration at his heart, and after he had mused a long
while in an uncertainty, he commanded three horses to be made ready, and having
dined temperately, he got on horseback, taking Toxaris and me to wait upon him;
Our lodging was near one of the City Gates, so that without being seen of many,
we got out into the fields; and taking the way that led us toward the River, we
arrived in the place whither the Queen was to come, but my Masters impatiency
having made him come abroad too soon, we staid a long while looking for her
coming, and my Prince alighting under certain trees, and giving our horses to
Toxaris, made me lie down by him upon the grass, and during the time we were in
this expectation, he broke forth into the most passionate expressions, that
human thoughts are able to imagine.

In the end we saw the Chariots appear, and my Prince standing up, waited with
an inward shivering for the approach of her he adored: we were at a little
distance from the place where the Chariots passed, but near enough to to
discern Statira, and to observe that the King was with her. This sight made my
Master tremble every joint, and put him again in those disturbing conflicts
that had kept him all night awake, he changed color many times, and seeing him
in such a case as I had never seen him in till then, I apprehended the effects
of some sudden and violent resolution. After he had continued a good while in
these trances, he began to be a little settled, when the Chariots made a stand
right against the place where we were; Meleager mounted upon a wonderful
handsome horse, was talking with the King who sat on one side of the Chariot:
After some discourse which we could not hear, Meleager alighted, and the King
leaping out of the Chariot, went to that gallant horse to get upon him; the
horse was extreme fiery and unruly, and though two or three men held him, the
King had very much ado to throw himself into the Saddle; but as soon as he made
him feel the spur, he fell a plunging and running so furiously, that the Kings
strength and skill, were both useless to govern him, he no longer obeyed the
hand nor heel, and having made 100 bounds, without giving the King leisure to
cast himself off, nor those that were round about to stop him, he took a full
carrier toward the River, the bank whereof was something high, and flung
himself headlong into the Current. But Sir, you perhaps were present at this
accident, and without question you know part of those things that passed there.
Lysimachus presently making answer, I was at that time (said he) in a condition
which would not suffer me to be there; and though I have heard part of it, I
beseech you interrupt not your discourse, since I am hitherto ignorant, what
share your Prince may have in that business. The horse (continued Araxes)
having thus precipitated himself into that deep and rapid stream, went to the
bottom with his burden, and within a while came up again without it. This
mischance did infinitely surprise the whole company, and with affrighted cries
looking what was become of the King, they saw him a little lower, struggling
with the waves, which sometimes tossing him up, and sometimes swallowing him
again, made most of those that were present despair of his safety; you know he
could never swim, and that he was wont often to complain of the carelessnesse
of those that had had the government of him, because they had not made him to
be taught in his youth; many leapt into the river to save him, but it was so
impetuous, and the banks of it so steep, that 'twas impossible for them to help
him, and two or three being drowned, took off the edg of all them that had yet
any desire to hazard their own life for that of their Prince. My Master and I
were also run to the river side, a little below the rest of the company, and
being likewise witnesses of the Kings manifest danger, we were assaulted with
very different thoughts: I am ashamed Sir to confess my own unworthiness;
though the peril in which I saw this great Prince, struck me with some trouble
and compassion as well as the rest, yet my Masters interest in the loss of a
life, which was incompatible with his* gave me some touch of joy, and made me
hope this accident would put an end to his misfortunes: but while I was
rejoicing at his happiness, I saw him plunge himself into the water, with a
mavelous suddenness, dividing the waves with so much force, that in a moment
he swam unto the King, who deprived of sense, made no longer any resistance
against the violence of the stream that carried him away: My Prince caught him
by the hair, and swimming with one hand, drew him to the shore, with a
wonderful strength, and with such difficulty that any other man but he, would
infallibly have perished in the attempt: I had thrown my self into the river
after him, and knowing his generous intention, seconded him as well as possibly
I could. As Soon as we were gotten to the bank, my Master lifting up the King by
the feet, made him cast up a great deal of the water he had swallowed, and
recover his senses, but with so little understanding, that he could not discern
any thing that was done in his presence: Not being satisfied with this action,
he took him in his arms, and forgetting the caution he formerly had of
discovering himself, he carried him through the company to the Queen his wife,
who more dead then alive at this accident, did by her tears express her true
affection to her husband.

My Prince laying him gently down before her, Madam, (said he) receive yet one
service more from him, of whom you no longer expected any, and by the nature of
this, acknowledge what you owed to all those others I have done you. The
Princess was so troubled at the first accident, that we could not judge by her
countenance, whither the amazement we observed in it, proceeded from her
knowledge of my Master, or from her former fright, neither indeed had we the
leisure to learn, for rising up instantly, he went with all possible have
through the company that stood round about, and running to our horses, he
vaulted readily upon his, and inviting me by his example to do the like, we
clapped spurs to them, and riding away full speed, lost sight of the company in a
moment.

Lysimachus stopped Araxes in this part of his story, crying out, Good Gods! is
it possible that our Age should have produced so virtuous a person? And was it
your Prince then, to whom Alexander was indebted for his life? Was he the man
who vanished from every bodies eyes like lightning, he who was thought to have
been miraculously sent from heaven for his preservation, and he to whom the
King, and the whole Court afterward offered sacrifices as to a God? Did
Oroondates, to whom the Kings death was of so great consequence, and so
necessary, and he who but a moment before had had such excusable designs
against his life, hazard his own so visibly for its conservation? Certainly
this generosity has no example, and of all the souls that ever were created,
none but only his could be capable of it. While Perdiccas, Meleager, Leonatus,
and many others who were present, suffered him to perish without relief, he
received his life from him, to whom it gave a death, and whose own could not be
saved but by his destruction. Lysimachus holding his peace after these words,
Araxes took up the thread of his Discourse again, and thus went on with it.

We galloped away so swiftly, that in less then half an hour, we were gotten
above threescore Furlongs from Alexander, and those that accompanied him. Yet
could we not ride without much trouble, the coldness of the water in a season
that was not very hot, had half benumbed us, and our Clothes yet full of it,
were extraordinary heavy: True it is, that they disburthen'd themselves of a
good part of it by the way, and we marked our track sufficiently, to discover
whither we were gone, if any body had had a mind to follow us, but they were
all so concerned in the Kings condition, that I believe their care of him took
them up wholly for the present; we struck out of the way, and rode cross the
Fields, and within an hour discovering certain Cottages, far from the great
Rode, my Prince thought good we should go thither to dry our selves, and pass
the rest of the day. When we had alighted, the Master of the house at my
entreaty, made us a great fire, and fitting a couple of such beds as his
poverty allowed him, we went into them, leaving the care of our horses and of
drying our clothes unto Toxaris. While we staid there, I could not retain my
thoughts, nor forbear extolling my Princes generosity to his face, expressing
how much I had been troubled, to see him oppose that happiness himself, which
the Gods had visibly sent him. But his modesty first cut off the course of
those praises I was running on withal, and then the greatness of his courage
quite stopped my mouth.

Araxes, ( said he to me) let us not pretend by base ways, to that which is not
due to such as are capable of base inclinations; if the Gods will not by other
means restore what they have taken from me, let us resolve rather to bear the
loss then recover it with so much shame, and meanness of spirit: Alexander has
no fortune, but what he has very well deserved, and if the Gods who have
destined to him the Empire of the whole Earth, have not exempted from it what I
pretended to, let us not oppose their wills, or at least let us oppose them with
more glory, and by the same ways, which gained him that we would dispute for.

But Sir, (replied I) though you should not have observed in what manner Heaven
labored so visibly to your advantage, what shame had you received by suffering
what Meleager, Perdiccas, and diverse others suffered without casting themselves
into the danger, whereinto you precipitated your self; and what cause would
Alexander have had to complain, if his mortal enemy had not given him that
succor, which he found not among his chiefest friends?

I should have been extremely ashamed, ( answered Or^ondates) if by my fault, I
had let perish the greatest of all men living, by whom I am injured only
through my own misfortune, and by whom I have been obliged only through his
generosity; besides, one could not without infamy have avoided the danger there
was in helping him, nor without inhumanity could I have refused my Princesses
tears the safety of a husband whom she loves, and whom she ought to love.
Though Alexander had had no cause to complain of me, I should have had a great
deal to complain of my self, and being my own satisfaction is dearer to me then
his, the reproach I might have us'^ unto my self (for having failed to do a
noble action, either through fear of danger, or consideration of interest)
would have been much more sensible to me, then that I could have received from
him, of whom I neither pretend to thanks, nor recompenses.

With this and other such Discourse, we spent the time till our Clothes were
dry, and when the night was near, we got our selves ready, and taking horse
again not long after Sunset, we made our Host bring us into the great
Highway, and as it grew late rode straight to Susa, where we arrived within
little more then an hour. The Gates of the Town did not use to be shut, and in
spite of the darkness we found our lodging where we alighted. As Soon as my
Prince was in his Chamber, the impatience of seeing his Princess, set him upon
the rack more then ever, and being resolved to execute what he had forethought,
he called Tyreus to make use of him in that occasion. His so long abode with
Darius had gotten him a great number of friends, who at that time held the same
place near Alexander, which they had enjoyed during the life of the deceased
King; He was most assured of Prince Oxiartes his friendship, that of Artabasus
was not unknown to him, neither did he doubt of Mazeus, Oxidates, Bagoas, and
many others, to whom he believed he might with safety commit his person, and
the secrecy of his affairs. Among the Ladies also he knew diverse, to whom he
would have made no difficulty to trust himself: the Princess Parisatis, and
even Queen Sysigambis, had expressed too much affection to leave him any
suspicion of their good wills. Apamia and Arsinoe then wives to Ptolomeus and
Eumenes, the daughters of King Occhus, and the daughters of Mentor, had
appeared too affectionate to his interests, to make him fear any alteration in
them. But amongst all these, he thought the fair and virtuous Barsina was she
in whom he might have the greatest confidence, and from whom he might hope for
the best assistance, and when he called to mind the modest friendship, whereof
she had given him so many proofs, and the report Tyreus had made him of her
perseverance in taking his part in the deepest of his disgrace, he judged he
ought not to discover himself to any other, and that he ought to give over the
care of the remainder of his life to her alone.

Having taken this resolution, he would not defer the executing of it, and for
that purpose going out of our lodging, accompanied only by Tyreus, and my self,
he went unto Barsina's, being guided by Tyreus, who knew the streets and
turnings of Susa very perfectly, and who had been often sent by the Queen his
Mistress unto her house. Tyreus having made himself known to the Porter brought
us in, and by the help of the Candles that were upon the stairs, conducted us
into a private Hall. Barsina having supped, was retired into her Chamber, where
by good fortune she was at that time without other company save one of her
waiting women; Tyreus who knew the house, and was known by every body in it,
went up to her without difficulty; but no sooner did Barsina see him, when
surprised at his arrival, she ran to him to enquire after the success of his
Voyage. After she had welcomed him, and received him very civilly, O Tyreus,
(said she, speaking reasonable softly) what news do you bring us? None bad,
Madam, (answered he) but I have left two men below in the Hall, who will tell
you more certainly what I bring you, if please to admit them to speak to you in
private.

Barsina without informing her self any farther, either of their names or
condition, entered into her Closet, and once again bidding Tyreus welcome, she
prayed him to fetch those persons from whom she expected very pleasing news.
Tyreus came back to us, and telling my Prince how Barsina had received him, led
us through a Gallery to a door that went into her Closet. It was presently
opened to us, and my Prince finding Barsina there alone, judged by her
impatiency of the truth of her friendly affection. As Soon as ever we appeared,
she arose from her seat, and came toward us with much civility, but scarce had
she cast her eyes upon my Masters face, when in spite of the change which some
years had made in it, she knew him by the light of many tapors which made the
place as bright as day: At first she was amazed, and by her silence testified
the confusion she was in, but within a while after, recovering her
astonishment, she could not forbear casting her arm about my Princes neck, and
embracing him with such kindness as discovered the freedom of her friendship
to him more then ever: Good Gods, Sir, (said she) is it you, and are we yet
indebted to your love, for a happiness we never expected again, and which we
had no reason in the world to hope for? Has not then the ingratitude you have
found amongst us, and the loss of what you had so gloriously acquired, kept you
from coming again into a Country, where you have suffered so much, and where
you have gained so little? Do you come, (continued she with tears, which grief
and joy shared equally between them) do you come to see her in the arms of
another, whom so many services, and so many gallant actions in favor both of
her, and of us all made so lawfully yours, and whom your common misfortune
rather then the fault of either of you, has unjustly robbed you of?

This thought touched them both so sensibly, that it was impossible for Barsina
to say more, and for my Prince to answer her otherwise, then by a stream of
tears, which he poured forth out of interest, to second those which she shed
out of charity; but when he was a little settled, and that having returned her
kindnesses in silence, he was set down by her, he looked upon her a while with
an eye able to make her die with pity, and then taking her hands, which he
pressed with transports of grief, and tenderness, Madam, (said he) behold this
castaway of Heavens anger is returned, this miserable banished man, or rather
this faithless, this unworthy man, whom you have oftentimes condemned your self
unto the torments he has felt; behold him more ardent* and more passionat then
ever, and as if his passion received increase from his misfortunes as they grew
up, and reached to the greatest height they could attain to, so fast likewise
did it re-double, and mount unto the highest pitch to which there was a
possibility for it to rise. I return, Madam, but I return to die in your
presence, or to receive that assistance from your goodness, which you have been
always pleased to afford me; you helped me charitably in my prosperity, and
forsook me not in my adversity, you also are the only person to whom I now have
recourse, and from whom I come to beg some relief, and some consolation in the
small remnant of my life; do not refuse, sweet Madam, to take this unfortunate
man under your protection, and to do something for the conservation of a life,
which he no longer hopes for but from you. I require from your friendship, no
proofs that may be prejudicial either to your virtue, or to what you owe to
Alexanders person, or condition: the inclinations I have, and have ever had to
you, are full of too much respect, and those I have had unto the Queen are too
noble, and too pure, to change their nature now; I have not with my hopes, lost
my remembrance of what is due to her, and to your self, and all the favor I
look for from you, and which I beg of you, by that pity which your tears
express to me, is nothing but to see* and to discourse with my Princess, which
you may easily procure me without danger to her, or to your self. If I may but
yet tell her upon my knees, that I am, and have been always constant, and that
I was never faithless, I shall then die satisfied* and no longer envy
Alexanders happiness, but confess my self obliged to you alone, for so
fortunate a conclusion of my life.

My Prince brought forth these words, and some others which he accompanied with
so many sighs, that Barsina's heart being touched with grief and compassion,
she was not able to answer him, and when she had a little recovered her
countenance, and wiped away the tears, that had bathed both her cheeks and
neck, she replied with a great deal of trouble, Sir, the Gods are my witnesses,
that I was not much more deeply grieved for the loss of my dear Memnon, then I
am for your afflictions, and that sorrow which brought me so near my grave, had
but little advantage over that I suffer for your misfortunes; Yes, Sir, I
protest to you, by the memory of that dear Husband, I would willingly restore
you part of your contentment, with part of my life, and should be so far from
considering Alexanders interests, that I would not at all consider mine own, to
settle you again in that happiness, which was so lawfully your due, and which
you so unjustly, and unfortunatly lost; I am too much concerned in your
affairs, to have laid aside the remembrance of them, and your virtue has too
powerfully won me, to leave you any belief, that I can rece^ve the occasions of
serving you, otherwise then as my greatest blessings. Make not use therefore of
any farther conjuration, to oblige me to do for you, all that so virtuous a
Prince can ever desire; I will labor for your satisfaction with much eagerness
and fidelity, and perhaps with more success then you expected, require the rest
from your own courage, let it supply my weakness, and the Queens want of power,
and find in it a love wherewithal to satisfy a noble and generous soul like
yours; perchance the Gods will make some alteration in your fortune; this day
wanted but little of being; the happyest you ever saw, and he who is now the
obstacle of your joys, is commonly exposed to so many dangers, that it is not
likely that hindrance can continue long. This sight you desire of me, shall not
be hard to be obtained; I have that good fortune, that the Queen in all the
accidents of her life has honored me with her first affections, and I yet have
hopes that the endeavors I shall use in it, will not be unpleasing to her.

My Prince not being able to suffer her to say more, cast himself down upon
her, and embracing her knees with raptures full of affection, said all that his
acknowledgment of so great an obligation would put into his mouth, and made
protestations to her, which might have been thought due only to Statira.
Barsina having raised him up with much respect and shame, to see a person of so
high quality in that posture, renewed her promises to him, and having given him
encouragement to hope much from her assistance, and made him abate something of
the violence of his grief, she began to enquire after the passages of his life,
for those years he had spent since he went from Persia.

My Prince was willing to content her, and to that end, related succinctly all
that had befallen him in Scythia, and the most important particulars she was
ignorant of; but when at the conclusion she learned that it was he who had
saved Alexander that afternoon, she was so seized with admiration, that she
could not forbear expressing it, by exclamations full of vvonder and amazement.
O Gods! Sir, ( cried she) have you then taken so painful a Voyage by Sea and
Land, to give that enemy his life, who gives you your death, and did you so
visibly expose your own, to preserve one that is so fatal to you? O miracle of
virtue and generosity! there was no other action remaining but this alone, to
crown all those gallant ones you had done before; if you had come to Susa but
one day later then you did, or that you had been but a little less generous
then you are, you would now perchance have been the happiest of all men living;
but great Prince, hope from so many mavelous events, for an advantageous
success unto your self; you have merited Statira by so many rights, that its
impossible but she must be one day yours, and the Gods were very unjust, if so
great a virtue should not in the end constrain fortune to yield it the victory.
After these, and some other sayings, which her astonishment produced, she in
exchange of his recital, gave him some account of the life, which the Queen and
she had led during his absence, she enlarged her self a little, upon such
matters as he had not learned from Tyreus, and ended with those that happened
since that Eunuchs departure.

My Prince informed himself curiously how she stood affected to him at that
present, and heard that her inclinations to him were little different from
those she had expressed in her Letter; and that knowing her self obliged to
love her husband, she endeavored by all manner of ways, to bury the
remembrance of my Prince; not that she has any hope (added Barsina) to effect
it, but her virtue is so perfect, and the proofs she receives of the Kings
affection are so great, that she makes incredible attempts, to root those
thoughts out of her heart, which are hardly consistent with the love to which
she believes her self engaged; but how strong soever her resolution to that
purpose is, we scarce can pass one day without speaking of you, and no sooner
has that mention awakened you in her memory, but her soul is so afflicted, that
the perplexity I see her in at those times, has made me often resolve to avoid
all occasions of that discourse. And for Roxana, (said my Prince) how is she
employed now? In bewailing her self (answered Barsina) for the little affection
the King expresses to her, having given himself so wholly to the merits of
Statira, that he seldom so much as bestows a visit on that other Queen; she is
fallen into such a jealousy, and vexation at it, that she is not to be
comforted, and they were saying to day at my Fathers, that not being able to
endure the Kings visible neglect of her, and his extraordinary fondness of
Statira, she is resolved to go away within a few days, to pass over her ill
humor at Babylon; the loss of her company will be but little lamented by any
of us, and we have all conceived such an aversion against her, that we vvait
impatiently for the hour of her departure.

Ah the wicked creature! cried my Prince, and making a stop at those words,
gave ear to the rest of the news Barsina was telling him. It was grown very
late while they entertained one another on this fashion; and Oroondates not to
incommode Barsina any longer, would have retired unto his Lodging; but she
would not suffer him to go from her house, and commanding that some Chambers a
little out of the way, should be made ready for Tyreus and those that were
with him, she caused us to be conducted to them, not accompanying my Prince
her self, for fear those honors should discover something of his quality. She
bad him not good night, till she had promised him, that he should see the Queen
the next day, and making us pass for Tyreus his friends or servants, took away
all the suspicion her people might have had of my Master. Ask me not how he
passed the rest of that night, in the expectation of an happiness he had been
encouraged to hope for; the day appeared before he could close his eyes, and
scarce could the length of his former watchings cause him to take a little rest
in the morning: It was reasonable late when he avvaked, and was not yet
gotten up, when Barsina sent to know if Tyreus were ready; we knew very
well it was my Prince whom she inquired after, and Tyreus went into her
Chamber to give her the good morrow from him, where he told her how he had
passed the night: As Soon as she was dressed, and that she knew my Master was
so too, she came into his Chamber, being attended only by a Waiting woman,
whose fidelity was well known to her, and with whom I had formerly made a
friendship. When she had bidden him good morrow, and used him with all the
modest kindness she could invent, she led him through a Gallery, into the
Closet, where they had conversed the night before, and after some Discourse
whose length hinders me from repeating it, she commanded the Table should be
served in her Closet, where she dined with my Master, not admitting any body
but that woman, and some servants who could not know us; yet howsoever she
before them gave the chief honors to Tyreus, to keep Oroondates the more from
being discovered. As Soon as we had dined, and that she believed the Queen was
risen from the Table, she gave order to have her Chariot made ready to go to
the Palace, but before that was done, they brought her word that Queen
Statira, was coming to visit her as she often did, and that she was already
at the Gate: So unexpected a good fortune, made my Prince's heart leap for joy,
and tremble with apprehension: It is hard for me to express his inward motions
to you, but it is true* that he was so besides himself, that in his whole life
time I had never seen him in such a condition; In the mean time Barsina having
given him charge to stay in the Closet, shut the door, and ran down to meet the
Queen, she found her at the bottom of the stairs, and having received her as
she was wont to do, she helped her by the arm in her coming up, and waited
upon her into her Chamber. The Queen who made that visit, to discourse with her
in private, bad all those that came with her, to stay in the out Chamber, and
taking only Cleone in with her, commanded her to shut the door; that of the
Closet was a little open, and my Prince coming gently to it, saw her enter, but
so charming, and so ravishingly beautiful, that he was like to lose his senses
in the ecstasy, which he was struck into by the sight of her. Good Gods! how
will it be possible for me to represent this encounter to you; and to make you
comprehend the agitations of his mind, and the transports unto which his soul
was elevated; he at first became as cold as marble, but afterward that Ice
giving place to the fire which was more essential to him, he appeared more
ardent and inflamed then ever, yet not without quaking and trembling in such
manner, that he had scarce strength enough to stand upon his legs.

In this interim the Queen was set down, and making Barsina sit by her, her
face changed color diverse times, and in all her actions she seemed so
troubled, and prepossessed either with some new thought, or some new accident,
that it was a long time before she was able to speak; after she had continued a
while in this perplexity, which put Barsina into some disquiet, Dear Barsina,
(said she at last) I am the most confounded of any woman living, and it is the
confusion I am in, which makes me run to you, as to her in whom of all the
world I find the greatest consolation; the accident that has happened to me,
will without doubt surprise you, and I assure my self that you will partake in
my joy, or in my grief, or in them both together.

She made a stop at these words, and seeing that Barsina hearkened to her
attentively, and by the alterations of her countenance witnessed how deep an
interest she took in all things that concerned her fortune, she went on thus:
Know that the same accident, which had like yesterday to have made me lose my
husband, made me recover Oroondates, but I only recovered him to lose him
again; and the same moment that presented him to my sight, robbed me also of
him for ever; I saw him with these eyes, him that is in the world for nothing
else but the safety of all that have relation to me, and the sorrow I was in at
that time, hindered me not from knowing the air of his face, from discerning the
tone of his voice, nor from understanding the sense of his words. 'Twas in his
arms I saw my husband cold, and in a trance, and 'twas from him that I received
him, as a present he made me of a good which I had lost. 'Twas he himself, ( my
dear Barsina) or if 'twere not his body, (as the suddenness wherewith he
vanished from our sight makes me to fear) 'twas at least the Ghost of him who
having been created only for me and mine, came out of the Elizian Fields just
at so fatal a minute, to preserve all that I had yet left to lose; my tears
drew him thither without doubt, and stifling in him the consideration of his
own interests, moved him to the conservation of that person which ruined him.
Alas! ( continued she, breaking forth into tears, and letting her head sink
gently upon Barsina 's shoulder) Alas; dear Oroondates! and too dear for my
quiet, and too dear for my duty; whether it be that thou still love me alive,
or that thy soul divested of its body, does still preserve its first
inclinations to me; why do thou return now, both to disturb my quiet, and to
assail my duty? If my quiet was dear to thee, my duty also ought to be
considerable; nor can thou trouble the one, without arming thy self against
the other, with those same arms, against which I never could defend my self.

Her sobs interrupted the progress of these words, and Barsina taking her in
her arms,and mixing her tears with hers, Madam, (said she) comfort your self,
since you have no new cause of affliction, and that if your soul be yet capable
of any joy, you have less matter of grief then consolation. Oroondates is
living without question, and you have really received a service from him, which
a spirit without a body could not possibly render you.

Ah! dear Barsina, (replied the Queen, with a deep sigh drawn from the bottom
of her heart) if he be dead, it is impossible I should live; but if he be alive
and near us, what do you think will become of me? how shall I receive him whom
I have used so ill, and how shall I use my self if I receive him otherwise then
as being the wife of Alexander? Shall I banish him once again, him to whom I am
engaged, by so much affection, by so many Oaths, and by so fresh obligations;
and if I cannot banish him, how shall I see him? how shall I suffer him, whom I
can neither see, nor suffer without mortally offending my husband, and mortally
offending my self? how shall I love him without blame, whom I neither can nor
will hate; and how shall I hate him without blame, whom I neither ought, nor
can lawfully love? do but see Barsina, the misery of my condition, I cannot
consent to Oroondates his death, nor can I consent to see him yet alive; I must
therefore die my self; by that means my grief will be satisfied, and my duty
will remain unblemished; I shall acquit my self to Oroondates, and to
Alexander, of what I owe to both, and shall likewise pay what I owe to my
duty, and to my affection. She would perchance have said more, if my Prince
quite besides himself, and in the condition you may imagine this discourse had
put him, could have had patience longer, and if he had not thrust open the
Closset door, running to her with so much ardency and suddenness, that he was
at her feet, almost before she perceived he was in the chamber. Judge Sir, in
what a case that poor Princess was at the sight of him, she first gave a great
shreek, and then letting her self fall into the arms of Barsina and Cleone, who
made haste to hold her up, she remained with so little sense or motion, that
she seemed rather to be dead then alive. Tyreus and I came in at the same time,
and were witnesses of the most moving spectacle we had ever seen, and certainly
there is no heart in the world so barbarous, that would not have been touched
with compassion. My poor Master lay prostrate before the Queen, and kissed her
feet with raptures able to have carried forth his soul along with them; and the
Queen looking upon him in that posture with a dying eye, had neither assurance
enough to speak to him, strength enough to raise him up, nor as I think,
understanding enough to know what he did; the whole room was in a profound
silence, and Barsina intentive upon their action, seemed as much astonished as
they themselves, and made no attempt to draw them out of the condition they
were in.

My Master opened his mouth to speak three several times, and as often his
sighs and sobs strangled his words e're he could get them out, but in the end,
recalling his great courage a little, in that necessity he had of it, he
strugled so with his passion, that he at last brought forth these words in
reply to those last his Princess had spoken. Trouble not your self any longer
Madam, to think what should become of you, nor to contest what resolution you
should take, for the interest of your duty and for the establishment of your
quiet; he who by your own confession, came into the world for no other end but
merely to serve you, and to please you, returns not to you now, to trouble a
quiet which must needs be dear, nor to assail a duty which is considerable to
you; neither come I to reproach you, or to challenge you of your word which you
have broken, and which you are now no longer in a condition to keep, your own
heart, and your own conscience speak enough to you for me, and I have nothing
to recall into your memory which both of them have not often represented to it;
I return only, Madam, to see yet once again, the person for whom only I have
lived; to save the life of a husband who is dear to you, and who ought to be so
for the consideration of his virtue; and to yield up a life at your feet, which
I have kept only for your sake, and which I will keep no longer, since you have
now drawn from it all the service it is able to do you, since it is prejudicial
to your quiet, and to your duty, and since it is not pleasing enough, to give
me any desire to prolong it. Behold the reasons, Madam, that brought me hither,
but how specious soever they may seem, they should not have recalled me from
that banishment to which you had condemned me, if you had not revoked it your
self, and if I had not learned that mine innocence was not unknown to you, and
that I was faulty in nothing else, but in having raised my thoughts to a
happiness, which Alexander alone could lawfully aspire to; the Gods have
granted him a fortune, which was due to none but him, and have given you him
for a husband, who of all men living is least unworthy to possess you; let him
live without any fear of losing, what cannot worthily be but his; and do you
live without any remembrance of the oaths which you have violated, I quickly
will deliver him from the apprehension of a rival as fearelss as himself, and
you from a remorse that may trouble the calm of those delights you ought to
enjoy.

The poor Prince would have said more, but the Queen, who during his discourse
had raised her self a little out of the astonishment in which she seemed to
have been buried, hearkened to his words with conflicts, which it were
impossible to represent, and looked upon him with eyes, which though drowned
themselves, made him live and die a thousand times in a moment: then it was
that love and duty renewed their dispute afresh, and that both of them
distracted the mind of that poor Princess with incredible vehemence. But in
the end though duty got the upper hand, yet was it not able to hinder love from
giving such expressions, as it could not have forbidden without inhumanity: and
that fair Queen after she had long enough contested it, let her self sink at
last upon my Prince, and casting her arm about his neck, joined her face to his
with such a transported ardency, that both of them were like to have yielded up
their souls, oneby the sweetness of that reception, and the other by the
violence of that sweetness. The mixture and force of their different passions,
had put the Queen so besides her self, that she appeared inseparable from my
Prince, and seemed to have forgotten her self in his arms; and my Master who
could not die more happily, nor more gloriously then in hers, begged of the Gods
either to prolong his bliss, or to finish his days in that condition: The Queen
in that action had not the strength to bring forth one word, but the name of
Oroondates only, which she repeated twice or thrice, with so much tenderness
and affection; that she expressed her meaning thereby more eloquently, then she
could have done by all the words which the estate she was in at that present
could have put into her mouth. In the end she withdrew her self from her
kindness, and sitting down again upon the bed side, where she sat before, she
seemed extremely out of countenance for an action that had so visibly testified
her want of power over her passions, and put her hankerchief up to her face, to
cover the blushes which died it, and to wipe away the tears which ran down her
cheeks.

When she had a little recovered her self, she looked awhile upon my Prince
with an eye, which dying as it was, commanded him to live, and then with much
ado forced out these words, though they were so interrupted with her sighs
that they were hardly to be understood. What testimonies soever you have newly
received of the affection I still bear you, I know not (Prince Oroodates) which
way I can carry my self toward you now; If I consider my present condition, and
what I owe to my lawful husband, and to mine own honor, I can neither speak
to you, hear you, nor see you; but if I remember what is past, and recall him
into my memory who was my dear Orontes, who was my life, who was my all, it is
not by speaking to you, by hearing you, or seeing you, no nor by giving you my
heart, my soul, and the little life I have yet remaining, that I can satisfy
the least part of my obligations to you: What will you therefore have me do,
and to what do you destine this unhappy creature, who had destined her self to
you alone, and who had never been but yours, if the Gods and her own misfortune
rather then yours, had not disposed of her to another? I know all you can say
against me, and all I can alledg for my justification, but you are too generous
to confound a wretched woman with your reproaches, and I am both too guilty,
and too much obliged to you, to go about to clear my self of a fault which I
cannot repair, and for which I suffer at least as much as you. It is true most
noble, and most faithful Oroondats, I ought to have been yours by all manner
of rights, and by all manner of reasons, and you ought to have been mine by
that ardent and pure affection which I really bore you, but you see the heavens
had otherwise ordained, and the sincerity of our love, has not been able to
defend us from the anger of the Gods, nor from the malice of our enemies. Now
my dear Oroondates, (I say my dear Oroondates, since in spite of all the
reasons that can forbid me, you are still, and to my grave shall always be dear
to me) since by that cruel decree which has separated us for ever, I am able
now to do nothing for you, what do you require of me? you know my want of
power, my reputation I am sure is dear to you, and that virtue which made you
yesterday run into the jaws of death, to rescue him from thence, who has sent
you thither, puts me in safety from all those thoughts that might offend it. By
what means then can I preserve unto my Lord, that which can be no bodies but
his, and satisfy part of those deep engagements you have laid upon me? O Gods
( continued she, lifting up her hands and eyes to heaven) Gods who have powered
down all your cruelties upon the Royal house of Persia, why did you not bury me
in the ruins of it, and why aimed you not all those darts of vengeance at me
alone, which were the destruction of poor Darius, and which robbed us of our
dear Artaxerxes?

Her tears which overflowed most violently, would not suffer her to go on, and
I must confess to you Sir, that Barsina, Cleone, Tyreus, and I, kept her such
faithful company in that employment, that we were incapable of giving her any
consolation. My poor Prince who had not stirred off from his knees, and who
still embraced hers with raptures of affection which cannot be expressed, nor
scarce imagined, received some comfort indeed by finding that her love was not
extinguished, but he was so sensible of the grief in which he saw her
overwhelmed, that his own thereby was unspeakably redoubled. He nevertheless
drew some relief from his great courage, and using infinite violence upon
himself to settle his passion so far that he might be able to speak, Cease
Madam (said he) to give me a double death, my grief is strong enough alone to
send me to my grave without the help of yours, nor ought you to be longer in
pain which way to satisfy me, since the tears you shed for this miserable man,
have but too fully requited all he ever did for you; weep no longer for a
misfortune, in which your charity only makes you be concerned, I alone ought to
bewail it, since it belongs to me alone: the Gods could not more equally match
the most perfect of all women, then with the greatest of all men, and you ought
not to murmur for what they have done against me, since for you they have done
all that in reason you could wish. Possess without disquiet, and without
sadness the Empire they have restored you, enjoy the tranquillity wherein they
have re-established you, and never disturb it with the remembrance of this
unhappy wretch, whom you have justly abandoned, and who will quickly abandon
himself to the last, and most assured of all remedies. These words were so
sharp unto the Queen, that it was impossible for her to suffer them longer
without interruption.

Cruel Oroondates (said she looking sidewise upon him) you should rather keep
your self to the justice of your cause, then make your self faulty by
reproaching me with so much inhumanity: reproach me with your services if you
will, reproach me with the falsenesse of my oaths, and the violation of my
faith which I had given you, and I will confess all without reply; for though
I be innocent in my intention, I am too guilty in the effects, ever to pretend
to justify my self; but reproach me no more with a baseness which I never was
capable of, I have shunned Empire too much, ever to give occasion to have it
believed that I found any sweetness in it, and the repugnance I have showed
against that I now enjoy, has given cause enough to have it thought I
established not my happiness in that. I am indeed more happy then I ought to
have hoped, in the possession, and in the love of a Prince worthy of a better
fortune: but I never found any felicity in that wherein you establish it for
me, and it is only the consideration of my duty that has made me taste any
sweetness, where my inclination made me to feel a bitterness: you are not
therefore unfortunate alone, neither shall you run to death alone, if all such
as are so must run thither; I do not love that Empire and that tranquillity you
reproach me with so well, but that I Will keep you faithful company, and if it
be thereby that you desire proofs of my affection, that without doubt will be
more easy to me, and more lawfully permitted then the least of those I now
could give you. Those you have received too day, though weak and fruitless,
are yet truly to be blamed, and I can no longer without fault, dispense with my
self to take those liberties which are now forbidden me; but I have given them
for this once, to the memory of what you have heretofore done for me, to the
reparation of a crime which I cannot better repair, to the pains you have taken
in coming to me again after the loss of your hopes, to the safety of a
husband, whom you so generously restored me, and in short to the remainder of a
passion which I was not Mistress of. All these considerations render my first
slips excusable, and you from henceforth will have so much regard of me, as not
to desire to make her more criminal whom you have loved so perfectly.

Oroondates knowing the aim of her discourse, suffered her not to continue it,
and after he was risen up, crossing his arms upon his breast, and retiring a
step or two, Yes Madam (said he) you have done too much for me, and you have
reason to repent the testimonies I have received to day of your friendship, I
have merited them so little, that you ought to blush for having granted them,
and this miserable man who is of so small value, and has done you such poor
services, could not justly hope for such favors from the greatest Queen in the
world.

The Queen drawing a sigh from the bottom of her heart* replied; You are too
blame Oroondatrs, to put me yet again in mind of the merit of your person and
services, you know that I am ignorant of neither; and I have already confessed
to you, that the gift of my heart, of my life, and of my very soul, could not
acquit me of any part of what I owe you, and shall owe you to my grave, how
much soever I strive to satisfy you. No Oroondates I am not ignorant of it,
nor do I disavow it, the Gods also are my witnesses, that if I were at my own
disposing, I would give my self entirely to you; and that if they had left me a
thousand lives, I would willingly lose them all to requite part of my
obligations; but what can I do more to escape ingratitude, and what can you
pretend to, or what can you hope for from me, beyond that confession and that
desire? Do you not know the strict rules of my duty? and do you not know that
I am still the same Statira, in whom you heretofore have loved some little
virtue?

My Prince who hearkened to her attentively, and who while she spoke seemed to
devour her with his eyes, interrupting her of a sudden; Well Madam (said he
with an extraordinary tone) do you live in this severity of your rules, and I
will die in the severity of my oaths, and of the protestations I have made
you; I approve your noble resolution, and I approve that entire affection you
bear to a husband worthy of you, but you also must approve, that not being able
to live without that hope which forbad me to die, I breath out a soul at your
feet, which ever was, and never can be but yours. With these words instantly
drawing out his sword, and clapping the pummel of it to the floor, he rushed
upon the point with so furious a suddenness, that if Barsina who was close by
him had not given the hilt of it a kick, which struck the sword a good way from
him, he had run himself through, before we could have been able to hinder it.
My Prince fell all along upon the boards, but he was so ashamed, and so
afflicted to have missed his design, that his grief was not far from executing
presently, what Barsina's speedy assistance had diverted. We ran all speedily
to him, but he appeared so confounded for having so ill effected his intention,
that he durst scarce lift up his eyes upon us that stood about him: The Queen
excessively affrighted, cast her self upon him, and embracing him with mortal
trances, endeavored to drive away his despair by the sweetest kindnesses, and
the most effectual words here affection could furnish her withal, What, my
dear, my beloved Orontes (said she, holding him still in her arms, quite
fainting and dejected) you that were heretofore, and who in spite of the rigor
of my destiny, are yet my life, had you a will to give me my death by so cruel
a means? had you then so little care of my life, and of my reputation, that you
had a mind to sacrifice both unto your sorrows, without considering that for
you alone my life is subject to the most bitter affliction that any soul is
able to bear? Ah! hard hearted Oroondates! if your resentments require blood,
and that you would have me die, as this action did visibly testify, content
your self with making me suffer one death alone, turn the point of that cruel
sword against this breast I offer you, pierce this heart which once was yours,
and in which you are still so deeply engraven, that duty can scarcely
introduce him, it obliges me to receive into it; If one of us must die, it is I
alone, I alone am guilty, perjured, faithless, and you are still innocent,
still firm, still constant; I am she who have unworthily betrayed you, and
basely forsaken you, and you are he who has too generously and too faithfully
loved me.

She said many other words to him with so much vehemence and tenderness, that
a heart of Adamant would doubtless have been softened by them; My Prince
answered her not but with his eyes, and casting looks at her in which death was
naturally painted, he made her understand sufficiently, that he was but little
capable to relish her arguments nor to take the resolution she would have
given him. The Queen who apprehended the effects of his despair, and who
feared he still presisted in the design of dying; resolved not to omit any
thing to draw him from it, believing that in such an extremity, gratitude and
pity Commanded her to slacken something of that severity to which she had
tied her self. For this effect, using a little violence upon her humor, and
seeing that he opend not his mouth to reply. What my dear Orontes, ( said she)
would you then have me to believe that you no longer love me, and that with the
power I had over my self, I have also lost all that you had given me over you?
come to your self a little for my sake and consider that you are not so
unfortunate, as perchance you have believed, I am still Statira, if you be
still Oroondates, and since in spite of all the laws of duty, and of decency
you force me to confess it, if you love me still a little, I love you still
above my self; do you desire any more? I submit my self to your judgment (my
dear Orontes) and if you think I can do any thing more, I am ready to obey
you; if you have yet your reason about you, this declaration will satisfy you
without question, and if you yet have any friendship to me you will be
contented with those proofs I am able to give you of mine.

Though my Prince knew well that the sweetness of these words, tended only to
alter his design of dying, and that through these kindnesses, he perceived the
Queen abated nothing of her resolution, yet did he seem a little settled, and
taking her hand which he sealed with many lasting kisses, Madam, (said he) I
call Heaven to witness, that I have never swerved from the vow I made to obey
you all my life, and I pray the Gods to send me (if they can) greater evils
then those they have already made me suffer, if to my last moment I persevere
not in that resolution. The desire you have to see me yet endure more, shall
hinder me from giving that end which I had destined to my miseries; I will
live, since you command me, and moreover I will live the way that you command
me; if you will but suffer me to love you, and see you, I will satisfy my self
as well as I can, with that friendship you promise me, nor will I ever urge any
thing from you, either contrary to your humor, or to that duty you oppose me
with.

Upon these conditions ( replied the Queen) I Will endeavor to let you see, that
I will not be ungrateful toward you, and notwithstanding I know how great a
fault I commit, and to how great dangers I certainly expose my self, I Will break
through all for him, whose I am more then I can or ought to be, and whose I
would have been entirely, if the Gods had been pleased to suffer me.

I should never have done, Sir, if I would repeat all the Discourse they had
together; it lasted as long as did the day, and the conclusion was, that by
Barsina's intermission, they might see one another again sometimes, and that my
Prince should content himself with words and looks, without ever pretending to
any other proofs of the Queens affection; nay, and she saw so much difficulty
and danger even in them, that she could not resolve upon that liberty without
mortal apprehensions. They parted when it was even almost night, and the Queen
getting up into her Chariot again, left my Prince at Barsina's in an estate
that surpasses my expression. The loss of his hopes was the tomb of all his
joys, and the happiness of his rival, who had for ever dispossessed him of
what he had so lawfully pretended to, was such a matter of affliction to his
soul, as left him not any room for a real consolation; yet how great an
aversion, or how great an insensibility soever she showed for the thoughts of
his felicity, his knowledge of the affection which his Princess had still
toward him, did much allay the sharpness of his grief, and flattered him at
least with this kind of comfort, that the misfortune which deprived him of the
possession of her body, did yet leave him some interest in her mind.

In this consideration he found wherewithal to lessen part of his despair, and
Barsina, who most affectionatly concerned in his contentment, set it often
before his eyes, and endeavored by all the reasons she could allege, to make
him pass his life a little less unpleasantly; but besides the consolation she
gave him by her Discourse, the good offices she did him contributed much more
unto it, and indeed she labored for his quiet with so much affection and so
discreet a carriage, that my Prince will never lose the remembrance of it, nor
the desire to requite it though with the loss of that life which she alone
prolonged. She feigned a sickness, and for some time she kept her bed, to give
the Queen pretense to visit her, and those to whom the friendship that great
Princess bore her was not unknown, thought it not strange that she went to see
her every day: In these favorable occasions, my Master found both an
abatement, and a redoubling of his sorrows, for tasting inconceivable delights
in those small favors she granted him, he found death in the restraint of
others, which were reserved for one more happy; he often complained of it to
the Queen, and being as a man he could not be utterly loosened from his senses,
he now and then took liberties beyond what were voluntarily permitted him, and
by some of his actions testified that he was not absolute Master of his
desires. But that discreet Princess, though she could not justly condemn them,
reproved them with a pleasing Majesty, and using the Empire she had over him,
handsomely, and without tyranny, she reduced him by reasoning, within the
limits of his former obedience.

Besides the visits which Barsina received from the Queen, during her feigned
indisposition, after she came abroad again, she had recourse to other
inventions for my Prince's satisfaction; she would never suffer him to leave
her house, and being perfectly loved and honored by all those of her servants,
who of necessity were to see him, she kept him there without any great danger,
and used him with so much sweetness, and so many testimonies of friendship,
that she made him recover part of his more lively humor: She often procured him
the sight of the Q^^in a fair Garden she had without the Town, and sending us
out of the house before day, she would come with the queen to the garden in the
afternoon, and bringing her either alone, or attended only by Cleone into
private Arbours, where my Master waited for her, gave him the convenience of
entertaining her now and then an hour. Tyreus was gone home again to the
Queen, and his fidelity being very well known to her, by his means their
interviews were for the most part effected. Three or four months were spent in
this manner of life, my Prince never discovering himself all that while, to any
body but Barsina, though (as I have already said) he had a great number of
friends of both sexes in the Court, whose fidelity he did not at all suspect;
but his consideration of the Queens honor and quiet, made him so cautious,
that he would not show himself so much as to the Princess Parisatis. The Gods
know with what affection both she, and Queen Sysigambis, as likewise Prince
Oxiartes, and Artabasus, with many others would have welcomed him, and with
what joy they would have made him partaker in their fortune; but the interest
of his love, had so banished all those out of his mind, whom else he would
gladly have received into it, that his soul was no longer capable of any
thought without the compass of his passion. Their most ordinary meetings were
at Barsina's, and one day they were there together, when the King as he
returned from Hunting heard at the entrance of the City, that the Queen was at
that Princesses house; whereupon without going to the Palace, he alighted at
her gate, and went up stairs, without giving any notice of his coming: Scarce
was Barsina advertised of it time enough, to run and meet him without the
Chamber door, and my Prince surprised with so unexpected a visit, had hardly
time to get into the next room, where he sat down in a dark corner, on the
farther side of a bed. From thence he heard the King as he came in, say to
Barsina in the Queens presence, Madam, you have robbed me of my Mistress, and
these frequent visits will at last make me jealous; she has given her self so
wholly to you, that I can scarce enjoy her a moment. The Queen answering for
her, Think it not strange (replied she) and believe it is an effect of those
rare qualities which you found in her, and that I have too much sympathy with
your Majesty to have inclinations different from yours.

They had many Discourses, after which the King being weary with the toil of
hunting, had a desire to sleep; and having a while striven against it, he asked
pardon of Barsina for the liberty he took at her house, and being well
acquainted with the Chambers, he went into that where my Master was retired, to
throw himself upon the bed, which he remembered he had seen in it. Hephestion,
Ptolomeus, Seleucus, Antigonus, Leonatus, and many others, staid with the
Ladies, and the King alone went to take his rest, where my Prince had taken
sanctuary. O Gods! with how many different thoughts was he assaulted, seeing
him come into the chamber; the antypathie he had against the ravisher of his
happiness, the desire to free himself from a rival whose life was the
destruction of his own, and his belief at first that he was discovered, and
that he was the cause of the Kings coming into that chamber, made him put his
hand upon the hilt of his sword, with a design to run him through the body;
but after that first motion was over, his care of the Queens reputation, which
that action would visibly have ruined, the consideration of Barsina to whom he
was so nearly obliged, and the remembrance that a good number of Alexanders
friends were in the next chamber, ready to oppose his intentions, and to make
him perish himself if he attempted any thing, with held him, and made him
resolve not to make any noise, nor to stir out of his corner if he were not
forced to it.

In the mean time the King not discovering him, by reason of the darkness of
the place where he was, threw himself upon the bed, and lay so near him, that
he wanted but very little of touching him; my Prince stirred not at all, nay
and kept in his very breath as much as possibly he could till he was asleep,
which was not long, for the King had scarce laid his head upon the pillow,
before he fell into a slumber; Alas, what were then the thoughts of this poor
Prince, seeing himself so near to him, whom the free possession of what he had
deprived him of, permitted to take so sweet and pleasing a rest; and what a
constraint did he use upon himself, to keep in those sighs, which this
consideration drew from the bottom of his heart?

Thou sleep (said he within himself) thou sleep happy Alexander, and
it is not so much the possession of thy Empires, as that of my Princess, which
gives thee this calm and quiet repose; thou sleep without being interrupted
by any care, and without being troubled by the remembrance of any loss, but I
wake whole days and nights, not out of envy I bear thy Victories, but out of
the grief which thou have settled in my heart for ever; thy eyes are shut to
give thee peaceful rest, and mine are open only to those tears whose source
proceed from thee; thou take that sleep without disquiet, which thou have
robbed me of for ever, and thou enjoyest that with tranquillity, but also with
injustice, which was lawfully due to none but me. Ah! thou who art the stealer
away of my repose, and the tormentor of my days, thou who though fast asleep,
utterly defencelesse, and absolutely exposed unto my mercy, do yet cruelly
and unjustly tear away my life; behold thine own is in my power, and with how
much ease I could deprive thee of that, which thou take from me with so much
inhumanity.

In the midst of these thoughts wherein he floated with mortal agonies, he
opened the curtain a little, and seeing Alexanders face turned toward him, he
was assaulted with inward motions, which carried him besides himself, and left
him almost void of sense upon the chair where he was sitting. He had oftentimes
a mind to draw close to his ear, and say; Awake Alexander, awake, is it
possible thou should sleep so near thy greatest enemy, does the courage thou
have proved in him, make thee so secure, that thou have no suspicion of foul
play? how generous soever thou know him to be, do thou believe that in
this despair whereinto thou have precipitated him, he is still capable of all
the incitements of generosity? up Alexander, rise to dispute upon even terms,
for that happiness which is not assured to thee so long as I have any life.
Statira cannot be thine while I am living, dispatch me out of the world, and
when I am dead thou may sleep securely; thou shall do thy self no injury to
measure thy sword with mine, my quality is as eminent as thine own, and it is
only fortune that advantages thee above me, by the Empires she has given thee.
He continued for some minutes in the desire of saying thus unto him, but after
he had a little bethought himself, the considerations I have already alleged
dissuaded him from it, and as soon as he found that he was fast asleep, he rose
up gently from his place, and walked as softly as possibly he could toward a
door, which led through a gallery to his own chamber, without passing through
Barsina's; but as if his grief had blinded him, and kept him from looking
carefully to his feet, he by chance stumbled against a stool, and fell all
along upon the floor, with such a noise that the King wakened in a start; he
sat up instantly on the bed, and drawing open the curtain, he saw a man of an
extraordinary stature, and a majestic fashion, who was close by the door,
ready to go out; the King was frighted at it, and asked him aloud who he was,
but my Master seeing himself discovered, opened the door without replying, and
shutting it after him, got to his own lodging, Alexander rose up a little
surprised, and going into Barsina's chamber, told the company into what an
apprehension the sight of that man had put him; the Queen and Barsina both
changed color, but Barsina making it up as well as she could, without doubt
(said she to the King) it is some one of my servants, who came in not knowing
your Majesty was in the chamber; and then perceiving the error he had
committed, got out amazed, without having the confidence to give your Majesty
an answer. The King was satisfied with this excuse, and within a while after
going away, and taking the Queen along with him, he gave my Master and Barsina
leisure to entertain themselves with that accident the rest of the day.

The Queen reflecting afterward upon that encounter, used more wariness in her
visits then she had done before, and took care with all imaginable
circumspection that her stolen meetings might not be discovered.

'Twas about that time that the whole Court was possessed with the Kings
sorrow, and that by his command it changed both face, and habit for a while.
The death of Hephestion Alexanders favorit, or rather his second self, and
husband to the Princess Parisatis, was cause of this desolation; I will
neither tell you of the Kings mourning, nor of the Pomp of that Funeral, those
things are sufficiently known to you already, nor will I entertain you with the
lamentations of that fair, noble widow, all I shall say is, that my Prince was
very sensible of her misfortune, and that he was exceedingly troubled he could
not visit her in her affliction, and give her some consolation, if she had been
capable of any in so fresh a loss. The Queen bore a great share in her sisters
grief, and complied so far with that of the King her husband, that for some
days she kept her chamber, and for many after she went abroad, visited only the
Princess her sister, to whom her affection was so real, that she had as great
a sense of her sorrow as she her self.

This disaster deprived my Prince of the sight of her, but there passed few
days wherein she comforted him not in that tedious absence, by two or three
words under her hand, which Tyreus brought him to Barsina's, and which my
Prince read, and kissed with such excess of contentment, as alone was able to
discover the greatness of his passion. I remember one day he received a Letter
from her, the words whereof were something to this purpose.

Queen STATIRA to Prince OROONDATES
IT were not just, while my husband and my poor Sister give themselves over to
their grief, that I alone should run to subjects of joy, and I am pardonable,
if for a short space, I lose the sight of what I love, to comfort her, who has
newly lost for ever, what she loved; compassion and decency enjoin me this
punishment; but believe my Orontes, that it is as harsh to me as to your self,
and that it is as difficult for Statira to keep her self from seeing you, as it
is blameable in the wife of Alexander to desire it.


My Prince answered her to this effect. Prince OROONDATES to Queen STATIRA.
It Is just that I should suffer while the whole world is in mourning, and I
have too much interest in what concerns you, to suffer the affliction of the
Princess your sister, without the mixture of my own misfortunes: shorten them
I beseech you as much as you are able, and give reasonable limits to that
compassion, and that decency, unless you will give very short ones to my life;
not that I ought to love it, since it is troublesome to you, in obliging you to
actions which you think are blameable, but neither can I hate it, since by the
violences you use upon your own humor for its conservation, you testify that
it is dear to you.


They wrote many others, which did a little sweeten my Masters wearisom
impatience; and the fair Barsina took so much care to make the time of his
banishment less tedious, that if he was not really satisfied, he feigned at
least before her to be very much pleased with the charms of her conversation.

The days of great mourning being expired, the Queen had the liberty to see him
again, but she had much more convenience within a while after, when the King
having rendered those honors to his dear Hephestion, which only the Gods exact
from men, caused the Mains, and Tails of Horses to be cut off, the Battlements
of City-walls to be beaten down, and made his Funerals famous by the expense of
twelve thousand talents, departed from Susa (as you know) to discharge his
grief upon the Cosseans a barbarous people near to Susa, against whom he ran,
as at so many wild beasts, calling that expedition the sacrifice of Hephestions
Funerals. You know also that Queen Statira stirred not from Susa, but wicked
Roxana having had the liberty to do so, retired to Babylon, and delivered her
rival, and all her friends, from a sight that was very insupportable to them.

The absence of those two persons, afforded my Prince great facilities in
entertaining the Queen, and there passed but very few days, wherein he had not
the happiness to see her, either at Barsina's house, or in her Garden, or in
that belonging to the Palace, whether Tyreus brought him by Cleone's
directions, and where he spent whole hours with her, in ecstasies and raptures,
which cannot be conceived but by those who have loved like him, and which would
absolutely have satisfied him, if he had not thought of the advantages which
Alexander had above him, and of the command that had been laid upon him, never
to pretend to greater. In the mean time that virtuous Princess behaved her
self toward him in such a manner, that though she expressed her
acknowledgement, and rendered him what she believed she owed to one that had
done so much to serve her, yet she never exceeded the bounds of her duty, nor
ever abated any thing in his favor, of what she knew only to be due to her
husband, she never let slip one word against him, and when my Prince by any of
his sayings, or any of his actions, made appear that he had a design against a
life, the loss whereof alone was the establishment of his, she would check
those motions so gracefully, and accompany her specious reasons with so many
tears, and such urging prayers, that settling him more then ever in the
admiration of her virtue, she also confirmed him strongly in the resolution of
never displeasing her, by any of his actions while he lived. One day when in
her presence and Barsina's, he let 'scape some threats against him, and accused
himself of the cowardice he showed in suffering him to live, the Queen after
she had a little sharply reproved him; Dear Oroondates (continued she) I may,
and ought to confess to you without doing you any injury, that I love the King
my husband as much as I ought to love him, and that no body can attempt against
his life, without striking directly at mine; but though I were void of those
inclinations I have and should have toward him, and that I could without grief
see the loss of him whom the Gods have given me for my husband; what do you
think I owe unto my own consideration, and with what eye do you believe the
care of my reputation would suffer me to look upon my husbands murderer? do
you judge that I could with decency receive him for my second husband, whose
hands were stained with the blood of my first? and though I should shut mine
eyes against all these considerations, and should throw my self blindly into
yours arms, what opinion would you your self have of me, after so shameful and
so base a lightness? No no, dear Orontes, never exact any thing from me, that
may injure the virtue which obliges you to love me; I will keep my self in your
esteem, since I was not able to keep my self wholly for you; and I will keep a
husband who deserves it, and whom next to the Gods I hold only from your self.
But (replied the Prince) since your reasons are so plausible, what will you
have me to do? I would have you live and suffer (answered the Queen) as I live
and suffer; and I would have you wait, as I do, the pleasure of the Gods, who
perchance will bring some change either to your fortune, or your inclinations.
In the mean time content your self with what I do for you, and though it be
very little in comparison of what you have done for me, you ought yet to value
it, if you consider what it costs me, and what I hazard to afford it you.

With these and such like words she for some little time would moderate the
violence of his different passions; and when she saw him so far transported by
the power of the object that moved them, as to make attempts, and take
advantage of oportunities, to the prejudice of her virtue, she would use her
authority so handsomely, and in the midst of all those charms that made her
lovely, she likewise would appear so terrible, that in a moment she made him
repent the thought of a design she disapproved; yet did she not so much trust
to the power she had over him, or to that she had over her self, as that she
would often cast her self into the occasions of exercising it, but to avoid
them as much as she could possibly in those interviews, she was commonly
accompanied either by Barsina, or Cleone, or at least was at so little a
distance from them, that she seldom gave him the means to persist in a
behavior that displeased her. They lived some months on this manner without
any remarkable cross; but in the end, the Queen who felt a remorse, and a
repugnancy to her humor, in a kind of life which she believed she could not
continue with innocence, and who (after having vainly consulted with Barsina,
and with my Prince himself, to what all those practices could tend) saw no help
nor remedy if they should be discovered, resolved to cut off the course of
them, though with them she should have been fain to cut off that of her life,
and began to prepare my Masters mind, with words premeditated to that purpose;
But at the first overtures she made to him concerning it, he fell into such a
passion and washed her feet with so many tears, that she left all hope of
making him resolve easily upon it, but not the design of resolving her self,
upon what she believed she ought to do. I think indeed, it was not without
strange conflicts of mind, that this remembrance of her duty carried it from
her affection, and we found by the changes of her countenance, and by the
sadness which for many days preceded her declaration, that she brought not her
self to it without exceeding violence: About that time she received Letters
from the King, who having destroyed the Cosseans was gone toward Babylon, and
entreated her to come thither to him, as soon as she could possibly.

This desire of his which she received as a most absolute command, perplexed
her mind with different thoughts, and gave my Prince matter of contriving new
expedients to continue the life he led; Barsina who meant to accompany the
Queen whethersoever she went, offered him the same assistance at Babylon, he
received from her at Susa, but my Master knowing how great an inconvenience it
was to her, would not abuse her goodness toward him; he nevertheless was
resolved to make the same voyage, and to seek out some other inventions to
continue his life, which thenceforth seemed only to subsist by the sight of his
Princess, and by those remainders of affection which she yet testified unto
him: But in the interim this virtuous Queen was a little more reserved then
ordinary in her carriage to him, and no longer afforded him her sight and
conversation, without marks of a very deep sadness, and actions which visibly
expressed with how great constraint she contributed what she believed she ought
not to his repose.

My Prince could not perceive it without such grief as cannot be represented,
and drawing an evil omen from her silence, which of late time was grown usual
to him, he asked her the cause of that alteration, but he asked it with so much
fear, and so little assurance, as made her sufficiently know, that he was more
afraid then desirous to learn it. The Queen suffered her self to be urged for
some days; but when that of her departure toward Babylon was come, after she
had armed her self with a strong resolution, she went unto Barsina's: my Prince
who expected her there with impatience, having received her with his ordinary
joy, threw himself down before her, and endeavored by all the words his
passion could suggest, to drive away that melancholy humor, in which of late
she had seemed buried: after she had been long pressed to it; the Queen lifting
up her eyes which were fixed upon the ground, and casting them upon my Masters,
strove all she could to retain her tears, and having studdied a while for
terms to express her self, she spoke to him on this manner. I take the Gods to
witness, Prince Oroondates, that I have loved you hitherto with the most pure
and perfect affection a soul is able to conceive, that I do still love you more
then my self, and that I will love you all my life as the services you have
done us, the affection you have testified to me, and my own inclination oblige
me. If I speak not truth, o Oroondates, I wish the Sun (whom we worship) may
never shine upon me more, and that great Orosmades may bury me in destruction
with those of my Family, that are gone before me. After this protestation, which
I conjure you to believe, I will also protest to you with the same truth, that
it is not without extreme violences, and grief of heart which I am not able to
express, that I declare my intentions to you, and that I most earnestly
beseech you, by all the love which yet you bear me, not to impute to
inconstancy of mind, or want of affection, what I do that I may not be the
most lost of all women living, and the most unworthy of your good opinion, and
of that greatness to which the Gods have raised me, With this caution I will
declare unto you, that if the heavens had made me to be born for you, my
desires were most readily disposed to it, I would have despised the hope of all
the Empires of the world, and all the felicities which the most happy
creatures yet ever knew, to have that of being yours; but since my cruel
destiny has opposed it, and that contrary to all appearance, and to my first
intentions, it has given me to another, you ought not to think it strange, if
I withdraw that from you, which you can no longer lawfully keep, and which I
can no longer afford you, without the loss of my reputation, the loss of a
quiet conscience, and the loss of my self; I confess I owe you much, but I have
not now the ability to pay you, and be your reproaches whatever they can, it is
fit I should represent unto you, that the husband whom the Gods have given me,
is not so little considerable, but that he deserves all my affections: what
rights soever your past services, and my inclinations have given you over my
life, you have now no longer any to dispute them with him, nor I still to grant
you, what can be no bodies but his. Give me leave therefore Sir, to conjure you
with these tears which it is impossible for me longer to refrain, to forbear
the courses, which we cannot continue any more without our ruin, and not to
think any more of this unhappie woman, who is no longer worth your cares, nor
in a condition to requite them: or if you will yet preserve any remembrance of
her, that you would carry it far from hence, and no longer waken by your
presence, those flames which duty ought already to have extinguished, and
which death shall extinguish for it, if it cannot draw that power from your
absence: besides the consideration of what I ought to do, the estate you are
in, the pains you take, and the hazards to which you expose your self, for some
shadow of favor, so light and empty that it merits not the least of your
endeavors, do really strike me with compassion of you, you are destined to
beter employments, and worthy of a better fortune, and the Gods would punish it
upon me, if I should longer retain in so pitiful a condition, the most
accomplished person they ever created. Go then, Sir, carry to some other place
those admirable qualities, which had gained you this unfortunate Princess, and
which yet will gain you one more lovely, and more happy, and leave her to the
conduct of her wretched destiny, who can no longer pretend lawfully to you,
and from whom you can no longer pretend any thing. I make you this request, by
all that you acknowledge to be most sacred, and conjure you by all the
friendship you heretofore have promised me, and by all the Empire you have
given me over your will, to leave this miserable creature for ever, or at least
never to appear before her, till she be in a condition to receive you.

I make you judge Sir, what effect these words wrought upon my poor Prince; he
had hearkened to them with changings of his countenance, and alterations able
to melt the most frozen hearts with pity, and when he heard the conclusion of
them, and saw them end in an eternal banishment, notwithstanding all the succor
he required of his courage, he could not get enough from it* to make him proof
against so violent an assault; he broke not forth into cries, nor into tears,
those shows of grief were too weak for the greatness of his; but he had not
power enough over his senses, nor over his forces, to keep them from forsaking
him, his eyes closed themselves, his head sunk gently upon his shoulder, and by
little and little, his whole body fell cold, and immovable upon the bed where
he was sitting.

The Queen who had prepared her self for all the worst events that could
happen, could not see him in that condition, without a most sensible
affliction, not without making war with her fair hair, and lovely face, which
grief had altered almost to an impossibility of being known; she spoke the most
compassionate words, that ever sorrow made those persons utter, who have been
the most deeply touched with it; and did some actions, which if they had not
been excusable by their cause, would have been a little unbeseeming her modesty
and quality; but yet she never stirred from her last resolution, and disposed
her self rather to die, then retract the sentence she had pronounced.

Barsina, Cleone, and I, were about my Prince, and labored to fetch him again
by all the remedies that can be made use of in such an occasion, but he was in
so deep a swoun, that it was above an hour ere we could observe the least sign
of life in him. Though the Queen was once resolved not to stay for his
complaints and reproaches, yet could she not leave him in that estate, but
as soon as ever she saw him open his eyes, she rose up from beside him, and
wiping away her tears, composed her countenance as well as possibly she could,
and prepared her self to give him the last farewell. My Prince having recovered
his senses, and seeing us all busy about him, turned his sight slowly on all
sides, and seeking her out with his eyes, when he was come to himself enough to
remember the command she had newly imposed upon him, he said only these words
to her with a feeble dying voice. I will obey you Madam, never fear it, I will
obey you. The Queen not permitting him to go on; I hope so my dear Oroondates
(said she) and with this assurance, I give you the last farewell, and the last
kiss. With these words, coming close to him, she kissed him for the last time
indeed; and getting loose from him, without staying for any other answer, she
went out of the chamber so besides her self, that I believe she hardly knew how
she got unto her Chariot.

My poor Master accompanied her with his eyes as far as he could, without
stirring from his place, and cried out after her, with a voice that showed how
weak he was; Farewell the most beloved, and the most ungrateful of all women
living; farewell for ever inhuman Statira. Farewell, since you fear to be
present at my death, and yet feared not to give it me. He uttered many other
complaints, and was presently seized with a most violent fever. Barsina would
not leave him in that condition, and though she had purposed to have gone along
with the Queen, Sysigambis, and Parisatis, who all departed that very day; she
made her excuses to them, promising the Queen to wait upon her at Babylon,
as soon as my Prince was recovered: thus the Queens went away from Susa, and
Barsina returning to her house, began to take care of my Masters health.

We had already got him to bed, and that good Princess, knowing the violence of
his Fever, sent for all the most skilful Physicians, and employed them in his
cure, with a diligence that cannot be imagined; she was so handsomely
industrious, and so affectionately careful about it, that she visibly expressed
the reality of her friendship to him; but the poor Prince was so ill handled
by his sickness, that within a few days, the Physicians began to despair of his
recovery. Do but judge, Sir, of my affliction, and of Barsina's, to see a
person that was so dear to us, and whose excellent qualities we were so well
acquainted with, die in her house, and in our arms. Certainly it is very hard
to represent it to you; and when we reflected upon all the accidents of so
mavelous a life, and that we saw the admirable events of it, end all in so
sad, so tragical a conclusion, we appeared to be more touched with his
sickness, then he himself. In the mean time he lay in a continual study, and
for many days was deprived of all manner of knowledge, his frenzy made him
speak many extravagant things, and the Physicians ascribing all to that, made
nothing of them, though they were able to have discovered some passages of his
life.

They continued many days in a belief that he would die, and the Gods are my
witnesses, that not being able to think of seeing Scythia again without him,
nor of living after him, I took a resolution to accompany him in the grave. But
when we least expected it, a favorable crisis gave some glimpse of hope, to
those that had him in hand; and to make short, that I may not keep you longer
in a narration, which already exceeds a reasonable length, his youth, and
vigorous constitution saved him, and in the end lessened the danger wherein he
had lien for many days. As Soon as the Physicians began to give me assurance of
his recovery, and that by the diminution of his fever my confidence of it was
increased, I turned my thoughts to the settling of his mind in quiet, but not
seeing the least hope of it, while his fortune was such, I took a resolution
something strange, but worthy of the affection I bore my Master, and after
having a while digested it, I came to his bedside, and knowing that no body
overheard me, Sir, (said I) since the Gods have so visibly delivered you from
a death which without their particular assistance was infallibly very near you,
they have without doubt thought of the establishment of your life, and do not
restore it you, beyond the hopes of all those that have looked to you in your
sickness, to make you languish it out in misfortunes and disasters. You must
live, but you must live happy, and to that end you must banish all scruples
that detain you in your present misery. Since Alexanders life is incompatible
with yours, he must die, and you must lose all those considerations, that may
dissuade you from a thought, in which alone your safety is to be found; if the
Queen loves you, her desire to be entirely, and peaceably yours, will make her
bear that loss with patience; and if she love you not, the fear of displeasing
her, ought not to be more considerable to you, then your own life, yet to keep
you clear from a crime, which you might believe you should commit in
disobeying her, Araxes will take that charge upon him, and this hand shall
free you from that enemy, before your own be able to undertake it: If I be so
fortunate as to do you a service of that importance, I shall prefer my
condition before that of any man alive, and if I perish in the difficulty of
that enterprise, I cannot fall more gloriously, then in sacrificing my life to
the repose of him, to whom I have wholly devoted it.

My Master having turned his head toward me while I spoke, cast his arm about
my neck, and embracing me a long time, Dear Araxes ( said he) I am so nearly
obliged to the fidelity of thy affection, that thy consideration alone, is
enough to make me desire to live still, that I may requite part of the good
services I receive from thee, thy thoughts are more generous, then they are
just, and thou do as much agree with mine in proposing the death of
Alexander, as thou crossest them in offering thy self to be the actor of it.
Yes, Alexander must dye, and my reason no sooner returned to me again, but I
decreed his ruin, he shall die, that Conqueror of the whole earth, but he
shall die only by the hand of Oroondates, I will stay no longer then till I
have recovered my strength, and I will either oblige Statira's affection by
giving her the means to satisfy what she owes me, or punish her ingratitude,
by sacrificing him before her eyes, whom she ought never to have loved unto my
prejudice; in this despair whereinto she has precipitated me, all
considerations are extinguished, and I am now quit with both of them by so many
actions in their favor, and to their advantage, I have paid Alexander all I
was indebted to him, by saving his life which his best friends suffered him to
lose, and since it is destructive of mine, he ought not to think it strange, if
I assault it fairly; I will neither use poison, nor have recourse to any
shameful ways, to send him out of this world, but I will divide the danger so,
that the greater share shall infallibly be mine own. If I perish in the
enterprise Statira; you shall for ever be delivered from the importunities of
this miserable man, and you shall with tranquillity enjoy that greatness for
which you meanly have forsaken me.

He said many things of this nature, and knowing his humor, I persisted not to
contest with him about the Proposition I had made. During the rest of his
sickness, he persevered in this resolution, and I know not whether it hastened
his cure, but in effect by the cares of Barsina, and of those that had him in
hand, he recovered his health sooner then was expected, and left his bed two
months after the day he sickned, but he was yet so weak, that of another whole
one, he was not able to ride on horseback.

This Relation is too long, Sir, but to come to a Conclusion of it, I will tell
you, that as soon as he had gotten his strength again, and that he found himself
able to execute what he had in his mind, he prepared for his departure. But
before he went from Susa, the disquietness I felt for his misfortunes persuaded
me to consult the pleasure of the Gods for him; and for that purpose visiting
the Temple of Orosmades, where famous Oracles are given, after I had made my
prayer on his behalf, the God commanded us to seek our repose upon the banks of
Euphrates, and without giving me any other answer sent me back, with some
little hope, and satisfaction. My Master also was satisfied with it, and
knowing that Babylon, where Alexander then made his abode, was situate upon
that River, he believed his intention was conformable to the will of the God
that sent him, whither he already had designed to go. You may be pleased to
dispense with me, if I omit to tell you what past at the parting of my Prince
and the fair Barsina, you may easily judge your self, that the sense of her
last obligations, together with the remembrance of so many former ones, put
into his mouth the most acknowledging words, and the most hearty protestations
of friendship he could devise, and that he went not from her without expressing
his trouble by many tears.

A whole day was spent in their farewels, and my Prince not having discovered
his design unto Barsina, contented himself, with saying he would see her again
ere long, and that he would not make his Journey toward Scythia, without taking
leave of her once again. That good Princess was a little comforted with that
promise, but she could not see him take horse, without being extreme sorry for
his departure. Thus did we go from Susa, and take our way toward Babylon; you
may well enough imagine the thoughts that entertained my Prince during that
Voyage, without my standing to describe them to you; he persisted still in his
last resolution, and his impatiency hastened him on such manner, that the speed
of his horses scarcely could suffice; sometimes when he was most sharply
persecuted with his remembrances, he could not forbear crying out, Thou shall
die Alexander, thou shall die, and thou no longer shall possess her, whom thou
hindrest me from possessing; his sadness was sometimes allayed by this thought,
and the fierceness that succeeded it, was visibly to be found in his
countenance.

Thus did we pass the time, till we arrived within three days journey of this
place; and when my Prince was most animated, and most firmly resolved upon the
death of his enemy, he heard that he had ended his life in the arms of his
friends, and that by the wickedness of some of his domestics, who were
suspected to have poisoned him, Statira was a Widow, he freed of a rival, and
the Earth deprived of the greatest man it ever bore: In short, there it was we
learnt that the great and victorious Alexander was dead at Babylon three days
before.

You will have much ado to believe, Sir, what I now shall tell you; I know you
doubt not but that by all manner of reason, my Prince should have rejoiced at
this loss, as the best fortune that could befall him; for my part I confess I
was infinitely over-joyed at it, and was ready to have fallen down upon my knees,
to thank the Gods for the mercy they had granted us; but I staid my self by
considering my Masters countenance, who after having held his eyes long fixed
upon the ground, shed tears suddenly, and spoke words so far from what in all
probability, one should have looked for, that I should have suspected any other
body of hypocrisy and dissimulation; but I was so well acquainted with his
generosity, that I questioned not the reality of his grief, but hearkened with
admiration to the moan he made, for the death of a man whom he was resolved to
kill, and which he ought to have desired as his own life. He understood well
enough what an advantage that loss was to him, and I believe that at first
hearing, he was touched with some sense of joy, but coming to reflect upon the
admirable qualities of that deceased Prince, his noble soul was so moved with
that remembrance, that it was impossible for him to refuse, what he believed
due from all virtuous persons to the memory of the greatest man that ever was.
This change of his affairs, made him also change his resolution, and after he
had passed the night in the thoughts which that revolution caused, we took
horse as soon as it was day, and prosecuted our Voyage. This report was
confirmed unto us by all we met, and moreover we heard the dispute that rose
among the Princes, about the sharing of his dominions.

My Master being come within a days Journey of Babylon, dispatched Toxaris
thither, with order to inform himself of what passed, and to enquire news of
Queen Statira, and bring him back word, to a place which he appointed him
within 3 or four hours riding of that City. Toxaris parted from us, but he
made us wait all the day following without hearing of him. My Prince being in
pain for his long stay, sent Loncates after him with the like Commission.
Loncates returned no more then he, and my Prince impatient of their delay,
after having expected that whole day also, went that way himself, with an
intention to send me likewise, and to stay for my coming again, near the place
where we met with you, and where after the news which (in spite of the tears my
Prince had shed) had raised his hopes, and had made me believe, that we were
for ever gotten under shelter from the persecutions of fortune, we learnt from
your mouth, the fatal death of that great and virtuous Queen, for whom alone he
had preserved the remnant of his life.

Behold, Sir, (pursued Araxes, shutting up his relation) behold the end of my
Prince his adventures; if the course of them have touched you with admiration,
the conclusion of them will without doubt touch you with pity, and you will
judge infallibly, that never virtue has been so perfectly tried, that perchance
never man carried it to so high a point, and that fortune never fixed her self
so obstinately to persecute any man; she never gratified him with any of her
favors, but instantly she was ready to throw him headlong into a bottomless
pit of miseries; and when after an infinite number of storms, she seemed to have
brought him in to the Haven, there it was she made him find his shipwreck,
and ruined him by the utmost cross that he could and by the only one which
he had not yet endured.

Araxes thus finished his long narration, and Lysimachus whom the recital of
so many wonders, had stricken with great admiration, after he had remained
for some time deeply buried in a study, lifting up his eyes suddenly to Heaven,
O Oroondates (cried he) the bravest of all men living; thou miracle, both of
our age, and of all ages past; have I prolonged my miserable life, to suffer
with you as I do, in the misfortunes of yours, and must I carry to my grave,
the sorrow I feel for the miseries of so divine a person? Was not the
consideration of my own, strong enough to bring me thither, and were not my
own disasters sensible enough, without the mixture of yours? Certainly,
(continued he, turning toward Araxes) if that fortune which followed deceased
Alexander with so much constancy and affection, had but declared her self a
little in favor of your gallant Prince, he would not only have obscured his
glory, and cut off the course of his great victories, but also have blotted out
of the memory of men, the luster of all those that went before him, and have
submitted all the habitable world to his Dominion. Alexander had no quality
which your Prince possesses not with all manner of advantages, and he appears
so free from all his vices, and from all those that can give the least blemish
to his admirable virtue, that only his misfortunes make us know him for a man,
whom so many miraculous actions might with justice make to pass for a God.

Lysimachus would have said more in the affection that transported him, if it
had not been already night; that consideration made him return into the house,
that he might not longer lose his company, whose transcendent virtue had so
powerfully gained him, and whose absence he no longer could endure with
patience.

The end of the Sixth Boook, and of the FIRST PART.
CASSANDRA TO CALISTA.
DO you not believe, Calista, that it is an inhuman thing to trouble the repose
of the dead? And are you not satisfied, that by ceasing to live, I cease to
dispute with you for any advantage, unless you violate the privilege of
Tombs, and pull me from my grave, where I have rested two thousand years, to
draw homages, and acknowledgements from me, which hitherto I never owed to any
body? If they justly are condemned, who by words of conjuration, call up
spirits from the infernal shades, what do you expect for the violence you use
to me? For to say truth, fair Calista, it is you alone that bring me back into
the world, whence I departed so many ages since; and the Empire you have ver
him who makes me live again, recalls me now out of the dark, where my abode
has been obscure indeed, but full of great tranquillity. My former life was
subject to so many misfortunes, that the remembrance I still retain of them,
makes me fear this second, for which you cause me to be born again; but it had
likewise so many notable advantages, as I cannot with justice complain of him
that revives me, though he renew my griefs to publish my glory to the whole
world* The troubles of the Age I lived in, the disasters of my family and the
brightness of that flaming light which in a few years kindled almost all the
Universe, did in part abate the luster of it; but this neccessity which your
commands have imposed upon the Author of my new life, makes me come forth from
under an heap of arms, and of dead bodies, from under the ruins of our house,
and from under the flames that consumed my Country, to dress my self up again
in my former ornaments, and to breath a more gentle air, and a more quiet life
under your protection. I ask you pardon therefore, O Calista, if my first words
expressed some resentment against you, you ought to receive them, as coming
from a person not yet well awake, and who having much ado to shake off a sleep
of twenty Ages, had not yet time enough to know who you were. Now that by the
beams of your fair eyes, this first Cloud of my still dazeling sight is
dissipated, and that you appear such to me, as I my self appeared heretofore to
my illustrious adorers, I come to wait upon you without murmuring, and I should
say I establish my retreat at your very feet, if with all France I did not know
you are too generous, and too good, to require such submissions from a person
of my sex and quality. I was a Woman as you are, I was beloved by the greatest
Personages upon Earth as you are, and if I dare say so Calista, I was fair as
you are; It is but by my Authors example, I make this comparison, he seems to
have drawn my picture by your face, and because he is born in an Age too far
distant from mine, to recover my true image, he has painted me such as you are
in his heart, and he believed with a great deal of reason, that to be infinitely
handsome, I must of necessity resemble you. He could not have formed an Idea
more advantageous to me, and to say he has made me like Calista, is enough to
make known to all the Earth he has made me like the highest perfection that
can be found in it. These praises cannot be suspected of flattery, in the mouth
of one who would be your Competitor, if she returned into the world, with any
other intention then to serve you; it is with that design I have already told
you the beginning of my adventures, and it is by your express command, I am
disposed to give you the continuation of them; if a thousand persons whose
sati^faction I regard not, do after you, find either diversion or tediousness
in them, let them thank, or accuse no body but your self. But if your Sovereign
will injoin my Author still to go on with them, give me leave, Calista, to do
an office below my self, and to forget both the greatness of my birth, and the
severity of my sex to implore your favor to him; if he be little worthy of
your affection, he is also but little confident to beg it, and besides, your
commands reduce him to a necessity of desiring some relief. It is very hard for
him in the violence of the pains he suffers, to describe the passions of others
pleasingly, and it is just you should consider both the greatness of his
respect, and the dignity of the person that intercedes for him.

To the Reader.
MAny wonder at the title of this Work, and search for this CASSANDRA, of whom
there is scarce so much as a light mention made in the first parts: but if they
have the patience to wait for the Conclusion of these adventures, they shall
find her to be a person considerable enough to give them her name. As for
other matters, seek neither for Science, nor fine Discourse, perchance thou
shall find neither in this Piece, and I may say unfeignedly it is written with
too little pains, or rather with too little care, to hope for any thing
studied, or delicate in it. In what I write (after my obedience to an absolute
command) my only aim is to divert my self, I find no other advantage in this
employment, and I am very far from pretending glory from a thing which I have
not owned, and which I will forsake when I can no longer disavow it. I think
nevertheless, though other beauties be wanting in it, one shall at least find
few things that thwart either probability or decency; nay, to that degree, that
I find most difficulty to accommodate those passages to a likelihood, which are
really in the History. Methinks it does not ill mingled with Romance; and of
those accidents that are feigned, there are not many in which I could be
contradicted if I would make them pass for true. I say nothing concerning the
faults escaped in Printing, the first part is full of them, and I believe this
will be but little better.

CASSANDRA, The Second Part. BOOK I.
ARAXES Discourse made such an impression in Lysimachus, that he looked upon
Oroondates as a God, and considering by what gallant proofs his virtue had
showed it self, he could hardly imagine how the Gods had endowed one man with
so many admirable qualities: After that by a thousand expressions, and a
thousand endearments full of respect and affection, he had testified how much
the Relation of his life had wrought upon him, he retired into his Chamber, and
going to bed, employed the best part of the night, (which his griefs would not
suffer him to spend in sleep) in the remembrance of those wonderful events,
which Araxes had recounted to him.

As Soon as it was day, he left both his Bed, and Chamber, and going out of the
house, took his walk in the neighboring Wood, which he had dedicated to the
entertainment of his sorrowful thoughts. Scarce did he perceive the first beams
of the rising Sun, shine through the boughs, but he turned away his eyes,
either through shame to enjoy its light, after the losses he had sustained, or
through anger to see that witness of his past felicities, and of the change of
his present fortune. When he had held them a while fixed upon the ground, on a
sudden lifting them up to that glorious Star. Divinity of Persia (cried he) is
it possible thou should appear without a Cloud, and that thou should wear
no mourning for thy most illustrious Adorers, and for the most worthy persons
thou ever shinedst upon? Art thou then alone unsensible, and dis-interessed in
these strange revolutions, in which the whole world is so much concerned? O
what a visible mark of thy Divinity, is this impassible nature of thine, in
this encounter! And how powerfully does the inconstancy of our estate, and the
immutability of thine, persuade those that are least touched with sense of
Religion; that thou art really a God!

He reasoned thus with himself, and walking softly under the Trees* he strove
by Discourses of the same nature, to engage in his fortune, all the objects
that presented themselves unto his sight. Then after those first motions, which
made him blindly talk to things insensible, he made a long reflection upon all
the past accidents of his life, and running lightly over the first of them, he
stuck upon the last with so much grief and resentment, that the remembrance of
his misfortunes was like to have made him lose a life which his misfortunes
themselves had not taken away. His deep musing, led him before he was aware,
near the River side, and when he thought least of any such thing, he saw
himself close by a man, who had newly alighted under those Trees, and who
having left his horse with a Squire that waited on him, walked up and down with
an intention like to his. This encounter made Lysimachus lift up his eyes, and
fixing them upon the Strangers face, he in it observed such admirable features,
as made him remember he had seen him some where else. This thought causing him
to look earnestly upon him, he quickly knew it was the same Stranger; whom he
had met at the Temple of Apollo, with whom he had long discoursed, and with
whom the Oracle had been confusedly pronounced to him. This Stranger who had
dearly preserved the Idea of Lysimachus, knew him also as easily, and having
accosted him very civilly, they embraced each other with much affection, and
showed as much joy for that unexpected meeting, as the remembrance of their
misfortunes would suffer them. They renewed their kindnesses many times, with
as great demonstrations of friendship, as if theirs had been established many
years, so strong are the charms of virtue to make it self be loved, and so
easily do those persons that bear its marks discern one another, and separate
themselves from the common, by that powerful character it has imprinted on
them. Lysimachus after some words of civility, spoke thus unto the Stranger: I
know not, Sir, what fortune detains you still in these parts, which I thought
you had forsaken, but whatsoever it be, it is a great advantage to me, since I
thereby reap a happiness, which I hoped not for, and which I receive as a most
especial favor from the Heavens.

The Stranger obliged by these civilities replied, If at our first encounter,
the company of a man, whose misfortunes have made him of a very unpleasing
humor, had been to be endured, I would not have left you; and whatsoever
necessity of affairs had called me other where, I would have deferred the
execution of them rather then have parted from so virtuous person.

This good opinion you express, (answered Lysimachus) is so glorious to me,
that if you have it really, I esteem my self exceeding happy, and exceeding
well recompensed for the strong passion I have to honor you, both through my
knowledge of your worth, and through a most powerful inclination. After these
passages, and many others of like nature the Stranger willing to give
Lysimachus an account of his abode in that Country, The cause (said he) of my
stay upon the banks of this River, is without doubt the same that retains you
also, and the command we received together from the Gods, to wait their
pleasure upon the banks of Euphrates, keeps me still here in some hope, that
their goodness to me is not absolutely extinguished.

May the same Gods, (replied Lysimachus) whom you serve so religiously, and
whose part you took so zealously at our last meeting, make your fortune equal
to your virtue, and I protest to you by those Powers themselves, my heart will
then be as truly touched with a passion whereof I no longer thought it capable,
as it could be by the recovery of those happinesses I have lost. The Stranger
highly obliged by the freedom of this Discourse, casting his arm about
Lysimachus his neck made answer, You know me so little, that I cannot but
blame your goodness, which makes you so easily grant your friendship to one
that has not deserved it, and who could not justly hope for it, but by the
knowledge (which you cannot yet have) of that which he really bears to you.

It Is true, ( said Lysimachus) I am yet ignorant of your name and birth, but
your virtue discovers it self by such visible marks, and the Gods have
accompanied it with so many graces of nature, that I cannot be accused of
lightness for having given my self entirely to you, without requiring a more
particular knowledge of what you are; not but that the interest I now take in
you, makes me long infinitely to learn a name which must needs be very famous,
but I will always regulate my desires, according to the will of those that are
so considerable to me as your self, and I will never exact proofs of friendship
from my friends, which may either be troublesome, or prejudicial to them.

The Stranger coming out of a little Study, in which this Discourse had buried
him, lifted up his head, and looking upon Lysimachus, Your satisfaction (said
he) shall ever be so dear to me, that I can receive no trouble by being made
acquainted with your desires, and though indeed since I came into this
Country, I never discovered my self to any body, I shall make no difficulty
for your sake, to break a resolution I had taken only for such as are less
considerable to me then your self. I was born in one of the Provinces, which
heretofore were subject to Darius, of parents very noble; but very unfortunate;
force and invasion having made them lose the Crowns their Ancestors had worn,
my name has gone so little out of those Countries where I have passed my days,
that I believe it has not yet reached your ears, and I know I shall learn you
nothing of my life, when I shall tell you I am called Arsaces. The Stranger
would have gone on, when Lysimachus interrupting him at the name of Arsaces,
What? (said he, stepping back a little, and looking intentively upon him) Are
you that valiant Arsaces, whose name resounded so loudly through all Europe,
who defeated Arimbas with his Forces, and restored peace to Scythia by so many
signal victories?

The Stranger showing some astonishment at this discourse, answered Lysimachus
very modestly, I did not believe that actions of so small moment as mine are,
had crossed the Countries which separate us from those where they were done;
but since notwithstanding the sleightnesse of them, they have come unto your
hearing, I will confess to you, I am that same Arsaces, who had the honor to
command the King of Scythia's Army, when Arimbas entered upon his Territories,
and when the justice of his cause, gave us the victory over him.

Lysimachus at this Discourse embracing him with great affection, I easily
guessed, ( said he) that some illustrious person, was hid under so handsome an
outside, and what we have heard of your mavelous actions, has such conformity
with those marks of greatness which shine visibly in you, that the sight of
you strongly persuades me to believe all that has been told me concerning them.

Arsaces was going to reply to these words, with a like civility, when he was
hindered by a noise, which made them turn their heads, and casting their eyes
(...) that side where they had heard it, they saw a Cavalier of a more then
(...) ^rmed at all points, who came riding toward them full speed. How (...)
have seemed to be, by the diligence he used, and by the swiftness of his
horse, he made a stop when he came near them, and addressing himself to Arsaces
his Squire, asked him the way to Babylon; and the Squire having showed it him,
he spurred on at the same rate as before, and was a great way from them in a
moment. The Beaver of his Helmet was up, and Lysimachus having had time to
observe his face, saw that he was a man of very good presence. But Arsaces had
scarce cast his eye upon him, when knowing him by the strong Idea, which was
engraven in his heart, he changed color twice or thrice in an instant, and by
a general trembling showed the greatness of his astonishment and surprise; but
getting suddenly out of it, by reason of the necessity that forced him to shake
it off, Great Gods! (cried he, very fiercely) behold the beginning of the
performance of your promises! With these words, calling for his horse and Cask
he hardly allowed himself time to take leave of Lysimachus, and beseeching him
in a few words to pardon the important necessity which constrained him to leave
him for a while, he buckled his Cask, and vaulting upon his horse, gave a loose
in the track of him that was past by, with so much speed and fury, that though
the other was already a great way off, he was not out of hope to overtake him.
Lysimachus was so surprised at his precipitate departure, that he had not the
leisure to offer him his assistance, and being a foot, and unarmed, he knew he
was not in a condition to follow him, wherefore judging that though he should
return unto Polemons house to furnish himself, he could not be able to reach
them who made away so swiftly, he stood still with his arms a cross, and
quickly loosing them in them in the dust that rose from their Horses feet, he
was very sensibly troubled at that accident. The sight and knowledge of
Arsaces, had produced in him a most powerful effect, and having vowed him a
firm and real friendship, he was much grieved at so sudden a separation. This
hindered him from walking there any longer, so he returned into the house,
meaning to tell his encounter to Oroondates. With this design, and that of
seeing him, he went into his Chamber, where he found him in reasonable good
health, and Amyntas assured him that within a few days he would be able to
leave his bed. Lysimachus drawing near unto him; bade him good morrow with his
wonted affection, and after having enquired how he did, he related to him his
encounter with Arsaces, and spoke of him in terms which discovered the ardent
friendship, he already had conceived toward him. Oroondates was surprised at
that adventure, and thinking upon the obligations his Country had unto that
man, he wished himself in a condition to serve him in his affairs.

He asked Lysimachus many questions concerning him, and seeing with what
praises he extolled his good qualities, he said to him with a forced smile, If
all that have seen, and conversed with Arsaces in Scythia; spoke not of him as
you do, and published not those wonders of him which you have observed, I
should be jealous of the friendship you express toward him, fearing it might
perchance make me lose a part of that you have promised me; but truly I have
heard so much good of him, that I think not that strange, I have heard from
you. I know not what occasion can have brought him into these Countries, nor
which way he has escaped out of the imprisonment wherein he was detained by the
King my Father; but I receive some consolation, in this beginning which the
Gods have given to the accomplishment of their promises; By his encounter of
that Stranger, after whom he made such haste, he conceives that they are
working his repose, and you know the Gods promised it us together, and that
they declared their wills and intentions to us by the same Oracle.

I hope you will quickly be able (replied Lysimachus) to assist in it your
self; and the health they are now restoring you, is a great step to what we
wait for from the Heavens. In the mean time I will instruct you in the
condition our Enemies are in, and after your knowledge of that, we will
consider what course we should take in our revenge. I not only desire that
information from you ( answered Oroondates) but if you remember the promise you
made me; I demand the recital of your adventures, which you are engaged to,
both by your word, and by the interest I take in all that concerns you, since
besides that which friendship gives me in yours, my own are likewise
intermingled with them, and I from you may learn some particulars of my
Princesses life, which hitherto have never been well known to me.

I am willing to obey you, (replied Lysimachus) and though this Discourse be a
most sensible renewing of my griefs, I will strive to bear it both to give you
satisfaction, and to acquaint you with things, which it is very just you should
know. At these words he made a stop, and being sat down upon the bedside,
after having thought a while upon what he had to say, he began his Story on
this manner:

The History of LYSIMACHVS.
ALthough my birth perhaps is not unknown to you, I will tell you, not only
that I am born a Prince among the Macedonians, but that I am of the same blood
with deceased Alexander, that Philip his Father, and Amyntas who was mine, were
Cosen Germans, and that my Grandfather wore the Crown, which by right of
eldership descended upon Philips Father. I will not entertain you with the
particulars of an infancy, which had nothing considerable but my education with
Alexander. The rank I held in Macedonia, as one of the nearest to the Crown,
obliged King Philip to cause me to be bred up with his son; and Prince Amyntas
my Father, contributed all that depended on him, to repair my defects of
nature, by the industry of the Masters he provided for me. I was five or six
years younger then Alexander, which hindered me from hearing the Lectures of
Aristotle the Philosopher, under whom he had already profited very much, before
I had reason and solidity enough to draw any benefit from the instructions of
that learned man: But in requital the wise Callisthenes, took care to read to
me, and used his endeavors to form my manners according to virtue and to the
true Philosophy, whereby if I was not bettered, I ought only to accuse the
perversity of mine own nature. The same care was taken, to make me expert in
all exercises of the body, and I may say without vanity; that with facility
enough, I learned all things fit and necessary for a person of my quality. I
was not above fourteen years old, when Philip took me with him to the siege of
Bizantium, where Alexander served his Apprentiship, under the most prudent, and
most politic Commander of all those that were before his time, and I was not
above sixteen when I departed with him, to bear him company in his Expeditions.
My Father was dead a few months before, and though my kindred used some
endeavors to keep me still with them, my love to the King, and the desire of
glory, which began already to be kindled in my heart, carried it from all their
entreaties, and considerations of my youth, which was the only cause of all
their apprehensions. I left Macedonia then with the King, who as young as I
was, made some account of me, and had already put me in the rank of Ptolomeus,
Hephestion, Craterus, and of those other Princes who were most dear, and most
considerable to him. Since it is an abridgement of my life alone which you
require, you will dispense with me if I relate not that of Alexander, with
which mine has always been interwoven, and besides not thinking it necessary to
repeat the less remarkable particularities, I will pass over all events that
happened to me before that fatal hour, wherein I began to love. And I may assure
you with truth; that at that unhappy moment, I began a new life, and that the
importance of those accidents; which have befallen me since, has blotted out
of my remembrance all that my heart was able to feel in a condition of
indifferency, and tranquillity. I will not therefore say any thing of
Alexanders progress in Greece, of the Siege of Thebes, nor of the defeat of
the Triballians, which were the beginnings of our Conquests. Neither will I
entertain you with our passage into Asia, nor the famous Battle of Granicus,
where the King, with so much danger of his own person, gave so many proofs of
an admirable valor. You have sufficiently learned his mavelous successes,
after that notable Victory, the taking of all the Towns upon the Sea side, his
proceedings upon the Coast of Pamphilia, the Conquest of Phrygia, of the
Pysidians, and of Cappadocia in less time, then others would have needed to
run through them, and the rest of those passages which we related to you,
during your stay at Birsa, until that bloody battle of Issus, where your self
did things that ought never to perish in the memory of man, the greatness of
which actions did in some sort make amends for the cowardice of so many
thousands, whom so glorious an example could not animate to their own defense.
It was that fatal day I was a loser as well as Darius, and being of the
victorious party, was perchance the only man who was conquered, and the only
man who lamented his misfortune, while the whole Camp resounded with songs of
triumph and rejoicing.

After a thousand spectacles of desolation and cruelty, which usually accompany
defeats of that nature; the Sun was beginning to decline, when being engaged
with a thousand horse which I commanded, in the pursuit of certain Persians, by
whose resistance we were exasperated, I chanced to meet Parmenio, returning
into the Camp, with the Queens and Princesses of Persia prisoners. This prize
began already to be divulged there, and the confirmation I received of it by
this encounter* touched me for that time only with compassion, and with some
considerations of humane misery upon occasion of so remarkable an example.
Parmenio respected me enough, to give me liberty to draw near the Chariots in
which they were. I was invited to it by curiosity, and by the desire of doing
such services to those illustrious persons in their misfortunes, as their
present condition could expect from one of my quality. Those that were about
the Chariots made way for me to come up to them* and when I was near enough to
be taken notice of by the Queens, and Princesses, I saluted them with all the
humility, which the greatness of their birth could require from the meanest of
their subjects. They returned my salutation, and I considering their faces;
observed in the countenance of the Queens, and particularly of Sysigambis; more
constancy, then the change of their fortune ought in probability to have
allowed them. That great Queen seemed to have received that blow from Heaven
without being moved at it* but the Princesses in whom age had not yet settled
that firmness of mind, expressed their griefs more freely, and by their tears
which ran down from their fair eyes, conformed themselves to the state of their
present condition. This object touched me with a compassion which it was
impossible for me to dissemble any longer, and receiving the impression of that
desolation which appeared in them, I had no trouble to compose my countenance
to such a sadness as decency required in that occasion. I thought my self
engaged to try if I could sweeten their sorrows by some words of consolation,
and make them judge by the opinion I should give them of the first Macedonians
they met withal, that they were not fallen into the hands of barbarous people,
and that their Captivity should not be so difficult to be born, as they
perchance had apprehended.

For this purpose, drawing near to Queen Sysigambis, I spoke to her in the
Persian Tongue which I had learnt in Macedonia, and which I had perfected since
my coming into Persia; Madam, ( said I, riding along by her Chariot, and bowing
down through respect, to the very saddle bow) if your Majesty will vouchsafe to
hearken to those whom their duty, and the misfortunes of War have made Enemies
to your family, and who by these cruel reasons have contributed to your
unhappiness, I shall conjure you, not to apprehend your Captivity otherwise
then by the absence of your friends, and to believe, only that inconveniency
shall make you find you are a prisoner; I am sufficiently acquainted with the
Kings virtue, to give you this assurance on his behalf, and I have conversed
enough with the Macedonians, to assure you also that the presence of your
Majesty's will imprint a great respect in their hearts, and give you the same
authority among them, as among the Persians.

The Queen having informed her self of my quality by some of them that were
about her, or having conjectured it by the honors they paid me, turning toward
me with much civility replied; If among the Macedonians we find many like
your self, one Captivity will be much more supportable then we hoped for, and
if fortune restore us not that liberty she has deprived us of, we will
endeavor to sweeten the loss of it, by the hope of such usage as is wont to
be received from virtuous persons. I confess to you that while Sysigambis
spoke on this manner, my constancy was less then hers, and that though she
brought forth these words without tears, 'twas not without great difficulty
that I withheld mine.

After some discourses of the same nature, which I had with the Queen her
daughter in law, leaving Parmenio to entertain them, I went to the Chariot of
the Princesses; the luster of their admirable beauty dazeled me at first, and
sorrow appeared in their countenances with so many charms, and so many
advantages, that they seemed to have borrowed an extraordinary addition from
it. The Princess Statira's right arm lay upon her sisters shoulder, and the
Princess Parisatis leaning one of her cheeks against Statira's face, their
tears mixed themselves confusedly with such a grace, that in that amiable
disorder, wherein love languished with pity, sadness appeared in its chiefest
triumph; their necks were almost quite uncovered, rather through the injury
which in the violence of their grief, their fair hands had done their apparel,
then through any affected desire, to set forth their excellent beauties to our
view; their hair by the same violence was half untied, flowing upon their
cheeks and shoulders; and the brightness of Parisatis's tresses, mingled it
self in the blackness of Statira's, with such a pleasing confusion, that the
eye of the mind lost it self in the care of unmixing them. They did not so
much as cast an eye upon any object about them, but limiting their looks to one
another, seemed wholly taken up in the consideration of their disasters. The
little heed they took of me, gave me liberty to observe them carefully, and
considering them as then, only with eyes of admiration and respect, though I
found something extraordinary within my self, yet did I settle no judgment, nor
frame any design, only I inferred by what fell under my, sense, that those two
fair afflicted Ladies, were the two most beautiful persons that ever the Gods
created. I rode a long time by the side of their Chariot, before they deigned
to cast their eyes upon me* and as soon as ever they turned them toward me, I
saluted them with the same submission I had showed unto the Queens; but they
returned my salutation, with so languishing a fashion, and put themselves again
in their former posture, with so little likelihood of taking farther notice of
me, that I had not the co^rage to speak to them; and interrupt their silent
entertainment.

We marched on thus, till we came to the entry of our Camp, and though the day
was so far spent, that there was hardly light enough left to discern any thing,
the first object that presented it self unto their sight, redoubled their grief
with so great violence, that we believed it would have killed them; it was King
Darius his Chariot which he had quitted, retiring himself, with his bow, and
part of his arms. This sight persuaded the Princesses he was dead, and then it
was they filled the air with Funeral cries, and such sad groans, that the most
barbarous of our soldiers, were thereby deeply touched with compassion; they
pronounced Darius his name aloud, and forth imprecations against us, which made
us judge that this last affliction proceeded sent from some other cause then a
Captivity, which they began already to support with more moderation. I
addressed my self to one of their women, and asking her the reason of those new
lamentations, I learned that they were caused only by the meeting of that
Chariot, and by their belief that the Master of it had perished with his
Forces. I was desirous to free them from that fear, and being confident Darius
was neither slain, nor prisoner, and that he had left his Chariot only to save
himself on horseback; I suffered them no longer to continue in that
apprehension, wherefore drawing near the Princess Parisatis, and having often
beseeched her to hear me, Madam, (said I) He whose loss you bewail, is in
safety, and I protest to you with truth, that King Darius is neither dead, nor
prisoner.

The Princesses settled themselves a little at these words, and Parisatis
looking upon me, with eyes wherein through grief, one might see some beams of
joy break forth, Whosoever you are (said she) that comforts us in our
afflictions, with this welcome news, may the Gods be pleased to recompense you
for it, but I beseech you flatter not our sorrows by a deceit which would only
serve to prolong, and aggravate them. She spoke these words with such a grace
and Majesty, that from that fatal moment, I felt such inward motions, as
compassion alone could not stir up in my heart, and desiring to draw her out of
that doubt wherein she still remained, Parmenio and I confirmed what I had
said, with so many protestations, that their fear began to vanish, and their
cries to cease.

In the mean time they alighted from their Chariots, and Parmenio conducting
them into certain Tents, where he continued to guard them, I went to wait upon
the King, and give him account of so important a prize; I found him in Darius
^his Tent, and in the Bath which that King had caused to be prepared to wash
himself after the Battle, but Alexander filled his room, and having from me
learnt the arrival of the prisoners, he commanded Leonatus to go and visit them
from him, and encourage them to hope for all manner of civility, and good
usage; then giving us leave to withdraw and refresh our selves after the toils
we had undergone, every one retired unto his Tent to take his rest. When I was
in bed, the passages of the day came into my memory, and calling to mind the
face, and words of Parisatis, I found something about my heart, which I was not
wont to feel, and was troubled with disquiets of which I had never been
sensible before. Besides the effect which her face had produced in my soul, the
sweetness of her words had penetrated into it with so delightful a sound, and
her looks also had made so deep an impression there, that I perceived my
inclination to lean rather toward her, then the Princess her sister. I spent
part of the night in very pleasing Idea's, and my love not being yet strong
enough to torment me with any violence, strove to deceive me, by disguising it
self under the veil of compassion, till its Forces were increased to such a
height, that it might declare it self, with that tyranny; which since it has
practiced upon me. Not but that the Princess Parisatis was capable to stir up
passions most violent even in their very birth, but I had seen her so little,
and till that day, had found so little disposition in my heart, to forgo its
liberty, that I think it not strange if at that first moment, her beauty did
not settle so absolute an Empire over it, as her admirable qualities have since
established there, for the remainder of my life.

The next day, the King went to visit them himself, and seeing me at his making
ready in the morning with many others, Cosen (said he) since you are already
known to these Princesses, I mean you shall facilitate my access to them; go
I pray you, and dispose them to suffer my visit, and prepare them for the sight
of a man, to whom without question they bear little friendship. I received this
command very joyfully, and seeing that the King was almost ready to go out of
his Tent, I went to theirs, whither I would not enter without being introduced
by their command. As Soon as I had obtained permission to see them, I was led
into the Chamber where they were together, and having humbly saluted them, I
acquainted them with the Kings coming, and the charge he had given me.
Sysigambis who was a wife discreet Princess, received my Discourse with much
civility, and by her words expressed a great sense of the honor the King
intended them. He came in presently after, and brought Hephestion with him,
having out of respect left all the rest of his attendants at the door.
Hephestion as you know, possessed his heart most absolutely, and certainly
notwithstanding what has passed between us, I must give this testimony to
truth, that the King amongst all his Followers, could not have chosen a man
more worthy of his favor; You have seen him enough to remember that he was
perfectly well fashioned, and that in valor, wit, and gracefulness, he
yielded to none among all the Macedonians; he had a great dexterity in managing
the Kings will, and used his fortune with him so well, that it was never
shaken. His stature being taller, and his garb more Majestic, then Alexanders;
Sysigambis at first took him to be the King, and casting her self at his feet,
paid him what she believed was due from a Captive to her Conqueror, and her
Master; but Hephestion stepping back with a great deal of modesty, showed her
the King, and by his action made her perceive her mistake. Sysigambis thought
she had committed a very great error, and to obtain the Kings pardon for it,
kneeled down again with her daughters, beseeching him to excuse the ignorance
of a woman, who had never had the happiness to see him. Alexander raising
her up with much respect, you were not at all deceived Madam, (said he) for
he indeed is my second self.

After that he comforted her with the kindest words civility and generosity
could furnish him withal, and by assurances of the same usage she could receive
from Darius. Their grief was something abated by that hope, and the King who
would not make his first visit too long, confirmed his promises again, and
went out of their Tent, leaving them as well satisfied as they could be in
their misfortune. He kept his word exactly which he had given them, and from
that very day gave order to settle their household again according to the
greatness of their quality, to furnish them with those Officers they vvanted,
and with guards for their persons, restoring them all that splendour which
their Captivity seemed to have taken away. In this interim my condition was
very much changed, and that second sight of Parisatis, had so weakened my
heart, that it was no longer able to defend it self, nor to avoid those mortal
vvounds, which it has so dearly conserved, and whereof it neither can nor
will be cured but by the end of my life alone. Sorrow appeared so charming in
the countenance of that fair prostrate Lady, and her eyes though full of
water, threw such fiery, piercing darts at me, that being quite surcharged
with love and compassion, I went forth with the King in such a perplexity,
that I had much ado to know where I was. When I was gotten into my Tent,
her Idea came yet more strongly into my remembrance, and notwithstanding all
the attempts I made to blot it out, my passion being vvhetted by that
difficulty, assaulted me with greater violence, and seemed to inflame it self
with anger, at the resistance I made against an affection that was so
glorious to me. Do thou defend thy self so obstinately (said Love) against
the beauty of Parisatis, and must the most accomplished of all creatures have
so much ado to introduce her self into thy heart? Do thou think thou can
owe thy liberty, for which thou strugglest so undecently, to a more fair or
more illustrious person? Or do thou believe thou should do a mean action,
unworthy of thy courage, if thou should deliver up thy arms to the greatest,
and most perfect Princess in the world?

Thus Love argued to complete his Victory, but Reason replied thus in my
defense; That which thou alledgest, O Love! were powerful enough to procure
thy entrance into a soul less capable of thy impressions; but those same
advantages which make Parisatis worthy to be adored, do likewise settle a
despair in us, which is the cause why we oppose thy birth. Fortune has not
enriched me with Crowns, which he ought necessarily to wear, who shall dare to
declare his affections to the daughter of the greatest King upon Earth; neither
has nature endowed me with qualities to vvin the love of the most accomplished
of all creatures. True it is, (continued I* taking part with my Reason) that
it would be a strange presumption, to raise my thoughts to her, who justly
might disdain even Alexander himself, as victorious as he is; and who with
truth, believes she may boast to have no equal in the world, unless her sister
may dispute that advantage with her; but though the Gods had raised me to as
high a pitch of greatness as that of Darius, it is not probable his daughters
should be reserved for his most mortal enemies.

By these considerations I strove to hinder Love from entering, but my arguments
were too weak, and notwithstanding all my endeavors to keep it out, either by
the remembrance of Parisatis's birth, or by the thought of that hatred, which
it was likely the house of Darius bore to all Alexanders party; I did but
vainly oppose its forces, and the power of my destiny. In short, I began to
love, but to love with so much violence, that no affection settled with length
of time, did ever torment a soul with more vehemence* then mine expressed even
in its very birth. Alas! when these first thoughts return into my mind, and
that I reflect upon the beginnings of my Love, I find how much reason I had
indeed to resist it, and how great an obligation I had to my good Genius, which
to withdraw me from that passion so fatal to my repose, did charitably
represent unto me all those evils, which I since have felt. In the mean time I
loved, as I have already told you, but I loved with so much silence and
discretion, and with such power over my tongue and actions, that it was hard
for the most interessed persons, to find any other alteration in me then that
of my countenance. And truly my affection settled it self with so much respect;
that for a long time I considered Parisatis as a Divinity, to whom I ought to
pay my vows, no otherwise then as adorations and sacrifices; having formed so
high an Idea unto my self, that I believed the whole Earth was infinitely below
her. I had the happiness to see her oftentimes with the Queens* and the
Princess her sister, and the acquaintance I had made with them the day they
were taken, added to many petty services, which in their misfortune I did them
with much diligence and affection, gave me a freer access to them, then all
the other Princes of Alexanders Court.

It is true, that my quality afforded me some advantage above many of them, and
though my youth exempted me from many Offices, which their age was more capable
of then mine, yet was I considered in the Court as one of the nearest to the
Crown; and among those Illustrious Princesses, as he who of all the Princes was
most submissive to them, and who most ardently sought the occasions to lessen
their misfortune by all manner of service and good offices; the condition they
were in presented opportunities every day, either in their own persons, or some
belonging to them, and I laid hoid of them with so much joy, that in the end I
obliged them all to some particular good will toward me. I think Hephestions
love took birth as soon as mine; but though the Kings favor gave him great
advantages, he abused them not of a long time, and considering how much
Parisatis was above him though a Captive, he looked upon her always with the
same respect, she could have required from him in the Court of the King her
Father. He visited her very often, and the power he had with the King, giving
him a thousand means to oblige those illustrious Captives* made his Company the
more considerable to them.

We were at the Siege of Marathon, when the King received Darius his first
^^tters by the hands of Mythranes; you know what they contained, and the Answer
which Alexander returned: but I will tell you that he was exasperated not only
by the terms of that Letter, which truly were too imperions for one making a
request, but also by the superscription which Darius wrote to him as to a
private person, without giving him the Title of King. Alexander was so incensed
at it, that he refused all he desired of him, and so the Princesses lost the
hope of liberty for that time. I would not carry them that unwelcome news, but
I was there when Mythranes having had permission to wait upon them before his
departure, came to tell it them himself. They received it with much trouble,
but also with much moderation, and the Queens keeping themselves within the
bounds of their ordinary constancy, permitted the young Princesses to deplore
their Captivity with some tears. I had much ado to forbear accompanying theirs
with mine, and I gave them so many testimonies of the share I took in their
sorrow, that they thereby received no slight marks of my affection. Drawing
near to the Princess Parisatis, who sat upon a Chair with an handkerchief
wiping away the tears which fell from her fair eyes, Madam, (said I) the Gods
are my witnesses, that the honor of your sight, is more precious to me, then
the Empire of Asia, and that I cannot desire your liberty, without making
wishes against mine own happiness, but those same Gods will also testify for
me, that I would not only forsake mine own interests, to restore it you, but
that I would give my life with joy, if the loss of it could be any way
advantageous to you.

The Princess thinking her self obliged by this Discourse took the handkerchief
from her eyes, and turning them toward me with an air, which as sad as it was,
expressed her acknowledgement, replied; Lysimachus, these are the effects of
your ordinary generosity, and your compassion of our deplorable destiny, puts
thoughts into your mind, which are indeed worthy of you; I know not what
satisfaction you can draw from the sight of miserable afflicted creatures, but
I may truly assure you both for the Queens, and for our selves, that in our
misfortunes your consolation is dear to us, and your person most considerable.

I had a fair occasion enough to discover my self absolutely, and matter good
enough to speak, but fear forbad me, and respect tied up my tongue, only
allowing me to make this reply. I reap so great a glory from the honor you do
me, in suffering me, and separating me from the number of your enemies, that if
this felicity continue, I will never envy the fortune of the most happy persons
upon Earth.

Having said thus, I drew near the Princess Statira, endeavoring by the like
discourse to sweeten the sharpness of her grief; true it is, that sorrow
appeared more lively in her, and now making reflection upon it, I believe that
besides the misfortunes of her Captivity, the thought of your absence, or of
your loss, was the greatest part of her affliction; she never gave any respite
to the deepnesse of her melancholy, and how great care soever was taken to
divert her, she never was sensible of any of those things, which perchance gave
some abatement to the grief of the Queens, and of the Princess her sister.
After the taking of Marathon, we went into Phaenicia, and during all the
Voyage, I had the happiness to march near their Chariots; it is true, that
Hephestion of whose diligence I began to be suspicious, and many others with
him, often kept me company, but I had at least my sight free, and the presence
of my rival, and of my companions, did not deprive me of a liberty, which I
should not have taken in the greatest solitude. The fourth or fifth days march*
while I was delighted in their conversation, and that by the absence of
Hephestion, I possessed my Princess a little more peaceably, Cleander (the most
brutish of all men living, and he of whom Alexander since made use for the
death of great Parmenio) having that day charge of the prisoners, and of the
Baggage, came up to the Queens Chariots, and with insolent words expressing his
anger to see them go so softly, commanded the Charioteers to drive on faster.

This dis-respect touched the Princesses very nearly, and reading their
displeasure in their countenances, I could not forbear blaming Cleanders
carriage, and showing him that such persons were to be used with greater
reverence; but that unmannerly fellow, after having replied that I was too
young to give him instructions, redoubled his command, and not thinking himself
readily enough obeyed, struck the Queens Charioteer in their presence, and one
of their Eunuchs who would have said something in his justification. This
action making the Princesses see they were really Captives, afflicted them so
sensibly, that they could not dissemble their discontent, and enflamed me with
such anger, that I lost all consideration and fear of displeasing the King, and
crying out to Cleander to defend himself, I took a Javelin out of a soldiers
hand, and spurring up my horse directly to him, assaulted him so suddenly, that
all he could do, was to lift up his arm, and receive me with the point of his;
it glanced upon my arms without doing me any hurt, and the fury wherewith I
precipitated my self against him, hindering me from finding the defects of his
Curasse, made my blow miss of its effect, and my dart fly into five or six
pieces. The tears which that affront had drawn from the eyes of my fair
Princess, had so animated me, that without being moved by the cries of those
who endeavored to part us, I drew my sword, and coming up to him again more
enraged then before, after having received a second stroke with his Javelin,
which gave me a light wound in the side, I ran my sword under his right arm,
which finding free entrance to the very hilt, appeared almost all of it behind
his shoulder; the wound was not mortal, but yet so great, that Cleander fell
among his horses feet with very little strength, and knowledge. I made a stop
seeing him fall, but I could not forbear to say, Get thee gone into the other
world thou insolent fellow, to injure Queens, and Princesses, and to teach
those who are like thee, that punishment is inseparable from crimes of this
nature.

By his fall my sword remained still in my hand, and putting it up into the
scabbard, I drew near to the Chariots and addressing my self to Sysigambis,
Madam, ( said I) pardon I beseech you a rashness full of irreverence, in a man
who saw himself wounded in the most sensible part of his soul, and believe that
if this rude fellows fault had been of another nature, we would not have ended
the quarrel in your presence.

Those good Queens, and those fair Princesses were so troubled at this
accident, that they had much ado to settle themselves, and after a good while
Sysigambis answered me thus, Sir, your generosity is great, but our injury was
not consider able enough, to require such violent remedies, and the offense we
received was too light to be repaired with the blood, and perhaps with the life
of such a person.

Though she said thus to me, and that their goodness made them sorry for
Cleanders mischance, whom all believed to be most dangerously wounded, yet did
I nevertheless perceive by their faces, they were not displeased with that
action, and I found cause to hope that proof I had given them of my respect,
and of the part I took in their interest, would not be unprofitable to me. In
the mean time Cleander was carried away, and the noise of this accident being
come to the Kings ear, and to all my friends, Ptolomeus, Craterus, Philotas,
Antigonus, Seleucus, Meleager, Polypercon, and all those who had showed any
affection to me, came and offered me all the assistances I could expect from
their friendship. Some of them thought it best for me to absent my self, and
avoid the Kings anger for a time, while they labored to make my peace, and
that we saw what would become of Cleanders wound; But the rest whose opinion I
resolved upon, believed it better for me not to stir from the Camp, and that my
action not being ill, I ought not to fear any thing from so just, and generous
a Prince as Alexander. It happened according to their hopes, and the King being
informed of the truth, though Cleanders friends endeavored to disguise it,
instead of blaming what I had done, condemned Cleander, in such a way, as might
have made his friends afraid for him, if he had not been punished enough for
his fault already. The King excused it to the Queens himself, and satisfied
them absolutely by words which showed how much he disapproved that action. In
the mean time we arrived at Sidon, and notwithstanding my slight wound for
which I never kept my Chamber, I had the happiness to see the Princesses every
day. When they saw me alone, and that they knew Cleanders recovery was not
despaired of, the remembrance of what I had done for their sakes coming into
their mind* made them full of acknowledgement, and moved them to return me
such civil, obliging thanks, that thereby I knew well ingratitude finds no
place in souls that are truly noble. But this acknowledgement was general
amongst them, and Parisatis whom I was desirous to oblige to a particular good
will, and to whom I every day gave particular marks of my affection, carried her
self to me as the Princess her sister, and not taking notice with how great
diligence I tied my self to her service, kept her self still within the limits
of civility and esteem. I cannot better represent unto you the condition I was
in, then by the description Araxes made to me of yours, when you were in the
same terms I became sad, and melancholy like you, I avoided company^ and the
society of my friends like you, and like you I lost a good part of my health,
and better looks. I came to my Princess an hundred times with a firm
resolution to discover my self, and to dye by her command, and for the
punishment of my temerity, rather then perish languishing, or in the violence
of a torment, which without being known would infallibly bring me to my grave.
But as often as I purposed that design, so often my respect made it vanish, and
the presence of Parisatis dissipating all the courage I had left, settled me
again in my intention to die in silence, rather then offend her by a
presumptuous declaration. On this manner I passed all the time we were at
Sidon, and all that we staid at the siege of Tire. Judge of my sufferance by
the length of my silence, and of the greatness of my respect, by the violence
I used upon my self during a whole year: The King* and all my friends, wondered
at the alteration of my humor and countenance, they often asked me the reason
of it, and I laid it upon some bodily indisposition, without discovering the
true cause. Ptolomeus the dearest of all my friends, used his utmost endeavors
to find it out, but though my most secret thoughts had never been concealed
from him, I then disguised the truth to him, as well as to others, and of a
long time he could not draw a true confession from my mouth.

After the siege of Tire, the Ladies (as you know) were carried to the siege of
Gaza; there it was that my wounds grew worse by the continual presence of
Parisatis, and my despair alone, made me resolve to bear the worst events J
could apprehend from declaring my self. It was not without great contestations,
and great difficulties, J obtained that effect from my courage; but considering
the miserable condition of my life, J determined to hazard the remainder of it,
to establish a better, or lose that which J only lingered out in pains, and
torments that were insupportable. With this design, coming one day into her
Chamber, and finding her alone employed in the reading of Homers Iliads which
she understood as well as her own language; the fear of disturbing her, made me
retire a little, but she perceived me, and laying down her Book upon the Table,
called me back, and at the same time wiped her eyes by reason of some tears
which ran down along her cheeks: my apprehension of any thing that concerned
her, moved me to ask the cause of her trouble; but she instantly composed her
countenance, and making a pleasing smile succeed her tears, I cannot conceal my
weakness from you, (said she) but must confess, I was not able to read
Andromache's lamentations for the loss of her dear husband, without being
touched with compassion, nor without accompanying with mine, those tears which
probably she shed upon that occasion.

This discourse drawing a sigh from the bottom of my heart, obliged me after a
great conflict in my self, to speak to her on this manner: J cannot think
(Madam) of the different causes, and different effects of pity, without
reflecting upon my own misfortunes, which ought to draw from me, for mine own
interests, a greater abundance of tears, then you have bestowed upon those of
the sad Andromache; nor without blaming the injustice of Nature, which gives
you a sense of compassion, for persons you never knew, and yet would without
doubt refuse it you, for those that are most affectionate to your service: you
bewail the loss of Hector, who died in the quarrel of his own Country, and not
of yours; who neither loved you, nor knew you, and to whose death you did not
at all contribute; and yet you would without any touch of pity, see him die at
your feet; nay, which is more, die for you, who of all men living, were most
perfectly yours; you would see him breath out his life without being moved at
it, and without sweetning the cruelty of his destiny by one look, by one sigh,
or by one word in his favor.

Though the Princess was of an apprehension quick enough to understand the
sense of these words, yet did she not dive into it at the first, and without
making a longer reflection upon them, she replied, I am little obliged to you,
Lysimachus, for thinking me so ill natured, I know not from which of my actions
you have drawn that opinion, but I do not believe I have showed my self so
unsensible in the misfortunes of my friends, and of those whom nature, or any
reason engaged me to love, or esteem, and I do less think, I should without a
real compassion, and without being nearly grieved, behold the ruin of a
person, whose destruction I had caused, and to whom I should be obliged for any
particular affection.

I would not stay the execution of my design any longer, and judging that I
ought not to lose so favorable an occasion, I fell upon my knees before her,
and not harkening to the commands she laid upon me to rise; The Gods, Madam,
(said I) the Gods who are witnesses of the Declaration you make in favor of
me, are also witnesses of my thoughts, and know that it is not till the last
extremity of my life, J beg of you the effects of that pity for one that dies
for you. It is true, Madam, I yield up my soul at your feet, unless you set
that compassion awork which you boasted of; you will never have a more just
occasion to make use of it, and you can never use it to a man that will serve
you, or adore you with a more profound respect, and a more holy zeal then mine;
I have suffered before I come to this last remedy, all that a soul is able to
endure without making it known; and J have only declared my passion to
insensible witnesses; and if my eyes, and the change of my looks, and humor,
have given you any knowledge of it, 'twas without the consent of a soul, which
opens not it self unto you now, without a violent constraint: In short, Madam,
Lysimachus adores you, if it be a crime, he comes to confess it before you; if
this presumption must be repaired by death, Lysimachus comes to suffer it at
your feet. And that he may end his life by the most glorious of all destinies,
he begs of you some slight mark of that compassion, which you have for the
unfortunate, and to which you have engaged your self for him.

J had said more in the rapture that transported me, if looking upon the
Princess, J had not seen her countenance change twice or thrice, and of a
sudden bedewed with a few tears, which she could not possibly retain. As we are
ready to flatter our selves in the belief of what we ardently desire, J took
them at first to my advantage, and thought pity had drawn them from her fair
eyes indeed; but within a moment after J found disdain was the cause of them,
and that her displeasure at hearing a Declaration of Love from one of
Alexanders followers, had forced he^ to show those marks of her grief, and of
her indignation. She darted a scornful look at me, and then of a sudden turning
away her eyes; I knew the misfortune of my condition (said she) enough before,
without your putting me in mind of it, and was sufficiently confirmed that I
was a prisoner, without this new assurance: Yes, Lysimachus, I am so, and
moreover I am exposed to all unhappinesses which Captivity carries inseparably
along with it. This consideration exempts you from that respect, which in
another season would be due to the Princess of Persia, and ought to stifle
that resentment in me which I am no longer in a condition to express.

These words pronounced with an accent divided between grief and anger, struck
me so to the quick, and wrought so deeply upon me, that J remained in a
confusion which J am not able to represent; J repented me a good while for
having displeased my Princess, and in that thought durst not so much as lift up
my eyes to her, but floated in a strange irresolution. Yet in the end coming to
consider, how unjustly she accused me of want of respect, J purposed to
justify my self, and let her know it was not the change of her condition, that
had encouraged me to commit that fault; with that intent though she looked no
more upon me* but leaned her elbows upon the Table, and her head upon her hand,
I spoke to her again on this manner: J acknowledge, Madam, J have been
infinitely to blame, and that the disproportion there is between you and all men
living, ought either to have strangled my passion in its birth, or this
confession in my mouth, which has offended you. J know you are both the most
accomplished, and the greatest Princess in the world, nor will J allege for
part of my justification, that J am born a Prince, and that all my Ancestors
have worn those Crowns, which J want, to dare (with any probability of success)
pretend to the daughter of the greatest of all the Kings upon Earth. This
consideration cannot excuse me for a fault, which your will, and my knowledge
have condemned; but if guilty as J am, J may yet beg any favor from you, J
conjure you by all that you account most holy and sacred, to believe that the
condition which the chance of war has reduced you to, did not at all authorize
my Declaration; and that J could not have considered you with more respect, and
submission in the Throne of Darius, no, nor in that of the Gods themselves,
then J do in this Captivity, to the misfortunes whereof you would impute my
crime; my courage is not capable of so much baseness, and to what estate
soever, Fortune should either precipitate, or raise you up, she cannot deprive
you of what the Gods, and your birth have given you; nor dis-engage me from a
servitude for which alone J was born, and for which alone J will die; though it
is not in my power to repair the offense J have committed against you, J have
both power and courage enough to punish it, and with my blood to pay the price
of those tears which my temerity has drawn from your fair eyes.

J pronounced these words with an accent, which made Parisatis believe J had
some design against my life, and seeing J was risen up, and that after a low
obeisance, J was going from her, she raised up her head, and called me back
again. Although she loved me not, nor had any intention to engage her self to
me in any other affection, then what civility, and the acknowledgement of some
small services obliged her to; yet did she not hate me enough to see me die,
and that for the expiation of a fault, which after having a little digested it,
she judged not worthy of so severe a punishment. That was it which persuaded
her to call me back, and seeing me return trembling, and with actions of a man
quite lost in his passion, after she had a while sought out terms to express
her self, she spoke to me on this manner: Lysimachus, I cannot shake off that
trouble, which your words have settled in my mind, but I am willing to banish
the belief I had, that my Captivity alone had encouraged you, to discover your
thoughts to me with too much liberty. I know that you are as generous, as I
have found you bold, and I will only accuse my misfortune, and the easiness
of my humor, for the displeasure I receive; I alone will suffer the punishment
of it, and I will inflict no other upon you, then what you before imposed upon
your self; my tears will be better recompensed by your silence, then by your
blood; I esteem you enough never to contribute to your ruin, and we are
enough obliged to you, to take care to prevent it; this is all I can do for
you, and if you be not contented with a particular esteem which I have had of
your person, and which by the repentance of your fault you may yet hope for, I
acknowledge my self very unable to give you satisfaction.

These words pronounced with much Majesty and moderation, gave me indeed some
knowledge of the good nature of that Princess, and of her generosity which
could not consent to the destruction of a person that loved her, and to whom
she thought she had some light obligation; but they gave me no mark at all of
that affection which J required, nor any hope to engage her to it; and yet they
were so sweet to me, and wrought such an effect upon me, that they banished a
good part of my despair, and drove away that desire of dying, which those she
spoke before had settled in my mind. J kneeled down again before her, and
kissing the hem of her garment, with a profound respect, Madam, (said J) this
guilty man deserves not the mercy you show him, but since you consent to the
conservation of his life* which his rashness gave you just cause to hate, he
will regulate it in such manner, that you shall never repent your goodness; and
not being able to free it from that violent passion which you have condemned,
he by his silence and discretion will repair the greatness of his fault: I will
offend you as little as possibly J can, with my discourse, and freeing you from
being troubled with my tongue, J will content my self that all my actions and
all my looks, tell you what J have in my heart. That particular esteem you make
me hope for, is too high, and too glorious a recompense for me, and if J should
pretend to more, from a person all divine as you are, I should be the blindest
and most presumptuous man upon the Earth.

The Princess was going to reply, J know not whether sharply or mildly, when
two of her maids entered the Chamber, and interrupted our conversation: The
Princess Statira came in within a while after, and we spent part of the day in
an indifferent entertainment, but if the sorrows of that Princess would have
suffered her to be concerned in the affairs of others, she might easily have
found something extraordinary in the trouble that appeared in both our faces.
Parisatis could not look upon me without blushing, and when I took notice of
the confusion I caused, and thought upon the displeasure I had stirred up in
her, I fixed my eyes upon the ground, and answered the discourse of the
Princess her sister, with so much distraction, that if her mind had not been
powerfully prepossessed, she must needs have observed the disturbance that was
visible in mine.

After that day I passed many others, not without violent disquiets, but at
least with a little more repose, and with this consolation, that what I
suffered was known unto my Princess, and that I was not hated of her; this was
to me the most advantageous thing I could believe, and how great testimonies
soever I gave her both of the continuation, and sincerity of my passion, by the
assiduity of my service, and by a thousand actions full of respect and
discretion, she kept her self always, with such a moderation, and with so
perfect a severity within the limits of that esteem she had made me hope for,
that I feared with a great deal of probability she would never be touched with
any other inclinations toward me. I said little to her of my love, and when any
word of it escaped me, I repaired it with submissions, which abated part of the
displeasure she received thereby: As I strove to make some progress in my
design of winning her heart, Hephestion on his side spared no endeavors to
introduce himself into it. I am ignorant how he discovered his passion to her,
and how Parisatis received the first overture of it; but this I know his
fortune was no better then mine, and that she used us both with so much
equality, as it was very hard to observe a difference; yet at that time I found
that Alexanders assistance upon which my rival grounded himself, gave me rather
some advantage; and that my Princess fearing her favorable usage of him,
should be attributed to some mean compliance for Alexander, took an occasion
contrary to Sysigambis's advice, to despise him, for that which made him
considerable to all others; not that she hated or disesteem'd him, Hephestion
was of too graceful a presence, to cause any aversion, and his valor and good
qualities were sufficiently known, to make her esteem him very much. We met
often at her Lodgings, and though we had ever been good friends before, the
hindrance we were to one another began to alienate our minds, and afterward
considering the diligence, and the actions of each other, with more
heedfulness, as with more interest then we had done formerly, that which
deceived indifferent persons, could not long abuse us that were concerned; and
our sight piercing more clearly into the intentions of a rival, discovered them
quickly to us with so perfect a knowledge, that we no longer doubted what we
had feared, but gave that jealousy an entrance into our souls, which has
since tormented them with so much violence.

You know that after the taking of Gaza, and some stay the King was constrained
to make there for the cure of two wounds he had received in that Siege, we took
our way toward Egypt, and the King, the whole Court, and the Ladies, went by
boat upon the Nile to Memphis. During that Voyage, and our abode in that Town,
Hephestion and I vied who should get the greatest share in Parisatis's favor;
I forgot none of those little cares, that could make the truth of my affection
be taken notice of, nor did I let pass any occasion to set before her eyes the
greatness and purity of my zeal, with all the respect, and discretion she
desired. The King who already was passionately taken with the Princess
Statira, gave her many testimonies of his love, and (which was more hurtful,
and more insupportable to me) having perceived that of Hephestion to Parisatis,
he swelled his courage by the assistances he promised him, and gave him the
boldness to serve her openly. These difficulties did not dishearten me, but
fortifying my self against the obstacles I foresaw, I resolved not to abandon
so glorious a design but with my life. In the mean time the King departed from
Memphis, to visit the Temple of Jupiter Hammon, and not being willing to take
the Princesses along, in so painful, and so dangerous a Voyage, left them at
Memphis under the guard of part of his Forces. My duty, and my honor obliged
me to wait upon him, and carried it against my inclination, which made all
places hateful to me, where my Princess was not. Hephestion who stirred not
from the Kings person, went the Voyage also, which was no small consolation to
me. Before our departure, having watched my opportunity when my rival was with
the King, and that the Princesses were in the Gardens near their Lodging, I
found means to address my self to Parisatis who was in an Alley with Apamia,
Arsinoe, and some of her maids, having given her my hand to help her in her
Walk, the Gentleman Usher that led her withdrew, and yiedling me that honor,
left me the liberty to entertain her; when we were far enough from the other
Ladies not to be overheard, and that I saw them busied in a particular
conversation, I took occasion to speak unto my Princess, Madam, (said J) it is
not to trouble you with the remembrance of a passion which you disapprove, nor
to call into your mind a fault which you have condemned, that I open my mouth
yet once again before you; but it is to protest to you at this rigorous
departure, that in being separated from you, I am really separated from my
self; and that the most sensible grief I feel, is that absence will deprive me
of the occasions of doing you some small service; not but that you have
imprinted a great deal of respect in the souls of those that stay behind with
you, but the duties of a person, tied by a most powerful inclination, are very
different from those, which are paid only to your quality, and to your merit;
and moreover which way soever they serve you, I shall envy their happiness so
much, that the remembrance of their good fortune will most sensibly aggravate
the discontents of this tedious and cruel Voyage, to which I see my self
condemned. I do not represent my sufferings to you, to oblige you to an
affection which with justice I can never hope for, but to draw from your
goodness some mark of compassion, for this glorious, unfortunate man, who
without murmuring endures the gallantest, and the most cruel of all torments.

The Princess, seeing I held my peace at these words, replied, I should be very
ungrateful, Lysimachus, if I did not acknowledge my self obliged to the good
will you express to me with so much discretion and respect, but I should also
be a dissemblet if J could hide the trouble you cause in me by your
perseverance in a design, which J opposed in its birth; not through any
aversion, or undervaluing of your person, but through the knowledge of the
difficulties you would meet withal in my humor, and of those which the Heavens
do so many ways produce against your intentions. J know your birth is
illustrious, and J have eyes as well as others, to discern the advantages of
your person: This consideration has indeed given me all the esteem, you can
with reason desire, from a Princess who knows you, and is obliged to you; but J
am not thereby exempted, from what J owe to my own quality, and to those
persons to whom my birth has submitted me; it is from them alone J will
receive thoughts beyond that esteem I have of you, and if you should see me
engaged to it for some other body, accuse only my obedience, and not an
inclination which shall never declare it self in favor of another, rather then
of Lysimachus. J do not think you have any reason to complain of a confession,
I make to you with a great deal of freedom; neither do J believe, that without
a design to offend me, you can desire any more.

She blushed at these words, as ashamed to have favored me so much; and though
being well explained, J found very little change in my condition, J received
them as a most advantageous obligation; and not being in a place where J could
cast my self at her feet, to give her thanks for it, J bowed down with much
respect, and answered; I never hoped (Madam) that my fortune should attain that
pitch you have raised it to, and having adored, as soon as loved you, I always
believed, that for the accomplishment of my glory and happiness, it was
sufficient my vows, and adorations were not unpleasing to you, without
pretending to any acknowledgement, which I could not aspire to without much
presumption. I see too well, the obstacles that oppose my more perfect
felicity, and I will expect from Heaven, and from your self, both the
alteration of our fortunes, and what you shall ordain concerning my life. In
the mean time, Madam, be pleased that at this rigorous departure, I may for my
consolation, make use of that hope you give me, and that to save me from
despair, I may believe, that Hephestion not being more zealous, nor more
passionate, shall neither be more happy then Lysimachus. J ended these words
with some fear of having displeased her; but that Princess, who had no
weakness at all in her mind, was but little moved at them, and having staid a
while before she made answer; Lysimachus (said she) I pardon this liberty for
the same cause, that made me pardon the others you have taken, and I not only
excuse it; but to let you see I am not cruel, I will also confirm the promise I
have made you. It is true I suffer Hephestion, both for his merit, and by the
command of the Queens, and because it is from their will only, next to that of
Darius, that I will receive the rule of my whole life; but be certain, that if
my inclination alone can establish the happiness of both, Hephestion by it,
shall never have advantage over you.

I was going to reply, and it was likely our conversation would have lasted
longer, if the King had not come into the Garden, and with him Hephestion,
Perdiccas, Seleucus, Antigonus, and many others, who interrupted us. The King
drew near to the Princess Statira, and Hephestion coming up to Parisatis, took
that hand which he found free, and being an obstacle to me all the rest of the
day, had also the displeasure, to see me take revenge on him the same way, and
deprive him by my presence, of the means to entertain her in particular.

We took our leaves that evening, and the next morning by break of day, we got
on horseback, and traveled toward the Temple of Jupiter Hammon. I will not
trouble you with the particulars of our Voyage, you have without question heard
speak of it; and the relation of it is but little important to the knowledge of
my life. My adventures were like to those of the rest of the company, but my
thoughts were without doubt more noble, and the absence of Parisatis; forced
those complaints from me, which the toil and the incommodities of that journey
drew from indifferent persons. This Voyage was the sharpest, and the most
painful of any that ever was undertaken: The insupportable heat that scorched
us in those dry, desert fields we were to pass, the want of all manner of
water, and the deepnesse of the sands which heretofore have buried whole
Armies, were like to have been the destruction of our party, and without the
particular assistance of Heaven, we could never have escaped. We broke through
all these difficulties, and arrived at that famous Temple, whose Oracles are
superstitiously adored through the whole world; and there it was, that whether
by chance, or by corrupting the Priests, or by the will of the Gods, the King
found the cause of that insupportable vanity, which has since made him commit
so many faults, and exact adorations from his friends, which have cost many
noble persons their lives. After he had obtained the answer he desired, he
returned presently; and passing near the Isle of Pharos, gave order for the
building of the stately City of Alexandria, and having drawn the plot of it
himself, and set workmen about it, he went back to Memphis, not doubting but
that Darius, fortified by his absence, was again recruited, and already in a
condition, with his Forces to trouble his new Conquests. He turned aside by the
way, to punish the revolt of the Syrians, who had cut the throats of their
Garrisons, and burnt their Governor Andromachus alive; and having given such
orders as were necessary for those unsettled Provinces, we at last drew near
that town again, where the King, Hephestion, and my self, had left our hearts
with the Captive Princesses. Hephestion and I met every day, but jealousy had
extinguished all our ancient friendship, and had made us so cold, that we
hardly spoke to one another all the Voyage.

We found all things at Memphis in the condition we had left them, and observed
no change either in our affairs, or in the hearts of our Princesses. Parisatis
used me at my arrival in the same fashion as she had done at my departure, and
made me know by that perseverance in her ordinary moderation, that her mind
was none of those light ones which are capable of all impressions, and that my
good or evil fortune, ought neither to make me hope, nor fear a change. We
made no stay at all in that City, and the King drawing his Forces out of their
Quarters, marched straight toward Darius, with so much diligence, that in
eleven days we encamped upon the banks of Euphrates, and having passed over it
upon Bridges of Boat, which the King caused to be made, we crossed the Plain
that lies between it and the River Tygris, which we waded through, and having
reached the bank with an incredible difficulty, we found all the Country burnt,
and yet smoking, for Mazeus had set it on fire by Darius his command^ The King
lay there two nights, to rest the Princesses who were wearied with that hasty
Voyage, and in spite of the Eclipse of the Moon which put some terror in his
men, and was taken by the more fearful for a very ill augury, the third he
marched with the same assurance toward the enemy. Here I cannot omit to recall
unto your memory, an accident which overwhelmed us all with sadness, and to
make you judge of my grief by the affliction of my Princess.

I was with the King when one of the Queens Eunuchs, came to give him notice;
that Darius his wife was dying, and that she was already in a sound in the arms
of the Princesses her daughters. Certainly how great soever my surprise was at
the hea^ring of this news* the King showed little less, and laying aside all
businesses wherein he was employed, he ran unto the Queens Tents, with a
sorrow which appeared most visibly in him. But O Gods! how great was our
affliction, when at our coming into the Chamber, we saw her expire, and our
fair Princesses faint away, at so sad a spectacle.

This sudden death of hers surprised us the more, by how much it appeared
extraordinary* and though a few days before I had heard her complain of some
indisposition caused by the troublesomenesse of that Journey, yet had we never
seen her in a condition that could give us any apprehension of a death which
did almost prevent her sickness. All the most mournful expressions that ever
grief sent forth, showed themselves visibly in our Princesses, and the greatest
sensibility it ever produced, was imprinted really in my heart. The King
comforted the Queen Mother, with the sweetest and most obliging words,
compassion could furnish him withal. Hephestion held Parisatis's head, who
languished with little show of life; I did the same to Statira, who deeply
buried in her sorrow, seemed to prepare her self to accompany to her grave, a
mother she had most perfectly honored; and mingled my tears with hers,
endeavoring to comfort her as much as my own affliction would permit. I did
not hear what Hephestion said to Parisatis, and though I envied him the
happiness of having prevented me, grief swallowed up my jealousy for a few
moments and made me without trouble behold the services he did her. It is not
necessary I should enlarge my self farther upon this matter, I see this
discourse draws tears from your eyes, and you have already sufficiently learned
all I can tell you of this sad adventure; I will only say, that Alexander,
after having wept a long while, and paid unto Sysigambis all she could have
expected from Darius himself, rendered also unto the deceased Queen all the
honor that could have been required from that dear husband, he caused her to
be interred with a pomp worthy of her quality, and of the glory of her
Ancestors. Some days were spent in that solemnity, and immediately after the
King prepared himself to give battle, having sent back Darius his Ambassadors
with the answer you have heard.

I will not entertain you with the particularities of the success of that
bloody battle, wherein you did so many miraculous actions, and wherein your
despair made you seek a death among the arms of the Macedonians, which they
refused you, and which you had so dearly sold them. You shall only learn that
after that cruel day, the incommodity of two wounds I had received, deprived me
for some time of the sight of my Princess; and 'twas not till I came to
Babylon, (where we were brought in by Mazeus within a while after) that I
received an honor I had not deserved; Though the Queens and Princesses were
sufficiently to be excused for not visiting those who had been wounded only in
fighting against their nearest friends, yet had they the goodness to do that
honor to Hephestion, Perdiccas, and my self; whether it were that they thought
themselves obliged to it, by the services we had done them, or that their
complacency made them give Alexander those marks of their esteem, for persons
that were either dear, or considerable to him. I received that honor as too
high a fortune for me, and not being able to give Parisatis particular thanks
for it, in the presence of the Queen, and of a great many others, I by my looks
expressed my acknowledgement of that favor, and thanked the Queen* with the
most respectful words the greatness of that obligation could suggest. The King
graced me with a visit while they were there, and I remember it was in my
Chamber he spoke of you to the Princess Statira, and that he held that
discourse with her which you have heard since from Tyrcus. Hephestion and
Perdiccas, who had been wounded by your hand* received the same honor, and
within a few days after we left our beds, and were in a condition to repay
their visits with usury. From Babylon he went to Susa, and there it was the
Princesses put a period to their Journeys, and that the King thought fit to
exempt them for the future, from the wearisomnesse of his Voiages. During our
abode there we visited them every day, and the King passionately in love with
Statira, solicited her with a great deal of obstinacy, but yet accompanied
with very much respect and civility. And Hephestion seeing himself favored in
his passion by the King, rose to such a pride, that he declared it openly, and
pretended in the sight of the whole world, to her whom he was not worthy to
look upon without adorations. Sysigambis gave way to it through prudence, and
reason of State, yet Parisatis could not forbear expressing to Hephestion, how
much that presumption had offended her; but as he naturally was very eloquent,
and graceful in all his actions, he excused it so many ways, and alleged so
many reasons for his justification, that she was constrained at first to
dissemble it, and a while after absolutely to pardon him. But the temerity of
his proceeding, wrought such a displeasure in me, and such an hatred against
him, that from that time I sought an occasion to quarrel with him, without
offending my Princess, and without exasperating the King, who took his part
most strongly; but for which consideration, I should not have deferred my
resentments. His thoughts were little different from mine, and his belief that
I was an obstacle to his intentions, and that I was in her favor at least as
much as he, kindled him with such a rage against me, that he had much ado to
conceal it.

'Twas about that time that Ptolomeus, my dearest friend, and one of the most
valiant, and virtuous Princes in the world, fell in love with Apami^, Artabasus
his daughter, and E^menes with Arsinoe her sister. Ptolomeus discovered his
passion to me with a great deal of freedom and obliged me in such manner by
the openness of his carriage, that I was constrained to lay my heart naked to
him, and crust him with a thing I had so carefully hidden from all the rest of
mankind; he gave me great consolation, and offered himself to serve me against
Hephestion, in all encounters which that competition might produce between us.
Within a shorttime after, we departed from Susa, but before we went away, I
pressed my Princess with so much love, and discretion, that at last I drew this
confession from her mouth. That if those persons to whom her birth had given
the power over her will, should enjoin her to love me, she would receive that
command in my favor, with less displeasure, and more satisfaction, then for
any other man living.

This assurance produced a joy in me, which it would be very hard for me to
express, and gave me all the comfort I could receive, for an absence that was
like to be of long continuance. I know not how Hephestion was used by her, but
a while after our departure being in the Province of the Vxians, he took the
boldness to write to her, and to send his Letter with those the King wrote to
Sysigambis, and to the Princess Statira, by the Messengers that came from them
to intercede in the behalf of Madates. I knew nothing of it at that time, but
shortly after being at Persepolis, two or three days before it was set on fire,
we being both in the Kings Palace, he passed by me looking upon a Letter, and
making a stop as it were to finish the reading of it, he brought it so near my
eyes, that he gave me leisure to observe Parisatis's hand, and the characters
of her Letter; and not satisfied with having given me that knowledge, he let it
fall at my feet, as by chance, and some of those that were about as stepping
forward to take it up, Leave this honor to me alone, (said he* with an
insupportable pride) all that comes from my Princess, is so divine and sacred,
that only Hephestion is worthy to touch it. Though that saying offended all
those who had offered to do him that service* his credit with the King, kept
them from replying, but I had not the same consideration, and my jealousy
laying before my eyes, the advantage he had above me, and the belief that
those words were meant to none but mee^, I was not capable of those arguments
that swayed others, but without considering the place where I was, I came a
little nearer to him, and taking my time as he rose again, after he had taken
up the Letter, and that to spite me the more he had kissed it, and stood
folding it up again before me, I said in his ear with a reasonable loud voice,
Hephestion is less worthy of that honor, then any body else.

He changed color hearing me say so, and turned briskly toward me; but as he
was going to reply with as much sharpness, as the place where we were would
suffer him to express, all those that had taken notice of our action, stepped
between us, and the King having heard of it, came to us, and reproved us very
severely. When he had told us of our fault, Hephestion, ( continued he) I would
have you to consider that Lysimachus is a Prince, but also Lysimachus, I would
have you remember that I love Hephestion as my self; I know not what interest
obliged you to make him that reply, but I do not mean that you, nor any body
in the world, shall cross him in the design of serving Parisatis, since it is
I that inspire it into him, and will assist him in it against all the world.

These words went very near me, but the command he laid upon us to embrace
each other in his presence, was but little more pleasing to me; we obeyed him
with much coldness, and though afterward he commanded us to love one another,
it was not possible for him to gain these proofs of our obedience. In the mean
time I was most sensibly afflicted, and the sight of Parisatis's Letter, had
wakened my jealousy so violently, that it was impossible for me to taste any
repose, my eyes were no longer capable of sleep, and while others unwearied
themselves in their beds, from those toils and labors which are inseparable
from the profession of arms* I spent whole nights in mine, in the
considerations of my misfortunes, and of the advantages which contrary to
Parisatis's promise, Hephestion had visibly obtained above me. Must then (said
I) the most accomplished of all creatures, and she upon whom the heavens have
poured down all their graces* be blemished with that vice, which of all others
I should least have suspected her to be guilty of? What reason, o fair, but
changeable Parisatis! What reason moved you to give me those glorious hopes,
wherewith I believed my passion too highly recompensed, if you had a design to
favor another with them, both to the prejudice of my life, and of your own
promise? What offense have I committed against you since then, and what service
have you received from Hephestion, that should have obliged you, not only in
favor of him to change those promises you had made me, but also to grant him
honors, to which I never yet so much as pretended? Ah, Lysimachus, (continued
I) it is with justice the Heavens chastise thy presumption, thou have raised
thy thoughts to a Princess too divine for thy unworthiness, and the Gods make
use of Hephestion, not to procure him a fortune which he merits no more then
thou, but to punish thee for thy foolish rashness, as they sometimes have made
use of thee to cross a happiness to which he undeservedly has pretended.

In these thoughts I passed the night of the desolation of Persepolis, and thus
it was I entertained my self, while Alexander himself with a torch in his hand,
set fire upon the fairest Palace, and bravest City in the world.

The King after he in the ruins of that stately Town, had left marks of his
fury, and debauch, took the Field again, to prosecute Darius to the uttermost*
and not to hold you in the recital of things you know already, within a while
after, we heard of the lamentable death of that great King, and were witnesses
of the most pitiful object that ever was beheld. You know the sorrow Alexander
expressed upon that occasion, with how many tears he bewailed that death, and
with what pomp he sent the body to the Q. his Mother, and to the Princesses his
daughters, to render him the last duties of burial. I will only tell you that
my passion for the Princess Parisatis, and the consideration of that great
Kings misfortunes, plunged me in so deep a sorrow, that of a long time I was
not to be comforted, and that only love, and the desire of seeing my Princess
again furnished me with strength enough to wait upon the King in the Journey he
made to Susa, to visit, and comfort them in their extremest affliction; You
know how he arrived there, how he was received by the Queens and Princesses,
how he testified unto them, the share he bore in their sorrow for that loss,
and what usage he found from the Princess Statira, when after the fresh
occasions she had to hate him, he would needs renew the discourses of his
passion. I will only tell you what concerns my self, and let you know that I
was so deeply afflicted, both with my Princesses sorrow, and that which my own
jealousy caused in me, that I had no difficulty to accommodate my countenance
to the grief which appeared in those fair desolate Ladies. After that the first
days of the greatest mourning were expired, and that they were capable of other
entertainment, then that of graves, I addressed my self to Princess Parisatis,
and fell again into my old path, notwithstanding all the King had said, who as
I have told you, had forbidden me to cross Hephestions design; but I not
only despised that command, but should have disobeyed the Gods themselves, if
they had required any proofs of that nature from my obedience. I found no
alteration in my Princesses humor, more then what her last loss had caused,
and though she received me not with so lively a countenance as before, it was
not the more severe for being more dejected. I did not ill accompany her
sadness, and I expressed mine to her so many ways, that two days before our
departure, being alone with her, she asked me the reason of my trouble; and
seeing that I fixed my sight upon the ground, and answered her only with a sigh,
she prayed me a second time to tell it her. With that I lift up mine eyes, and
having looked upon her a while without speaking, Madam, (said I, at last) my
passion for you, cannot be equalled but by the respect that accompanies it; as
also the greatness of my respect to you, cannot be compared but unto that of
my passion: It is that respect, Madam, which keeps me in that perfect
resignation, wherewith I have laid my life, and all my thoughts at your feet,
and it is that respect, and that resignation, which make me suffer in silence,
and without murmuring, receive all those usages that can open me a passage to
my grave, as from my Sovereign, and from her that cannot err in her carriage
toward me: For proof I protest unto you, that if you had not imposed your
command upon me, you should never have learned that from my mouth, which you
discovered in my face, over which I have not had the same power. I will tell
you therefore, since you enjoin me to it, that after the pardon you had granted
to my fault, and the goodness you expressed in tolerating its continuance, I
had banished that despair out of my mind, which began to settle it self there,
and esteemed my self most happy in those limits you had given unto my hopes,
and in the promise you had made me never to grant my rival any advantage over
me; I confess this hope had begot a pride in me, but Hephestions vanity
quickly cast it down, and his showing us your Letter, made those fair hopes
quickly vanish, which I had unjustly conceived, but yet not without your
permission: I confess to you, Madam, this change of my fortune has touched me
so nearly, that I have not courage enough to bear it; and though perchance I
have enough to dispute for you, with Hephestion to the last moment of my life,
I have not any that is proof against the Declaration you make in favor of him;
I do not at all urge the promise you made me, there is no engagement of a
Sovereign to his Subjects, and I have no right to exact that from you, which
you were pleased to grant me out of mere mercy.

I ended these words with the same confusion I had showed at the beginning of
my discourse, and the Princess after she had hearkened patiently to me, replied
without being moved; It is true, Lysimachus, I have in favor of you taken a
liberty to do what I might well have forborne; but what fault soever I
committed, I forgot not those reservations it was necessary for me to add, and
I remember I often represented to you, with what dependence I am tied to the
will of those persons to whom my birth has submitted me, and my own intention
never to swerve from it while I live. This suffices for my justification, and
as you have learned that I returned an Answer to Hephestions Letter, you shall
learn also when you please, that I did it by the Queens express command, and
that if I can be blamed in that action, it is only for the resistance I showed
in obeying her, both through the repugnance I found in my self, and perhaps
through your consideration. Without her absolute order, I would not so much as
have received his letter, but she was solicited by Alexanders entreaties, to
which she could refuse nothing in the fresh obligation she had to him, and the
deplorable condition of our affairs. Behold what I believe due to your
satisfaction; and for mine own I will tell you, that you ought not to think it
strange hereafter, if I obey the only person to whom the Gods have left any
lawful power over me; and although I esteem you at least as much as Hephestion,
and that perchance in my inclination you have some advantage above him, be
certain that as long as I live, I will follow only those motions the Queen
shall give me.

It would be hard for me to represent unto you the different effects this
discourse produced in me; on the one side, the care my Princess took to justify
her self to me, and the preferring of me before Hephestion, by her own
confession, did extremely joy me; but the protestation she made, to regulate
her will totally by that of Sysigambis, which I knew to be for Hephestion
rather then for me, overwhelmed me in a mortal sorrow. These two passions
wrought each its effect, but they were so confused at that time, that they
hindered one another from breaking forth in my Princesses presence. I made as
short a reflection upon them as possibly I could, and as soon as I was come to my
self again, lifting up my head, and looking upon my Princess with a
languishing countenance) Madam, ( said I) I do not deserve the care you
vouchsafe to take for my satisfaction, neither was it indeed to complain of
you, nor to demand reparation, but only to obey you, that I made this
confession of my misfortune. If the will of Sysigambis alone, establish
Hephestions happiness, I shall bear it with more patience, then if it came
from your own inclination, and the favors I shall receive purely from your
self, will be much more dear, and much more considerable to me, then those to
which others shall contribute; but this I know that from what hand soever my
unhappiness comes, I shall never be able to end my hopes but with my days, nor
suffer the loss of them but with that of my life. I doubt not but the favor
of Alexander gives those advantages to Hephestion, which my birth ought to give
me above him; nor do I doubt but that consideration makes the Queen declare
for him, and by her authority destroy all my hopes, but if my misery be
inevitable, the happiness of others is not very certain, and since I have had
the courage to serve you, I shall also have so much as never to give over that
design, but with the last drop of my blood.

I brought forth these words with so sad a tone, that she was touched with
compassion, and would perchance have given me farther marks of it, if we had
not been interrupted by Hephestion, who entering into the Chamber, came and took
his place on the other side of the Princess. That troubling of our
conversation, redoubled my hatred of him, and during the stay we made yet at
Susa, we thwarted one another as much as possibly we could. I could entertain
my Princess in particular, but once more before our departure, and then I
conjured her, with the most ardent prayers my passion could invent to grant me
the favor Hephestion had obtained already, and to be pleased, that since he
had gotten that advantage of me in an absence which was but short, I might be
permitted during an absence which was to be a very long one to write to her,
and by that only comfort sweeten the rigours of so cruel a separation she was
not offended at that request, but she stopped my mouth by saying, that it was
only by Sysigambis's command, she had received Hephestions Letter, and that if
I could obtain the same permission of her she would show no difficulty on her
part.

I saw well enough that answer was a refusal of what I desired, but being
within the rules she had established to her self, and wherewith I had promised
to be contented, I had nothing to reply against it. I doubted not but that the
Queen, and many others had already perceived, or at least suspected my
intention, but I would not hazard my self to beg that favor, from her who
already declared her self for my rival. I testified my sorrow by the saddest
words I could invent, and took my leave of her, without being able to obtain
any thing else.

We departed from Susa, as you have heard, and the King having left the Ladies
in that City, in perfect liberty, went to join with his Army again upon the way
toward Parthia. You may well exempt me from relating all our Voiages, and all
Alexanders victories, you have learned a good part of them already, and that
discourse would require many whole days, besides they contain nothing
particularly of my self, but the wounds I received in several encounters, and
the disquiets my love made me suffer. I will only tell you, that we entered
into Hyrcania, and that having subdued that Province in a few days, we marched
against the Mardes, whom we conquered with the same facility.

After them we tamed the Agriaspes, and the Arrachosians, and after the taking
of the City of the Mamacenes, we made war against some Provinces which draw
their original from the Scythians, and live wholly according to their manners,
though they are not under the dominion of the King your Father. After that we
passed the Tanais, and entered into the Territories of the Zogdians, where the
King prosecuted his Conquests with the same success, and having made himself
Master of that Country, he advanced into Bactria, where he defeated the
disloial Bessus, and settled that great Province under his obedience. It was in
those Countries his manners were corrupted, and that among delights he lost all
that he had left of the Grecian Discipline. Then it was he began to spend whole
days, and nights in debauches, and dissoluteness, and that he exacted
adoratious from his Followers, which alienated some of their hearts, and
exasperated him so far against his best friends, that by their deaths he gave
most fatal testimonies of the alteration of his nature. He caused the
unfortunate Philotas, to end his life in torments, made the great and renowned
Parmenio, to whom he owed a good part of his Conquests, to suffer death by the
hand of Cleander and with his own killed Clitus, one of his most necessary and
most faithful friends. True it is, that Philotas and his Father were suspected
of a conspiracy against his person, and that Clitus by his insolent words, drew
the Kings anger upon him; but in the death of the innocent, and virtuous
Callisthenes, my old Tutor, whose interests were like to have buried me in his
ruins, he showed marks of the greatest cruelty, and of the most blameable
ambition that ever was. The virtue of that great man, which could not be swayed
to those base adorations, which he saw part of the Macedonians stoop to, did so
animate that Prince jealous of his glory, that he commanded that Learned
Philosopher to be put in irons, and accusing him for having meddled in the
conspiracy of Hermolaus, he caused his nose, lips, and ears, to be cut off, and
shutting him up in a Cage, refused him even death it self, for a conclusion of
his miseries. I could not suffer the deplorable condition both of so virtuous a
person, and one to whom I was infinitely obliged, without showing some marks of
compassion, which were like to have been my destruction. I visited him in
prison, and having with tears (which that pitiful object made me shed in
abundance) offered him all the services I could do him in his misfortune, and
which he was in a condition to hope for; he desired me to help him to poison,
but he desired it with such urging prayers, that I could not refuse him so
cruel a mercy, and yet the only one he could with reason wish, in the woeful
estate to which he was reduced. I sent him that fatal Present secretly, and
with it the means of ending by one death alone, the miseries of many others, to
which he was inhumanely destined. The King having been advertised of it, was
kindled with so great a fury against me, that he commanded my person to be
seized on, and in the first motions of his wrath, was ready to make me feel the
most harsh, and cruel usage his resentment could suggest; but in the end he
remembered I was a Prince, and the consideration of the alliance that tied us
together, assuaged part of his anger, and saved my life, against which he had
already pronounced the sentence of death. He caused me to be set at liberty,
but with the most bloody threats, his displeasure could bring forth, and a
protestation, never to have regard any more to my quality, if ever I was so
insolent, or so unfortunate as to cross him in his intentions. True it is,
that besides that cause of complaint, the manner of my carriage toward
Hephestion, had given him many others; he had often commanded me to be his
friend, and had found me so little disposed to obey him, that he was thereby
infinitely exasperated against me; we never spoke to, nor never saluted one
another, and in a quarrel he had with Craterus, I offered my self unto his
enemy, and pressed him with so much earnestness to accept my service, that all
the world saw easily, it was rather my hatred to Hephestion, then my friendship
to Craterus, that made me embrace his interests with so much affection. In the
mean time I was tormented by my passion with such violence, that absence in
which other souls find remedy and ease, seemed to have produced a contrary
effect in mine. In all occasions where Alexander fought, (in which I may say
without vanity, I was not the last) the image of Parisatis was always present
to my memory, even in the midst of disorder, blood, and confusion; and all the
most dismal and most dangerous objects, could never put her out of it for a
moment. I discoursed of her only with Ptolomeus, and the near confidence we
had in one another, suffered me to declare my most secret thoughts to him
alone. We were at Maracauda, when I told him the trouble it was to me, that I
could not write to Parisatis, not having been able at my coming away, to obtain
that permission, which I had begged of her. Ptolomeus thought a while upon what
I said, and being sensible of the sadness which he found in my words and
countenance, after he had considered a little, Dear brother, (said he) the Gods
do without doubt inspire me a means for your satisfaction, and if you approve
of what I shall propose to you, I believe you may get Letters conveyed to
Parisatis.

I embraced him dearly at that Proposition, and beseeching him most earnestly
to discover what he knew toward my happiness; The Gods, and my good fortune (
continued he) have been pleased, that in spite of the obstacles I have met
withal, and of the difficulties I have overcome, I by the greatness of my love,
and by my services, have won the favor of Apamia, as you have heard already
from me: That Princess is as dear to Parisatis, as her sister Barsina is to
Statira, and I believe that of all the Ladies near her person, there is not any
has a more free access to her; she trusts her with her most secret thoughts,
and prefers her visibly before all those she loves. I am vain enough to promise
my self, that out of her friendship to me, and her esteem of you, she will not
avoid the occasion of doing you good offices, and that if you trust a Letter to
her, she will not only deliver it to Parisatis, but will also make her well
satisfied with her liberty, and pardon yours; she has a great deal of
dexterity, a great deal of freedom, and a great deal of power with Parisatis.
Tomorrow I will dispatch Lycastes the most faithful and understanding of all my
servants, with Letters to her, if you send any one of yours along with him, to
bring you back word what she has done for you. I assure my self you will
receive satisfaction from her; and I will beseech her so ardently to serve you,
that my prayers shall not be unprofitable.

I accepted Ptolomeus his offer with much joy, and though I was in a continual
fear of displeasing my Princess, J passed it over at that time, and assuring
my self upon Apamia's discretion, that she would not give her my Letter without
such precaution as was necessary, I in the end resolved to write to her; and
with that intention having left Ptolomeus, that he might have leisure to think
of his dispatch, I went away to do the like, and after having long bethought my
self of words to sweeten the fault I committed in usurping a favor, which had
not been granted me, I at last wrote to her in these terms.

LYSIMACHUS to the Princess PARISATIS.
Madam,
IF the Queens permission had been necessary for the liberty I take, I should
have followed your Orders with a most perfect obedience; but not addressing
these lines, without the mediation of one that is dear to you, either her
consideration will make you pardon my fault, or her discretion will keep it
from your knowledge. If these words have the happinesses to employ your eyes
for some few moments, they will recall into your memory the image of the most
faithful of all men living, and the remembrance of those glorious hopes, to
which you have given me leave to raise my thoughts. Were I but dear enough to
the Gods to hope you had still conserved the Idea of him who adores you with
all the respect we owe to them, I should suffer the rigors of this cruel
absence with a courage, which begins to forsake me with my hope, and should
only fight to obtain glory, whereas now I do it only to seek a death, to which
my miseries make me run, as to the only remedy not forbidden me. But if my
unhappiness be as great as my te^merity, and if the Idea of this unfortunate
man, be either troublesome to you, or be slipped out of your remembrance, he will
without sorrow lay down a life, which he cannot keep without hope, and will die
without any other grief, then that of depriving you thereby, of the most
zealous, and most faithful of all those, that ever adored you.


This was what I wrote unto my Princess at that time, and having given it to
Ptolomeus, he showed me a note he had written in my favor to Apamia, which he
folded up in his Letter with mine. I think the words of it were these or to
this purpose.

PTOLOMEVS To the Princess APAMIA.
IF Lysimachus his safety were not much dearer to me then my own, I should not
demand proofs of my Princesses friendship, of the nature of those I now desire;
I put my life with that of this dear friend into her hands, and am encouraged
by her goodness to hope she will have some care of their conservation; she
has all power with the Princess Parisatis, and if I have any with her, I
conjure her to get her to receive Lysimachus his Letter, and to do something
more (if it be possible) for his satisfaction: I shall take this favor as the
greatest I can receive from her, next to that of her friendship.


When we had sealed our Letters, Ptolomeus sent away Lycastes, and I caused him
to be accompanied by my Squire Cleantes, in whom I had most confidence of any
man about me, and whose fidelity I had made trial of in many encounters. We
gave them charge to make all the haste they could, with order to come back to
us into the Country of the Sacans, whether the King was preparing to enter. We
went from Maracanda some few days after, and crossed the Xenippa, where we
defeated certain Troops that were drawn together to hinder our passage, and
from thence we came into the Province of Naura. That Country by the mediation
of Prince Oxyartes, put it self into the Kings hands, and from thence he
marched against the Sacans; but Prince Cohortanus Roxana's Father, who was
Governor of that Province, came to meet him, and receiving him as his King,
made very magnificent entries for us, through all the Towns of his Government,
and without drawing sword submitted to him, all the Country under his
obedience. You have heard how courteously the King used him, and moreover how
it was there he fell in love with that crafty woman, and accomplished that
marriage which was disapproved by all his friends, and which has caused us so
many misfortunes, and so much sorrow.

The whole Court was taken up with the pomp of that fatal marriage, and Roxana
was in the highest pitch her ambition had ever made her aim at, when Ptolomeus
his Squire, and mine returned from Susa. Ptolomeus by his, received a Letter
from Apamia, but mine came back empty handed. I began to be afflicted at my
misfortune, and to express my grief for a thing, which nevertheless I was
prepared for before, when Ptolomeus found a little note in his Letter, which
we believe contained an answer of the Commission he had given unto Apamia; He
read her Letter, the words whereof I do not remember, besides the recital of
them is no way important to that of my life; and after that we opened the
note in which we found these words.

The Princess APAMIA, to Prince PTOLOMEUS.
Judge by the success, with what care I have labored for your friends
interests, Parisatis's mind is not easily to be managed, but I have so
persecuted her, that without doubt I have drawn more from her then you
expected; do not accuse me if you be not both satisfied, and believe I will
lose no occasions of doing your friend all the good offices he can hope for,
from a person who has a most particular esteem of his merit.


A little below these lines we saw others, which we instantly knew to be my
Princesses hand, and casting my eyes upon them with incredible transports,
Ptolomeus and I read these words.

Apamia is the most troublesome creature in the world; she is not contented
with having made me receive Lysimachus his Letter, but will also make me
assure him my self, that I have not forgotten him, and I am willing to give
her that testimony of my friendship to her, and Lysimachus that of my esteem of
him. I read these words over a thousand times, and kissed the Letters as often,
with such excess of joy, as J am not able to represent. See what my condition
was, and in what manner J acknowledged the merit of that Princess, and the
price of her favors, since after a service of many years, J was so overjoyed
to receive words which scarce surpassed the limits of ordinary civility; and
yet it is most true, that perhaps never Lover vvelcomed the favors he had most
ardently desired, with greater raptures of contentment, then J showed at these
slight marks of my Princesses remembrance. J would not stop at so happy
beginnings, but making use of the same convenience, and of Apamia's goodness,
who assisted me with so much freedom, J vvrote to her many times during the
rest of our Voyage, and was used by her with that equality, which J have
ever found in her moderate humor. Within a few days after, Craterus and J were
sent with a flying Camp against Haustenes, and Catenes, the most insolent
Barbarians that ever were, and who yet refused the yoke to which all Asia
had submitted. We defeated them in a pitched battle, and Catenes being killed
by my hand, and Haustenes taken prisoner, the King found nothing more to do in
that Country, but prepared himself for his march into the Indies. It was at
that time that the misfortune of the Philosopher Callisthenes, and mine also
happened as J have told you already, and although I stood then upon very ill
terms in the Kings opinion, yet would J not fail to attend him through honor
in that Expedition, as the most dangerous of all those he had ever undertaken.
You have heard the success of that famous Voyage, how we entered into the
Indies, the Towns we stormed, the batte^s we gave, and the notable Victory the
King obtained of Porus, to whom he generously restored his kingdom. From
thence we went into the Country of the Sophites, took the City of the
Oxydrakes, by assault, where the King with so great danger of his person,
showed so many proofs of an admirable valor; we passed the Gedrosia, and
overran all the Indies with the success that accompanied the King in all his
Expeditions. Why should I keep you longer in a superfluous Relation? In short,
after having done things that surpass belief, and made the bounds of his Empire
almost as vast as those of the whole Earth, the King with his Triumphant Army
took his way toward Susa, and arrived there two years after his departure from
thence. I have told you succinctly, what passed in many years, but J will
recount the more important accidents of my life, something more at large, and
the recital of them vvil without doubt be less tedious to you. You heard from
Tyreus the Kings reception into that Town, after what manner he carried
himself to the Princesses, and how by the sight of Statira, he grew more
inflamed then ever, in that love, which the rigorous usage of that Princess, a
two years absence, the great employments he had, and the charms, or rather the
artifices of wicked Roxana, had almost extinguished; you know how he fell to
serve her more ardently then before, and how that courageous Princess continued
a long time the prosecution of her former rigor, and generously disdained that
authority which the chance of war, and the misfortunes of her family had given
him over her. I will not tell you how I was received by the Princess
Parisatis, I found her the very same, and that moderation J had always observed
in her, from the birth of my affection, had not forsaken her, nor never parted
from her so long as the Gods were pleased to continue her among mortals:
Certain it is, I never saw so great a firmness and solidity in a mind, nor did
I ever see her vvaver in any resolution her duty made her take.

Yet I may say without vanity, that at my arrival, she went a little beyond
the bounds of that esteem, within which she seemed to have limited my
pretensions, and that if she did not express some love to me, she at least
showed me marks af a great deal of good will: I received them as the Sovereign
felicity, to which I had ever raised my thoughts, and began to hope for the
most advantageous change in my fortune, that I had ever proposed unto my self.
I returned thanks to the Princess Apamia, answerable to the greatness of my
obligations, and found her so disposed to the continuance of her good offices,
that J abused her goodness oftentimes, to entertain my Princess at her Lodgings
out of Hephestions presence. And truly J was not so unfortunate, but that by
the length and diligence of my services, I gained all that could be pretended
to, from a person of her humor, and likewise hopes of being preferred before
Hephestion, if it depended absolutely upon her own choice; but how great
assurances soever J received of her favor, J could never persuade her to make
any resistance against the will of Sysigambis, nor ever to follow any other
Laws while she lived, then those she should prescribe her. That was my
misfortune, and my utter ruin, and my rival fortified by the Kings assistance,
employed his intercession so powerfully to Sysigambis, that that ambitious
Queen, finding greater advantages in matching her daughter to Hephestion, who
had an absolute power with Alexander, took his part openly, and declared her
intentions publicly. She commanded the Princess her daughter to receive his
services, as from one whom she destined for her husband, and whose alliance the
change of their condition made them to accept with joy, as that of a Prince,
who by the favor of the greatest man upon Earth, was at that time the second
person in the world: I heard from Apamia the first news of the misfortune I had
ever feared, she was vvilling to flatter me, by the relation she made of the
grief this command had wrought in Parisatis; but I was easily undeceived, and
judged with probability, that albeit she inclined to my side, the graceful
fashion of my rival, his valor, and the other good qualities he possessed very
advantageously, would quickly comfort her, though she perhaps had received that
command with some displeasure. I nevertheless beseeched Apamia, to help me to
the means of entertaining her with more liberty, then I should have from
thenceforward at the Palace, and Parisatis was content to give Apamia that
proof of her friendship, and me that recompense of the services I had done her,
since my ill fate forbad me to hope for a greater one. I had the happiness to
see her at that Princesses Chamber, and having cast my self at her feet, I said
all that a most violent passion could put into the mouth of a despairing man; I
spared neither words nor tears to move her, but though I stirred up some pity
in her, and that I found her touched with so much tenderness and compassion,
it was impossible for me to make her change her resolution, or draw her in the
least manner from the terms of that obedience, to which she had submitted her
self. I do not disavow, Lysimachus, (said she) but that your services full of
respect, and discretion, have really wrought in me some good will toward you,
and I give you proofs of it, which you cannot but acknowledge, if you have not
changed your humor; yet neither can you deny but that through the whole course
of your affection, and in all the assurances I have given you of my esteem, I
have used all those precautions that might free me from your reproaches: I
esteem you very much, and if you force me to say more, I bear a good will
toward you, which goes beyond an esteem, and which I never bore to any other
body in the world; but I have not so strong an affection to you, as to make me
forget what I owe unto my self, and to commit faults that would wound my
reputation, and do a mortal injury to that illustrious blood whence I am
descended.

Madam, (said I, interrupting her) I demand no proofs of you, that can offend
the severest virtue, I do not require that you should openly oppose the Queens
will, nor that in spite of her commands, you should tie your self to the
fortune of a miserable man; But what wrong shall you do your self, or your
birth, or your reputation, though you should take the pains to represent unto
her the sincerity of my affection, and though you should let her know, you
could receive a command in my favor, with more satisfaction, then one to the
advantage of my rival; she will not accuse you of meanness of spirit, nor will
she think it strange you should be pleased with the services of Lysimachus,
since she suffers, and furthers the suit of Hephestion, who, bate the Kings
favor, cannot boast of any advantage over me.

Lysimachus, ( replied the Princess) never desire those things of me, which I
neither ought, nor will ever be of an humor to grant you; I value Hephestion
very much, I am obliged to him for the services he has done me, and I have no
aversion to his person, but notwithstanding this declaration, which I make to
you with truth, if you can persuade the Queen to ask me my inclinations, and to
leave it to my own disposing whether I will make choice of Hephestion or of
your self, I protest to you it shall never be but in your favor. Behold the
greatest you can ever hope for from me, and I beseech you to desire no more.

This was all I could obtain of her, and retiring a little from me, she left
me, in a mortal affliction, accompanied with an unprofitable consolation. In
former times I should have received such a discourse, with transports of joy,
but then my misfortune was too near, and effects were too necessary for me to
be satisfied with words alone; it was not enough that she wished, it was
requisite to do something in my favor, and J was no longer in a condition to
be satisfied with fruitless desires. I passed all the night after, in thoughts
full of irresolution, and in considerations of my misfortune, which were like
to have sent me to my grave: All my designs ended in the death of Hephestion;
but before I came to that extremity, which was indeed a way to my revenge,
but not to the free possession of my Princess, I resolved to try the means I
had yet left, and use some endeavors to turn Sysigambis to my side; I saw but
little possibility in it, but I would not neglect any thing that could serve
for my preservation. I could not entertain her in particular of all the day
following, but the next after, hearing she was alone in her Closet, I desired
admittance, which was very civilly granted me. As Soon as I was alone with
her, I fell down upon my knee, and notwithstanding all she did to make me rise,
I continued still in that posture, and spoke to her on this manner: It is no
longer time, Madam, to ask you pardon of a fault, for which I see my self
severely punished, and for which I have already suffered all the pains that
could be due to the blackest crimes. I have been infinitely to blame, for
having raised my thoughts unto the Princess Parisatis, who cannot be worthily
served, but by the greatest King in the world: but it is a fault, which
certainly she has forced me to commit, and against which I have made all the
resistance, a just knowledge of my own demerit could inspire. I have done
amiss, in having without your consent, served her who draws her birth from
you, and all whose intentions are governed wholly by yours; but that same
knowledge which made me defend my self long against her charms, kept me from
declaring to you such ambitious designs, and would still tie up my tongue, if
the fortune of my rival did not authorize my presumption. Since you suffer
Hephestions pretensions, I may without offending you, make confession of mine,
and take the boldness to declare my love, from the allowance you afford to
his. Though fortune, or his deserts have given him the favor of a King, the
Heavens have made me to be born, with some advantage above him, and I am of a
blood to which he thinks it an honor to be allied in a very remote degree. I
lay these things before your eyes, only to obtain pardon for a fault, which
you have pardoned in him, and not to draw from your Majesty, a consent to my
happiness, which I can neither hope for by my birth, nor merit: It Is only my
passion, the purest, and most perfect that ever was, that intercedes to you now
in favor of me, it is that which makes me embrace your knees, and beg a life of
you, which I will not keep but for the service of your family; be pleased to
suffer me to serve Parisatis, with the same hopes that Hephestion does, and
incline only to him who of us two shall make himself most considerable by his
services, or who by his adorations shall oblige the Princess to favor him
with her choice; it is a mercy full of justice which I beg of you, and which I
conjure you to grant me by the memory of Darius, and by all that you
acknowledge to be most holy, and most venerable.

I ended in this manner, kissing the hem of her garment, and embracing her
knees, with actions which mollified her without doubt, and made me discover
some marks of compassion in her face. But after having patiently heard me, and
made yet some attempts to raise me up, she replied in these words; The Gods are
my witnesses, Lysimachus, that your person is very considerable to me, and that
your Discourse has touched me very sensibly; I know the greatness of your
birth, and am acquainted with the merit of your person, both of them give me
just inclinations for you, and make me account my daughters happy, to find in
their misfortunes, and in the ruin of our Family, that such as your self, yet
turn their eyes upon them. And I beseech you to believe, it is not the favor
of Alexander, neither the need we have in our present calamity, of a support
near the King, that makes me prefer Hephestion before you; nor yet less any
advantage I have observed in his person more then yours, that moves me to
approve of his designs* but his having made them known to me sooner then you,
and the promises whereby I am engaged to the King and to him; you are not
ignorant, that among persons of our quality they are inviolable; and you know
besides, that they to whom I have given my word, are in a condition to make me
keep it, and that I am little capable to dispute it with them. I hope,
Lysimachus, you will be satisfied with these reasons, and that you will not
attribute a pure effect of my misfortune, to any want of good will, or respect.

This was the answer I had from Sysigambis, and I by it was so mo^tally
surcharged with grief, that it was impossible for me to dissemble it from the
Queen; I rose up from before her, without replying, and went out of the Closet
so changed, that I could hardly have been known.

Hitherto Oroondates had hearkened to Lysimachus, without interrupting him, but
when he was in this part of his relation, he could not forbear saying to him
with a deep sigh, Ah, Lysimachus! What a resemblance our misfortunes have to
one another; and how much you will afflict me by the recital of your disasters.
I shall be too much concerned in them, to hearken to them with curiosity; but
it is no matter, let us break through these dangerous passages, and since the
remainder of our lives is destined only to miseries, let us not henceforth
entertain each other with any thing but matters of affliction.

Oroondates holding his peace after these words, and disposing himself to lend
attention, Lysimachus went on with his Discourse on this manner.

The end of the first Book.
CASSANDRA* BOOK II.
WHich way shall I be able (great Prince) to describe the excess of my
affliction, after the cruel sentence of Sysigambis? Imagine to your self, all
that love, jealousy, grief, anger, and despair, can produce in a soul mortally
agitated with all these passions, and you may go near to conceive the motions
that tormented mine. I passed the rest of the day in transports of a man
distracted, which caused a fear in Ptolomeus, who forsook me not in my
misfortunes, that I was in some danger of losing my senses. But for his
hindrance I should not have deferred my resentments longer; but he persuaded me
to try yet the Kings favor, thereby to free my self from those reproaches I
might receive one day, of having offended him injustly. To satisfy him I went
to the Palace next morning, and getting the King moved, to grant me leave to
speak with him in private, he sent for me alone into his Closet, I drew near to
a window upon which he was leaning, and having made my obeisance to him, with a
countenance quite changed, he in my eyes found marks of my despair; I think he
doubted what was the cause that brought me, but he dissembled it, and having
asked me very coldly, I come, Sir, (said ^) to beg of your Majesty, what a
Prince who has the honor to be of your blood, hopes he may obtain, and what a
most just King may lawfully grant to one that has most faithfully served him;
I require of you neither Treasures nor Provinces for the price of the blood I
have lost in your service, my ambition is more noble, and more legitimate, and
if it be blameable in having made me raise my eyes to the Princess Parisatis,
I have prescribed just limits to those desires it has bred in me; since it is
not that Princess I demand for the recompense of my services, but only the
power to serve her with an advantage equal to that of my rivals; let your
Majesty be pleased but to restrain your authority, and not to declare your self
for Hephestion, against a person who has the happiness to be near you; leave
but Parisatis the liberty of her choice, and those that serve her, the hope of
being recompensed according to the merit of their services. Justice speaks in
favor of my interests, and its consideration alone, may move a King, who has
always followed it exactly, to grant, what he would refuse to my birth, and
services.

The King would not suffer me to say more, but interrupting me tartly,
Lysimachus, (said he) my intentions were sufficiently known to you, to keep you
from asking me a thing which I neither can, nor will grant you; I am not
ignorant of your birth and services, neither are you ignorant of the friendship
I bear Hephestion; nor of the promise J have made to assist him in an affection
which he discovered to me before you did yours, and in which J strengthened him
my self by the hopes J have given him. This knowledge ought not only to have
dissuaded you from a most unjust request, but ought also to have curbed those
designs which you have nourished to the prejudice of my intentions, and of the
command I gave you to the contrary.

These words went so near me, that it was impossible for me to suffer the
continuation of them without interruption; and though the death of Clytus, had
banished liberty of speech from Court, my rage blinded me so far* that I could
not forbear to make this reply.

I never failed of my obedience to your Majesty, while you required no other
proofs of it, but such as were within my power; and Hephestion never obeyed you
more readily then I whensoe're you commanded us to assault a wall, or charge
into a Battalion; but when you forbad me to love Parisatis, I confess I
disobeyed you, as I should have done the Gods themselves, if they had imposed
the same command upon me; I love her, and serve her, and I must love her and
serve her to my grave; my passion for her never withdrew me from any occasion
whether your interests called me; I bear the marks of it, all over my body, and
such as this happy Favorite cannot show the like. If by the number of my
wounds I cannot dispute with him for Alexanders favor, I will dispute with him
to the last drop of my blood, for the possession of Parisatis; let your Majesty
be but pleased to give us leave, to decide our pretensions with our swords; let
Parisatis be his, who is the more valiant, or the more happy, and let death be
the portion of him that is the weaker, or the more unfortunate.

The King could hardly contain himself at the hearing of these words, and his
anger breaking out through his eyes, and in the changes of his countenance,
would without doubt have terrified a person from whom, his disasters had not
taken away that affection which we naturally bear to life. But J beheld him
without fear, as likewise without fear I heard him make this answer.

This is not the first time* Lysimachus, that you have given proofs of your
irreverence, and contempt of him to whom you are born a subject, I remember it
still very well, and I shall be able to bring you again within the limits of
your duty, whenever you shall take the boldness to go beyond them: In the
mean time I forbid you not only to cross Hephestion in his love, but so much as
ever to look upon Parisatis; and I protest to you by Jupiter Hammon, and by the
soul of King Philip, that if you disobey what I command, by all the authority I
have over you, J will have no respect at all unto your birth, but will submit
you to the severity of our Laws* as the meanest Macedonian.

He brought forth these last words with such a thundering voice, that they
easily were heard by them in the next Chamber, and not giving me any leisure to
reply, he opened the Closet door himself, and went out to the Company, who
quickly observed in his face, the ill humor J had put him in* I came out after
him, and passed through the Chamber so blinded with grief and rage, that J
hardly knew my dearest friends as J went by them. Ptolomeus followed me, and
Antigonus, Polypercon, Craterus, Eumenes, Meleager, and many others, whom
favor did not basely make to forsake their friends, came presently after to my
Lodging, and offered me all the assistance I could desire from their
friendship. I was so transported, that I had scarce the judgment to thank them
for their offers, and Ptolomeus having eased me of that care, they retired
within a while, and left me at liberty to digest my anger, and to let my grief
break forth with violence. Then it was that I discharged my heart, by words
full of passion, and that J poured forth against Alexanders injustice, all that
rage, and resentment could put into the mouth of a desperate man; I walked fast
up and down, and making a stop now and then with furious exclamations, I struck
a fear of my safety into them that were about me.

What! ( said I) will they then thus by authority take Parisatis away from me,
and my soul with her? Shall a Tyrant dispose thus of what I alone have lawfully
acquired, and shall his Minion triumph over my life for a reward of his
flatteries? No, no, Hephestion; No, no, Alexander, you are not yet at the end
of your designs, and to give you notice that Lysimachus is alive, is enough to
persuade you, that you shall not carry away these illustrious spoils without
bloudshed^ Yes, Rival, I have an heart still, and I have also an hand to pierce
thine a thousand times, and with thy life, tear an image thence, which it is
unworthy to conserve.

In the like spe^ches, and motions full of fury, I spent the rest of the day,
all Ptolomeus his Councels, and those of my other friends, who came to visit
me, not being able any way to ^bate my sorrows, nor moderate the violence of my
resolutions: When Ptolomeus saw I was resolved to run to extreamities, and that
I no longer gave ear to the reasons he alleged, he gave over arguing against
my intentions, and only told me, that whatsoever my design was, he would
blindly follow my fortune, and never separate himself from my interests. I
thanked him for his affection, as much as I could in that condition, and having
assured him, that I would not refuse the proofs of it, when they should be
necessary for me, I begged of him to visit Apamia, and to attempt yet something
in my behalf. When I was rid of him, J bethought my self of the means to see
Hephestion, and not finding it very easy, by reason of a great number of
persons whom favor kept still close about him. J believed J could not declare
my intentions to him otherwise then by a Letter, which J might without
difficulty get delivered to him, by some servant of mine who were not known
unto his Family. With this design J called for paper, and wrote to him in these
terms.

LYSIMACHVS To HEPHES^ION.
IT is not by the Kings favor, Hephestion, that Parisatis is to be disputed
for; that Conquest is too illustrious to be obtained by any other price, then
that of our blood; our Swords shall decide our contestations, and shall give
the Conqueror that glorious recompense of his valor and death to the
conquered for the punishment of his ambition. These shall be the Laws of our
Combat, and it is to observe them, that I stay for you in Saturn's Field, with
my sword alone, other arms would but retard our designs, and would suit ill
with the desire of Conquering, or dying presently.


Having written this Letter I called Timantes, who of all my servants was least
known at Court, but not least capable of such a Commission; J instructed him in
what he had to do, and having injoined him secrecy upon his life, J passed the
night in the impatiency you imagine.

All the Court was full of our Affairs, and very few were ignorant of the cause
I had to quarrel with Hephestion, but there were fewer who believed, that after
having received so express a command to the contrary from the King, and such
fresh threats, J would so quickly run to extremities wherein my destruction
appeared inevitable. This was it that facilitated my design, and hindered
Hephestions friends and mine from keeping with us, as they would have done, if
that opinion had not made them a little confident. Yet did I not doubt but that
Hephestion would have a great many with him at his rising, and that Ptolomeus,
and some others of my friends would come early to my Lodging, whereupon I got
abroad by break of day, and mounting my best horse, I went out of the Town
alone, after having given Tymantes such other orders and instructions as were
necessary; he discharged that trust very discreetly, and I will tell you the
manner as I learned it from himself. Scarce did the day begin to appear, when
he was at Hephestions gate, he went into the Court, up stairs, and into the
great Chamber without difficulty, the entry thither not being hard for a man of
any fashion, but drawing near the door of the antichamber, with many others,
who waited for Hephestions rising, he knocked softly, a doorkeeper opened it a
little, and having rebuked him for the noise he made, while Hephestion was
asleep, I know the orders well enough, (said he) to pay him that respect if I
were not forced to break it, by a stronger consideration, tell your Master that
I have a very important advertisement to give him, and that for the safety of
his life, he ought to admit me to the speech of him without further delay.

See how far this man hazarded his life to serve me, there is no doubt but if
Hephestion had not been truly generous, he and been in manifest peril, and it
was that knowledge made me make use of so dangerous a way. The doorkeeper
having made some of Hephestions principal servants acquainted with what
Timantes had said, they were of opinion together, that the business was of
consequence enough to waken him for it, and thereupon going presently to his
bedside, they interrupted his sleep to tell him what they had heard from
Timantes. Hephestion presently commanded him to be brought into the Chamber,
and to his bedside, and seeing Hephestions servants were retired, he delivered
my Letter to him, saying, he in that paper should find the advertisement he
had to give him.

I know not what Hephestion thought when he saw himself so deceived, but
Timantes told me he read it without being moved, and without showing any other
marks in his eyes and countenance, save of anger and fierceness. When he had
made an end of reading it, he said so low that he could not be overheard by
those that were on the far side of the Chamber, you are a discreet man, and I
am not less obliged to you then your Master.

With these words, he called for his Clothes, and commanded his best Horse
should be made ready, and brought presently to the Gate; Being extremely
respected by his servants, he was obeyed without farther informing themselves
of his intentions, and was no sooner dressed, but he went out of his Chamber,
and not suffering any of his people to attend him, came down into the Court,
and took the Horse he had given order for. The place ^ had appointed him was
sufficiently known; it was there the King used often to exercise his Troops,
being a Field not above ten or twelve furlongs from the City. He gallopt his
Horse full speed through the streets of Susa, and carried by an impatiency like
mine, went out of the Town, and came to me much sooner then I expected. When I
saw him appear, all my blood was moved, and all my passions stirred up with so
much vehemence, that they deprived me of the judgment, I was wont to make use
of in such like encounters: I ran to meet him with my Sword ready drawn, and
with a threatening cry, not having modesty enough to forbear saying; Here it is,
thou unjust ravisher of my happiness, that we will decide our pretensions,
otherwise then by the favor of thy Master, and thou shall either lose
Parisatis, with thy life, or win her, with mine. He staid not to answer me,
neither indeed did I give him the leisure, but rushing upon him with more fury
then judgment, I was received so vigorously, that at that first encounter, our
swords having met without effect, our horses were like to have touched the
ground with their haunches, we raised them up again with the spur, and having
taken a little career to make them recover the shock, we turned about and
closed up to one another, with the same impetuosity as before, but with a
different success. I wounded Hephestion with the point of my Sword in the
shoulder, and Hephestion striking at me with his, gave me a very slight touch
on the head, but his Sword coming down upon the poll of my Horse, he received a
wound wherewith I was much more incommodated then with my own. That vigorous
beast, feeling himself hurt, fell a leaping and bounding, and in spite of all I
could do to stop him, ran away with me above an hundred paces; Hephestion
followed exceeding fiercely, and holding his Sword almost at my reins, Ah!
Lysimachus, (said he) is it thus thou fightest for Parisatis?

These words kindled such rage in me, as I cannot possibly represent, and
having tamed that first fury of my Horse, I turned his head at last against
Hephestion, who had overtaken me, and pressing violently upon him, his Sword
slipped along my ribs without entering into my body, and I thrusting mine under
his arm, ran him through the thigh, and nailed it to the cantle of his Saddle;
the difficulty was to get my Sword out again, and judging that J could not have
time enough, without giving a great deal to my enemy, I quitted it, and flew to
the hilts of his, which he had lifted up, and caught fast hold of it with a
design to wrest it out of his hand; Hephestion had not foreseen my intent, and
therefore it was not hard for me to effect it, I seized upon the guard so to my
advantage, that spurring my Horse, at the same time Hephestion was constrained
to let it go; but he neither lost heart, nor judgment, for pulling mine out
of his thigh, with an unparalled courage, he had already got it in his hand,
before I could turn about, and came back to me more furious then at the
beginning of the fight.

At that third encounter our designs were both the same, but our precipitation
made them vain, and fortunate to one another; instead of tilting the points
into each others bodies as we had resolved, we ran both into the saddle bows,
but with such a force, that my Sword broke into three pieces, and Hephestion's
bending to the very hilts sprung out of his hand, and fell amongst our Horses
feet. With that, seeing our selves deprived of our Swords,we began another kind
of combat, and clasping one another fast about the body, and at the same
instant clapping spurs to our Horses, we pulled each other out of our saddles,
and fell down together upon the grass, where we began to struggle for the
upper hand; we strove a great while for that advantage, and won it, and lost it
many times, but after a long contestation, we grew weak and I may say without
vanity, that Hephestion's wound, and the abundance of blood that ran from it,
made the victory incline already to my side, and gave me probable hopes of
obtaining it, when we were surrounded by a great many Horsemen, who had
environed, and parted us, before we ever perceived them, so much were we
transported with rage, and blinded with the desire of victory. They were our
common friends, who having been advertised by our servants, of our departure,
had taken horse in all haste, and run after us with all the diligence that was
necessary, to hinder the success of our combat. Amongst mine, I saw Ptolomeus,
Meleager, Antigonus, Craterus, and many others, and Hephestion among his, saw
Perdiccas, Seleucus, Leonatus, Cassander, Nearchus, and diverse more, whom
either the consideration of his power, or that of his virtue, had engaged to
him, but at that time they none of them took sides, but were contented with
separting us, not expressing any animosity at all. Hephestions friends carried
him back to Susa, and mine staid with me, not thinking in that state of my
affairs, there was any safety for me at Court. Alexanders oath and threatenings,
made them apprehensive with much reason, and they all believed, I could not
without manifest danger of my life appear, till the Kings anger were over. I
was in such a rage at the issue of our Combat, and at the knowledge that my
condition was but made worse, and my hopes the more weakened, that J shut my
ears along time against all they proposed for my safety. I would have returned
boldly into the Town, and have exposed my self to Alexanders fury, since by his
injustice he had destined me to a death, which I judged a thousand times more
cruel, then any he could have made me suffer. The Gods forbid (said J) that I
should fly for Hephestion, and that that happy Favorite should triumph over me
in Susa all manner of Ways, while I hide my self shamefully to save my life;
neither my birth, nor courage, will permit me to yield to him; and if the wrath
of a King be to be avoided, it is only by those, who have drawn it upon
themselves by evil actions, or who love their lives so dearly, that they are
afraid to lose them; for my part I have ever despised mine, and have so many
causes to hate it, that the care of its preservation shall never make me do
any thing contrary to my inclinations, nor to that generosity you have inspired
into me by your examples. It is for cowardly souls to fear like slaves, I am
born a Free man, and a Prince, and will never do a baseness, that might make
you blush for me, and render me unworthy of the glory of my Ancestors.

I said these things, and diverse others, but on the other side they alleged so
many reasons to me, and used the power they had over me so imperiously, that J
was constrained to obey, and go whither it pleased them to have me, before the
King could be advertised, and cause me to be pursued. They carried me to an
house which Abulites had, about an hundred furlongs from Susa, it was in a
Wood, far from any Highway, and my friends believed I might lie there to be
cured of my wounds, while they used their endeavors to make my peace with the
King. They left me there with Ptolomeus, who staid to keep me company, and a
while after they sent me Chirurgians, and such of my servants, as were most
necessary for me; my rage was risen to so high a pitch, that of a long time I
was not capable of any discourse, and Ptolomeus had very much ado to persuade
me to let my wounds be dressed; they were such light ones, that I hardly kept
my bed at all for them, and within a fortnight they were perfectly healed. I
heard news every day from Susa, by my friends, who came to visit me, and gave
me a faithful account of all that passed at Court. From them I learned the
extremity of the Kings anger, and in what manner it had broken forth; he was
not so well able to dissemble it, but that he loudly redoubled his threats
against me, and protested I should never obtain his pardon. He seemed
nevertheless to be satisfied for the present with my absence, and not
believing I was so near him, he used no great industry to have me taken; but if
he had, my friends were always at watch, and ready to remove me from the place
where I was, as soon as they should find I was there in any danger; I believe
notwithstanding that it was easy for my enemies to suspect the place of my
abode, being so near them, and so often visited by my friends, but they were
very circumspect in their visits, and I think that either Hephestion himself,
out of generosity, hindered the search which else would have been made for me,
or that my friends prevented it by their authority in the Court, especially
Ptolomeus, and Craterus, whose virtue, and quality, were so considered, that
they had no equals in credit except Hephestion. I learned also that mine
enemie's wounds were not dangerous, but that that in his thigh was great, and
required time for the healing of it, that the King spent all the time at his
bedside, which he passed not with Statira, and that they waited for nothing
but his cure to accomplish the marriage. This news drove me back again into my
despair, and into the most violent resolutions that rage could suggest. Let him
not think he has escaped me, (said I to those that spoke to me concerning him)
and let him account his pretensions but uncertain, while Lysimachus is alive; I
will live to trouble his repose eternally, and into the midst of a thousand
guards, will I carry him a death which he believes he has avoided. After that
effect of my despair, let Alexander do his worst, and when I am satisfied, let
him pour the most dreadful storms of his indignation upon me, let him renew the
memory of Philotas and Callisthenes, in the person of his near kinsman, and let
him make his cruelties be as much talked of as his Conquests, to which I have
contributed the best part of my blood; I will expect it all without terror,
provided I be revenged, and I will laugh at my own destruction, so my rival may
be buried in my ruins.

These were my ordinary discourses, and 'twas in these, and more violent
disquiets I passed all the time my wounds kept me at that house, where I was
confined. As Soon as I was in better condition, it was impossible for me to
suffer the absence of Parisatis, and in spite of the counsels of all my
friends, I would needs return to Susa. They in vain opposed that intention, and
all they could obtain from me, was that I would not go into the Town but by
night, and that I would retire to Ptolomeus his Lodging. I obeyed them in that,
and when it was dark, I took horse with them, and being very well accompanied,
I went to the City, and to the house of that dear friend. My retreat was secret
enough, and would have been so a great deal more, if I could have contained my
self within the limits that were set me, and without the thought of seeing
Parisatis. But scarce was I at Susa, when that desire awakened it self strongly
in me, and I conjured Ptolomeus to make Apamia endeavor my satisfaction. That
faithful friend undertook the employment most affectionately, and had no great
difficulty to persuade his Princess to favor my desires with her good offices,
yet in the condition my affairs were in, she neither thought it very easy, nor
very safe for me. Sysigambis was already resolved upon Hephestion's marriage,
and the Princess having heard her last intentions, had disposed her self to be
obedient; Apamia's perfect knowledge hereof made her foresee the difficulties;
she proposed them to Ptolomeus, but he urged her so earnestly, that to please
him she was willing to try all ways imaginable to content me. With this design,
after she had bethought her self in vain, of other means, she feigned her self
not well; Parisatis who could not be without her, having wanted her company a
whole day, sent to know how she did, and hearing she kept her bed, gave her
notice she would spend the afternoon with her; Apamia, by the Messenger that
came from her, begged that honor with as little company as she could, that she
might have the opportunity to entertain her in particular. Ptolomeus as soon as
it was break of day, and before there was any company stirring to discover me
in the streets, had brought me to Apamia's, and that Princess having shut us
up into her Closet, I waited for Parisatis's coming, with such an impatiency,
as you may imagine. She failed not to come at the appointed hour, and when she
was sat down by Apamia, and had enquired concerning her health, that Princess
seeing some of her Maids there, who might perchance have bin gained by
Hephestion, commanded her own to divert them, and to carry them into a Garden
while she discoursed with Parisatis. Those cunning Wenches obeyed her, and
as soon as the two Princesses were alone, Ptolomeus and I came into the Chamber.
Parisatis no sooner saw me, but she changed color, and turning toward Apamia,
Ah! Cosen, (said she) you have put a trick upon me.

I gave not Apamia leasrue to reply, but answering for her, and casting my self
at Parisatis's feet; Madam, (said I) if this fair Princess has deceived you to
favor me, you may pardon her an effect of pity, which generosity forbad her to
refuse to the most miserable of all men living; true it is, that she was
touched with compassion by the knowledge of my misfortunes, and she believed
she owed that consolation to him who has so perfectly served you, and so
religiously adored you. Do not you therefore (most divine Princess) envy the
only happiness I have left after so many years service, and since my hopes are
extinguished, be not jealous, if I have the good fortune, yet once again to
renew those protestations at your feet, which I have made to live and die for
you.

Parisatis would not suffer me to proceed, but having commanded me to rise,
she made answer with her ordinary moderation. It is true, Lysimachus, that
your sight did really surprise me, and that J suffer it with some trouble, not
that J envy your contentment, or that I am sorry for your happiness, Heaven is
my witness that J shall ever wish you a good fortune, and that to procure it
you, J shall with much joy contribute all that depends on me; J am too much
obliged to you, ever to have other thoughts of you, and J esteem your person
too much, to desire any thing to your disadvantage: but, Lysimachus, J am no
longer at liberty to follow my own inclinations, nor can J longer suffer the
continuance of your designs, after the charge the Queen has given me to think
no more of any body but Hephestion. The Gods know how J received that command,
nor is it necessary J should tell you again what J have confessed already to my
confusion, now you have exasperated matters, and stirred up the King against
you by the violence of your proceeding. J see you with a great deal of fear,
knowing that you see not me without a great deal of danger. Behold the reasons,
Lysimachus, which oblige me to be troubled at your sight and which force me
also to conjure you to break off these courses, and submitt your self as I
do to the law that is imposed upon me.

These words touched me so nearly that I had much ado to forbear interrupting
her; I retired a step or two, and crossing my arms upon my breast; What? Madam
(said I) have you then taken the last resolution, to sign the decree of poor
Lysimachus his death? and shall this unfortunate man who has so faithfully
served you, have no other recompense for all his services, but the glory of
having rendered them to you, and the grief of seeing them blotted out of your
remembrance? do you then out of some consideration of fortune, or some
phantasy of Sysigambis'es, prefer Alexanders favorite before me, he who of
all his followers has contributed most to your losses and who has neither
loved you perfectly, nor served you discreetly? and can you have the heart to
see him die at your feet, in whom you have nourished such fair hopes, and who
has adored you these five, or six years, withal the submissions we owe unto
the Gods themselves? Can you without grief see him breath out his soul, who
never was but yours; and will you give your self to his rival while he
facilitates his happiness by the loss of a life which he had dedicated to
you? Have you then resolved it Madame, and does this cruel resolution come
from the heart of Parisatis! Parisatis whom I have always considered as the
most accomplished Masterpiece of the Gods, and whom I never thought capable of
an injustice, and of an in humanity, which must needs blemish the fairest life
that ever was? Parisatis ^arken'd patiently to this discourse, and with much
ado retaining some tears which compassion would have forced from her, she
replied. You are unjust Lisimachus; to accuse me of your misfortune, I have
contributed nothing toward it but the obedience to which I was obliged, and
for which I thought I had prepared you. Not but that Hepestion (since you
constrain me to say so) is worthy of as good a fortune, nor that I have any
occasion to be unsatisfied with his services; but if the Gods, and the Queens
pleasure had destined me to Lisimachus, I should have received that command
without murmuring, which perhaps I received now without much satisfaction.
After this last confession, hope for nothing from me, but compassion of your
misfortunes; and wishes for your prosperity; I shall be eternally indebted to
you, and will consider you while I live-as the man of all others, in whom I
have observed the rarest qualities, and to whom I am the most obliged. This is
all you can require of me, and if it be true that you have loved mereally; you
ought no longer to oppose that which my duty exacteth from me, and to which my
will is swayed as it ought to be. These last words absolutely settled despair
in my heart, and banished from thence a part of that respect which till then
had so imperiously reigned there; my blindness suffered me not to consider any
longer that I was in the presence of Parisatis; and the fear which was wont
ever to accompany me in her sight, having forsaken me at that time, I could not
forbear saying; Madam, your resolutions are commendable, but you will be
likewise pleased that I declare mine to you; know that Sysigambis, and the King
dispose vainly of you; and they ought never to hope that Hephestion, nor any
other man in the world shall possess you, so long as Lysimachus is living; it
is through his blood they must make their passage to you, and it is in theyrs I
will find my repose and my revenge. Let Hephestion defend himself if he can,
from this hand, which he has felt already, let him shut himself up, let him
strengthen himself with a million of guards, it shall be in the very midst of
them, that I will stab this enemy of my life, and that I will make him find his
funeral, insted of the marriage which he hopes for. This last thought so
transported me, that being no longer my own man in the rage that possessed
me, J went out of the Princesses chamber, without so much as saluting them, or
taking any leave of them. Ptolomeus was gone away before, while we were
discoursing, not believing J would appear in broad day light in the streets of
Susa, and his departure gave me the more facility in mine. J went down the
stairs, and finding a horse below which J caused to be held there, J leapt
instantly upon him, and without further reasoning, J took my way toward
Hephestions Lodging, being fully resolved either to be slain in the attempt,
or to kill him in the midst of all his people. Consider a little into what a
blindness my passion had precipitated me, J went about a business whereof
the execution was impossible, and wherein my destruction was inevitable; and
indeed J expected an infallible death, for if J had had the least care of my
life, I should not have gone headlong into so manifest a danger, and out of
which J had so little likelihood to escape. J ran full speed through the
streets of Susa and being come to the gate of Hephestions Lodging, I entered
into the court with the same fury; but scarce had J allighted, and turned
toward the stairs when the guards having known me got within the door, and
presenting the points of their halberds, forbad me to enter. There it was J
perceived the vanity of those designs which passion alone inspires into us;
but being resolved for death, J had already drawn my sword, to make my
passage through the guards, or find the end of my life in the points of their
weapons, when the King who came often to visit Hephestion, entered into the
Court* attended by many of his followers, and his ordinary guards. He showed a
great asonishment at that encounter, and commanding me to be taken alive, J was
presently environed on all sides. The Gods know and so do some of those who
were present at that action, that J made a resistance which was not ordinary,
and that if the Kings often redoubled command had not been more powerful then
their resentment, J urged them sufficiently to give me my death. J wounded
Leonatus in two places, J ran Egilochees through the right arm, and made some
of the guard fall at my feet who never rose again; but while I by this defense
endeavored to exasperate them against me, J felt my self seized upon behind,
thrown down, and disarmed. The King commanded J should be tied like some
furious beast, and being commonly not Master of his passions, he suffered
himself easily, to be so far transported by his anger, as to make it appear
by most severe, and fatal resolutions: at that time he could not contain
himself so well, but that looking upon me with eyes sparkling with
indignation, he said thus to me. You have not only mocked, and slighted my
commands Lysimachus, but you have also offended me in the better part of my
self. The dignity of all Kings is concerned in my affront, and never did
subject abuse it so contumaciously, and so unworthyly; but I will revenge their
quarrel with mine own, and will find out punishments which shall be able to
tame this rage. I did not vouchsafe to answer those high threats, but looking
upon him with an eye which testified how little I was affrayd of them, I
exasperated him more by that disdainful silence, then I should have done by
some sharp reply. He turned toward those that were about him, and said.
Lysimachus is a Lion, but we will use him like a Lion, and shall perchance be
able to quell this fierceness. After these words he commanded I should be
carried to the dungeon, and kept like a Tiger, or some other more furious
creature; I was shut up in a very close prison, and guarded with such care as
was necessary for the custody of a man of my humor, and condition. All my
friends fell down at the Kings feet, and represented to him whatsoever their
freindship could make them say on the behalf of a Prince of his blood, and of a
man that had done him faithful service, but he was still inexorable, and not
only refused them my life, but knowing how much J despised it, he resolved to
make me feel my death by the length of those torments, and by the shame of
those punishments to which he destined me. Jn the mean time J was strictly
imprisoned, and judging that by my captivity J had lost the hope of that
revenge J had proposed unto my self, J desired nothing more then to end all my
pains, and avoid the reproach of seeing Hephestion triumph over me during my
life, and of enjoying Parisatis before my death. To that end, seeing my self
deprived of all weapons which might serve my despair, and not having so much
as my hands free, J resolved to starve my self with hunger, and by a death J
could so easily compass avoid the infamy of that, which the King intended me.
Thereupon J refused the meat they brought me, and continued near two whole
days without receiving any nourishment at all. None of my friends had the
liberty to see me, and scarcely was I suffered to have a man to serve me. But
Ptolomeus having learned my obstinate resolution from my keepers, was like to
have dyed with grief, and taking recourse to all inventions that could prolong
my life, he at the last bethought himself with Apamia, of an expedient to
preserve me a while longer, and wrought so well by her means, with the
Princess Parisatis, that I received this note from her in my prison, when I had
lost all hope of hearing from her any more.

The Princess PARISATIS to Prince LYSIMACHUS.
I Should never have believed that Lysimachus could hate a life which has
been, and is yet very dear to me, I conjure him by all the affection he has
born me, to conserve it, and if I have still any power with him, I forbid him
to end it, but by the will of the Gods, and of Parisatis.


O Gods! (cried I, as I made an end of reading these words) inhumane Parisatis,
for what torments do you reserve me yet? Are you not satisfied with those I
have already suffered, and do now suffer for you, being deprived of all hope
of recompense, but you must destine me to endure pains which yet I have not
felt? you desire without question to have me see you in Hephestions arms, nor
are you content to have me die, unless you assemble at my death, all that can
make it odious to me. Well then, Parisatis, I obey you, and the Gods are my
witnesses, J would obey you as blindly, if you should impose upon me yet
greater difficulties.

This was the invention Ptolomeus used to make me eat, and it wrought the
effect he had imagined; I took the meat they brought me, and though my life was
as hateful to me as before, Parisatis's command, and the knowledge she gave me,
that it was not indifferent to her, hindered me from doing any thing to put an
end to it. In the mean time my friends stirred not from the Kings feet, nor
left any thing unattempted to save me; but Ptolomeus was so urgent in the
business, that the King fearing lest in the extremity he might cause some
revolt, and knowing his credit among the Macedonians, made his person to be
seized upon, and put into a place of security. My other friends were extremely
grieved at this surcharge of affliction, though they were in no fear of
Ptolomeus his life, which they knew was very considerable to the King, but they
nevertheless were not at all the colder, and not content with their own
endeavous, they made the Queen and Princesses to intercede for me. Parisatis
who saw me reduced to that miserable condition only for her sake, employed her
sisters credit with the King; but all their intercessions were vain, and he
alleging his Oath, and the importance of the example would never suffer
himself to be persuaded. He thought fit to observe some form of justice in my
death, and to that purpose, sent Perdiccas, and Nearchus, to prison to me, with
Judges to examine end arraign me. They came into the place where I was kept,
and having made me acquainted with their Commission, and the command they had
received from the King, they would have examined me; I did not deign to answer
the Judges, and only turning toward Perdiccas, with an assuredness which
sufficiently discovered the little fear I had of their proceedings; Tell the
King, (said I) that it is not needful to examine him, who declares his crime
aloud, and that the tortures of miserable Philotas are not necessary to force a
confession from my mouth, I would have killed Hephestion; I would kill him yet
if I were at liberty, and the hope of my life shall never make me give over the
design I have against his, unless he give over his for Parisatis. J think this
is all my crime, and it is of a nature not to be disavowed, since it draws no
infamy along with it; J neither hope, nor ask for pardon, nor shall J complain
of a destiny, like that of Parmenio, Clytus, and many others, who like me, have
often saved the life of Alexander, with the hazard of their own, and who in a
thousand occasions have spent that same blood for his service, the remainder
whereof he poured out to satisfy his cruelty. Tell him moreover, Perdiccas,
that J am of his Family, you are allied to it your self, and that consideration
ought to oblige you, to help me to a death, either among the arms of soldiers,
or the paws of wild beasts, without the infamy of executioners; it is your
interest as well as mine, and Alexander himself also is concerned in it.

This was what I said to Perdiccas, and notwithstanding all the questions the
Judges asked me, they received no other answer, but an intreatly not to trouble
me any more. They returned on this manner, and related to the King what they
had done, and what I had said: That liberty of speech, and the contempt I
showed of him, did so exasperate him against me, that 'twas impossible for him
to dissemble his rage. Lysimachus, (says he) braves us like a Lion; but we have
tamed both Lions and Elephants, and will make his grave in the bellies of those
beasts he imitates. So without deferring any longer, he (notwithstanding all
that could be alleged to dissuade him from so cruel a resolution) condemned me
to be devoured by a Lion.

I know not whether the words I had said unto Perdiccas, touching the king of
my death, moved him to appoint me that, to free his blood from the shame of an
infamous punishment, or whether he intended by the fury of that cruel beast, to
quel the rage I had expressed in my last actions. But whatsoever it were, that
was my doom, and Peucestas, Python, and Neaptolemus, had the charge to
pronounce my sentence and cause it to be executed. I have this obligation to
the memory of Parisatis, that the news touched her very nearly, and her knowing
the King could not be mollified, afflicted her so sensibly, that she fell sick
with it. 'Twas an effect of her compassion, and of her generosity, for I never
was vain enough to believe she loved me, but to say truth, I have heard since,
this accident produced the same effects in her, that could be hoped for from
that passion, and that she deplored the misfortune of a Prince who perished
only for her, with all the tears, and all the words compassion could draw from
the eyes and mouth of a generous person. My Judges came unto my prison attended
by a great number of guards, and Python having pronounced my sentence,
testified a great deal of sorrow to me both for my misfortune, and for his
which had constrained him to take that office by the Kings express command; His
fellow Commissioners made the same excuses to me, and though I knew them to be
friends to Hephestion, I believed they were not much joyed at that employment.
I hearkened to the sentence of my death, without changing countenance, and said
to them with an assured voice; The King obliges me in putting some difference
by this kind of death, between me and base Malefactors; Let Us go Python, and
let us show him we can brave death for his service, and receive it joyfully
when it delivers us from his cruelties, and from the tyranny of our fate.

After these words I went out of my prison, without staying to be bidden, and
walked without terror in the midst of the guards through a Gallery, that led
to the Court which was appointed for me to suffer in. I looked upon it without
any apprehension, but though I had no desire at all to live, yet had I a mind
to let Alexander see by the last action of my life, that in putting me to
death, he did not deprive himself of the most inconsiderable of all his
subjects; and that perchance I had deserved his protection, and his assistance
in stead of the punishment to which he condemned me. This little desire of
glory, made me turn toward Peucestas, and his fellow-Commissioners, and looking
upon them with a countenance, which seemed to demand some courtesy. The King
(said I) has seen ^e kill Lions for the defense of his person, and he knows
that so long as J had arms, I never feared any kind of enemy; but being bound
as now I am, I shall be but an unpleasing spectacle to you, and you will see me
torn in pieces without any resistance; if your Commission do not forbid it you,
let me have but my hands free, and let one of your Guards lend me but his
Gantlets, I ask neither Sword nor Javelin of you; without arms I cannot free my
self from death; neither is that my intention, but only to give you some
divertisement at the end of my life, and some knowledge of the difference there
is between Lysimachus and ordinary persons.

I made no difficulty of speaking some words of vanity at my death, which I
should not have uttered in another season. My desire was not granted at the
first, as contrary to the charge they had, but Peucestas praying his friends to
defer the execution till his return, made haste to the Palace, and falling upon
his knee before the King, besought him earnestly to grant me that favor; at
first it was refused him, but in the end the King was so much pressed by those
that were about him, and by Sysigambis her self who happened to be there, that
believing my death was infallible though I should be unbound, he granted me a
favor which he thought would be unprofitable to me. As Soon as Peucestas had
obtained it, he came back to us, and having told his fellows the permission the
King had given him, he caused me to be unbound, and gave me a pair of
Gauntlets. I received that Present from him very civilly, and having embraced
him, and his fellow Commissioners, who had tears in their eyes, I went
cheerfully down the stairs which led into that fatal Court, where I was to
find the end of my life. The Gate of it was instantly shut, and my Judges
remaining in the Gallery, saw me walk fearless up and down, waiting for the
enemy that was appointed me. The door of a little room where he was kept, being
drawn up, that fierce creature no sooner saw the light, but he came out of his
Den, and turning his head on all sides with horrible warnings, struck a terror
into the hearts of my very Judges, and Guards; he stretched his legs twice or
thrice, as to shake off the sluggish rest he had lien in, and whipping his
Flanks with two or three lashes of his Tail, he began to walk gravely toward
the middle of the Court, at first he turned his sparkling fiery eyes toward the
Gallery, and discovering a prey that was out of his reach, testified his anger,
by roaring again, far more dreadfully then before, which made the spectators
believe they themselves were hardly in safety. But as soon as he perceived me,
and saw me come straight toward him, he gave over the thought of that prey to
run to a nearer, and a more easy one. Then it was that the Beholders bewailed
my misfortune, and expressed their trouble by a loud cry; but before that
furious beast assaulted me, O Parisatis! (cried J) receive this noble sacifice,
and cherish at least the memory of him who prefers death, before life without
Parisatis.

I had not made an end of these words, when the Lion flew at me so fiercely,
and so suddenly, that I had much ado to avoid the first encounter; I saved my
self nevertheless, and half one of my sleeves was torn off by one of his paws;
he would have turned head, but I caught fast hold of the long hair that hung
down upon his shoulders, and raising my self with strength and nimblenesse
enough, I leaped upon his back. That burden to which he was not accustomed,
made his reins bend to the very ground, and knowing the disorder I had put him
in, I stamped upon his feet with mine, and griped him so closely with my knees
and heels, that J got him absolutely down. He then instantly rolled himself
about with me, and we began a dangerous struggling, wherein J still endeavored
to keep my advantage; yet could I not avoid being wounded with his nails in
diverse places; but seeing his jaws open, and froathy with foam and blood, J
chopp'd my hand suddenly into his throat; my Gauntlet defended me from his
teeth, yet not so well, but that he dinted it in many places, and almost broke
it in pieces; in the mean time I took him by the tongue, and having pulled it
out of his mouth, I joined my left hand to my right, and setting my knees
stiffely against the hinder part of the Lions head, and my feet as stiffely
against the ground, I tugged with so much violence, that I tore it out by the
very roots: The Lion lost all his strength by the extremity of that pain, and
discharging the rest of his rage against the Earth, which he dug up with
his teeth, and watered with his blood, he gave me the leisure to beat his skull
in pieces with my Gauntlets.

Oroondates who till then had hearkened attentively to Lysimachus, interrupted
him in this place, saying; If I desired to hear this action from your own
mouth, it was not because I was ignorant of it, the fame thereof is spread as
far as the reputation of Alexander, and that proof of an admirable valor,
shall never perish in the memory of men.

It Was not an act of valor, replied Lysimachus, but an effect of my despair,
and of the anger of the Gods, who would not give me leave to die in the
beginning of my sufferings, and who destined me to more sensible ones, which I
felt afterward, and to these last which I now partake with you. As Soon as this
furious beast had vomited his life out with his blood, I dis-engaged my self
from his paws, and rose up all smeared with his blood, and with mine own which
ran down from diverse places of my body. Scarce was I up but I saw my self
environed by Peucestas, Python, and Neoptolemus who were come down into the
Court, and who with tears in their eyes came to rejoice with me for that
victory, I appeared the least joyful of all the company, and looking upon my
Judges with a very moderate countenance, Send forth another Lion more furious
then this, (said I) or command that a great many be let loose together, if you
would have them kill Lysimachus without difficulty. I made not this resistance
to save my self, nor do I pretend to be more free by this victory, then when
my hands were bound; cause Tigers, Leopards, or Elephants, to come forth
against me, and do not defer the execution of Alexanders pleasure, which I
retarded only to give you at the end of my life a spectacle worthy of his
presence.

The Gods forbid, (replied Peucestas) that we should proceed farther without
new orders from the King, you too well deserve a life which you have defended
with so much valor, nor can he refuse it you, without drawing upon himself the
hatred both of the Gods and men.

At these words they made me return the same way they had brought me, and
though I solicited them, not to defer the effecting of their Commission any
longer, they carried me back into my ordinary prison, and having left me with my
usual Keepers, within a while after they sent me Chirurgians to dress those
slight hurts I had received; Purisatis's command was therein most powerful
over me, and the order I had from her, to let my life last still, made me
suffer the remedies that were used to heal them. Then it was that my sad
thoughts renewed their war against me, and though I was victorious over a Lion,
yet was I not so over my misfortunes, much less over those cruel passions
which tormented me with so much inhumanity. I was served that day as I had been
before, but the next after, the cause of it being unknown to me I began to be
better used then I had been formerly, but I was still kept with the same care,
and the entrance of my prison was still refused to my friends, and to all those
that could bring me any intelligence of what passed. The second day after this
change, I received a Letter from the Princess Parisatis by the hands of my
Keepers. Although my hope was quite extinguished, my flames were not at all
abated, and I read those lovely Characters with such raptures, as I thought I
had no longer been capable of. If I remember well, these were the words of her
Letter.

PARISATIS to LYSIMACHUS.
I Partake as much in your Victory, as I did before in your misfortune; I will
assure you I contributed not at all unto it willingly, nor will I ever, but by
the necessity which duty imposes upon me; yet what Laws soever it prescribes
me, be most certain, that which I am pressed to shall never be obtained, but by
the safety and liberty of Lysimachus. In the mean time I conjure you to live,
and to believe it is the most acceptable service, I can ever receive from you.
I hope for this proof of your affection, and desire it of you with all my heart.


This second command of Parisatis was necessary, to make me resolve to suffer
the tediousness of my restraint; and but for the fear of offending her which
never forsook me, I was no longer capable of that resolution. Truly the
condition I was in, was the most lamentable one that ever was, and had it not
been for some glimpse of hope, which my Princesses care made me to conceive, my
grief alone would without doubt have executed, what my hands durst not
undertake for fear of disobeying her. I was waited on well enough, but with an
eternalsilence, and what news soever I enquired of my Keepers, concerning
Parisatis, Statira, Hephestion, and Alexander, I could never hear any thing at
all. This persisting to conceal from me, what passed at Court, made me suspect
the truth of my misfortunes, and I believed it was not without an express
order, they so obstinatly refused what I so earnestly demanded. J wondered why
the King delayed my death so long, and sometimes J said unto my Keepers, What
hinders the King from throwing the last darts of his cruelty at me, and why
does he not free himself from fear, by freeing Hephestion from his enemy? Jf
the life of that Favorite be dear to him, why does he not provide for his
safety, and why does he not dispatch that man out of the world, who will never
suffer him to continue in it, if he be once at liberty? Js it not, (pursued J)
because he destines me to deaths far more sensible then that J have escaped,
and that he will not have me die till J have felt my utmost miseries, and with
mine own eyes beheld happy Hephestion in the arms of Parisatis? This thought
transported me so exceedingly, that J was sometimes whole hours besides my
self, nor could I fix my mind upon less fatal remembrances.

O Parisatis! (cried I then) what favor do you believe you do me, in
laboring for my safety, and for my liberty? I have lost one of them for you,
and will not have the other without you. Demand rather my death of the King, or
rather demand it of your self who are the only Mistress of it; intercede for
me to that cruel Parisatis, who has forbidden me to die, and give not my rival
the price of a safety which I abhor without you, and which I cannot receive if
I lose you.

In such like Discourses, and in such like thoughts, I passed full twenty days
without hearing any news of Parisatis, Ptolomeus, or any of my friends; But I
detain you too long upon a tedious subject, I must shorten the recital of it,
since these particulars are not important. I wondered at the length of my
imprisonment, or rather at that of my life, and I could not devise what J ought
to expect from that mystery, when one day being in my ordinary entertainment, J
saw my Chamber door open; I vouchsafed not to lift up my head, to see who came
in, when an extraordinary luster striking my eyes, made me look up, to consider
the persons that came to visit me. I am not able to tell you my astonishment,
when J knew them to be the Princess Statira, the Princess Parisatis her sister,
Apamia, Arsinoe, Cleone, and Ptolomeus, and Eumenes with them, and many other
Ladies that attended them. This object interrupted my melancholy thoughts, and
made me start up from my seat to meet and receive them according to the
greatness of their quality, and of the honor they did me. I cast my self
instantly at their feet, but those great Princesses entreated me to rise, and
after they were sat down by the care Ptolomeus took to pay those civilities J
was obliged to in my Chamber, the Princess Parisatis, when she had bethought
her self a while what she had to say, spoke to me in these terms.

If this visit have surprised you, Lysimachus, the words J have to say, will
surprise you more; so that were J not assured by too many trials that
Lysimachus has perfectly loved me, and were not my conscience clear from all
the reproaches he can use, I should never have ventured to make a necessary
Declaration, and to ask him much greater, and much more difficult proofs of his
friendship, then all those he has already showed me. In short, Lysimachus, I
come to give you the last marks of my affection, and to receive the last
testimonies of yours. But before J declare what J have done for you, and what I
desire of you, be pleased that by the remainder of that Empire you have given
me over you, J require some assurance, and engage you to grant what J hope for
from you, of what nature soever it be.

The beginning of this Discourse caused a strange perplexity in my mind, and
made me guess part of my misfortunes: But while I waited trembling for the
continuation of it, I saw the Princess had made stop to hearken to my answer. I
cast my self at her feet a second time, and lifting up my hands and eyes, J
protest to you, Madam, (said J) by the respect we owe to the Divinities that
hear us, and by that J owe unto your self, which is much more considerable to
me, that there is but one only thing wherein J can disobey you, and that if
you forbid me not to love you, I will execute all your Commands as religiously
as you can desire.

The Princess seemed satisfied with this Discourse, and having commanded me to
use, she continued hers on this manner: After this assurance, Lysimachus, I
will make no more difficulty to open my heart to you, to let you know what it
would be hard for you to be longer ignorant of, and to make those requests to
you, which I disposed my self to, with a great deal of fear, and distrust of my
forces. Know then that the cause which brings us hither, is no other then to
bring you from hence, and with your liberty to restore you the Kings favor,
and much greater advantages near his person, then those you have lost. The
Queen my Mother has been carefully industrious in the business, the Queen my
sister refused the King her Husband the consent he desired of her, till she^
had got a certain grant of your safety; neither did J yield that which was
required of me, till the Kings word had freed me from those fears J was in for
you; but only Hephestion could obtain, what all of us had begged in vain; and
in short, it is to that enemy you are indebted for your life, and liberty, he
employed his power in it, handsomely, and with success, and touched my heart
more by the generosity of that action, then by the memory of all his services.
But withal, Lysimachus, it is for the price of your safety that Alexander has
obtained Statira for his wife, and that Hephestion has married Parisatis. Be
not astonished I beseech you, ( said she, seeing me grow pale, and almost like
to faint in Ptolomeus his arms) but call up your great courage in a misfortune
for which you were already prepared, or at least ought to have been so, by the
reasons J have often alleged to you. True it is Hephestion is my Husband; the
Gods, the Queens command, my duty, and the merit of his services have given me
to him: J will not urge for my justification, what J have told you a thousand
times; but J will only conjure you, by all the power over you J have yet left,
to consent to this alteration of my fortuno without attempting any thing
against your self, to change that violent passion which has brought you to so
great extreamities, into a more moderate friendship, such an one as J
heretofore could have desired from Artaxerxes, and which J will requite by the
same inclinations J had heretofore for that dear brother; and lastly ( which I
most earnestly beg of you) to attempt nothing against him whom the Gods have
given me for my Husband. J will not allege what he has done for you, after
that you have done against him, and in spite of your threats and daily designs
against his life; this service is too inconsiderable to strangle your
interests, and generosity alone obliged him to save the life of an enemy, by
the loss whereof he might have secured his own. But in short, Lysimachus, he
is my husband, and you cannot touch his life, without making your passage to it
through mine. You cannot hurt Hephestion, without wounding Parisatis, nor can
you behold him as an enemy, and not look with an eye of hatred upon her you
have so perfectly loved. I thought fit to represent this unto you, though the
promise you have already made me, might have freed me from that care, but it is
to let you see, J will neither abuse your affection, nor make any requests to
you that are not reasonable. Who will furnish me with words, ( generous Prince)
to express the motions of my soul, at the conclusion of this sad discourse, or
rather who will furnish me with an heart, to remember this miserable part of my
life, and not expire in your presence? But why should J die at the remembrance
of a misfortune, since J supported the misfortune it self without dying, and
that J have conserved my life, after events which were yet more fatal?

It is true, this cruel Declaration, and these rigorous commands killed me not,
but the condition they reduced me to, was little different from that of a dead
body. I sunk down between Ptolomeus his arms, with very little sense or
knowledge, and looking upon Parisatis without speaking or stirring, J by that
silence and unmoveableness, expressed my grief more to the life, then J could
have done by the saddest words which the greatness of my affliction could put
into my mouth. All the company seemed to participate in my sorrow, and
Parisatis her self had not constancy enough to dissemble her compassion. Her
fair eyes shed some tears in spite of her, and 'twas in spite of me that J
remained alive, after that fatal sentence of my death. And truly when I reflect
upon that deplorable part of my life, I can accuse nothing for its
conservation, but the same anger of the Gods, who saved me from the paw of the
Lion, and which prolonged my days still, to reserve me to my utmost
misfortunes. When I had continued a long time in trances which deprived me of
speech, and seemed to forbid me the use of all my senses, I began to be ashamed
of my weakness, and did my best endeavors to show some marks of courage in the
most dangerous occasion I had ever met. It was with much difficulty it gave me
strength enough to settle my self, and to consider the condition I was in, and
all the rest of the company; their faces had borrowed some of the sadness of
mine, and those desolate persons seemed rather to have been com thither to
pronounce the decree of my death, then to restore me my liberty.

I turned my eyes slowly upon Parisatis'es, and having looked upon her a while
without speaking, at last with a broken sigh I said to her. Are you then
Hephestions wife Madam, and was it to give me that pleasing spectacle you
forbad me to die? I forbad you to die (answered my Princess) because I should
have been very sensible of your death, and because your life shall ever be very
dear to me; and I commanded you to live, that in you I might preserve him whom
I will love as my brother, since I cannot love him as my husband. I am
infinitely obliged to you (replied I with a feeble voice) and I receive no light
mark of your affection, in the command you lay upon me, to give that passion
to Hephestion which I have had for you. I do not require of you (said
Parisatis) that you should love him as ardently as I beleev you have loved me,
but I with all my heart beseech you not to hate him who from hence forth must
be the better part of my self, and not to injure in his person that of
Parisatis, to whom you have expressed more affection then she deserved, and
more then she was able to requite Nor do I forbid you to love me, on the
contary I beseech you to live that you may love me, and I assure my self my
husband will not be jealous of the affection which I yet desire from you; but I
entreat you to reduce it within such bounds as may permit me to suffer it, and
to cut off all violences, conserving only a pure good will toward me, as I
will toward you so long as I live. Do you not promise it me Lysimachus? At
these words making a stop, she put forth her hand to me, as to give me a
pledge of the friendship she offered me, and to ask assurance of that she
required from me. Although I saw my death infallible on all sides, I would yet
die handsomely however, and till my last gasp give her cause to commend the
sincerity and perfection of my love. With that design, not resisting any
longer, I answered: Yes, Madam, I promise you that I will never disobey you
while I live. I will lay my neck under Hephestions foot if you desire it, and
with respect and submission will kiss the very hand that murders me, if you
command me; I will do more yet, and if for the small remnant of my life I
cannot change the nature of my affection, I at least protest to you that you
shall never be troubled with it, and that neither you nor your husband, shall
ever have any cause to complain of my words, or actions. Having said thus I
took her hand which she held out to me, and kneeling down upon one knee, I
kissed it with a profound submission. That was the only time in my whole life I
ever had that favor, and though the Princess blushed to see me give my self
a liberty I had never taken before, yet did she not envy me so small a
satisfaction in the loss of all my hopes. After this action all the Ladies
came kindly to me, and endeavored by words of consolation to sweeten the
excessive grief wherein I was buried, but I was insensible of al those
testimonies of their goodwil, and appeared so prepossessed with my misfortune,
that they almost lost hope of ever settling me while J lived. It would be hard
for me to tell you Ptolomeus his kindnesses, and the proofs I received of his
affection; after the time that he had been set at liberty, he might have
married Apamia, for he had her consent, as likewise Artabasus and the Kings;
and if he had pleased his marriage might have been celebrated with the Kings,
Hephestions, and many other Lords who matchd themselves with the Persian
Ladies, but he was not able to resolve upon actions of rejoicing while I was in
danger and captivity, and therefore would needs defer his happiness till the
alteration of my fortune. Arsinoe had kept her sister company, and had retarded
her wedding with Eumenes out of the same consideration. I gave Ptolomeus
thanks for that last testimony of his freindship, as well as J was able in a
condition, which made me incapable of all things, Before J went out of Prison,
J learned from him more at large, that after my victory over the Lion, the
Queen, and the two Princesses her daughters, had been upon their knees to the
King to beg my pardon; that Parisatis made Statira employ all the power she
had with him, and that she her self had made Hephestion despair of
possessing her, otherwise then by my safety and liberty. That Hephestion either
set on by that consideration, or by his own generosity, nobly embraced that
occasion of serving them, and that wounded as he was, he waited upon them to
the King, and fell down with them at his feet, and never stird from thence till
he had obtaind that J should be set at liberty, and restored to the same favor
I was in before my disgrace. That the King granted them their request, with
this reservation that J should continue in prison till his marriage and
Hephestions were accomplished, fearing least I should trouble their weddings by
some new folly: That after this assurance of my life, order was given J should
be better used then before, but that my keepers were forbidden upon pain of
death, to tell me any thing that passed at Court, or to let in any body who
could give me the least notice of it; that this was the cause why I was
ignorant of those fatal marriages, which were celebrated with much pomp and
magnificence, presently after Hephestion was cured. He added for my
consolation, that the Princess Parisatis was like to have died with grief
upon her wedding day, and that all they who had seen her in that condition were
afraid her marriage bed would have been her grave; that she had fainting fits
in the Temple, and that by her sadness, she had abated much of the public
rejoicing. After all this discourse which I hearkend to without being moved,
and as a person who no longer had any interest in the world, the Princesses
would needs have me out with them, and accompany them to the King, whom they
intended to present me to that very day. J suffered my self to be guided by
their will, as a man who had none left of my own, nor any other motion then what
was given him. They causd me come up into their Chariot, and carried me with
them as a victim to the Altar, or at least as a man deprived of sense, and
knowledge; all those we met as we went in, renewed their protestations of
friendship to me, and followed in a crowd to Sysigambises chamber, where the
King was, atended by the chief of his Court, except Hephestion, who would not
redouble my griefs by his presence, without having caused me to be prepared to
see him. As Soon as we entered into the chamber, the King came forward to meet
the Queen, who held me by the hand, and without giving her time to speak, or
me hardly to kneel down, he gave me his hand, and lifting me up said, Let Us not
talk of what is past Lysimachus, we have both done amiss, and our faults are
mutual, but my will is* that from this time forward we hold a better
correspondence, and drown the remembrance both of my rigor, and of your
disobedience, in better usages. With these words he embraced me tenderly, and
though my sorrow seemed to have extinguishd in me all sense of any thing, the
veneration J had still remaining to the person of my King, made me sensible of
his favor, and obliged me to answer; Sir, I confess my self as guilty as a
man can be, but your Majesty has not been unsensible your self of that passion
which has been the cause of all my faults, nor can J allege any thing but love
for the justification of my crimes. Lets speak no more of it (replied the King)
Love me as Alexander, and I will always remember you are Lysimachus, saying
thus, he embraced me a second time, and having expressed a great deal of
kindness to me, he exalted my combat against the Lion with praises which made
the whole company know he esteemd that action infinitely, and that it had
touchd him more then all the prayers which had been made to him in favor of
me. After these discourses and some other, to which I was not able to make
answer, so exceedingly was I cast down with the violence of my affliction, the
King asked me if for his sake, and Parisatises I would not see Hephestion. This
question made me tremble, and change color, and if the King had observed my
countenance, he might have found the alteration he had caused in it; yet J
forced my self to answer, That I would neither disobey him, nor the Princesses
Parisatis while I lived Consider a little I beseech you, and with all admire
the wonderful change of my humor, see how mild J was grown, and how different
from that furious Lysimachus who but a few days before, ran with his sword
drawn unto Hephestions house to kill him in the midst of all his followers,
and who to satisfy his passion, had blindly precipitated himself into a most
evident death, who had despised the Kings threats, out-braved the punishmemts
prepared for him, and shut his eyes against all manner of considerations to
content his rage.

Certainly when I make reflection upon this sudden Metamorphosis, I cannot
sufficiently admire the power of Parisatis, whose will had in a moment carried
mine from one extremity to the other, nor forbear concluding by this proof,
that never man equalled me in the perfection of Love. It is a small matter to
undertake Combats, to run headlong into dangers for a person that one loves,
glory alone can inspire us with these designs; but to divest ones self of the
most pressing and most violent thoughts a soul is able to conceive or suffer,
to cast off the interests of a man's own life, to establish the repose of his
enemy, by the loss of his own, and to pass from an excess of rage, to such
submissive resignations, is that which we see in very few persons; and if in
what you did at Susa for the safety of Alexander, you had not shown an
admirable example of a generosity of this nature, I should say, it were that
which appertains to no body but Lysimachus alone. In the mean time, Hephestion
to whom the King had sent to give notice, came into the Chamber; and though I
had done all that possibly I could to dispose my self to that interview, and to
recall all the courage I had left, for that action, I could not keep my self
from waxing pale, nor from trembling and expressing thereby, and by the trouble
of my countenance, into what a perplexity that sight had put me; I was like to
have fallen in a swoun, and if I had not been upheld by some of my friends who
were near me, I should without doubt have sunk to the ground, and by that
action have laid my self prostrate before my Conqueror, and the possessor of
Parisatis. Hephestion without farther ceremony, and without staying for the
Kings command, came toward me with open arms, and though my confusion made me
uncivil, and kept me from going to meet him, he was content to come the whole
way, and was so modest as to accommodate his countenance, not to the happiness
of his condition, but to the misfortune of mine. He embraced me many times,
without being repulsed by the coldness of my reception, and with much
tenderness made protestations of friendship to me, which I had not constancy
enough to answer. The cause of my sadness and confusion was sufficiently known
to procure pardon for my incivility from persons who knew that in another
season, and in another condition, I should have behaved my self otherwise; and
Hephestion easily excusing it himself, did not seem cooled by my silence, but
said to me with a very obliging fashion, I would it pleased the Gods,
Lysimachus, that I could buy your friendship with any other price except
Parisatis; they are my witnesses, that J have nothing so precious, but I would
give it joyfully; and that after that of my Princess, and of my King, J should
never account any so dear.

Notwithstanding the trouble, or rather the distraction I was in, I was not
utterly insensible of this Discourse, and drawing a sigh from the bottom of my
heart, O Hephestion! (said I) how lawfully is Parisatis due to you, and how
well has the King placed his affection; enjoy both peaceably, and forget what
rage produced in him who was not capable of it for any thing but Parisatis.

After these words, we embraced one another again many times, and the King made
me promise him, that I would be Hephestions friend all the rest of my life.
Certainly he deserved that friendship very well, from any other body except
Lysimachus, and his good qualities, wrought as great an esteem in me, as in
those to whom he always had been dear. Besides, his manner of carriage obliged
me to a good will toward him; but if I was content to love him as Hephestion,
who was gallant, noble, generous* and one who behaved himself toward me in a
very winning fashion; I could not look upon him as Parisatis's husband, without
considering him as the ravisher of my happiness, and the destroyer of my
repose, and of my life. The King, and the Queens, but above all the Princess
Parisatis expressed a great deal of joy at this reconciliation, and within two
days after Ptolomeus seeing some change in the condition of my affairs, married
his dear Apamia, and Eumenes the Princess Arsinoe her sister. The whole Court
interessed it self in this alliance, and upon that occasion renewed the
rejoycings of the former Weddings. But though I was Ptolomeus his nearest
friend, and that I participated in his particular joy, I had no share at all in
the public, nor did I make one in any of those meetings wherewith his marriage
was solemnized. The next day after it Roxana came to Susa, and within two more,
I sunk under the burden of my afflictions, and not being able to resist the
violence of my sorrow any longer, I fell sick. Then it was I praised the Gods,
believing I might let them and nature work, without disobeying Parisatis; it
sufficed me not to lay violent hands upon my self, and to take the remedies
prescribed me, that J might not rebel against her commands; but J was not
Master of my grief, and if it effected of it self, what my hands had not the
liberty to execute, I was not to be condemned for that. This was the account J
gave her, and that which I alleged for my justification, when she complained
of the little care I had to please her in the conservation of a life which she
had recommended to me.

The King whose former hatred was changed into a real affection to me, and who
looked upon my sorrows with much compassion, expressed a great deal for my
sickness; The Queens appeared afflicted at it, and did me the honor to visit
me often, but Hephestion was he who behaved himself the handsomeliest in that
occasion; he was not satisfied with being every day at my bedside, nor with
showing himself next Ptolomeus the most diligent of all my friends; neither did
he think it enough that the Princess his wife came many times to see me, but he
accused her himself of ill nature, and solicited her to visit me oftener; he
brought her diverse times himself, and going away without her, gave me as much
liberty to entertain her as I could wish: True it is, that by long conversing
with that Princess, he had a perfect knowledge of her virtue, and his
assurance of it made him the less severe in guarding that which ran no hazard
under so safe a custody. So civil, so free, and so obliging a comportment,
gained very much upon me, but it impaired my condition; for Parisatis's
affection to her husband, was redoubled by the franknesse of his proceeding,
and by the confidence he had of her; and it wrought a belief even in me, that J
could not without baseness undermine the affection she owed unto so generous a
husband, and to whom I was nearly obliged. This consideration and that of her
virtue kept my mouth almost always shut, and hardly permitted me so much as to
complain in her presence, of those torments which brought me to my grave; true
it is, that my looks spoke to her with eloquence enough, and that through them
she easily might read, all that my mouth could have made her comprehend. Truly
J have all the cause in the world to acknowledge her good nature, whereof I
could not desire any proofs which I received not from her every day, and though
she no way abused the liberty Hephestion gave her, but was rather obliged by
his freedom to live with more reservednesse, then she needed to have done if
her husband had been less generous; yet did she forget nothing she could or
ought to do, that she might not be accused of ingratitude. She was by my
bedside with Arsinoe, and Aspasia one day, which was the most dangerous of all
my sickness, the Physicians being at that time almost in despair of my
recovery; the knowledge my weakness gave me, that I was drawing near my end,
brought me a real consolation; and the hope I had, that I might perchance be so
happy as to finish my days in the sight of my Princess, made me turn my eyes
slowly toward her, and looking upon her with that respect which J had ever
perfectly conserved, after two or three sighs drawn from a weak and dying
breast, J with the little strength J had left, spoke to her on this manner: To
day it is, (Madam) J shall arrive at the end of that race which J have
gloriously run, and J shall see that happy conclusion of my pains, and of my
life, which J ever proposed unto my self; I call the Gods that hear us, to be
witnesses of the last protestation I make to you, that through the whole course
of that noble passion I have had for the Princess Parisatis, I never aspired
to a more advantageous fortune then that of dying for her. Not but that the
greatness of my love, and the encouragement of your promises, had raised me to
hopes that were too high, and had blotted out of my mind the knowledge of my
self, to make me pretend unto a prize which J could not worthily look upon; but
if at the last moments of a life which J lose for you, you ought to give any
credit to my words, J conjure you to believe, that J have always equally
esteemed these two advantages, to possess Parisatis, or to die for Parisatis:
the first has been denied me, and the Gods have granted me the last. Hephestion
has the happiness to possess her, and Lysimachus the glory to die for her. If
I have been jealous of Hephestions fortune, he ought to envy my destiny; and if
his passion could not be more happily recompensed, mine could not have a more
honorable conclusion. After the Declaration J make to you of this truth,
suffer me, I beseech you, Madam, suffer me for pitie's sake, to tell you once
again at the extremity of my life, that J die yours, and that I yield up to
you a soul pure, and clean even to the smallest thought; a soul that was never
touched but for you alone, with that passion which drives it from this body, to
make it take a more gallant flight; a soul that parts not from its body to
forsake your service, but to tie it self inseparably unto you; whithersoever
you move your foot, this faithful spirit shall wait upon you, but will not
borrow any shape that may affright you, and being neither visible nor palpable,
it without being perceived by you, will taste the most solid happinesses, its
nature is capable to enjoy. Be not jealous of its good fortune, since it shall
not be incommodious to you, and if I yet may be permitted to importune you with
my prayers, give me leave to conjure you to afford some moments of your life,
to the remembrance of the most faithful of all those that have ever loved you,
and who with a most perfect joy bequeaths you a life which he had dedicated to
none but you alone.

My weakness would not suffer me to say more, and scarce had I strength enough
to pronounce the last words distinctly. But how great constancy soever
Parisatis had shown through the whole course of her life, it was impossible for
her to dissemble her compassion, and to retain tears which running along her
cheeks, fell down from thence upon mine. That sight gave me all the consolation
I could receive, but as soon as ever she had wiped her eyes, turning them
toward me with an air that was languishing, and imperious both together.

No, Lysimachus, (said she) I will never consent unto your death, nor can you
without putting mine in danger abandon your life as you do; it is as dear to
me, as you can, and ought to wish, neither can you neglect it after this
knowledge, without a manifest rebellion.

I was not able to reply, and when I would have put forth my hand to give her
the last assurance of my fidelity, my strength failed me, and I fell into such
a weakness, as made me lose both all knowledge, and the use of all my senses.
The Physicians desired the Princess to retire, and they labored about me with
so much care, that they brought me to my self again; the rest of the day was
spent in applying remedies, and contrary to their opinion, and to that of the
whole world; the night following I had a very favorable crisis. In short, the
Gods would not suffer me to dye, and from that day they that waited upon me,
observed a visible amendment. All my friends showed an extraordinary joy, and
Parisatis appeared not the least satisfied at it; they all continued the proofs
of their good will toward me, and contributed whatsoever depended upon their
assistance, toward my recovery. Why should I hold you longer in this tedious
Narration? I recovered in the end, and whether I would or no, got up again from
that sickness, upon which I had grounded my last hopes. I left my bed, and my
chamber, but not that mortal sorrow, which ought to have brought me to my
grave, yet had not the strength to send me thither, so soon as I desired. I saw
the Court again in greater pomp and splendour then ever it had been, and I
observed joy in all faces except my own, and Queen Statira's; the reason of her
sadness was unknown to me, yet now I no longer doubt but that it was caused by
the discourses of Roxana, and by the knowledge of your innocence.

All objects of joy to me, were objects of desolation, and though my friends
used all their endeavors to comfort and divert me, and that the King was very
kind and liberal to me; their cares were all unprofitable, and did nothing but
aggravate a sorrow which was no longer in a condition to suffer either remedy
or consolation. The King to make me amends for the loss of Parisatis, would
have married me to a Princess of the same quality, the daughter of King
Occhus, Darius his Predecessor, an exceeding fair and virtuous Lady. But I
thanked him for that honor, in terms that made him see I was not capable of a
second affection. In the mean time I lived as a man who desired only to die,
and I drew matter of sadness from all manner of encounters; if I saw the King
sometimes, I could not look upon him as other then the Author of my
unhappiness, and the unjust arbitrator of my miserable fortune; if I saw
Hephestion, I could not consider him as other then the murderer of my life,
and the ravisher of Parisatis; and if I cast my eyes upon Parisatis, I beheld
her no longer as the Mistress of my soul, but as the wife of Hephestion. This
burden of afflictions made me resolve to leave a place where all objects were
fatal to me. To that end, having asked the Kings leave for a few days, I went
from Susa with a small train, and with Abulites his permission, retired to that
house of his where J had been dressed and had lien concealed for some time
after my combat with Hephestion; the situation of it was very pleasing, and
suitable to my solitary, thinking humor, it stood in an exceeding high Wood,
near the River Hydaspes, and was beautified with Fountains, Grots, Allies,
Arbours, and all manner of such like ornaments. I spent some time there, in an
entertainment conformable to my present condition; sometimes I sought out the
gloomiest shades in all the wood, and lying down at the foot of some Oak, J
recalled into my memory the past accidents of my life; and making a mixtture of
sad and delightful thoughts, I was so ingenious in tormenting my self, that I
drowned all the pleasures and contentments I had felt, in the remembrance of my
last misfortunes. Other while sitting by the River side, and fixing my eyes
upon the waters, which rolled impetuously away, I compared the lasting of the
delights I had enjoyed, unto the swiftness of their stream, and Parisatis's
coldness to the coldness of that element. That Princess had at least this cause
to praise the fidelity of my love, that in all my deepest melancholy, I never
accused her in the smallest thought, nor spent one moment in the desire of
shaking off the yoke she had imposed upon me for the remainder of my days. I
never complained of her, J never made any wishes against the pleasures she
enjoyed with Hephestion; nor did I ever repine at the years I had spent in her
service with so little fruit: I kept my self always without wavering in my
first inclinations, and never repented that I had given my life to her, who had
given her self to another. The place of my retreat, was known to very few, and
not being willing to be troubled in my solitude by the visits of my friends, I
hardly discovered it so much as to Ptolomeus. Yet could I not hinder many
others from learning where I was, nor my self from being often visited by those
that were most affectionate to me: They attempted in vain to bring me back to
Court, and instead of working that desire in me by their discourse, they made
me think of seeking a farther retreat that might be unknown to all men living.
I was not only visited by my friends, but in my solitariness I received also a
Letter from Parisatis, which she wrote to me, as I have learned since, by
Hephestions consent. Although I seemed unsensible of any happiness, yet was I
sufficiently touched with one of that nature, and the inward motions wherewith I
read her Letter, were very far from that indifferency I showed to all things
else. The words of it I think were these, or to this purpose.

PARISATIS to LYSIMACHUS.
THough I have not at all contributed to Lysimachus his exile, the whole Court
asks me what is become of him, and they accuse none but me for his voluntary
banishment; I envy not the delights you taste in your solitariness, but I pity
your friends, whom this retirement has deprived of your company, and
particularly Parisatis, to whom it shall ever be very dear.


If this Letter had commanded me expressly to return to Court, there is no
question but how great an aversion soever I had to it, the perfect obedience
wherewith I had resigned my self wholly to the will of Parisatis, would have
made me forsake my desert; but seeing it left me still the liberty of that
abode, I stirred not from thence, but spent some months in my melancholy
thoughts, and in reading the works of good Callisthenes, which he had
bequeathed to me alone, as to the dearest of all his scholars, and he who had
the most perfectly honored him during his life. In that Philosophy J sought
for some consolation in my misfortunes, and doubtless J found a great deal
more in it, then in the conversation of my friends; the solidity of his
reasonings affording me wherewithal to ^ull my afflictions asleep for some few
moments.

In the mean time this languishing decayed me insensibly, and had wonderfully
altered me, when my fortune received a strange revolution. I heard by Ptolomeus
that Hephestion was sick, and that Parisatis tended him in his sickness with
a care that visibly testified her affection to him. I desired Ptolomeus to
visit her from me, and assure her, that if his sickness lasted, or grew more
dangerous, I would forsake my retirement to wait upon him, and repay part of
his civilities. J believed nevertheless he would not be much pleased to see one
that had so great interest in his death, and so great cause, to desire it,
according to all the appearances in the world. This consideration, together
with my hatred of the Court, hindered me from leaving my solitude. But within a
few days after Ptolomeus came to me again, and as soon as ever he saw me,
Cheer up Lysimachus (said he) take courage, and change your manner of life, in
changing your condition, Hephestion is dead, and has left Parisatis for
Lysimachus. I am not able to tell you the astonishment these words caused in
me, nor to express the motions that agitated my soul. J was struck mute, and
unmovable, and Ptolomeus had talked to me a good while before I thought of
welcoming or answering him. When J was come a little to my self. Oh Ptolomeus
(cried J) what do you tell me, is Hephestion dead? He is, (replied Ptolomeus)
and that above two hours before I came from Susa. At this confirmation I
remained more surprised then before, and in the greatest confusion of thoughts
my mind was ever entangled in: I protest truly to you J was sorry for
Hephestion, as well by reason of the fresh obligations J had to him, as of the
esteem which the merit of his person had wrought in me as well as others, and
because J knew Parisatis would be most sensibly afflicted. Yet will J not
dissemble to you, that in this encounter J could not forget my interests, and
that J had not generosity enough, to make my sorrow for his loss drown the
hopes it revived in me; J loved my self so well as to ^ind comfort for his
death, in the advantages it brought me, and J was modest enough to dissemble
the satisfaction which in probability it was like to give me. But not being
able to conceal any thing from Ptolomeus, J could not long disguise my
thoughts to him, nor the diverse alterations that news produced in me. His
thoughts were conformable to mine, but being really my friend, and tying
himself inseparably to my fortune, the remembrance of my interests was
stronger then the grief J might else have had for so great a Man, and made him
pass over a death which alone seemed to establish his friends life. When we
had discoursed long upon that accident, and that he had told me the particulars
of his death, which were no other then what are ordinary in natural sickness,
he persuaded me to return to Susa, as well to pay my respects to that
Jllustrious widow, as to wait upon the King who was no way to be comforted,
and who by his words and actions made some believe he would accompany
Hephestion in his grave. J resisted not his desire, but referring my self to be
guided by him, and by fortune who seemed to have changed her countenance toward
me, J returned with him to Susa. You were in the Town at that time, and
therefore may dispense with me for relating the things that passd there, as
well about the Kings mourning as the pomp of Hephestions funerals, both which
rose to such an excess, that the whole world talked of them with astonishment;
the Kings treasures were like to have been exhausted with the expense he made
at his obsequies, and the great courage of Alexander which in a thousand
dangers had seemed invincible, was like to have sunk under the weight of that
affliction, I durst not come into his presence, fearing he would not look well
upon him, who according to all appearance was not like to be much troubled for
the loss, which he bewailed with so many tears, and so many other signs of
a mortal sorrow; neither did J know with what face to see Parisatis, nor which
way J could gain belief of the assurances J should give her of the part J bore
in her affliction. These considerations made me keep my lodging a few days,
but in the end I passd them over, and suffering my self to be led by the
strength of my inclination, I resolved to give my first visit to Parisatis;
but before J exposed my self to that hazard, J thought best to sound her
pleasure by Apamia, and find by her means whether she would be content I
should wait upon her. That Princess who had really loved Hephestion, as her
duty, and the merit of such a husband obliged her, could not resolve to see me
so soon, and got Apamia to desire me that I would defer my intention for a
while, and not to think it strange, if she was not able yet to dispose her
self to see me. J received this command without murmuring, and changing the
order of my visites, I went to the Palace with Ptolomeus. I found the King in
bed, and his Chamber full of the Principal men of his Court, who by dejected
countenances, and a profound silence, strove to accompany the sorrow of their
Prince; Indeed it was immoderate, and it sometimes transported him to cries,
and actions unbeseeming his quality, and the greatness of his courage. The
reasons I have alleged made me come with fear into his chamber, and hindered me
from making my address to him with assurance; but he deceived me in the
reception he gave me, and calling me to him as soon as ever he saw me, he put
forth his hand, and made me come close to his bed side. I kissed his hand which
he offered me, and the King wiping away some tears, wherewith his cheeks were
yet wet. At last, Hephestion's dead (said he; and having made a stop at those
first words,) You have lost your rival Lysimachus (continued he) but I assure
my self you are generous enough not to rejoice at it. I answered him only by
some tears, which those sad objects made me shed, and which confirmed him in
that opinion. This knowledge, (added he) moves me to love you very well, and
causes me not only to forget all you did against the poor man that is now
gone, but also obliges me to give you a great share, in the place he possessed
in my heart. I replied only with an humble obeisance, and retiring among the
rest, I conformed my countenance, and my silence to that of all the company.
The King kept his bed yet a few days, whereof I let not one pass without
doing my duty to him diligently; In the end he left his chamber having
commanded the whole court to put on mourning, and his first going a broad was
with no other intention then to visit Parisatis. He commanded me to wait
upon him, after having caused the princess to be asked if she would give way
to it, she yielded to it out of complacency, not hating me so much as to
refuse a favor I so ardently desired. I went along therefore with the King to
make that visit, and following him into the Chamber of that fair widow, I
found her in an obscure night, and in a condition suitable to the greatness of
her affliction and of her virtue. The Queen her mother, the Queen her sister,
Barsina, Apamia, and many other Ladies were with her, and by their eyes, and by
their discourse solemnized her grief in a very mournful fashion; The King
drawing near to her bedside, mingled his tears with hers, and made her
sufficiently know he was come rather to keep her company in her sorrow, then to
give her any consolation. They continued along time in a mute entertainment,
and as soon as their grief would give them leave to speak, they said the
saddest words, it ever produced in those that have been the most deeply touched
with it. After that doleful conversation, the King called me, and presenting
me himself to Parisatis, prayed her to receive me as a man who had not rejoiced
at Hephestions death. My looks easily seconded his words, and the sight of my
Princesses face having touched me with a most sensible grief, made mine but
little different from hers. Parisatis seeing me could not retain some sighs,
and having bowed her head to me, made me know that in that estate she was not
capable of giving me any other reception, and that though the sight of me did
something renew her sorrow, her misfortune did not make her hate a person who
had not at all contributed to it. At that first visit J said nothing to her, as
well by reason of the Kings being present to whom out of respect, we left her
whole conversation, as because J thought her little capable in that condition,
of any other entertainment, save that of her loss. I talked a while with the
Queen her sister, but it was of matters very far from the thoughts which
possessed me, and which as innocent as they were, could not but pass for very
criminal in so fresh an affliction. I saw my Princess daily for a good while,
but I bore her so much respect, that J left the care unto my looks of
declaring my intentions to her, and considered her so far in her sorrow, that I
never mingled any thing of love, among the discourses of consolation.

This constraint nevertheless was very hard to me, and when I was alone with
her, I had much ado to conceal my thoughts, but I had at least this
satisfaction, that they were not unknown to her, and that my silence was
eloquent enough to make it self be understood. You know that within a little
after Hephestions Funerals, the King having heard that the Cosseans a barbarous
people near Susa, were revolted, departed thence, and marched strait against
them with a design to sacrifice them to his friends ghost. At our going away, I
trespassed upon my respect, to let Parisatis see, I was still Lysimachus. With
that design, having the liberty to entertain her one day before we departed,
after I had prepared her by my looks, for the Discourse I had to make, I spoke
to her on this manner: Madam, if I were not upon the point of a departure,
which perchance will separate me from you for ever, I would not open my mouth
to interrupt your sad remembrances with that of the faithful Lysimachus; you
know that since your loss I have forgot my interests to afflict my self with
you, and I protest to you I would persevere in the same course if I were still
to continue here, and if I were not returning to places where the chance of
War, which has spared me hitherto to serve you, may probably make me fall as
well as others. That consideration alone forces me beyond the respect I have
inviolably observed toward you, and constrains me to declare to you, that if
the Gods have disposed of my destinies, I shall die without sorrow, provided
you suffer me to die yours, and that you disown not him at the end of his life,
who served you most religiously as long as you were in a condition to permit
him, who troubled you not while you were in another estate, and who in spite of
his own interests, does participate very much in your afflictions. If the Gods
who have delivered me from many dangers, bring me back to you again, I will
without murmuring, follow the Laws you shall impose upon me, and will keep my
self severely within that absolute resignation, wherewith I may boast I have
submitted to your will: give me leave only at this departure, to flatter my
self with an hope that I am not indifferent to you, and to believe for the
repose of this soul which never was but yours, that the memory you owe to the
ashes of Hephestion, has not blotted out of your mind the remembrance of
Lysimachus.

The Princess remained a while without answering, as being ashamed to have lent
an ear to such words in a time that seemed to condemn them, but at last she
spoke to me in these terms. This Discourse, Lysimachus, is so unseasonable in
the condition I now am, that I was not able to hear it without being moved; not
that I think it strange from you, to whom I have obligations enough, to make me
bear with much greater offenses; but it is so little conformable to my present
estate, and my loss is yet so fresh, that I can neither approve, nor hearken
to what you say, without a lightness extremely to be blamed; I am content
nevertheless to pardon this fault in him, to whom I am much indebted, and will
moreover assure him, that if after the death of my dear Husband, I could be
capable of a second affection, it would never be to any body but Lysimachus. I
beseech you to press me no farther, nor to desire any thing more from me, in a
season that makes discourses of this nature very condemnable.

I thought not this reply strange, and though Parisatis seemed by her words to
forbid her self a second affection, I excused it without losing my hopes,
knowing that her grief, and decency it self required such an answer. I
therefore urged her no farther, and testifying that I was exceedingly satisfied
with her inclinations toward me, I took my leave of her, and departed with the
King.

We marched against the Cosseans, and the King transported by his grief, and
exasperated by the rebellion of that people, did not only defeat them in
battle, but hunting them out, in the most retired places where they hid
themselves to avoid his fury, sacrificed them all to Hephestions Ghost, without
exception of age, sex, or condition. He appeared satisfied after this
execution, but instead of returning to Susa, he went to Babylon, and sent to
the Queens and Princesses to come thither to him. You know what passed in that
time at Susa, yourself made a part of the most memorable events, and were
against your will, a witness of the departure of those illustrious persons. I
stirred not from the King who then made extraordinary much of me, and gave me a
great many of those testimonies of affection, which he had formerly given
Hephestion.

In the battle against the Cosseans, where he himself led the right Wing, he
favored me with the command of the left, and having seen me defeat the Enemies
I fought against, he did me honors, and gave me praises which I neither
deserved nor expected, and not being at all satisfied with expressing his
favor to me, by the honors and offices he raised me to, he promised me openly
the possession of the Princess Parisatis, and engaged his word that he would
get her to consent unto my happiness. That hope revived a joy which had so long
been extinguished in my soul, and made me bless those sufferings that were to
be so gloriously recompensed. In the mean time we marched toward Babylon but
by the way we met the Soothsayers of Chaldaea, who came to the King purposely
to dissuade him from that Journey; they assured him from their God, that it
would be fatal to him, and that he was threatened with an infallible death, if
he entered into that City, but he laughed at their predictions, and passed on
without giving any farther ear to any of them: He knew he was attended there
by the Ambassadors of many Kingdoms, which his reputation forced to submit
themselves unto him, and to receive without resistance, that yoke he meant to
impose upon the whole Earth.

This reason made him hasten his Voyage, or rather the power of his destinies
forced him to it in spite of presages, and the counsels of his friends. Being
near the walls, a flock of Crows after they had fought a great while before
him fell some of them dead at his feet; but he mocked at that adventure, and
told his soothsayers, it was not able to daunt a gallant courage. He entered
into that fatal Town, where he was received with great pomp and magnificence,
and finding there the Deputies of Greece, and of many remote Provinces, he gave
them audience, and sent them home with rich Presents. Within a while after the
Queens and Princesses, with the rest of the Ladies arrived there, where the
Court was greater and fairer then ever, and Lysimachus fortified with the hopes
the King had given him, and with the good reception he had from his Princess,
was more cheerful and more contented then ever he had been in his life: Within
a few days after our arrival, the King himself presented me to Parisatis, and
holding me by the hand, Sister; (said he) you must receive Lysimachus for my
sake; before I gave you the man, who of all the world was dearest to me; and
now I offer you him whom I esteem most, who is nearest to me, and who has best
deserved you.

'Twas in Sysigambis's presence he said thus, and the Princess having looked
upon her, answered the King only with a low obeisance, and though she was
Mistress of her person, and of her actions, she left it to her Mother to make
reply, which she did very civilly, and as much to my advantage as I could wish.
In short, all things began to contribute to my happiness, Parisatis's humor
grew disposed toward it, and made me hope for a Declaration in favor of me,
when once the time of her mourning was expired, and that she might receive me
with decency. But about that time Queen Statira was not very well, and the
Physicians advising her to take some Country air, the King persuaded her to
retire for some days to the Castle of Calcis, which was not above two or three
hundred Furlongs from Babylon, and the Princess her sister who loved her
dearly, and could not brook her absence, would needs keep her company. I had
waited upon them, if some employments the King gave me about that time, had not
in consideration of my honor kept me with them. Their stay there was to be but
for a few days, and yet I was mortally afflicted at that separation, and the
great violences my heart suffered upon that occasion, were but the omens of
those strange revolutions which happened within a little after. Alas! when I
remember the words which that secret and unknown presage made me speak to
Parisatis, and the grief which contrary to all show of reason oppressed me at
her departure for so short a Journey, I cannot sufficiently admire the
foreknowledge the Gods often give us of our misfortunes. These fair Princesses
went from Court, but they went from thence for ever; and within a short while
after fell that shining star, which did already spread his light over the whole
Earth. In brief, the fatal hour of the greatness and beauty of the world was
come, and the royal dignity was to suffer an Eclipse in the person of the
greatest King that ever was. He felt himself ill first, at the house of
Thessalus a Median, and in the midst of the Feast among all his friends, he
sent forth a loud cry on a sudden, and sunk down in the arms of those that were
about him, as if he had been stricken with a mortal blow. I was one of the
first that ran to him; and asking him with others the cause why he cried out,
and the nature of his sickness; Let me be carried away, (said he) I am but a
dead man.

Though this accident amazed us all, his command was executed, and he was
carried presently from Thessalus his house unto his own Palace; he was
instantly visited by his Physicians, but they could find no sign of his
disease upon his body, and though at the same time he was seized with a most
violent Fever, it was impossible to discover the cause of it; the King said
that at the same moment he cried out, he felt between his shoulders something
like a sudden stab with a Dagger, and that from that time he was tormented with
an excessive pain. The skilfullest Physicians did all that was in the power of
Art and Nature for the recovery of their Prince; but he grew visibly worse and
worse, and at last began to make them fear their endeavors were all in vain:
the most general opinion was that he was poisoned, and that belief made them
who had him in hand strive to strengthen him with Antidotes* and to drive away
the venom by the most Sovereign remedies. Queen Roxana fortified by the
absence of her rival, kept still close by his bedside, and Sysigambis stirred
but very little from him; some would have had Queen Statira advertised how he
was, but the King absolutely forbad it, and knowing she was not well before her
departure from Babylon, he was afraid that news would redouble her sickness.
The fourth day after he fell ill, the soldiers cried out that their King was
dead, and that out of some considerations that misfortune was concealed from
them. The contrary was affirmed to them, but they persisted in their belief,
and coming to the Gates of the Palace with cries and tears, desired that if
their King were alive, they might have leave to see him; The King being told of
their impatience, commanded the Gates to be set open, and that they should be
suffered to enter one after another; all the Officers had that honor first,
and after them the Soldiers. The sight of their Prince drew tears from the most
flinty of them, and the Macedonians considering him in that bed as in his
grave, bewailed his loss with most pitiful complaints; the King was thereby
touched with compassion, and looking upon those who stood nearest to him
weeping; comfort your selves my friends, (said he) the Gods will have a care of
you, and will give you after me, a Prince worthy to command such generous
Forces.

The Kings patience was to be admired in this action for notwithstanding his
being so very ill, he kept himself still in the same posture, and suffered all
the soldiers to come one after another to his bedside, and to kiss his hand
which he held out of bed. When that ceremony was ended, and that only the
Princes, and the most considerable of the Court were left in his Chamber, he
laid himself a little better at ease, and turning toward us, We must yield,
(said he) to the fate of the Aeacides, from whom I am descended, who almost all
dyed in the thirtieth year of their age.

The next day he caused himself to be removed to the Palace which is on the
other side of the Lake; but there as well as in the other place, he was
tormented with such violent pains, and so weakened, that at last he saw his
hour was come, and that it was time to forsake the Earth which in ten years he
had reduced almost all under his Dominion. This assurance moved him to assemble
us altogether; we were so constantly near him, that it was not hard for him to
do, and when he saw us about his bed, he embraced us all with much tenderness,
and pulling a ring off from his finger he gave it to Perdiccas, commanding him
to take care of his Burial, and to cause his body to be carried to the Temple
of Jupiter Hammon; Perdiccas in the name of all the rest, asked him to whom he
would leave his Empire; To him that is most worthy of it (replied he) and by
that answer he showed the greatness of his courage, which in the last moments
of his life, made him prefer virtuous persons, before those whom nearness of
blood, and kindred, might have made considerable to another. His brother
Aridaeus was living, and amongst us, and Queen Roxana was with child; and yet
these considerations hindered him not from adjudging the Universal command to
him that best deserved it. Perdiccas asked him last of all, when he desired to
have those honors given him, which are due unto the Gods, and to those who
like him, had gloriously acquired a place in the Heavens. When you (said he)
are all happy, and in peace.

These were his last words, within a while after his strength failed him, and
the use of speech forsook him with his life.

Behold in short, what the end was of the greatest man the Earth ever bore, and
of whom posterity to the last ages of the world, shall never speak but with
astonishment. He remained cold, and unmovable amongst us, and his death
dejected us on such manner, that we all seemed to have breathed out our souls
with him. Never was so great a consternation seen in so generous persons, and
the courage of so many gallant Princes, who in a thousand dangers had made
themselves a thousand ways remarkable, seemed to have taken flight with the
spirit of Alexander. I will not describe the height of our affliction
particularly, it shall suffice me to tell you that it was suitable to our loss,
and that the Macedonians bewailed him as their God, and the Persians as their
lawful King, and the greatest that ever had reigned over them. And in brief,
you need only make a little reflection upon the life of that potent man, to
comprehend the effects his death produced in all those that knew him.

For mine own part, I will assure you with truth, that his loss imprinted such
a grief into my heart, that I was hardly to be comforted, and though I had
received such usage from him, as was enough to alienate the affections of the
most zealous, the last testimonies he gave me of his love, had wiped them all
so clean out of my memory, that there remained not the least sign of them; and
the remembrance of that great Prince his admirable virtues, settled so deep a
sorrow in my breast, as for some time I suspended the thoughts of my love, to
give them wholly to the consideration of our general loss.

The next day we met altogether in the Palace with a general consent, and
admitting none into our Assembly but the Princes, and the most considerable
Commanders, we began to deliberate what honors should be rendered to the body
of our King, and who should be his Successor. Perdiccas having placed the Kings
Chair in the midst of the Hall, upon which was his Crown and his Arms; laid the
Ring there also which the King had given him at his death, and by the sight of
that object drew new cries and tears from the whole company, which of a long
time afforded him not that silence he demanded. They all were willing he should
speak first, and when he saw the Assembly settled, he began his Discourse with
the praises of the deceased King, and with the revenge that was fit to be taken
for his death upon those Pa^^^cides (if they could be discovered) who by poison
had shortened so brave, and so glorious a life. He went on with recommending
those honors that were to be rendered to his body, and to his memory, and ended
with the care that was to be taken in the election of a Successor worthy to
possess the place of our late King. To that end, he mentioned Roxana's being
with child, and concluded it fit to wait till she were delivered, that her
issue might enjoy the Crown of its Father. Perdiccas his motion was seconded by
some of the company, but a great many others opposed it, and particularly
Nearchus, Ptolomeus, and my self, who knowing Roxana's spirit, and her enraged
jealousy against Queen Statira, and the Princess her sister, desired to
prevent the storm which threatened them in the authority of that ambitious
Princess. Ptolomeus represented unto the Assembly that the condition of our
affairs would not permit the staying for an uncertain birth, nor the Government
of a child who perchance would prove of a different sex from that which ought
to have the command over us, and then proposed to elect a Prince by plurality
of voices, among those of the Blood Royal, and to yield the Empire to him with
an Universal consent. I believe that his friendship to me, persuaded him partly
to give that counsel to the Assembly, knowing that by nearness of alliance I
was like to have good pretensions to it. Ptolomeus his authority procured him
instantly the attention of the whole Company, and presently after Ariston
nominated Perdiccas, Alexanders Successor. Some of his adherents approved that
Election; but we opposed it stiffely, and Meleager one of the boldest, and
valiantest Commanders in all the Army, but of a factious turbulent nature, was
not satisfied with contradicting those that voted in favor of Perdiccas; but
after having alleged the injury it was to other Princes, who were more
considerable, he crowded through the press, and putting himself among the
Soldiery, began to stir up a sedition. All things were going into a strange
disorder, when I bethought my self of the wrong that was done to Alexanders
lawful heir, and though my own interests were sufficient to have stopped my mouth
if I had been of an humor to prefer them before justice; I could not suffer
them to go on farther; without proposing what my conscience, and the
consideration of the deceased King enjoined me; and addressing my self to the
whole Assembly, What need is there, (said I) to waver longer in the Election
of a Prince, whom the Gods have left us, and who is amongst us? Is not
Aridaeus, Alexanders brother, and the son of King Philip? Why will you deprive
him of the Crown, which belongs to him by right and by succession? And why will
you frustrate him, of what Reason and Nature have given him? These words
appeased all the tumult, and the Princes having digested them a little; though
their interests made them of a different opinion, believed they could not with
justice oppose so lawful an Election. Aridaeus thereupon was called; and
Meleager to spite Perdiccas, having guarded him into the Hall with an armed
Band; he was saluted King; and named Philip by the Soldiers. Though this
Election appeared most just, the Princes were not very well pleased with it,
and knowing there were such defects both in the body and mind of that Prince,
as rendered him in a manner incapable of so important a charge, they destined it
to the son that should be born of Roxana, when he should be of a fit age and
condition to execute it, and named Perdiccas and Leonatus his Guardians,
submitting themselves unto the new King, until such time as Alexanders son
should be able to hold his place. This was that which gave Roxana that
authority which has proved so fatal to us, and the consideration of the King
her husband, hindered me from opposing those advantages which were aimed at for
her son.

This order appeased the uproar for a day or two, but presently after it broke
forth again more strongly then ever. Many Macedonians lost their lives in it,
and Meleager was assassinated in a Temple by the command of Perdiccas, who had
usurped the greatest authority. These disorders obliged us to assemble our
selves again, and not being able to agree about the Election of a Prince, we
resolved to share the Territories Alexande^ had conquered, toward which we had
contributed the best part of our bloods. We left King Philip some shadow of
Sovereignty amongst us, and with a common consent divided the Provinces that
were at our disposing, on this manner. Ptolomeus had Egypt; and part of
Africa; Syria, and Phoenicia, fell to Laomedon; Cylicia to Philotas; Lycia;
Phrygia, and Pamphilia, to Antigonus; Caria to Cassander; and Lydia to
Menander; Eumenes had Cappadocia; and Paphlagonia; Leonatus the lesser Phrygia,
with the Coast of the Hellespont, and I for my part had Thracia, Pontus, and
Media; the remainder was divided among the rest, about which I will not enlarge
my self, and Perdiccas keeping the Superintendence of Babylon, was contented
with governing the King, and being General of all his Armies, staying still
with Roxana, in expectation of the birth of her child, whose Guardian he was
declared, retaining by that means the greatest share in the authority by reason
of Philips weakness, who did nothing without him, and who followed no other
counsels but his. This order having been taken in our affairs* I left the care
of mine to Ptolomeus, and went from Babylon, to pay unto Statira what I owed
unto her after the greatness of her loss, and unto the Princess her sister all
the testimonies of affection she could expect from me in the change of their
affairs. Care had bin used to conceal that misfortune from them, and it was
done but with too much industry. Here it is, (generous Oroondates) that you
have need of all your courage, and that you must resolve to hearken to the
fatal, bloody Catastrophe of our lives; I shall tell you nothing which you have
not learned from me already; but if this renewing of sorrow, produce in you the
same effects it does in me, you will not be exempt from that perplexity which I
now am in, and which hardly leaves me strength to finish this doleful relation.

Lysimachus made a stop in this place, as to recover new Forces, and wiped away
the tears wherewith his cheeks were already wet, while Oroondates by his sighs
expressed how sensible he was of that recital, and prepared himself to hear the
lamentable conclusion of his Discourse. After some moments spent in silence,
Lysimachus prosecuted his Narration thus. I came to the Castle of Calcis, where
I believed I should find the Princesses, but my astonishment was not to be
equalled, when I saw the house empty, and learned from some servants who were
left behind, that they were gone away the day before, having received Letters
from the King, which called them back in have to Babylon. This news surprised
me infinitely, and made me apprehend part of those misfortunes which were
befallen. I knew the King had been dead five or six days, and that he could not
have writ that Letter which had made them depart so suddenly. I would not stay
to talk longer where J could hear nothing more, and taking horse presently
again, I returned with all speed to Babylon, I ran instantly to Queen Statira's
Lodgings, but being told she was not come thither, I went full of astonishment
and confusion to Queen Sysigambis's, and as I went up stairs the beating of my
heart foretold me, the Tragic adventure I should meet there, and when I was
brought into the Chamber, I was witness of a sight that made me divine a part
of my mifortunes. All Sysigambis's Maids were stretched upon the floor, and
filled the room with most woeful cries and groans, and that great Queen having
her head covered with a Vail, lay by them her self, and with the force of her
courage, restraining her cries, she expressed her sorrow more to the life, by
that mortal silence. Hard by them lay a man all bloody, whom in spite of the
trouble I was in, I knew quickly to be the faithful Eunuch Tyreus.
Notwithstanding the strange surprise this encounter had caused in me, I forbore
not to draw near unto the Queen, and kneeling down upon one knee, I conjured
her to tell the cause of her new affliction, to him that would die to serve
her. She hearing my voice, lifted up her Vail a little, and said, Ah!
Lysimachus, the whole race of Darius is extinct, J leave the care to you to
revenge with it, the memory of Alexander, and of your self; I am ashamed to die
the last of all my Family; but if I have survived the loss of Darius, I will
not outlive that of Alexander, and of my daughters.

At these words she covered her face again, and put her self in her former
posture, in which as I have heard since, she continued till she had ended her
days. Judge, I beseech you, whether her discourse and action did not touch me
sensibly, I turned toward Tyreus from whom I believed I might get a more
particular knowledge of what was happened, and asking it him with impatiency,
Sir, (said he) the Gods have left me this remnant of life, to discover the
murder of our Princesses, and to publish that horrible parricide, which the
darkness has concealed from the whole world, and to which the Sun would have
abhorred to lend his light. I desire no more strength of them then what will
serve my turn to make this fatal relation, and then I shall without grief
forsake a life, which I cannot conserve after the loss of my dearest Mistress.

This Discourse did so surprise and deject me, that having deprived me of part
of my senses, it scarce left me my hearing free, to understand Tyreus his
words, who continued on this manner.

I will not entertain you, Sir, with the divertisements, the Queen and the
Princess her sister found at the Castle of Calcis, vvhither the Queens
indisposition had caused them to retire; this recital would be but little
important, and less seasonable at this time, besides I feel my strength decay
so fast, that it will not suffer me to enlarge my self upon that subject; it
will suffice if I tell you, that by the change of air, the Queen had recovered
her health, but by a mortal sadness, which seldom had a minutes respite, she
presaged her approaching misfortune, and hardly found any abatement of her
secret griefs, in the conversation of the Princess her sister. She languish'd
out her life on that fashion to the end, and to come to it in a few words, know
that yesterday an hour or two before Sunset, she was told that one of the
Kings guard had brought her a Letter from him, she commanded him to be brought
in, and asking him news concerning the King, he only presented the Letter to
her, and by that action made her apprehend something of her disaster. Having
opened it trembling, she read these words.

King ALEXANDER to the Queen STATIRA.
I commanded that my sickness should be concealed from you, so long as I hoped
for a recovery, but now that I feel the approaches of death, I should be very
sorry to depart this world, without seeing you, and giving you the last
farewell. I entreat you, therefore to come thither, since my weakness will not
suffer me to go to you, and refuse not this last testimony of your affection,
to him who loves you more then himself.

ALEXANDER.


Although this Letter was not written with the Kings own hand, it was sealed
with the Signet, which he was wont to use, and the Kings sickness kept the
Queen from suspecting any thing. She made an end of reading it with a loud
cry, and not wavering at all about the resolution she should take, she gave
order to have her Chariots presently made ready, and by her speedy obedience
expressed the greatness and sincerity of her affection to her husband. The
night was already near at hand, and some of her servants persuaded her to defer
her Journey till the next day, but she was displeased at that motion, and
though darkness began already to overspread the face of the Earth, she got up
into her Chariot with the Princess her sister, and set forward on her way,
being attended by a very small Train. Her impatiency to see the King, made her
cause her horses to be driven at such a rate, that she was near Babylon in less
then three hours; but when we were within five or six Furlongs of the town,
we were environed by a Troup of armed men, who having surrounded the Chariot,
commanded us to retire, or they would kill us; and putting themselves in a
readiness, to do as they had threatened, they so terrified those fearful souls,
that the fear of death, made them take flight, while they turned out of the way
with the Queen, and Princes^ toward an house of Roxana's without the City. But
I bore my Mistress a stronger affection, then those base servants, and I
resolved to follow her to the utmost, and never to forsake her but with my
life, which I could not value out of her service. These good Princesses seeing
themselves Captives, and alone among those strangers, sent forth most
lamentable cries, and fearing (with probability) some violence against their
honors, they would have prevented their destinies with their own hands, and
had done so, if they had not been hindered by Cleone, who alone had accompanied
them, because she alone was in the Chariot with them. We arrived at that house
of Roxana's, which I presently knew, and from that knowledge drew most fatal
presages; there they made them alight, and the Commanders of that Troup, in
spite of their cries and resistance, forced them to go up a pair of stairs, and
from thence enter into a room, where I had been many times before; under favor
of the darkness; I got in among the rest, and not loosing sight of my
Princesses, I saw them led into that Chamber, which we found hung with black,
and the wicked Roxana in it. The Captain of the Troup having discovered his
face, was known likewise to be Perdiccas, and these poor Princesses ignorant as
yet, what they were destined to, waited for the end of the Tragedy with some
apprehension, but with a great deal of constancy. Roxana coming up to them,
Madam, (said she to the Queen) Alexander is dead, if you loved him well, you
will not be sorry to follow him; nor is it just that you or yours should one
day dispute for the Empire with the heir that shall be born of him; it is
against my will I consent to your destruction, but I cannot secure my self by
other means.

The Queen was so surprised with Roxana's first words, which informed her of
her husbands death, that she had scarcely strength to hearken to the rest, much
less to reply; nor indeed had she the leisure given her, for Perdiccas making
her and her sister, and Cleone go down a back stair, led them into a little
Court appointed for their execution, while Roxana looked out at a window, to be
witness of that doleful spectacle. How shall I be able, Sir, to relate what in
spite of the darkness, ^ saw with mine own eye; yes, 'twas with mine own eyes,
J beheld those pitiless Butchers, sacrifice those divine Princesses to the
malice of Roxana, and presently throw their bodies into two Wells, and a great
number of stones after them. These great Princesses received their death
without murmuring, but I sent forth cries, which quickly made me to be known,
and caused those executioners to turn their swords against me, and put me into
the condition in which you see me.

Tyreus would have prosecuted his Discourse to tell me which way he got to
Sysigambis's Palace, but he was seized with such a weakness, as took away his
speech with his strength. Neither indeed was I in a condition to hearken to him
any longer, this fatal relation having left me but as much life as was
necessary to revenge the Princesses. With that design I recollected all my
Forces, and courage, and only crying out, Are you dead then, Parisatis? I went
out of Sysigambis's Chamber, without speaking a word more. I ran instantly to
Perdiccas his house, fully resolved to sacrifice him first unto my Princesses
ghost; but I heard he was gone out of the City at the Gate which led toward
Euphrates. I called for my Arms and an Horse, and without more company, I went
after him with a resolution never to return to Babylon, but to pierce my heart
with my own sword, after having dyed it in the bloods of Perdiccas and Roxana.
Some soldiers I knew, whom I met without the Gate, assured me they had seen
that disloial man pass by alone, and that he in their presence had sent away
ten or twelve Horsemen that were of his company, to whom he had given some
Commission or other. This news made me ride after him with the greater
confidence, and within a little while I met him in the place, where you
retarded my just revenge, and where by the hindrance you gave to so lawful a
design; you urged me to an incivility, which would have merited, no pardon, if
the cause of it had been of less importance; but which nevertheless could not
keep you from showing marks of your ordinary generosity to him that had so
little deserved it, and who by the happiness of your encounter, has received
all the consolation he was capable of in the excess of his misfortunes.

Lysimachus ended his Narration thus, and Oroondates whom the recital of these
last accidents had put into a strange perplexity, at first only lifted up his
eyes and hands to Heaven, and by his actions and silence, expressed a sorrow
which all the words in the world could not represent. But after he had
continued so awhile, Ah! Lysimachus, (cried he) let us die, since our
Princesses are dead; we have lived too long, and my soul burns already with
impatience to follow that of my lovely Statira.

He made a little pause at these words, and then going on of a sudden, No, no
Lysimachus, (continued he) let us not die till our Princesses be revenged, my
wounds cannot detain me longer; and Perdiccas and Roxana, have no Sanctuaries
that can secure them from our hands.

Lysimachus answered these transports only with some sighs which this
renewing of his grief forced from the bottom of his heart, and Oroondates
having for some time kept him company in that entertainment; and having a
little past over that first violence; Dear companion of my fortune, ( said he,
with a more settled voice) I have found in your life so many marks of your
virtue, that I am extremely sorry J never enjoyed the happiness of your
friendship till the conclusion of my days; be not displeased at the occasion
that gave it me; but if you be troubled at the delay J interposed in your
revenge, believe the Gods had ordained it so, that I might not be frustrated of
the same satisfaction, and that you in so just an enterprise, might have a
companion who has an equal interest with you in it.

There is no doubt (replied Lysimachus) but that I feel my self infinitely
fortified by your assistance, and that your consideration alone has made me
conserve a life, which nothing else was able to make me prolong; but it is
also true, that my grief for not having known you, till now that I see you
perish by the same destiny, will most sensibly redouble those sorrows which
will accompany me to my grave. Oroondates would have made answer, and they
were going to prosecute their sad conversation, when their servants came into
the Chamber, and forced them to take a repast, which they could willingly have
forborne, in the condition they were in, if the preservation of their strength
had not been necessary, for effecting the design of their revenge.

The end of the Second Book.
CASSANDRA. BOOK III.
THE two Princes employed the rest of that day in contriving what means they
should use for their revenge, and their interests from thenceforth being
inseparable, as well by reason of the tie of friendship, as of the union of
their fortunes, they opened, their hearts mutually to one another, and resolved
to die together, and appease the ghosts of their Princesses by the blood of
their Enemies, and by their own.

For that end, they determined that in the interim while Oroondates was
recovering, Cleantes, Lysimachus his Squire, should go secretly to Babylon,
where he should inform himself under hand, concerning the estate both of their
enemies, and also of their friends, especially of Ptolomeus, who but a few days
before, had a body of an Army, and in whose assistance Lysimachus had grounded
part of his hopes. Cleantes departed with this charge, and the Princes remained
in their ordinary entertainment.

The next day Oroondates by the Chirurgians permission, left his bed, and began
to walk up and down his Chamber. Lysimachus was gone out betimes in the
morning, according to his custom, to convers with his sorrowful thoughts in
the Wood, which he had destined to that employment. They led him to the bank of
the Euphrates, where lying down, he mingled some of his tears with the waters
of the River, and deplored his fate in words very suitable to the condition of
his fortune. He was deeply buried in a melancholy study, when he was put
beside it by the noise of certain Horses which seemed to come toward him; he
sat upright, and turning his head to that side whence he had heard them
coming, saw three men on Horseback, whereof one completely armed, and bravely
mounted, appeared to be the Master of two Squires, that attended him.

They had left the great Road, to draw near unto the River, and when they were
upon the bank, a little below Lysimachus, the Stranger alighting took one of
his squires with him, and leaving the horses with the other, while he watered
them, sought a place fit to rest him self after the wearysomnesse of his
journey, and leaning upon his squire came to lie down hard by Lysimachus, but
where by reason of the bushes he could not discover him.

Though Lysimachus was little concerned in others fortunes, and little moved at
any other considerations save those of his own mishaps, he could not forbear
looking upon that stranger, who was of a very fair stature, and whose arms
were very rich; his Cuirasse seemed to be of silver damask'd with gold, and the
caske of the same matter, and of the same work was covered with a plume of
black, and white feathers which waved negligently upon his shoulders.
Lysimachus lost sight of him as be lay down, but in requital he could hear
what he said without being perceived, and lending his ear with some attention,
heard that after two, or three violent sighs he spoak thus unto his squire. I
absolutely forbid thee ever to take up the defense of that traitor any more,
his infidelity can never be justified, and that disloyal Scythian, ought never
to hope for any thing but death, for a reward of his perfidiousnesse: and it is
only to give it him, that I will seek him so long as I live; I will return
into Scythia, whither perhaps he is already retired, to stab him with a
thousand blows in the midst of all his friends, and give an examplary
punishment of a treachery without example. The stranger accompanied these words
with deep sighs, an his squire seeing he had don speaking. The Gods forbid
(said he) that ever I should oppose your anger, or undertake to justify
Orontes, who is apparently guilty of a most horrible ingratitude; but how do
we know whither he be in a condition to fear your threats, and whither death
have not already stolen him from your revenge? Ah! friend (replied the
stranger) if Orontes be dead, I will quickly follow him; but if he be yet
alive, he shall die for the expiation of his ingratitude; I easily incline to
that belief, nor ought I to have hoped for other usage from a Scythian, though
he be a Prince, and that his birth ought to have exempted him from part of the
inhumanity of his country, after such obligations as he has to me, and such
usage as I have received from him, nothing but his death can satisfy me; I
will therefore dispatch him if he be alive, and this same hand which for his
sake J had destined to another use, shall free the earth from that monster of
infidelity. Lysimachus whom the name of Orontes had made attentive, hearkend to
this discourse with more interest, then he had taken in it at first, and
finding by the pursuit of it what an ill design the stranger had against
Orontes Prince of Scithia, he believed his threats could he adressed to none
but his friend, who was Prince of Scithia, and who had passd his time in
foreign Countries under the name of Orontes. This belief, kept him from
harkening longer to the talk of his enemies, and not being able to suffer him
to be threatened, and injured in his presence, in whom of all men living he had
found the greatest virtue, and to whom he had vowed the greatest freindship: He
arose suddenly from his place; not regarding what noise he made, and advancing
toward them he showed himself, and made them see he had heard all their
discourse. The stranger surprisd at his coming, and displeased to have been
overheard, and interrupted, start-up, and putting the beaver of his caske half
way down, which before was up, he gave not Lysimachus leisure to quarrel with
him, but preventing him with an angry voice; Whosoever thou art (said he) thou
showest thy self indiscreet to interrupt those that call thee not to their
conversation. Lysimachus who saw himself prevented in his intentions, and who
came not to make excuses replied, briskly, The conversation J have interrupted,
concerned me too much to suffer the continuance of it; and I heard thee injure
and threaten a man the sight of whom would make thee tremble, and to whom J am
too much a friend to pardon the wrong thou do him. The Stranger at these
words stepping back, and lifting up his eyes to heaven, cried out, O Gods!
shall J be so fortunate as to find a man that takes the part of that traitor,
and against whom J may discharge part of my just indignation from which you
hide him? If thou will have but a minutes patience (said Lysimachus) J will
give thee that satisfaction, I have arms and horses hard by here, and though
perhaps my sword alone were sufficent to defend my friends interests, thy
choice of so considerable an enemy, makes me believe thee too courageous, to
take the advantage thou have. The stranger enflamed with anger, and making his
fury sparkle through the sight of his helmet, Go thy way (said he) Go fetch a
horse, and arms presently, I am content to delay thy death so long, but see
thou come back again, unless thou will put me to the trouble of seeking thee,
and give me cause to publish, that all Orontes his friends are as base as he
himself. Lysimachus staid not to answer, but returning a pace unto the house,
he went in at the door which led out of the wood into the garden: He passed
through it, and went up into his chamber, where finding one of his servants, he
called for his arms, and commanded a horse to be made ready. He was obeyed
without reply, and putting on the same black arms he wore when he fought with
Perdiccas, he went down to the stable, and vaulting lightly on horsback he had
one of his servants follow him, and took his way toward the place where he was
expected, giving his people order to tell Oroondates if he asked for him, that
he would be back again presently, and that a business of importance obliged
him to leave him for some few moments. He gallopt away toward the river, and
within a very little while came up to the stranger who waited for him with an
impatience as great as his. No sooner did he see him, but instantly he got upon
his horse, and taking a little carreere to quicken him, he appeared to have so
good a seat, and to be so firm in his saddle, that Lysimachus conceived an
exceeding high opinion of him. The stranger having stopped his horse, drew near
him with a gentle pace, and without using any other civility; I find thee
courageous enough (said he) for the friend of a traitor, but since thou have
undertaken it, resolve to pay for him, and to wash away his infidelity with thy
blood. These words raised Lysimachus his choler to the highest degree, yet
made he no reply; but having looked on him with eyes that sparkled with fury,
he turned about his horse, and taking a dart from the hand of his servant that
had followed him, while the stranger did the like, he trotted off a little to
make his carreere; when they had taken a reasonable space for it, they faced
about, and setting spures to their horses, ran at one another with an
impetuousnesse which can be compared to nothing but that of thunder; the shocke
was wonderful furious, and their javelings being broken to shivers even within
their very gauntlets, without shaking them, they rushed against each other with
their bodies, and shields so forcible that their horses too weak to sustain so
potent an encounter, fell backwards, and cast their Masters both upon the sand.
They got up again with a great deal of nimblenesse, and drawing their swords
came close together in a moment, and laid on such weighty blows, that their
mutual knowledge of one another strength made them fight with more
circumspectnesse and neglect nothing against such redoubled enemies. This
reflection saved them a great deal of blood, and having fought almost an hour
without being able to draw any on either side, the stranger to whom that
tediousness seemed insupportable, forgot his fencing, and throwing his shield
hehind his back, he took his sword in both hands, and struck such a heavy blow,
upon Lysimachus his head, that he was astonished with it, and reeled backward two
or three steps. The stranger proud with that good success, presses his enemy,
and thinking to beat him down with a second blow, only fetched him again out of
his astonishment, and not being any longer defended by his shield received a
thrust which passing between the mails of his sleeve, wounded him in the right
arm. The heat of the fight kept him from feeling the pain of his hurt at
first, but within a while after, loss of blood so weakened his arm, that he
had scarcely strength to hold his sword, and without the help of the left hand
he was no longer able to make use of it. Lysimachus perceived it by the
feebleness of his blows, and by the blood he saw run down upon his arms; and
though that stranger's pride, had raised his anger to the extremity, yet could
he not forget his natural generosity; and retiring a little; Thou art no
longer in a condition (said he) to revenge those wrongs upon me, which thou
have received from the Prince of Scythia; our Combat shall end here if thou will, but after this trial I have had of thee, I would not counsel thee to
measure thy forces with his, which are above mine without comparison. The
stranger whom the sight of his blood had kindled with fury, and who believed
himself injured by Lysimachus his words, answered only with a great stroke,
which glancing upon the side of his cask gave him a light wound upon the
shoulder, and seconding it with many others, made him quickly know, he was not
capable of hearkening to what he said, nor of thanking him for his offers, and
advice: Lysimachus then lost all the consideration he had of him, and striking
him a back blow under his chin cut assunder the straps of his headpiece, which
fell upon the ground, leaving his head naked, and disarmed.

Lysimachus had lift up his arm again, when looking upon his enemies head, he
saw a fair, long hair, which forcing certain knots, and fillets wherewith it
was ill tied up, instantly covered his shoulders, and part of his body, and
considering his face more heedfully, he at last perceived it was a woman, and
one of the fairest in the world, against whom he had fought with so much
animosity. While he was beginning to repent himself, and let fall the point of
his sword, stepping back a little, that Warlike dame, to whose cheeks shame
and anger had given a color which increased her beauty, flew at him more
fiercely then before, and thrusting her sword at his very eyes, with a
threatening cry, Fly not, (said she) neither be ashamed to have usd thy arms
against a Woman, who has often died the feilds, in the blood of such as thou
art; I am not so weak, that thou should need to despise me; and there is
more honor to be won with me, then thou think for. She accompanied these
words with a storm of blows, and enraged by the contempt she thought
Lysimachus showed of her, ran upon him with so much fury, and so little
caution, that he was often afraid she would give herself a death with those
arms which he no more would turn against her; he retired still warding her
blows, which the wound in her arm already made but faint ones, and when he
saw he was out of their reach, and that the fair Amazone was forced to give
him some respite, to the end she might take breath; Madam (said he) I will
rather turn the point of my sword against my own heart; then make use of it
against you, I know too well what is due to your sex, and to your beauty, and
I should be glad if I could with a good part of my own blood, repair the loss
of that which my sacrilegious hands have drawn from your fair body; if this
satisfaction content you not, pierce this breast which J offer to you, I will
take off my cuirasse, that you may the more easily, do it, and in the sad
estate of my fortune which makes me wish for death, I cannot hope for a more
glorious one then that I shall receive from so fair a hand. How excessive
soever the anger of this valiant Lady was, she could not but abate part of it,
at so great reparations, and so profound submissions: and beholding Lysimachus,
with eyes wherein even through the rage that enflamed them, one might observe
some gentleness; I cannot (said she) guess at the cause why thou slightest
me thus; thou have not yet had so much advantage over me, as to find reason to
contemn me. I will never pretend to any greater (replied Lysimachus) then the
occasions of serving you, and you are armed so many several ways to conquer
men, that the victory will always be yours infallibly. I desire none (answered
the Amazone) but what I can win with the point of my sword, and though I be a
woman, my profession is to fight with men; nor have I gained so little
reputation in that exercise, that you should need to be ashamed of our Combat:
it shall end here since you will have it so, and that it would be ignoble in me
to persist in it, but I could wish also you would quit the interests of a
traitor, who never deserved the affection of so virtuous a person as your
self. These words were enough to have renewed the quarrel if a man had spoken
them; but Lysimachus who had not been able to endure them from one of another
sex and who would have taken up the defense of his friend against the most
valiant living, thought fit to combat the resentments of a woman with
mildness, and was content with answering thus, as he put up his sword. I know
not what injury you can have received from him, who is really the most generous
and the most respective to Ladies of all the men in the world; I have ever seen
him most averse from such crimes as those you tax him with, and in the
recital which has been made me of his life, I did not hear that ever he had
any business with you; but if he be so unfortunate as to have offended you, I
will engage my self that he shall give you all the satisfaction you can desire
of him. For that I pass my word to you, and in the mean time, Madam, be
pleased to accept the offer I make you of a place hard by, where your wounds
may be dressed; I have servants there who are skillfull in that art, you may be
there more privately, and also more conveniently then at Babylon, and in that
place it is you shall receive all manner of duty and submission from Orontes.

At these words the Ladies countenance was dyed with a color, which Lysimachus
knew not whether he should attribute to joy, or anger. And after having
wavered a long time in the consideration of what answer she should return. I
believe, Orontes, so far from hence, (said she) and so different from what you
report of him, that I know not what satisfaction you can make him give me; but
yet your offers are so civil, that I cannot refuse them; and since you desire
to have it so, I will go along with you to get remedy for the wound I have
received from you.

Saying thus, she put forth her hand to him, and calling her Squires, she
leaned upon the arm of Hyppolita, the person with whom she had talked; and who
also was a woman, and went with Lysimachus too toward the house; it was so near,
that they got not on Horseback, and Lysimachus sending his servant who had been
spectator of the Combat, before to prepare a Chamber, led her thither softly by
the Garden Gate* They found Polemon there, who was come out to meet them, and
to use the civilities he was obliged to in his house; his wife carried the fair
Amazone to her Chamber, and offered her all the service she could expect from
those of her own sex. While the women undressed her to put her to bed,
Lysimachus withdrawing out of respect, went into Oroondates his Chamber. That
was the first day he had left his bed since his wound, and Lysimachus giving
him an exact account of all that had happened, surprised him with a mavelous
astonishment.

After having lent him a very quiet attention; I find ( said he) two things in
this adventure very remarkable, Lysimachus his friendship, and this woman's
hatred; I believe I have deserved neither of them, and as I never obliged
Lysimachus so much as to afford me a bare good will, so likewise I do not
think that ever I by any of my actions gave this woman cause to hate me; these
are the effects of chance, which blindly sends us both good and evil fortune;
but since after having so generously defended my quarrel, you have also engaged
your self for me, I will free you from that obligation, and if this fair Lady
be capable of receiving a reparation for those wrongs she pretends J have done
her, I will give it her so fully, that you shall have nothing more to desire
for the dis-engaging of your word. I will go into her Chamber with you, as soon
as she is in a condition to receive our visit, and I will submit my self to
suffer whatsoever her resentment shall enjoin me.

While they discoursed on this manner; Lysimachus his Chirurgian waited upon
the Amazone Lady, and having searched her wound, he found there was neither
nerve nor artery touched, and though her arm was run quite through, he promised
her a speedy cure. After he had applied the first remedies, he went to the
Princes, and having given them an account how she was, he looked upon
Lysimachus his hurt, who already had put off his arms; he found it so slight a
one, that he thought he should not need to keep his bed, nor his chamber above
two days; when he had dressed it, they sent him back to the Lady to know
whether it would not be incommodious for her to be visited. She received the
Message very civilly, and having told Amyntas she should be extremely well
pleased to see his Master, he no sooner heard it; but he went into her Chamber
with Oroondates; she gave them a reception full of civility, and commanding
Hyppolita, to set Chairs by her bedside, they sat down and presently the Lady
having thanked Lysimachus for his care of her, turned her eyes upon Oroondates,
who in most civil terms expressed his trouble for her wound, and having
answered his first words exceeding courteously, she looked very intentively
upon him. His wound had taken off something of that lively color, which was
wont to increase the luster of his natural handsomness, and his sorrows had in
great measure abated it, yet he had features still left, accompanied with so
great Majesty, that she considered him not without admiration.

While she was in the same astonishment at the graceful presence of those two
Princes, that they were in at her excellent beauty, Lysimachus spoke thus unto
her* I cannot express, Madam, the trouble I receive, in seeing you reduced to
this condition, by him, who of all the men in the world, will while he lives be
most unwilling to offend you; but these are the fruits of the profession you
follow, and as you have extreme great advantages above all the rest of your
sex, so are you likewise subject to those accidents, from which they commonly
are exempted* the most sensible grief for it ought to be mine, whose profane
hands have born arms against a person totally divine; and doubtless it will be
redoubled, if after the promise I have made you, I should not contribute
whatsoever you could desire, for your satisfaction; I have found the Prince
whom you complain of, most readily disposed to submit himself to any you can
wish, and it is for that end I have brought him into your Chamber.

Into my Chamber, (cried the Lady interrupting him) and where is he? With these
words she threw the curtain of her bed quite open, and seeing no body else in
the Chamber, she looked upon Lysimachus, with an eye that accused him of
deceit and inhumanity, and which obliged him to continue; Yes, Madam, he is in
your Chamber, and in your presence; You see before you, (added he, showing her
Oroondates) that Prince of Scythia whom you accuse of infidelity; and if your
resentment against him be as great as you have testified, I wonder you have
been so long before you knew him.

Lysimachus holding his peace at these words, Oroondates began to speak, and
while the Lady looked earnestly upon him, If I be so unfortunate, Madam, (said
he) as to have offended you, I will give my life for the expiation of my
faults, the Gods are my witnesses, I never had such an intention, and that I am
ignorant of the reasons you have to complain of me, but be they what they can,
you shall find me most ready to give you satisfaction, and to dis-engage my
friend of the word he has given you for me.

Oroondates having said thus, remained silent, and the fair Stranger drawing a
sigh from the bottom of her heart, considered him awhile without replying, and
then of a sudden turning toward Lysimachus, and beholding him with a
discontented eye, I always doubted (said she) that you knew not my Traitor,
since you were so forward to embrace his interests. With these words she turned
her head on the other side, and having continued a long time silent, in the
constraint she suffered to force back some sighs that would have burst forth,
whether she would or no; she at last, lift up her eyes to Heaven, and joining
her hands upon her breast: O Fortune (cried she) I ask thee pardon, I was to
blame to conceive any glimpse of hope, and I ought to have known thee better,
after so long a time as thou have persecuted me.

When she had said so, she settled her self a little, and looking very
heedfully upon Oroondates, It is true, Sir, (pursued she) that you never
offended me, but it is true also, that you are not Orontes, at least not that
Orontes, whom I complain of, and whom I accuse of infidelity. I confess,
(replied the Prince) that Orontes is not my true name, but it is that under
which I have passed part of my years, and which I have ever born in Forain
Countries. Besides I am a Scythian, and a Prince as he whom you accuse, and I
know very well that Scythia has now no other Prince who is called Orontes.

The Lady having hearkened to him patiently; And what is become then (said she)
of Orontes, Prince of the Massagetes, and Nephew to the King of Scythia? It is
true, (answered Oroondates) the Massagetes had heretofore a Prince of that
name, who was very dear to me, both by reason of his merit, and of the near
alliance between us, we were of the same age, and were bred up together, but
impartial death robbed us of him, just when he was grown marvellously hopeful
to all his friends.

The fair Stranger gave ear to this discourse with trembling, and not bing
able to suffer the continuance of it without interruption* And about what time,
Sir, ( said she much troubled) dyed that Prince whom you knew? It Is eight, or
ten years, (replied Oroondates) since he was drowned in the Araxis, by the
breaking of a bridge of Boats, which involved part of our Army in his loss.
The Ladies face at these words came to its former color, and expressing a
little more tranquillity, then had appeared in it a few minutes before; Would
it had pleased the Gods. ( said she, with a great sigh) that the faithless
Orontes had dyed then really, as he did in the opinion of every body, my soul
perhaps would yet be in its first repose, and perchance I should not now be the
most unfortunate Princess in the world. Without doubt, ( continued she turning
to Oroondates) you must needs be Prince Oroondates, Son to the King of Scythia,
I have heard from Orontes, that he was bred up with you, and your countenance
easily persuades me to believe all he told me to your advantage.

Oroondates casting down his eyes through modesty and respect, I am indeed
(said he) that unfortunate Prince of whom you speak, and though hitherto I have
confessed it but to very few persons, you shall ever be one of those, for whom
I will have particular considerations. I am ashamed to own him for my kinsman,
whom you accuse of infidelity, and by whom you have been injured, but how
faithless soever he be, it is true, that that Orontes whom you complain of, is
son to the Princess Thomiria, the King my Fathers sister; I know not whether
he be still alive; but notwithstanding his nearness to me, I shall be one of
the first to condemn him, and declare my self against him, if he be capable of
infidelity toward you.

The fair Amazone answered these words with a great deal of civility, and
asking him pardon for the errors she had committed before his quality was known
to her, she learned from him also the name of Lysimachus. That knowledge
comforted her in the disadvantage she had in the combat with him, and by most
obliging words testifying her esteem of his valor; If you be that Lysimachus
(said he) who was always so near to Alexander the Great, is it possible that
the face of Thalestris should be unknown to you, and that you should not
remember you had seen me upon the Frontiers of Hyrcania, in an Equipage
remarkable enough to have preserved some memory of it? Lysimachus showing a
great astonishment at these words, What, Madam, (said he) are you then that
great Queen of the Amazones, who came to meet Alexander upon the confines of
Hyrcania, with so stately a Train, and to whom the King showed respects worthy
of the birth, and virtue of so great and so generous a Princess? I am the same
Thalestris, (answered the Amazone) who visited the Court of Alexander, for
considerations very different from those, to which perhaps some attributed my
Journey.

I was at that time (replied Lysimachus) gone upon an Expedition, where the
King had sent me with Craterus, and Ptolomeus, but when I came back to Court,
it was yet full of the fame you had left in it, nor did any body talk there of
the fair Queen of the Amazones, as other then a wonder that had filled our Army
with astonishment. The fair Queen made answer with a great deal of modesty, and
their conversation would have lasted longer, if Amyntas had not desired the two
Princes to let the Queen take her rest the remainder of that day, and not to
engage her longer in discourse which might be hurtful to her. The Princes
obeyed, and having taken their leave of her, retired into Oroondates his
Chamber.

Though Polemon their Landlord lived plainly, and out of the confusion of the
Court, yet was he of one of the Families in Babylon, very rich for a man of his
quality, and the house whither he was then retired, one of the fairest, and of
the best receipt any where near the City; this made the abode of the Princes the
more commodious, and they were lodged there very handsomely, and with room
enough. Scarce had they dined when Cleantes Lysimachus his Squire, returned
from Babylon, whither his Master had sent him the day before. They presently
enquired after the success of his Journey, and Cleantes to give them account in
a few words. The face of affairs (said he) is not much altered since your being
here; Roxana is still absolute in Babylon, by the submission of Peucestas, who
is at the devotion of her and of Perdiccas, who is now almost quite recovered
of his wounds. They have usurped so Sovereign an Authority, that nothing is
done but by their orders, especially since the greater part of the Princes
retired into the Territories that are fallen to their share. Antigonus is
already gone toward Lycia, and Pamphilia; Eumenes into Cappadocia; Leonatus to
the lesser Phrygia; Cassander is upon his way into Caria; Laomedon into Syria;
and Maenander into Lydia; Ptolomeus concerning whom I informed my self most,
and from whom I learned what was become of the rest, would not stir without
hearing of you; I found him, Sir, (continued he, addressing himself to
Lysimachus) encamped with an Army two hundred Furlongs on the other side of
Babylon; and if I had not told him where you were, he was coming back with his
Forces to make Perdiccas give an account of you, upon the report of your having
fought with him. I am not able to tell you how vvelcome I was to him, nor how
much he participates in your sorrows; he would have come hither with me, but
that I assured him you would be with him very shortly, and I prayed him to stay
with the Army, to preserve a power which would perhaps be necessary for you. He
yielded to my entreaty with much ado, and commanded me to bid you be confident
he would be ever ready to give you all the proofs you can desire from his
friendship.

Cleantes having to this discourse added many particularities of his short
Journey, and answered many questions Lysimachus asked him; the Princes began to
deliberate what they should do, and after long consultation of the means they
ought to use for their design, they agreed that in the interim while Oroondates
were perfectly cu* red, Lysimachus should go up to Ptolomeus, and with him arm
all his friends, to take a solemn revenge for the death of their Princesses; He
had a great many whom he believed he could easily dispose to his intention, and
Perdiccas and Roxana stood too strongly upon their guard, to be surprised and
punished for their crime any other way* then by open force; and to say truth,
(added Lysimachus) the death of those two persons would not suffice alone for
the reparation of our losses; whole Armies ought to perish for the expiation of
their guilt, and it ought to be washed with the blood of their whole faction.
We must drown all Babylon with it, and offer a sacrifice to our Princesses,
that may be worthy of them; I will join all the virtuous Princes that are
among Alexanders successors unto our party, and our confederacy shall be so
strong* that the Traitors shall infallibly be overwhelmed. Oroondates approved
Lysimachus his thoughts, and consented to his departure the next day, though
his Surgeon entreated him to stay a day or two longer by reason of his
wound, which might be something incommodious to him; but Lysimachus was too
impatient to hearken to his advice, and Ptolomeus was too near him to defer so
small a Journey longer. When they had fully resolved it, they spent the rest of
the day in their ordinary conversation, and the next morning no sooner did the
Sun appear, but Lysimachus was up, and called for his arms. Oroondates arose
as soon as he, and notwithstanding all Amyntas his persuasions, would needs go
down, and accompany Lysimachus to the Gate. I could do no more (said he) if my
life were dear to me, then take such care for its preservation.

With these words he went forth, and resting himself upon a staff, and upon
Araxes his arm, he waited upon Lysimachus down the stairs. The Horses stood
ready in the Court, and Lysimachus taking only Cleantes with him, left the
rest of his Officers to serve Oroondates, and the Amazone Queen. Lysimachus had
taken his leave of her the night before, and had assured her he would return
again within a week at the farthest; he gave the same promise to the Prince of
Scythia, who burning with impatience to accompany him, and bidding him farewell
with tears: Go, Lysimachus, (said he) go dear brother of my misfortunes, labor
for our common repose, and leave me not long unprofitable; though I can serve
you but as a single man, I will serve you as one that is most highly and
passionately concerned.

I prefer your assistance (answered Lysimachus) before the help of all the
world; and I shall march more boldly with you, then if I were environed by all
the Troops which heretofore accompanied Darius. After some other discourse full
of affection, of protestations of friendship, and of an inseparable union in
their interests, Lysimachus got on horseback, and taking his way toward
Ptolomeus his Camp, left Oroondates sensibly grieved at his departure, but
having an exceeding firm courage, he comforted himself with the hope of his
speedy return, and the necessity of that separation.

He would not go up again into his Chamber, and although Araxes pressed him to
it very earnestly, he neglected his entreaties, and feeling he had strength
enough to walk, he went into the Garden, and visited the pleasant Allies,
which till then he had not seen. Araxes helped him in his walk, and the Prince
having with his assistance taken a turn or two in the Garden, went out at the
little Gate which led into the Wood. Having a while considered the fair spread
Trees, the Rocks overgrown with moss, and the many little streams which
rolled along upon the gravel with a very pleasing murmr; What a delightful
place is this, Araxes, (said he) for one in my condition, I dedicate a good
part of my time to be spent in it, and do not wonder if Lysimachus found
consolation here.

Having said thus, he took a beaten path, and following it softly, came to the
side of a fountain, which was very beautiful for one that was beholding to
none but nature; he sat down on the bank of it, upon Araxes his Mantle, and
cast his eyes upon a Brook, which taking its source from thence, emptied it
self about two hundred paces off into the Euphrates. While he was in his
deepest muse, he thought he heard some persons talking hard by him, and having
his imagination still prepossessed with the remembrance of Statira, and the
vision he had seen a few days before being still present to his memory, he
believed he heard something of the tone of her voice, and of the Princess her
sisters; he roused himself in a start, and lending an ear with more attention.
Did thou hear nothing? said he to Araxes, who was by him in a study; No,
Sir, answered Araxes. Ah! without doubt (replied the Prince) I deceived my
self, and only my wounded fancy brought this sound unto my ears.

He was confirmed in that conceit, when he could hear no more noise, and
letting himself loose to the consideration of his misfortunes, he continued
near an hour in an entertainment suitable to his present estate: in the end he
grew weary of sitting there, and rising up with Araxes, he went on farther
into the Wood, and following the course of the Brook, he came insensibly to the
place, where Lysimachus a few days before had found the names of Cassandra,
and Euridice, engraven upon the Rocks and Trees. Oroondates had been told that
adventure, by Lysimachus, and knowing the place by the tokens he had given him
of it. Here it is (said he) Araxes, that some unfortunate persons like us give
themselves ease by communicating their disasters to things inanimate. O Gods!
have they not reason to complain to them, since they find you so little
sensible?

Whosoever you be, ( continued he* casting his eyes upon the names of
Cassandra, and Euridice) afflicted souls, comfort your selves, by the encounter
of such as are in the same condition, and suffer not your selves to be cast
down by misfortunes, which ordinarily persecute the virtuous.

A sudden fancy that came into his mind, hindered him from going on with that
Discourse, and making Araxes cast up his eye, Look here with me I pray thee (
said he) and tell me, if these characters, are not very like my Princesses: the
bark and stone upon which one cannot engrave with such facility as one may
write upon paper, have a little disguised them, yet if thy memory be good, thou
can not deny but that many strokes have a great resemblance.

Araxes was of his opinion, and this encounter obliged him to read the same
Lymathus had done before; he had gone but a very little way in it when he cried
out, O Gods! Araxes, What is this I see? Is it possible the destiny of this
afflicted Cassandra, should agree so much with that of my Princess, if she
were yet alive? Certainly if the Gods had continued her in the world after the
loss of Alexander, and that she had preserved me in her remembrance, I should
have believed she her self had writ these words. But alas! Araxes, she is dead,
and if any spirit, under the name of Cassandra, has graved them here to recall
her into my memory, and to put me in mind of what I owe to her, that care is
very needless, since there is no moment, but that remembrance, and I are
inseparable:

Having said thus, he went on, with his reading, and the farther he read, the
more he was confirmed in his opinion. After he had spent some time in that
employment, his restless thoughts made him desire to go to some other place,
so following the current of the ^rook, he came to a pleasing grassy place,
where he found two women asleep; their habit was very plain, and little
different from that of Polemons wife and daughters. They were laid along upon
their side, and embracing one another, their faces with the help of their loose
hair, hid each others mutually. Araxes had formerly told his Master the
encounter Lysimachus and he had in the Garden, of that unknown Cassandra, and
remembering that she was apparelled as those two women, he believed it was she
her self, and that Euridice whose name was interwoven with hers in so many
places. That which Oroondates had read concerning he fortunes of those two
women, and the resemblance he found in them to those of Statira, and the
Princess her sister, would have been enough to have stirred up a desire of
knowing them, in a man less afflicted; but his soul was so taken up with
grief, that there was no room in it for curiosity; besides he believed them to
be of a quality answerable to the habit they wore, and to the condition they
were in, not being ignorant that Love and Fortune exercise their tyranny
equally upon persons of all estates.

He passed on without interrupting them in their repose, when Araxes more
curious then he, turning back to consider them, saw an open paper fall from one
of their hands, which the wind carried presently to his feet; He took it up,
though his Master would have dissuaded him from it, and bringing it with him to
read it when they were a little farther off, they walked on gently, and taking
an Allie they met withal, returned into Polemons Garden. Araxes led his Master
to the Fountain, where he had related the beginning of his life unto
Lysimachus, and when they were sit down by the side of it, Araxes drawing out
the paper he had taken up; See here, Sir, (said he to his Master) that which
will learn us something of this unknown Cassandra, who mingles her misfortunes
thus with ours.

At these words he looked upon the Writing, but scarce had he read the first
line when giving the paper to his Master, Ah! Sir, (said he) what is this I see?
Look I beseech you, your self, upon Characters, and words that confound me: The
Prince taking the paper from Araxes his hand, had no sooner cast his eyes upon
it, but he cried out, Ah! Araxes, there is no doubt but this Writing is
directly like that of my deceased Queen. Read the first words (replied Araxes)
and without question your astonishment will be increased. Oroondates infinitely
surprised at this encounter, began with strange inward motions to read these
words.

The unfortunate and happy Cassandra; unfortunate by the change of her fortune,
and happy by the fidelity of Orontes; To her too faithful ORONTES.


O Gods, (cried the Prince) what do I see? Will Fortune mock me, or am I that
Orontes to whom are directed the words of this Cassandra, whose writing, and
whose thoughts are so conformable to those of my Princess? Ah! no, (pursued
he) it is without doubt to the revived Orontes, Prince of the Massagetes, and
this Cassandra to whom his fidelity is so dear, is infallibly the cause of the
complaints of the fair Quen Thalestris: he whose name I have so long usurped,
must needs have some mixture in my adventures; but, O Gods! is it possible that
two persons should write so like, and have so equal destinies? Read, Sir, (said
Araxes) that which is under this Inscription, and perchance you may draw some
farther knowledge from thence. The Prince followed his counsel, and beginning
to read again, he went on thus.

I know not in what manner I ought to look upon my fortune; two different
remembrances, O faithful Orontes, contest within my soul, for you, and against
you. What do I not owe unto Orontes? but also what do I not owe to my
condition, and to an illustrious memory? my inclination, and my duty put my
mind into an equal balance, and both have very weighty reasons; but all the
reasons of my inclination yield unto my duty, and all those of my duty vanish
in presence of my inclination. Alas! if we could make an accommodation between
them, how happy would be the destiny of Cassandra, and how little would she be
troubled for the change of her fortune, if a more considerable loss, had not
settled a more lawful sorrow in her heart! she nevertheless loves her
faithful Orontes, as much as he can, and ought to desire; but she has some
scruples remaining, which she cannot overcome, if she will be worthy of his
affection. It is a continuation of the anger of the Gods, who only present
happynesses to her, when she is no longer in a condition to receive them. We
had, found a haven indeed (my dear Orontes) but it is worse then shipwreck, and
if you love me as I believe; and as I know you do, you ought not to desire of
me. --


Oroondates turned over the leaf to make an end of reading the letter, but he
saw nothing written on the other side, and judgd that the party had either
wanted time, or will to finish it. Alas! with how many different thoughts was
he assailed at the reading of these words: he perused them again many times,
and being in a confusion full of perplexity, he could not express it better
then by his silence.

He looked upon Araxes, holding his arms acrosse upon his breast, and having
continued a long time without speaking, ( Araxes said he at last) where am I?
Sir (answered Araxes) I am as much surprised as you. But (replied Oroondates)
is not this Statira's hand, and are not these the very words I ought to have
expected from her, if she had survived her Illustious husband? do thou not
find in this discourse, that same severe virtue, which made part of my
misfortunes and which would have prepared new difficulties for me, if the
Gods should have spared her still unto the world. Ah! without question it is
her spirit that has inspired these words into Cassandra, and that has guided
her hand; to frame Characters so like to hers. Araxes answered not his Masters
doubts, but musing upon this adventure strove to draw from it some cause of
consolation for him. What do we know Sir (said he) but that the Gods may
miraculously have preserved that virtuous Queen, and whither this unperfect
letter, may not by some chance or other have fallen into the hands of these
women we found asleep? Ah Araxes (replied Oroondates) let us not flatter our
selves foolishly, the Queens death is too certain to be still doubted of, and
it is now unknown to no body; yet I should believe she had written these words
after Alexanders death, if two difficulties did not stagger me; the first is
that till her own death she knew not of the King her Husbands, and the other
this name of Cassandra, which brings all out of square, and puts me into
astrange confusion. Whatsoever it be (said Araxes) I will return if you think
fit, to the place where we light upon this letter, and if I find those women
there still, I may perchance draw something from them to clear our doubts and
give you comfort. Run Araxes, (cried the Prince) run, I pray thee and though I
be no longer in an estate to conceive any hope, offer at least, our assistance
unto that person, who in so many things is conformable to my Princesses. Araxes
rising from his Master, went out of the garden, and the Prince sat still by
the fountain, so taken up with the consideration of this last adventure, that
he never in his life, had been in so profound a muse. After having bethought
himself every way, he could imagine nothing else but that Cassandras letter
was without doubt intended to Orontes Prince of the Massagetes, and that it
was neither impossible, nor un heard of that the writings, and fortunes of two
several person should resemble one another. He had continued above an hour in
this confusion of thoughts, when Araxes came back to him again, and assured
him he could not find these women in the place where they had left them, and
that he had sought them in vain all over the wood, and along the banks of the
river Oroondates was exceedingly troubled at it, and resolved to seek them
himself, when he had gotten a little more strength. After some discourse
whereof this encounter furnished them with matter enough, he rose up, and
going out of the garden returned into his Chamber. As Soon as he was there, he
sent to know of Hippolita, if he might seasonably visit the Queen her
Mistress, and having had an answer, he went into her chamber to wait upon
her. He said nothing to her of the suspicions he had concerning Orontes, for
fear of afflicting her, and of stirring up a hatred against him which already
was very violent. He dined with her she having desired him, and after diner she
beseeched him to give her a little better knowledge of his adventures then
fortune yet had favored her with all; hereupon the Prince made her an
abridgment of his life, and though out of modesty he blemished the luster of
his most gallant actions, he filled her with an admiration, and an esteem which
made her consider him as something more then mortal. This recital was not so
short but that the remainder of the day was spent in it, and the cloth was laid
for supper, and lights brought in before he had made an end. The Queen ravished
with the wonders she had heard, made a short meal, and being willing to requite
Oroondates his freedom, who had made her a frank confession of the most secret
passages of his life, offered her self to give him the relation of hers, with
the same trust and assurance. Oroondates testified that he would receive that
favor with a great deal of respect, and having settled his attention, he heard
the fair Queen begin her History in these terms.

The History of THALESTRIS Queen of the AMAZONS.
WIth how great virtue soever a soul is fortified, human nature has weaknesses
which it cannot disavow; and how great resistance so ever it make, through
principles of virtue, against irregular motions, if it be not supported by an
especial providence from heaven, it is very hard for it not to yield sometimes,
and give most visible marks of frailty; the passions have gotten such an
Empire over it that it cannot without great difficulty shake them off, and if
we sometimes win the victory. I hold it a much more advantageous one, then those
we obtain against foreign enemies, I would it pleased the Gods, this were not
so great a truth, and that it gave me not matter for a discourse which cannot
choose but be unpleasing. It is not to be wondered at if my adventures are
mingled with those of a Scythian, nor is it strange if I recount them to a
Scythian Prince, since I also am a Scythian my self, and that the first
original of the Amazons came from that very Scythia you ought to command.
Perhaps it is not unknown to you, but to refresh your memory I will tell it you
again in a few words.

A long time after the siege of Troy, two Princes of the Royal blood of
Scythia, Plinos, and Scolophites, being driven out of their country by civil
wars, wandered up and down with their troops many years, to seek a settled
abode for themselves, their families, and those that accompanied them; After
diverse tedious voyages, they came into that part of Capadocia, which is called
Themiscira, and there upon the the banks of the Thermodoon having defeated
those that opposed their passage, they resolved to put an end to all their
journeys, and to make their habitation in those pleasant fields, the most
fertile, and the most delightful of all Asia. They put that design in
execution, and having made themselves Masters of the Country in a little while,
they extended, their limits very far, and by many battles assured themselves
of an exceeding spacious territory; Their dominion maintaind it self many
years, but in the end their enemies having drawn them into ambushes, cut them
all in pieces. The widows of these valliant men, succeeded them in courage,
and being armed with an admirable resolution, themselves defended the countries
of their husbands conquest, against their murderers, with so rare a valor,
that they sent them back with loss, and confusion, and made proud by that good
success, they killd, or drove away all the men that were left among them, and
established that Monarchy of women which has lasted ever since, and which as I
believe, has spread it is reputation over all the world. I will not entertain
you with their laws, but will only tell you, that having decreed not to suffer
any men amongst them, they concluded a treaty with their neighbors, and by
visites which they made upon their frontiers, at certain seasons appointed for
that purpose, and which I know not in what terms I can explain to you, they
provided for the conservation of their kind. These words made the Queen blush,
but settling her self a little, she went on. The Children that were born by
these meetings, if they were males were either killed, or carried out of their
dominions, and the daughters were carefully bred up; their whole exercise, from
their most tender infancy, was only that of arms, and to give them the greater
facility in shooting with their bows, they cut off their right breast from
whence in process of time, they took the name of Amazones. Having established
this order amongst themselves, which ever since has been inviolably kept, they
chose two Queens, to whom they submitted themselves, and while one of them
enlarged the bounds of their Monarchy by the Sword, the other staid at home to
govern the Country. The most famous among the first were Lampedo, and
Martesia, who not content with the Territories they peaceably possessed, rais^d
two mighty Armies, came a great way into Europe, subdued a good part of it,
usurped diverse of the Cities, and Provinces of Asia, and conquered a large
extent of ground, which their posterity since has not been able to conserve.
Ortrera, and Antiopa, succeeded them, those two Queens against whom Hercules
made War, and whose two sisters he carried away. Menalippa, and Hippolita, who
afterward was wife to King Theseus.

After these reigned that valiant Penthasilaea, who was slain at the siege of
Troy, by the hand of Achilles, and who as she died made her Conqueror so much
in love with her. I will not tell you the names of those that followed her, nor
will I say any thing of all that passed among them till the Reign of Queen
Minotea my Mother, who is descended in a right line from those gallant Queens I
have spoken of. She had but newly began her Reign, when she brought me into
the world; she presently grew extraordinary tender of me, insomuch that she
would not suffer my right breast to be cut off, as had been done to all that
were before me; whether it were that she feared the danger that might come of
it, or that she desired to preserve my body from that deformity. I was brought
up with wonderful care, and the affection of the Queen my Mother, making her
find more beauty and gracefulness in me, then I really had, caused her to
improve both with such industry, as could not proceed, but from such a passion
as hers: she desired to have my manners formed to some sweetness and
civility, and among the Martial spirits that were infused into me, she likewise
made some morality to be mixed, and to the exercises of the body, added also
some exercises of the mind, able to purge it from those bloody humors, that
were predominant amongst our women.

I grew expert and vigorous enough in those of the body, and by the toil of
hunting whenever I had any spare time, and by the care of my Mistresses, I
became so strong, and so skilful, that when I was but 16 years old, there were
but few women among our Amazons, whom I could not dismount, and whom I was not
able to instruct either how to draw a Bow, or how to fight on Foot, or how to
ride an Horse vigorously. These were our ordinary passe-times, and upon the
banks of the rapide Thermodoon, we drew up Battalions every day, and kept up
that Warlike humor, which had maintained them for many Ages. The Queen my
Mother bred me to that aversion against men, which is general amongst us, and
exhorted me daily, rather to suffer death, then to slacken any thing of our
ancient customs, or submit my self to that sex, which has usurped so
tyrannical an Empire over ours. I would it had pleased the Gods (great Queen)
that I had followed thy counsels, I should not then have drawn Heavens anger
upon me for my disobedience, nor should I have precipitated my self into
misfortunes, which I can attribute to nothing but that alone. I will not
entertain you with the particulars of my childhood, which are too trivial for
your hearing; but I will pass them over, and content my self with telling you,
that I had completed my fifteenth year, when the Queen my Mother at her return
from an Expedition, in which by reason of my youth, I had not waited on her,
presented the valiant Orithia to me, a person of a stature extraordinary
amongst us, of a most Martial Garb, and of a most excellent Beauty. She was yet
all armed, when the Queen my Mother brought her into my Chamber, and I thought
her so handsome, that I found no difficulty in obeying the command she gave me
to love and esteem her particularly.

This generous Lady, ( said the Queen to me) though she was not born among us,
yet having the same inclinations, has cast her self voluntarily into our
party, and in all the encounters we have had with the Cilicians, she has
showed proofs of such an admirable valor, that I took her a long time for
Bellona, whom I thought the defense of her sex, had armed in our favor. In
our last action she dis-engaged me from a throng of Enemies, where else I had
infallibly perished, and succored me in so great extremity, that I cannot deny
but that I am indebted to her for my life; she in my sight, killed the most
valiant of all our enemies with her own hand, and overthrew all that made any
opposition against her; In short, she has begot in me so much admiration, and
so much love, that next to my only daughter, she shall ever be to me the
dearest person in the world.

She ended these words embracing her, and by her example, obliged me to welcome
her with an extraordinary kindness. Orithia received it with great submission,
and made protestations of fidelity to me, in so respectful, and so civil
terms, that from that very moment, I esteemed her extreme worthy of the
judgment the Queen had made of her. I am most readily disposed (said I to her)
to second the Queens affections with mine, and to requite the virtue of this
fair Stranger by all the proofs she can desire from my friendship. Orithia
kneeled down upon one knee, at these words, and kissing my hand which I put
forth to raise her up: Madam, (said she) I make a vow, never to be but yours,
and from this instant I dedicate my self unto you with a passion, which shall
never end but with my life.

She pronounced these words so gracefully, that I was touched by them with an
affection, and casting my arm once more about her neck, I promised her an
eternal friendship. She went out of my Chamber to put off her arms, and
returned thither within a while after in her Woman's apparel, in which I thought
her so lovely and so well shaped, that I gave her the advantage above all those
of our Country. I renewed my endearments at that second sight, and begged of
her not to leave us, in terms which she accounted very obliging. O Gods! when
I remember the protestations she made to me of an eternal fidelity, and the
oaths wherewith she accompanied those protestations, I cannot sufficiently
admire the patience of the Gods, that suffer such perjured souls, without
darting their loudest thunderbolts against them? After I had given her all the
proofs she could desire of the friendship she sued for from me, I prayed her to
tell me who she was, and what fortune, had brought her into our Countries. This
new Amazone having bethought her self a while what to say, spoke to me at last
on this manner.

Although you see me now in the exercise of arms, I have not been bred up in
it, and that little valor the Queen your Mother exalted with more affection
then justice, is rather an effect of my misfortunes, then of my nature: I am
the daughter of the deceased Prince of the Massagetes, and Niece to the King of
Scythia, to whom our Province is Tributary: Death having deprived me of my
Father in my very infancy, I was bred up in the Court of Scythia, with the
Princess Berenice, and my Brother Orontes, with Prince Oroondates his Cosen;
I spent some years in that Court with pleasure enough, but the War between the
Scythians and Persians, breaking out afresh, Prince Orontes my Brother, marched
along with the Prince of Scythia, and scarce had he begun to show some proofs
of his valor in so early a youth, when by the fall of a Bridge he was drowned
in the Araxis, and all the fair hopes he had given, were buried with him in the
waves of that River. I will not trouble you with the Discourse of my sorrow for
that dear Brother, it is enough if I tell you, that his death making me Heiresse
of the Province of the Massagetes, moved diverse Princes to cast their eyes upon
me. I had a natural aversion to men; but it was visibly augmented by the offer
the King made me of one of his Favorites, whose birth was obscure, and his
person unhandsome. I received the first overture of it as a mortal injury, but
the King who desired with my fortune to recompense the services that man had
done him, was not at all repulsed by my denial, but using his Authority on the
behalf of that unworthy Favorite, commanded me absolutely, to resolve to marry
him. This forcing of me* redoubled my hatred, and I should infallibly have
rather chosen my grave, then his alliance, whom I beheld as no other then a
deadly enemy, and a monster appointed to devour me. I need not tell you how
many tears I shed, how often I cast my self at the Kings feet, and how many
imprecations I uttered against his tyranny; the recital of these would be as
useless, as they themselves were unprofitable. In short, I saw my self reduced
to the cruel necessity of marrying a man; against whom I had a mortal aversion;
but having begged assistance from the Gods, and called for help from my own
courage, I resolved by flight to avoid the misery that threatened me; and
knowing my self to be of a reasonable strong constitution, I discovered my
secret to no body, but one of my women, in whom I had a perfect confidence, and
by whose means I procured a suit of man's Apparel, so getting away with her, the
night before that day which was appointed for my fatal Wedding, I left Issedon
without any other design, then that of flying to the worlds end, but I would
avoid the misfortune intended me. I went out of the Kingdom with a great deal
of trouble, and incommodity, but by little and little, I became inured to the
toilsomnesse of travel; and finding my self strong enough to bear arms, the
general indignation I had against men, made me resolve to do my uttermost
against them, and to conquer the weakness of my nature, to follow the
incitements of my hatred. My knowledge that you were their implacable enemies
made me take my Journey this way, and to abridge an unnecessary relation, after
the wearisomnesse of a long Voyage, I arrived at the Army of the Queen your
Mother. The Maid that came away with me from Issedon, forsook me not, and
except her company, I was left quite alone, without support, or acquaintance,
if the Queen had not charitably received me, and if the Gods had not increased
my Forces, to make me do that great Princess some considerable service.

In these terms Orithia recounted her adventures succinctly to me, and the
knowledge of her quality obliging me to look upon her with more respect then
before, I began to use her, as if she had been my sister. I confirmed the
assurances the Queen had given her of our protection, and offered her our
assistance for the recovery of her inheritance, and to take satisfaction for
the violence that had been used to her. She thanked me for my offers with very
civil, and passionate expressions, and protested to me that her highest
ambition, was to spend the remainder of her life with me. I prefer that
advantage (said she) before the Province of the Massagetes, nay before all
Scythia; and if my Princess disdain not my services, and affections, I will
never part from her, but to be carried to my grave.

I answered these words no otherwise then with a thousand kisses, which I gave
her with a great deal of innocence, and affection, and having testified that
her company should always be most dear to me, I observed more joy in her
countenance, then the condition of her fortune seemed in reason to permit: From
that day I lived exceeding freely, and familiarly with her; she was lodged in
Chambers near to mine, and the Queen presently settled her a Family, and
furnished her with all servants necessary. I saw her every day, and though at
first she expressed her self with some difficulty in our Language, she had
quickly learned it, and spoke diverse others so fluently, and gracefully, that
her conversation was wondrously delightful: We were always together at one
exercise or other, and seeing her far more expert, then it was probable she
should be, for the little time she had practiced them, I received instructions
from her, and admiring what nature had wrought in her in so short a space, I
formed my self by her example, in a profession I had ever used. I was also
desirous to learn some of those Tongues she knew, she taught me the Greek, the
Persian, and some others, which she spoke very pleasingly, and did it with so
much mildness, took so much care to frame my mind and manners, and in all her
actions testified so firm a friendship to me, and so profound a respect, that
she won my heart infinitely, and tied me to her with such an affection, as yet
I had not born to any body but the Queen my Mother; Within doors, abroad a
hunting, and in all our ordinary passtimes, we were inseparable, and if
sometimes I had been but a while without seeing her, I ran to her with open
arms, and gave her kisses which she received with inconceivable joy, and
delight. If it had not been avoided by her self, we had lien together, I often
proposed it to her, but her not accepting, hindered me from pressing it farther.
I declared to her the aversion I had against diverse of our customs, and my
resolution rather to let the. Crown fall to another Family, then to give it an
Inheritrix* by those shameful ways our former Queens had taken. Orithia
approved that modest intention, and confirmed me in it by reasons* which made
me yet more in love with her virtue.

In the mean time, when we were hunting together, if she saw me obstinate in
the pursuit of any dangerous beast, she would withhold me gently, and when the
beast being pressed home, turned to a bay against us, she would cast her self
before me, and exposing her self to the danger for my security, made me visibly
find my life was without comparison dearer to her then her own. All these
actions, together with the grace wherewith she accompanied them, and her
charming conversation, absolutely Mastred all my affections, and made me even
foolishly fond of her. She lived on this manner a whole year amongst us, giving
me no proofs of her love, but such as were very innocent.

In this interim our neighbors made many incursions into our Territories, and
we entered often into theirs, and in all those occasions Orithia showed so many
proofs of an admirable valor, and of a prudence infinitely beyond her age,
that the Queen my Mother gave her most important commands in her Armies, and
undertook no Expedition of any moment, without her advice. I about that time
began to go into the wars, and desiring to pass my Apprentiship with Orithia,
I never stirred from her side, she was often troubled at it, and her care of my
safety hindered her from running on into dangers, as she did when she had no
other life to look to but her own; she perpetually blamed the ardour that
carried me into the thickest of our enemies, and though her commands often
called her otherwhere, she would not move a foot from me; and when she saw
the point of any Sword or Javelin turned against me, she opposed the passage of
it, and neglected all the blows that were made at her, to break those that
might have wounded me. Alas! dear and faithless Orithia; how welcome to me
were those first testimonies of thy affection, and how sweet is the remembrance
of them still unto my memory! Certain it is, thou forgottest nothing that could
be done to make thy self be loved, and that thou livedst only for Thalestris,
neither was she ungrateful to those proofs of thy affection, but gave her self
so absolutely to thee, that Orithia as she was Orithia, could not desire any
thing she possessed not entirely. We had besieged Phryne, a City in Cilicia,
upon our Enemies Frontiers, and our Rams had made a reasonable breach; Orithia
at the head of six thousand Amazons, prepared to assault it: I would needs
fight by her side, and notwithstanding all her prayers to dissuade me from it,
I was so obstinate in my resolution, that she was constrained to suffer my
company. She marched through the midst of our Enemies Darts and Swords, with
such a fierceness as froze the hearts of the Trojans, when Minerva shook their
Walls, and with her dreadful Gorgon, carried terror, and death into their City.

She went undauntedly up those ruins defended by valiant men, and despising a
cloud of arrows, and stones that came pouring upon her; she covered me with
her shield, and encouraging our women by her glorious example, in spite of the
resistance of our Enemies, got to the top of the breach. We fought already at
handy blows, and I may say without vanity, that I had already slain some, and
given proofs of valor considerable enough in one of my age, when I was stunned
either with the stroke of a club, or with some stone, and fell down at
Orithia's feet without sense or motion, and certainly it was my great good
fortune, to fall so near her, since that without her assistance my death had
been inevitable. Never was Tygresse when robbed of her young, so furiously
sensible of her loss, as Orithia was observed to be by them that were near
her, from whom I heard it since; she flew with a great cry, upon some of the
Enemies, who went to make an end of me, and sheltring me with her body, and her
Target, gave death to all that came near her, and having made a Rampart of dead
bodies, which left her free room enough, she took me up in her arms, and
turning toward Menalippa one of our women who commanded with her; Menalippa
(said she) the victory is ours, take care to prosecute it, I can neither
fight, nor live, unless the Princess be in safety.

At these words continuing to make way with her Sword, she came down with her
burden, through the passage she had opened her self before, and carried me
out of the Fight with such impatiency, and sense of sorrow, as she afterward
expressed to me, and as only she was able to represent. As Soon as she had taken
off my Cask, the fresh air* I took, restored me to my self, and Orithia seeing
me open my eyes, was like then to have died with joy, as before she was with
grief. I observed the mixture of joy and fear in her countenance; and desiring
to assure her, It Is nothing (said I) my dear Orithia, I was only felled, and I
need nothing but a little rest. Her face grew settled at the hearing of these
words; but not being too confident of them, she looked upon my head, where she
found no wound at all, by reason of the goodness of my Headpiece which had
defended me; and that sight completing her joy, she took me in her arms, and
carried me on into my Tent, where she laid me upon my bed; but all the way her
face was firmly cimented to mine, and I received kisses from her, which might
have made me know the difference there was between her affection and that of
our other women. The Queen who with a good part of the Army, had continued
in arms within the Camp to give Orders, and who had in vain endeavored to
keep me with her, no sooner heard the news, but she came running frighted to
me; but finding me reasonable well, and knowing she was obliged only to
Orithia for my safety, she made such dear expressions to her, as it is
impossible for me to repeat; but that valiant Amazone, no sooner had seen me in
a place of security, and learned from our Chirurgians that there was no danger
of me, but forcing her affection, she left me, and went back to the assault,
from which no other consideration but mine could have been able to draw her.

Her presence there was very necessary, and the Enemies who by her absence, had
recovered heart, lost it again at her return, and made but a vain resistance
against her valor, and the new Orders she gave. But as her return was fatal
to them* so likewise was it very profitable to them, and her mercy saved diverse
of them from the fury of our Women, who would have put all to the Sword without
exception. Orithia opposed their intention successefully, and the credit she
had already gained among them, made them slacken something of their ordinary
cruelty. When she had set the Town in some Order, and had left Menalippa to
command there, she came back to us, and found me almost recovered of my blow;
yet was it incommodious to me for a few days, and during the stay we made at
that City, which the Queen entered the next morning, I kept my bed continually.

I will not entertain you with the relation of that War; as long as it
lasted, I received proofs of this nature, from Orithia's affection; but it
being ended by an advantageous peace, we entered again into our own
Territories, and took our way toward the Capital City, which as the Province,
bears the name of Themiscira.

It was about that time Alexander Invaded Asia, and as an impetuous Torrent,
overran all those Provinces, the greater part whereof submitted to him without
drawing Sword. Our Neighbors of Cappadocia, and Cilicia, yielded without
resistance, and voluntarily underwent that yoke which he imposed upon all the
Earth. Alexander used them favorably, and continud to them their former
Governors, and their ancient Privileges.

The Queen my Mother knowing her self too weak to resist so Potent an Enemy,
meant to try gentle ways, and sent Menalippa, and Clytemnestra to him, to
represent, that his generosity obliged him to leave us in our former Liberties,
and not to employ those victorious arms which had conquered all Asia, against
feeble Women. Alexander received our Ambassadors with much civility, and having
told them that he had no intention to trouble our quietness, nor our Laws, he
turned his Forces another way, and entered not into our Country. The, Queen was
extremely glad she had diverted that Storm, and she had taken that course by
Orithia's advice, who had acquired such a reputation amongst our Women, that
every body considered her as an extraordinary person, and by the sweetness of
her manners, and conversation, she had so gained the hearts of the whole
Court, that she was both the delight and admiration of it.

She had been near upon two years amongst us, when from her natural
liveliness, she fell into a deep melancholy. She did all she possibly could,
to disguise it, but it was quickly to be perceived in her countenance, which
was so visibly altered, that 'twas no longer in her power to dissemble it; the
affection I bore her made me one of the first that took notice of it, and
having often vainly attempted to learn the cause, I did all that possibly I
could to divert her from that sadness. I made meetings of our gallantest
Ladies, whose company might have been capable to charm part of her discontents,
I made hunting Matches, and Journies of pleasure upon the Iris, (which is one
of the most delightful Rivers in the world, and which washes the Foundations of
our Walls) races, and combats on Horseback for exercise, and for diversion; but
her melancholy was not at all abated by them, and I clearly found, that only
her affection to me, made her comply with us in those our pass-times.

We were together one day in the Gardens of the Palace, accompanied with some
of our Maids, who out of respect, kept at a distance from us; our conversation
was for a while about indifferent matters, and our Discourse being at last
fallen upon her melancholy: Orithia, ( said I) it is impossible I should longer
dissemble the cause I have to take a thing ill from you; if you loved me so
well as I d^e you, I know you would not conceal from me the cause of your
discontents, and if I dare say more, amongst us you would not be sensible of
any. This sadness in our company, visibly demonstrates, an abatement in your
affection, nor have you so much cause to love your own friends, but that among
persons who love you so dearly, you might find wherewithal to comfort your
self in their absence. If it be the loss of your Estate that afflicts you, you
know you are Mistress of ours, and that I shall never be more joyed, then when
I shall be able to share mine with you.

Orithia after a deep sigh, fixed her eyes upon my face, and striving to retain
some tears, which would have burst forth with violence, she replied: You are
too generous, my fair, and my too dear Princess, to make so ill a judgment
of my thoughts, and to suspect me of a baseness unworthy of your affection. I
take the Gods once more to witness, that it is without comparison more dear to
me, and more considerable then all the Empires of the Earth, and that for it I
would forsake my nearest kindred, my Country, and that life it self, which I
have given entirely to you. After this protestation, exempt me from taking new
Oaths to assure you, that it is neither the absence of my friends, nor the
loss of my fortune, that troubles the sweetness of the retreat, which I have
found under your protection; my sadness has more lawful, and more glorious
causes, and to make a naked confession to you of it, know it proceeds only from
my love to you. I love you, my fair Princess, with an excess worthy of you,
and my affection is accompanied with those transports and disquiets, which
usually steal away all joy, and disturb repose. I die when I am from you, and I
consume when I am with you: I think you love me too much, and yet I think you
love me not enough; and my soul in these continual troubles, has lost all its
tranquillity.

Orithia had said more, but that I interrupted her with my kind indearments,
and though I found something that was very odd in her Discourse, yet was it so
obliging to me, that I could not forbear casting my arm about her neck, and
embracing her strictly a good while.

She repaid my kisses with more fear and reservednesse, then she was wont to
do; and getting loose first from my embraces; Dear Orithia, (said I) if what
you tell me were a truth, I should be as melancholy as you, since I may
protest truly to you, that my affection yields not at all to yours, and that
the Queen my Mother is not more dear to me, then your self, and yet it
produces quite contrary effects in me, and I find so great a contentment in
loving you, and being loved by you, that if your sadness did not afflict me,
our affection would cause nothing in me but joy.

Alas! (replied Orithia) how different are our fortunes! Know, Madam, that it is
not my present suffering that occasions all my sorrow, but my foresight of the
future that plunges me into this deadly melancholy. You love me now, and more
then I deserve; nay even as much as I could wish; but alas! this affection,
which gives me an imperfect happiness, frees me not from my fears, and will
without doubt forsake me, when I shall stand in greatest need of it; you will
cease to love me when my affection shall be truly known to you, and I shall
cease to live, when you shall cease to love me.

She made an end of these words with much a do, and fixing her eyes upon the
ground with some kind of fear, and confusion, remained a long time in that
posture, without looking upon me. But being desirous to draw her out of a
distrust which grieved me. My dear Orithia (said I) I cannot guess at the cause
of your suspicions, nor do I know what proofs you have of my inconstancy,
that you should apprehend such strange effects of it. I love you really as my
self, and if it be in my friendship, that you establish your happiness, live
in assurance that you shall be ever happy; since I protest to you by the Majesty
of the Gods that hear us, the affection which Thalestris bears you, shall never
end but with her life.

Orithias Countenance cleared up a little at this discourse, yet not so much,
but that I found she was not quite cured of her apprehensions, I was preparing
my self to drive them away by new assurances, when the Queen my mother came
into the garden, and broak off our conversation. We had afterward diverse
times, the same talk or little different, and by a thousand testimonies of my
freindship, I endeavored to take away those just disquiets that tormented her.
The promises I made to love her eternally, wrought some effect indeed, and
often raised her out of that deep sadness in which she had seemed buried, but
there still remaind some trouble in her mind, whereof I could not deny the
cause; she received my kindnesses with more fear and respect then formerly, and
no longer gave her self those liberties she was wont to take* Sometimes when I
embraced her, and with kisses conjured her to be merry for my sake. Ah! Madam
(would she say) I am unworthy of your cares, and of your favors; let this
culpable Orithia die, who betrays you, and abuses your goodness, and your
innocence; I rob you of favors I have not deserved, and I ought to give
account for them, as for a theft, which I unworthyly am guilty of, to the
fairest, and best Princess in the world. I understood nothing of all these
words, and I feared often, when I heard her speak them, that her melancholy
began to distract her. This belief caused in me a very sensible affliction, and
made me take recourse to all the inventions, that might divert, or prevent the
misfortune I apprehended. The Queen, to whom she was very dear, as she ought to
be, in consideration of her good qualities, and of the services she had done
her was extremely concerned in her trouble, and every day offered her what
soever she was able to contribute, to her contentment. The chief of our
Ladies, whose hearts she had wonderfully gaind, strove in emulation of each
other to cheer her up; but all their cares were to no purpose, and all of them
having in vain attempted it, at last the fatal hour came wherein I was to be
undeceived.

Near to the gardens of our Palace, there is an exceeding high wood, one of the
fairest in all Capadocia, which seprading it self to the very bank of the
river Iris is one of the most pleasant places to walk in, that Asia affords;
there are a great number of fair, spacious alleys, and in little by-turnings
where one may insensibly loose ones self, are private arbours, with seats of
green turfe, and little banks of the same, where one may lie down shelterd
from the heat of the sunn, and not be interrupted in their retired thoughts.

I was one day in this wood with my maids, and having walked a while upon the
bank of the river, I went aside with Hippolita, the dearest of them all, and
the very same you see now here with me. I entered by chance into one of those
paths, that led to the secret arbor and having followed it a while, when I
was near one of them I heard a voice interrupted with sighs, and sobs, and
drawing a little nearer, I discerned it to be Orithia's, who thinking her self
not overheard by any body, in such a private place, complained in a very
pittyfull manner. I was glad of that encounter, and believing I should thereby
learn the true cause of her affliction, I forbad Hippolita to come any
further, not being willing she should hear the secrets of that dear friend,
though I had never concealed my own from her. When I was alone, I went forward
gently, and without making any noise till I came close to the arbor, and
peeping through the boughs that grew about it, I saw my dear Orithia laid a
long upon one of those green banks, holding a hankerchief to her eyes,
wherewith she wiped away the tears that fell in great abundance.

This object touched me deeply with compassion, but much more, when after
having continued a wile silent, she began to speak again in these terms. Why
do thou defer any longer, miserable wretch? and what do thou hope for,
yet from heaven, but that death, for which thy mind, ought already to be
prepared? lose that life really, which thou yet have only lost in the opinion
of the world, and be no longer obstinate to strive against thy destiny; thou
may yet die with the freindship of her thou love, and if thou defer thy
death till after the knowledge of thy deceits, thou will it certainly die with
her anger, and her hatred; and insted of the tears, which she now would give
unto thy grave, thou will carry nothing with thee thither but her imprecations.
While Orithia spoke these words, her back was toward the entrance of the
arbor, and not being able to mark her actions well enough, in the place where
I was, I stole insensibly to the door, where in the posture she then lay, she
could not discover me. There I observed her more heedfully, and after many
sighs I heard her go on thus. Was it necessary, O Gods! was it necessary, you
should raise so many impossiblities against my happiness, and that you should
oppose the Laws, and powers of a whole Monarchy against the preservation of my
life? for in short, what can I expect; what vain hope soever I flatter my felfe
withal, that which I love is too pure, and too perfect, to make use to my
advantage of the immodest customs of her country: and besides I love her too
well, to seek my fortune by those ways, and she I love, loves her self too
well, to overturn for my sake, the constitutions of a Monarchy, which has
subsisted so many years, and to forsake a scepter, for an unknown, and a
deciptfull Orithia; Die then, miserable wretch, die, and make Thalestris see
that thou embracest death, rather then the occasions of offending her any more;
thy blood shall wash away part of the crimes thou have committed against her,
and she without doubt will pardon them, when she remembers thou dyedst to give
her reparation. I understood almost nothing by these words, though they put me
into strange suspicions; and yet I was so troubled at them, that contrary to my
resolution, I could not forbear making a little noise. I know not whither it
were that, which with drew Orithia from that dialogue with her thoughts, but
she turned about, and casting her eyes toward the door, discovered me. I am
not able to represent her confusion to you; being got up, she began to look
upon me, and observing in my countenance, as much amazement as appeared in
hers, she believed I had heard all that she had said before I came, and that
she had infallibly discovered herself. This belief made her grow pale* and
tremble from head to foot, which actions of a person quite beside her self,
she neither durst look me in the face, nor stir from the place where she stood,
and keeping her eyes fast upon the ground, remained a long time in a posture
that testified her surprise, and her irresolution. At last she broak her
silence, and unmoveablenesse, and casting her self of a sudden at my feet,
redoubled my astonishment by that action; I was already set down upon one of
the seats, and beholding her in that condition; I had neither strength to
raise her up, nor courage to ask the cause of what I saw; but she drew me out
of that perplexity, when without lifting up her eyes to me. Madam ( said she)
it has pleased the Gods that my deceit, should be at last discovered, and my
happiness, though but an imperfect one, has in the end begot an envy in them.
This miserable man, whom they saved from the waters was to perish by a more
noble destiny, and that death was too common for a person whom they reserved to
such extraordinary fortunes. I am an Impostor, I am a Deceiver, I have abused
your goodness, with an impudence that deserves no mercy; and I submit my self
to the rigor of those Laws, which your sex has established against ours; you
may take revenge upon the brother, for the sisters Treacheries, and punish the
true Orontes, for the crimes of the false Orithia. I am that Prince, equally
happy and unfortunate, saved from shipwreck, to end his life more gloriously at
your feet, and too proud of his fate, since he revived from an ordinary death,
only that ^e may die for love, and that of the fairest, and most lovely
Princess in the world. I implore not your goodness here, to obtain a pardon
which I have not deserved; the Gods are my witnesses, that I no longer love a
life which begins to displease you; and I protest also before them, that I will
not abate any thing of my affection to you, though you pronounce the sentence
of death against me. This lovely Impostor said many other words, but I gave no
ear to them, and was so seized with that unlooked for declaration, that I had
scarce any sense or knowledge remaining.

Instantly all my thoughts ran toward revenge, and my resentment, laid the
theat that had been put upon me, before my eyes in so lively colors, that I
could not but break forth with violence: All the favors he had stolen from me,
all the familiarities I had innocently granted him, came thronging into my
memory, and making a mixture of shame and anger, kindled in my face a color
like fire, and in my mind a deadly wrath; yes, wrath, shame, and despite,
joined all together to transport me to the ruin of that deceiver; and made me
believe I ought to expose him to the rigor of our Laws, and with his blood,
wash off the injury he had done unto mine innocence.

In these first motions, after having looked upon him with a threatening eye,
Traitor, (said I) thou shall die, and since thy Treachery is without example,
thy death shall serve for an example, to all those of thy sex, who shall
attempt to put that Tyranical yoke again upon ours, which we so nobly have
shaken off. Hope for no mercy from her, thou have so unworthily offended, and
since thou have basely abused that innocent affection, I bore to thee, die for
the reparation of a crime, which all thy blood cannot wash away.

The feigned Orithia, while I spoke these words; continued still upon her
knees, and as soon as I had ended them: Yes, Madam, ( replied she, with an
assured voice) I will die, and I value that death above the Empire of the
Amazons. It Is no small recompense to Orontes, for the services he has done
you, to have the honor to die for you; and I protest to you by those fair
eyes, which will light me to my grave, I die satisfied, since for the
reparation of the offense I have committed, I give you a life, that never was
but yours. Only, Madam, if the remembrance of that affection, which you justly
accuse me for having unworthily abused, be not criminal in your mind, I
conjure you by the blood I am going to shed, to receive it for the expiation of
my guilt, and not to preserve any hatred after my death, to him who has indeed
offended the Princess Thalestris, but also who to satisfy her, dies for the
Princess Thalestris.

While he spoke on this manner, I made some reflection, upon the services he
had done me, and upon the proofs which with so much hazard he had given me of a
most pure, and perfect affection: This consideration mollified me a little, and
the constancy of his last words, added to the grace wherewith he accompanied
them, made me slacken something of the strictness of my first motions which
had destined him to death, and made me believe I could not without ingratitude,
and inhumanity, sacrifice a life which he had so voluntarily given me, and
which he often had set at naught for the preservation of mine.

In these last thoughts I cast mine eyes again upon him, and forcing back some
sighs, which hindered the course of my words, I will not take thy life, (said I)
I give it to those services I have received from thee, and I leave it to the
remorse of thy own conscience, which shall revenge me for the offense thou have
committed. Live to repent thy crime, but live so far from hence, that I may
never see thee upon our Territories again.

Having said thus, I rose from the place where I was sat, and went out of the
Arbor so troubled, that I knew not what to do with my self: I took no heed
what became of Orontes, and going back to the place where ^ had left Hippolita,
it was not long before I found her again: She presently observed an alteration
in my countenance, and having asked me the cause; Ah! Hippolita, (said I) what
strange news have I to tell thee; but stay till we be in my Chamber; I am now
so beside my self, that I am not able to tell it thee.

This Wench was very discreet, and I had so perfect a confidence in her, that I
was wont to discover my most secret thoughts to her, and indeed that which was
befaln me, was important enough, to be concealed from every body else, and the
life of Orontes, was in too manifest a danger, if he had been known by our
other Women. After that the rest of my Maids were come to us again, I went back
toward my Chamber, whither I was no sooner come, but having commanded Hippolita
to bid every body withdraw, I related my adventure to her. She was wonderfully
surprised at it, and bore the same part in that misfortune she was wont to bear
in all things that concerned me; yet she having naturally a great deal of
goodness, and the feigned Orithia having taken much care to gain her
friendship, she deplored his disaster with words that begot some pity in my
self, and took the liberty to accuse me of some inhumanity.

At first I was angry with her, and with specious reasons justified my usage
of him; but in the end coming to remember all the actions of that counterfeit
Amazone, and representing to my self her graceful fashion, and her excellent
qualities, I was carried away to some compliance with Hippolita's Discourse,
but I could not persuade my self to repent what I had done, yet did I at least
incline to some compassion of that Prince his misfortunes, and to a great deal
of sorrow for my own, which had constrained me to banish a person for ever,
whose merit and former services, had wrought in me a strong inclination.

We spent the rest of the day in that entertainment, and the night following,
I was tossed with great disquiets, this accident furnished matter enough to
cause them, and the day began to appear, before I had ever closed my eyes. When
it was dinner time, the Queen asked for Orithia, but she came not, and her
servants of whom they enquired after her, affirmed that since the day before
she had not returned unto her Lodging. That answer put the Queen into some
trouble, and having caused her to be sought all the rest of the day in vain,
she was extremely grieved, either for her departure, or for the accident that
might have befallen he.

Can it be possible, ( said she) that our dear Orithia should have left us,
without bidding us farewell? But ought we not rather to fear some misfortune
separates her from us, and deprives us of the most amiable person in the world?

These words which the Queen spoke in my presence, began to touch my heart,
and the Gods who destined me to many disasters, already gave me an unprofitable
repentance. At night being retired into my Chamber, and ready to go to bed,
Hippolita delivered me a Letter, which she had received from one of Orithia's
Women, whom of all about her she trusted most; I judged instantly that it came
from her, and would not have taken it, but that I waa persecuted by Hippolita,
who was absolutely resolved I should see the last marks of the affection of a
person that had so perfectly loved me; I was forced to yield to her, and as soon
as I was in bed, I took it, and breaking it open, I read these words.

The Guilty ORITHIA, to the Divine THALESTRIS.
Madam,
I Depart, as you have commanded me, and with your sight, I forsake this
Country, from whence you have banished me for ever: It Is not to avoid death,
that I go away, for I should have run boldly to demand it of the Queen, for
the punishment of my crime, if I could have died in that manner, without
interessing you in my death; the cause of it would without question have broken
forth, and you would have received displeasures by it, which would have
afflicted me more sensibly then death it self. I go therefore to seek it far
from hence, and to free the Earth from that ambitious Orithia, who by the
greatness of her crime, has merited your indignation; nor could she however,
have resisted that remorse to which you gave her over, and which would justly
have punished her, for having troubled the tranquillity of your soul. I beg
of the Gods to restore it you for ever, and to conserve it as entire to you, as
I have, and will unto my grave, that passion which leads me thither, by its
violence, by your will, and by the knowledge of my fault. In the mean time,
most divine Princess, if the prayers of one so guilty may be received by you,
suffer me yet once again to implore your pardon for the offense I have
committed, and at the extremity of my life, to conjure you, not to hate the
memory of a person who has offended you, only in loving you, and who has
loved you, only with the most pure, and perfect affection, a heart is able to
conceive. Grant me this favor with generosity, as I give you my life with
joy, and if the fault of the guilty Orithia, come sometimes into your mind,
remember that if she was too blame, 'twas rather through love, then malice,
and that though she was imprudent, though she was presumptuous, yet was she
ever faithful, and died as she had lived yours.


I know not how to express to you, Sir, with what motions my soul was touched,
at the reading of this Letter, but certainly tenderness and pity, never
produced more sudden, nor more powerful effects in an heart prepossessed with
anger, and resentment, then they did at that time in mine. I let the Letter
fall upon my bed, and looking upon Hippolita, without one word, I set forth my
sorrow by my silence and by some tears, which I could not possibly retain. Then
it was that Orithia represented her self unto my eyes, in her most lovely
shape, and if to banish those thoughts that argued for her; I fancied her to my
self as that presumptuous Orontes, who had maliciously deceived me, and abused
my favors, and my easiness; she would return within a moment into my memory,
as that charming Orithia, who had exposed her self unto such manifest hazards,
to see me, and to serve me, who in a storm of blows had saved me from a death,
which without her help had been inevitable; who by her valor had restored me
the Queen my Mother, who by a thousand actions of that nature, had heretofore
won my heart with a most absolute Empire, and for a conclusion died for me, and
died with a resignation and a fidelity which the rigor of my usage had not
been able to shake.

O Gods! how sensible was this remembrance to me, and how nearly did that
consideration touch me. I took up the Letter again, and reading every word of
it over and over diverse times, I suffered my self to be insensibly carried away
into a compassion very little different from that which is called Love. All
that Prince his good qualities, and all the proofs he had given me of his
affection, appeared unto me then with so much advantage, that it was impossible
for me to defend my self both against the grief for his misfortune, and against
the birth of that passion, for which ^ since have so much suffered.

In short, Sir, if I loved him as Orithia before, I began now to love him as
Orontes, and could neither find strength enough in the consideration of that
virtue I had proposed unto my self, nor in that of our Laws to resist the
violence of my destiny. I spent the night in cruel agitations, and if I went
to shut my eyes, in hope that sleep would give some respite to my disquiets,
Otontes came presently into my imagination, with that gracefulness which
accompanied all his actions.

It is not just ( me thought he said) Thalestris, that you should enjoy a
repose, which you have robbed me of for ever; awake to think upon this
unfortunate man, whom you have ruined; remember that I have forsaken my
Country, my kindred, and my life it self to love you, that I have witnessed my
love, by proofs, which perhaps have no example, and that for all my reward you
have banished me from your sight for ever; If you will be quit with me, and
capable of that sleep you seek for, restore me the years, which with so much
peril of my life, I have spent in your service; put your self again in the
condition you were upon the breach of Phryne, and into so many other dangers,
from which my valor alone has delivered you; and in short, if you can
possible, make all that is past, never to have been, and you shall be free from
that remorse to which I leave the care of revenging me, and with which I may
more justly threaten you, then you can me.

This Discourse seemed to argue incessantly in mine ears; and my grief making
my fancy work exceeding strongly, I passed from this thought to a more dismal
one, and imagined Orontes either dead, or dying for me.

Behold, Thalestris, (said he in my mind) behold the brave effect of thy
cruelty, I could not live, after the sentence of death thou did pronounce
against me, and my own hand has freed me from those miseries to which thou
inhumanely had condemned me. See the happy conclusion of a Love full of
respect, and fidelity; and see the worthy recompense of the services I have so
zealously, and so discreetly rendered thee.

In these thoughts and entertainments, J passed the whole night, and the next
morning J was so ill that J could not rise all that day. J made no difficulty
to trust Hippolita with my disquiets, and with the birth of my affection. That
discreet Wench endeavored to comfort me, and to banish from my mind those
thoughts which fruitlesly afflicted me; She represented how unprofitable
those reflections were, and though she took Orontes his part* her belief that
the mischief was then past remedy, made her use all attempts to put him out of
my remembrance. The Queen my Mother came to see me in bed, and being her self
deeply afflicted for the departure, or loss of Orithia, she thought it not
strange that J was so sensibly grieved.

J spent many days in striving with my self to banish that sad remembrance out
of my mind, and to that end diverted my self with company, hunting, exercises,
and all the pass times, which formerly had been able to charm part of my
discontents, but J no longer found the same virtue in them, and wheresoever J
was or whatsoever J did the image of Orontes was still before me, and by his
reproaches troubled the repose J vainly sought for.

Sometimes when J was alone, or accompanied only by Hippolita, after having
long struggled with my disquiets, Ah! Orontes, (would J cry) notwithstanding
all the cause thou have to accuse me of ingratitude, if my thoughts were known
to thee, thou would without doubt be satisfied, and thou never desiredst
more affection from me, then I now have granted thee. But, alas! how fruitless
is both my affection, and my repentance, thou will never return into this
Country where thy services have been so ill requited, and perchance thou art
no longer in a condition to be satisfied with either of them.

J never ended these kind of speeches without some tears, and that long War I
made against my sorrows* and against my remorse, wrought a very great
alteration in my humor, and in my countenance. I will not detain you longer,
Sir, in the tedious recital of my disquiets; I had spent many months in this
course of life, when my grief received a fatal surcharge, and J had not yet
dried up my tears for the loss of Orithia, when the death of the Queen my
Mother, gave me a sad occasion to pour them forth afresh. That good Princess
who so dearly loved me, was taken away in the flower of her age, and a sudden,
violent Fever, robbed me of her in the space of eight days.

I will not trouble you with the particularities of her sickness, which had
nothing remarkable, but will only tell you, that a few hours before her end,
having sent for me to her bedside, and alleged some reasons to comfort me for
her loss, she gave me instructions to rule by, and conjured me with the most
ardent entreaties her affection could furnish her withal in that last period
of her life, never to permit that our Laws should be violated, and to perish
for the conservation of that liberty, which our predecessors had obtained by
their sword, and which till then we had so courageously defended. I answered
her only with my tears and sighs, and within a few moments after J had
received her last embraces, I saw her shut her eyes for ever. This remembrance
interrupted the fair Amazons discourse, and causing her to shed tears, obliged
Oroondates, to speak some words of consolation to her, but within a while after
being a little settled, she went on with her story on this manner.

J make you judge, Sir, of the greatness of my affliction, and will not spend
time in painting it forth unto you, since the greatness of my love to so good a
Mother, may give you some knowledge of it. I did all that the weakness of Women
makes them use to do in such like encounters; I wept, I tore my hair, and was
for many days incapable of comfort; but in the end, my grief wore away, with
time, reason, and the persuasions of my friends, who desired me to leave off my
lamentations, to take some care of governing my subjects.

I was solemnly Crowned, and received power over the Scepter, in a season when
my youth, and passions made me incapable of any over my self. I began my Reign
with tranquillity enough, and J was willing according to Orithia's counsels, to
sweeten the harshness of our Laws a little, and take away from them that touch
of savageness which they had. J forbad our Women to kill any of their male
children, and commanded them only to make them be carried away among the
Cappadocians, or others of our Neighbors, and to change them for daughters, if
they found any opportunity. I ordained, that those men who by Tempests or any
other accidents were cast upon our Territories, should not be ill used, and
that they should only be made to go forth of them again, without receiving any
other injury.

J altered many other things in the severity of our Customs, and put a milder
face upon my Government, then it was wont to have under the Reign of former
Queens. I caused our Towns and Seaports to be fortified, our arms to be well
kept, and our exercises to be continued with great assiduity. Our Women became
more active and more courageous, then ever they had been, and finding in me (as
they said) a strength and vigor above my sex, they grew Warlike by my example,
and divested themselves of all their weaknesses, to acquire a true valor and
fortitude. The time J had to spare from these employments, was spent in
reading, or in other exercises of the mind and a good part of it was given to
the remembrance of my dear Orithia; J represented her to my self sometimes as
Orithia, sometimes as Orontes, but always as a person infinite lovely, and
infinitely beloved of me.

My dear Orithia, (said I sometimes) Why did thou appear unto mine eyes, but
as a flash of Lightning, and why did the Gods present thee unto the unfortunate
Thalestris, only to take thee from her sight for ever? But ( said J again)
cruel and imprudent Thalestris, why did thou banish her thy self, whom now
thou vainly bewailest? Or rather, why do thou vainly bewail the want of that
which thou have lost only by thine own will?

J discoursed often with Hippolita upon that subject, and bringing into our
talk all the actions of that feigned Amazon, which were the most capable to
have made us discover her, we admired at our blindness, which had lasted for
so long a time. It is true, that Orontes had lived with so great a modesty and
so great wariness amongst us, that it was not easy to know him for a man, and
besides that deceit, was nothing so difficult amongst us as amongst other
Women, and though I have wondered to see such like disguises in History, as that
of Achilles among the daughters of Lycomedes, there was no such cause of wonder
amongst us, in whom that Martial presence, and humor, (which might have
discovered the truth of his sex, amongst other women) was as ordinarily found,
as amongst men. This was it that favored the deceit of Orontes, who in that
fierceness which accompanied him in fight, in his words, and in his actions,
had nothing that was not common in our Women. The real affection I then bore
him, was so settled in my heart, that if I had not yet retained some care of a
reputation, which contrary to our Laws and Customs, I was resolved to keep
inviolable, I should have sent Hippolita to seek him, with charge to bring him
back to me, if she were so happy as to find him in Scythia. Besides this
consideration, I was withheld by the difficulties, or rather by the
impossibilities I met with in the state of my affairs, since I could not think
of taking Orontes for my husband, without forsaking both the Empire, and
Country of the Amazons, who for my particular interest would never have
consented to the loss of their Liberties, and of their Customs. These reasons
made me take patience in my misfortune, and turn all my thoughts to my ordinary
imploiments, and to the care of my Government.

I passed a whole year without other troubles then those of my mind, and with
much more tranquillity in my Dominions then in my heart. I at my coming to the
Crown had confirmed the Truce, which the Queen my Mother had made with the
Cilicians our Neighbors, and our usual Enemies. Neobarzanes had been their
Governor under Darius, and having of late followed Alexanders party, he by him
was confirmed in the absolute Authority of that Kingdom, and in as Sovereign a
power, as if he had been lawful King of it. That ambitious man desiring to
enlarge his Confines, and to extirpate us Women, who had always held him play,
and often put him to the worst, took the Field, and invaded our Territories
with an Army of thirty thousand men: They at first made some progress upon our
Frontiers, and defeated some of our Forces* whom the Truce had made secure and
negligent; but within a while after being sat down to besiege one of our
Cities, they gave me the leisure to raise an Army as strong as theirs. I
marched straight toward them in good order, and with great diligence, and they
no sooner had the news, but they raised their siege, and advanced to meet us
with Colors flying. The Armies met in a plain, which is between the Iris, and
the Thermodoon, and having heard that Neobarzanes had given the command of his
left Wing to his Brother Tisaphernes, a man who by his valor had acquird a
mighty reputation in War, and kept the right Wing for himself. I followed his
example, and giving my left to Menalippa, I took the right my self, that I
might encounter Tisaphernes, whom I believed much more dangerous then his
brother. I was not deceived in my expectation, for at the shock of the two
Armies, Tisaphernes and I charged one another; and having broken our Javelins
without effect, we began a combat with our swords, the sight whereof would have
been pleasing enough, if we had been permitted to continue in it, but the
throng having parted us, we ran both to our Commands. I will not weary you with
the Relation of that Battle, it was sufficiently bloody, and the Victory was
disputed by the death of a great number; but in the end it proved ours, and the
Enemies lost the Field, with fifteen thousand of their men, but not without
having slain seven or eight thousand of our Women, and wounded many of the
rest. The night hindered a more general defeat, and the next morning by break of
day, the Cilicians finding their loss, disencamped, and drew off from us; the
incommodity of our hurt Women, and the suddenness of their departure, kept us
from hot pursuing them; we nevertheless marched after them, and falling often
upon the Rear of such as were cast behind, we accompanied them to their
Frontiers with a great deal of execution. While we were in doubt whether we
should enter into their Territories after them, intelligence came to us that
they had received a supply of ten thousand men. This news hindered us from
passing farther, and made us stand upon our guard; and Neobarzanes and
Tisaphernes, were so pufft up with it, that within three days after they
presented us battle again. Some of our Women to whom riper years had given more
experience, and more fear of danger, were of opinion we ought to refuse it; the
more courageous desired it, and I held part with them, and had a mind to decide
the business by a general defeat. The ground enforced me to divide our Army
into three Bodies, and I gave the third to Clitemnestra. As Soon as the
appointed day appeared, the Armies were in Battalia, and marched toward one
another with a great deal deal of eagerness. The day was very fair, and the
Sun shining upon our arms, made the two Armies a gallant sight; but it was
quickly changed, and all the beauty they had in their drawing near, was
instantly lost in horror, and in the blood that was spilt.

My Narration would be too long, if I should descend to the particulars of that
battle, but I believe that never any was more bravely fought, and that
animosity never produced more strange effects. All the Squadrons were mingled
pell mell, and we killed one another without order, and without pity, when
Tisaphernee knowing me again, made way with his Sword to come to charge me, and
as soon as he was within hearing, I pray thee (cried he) let us finish the
Combat we began at the former battle, and let us withdraw out of this crowd,
that we may end it without hindrance, and without advantage.

I answered him only with my head, and making him a sign to follow me, I put on
my Horse to the place where I saw the freest room. He came courageously after
me, and when we were gotten out of that thick multitude, seeing me turn about,
he struck me such a blow upon the head, that he beat down my crest, with the
plumes that covered it; and perceiving me a little dazzled, he went to redouble
it, but I rushed directly upon him, and luckily finding the defect of his
Curass, I ran my sword up to the hilts in his right side. Tisaphernes fell dead
with the wound, but he was hardly down, and my sword free in my hand, when I
was charged behind with a stroke which was like to have laid me among the
Horses feet. I clapped spurs to mine, and facing about toward him that had struck
me, I saw Neobarzanes himself, who to succor, or revenge his brother, fell upon
me with a great many of his men; I sought him out in the midst of them, and
aiming my sword at his very eyes, I gave him such a terrible shock, that I set
him beside his saddle, and made him tumble under the feet of his Followers.
They got round about him presently, and some of them helping him again on
horseback, the rest came pouring upon me with exceeding fury; I had then been
in a great deal of danger, if Menalippa had not rescued me with some of her
Troops, and the Enemies drawing up theirs within a very short space, the most
dangerous, and bloody service proved to be there. We fought so obstinately,
that both Armies were almost defeated, but though the Victory according to
probability was more likely to have been theirs, we obtained it at the last,
with the death of above ten thousand of our Women. That great loss did so
exasperate me against Neobarzanes and his soldiers, that I was blindly
obstinate in the pursuit of them: true it is, that I disdained all the rest to
fix upon the person of the Chief, and by killing or taking him prisoner, to
decide our eternal quarrel. This desire made me fall in eagerly among the
run-aways, and not considering that I was followed by but few of my Amazons, I
engaged my self in a Wood, where Neobarzanes had rallied part of the Cavalry he
had left. I found my error when I was in the midst of them, but 'twas too late
to help it, and the Enemy having discovered the smalness of the number that
pursued them, made an halt, and environed us on all sides. I may say without
vanity, that we in that occasion did all that valiant and desperate persons
could do in such a like encounter. I made part of them that opposed me, fall at
my feet, and getting to Neobarzanes in spite of them, I dismounted him a second
time, but he was instantly taken up by his men, and our resistance serving only
to exasperate them against us, they charged us so furiously on every side, that
all our Women were slain upon the place, and my horse being killed with a
thousand wounds, left me upon the ground at the mercy of my Enemies. I expected
nothing from them but death, and I should certainly have received it, if
Neobarzanes had not commanded them to take me alive. They presently went about
to do it, and it was impossible for me to hinder them, so that after having
vainly defended my liberty, I was taken, disarmed of my sword, and tied upon an
horse, which was presently sent away, for fear I should be rescued by the
Troops I had left behind; they carried me away with so much speed, that within
an hour I was brought to Phryne that same City, which before we had taken by
the valor of Orithia, and which the Cilicians had afterward recovered from us.
There it was that Neobarzanes gathered up his run-aways, and shut himself in
with them, though the place was not yet very well fortified; but he knew our
broken Forces were not in a condition to besiege it, nor to attempt any thing
upon his Territories without fresh Supplies. This consideration made him
resolve, there to expect the event of that War, that he might give Orders upon
the Frontiers, till more strength came to him from Tharsus. Judge, Sir, of my
grief and shame to see my self in the power of my most cruel Enemies and of the
imprecations I uttered against fortune that had suffered me to fall into their
hands, and not to perish in the Fight with the valiantest of my Women. I began
to deplore my Captivity; with the saddest words my sorrow could bring forth,
when I was led before Neobarzanes; some light hurts I had which they vouchsafed
not to get dressed, nor I to desire that favor, or to hope for any from them
after the loss they had sustained. As Soon as Neobarzanes saw me, he could
scarce forbear revilings, and the remembrance of a brother whom he had dearly
loved, and whom I had killed before his face, was so powerfully renewed in him,
that he was ready to have put me instantly to death; but having cast his eyes
upon my face, he found something there that mollified part of his anger, and
restrained the impetuousness of that fury, which carried him headlong to my
destruction. Yet could he not so well contain himself, but that looking upon me
with eyes sparkling with wrath, The Gods, bloody woman! (said he) have at last
delivered thee into his hands, whom they have destined for the revenger of thy
cruelties, and if the death of my dear brother, and of so many thousand of my
soldiers, which cries for vengeance against thee, cannot be satisfied with that
of one woman, I shall at least have this satisfaction to punish the head for
the crimes of the whole body, and to appease my brothers ghost by the blood of
her that deprived me of him.

I heard these words without being terrified, and having looked a good while
upon him with a disdain, that might have incensed him more; I replied at last
without being moved, I expected neither favor, nor good usage of thee, (
Neobarzanes) and I should think it a shame to receive that from thee which thou
never shewedst to any body, do not believe thou can affright me with thy
threats, Fortune the Goddess thou adorest, and who puffs up such empty souls,
never had any Empire over mine, and can neither deject it, nor subdue it to
thee; thou alone art guilty of those cruelties with which thou reproachest me.
I have defended my Territories, which contrary to the Law of Nations, and thy
promise given, thou unjustly did invade, and if thy brother, and thy soldiers
have fallen in thy quarrel, they died like valiant men, and have received that
punishment for thy crime, from which thou feedest thy self by flight. These
words were enough to redouble his fury, and carry him to extreamities against a
person who braved him, and injured him, though a prisoner. But that little
beauty wherewith some had flattered me, upon which he cast his eyes with most
base, and guilty designs, suspended his anger, and hindered it from breaking
forth with violence, but not him from answering with a sharp and dangerous
smile. We will see whether thy constancy will hold out to the end, and if thou will be as courageous in the certainty of thy death, as thou art in the
expectation of a pardon, which thou vainly hopest for by reason of thy sex.
Though he spoke these words with a choleric voice, he cast looks at me which
were sufficient to make me doubt his violence, and commanding me to be taken
away, he had also the care to give order that Chirurgians should be sent to
dress my wounds. I was carried back into the Chamber, which was given me for my
prison, and though my Captivity caused as much grief in me, as a courageous
heart was capable to feel, some remainder of that desire which we have
naturally for life, made me give way to the care that was taken of my wounds.
As Soon as I was in bed, they were searched and dressed, but they were such
slight ones, that the Chirurgians did not doubt but they would be healed in a
few days. I was not a little confirmed in my belief, that Neobarzanes his anger
was assuaged, when I saw women sent to wait upon me, from whose sight I
received much consolation. That was the thing I had most desired in my
misfortune, and I feared nothing so much, as to see my self among men, whose
conversation I was not used to, and from whom I apprehended violence. The
second day of my Captivity, I learned from the Women that served me, that they
did not believe that Neobarzanes would put me to death, and the third they told
me he had sent to enquire after my health. As I had not been terrified by his
threats, so neither was I touched with that alteration, and I resolved for the
worst events a Captive could expect, except the loss of my honor, for the
defense whereof I determined to suffer death, if any body should go about to
assault it.

The fair Queen was in this part of her Story, when she was interrupted by
Amyntas, who came to see her wound; Thalestris put forth her arm, and after he
had dressed it, and assured her of a speedy cure, she set her self in her
former posture, and went on thus with her Discourse.

The end of the Third Book.
The Continuation of the second Part of CASSANDRA. The fourth Book.
THe usage I had received from Neobarzanes, at the beginning of my captivity,
began quickly to alter for the better; and the women, that were appointed to
wait upon me, began to serve me with very great diligence and respect.
Neobarzanes sent often to see how I did, and when my wounds permitted me to
leav my bed, he came himself into my Chamber; I was surprised at that
unexspected visit; and if I would have followed my first motions, I had given
him a reception, which without question would have kept him from coming any
more: but considering the power he had over me, and how much his former
behavior might be excused by the death of his Brother, and the loss of his
Army, I believed it fit for me to receiv him as a man that repented his
having used me ill, though his pretenses for it were specious enough, and as a
man whom I ought not to exasperate, if I had desired to secure what it was in
his power to take from me by violence: These Reasons obliged me to use him
reasonable civilly, which without doubt confirmed his evil intentions, and that
passion which had mollified him, and which brought him then into my Chamber.
When he had enquired after my health, and was set down by me: Madam (said
he) I doubt not but you are much offended with me for my first usage of you,
and that you still keep some resentment of your ill welcome, and of the threats
which my grief made me utter against so fair a Queen, and one worthy of a
better fortune, and of a better reception; but your goodness will pardon those
transports in a person, who by your hands has lost a Brother (who was
extremely dear to him, and whom his virtue made very considerable to the whole
world,) and (by the hands of your Soldiers) an Army of forty thousand men,
the Relics whereof can hardly be perceived within this City; you will
without question have some regard to so lawful an anger, and will judge of the
cause that suppresse's it, by my forgetting so great, and so late offenses. It Is
true, the blood of my Brother, and of all my Soldiers, demand's some
satisfaction from me; but a force more powerful then nature, or reason of
State, forbid's me to give them any to your disadvantage, and disarm's my
rage, after having disarmed my heart of all that could defend it against you. I
think this knowledge is sufficient to make you understand my inclinations, and I
cannot declare them better then by representing to you that they divest me of
those of nature, and of my most tender affections; nor can I more truly
testify that I love you, then in loosing for your sake the remembrance of what
I loved most dearly. Think not this Declaration strange, I know it is a
Discourse to which you have not been accustomed, but we daily see greater
changes; and if you had suffered the access of men, you would doubtless have
engaged them in that passion which has made me absolutely yours; you hate
them only, because you know them not, and 'twas an irregular caprichio of your
Predecessors, that deprive's you of the society the gods have established, and
by which, and for which, the world subsist's. You may if you pleas make some
reflection upon what I have said, and if among men whom you have always
shunned, you can find any one worthy of your affections, be pleased to cast
your eyes upon me, who have given you mine first, with an exceeding great
respect, and a most absolute Empire. I am not able, Sir, to express how much I
was incensed at this Discourse, and how much I resented that Captivity which
constrained me to suffer it; if I had been at liberty, I would have punished
that insolent fellow with mine own hands, and would have made him feel that
force to the purpose, of which he had twice had experience to his shame; but I
had too many reasons to moderate my fury, so that I suffered it not to rise to
that extremity; and I at that time had prudence enough to dissemble part of
it, but not power enough over my face to keep it from being inflamed with a
color like fire, nor over my tongue to hinder it from replying sharply:
Remember Neobarzanes that I am a Queen, though I be your Prisoner, and that if
the chance of war has given you some power over my body, my mind is still in
its former liberty, and does no way partake in the changes of my fortune.
This first knowledge you give me of men, confirm's me in my intention of
hating them, if you persevere in yours; and this freedom you take to a Queen,
whom her disaster has brought into your hands, is a strong obstacle against
that esteem of them, you desire to work in me; therefore give over an
unprofitable care, and a more unprofitable affection, and believ I shall value
you as much, if you use your fortune generously; as I shall despise you, if it
encourage you to unjust liberties, and such as you cannot give your self
without unworthiness. Though Neobarzanes was stung with this answer, yet did
he not show himself much moved at it, and after having continued a while
silent, he only replied, I doubted you would not receiv this first overture
of my love without some displeasure, but I also hoped that time might sweeten
the sharpness of your first motions, and make you find that I may, without
offending you, or abusing the power I have over you, make you an offer of my
affections. Time (said I) shall never make me loos my first resolutions, nor
can it do any thing to your advantage, but by such usage as is due to Prisoners
of war of my quality. If you are my Prisoner of war (answered Neobarzanes) I
am your prisoner of love, and if you use me with any favor, I shall no longer
consider you as a Captive, but as the sovereign Mrs of my heart: Use me
(replied I tartly) as Thalestris, who within these few days has conquered you
in two set battles, and who by the defeating of your Forces, has showed her
self capable of another entertainment then that of your loves. Neobarzanes was
touched with these words, and answered me with a smile mingled with some
sharpness: You are capable both of war and of love, and will make both, if you
follow the course of your Predecessors, how great aversion soever they have
expressed in their government against men, they have not conserved themselves
without them, nor were you born your self withour their assistance. This
reproach made me blush for shame, and confirmed me in the dislike of that ill
custom which necessity had introduced amongst our women; whereupon I showed
Neobarzanes that I resented it, by these words: If my Predecessors have don
amiss, I will not imitate them, and though I were so base as to follow their
evil customs, or so imprudent as to abolish their good ones, and submit my self
to a man by lawful ways, I should never make choice of Neobarzanes. Time
(replied he, resing up) will inspire you with other thoughts, and mitigate
that cruel humor, which ill becom's so fair a person, I give you leisure
therefore to consider, and to reflect upon the condition you are in, and upon
what you do despise. He staid not for my answer, but making a low congie went
out of my Chamber, having first recommended me to the care of the women that
waited on me. IN remained in an anger, which it would be very difficult for
me to describe, and of all that day, I could not digest the words he had
said, nor his reproaches of our customs; This remembrance wrought so strong an
aversion in me, that I thought it impossible for me to endure his company a
second time, and I settled my self in the resolution of dying in his hands,
rather then to oblige him by the least favor, or by the least word, from whence
he could draw any advantage. The women that served me already bore me a
real affection, and were not so tied to Neobarzanes his interests, but that
they used all their endevors to give me some consolation. I continued five or
six days without his coming to see me, and I employed them in bewailing my
misfortune, as much as my courage would suffer me. Have I then (said I, when I
was pressed with the violence of my grief) banished my lovely, and my faithful
Orontes, to receiv Neobarzanes? and have I so ill used, and so ill requited
virtue, handsomness, and services, to recompense vice, ugliness, and scurvie
usage? Ah! if our laws were to be violated, sure it should be in favor of
Orontes, and not of Neobarzanes; This heart which defended it self, and that
too inhumanely against the charms of that lovely imposture, is proof against
the persecutions of a Barbarian, nor need it fear a second assault, having
escaped the first: let that cruel man arm himself with what soever rage can
produce, he shall find this soul in an unshaken seat, and since my cruel
destiny forbid's me to give my self to my dear Orithia, both Neobarzanes, and
all men living shall assault it but in vain. Discourses, and thoughts of this
nature were my ordinary entertainments, and though I bore my Captivity with
moderation enough, that remembrance often drew both sighs and tears from me. I
sometimes questioned my women, and endeavored to learn of them, if our Amazones
did not attempt something for my deliverance, or if Neobarzanes did not think
upon some treaty for my liberty; but whether it were that they knew it not, or
were enjoined silence, I could never get any information from them.

Some few days after, Neobarzanes came to me again, and as soon as he had
saluted me: Well Madam (said he) have you thought upon our last Discourse* and
have you slackn'd any thing of that severitie which make's you disdain my
affections? Neobarzanes (answered I) in what conditions soever you see me,
know that nothing is able to shake my resolutions, and that you ought to hope
for but little satisfaction, by your pernicious designs; not, but I am inclined
to peace with you, if you will make lawful propositions, nor would I to recover
my liberty, refuse a reasonable treaty, which may resettle our Territories in
that quietness you have disturbed; but if you have any other thoughts, banish
them for ever, and hope for nothing from a courage which misfortune cannot
deject. I hope (replied Neobarzanes) that you will hearken to reason, and to
the advantage of the offers I make you; but hope for no liberty Thalestris, by
any other treaty, then by that which I propose; and consider that I neither
abuse my fortune nor the power I have over you, by making propositions which
would be advantageous to you, though in perfect liberty: Your are not
ignorant, Madam, that in my affection to you, I may seek for help by all manner
of ways, and that the death of my Brother, and of so many thousand of my men,
does sufficiently dispense with me, if I have not those considerations which
are due to a person of your qualitive, and free's me from the reproaches I
might fear, for having used violence to a Captive, who is stained with blood
that was so dear to me. But Madam, to testify that my love to you is full of
a real esteem, I will only sue for yours by lawful means, and I will forget
you are my Prisoner to make you my wife; by this alliance we will unite our
Provinces, we will give your women lawful husbands, and abolish customs that
are enemies to Nature, and detested both by the gods and men, to live in a more
reasonable society, and in everlasting tranquillity. I knew very well, that
unworthie man made not that proposition out of any esteem he had of me, nor
out of any sens of virtue, but that finding advantages to himself, by the
alliance he offered me, which he could neither hope for by my death, nor by
using violence, he was fallen upon that thought, not being in a condition,
after so great losses, to profit any other way by having taken me, nor to
conquer a Country, which I had not left destitute of persons able to defend it
against him. And indeed, I received that motion with the scorn it deserved, and
looking disdainfully upon him: Think not Neobarzanes (said I) that my
imprisonment has so far abased my heart, as to find any advantage in the
offers you make me. I am a Queen by birth and virtue, both of them are wanting
in thee, and thou art indebted to fortune, and to the goodness of Darius for
that greatness, which thy base submission to Alexander has since conserved;
It Is not for thee our laws shall be abolished; and if the gods (continued I
with a sigh) had so decreed it, that alteration was reserved for another, not
Neobarzanes. He was so netled with this answer, that he sat a long time
without reply, witnessing his irresolution by the diverse changes of his
countenance; but in the end, after having darted an angry look at me: Well,
well, Thalestris (said he) since you disdain my offer, dispose your self to
satisfy me by other ways, this shall never be proposed to you again; and
you may be assured, I will no longer neglect the power I have over you. He
pronounced these words with a thundering voice, and went out of my Chamber,
without giving me the leisure to reply.

I was so enraged at this Discourse, that of a long time I was not capable of
any reason; but I presently recovered my ordinary resolution, and that
inviolable design of dying for the defense of what he threatened; the women
that waited on me, gave me counsel to mollify him, and dissemble part of my
thoughts, which I discoverd with too much sharpness; they represented to me,
that by that fierceness, I should without doubt stir him up to the violence I
ought to apprehend, and that by managing him with more dexterity, I might
perchance banish those pernicious designs: I esteemed their advice very
prudent, and sometimes was minded to follow it; but as soon as that barbarous
fellow presented himself before me, as he did every day, I had much adoo to
restrain the motions of my anger, and of my just displeasure. Yet did I
dissemble them now and then, and suffered his persecutions a whole month without
driving him to extremity; sometimes he flattered me; from flatteries he
often fell to threats, but his threats and flatteries were equally
unprofitable. When he was fully assured of that, and had lost all hope of
satisfying his desires by gentle means, he resolved upon the violence which
he had till then deferred; and coming into my Chamber with that intention, he
made signs to my women to withdraw, and when he was alone with me, having
eied me awhile with a wandering look; It is no longer time Thalestris (said
he) to dissemble my last intention, I am weary of suffering a pain, which I
can remedy my self, and of suing vainly to her whom I can compel to satisfy
me: I have made you offers, which you imprudently have disdained, and I will
offer you nothing now, but the choice of death, or of my love. Though these
words surprised me extremely, yet was I not at all in doubt what answer I
should return, but looking upon him with more scorn then ever: Thy threats
(said I) cannot terrify me, I prefer death before thy affection, and all
manner of tortures before that satisfaction thou demandest. Since thou desire
death (replied he) thou shall have it, and saying so, he rose up, and drawing
a dagger which he wore concealed, he lift up his arm to strike it into my
breast. Notwithstanding, I was very indifferent in matter of life, yet was it
not so odious to me, as to give that Monster the contentment of taking it
away, and remembering that I had tried his strength before, I flew upon him, and
with my left hand stopping his arm, which was up to stab me, I with my other,
which was free, caught hold about his middle, and after some struggling laid
him in the floor: I quickly wrung the dagger out of his hand, and was presently
in a condition, to tear away his infamous life without any difficulty; but
that base wretch who loved it more then I did, was afraid of loosing it, and
begged it of me with word's, which sufficiently testified the meanness of his
spirit; although he was unworthie of that mercy, I thought him also unworthie
to receiv death from my hands, and instantly making my self Mistress of my just
resentment: Rise coward (said I) thou deservest neither death nor pardon from
Thalestris, and therefore she will give thee neither, but leave's thee a life,
which she cannot, without dishonor, take from such an one as thou art; thou
knew before my strength was above thine, and thou shall know now that my
goodness is equal to thy baseness. Neobarzanes made me no answer at all, but
casting down his eyes full of shame, and confusion, he went out of my Chamber,
and left me Mistress of the dagger I had wrested from him: If I had been in
another estate, this adventure would have afforded matter of laughter, and
there was cause enough to deride a man, who so weakly attempted such high
Enterprises; but the condition I was then reduced to, made me insensible of
any diversion, and would not suffer me to draw any joy from the disgrace of
that detestable villain, nor from the advantage I had over him. The women who
attended on me, who came running at the nois, and who were witnesses of part
of the business, believed that Neobarzanes would have some sens of the mercy I
had showed him, and that without doubt he would be touched with a favor he
had so little deserved; but I knew his baseness too well, to expect any good
from him, and it was rather for my own satisfaction, then for that hope, I had
let him live. I remained three or four days without seeing him, or hearing
from him; and I began to believ there might be some amendment in him; when I
was surprised with the accident I am going to relate, and reduced to very great
extremities. I was in my bed, where I tasted that little repose my disquiets
would suffer me, when two hours before day, I was wakened by a dread^ul nois
in the street, I ask't my women what the matter was, but they were as ignorant
of it as I, and my windows were so grated, that there was no possibility of
looking out to see: while I was in some trouble by reason of that nois, which
still redoubled with horrible cries; I heard a loud knocking at my door, the
first blow was followed with many others, which made me find they had an
intent to break it open. I was unwilling to be caught in bed, and casting a
loos coat hastily about me, I leapt into the floor, and presently laid hold of
Neobarzanes his dagger, being resolved to defend my life, or mine honor to my
last breath: Scarce was I gotten into this posture, when my Chamber door was
beaten open, and by the help of certain watch candles, which I always kept
burning by night for fear of some such surprise; I saw Neobarzanes com in with
his sword drawn, accompanied with a great many of his Followers in the same
equipage. I straightway doubted of his cruel intention, and in a moment
confirmed my self in the resolution I had taken. As Soon as he perceived me,
Thalestris (cried he with a terrible voice) I must die, since my hopes are
dead, and since I loos thee and my self, I will keep thee from laughing and
triumphing at my ruin: He had hardly ended these words, when he flew
directly at me, and without giving me leisure to reproach his ingratitude,
after the mercy I had showed him, he made a thrust at me, which had run me
quite through, if I had not bowed my body to avoid it, I escaped that danger
by stooping suddenly, and striking up the point of his sword with the dagger I
held in my hand, I made it slip over my shoulder, and running under it, I
seized upon the guard with my left hand, and with my right, I stabbed the
dagger into his breast unto the very hilt: That perfidious wretch fell dead at
my feet, and his sword remaining in my hand, I set my self to dispute my life
against those that were com along with him; they all turned their points upon
me, and made me see they meant to revenge the death of their Prince by mine;
the two first that advanced, I quickly laid at the feet of their Companions,
and made them judge that though I was but a woman, and in my smock, they should
not effect their purpose without difficulty; I retired to the wall, that I
might not be assaulted behind; and those cowardly villains making a half
circle about me, began to press me so furiously, that I utterly despaired of
safety, I defended my self nevertheless, like a wild bore against so many
hounds, and sometimes rushing forward at those that were most eager upon me, I
made them fly back to the other side of the Chamber, and gave them both terror
and death it self, in the midst of thirty swords that environed me; but in
the end, my resistance would have been unprofitable, and feeling my self
wounded in dive^s places, I also found my strength began to fail me, and that
I prolonged my destiny but in vain, when we heard a great nois upon the
stairs, and saw a great many com in armed, who charging those base fellows that
were about me, presently gave some of them what they deserved; the Leader of
them did the greatest execution, and striking no blows that were not mortal,
quickly covered the floor with blood, and with dead bodies: When they had made
themselves a passage to com to me, Courage (cried one of my Defenders) Courage,
Madam, you are delivered, and your enemies are destroyed; being very well
acquainted with that voice, I presently knew to be my faithful Hippolita's,
and I soon observed, they were my Amazones from whom I received that
assistance. When I saw my self so well succored, I felt my forces redouble,
and desiring to have a share in my revenge I joined my self to my valiant
deliverers, and with them finished what they had so courageously begun, all our
Enemies lost their lives, and our Amazones (among whom I had already
discovered Menalippa, and many others) were so exasperated against them, that
they gave no quarter; My Chamber was then a spectacle full of horror; and the
blood which flowed on all sides, in which one might see a great number of
bodies swim, which had newly expired, or were yet expiring, was able to strike
fear, and terror into the most resolved minds.

After this execution, my gallant rescuers took off all their mask's, and
embraced my knees one after another, with words and actions which visibly
expressed the ardent affection they had ever born me; but I was so weakened by
the loss of blood, which ran down still from my wounds, and by the weariness of
so long and so unequal a fight, that I had hardly strength to embrace them, or
sens to know them, yet did I hear Menalippa among the rest, who speaking for
them all, said; Madam, you are free, and as much Mistress in this City, as in
Themiscira* it is in your own power by the assistance of the gods, and the valor
of your Amazones who have taken it, and all your Enemies are either dead, or
dying. I judged by this Discourse that the Town had been taken by surprise, and
that that was the cause of the nois we had heard in the streets, and of
Neobarzanes his rage, not doubting but that my women would revenge my injuries
with a great deal of blood, and that they would extirpate a people innocent of
the wrongs I had received; I desired to stop those proceedings, and getting a
little loos from their embrace; My dear friends (said I) I hold my life from
the god's, and from you, let us not stir them up against us, after the mercy
we have received, and let us not dishonor our victory by an excess of
cruelty; there is blood enough shed already; if any of our enemies be yet
alive, let them have quarter given them, and let those be spared who ceas to
make resistance. Clytemnestra went presently away to execute that Order, and my
faithful Hippolita, upon whom I leaned, feeling me ready to sink in her arms,
took me up, with some other of her companions, to carry me to bed. There was
no likelihood of putting me again into my own, nor of staying in a Chamber
full of blood, and dead bodies; but another was found by the assistance of the
women that served me, who at the beginning of our fight had hid themselves in a
Closet, whence they were fetched out in a terrible fear, but I reassumed them,
and promised them all manner of good usage; they brought me into the best
Chamber there was, where being got to bed, my wounds searched, were not found
dangerous, and my Chyrurgians, who had don their part in my deliverance, having
applied their first remedies to them, left me to my rest, while Menalippa by
my command, went to quiet the disorders in the Town, and to do what was
requisite in such encounters. I rested that small remainder of the night, and
the day following without being interrupted, no body coming into my Chamber
but only Hippolita, and some women, who were necessary to wait upon me, and
with whom I had no discourse, by reason of the charge my Chyrurgians had given
me to the contrary; but night being com, I called Hippolita to my bedside,
and having embraced her many times with expressions of my former kindness, I
asked her diverse questions, and desired her to relate the taking of the Town,
but she would not obey me, praying me to take my rest; you are not yet well
enough Madam (said she) to hold discourse, have patience but to night, and to
morrow I will give you an exact account of all you can demand. I was willing to
be advised by her, and making my curtains be drawn, I spent the night as I
had don the day, but with great show of amendment, and more quietness of mind,
then I had felt of many months. The next morning Hippolita came to my bedside,
and having bidden me good morrow, I commanded her to tell me, what she had
deferred the day before. I am readily disposed to satisfy you Madam (said
she) and if what I have to say, could have been heard by you without
alteration, I would not have delai'd to give you contentment; but I beseech you
be pleased to let me send these maids out of the Chamber, that I may
entertain you with the more liberty. I gave her leav to do as she desired, and
Hippolita, bidding them withdraw, remained alone with me, and being by my
command set down close by my bed, she spoke to me on this manner.

When your Majesty engaged your self in the pursuit of Neobarzanes, I was not
one of the last that followed you, and I should certainly have had the same
fate with my companions, if the gods, who reserved me to serve you more
profitably then I could have don in that encounter, had not suffered my horse to
fall dead between my legs, of certain wounds he had received in the fight; by
this accident I was deprived of the means of waiting upon you, and reduced to a
necessity of turning back afoot into the body we had left standing upon the
place of battle; I there found the dismal relics of a bloody day, and a
thousand images of terror and desolation; of thirty thousand women we had
brought from Themiscira, we had not ten thousand remaining, the greater part
whereof were wounded, and unfit for service. The enemies had lost twenty
thousand men in that last battle, and those two defeates had left them only
those few soldiers, who took refuge in this City, I found the Camp in an
allarm, for your Majesty's absence, but it increased, when the night was com,
and that they heard no news of you; a great many went scattring from their
Troops in search of you, and I assure you I was none of the backwardest, but
all the night having been vainly spent about it, the whole Camp was filled with
cries, and an universal consternation; All the next day was bestowed in the
same imploiment, and the remnant of the Army, divided it self into above
fifty several companies to seek you. To what purpose should I detain you in
this Discourse, or with the general, and my particular complaints? the third
day, it was thought fit to send a trumpet hither, to learn whether you were
dead, or a Prisoner; and in case you were alive, to make propositions for your
liberty, which they promised to get you to ratify. I would needs go along with
the trumpet; and the Law of Nations, which our enemies had not yet forgotten,
gave us access to this Town, and to Neobarzanes. When they had blinded us, we
were brought before him, and as soon as we opened our mouths to enquire after
you, your Queen is living (said he) but her condition is little better then if
she were dead; Hope not for her liberty any manner of way, and get you gone
presently out of my Territories, unless you will have me violate a law that
give's you some assurance amongst us. We desired permission to see our Queen,
but it was refused us, and we returned from this Town without carrying any
thing, but the confirmation of your life, and of your Captivity. I am not able
to tell you, Madam, which was the greater in my mind, and in the minds of all
your subjects, the joy to know you were alive, or the sorrow to hear you were
in the power of a pitiless enemy. Yet did we prefer the latter before the
former, and though the report of Neobarzanes's harsh nature, and his late
losses made us in fear for you, we believed nevertheless, that if he had any
knowledge, or any sens of honor, he would have such considerations both of the
royal dignity, and of your beauty, as would be able to take away part of
his savageness. Yet this belief made us not so confident, but that we still
had terrible apprehensions, and all the Camp was in such grief and desolation,
as it would be impossible for me to represent. The remainders of our Army
were not in a condition to attempt your deliverance, nor to assault a Town, in
which all the forces the enemy had left were shut up together. Five or six
days having been wasted in fruitless deliberations, another trumpet was sent,
in hope that Neobarzanes's anger might be appeased, and that he might hearken
to propositions then, which in his heat he had rejected; but that Monster
would not so much as see her, and forbad her, upon pain of death, to com any
more within his quarters. This second refusal made us despair of so speedy a
deliverance, and after new consultations, Menalippa, who commanded our forces,
gave us order to dis-encamp and retire near some of our Towns, there to expect
new supplies from Themiscira, with which it was resolved, we should attempt
your deliverance, and the recoverie of this City by open force. Clytemnestra
went away to hasten up the supplies which were reserved for an extremity, and
we remained near Callira, whither we sent our wounded women, and gave order
to recruit our troops, with all imaginable diligence. My sorrow for your being
taken was so great, that I took no care, to have a slight hurt or two dressed,
which I had received in the battle, but the entreaties of my friends having
prevailed over my will, I was constrained to suffer the remedies that were
given me, and to consent to the preservation of a life, which I could not
value without you; and which I would not have kept, if the hope of your
liberty had forsaken me. I will not entertain you with our imploiments at
that Town, and will only tell you that after three weeks stay there, we heard
that Clytemnestra, whose diligence was to be admired, was already upon her
march, and drawing near us with her supplies. This news raised our spirits, and
we resolved to advance boldly to this City, and perish under the walls of it,
or purchase the liberty of our Queen with the price of our blood. The day that
our sorces were augmented by that addition, being entered alone into a wood,
upon the edg whereof we were encamped, to entertain my humor, which your
misfortune had made pensive, and melancholy, when I had walked there awhile, I
heard one that followed me call Hippolita, Hippolita! That voice made me
stop, and turning toward that side where I had heard it, I saw a woman com a
great pace after me, as she drew nearer, me thought I knew her face, and
when she was within such a distance, that I could discern her plainly, and
recall her features into my memory, I knew her (shall I tell you Madam?) I knew
her to be the fained, and the generous Orithia.

I could not hear this discourse, and the name of Orithia without an inward
trembling, nor without interrupting Hippolita* by crying out, O gods Hippolita,
What do you tell me? I tell you a truth Madam, (answered Hippolita) Ah!
Hippolita, (said I) do not abuse me, and believ that I am not able to pardon
such a deceit. I deceiv you not Madam, (replied Hippolita) and if you will have
but a minutes patience, this astonishment will ceas, to give place to a more
reasonable one. Ah! Hippolita (said I) suffer me to doubt of the truth of your
report; What, is Orithia com back amongst us, when we least expected her, and
when she was most necessary to me? You shall hear the truth (answered
Hippolita) if you will give me leav to continue my relation: Make an end
(replied I) but make an end presently, for I am no longer in a condition to
lend thee quiet attention, and thou have so surprised me, that I have scarce
any sens, or underastnding left.

I am not able Madam (pursued Hippolita) to tell you how much I was astonished
at so unexspected an encounter, I was struck dumb with wonder at that sight,
and though I knew Orithia to be a man, I suffered her to embrace and kiss me
as she had formerly don, without defending my self against her expressions of
kindeness; and I confess moreover though your Majesty may blame me for it,
that I could not forbear to repay her a part of them, nor to use her as that
Orithia, who had been so dear to you, and to whom you had so great obligations.
I was at last something ashamed at my easiness, and withdrawing my self from
her embraces, Ah! Orithia (cried I) is it your self? yes (answered Orontes)
it is I my self, and I know you to be too dear unto my Princess, to believ,
that you are now ignorant who I am. It Is true Orontes (said I) I know you, the
Queen has concealed nothing from me, and I am indeed the only body that can
boast of that advantage. The Gods be praised, (added Orontes) it is with that
belief I have sought you out, and that I have addressed my self to you, before
I showed my self to your companions, and it is upon the confidence I have in
your goodness, that I cast my self now into your arms, that I may find some
opportunity by your means, of doing my Princess service, or of dying for her,
as I have always lived for her: the Gods have preserved my life for that
purpose, and have not suffered me to lose it, knowing it might yet be useful
to her, to whom I have given it entirely. But, O dear Hippolita, what may I
hope for from you? will you consider me as an enemy after the deceit I have
used, and after the owning of a sex, against which you have so great an
aversion? or will you still preserv some remainder of that goodness to me,
whereof I have received so many testimonies? I was much troubled what answer I
should make, both by reason I was ashamed to be so easily reconciled to a man,
and to promiss him my assistance, after the marks you had shown him of your
anger, and by reason of my uncertaintie whether you would approve of what I
did; but when I remembered your last thoughts of him, your sorrow for his loss,
and the affection you really bore him, and when to that remembrance, I added
the consideration of those services we might receiv from him in the design of
procuring your liberty, at a time when that valor, he had so often tried to
your advantage, was so necessary for us; I believed I should not disserv you,
in keeping him amongst us, by the hope of those good offices I might do him.
This thought, was the cause that after I had been long silent, I at last
replied; I will never be against you Orontes, and though my knowledge of your
sex might excuse me, if I should not do what you may desire from me; yet that
of your virtue which make's you dear to the whole world, and that of your
ardent affection to the Queen, whereof you ought to give her proofs in a season
when she has so much need of them, oblige me particularly to serve you; I
would it pleased the Gods, we were in such a condition that I might do it, but
I hope we shall quickly be so by your assistance, and my hopes are strongly
raised by your return. You may continue amongst us, with the same assurance as
you did before your departure, you are known to no creature here but me, and
if you show your self to my companions, you will certainly be received by them
as Orithia, whose memory is very dear to them, and at whose loss they were so
sensibly afflicted. Orontes having returned me such thanks, as he thought due
to the offers I made him, was willing to follow my counsel, and after many
other discourses, the length whereof hinder's me from repeating them, we went
together into the Camp: As soon as he appeared there, the first that knew his
face, cried out that Orithia was com again, and that report flying from one to
another, was in a little time spread through the whole army. We went to
Menalippa's tent, and she received her with demonstrations of friendship, and
respect, which had never been rendered to any but to her, and instantly after,
all the principal women of the army, running by troops to see her, received her
as a Goddess sent from heaven for our assistance, and for the safety of our
Queen, there was hardly one but would needs kiss her hand, and all cried out
that their Queen was now as good as at liberty, since the Gods had restored
Orithia to them; she spent all that day in receiving welcoms and civilities,
and after Clytemnestra's arrival with her supplies, Menalippa would have put
the command of the army into her hands, but Orithia refused it very modestly,
and being urged to it by the general entreaties, she was contented to share
it with her. Presently they fell to consider what should be attempted for your
deliverance; Men^lippa, Clytemnestra, and my self with all the rest, were of
opinion to besiege this Town, having already sufficient forces to undertake it,
and knowing that the supplies Neobarzanes expected were not yet arrived, we
believed this Town, being ill fortified and ill provided, might be taken by
force, before their coming, which according to the distance of places, could
not be very sudden. But when Orithia had hearken^d to our propositions; I do
not doubt (said she) my valiant Companions, but that you will successfully
perform what you shall undertake, and I believ this City may be as soon taken
as viewed, by persons of so great courage; but friends, you do not remember,
that the Queen is in our enemies hands, and that when he see's himself brought
to extremity, he will expose her first to the fury of your arrows, either to
save himself, and stop the course of your arms by that consideration, or to
revenge his losses upon a person whom we so dearly value. I beseech you, let
us think upon her conservation, and since we have taken up arms for her alone,
let us save her from a destruction, which the rage of that cruel man would make
inevitable. We may more easily carry the Town by a surprise in the night, then
by a formed siege, and we may march in the dark so secretly, and so warily,
that we may be upon the walls, before the enemies so much as suspect it. It
is hard for them to have any spies amongst us, they have no women adventrous
enough to take that employment, and 'twill be very difficult for men to
conceal themselves amongst our forces, if all the Officers take care to look
exactly amongst those under their command; by that order we shall be secure,
I pray you let it be observed, and let the care of this enterprise be left to
me, who with the assistance of the Gods, and of your valor, promise you an
infallible success in it. All we that were of the Counsel, approved Orithia's
design, and admired her prudence, we instantly resolved to follow it, and the
Officers having received such Orders carefully overlooked all the women they
commanded, whose faces were never so little unknown to them. After this
precaution, among fifteen, or sixteen thousand, whereof our army was composed,
beside those we had left wounded at Callira, Orithia chose out eight thousand
for the effecting of her enterprise, leaving the rest to Clytemnestra with
order not to set forward, till three days after our departure. From the place
where we were, we had four days march unto this Town, and Orithia having
informed her self by those who best knew the country, in what places we might
lie concealed while we were upon the way, caused our little army to take
victual for six days, leaving the rest to the forces that followed us, and
which were to arrive two days after us. She made provision of ladders,
brush-faggots, and all necessaries for her design, and having carefully taken
order for every thing, and visited all her self in person, as soon as night was
com, we began to march, being guided by women of the country, who were
perfectly acquainted with all the by-passages, and at break of day we made a
halt in a wood far from the high ways, and on the edges of it we set forth
Corpse de guard, to keep our selves from being discovered; we rested there all
that day, and the night following continued our march, advancing with the same
order, and the same diligence; we made a stop again as soon as day appeared,
and so marching only by night, and seizing indifferently upon all persons we
met, we arrived near this Town, two hours within the fifth night; it was
neither very clear, nor very cloudy, but dark enough to favor our approach, and
light enough to give us the means to know, and disc^rn objects, as much as was
necessary. When we were within a few furlongs of the Town, we met some scouts
which the enemy had abroad, but they were so surprised by ours, who had
prepared themselves for that encounter, that it was impossible for them to get
away, and carry news unto the Town, of our arrival. After they were all killed,
or taken, and that Orithia by those that escaped the fury of our women, had
learned how the Town-guards were ordered, and how little care Neobarzanes's
love had left him for the conservation of the place, she divided the army into
four bodies, giving the first to Menalippa, the second to Arethusa, and the
third to Amalthea, keeping the fourth her self, with a design to storm the Town
in four several places; Menalippa had order to give the allarm on her side,
which was that we came in, to draw the enemies thither* while Orithia took a
compass to fall on at her post, and while Amal^hea, and Arethusa drew off to
the right, and left hand, to make their assaults where they were appointed. You
know that the situation of this Town, which she had formerly taken her self,
was not unknown to her, and that she was acquainted with all the avenues, and
the weakest places; for my part I desired to fight near her, and leaving
commands to them of riper years, I kept inseparably with her. All things were
executed as she had given directions, Menalippa came up boldly to the Town,
and being presently discovered by the sentinels, gave a very hot allarm;
faggots were instantly thrown into the moat, and some ladders clapped to the
walls, which (as it was believed it would) made the greatest part of the
soldiers that were within run withal speed unto that place: when Menalippa
had engaged them in fight, she followed the order that had been given her, and
knowing that place whither most of the enemies forces were drawn, would be too
difficult to be entered, before the rest were assaulted, she managed the
business discreetly, and contented her self with holding them in play, and
drawing them thither more and more, without running on headlong to no purpose.
In the mean time we arrived at our post, and Orithia causing the moat to be
filled up in little time, and finding the curtine almost quite unmann'd, she
set a ladder her self, and scaled the walls with her sword in her hand, as
proud Capaneus, that despiser of the Gods, and of their thunder, did at the
siege of Thebes; or as ambitious Briareus climbed mountains heaped upon one
another to defeat the Gods. We followed her with a resolution little different
from her, and endeavored to imitate a valor, whereof in spite of darkness, she
gave us a thousand proofs. The place where we fell on, was not so unfurnished
of soldiers to defend it, but that we found a stout resistance; yet Orithia's
courage overcame all difficulties, and after a combat obstinately disputed,
many ladders beaten down under her, and a shour of stones and arrows, sustained
upon her cask, and upon her shield, she got to the top of the wall, and laying
hold of one of the battlements threw her self lightly up; then instantly by a
cry of victory, inviting us to follow her, she struck a terror into the
hearts of our enemies, and presently after sent death amongst them, both by the
blows of her sword, and by the falls she gave them, from the top of the walls
into the street; as soon as they saw her, accompanied with a small number of
us, they lost courage, and leaping down themselves, or flying away in disorder,
left the wall without defense, and gave the rest of our women leisure to get up
without any opposition; within a short space all our Brigade was in the Town,
and Orithia marching at the head of us all bloody, led us to those places,
where there was yet any resistance, and charging the enemies in the rear,
carried utter destruction, and despair amongst them. Why should I keep you in a
needless relation? the victory was ours on all sides, and Menalippa having
opened her self a way by our assistance, Amalthea, and Arethusa found little
opposition, and were quickly gotten into the Town. Then it was, the streets
began to be overflowed with blood, and that our women glutted themselves with
the revenge they so eagerly had thirsted after. All the men were put to the
sword, nor was it in Orithia's power to save them from the fury of our
Viragoes, that was all her business, when she found they no longer resisted,
and though your interest had stirred up a most violent anger in her, she could
not behold those spectacles of cruelty, without being touched with much
compassion. She enquired every where for you, and promised pardon aloud, to
whoso^ver could bring her where you were; no body hearkened to her amidst
those cries, that horror, and their first apprehensions; but coming to save the
life of one who seemed to be an Officer, Madam. (said he) in requital of your
goodness, I will do you a considerable service; com presently along with me,
if you will prevent the death of your Queen, whom desperate Neobarzanes, is
going to kill with his own hands, if you run not instantly to rescue her.
Orithia enraged as a Lioness, at this news, followed the man, and promising him
excessive rewards, if she could save you by his means, was speedily guided to
this house, and got into your chamber time enough, to do you a service of the
same nature with those you had already received from her.

Scarce did I give Hippolita leisure to make an end of this discourse, but cried
out, O Gods! Hippolita, what do thou tell me? was it Orontes then, to whom I
am yet once more endebted for my life, was it Orontes himself, whom I saw do so
many wonders for my safety, at the head of our women, and was it Orontes, who
projected, managed, and executed this enterprise? 'Twas even Orontes himself
(answered Hippolita) nor had he vanished from your sight without making
himself known, but for fear of displeasing you, after the rigorous commands you
had laid upon him; beleiving, unfortunate man, that he had not don enough for
the expiation of his crime; he came only to save you, not to present himself
to you, and though your kind remors, and last inclinations were not unknown to
him, he durst not hazard himself in that presence, from whence you had
banished him for ever. How, Hippolita (replied I extremely moved) are not my
last inclinations unknown to him, and from whom did he learn them? From me
Madam (answered she coldly) to whom you imparted them. What, (said I, raising
my voice with an angry tone) have you then told Orontes, my sorrow for his
absence, and the affection which I really have born him since his departure? It
is true Madam (answered Hippolita) that I told him all, to comfort him in his
affliction, and to animate him in an enterprise upon which your safety
depended; the fidelity of his love, touched me with a sens of pity, and I
believed I ought no longer to conceal his happiness from him who gave us his
life so liberally. I am not able Sr, to represent the trouble, these words
produced in me, nor how much I was ashamed to see my passion discovered. It
was impossible for me to dissemble it, and looking upon Hippolita with an
angry eye, Ah! thou indiscreet, and disloiall wench (cried I) is this the care
thou have of my reputation, and have thou made this use of a secret wherewith I
so freely trusted thee? have thou thus fixed an eternal reproach upon my days,
and will thou make me blush for ever, for a fault which I discovered to none
but thee alone? Ah! never hope for pardon from me, nor let him for whom thou
have dishonored me, ever expect any, for the confusion he make's me suffer
by his imprudence; this last service might have obtained it, both for his
disobedience, and for his former faults; but my reputation, whereof thou have
been so lavishly prodigal, forbid's ever to see him any more, who not content
to have displeased me by his love, to have deceived me by his disguise, and
to have disobeyed me by his return, has known to my shame that he had made
me sigh, that he had made me in love, and that he had made me foolish; Ah!
no Hippolita, let him never com before me again; if he be innocent of thy
fault, he is guilty of mine, and I am resolved yet once more to banish him,
who to aggravate all his crimes, has learned from thy mouth, that I loved him;
I had rather put my self again into the condition from which he has delivered
me, then be obliged to see him, because I am engaged to him for my life; go
thy ways therefore indiscreet Hippolita, go and repair thy fault, by
forbidding him to see me, and resolv either to free me from his sight, or to
absent thy self from mine for ever. I ended these words, with so loud a voice,
that they were easily to be heard into the next chambers; and Hippolita, who
knew my weakness, and my first motions very well, seemed but little moved with
them, and when she had heard me patiently, of a sudden putting her
handkerchief to her eyes, Ah! Madam, (said she) how lawful is your anger; and
it is with a great deal of justice, the Gods have taken away this unfortunate
man from your resentment; it is well for him the destinies have called him
hence, since, after so many services you prepared him so unworthie a compence;
be no longer offended Madam, be no longer in choler against that unhappie
man; he is rather in a condition to draw tears from you, then imprecations,
and the death he has newly suffered for you, secure's him from all your
anger, and satisfie's you for all the offenses you have received from him. I
was so troubled at this discourse, that I could not permit the continuation of
it, and turning suddenly toward Hippolita, How, (said I) Hippolita, is Orontes
dead? He is, Madam, (answered Hippolita sadly) and with my own eyes I saw him
breathe out his life, of those wounds he received, for your deliverance; his
blood has washed away our common faults, and his last words, were the first
he spoke to me, to assure you that he died yours, and that he died with
glory, and satisfaction, since he was so happy as to die for you. These
words went so near me, that I lost both sens and knowledge, and my strength
forsaking me, I remained cold, and in a swoun in Hippolita's arms, she would
not call in help, but running to water that stood in my chamber, threw so much
of it in my face, that she fetched my spirits again; no sooner did I open my
eyes, and my mouth, but I employed them in tears, and cries, and not believing
my self longer in an estate to dissemble my grief, or rather my despair, I did
all the actions, and spoke all the words that could be expected from those who
are most deeply touched with it. Dear Orontes (cried I) art thou dead then, and
does this wretched woman, who is indebted to thee for two lives, survive thy
death? Have thou yielded up that faithful soul, which my ingratitude was not
able to repuls from an affection I had so little deserved, and did thou
return from these places whither my cruelty had confined thee, to accompany
the life thou regavest me, with the loss of thine own? Ah! cruel, if there
were a necessity of thy dying, why diedst thou not far from hence, and of some
death unknown to me; and why came thou, to open those wounds again, by this
last effect of thy love, which time had already half closed up; I had suffered
enough for thee before, and yet would thou aggravate my sorrows by the last
my heart was capable to feel? Yes, dear Orontes, this shall be the last of all
my afflictions, and if by my ingratitude I have made my self unworthie of thy
love, I will testify to thee by my death, that I am not insensible of that
affection, wherewith thou mai'st lawfully upbraid me. I accompanied these
words with so many sighs, that one must have been extreme hard-hearted, not to
be moved with some compassion; but Hippolita used reproaches to me, in stead of
consolations, and abusing the affection I bore her, you are to blame, Madam,
(said she) to afflict your self for a thing you had before decreed, and
whereof the Gods have saved you the labor; it is much better that Orontes died
of his wounds, then if you had killed him your self, after this last service
he has don you; a second banishment would certainly have been his death; you
are at least exempt from those complaints, which you must justly have expected
from him, and you ought not to bewail the loss of that, which perchance you
would refuse yet, if the Gods would restore it you. I took these words very ill
from Hippolita, and looking sidewaies upon her, Cruel girl (said I) renew not
my sorrows by thy reproaches; and since thou give me my death by a recital,
which thou might have disguised from me, prepare thy self to see me part
from thee for ever; thou could have concealed, not only Orithia's death,
but even her return also, if thou had been so minded; but since thou were
willing her death should be known to me, thou ought likewise to be willing
I should accompany her to her grave; never speak word to me therefore of
consolation, but represent my ingratitude to me, if thou can, in a blacker,
and more hideous form, to make my death the more sorrowful, and the more
painful. Since Orontes is dead, I make this last true confession, that I loved
him, and yet love his memory, more then my self, and though thy indiscretion
made me something displeased with him, his last services, and my own
inclination were able to have reconciled me, and I should without doubt have
pardoned all, to my dear deliverer, to my dear Orithia, or rather to that
dearer half of my own heart. Pardon her then Madam (said a voice which I heard
at my bed's head) pardon this happy Orithia, who despise's all other wounds,
since she can die of nothing but of love. These words, and the tone of the
voice that spoke them, made me cast my eyes toward the place whence they came,
and turning about I saw Orithia upon her knees, close by the other side of my
bed. At this second surprise I was almost like to have fainted, as I had don at
the former, and I was instantly assaulted with such different motions, that I
remained in a manner void of understanding. I was as sensible of joy for
Orontes his life, as it was fit in reason I should be, but I was so vexed to
have been so maliciously deceived by Hippolita, and so out of countenance, for
having so openly declared a passion so full of violence, to Orontes, that my
shame and anger wanted not much of equalling my satisfaction; I was two or
three several times ready to break forth into indignation, both against
Orontes, and against Hippolita, to punish their last deceits, by an eternal
banishment, and my own imprudence by the most sensible displeasure I could
possibly receiv. My mouth was open, to pronounce that last sentence to Orontes,
but my inclination, strengthened by the last service he had rendered me, was
too powerful to suffer it, and being likewise too weak to overcom my shame,
and to declare my self more openly, I continued in these terms, and those two
passions being equally suspended, kept me irresolute, silent and unmovable.
In the interim Orontes being still upon his knees, and not daring to lift up
his eyes toward my face, made an end of overcoming me by his words. I com not,
Madam, (said he) to draw any advantage from a confession you have made in
favor of me: besides, that that happiness was above my hopes, I have made my
self unworthie of it by my deceits, and by my disobedience; but my deceits have
not wanted punishment, though they might justly have been exempted, because they
wanted not excuse; nor is my disobedience without some pretense, since that I
might not fail in performing the command wherewith you forbad me ever to see
you again upon your territories, I have stayed till you were upon your enemies,
before I presented my self unto you; not that I am innocent, Madam, I confess I
am truly guilty, since I have offended you so many ways, and my services are
too highly rewarded by those tears, which the opinion of my death has drawn
from your fair eyes, all my blood is not of sufficient value to repay them, and
a thousand lives, if the Gods had given me so many, could not acquit me of
any part of so high an obligation; I com to submit the remainder of that one I
have, to the remainder of your displeasure. I com to lay at your feet that life
which shall never be but yours, and I will leav it there for your
satisfaction, rather then languish it out in absence from you: Envy me not
the felicity the gods have granted me, and be not angry, that from the
mouth of Hippolita, and from your own, I have learned that you have had some
sens of my misfortunes; it is a happiness, which only your goodness, and the
purity of my affection could procure me, but it is also a happiness, whereof I
will never make my self unworthie by my actions, and which I will receive as a
mercy which I had neither deserved nor pretended to. He said a great deal
more, and I gave him leisure enough, being in a confusion, which made me
unable to reply, and which scarce would suffer me to look upon him; I floated
a long time very much unresolved, and was in a conflict between love and shame,
which did not trouble me a little, and which put Orontes into no small
perplexity: but alas! I had so great an inclination to him, he had so many
ways obliged me, and accompanied his words with such a grace, that at last I
delivered up my arms, and putting forth my hand to him, with a blush which
bashfulness cast upon my face, you have got the victory Orontes (said I) but
abuse not your conquest, and spare my mouth a more ample confession. Gratitude,
pity, and even my inclination, forced these words from me; but I was so out
of countenance when I had spoken them, that not having the confidence to look
upon him, I turned my head on the other side, while Orontes, ravished with his
fortune, imprinted a thousand kisses upon my hand which I had given him, and by
words full of rapture, expressed the violence of his passion; but I could not
settle my self, nor digest the fault which I committed, and notwithstanding the
joy which his recoverie, and his constancy caused in me, when I remembered
that it was a man, to whom I granted that advantage; I who above all other
women had particular reasons to hate them, who ought to have fled from them by
the example of all my predecessors, and who could not suffer them without the
violation of our laws, and the loss of my Dominions, or without quitting the
resolution I had taken to exempt my self from the immodestie of our customs, I
was in such a perplexity, and confusion as you can hardly imagine. In the end
I made an attempt to overcom my shame, and to get out of that deep abashment;
and while Orontes upon his knees continued to make protestations of an eternal
fidelity, with more transport, then coherence in his discourse, I turned
toward him, and pulling back my hand, which I had let him hold till then, I
spoke to him on this manner. I know not Orontes, which way I should carry my
self to you; nor in what terms I can declare the condition of my soul. After
what you have heard from my own mouth, I can no longer say you are indifferent
to me; but if this accident, and Hippolita's indiscretion, had not laid open
my thoughts, you should never have known them; and if my sens of the
obligations I have to you, had not been as powerful in my heart, as my
inclination, I should never have consented to see you, after your knowledge of
my weakness; it is now but too much discovered to you, and I would it pleased
the Gods, that with the power I had over my self before, I had lost a life
which I can no longer preserv in its first estate, and in its first innocence;
not that this affection, wherewith I recompense the effects of yours, and which
I can no more dissemble, has any thing in it impure, or unbeseeming an
ordinary virtue; but yet it is very faulty, since it overthrow's our laws,
crosse's the last commands of the Queen my Mother; and in short, reduce's me
to such terms, that I neither know what I ought to do, nor what will become of
me. The Gods who have suffered the birth of it, shall, if they pleas, take
that care of its progress, which I give over to them, and will acknowledge,
since they are all just and clear-sighted, that I cannot keep to the strictness
of our laws, without offending more natural, and more ancient ones, which they
have established amongst us; nor be an exact Amazon, without being an
unsensible and an ungrateful woman. I desire you also Orontes, to consider it,
and to be so careful not to make an ill use of the fault you cause me to
commit, that I never may have any occasion to repent it. I ended these words
with so much confusion, that I scarce knew what I did, and Orontes received
them with so great show of joy, that of a long time he was not able to answer
me otherwise, then in that confused language wherewith he had already
entertained me, and which gave me a fuller assurance of his passion, then the
most eloquent expressions could have done; but when he had a little recovered
that first inward trouble, he spoke to me on this manner. The gods are my
witnesses, Madam, that I arrive this day at that supreme degree of happiness,
which I never proposed unto my self as other, then a prize above any reasonable
hope, and that I would not change a part of my fortune for all the advantages
of theirs; and I conjure them also to throw me down headlong from this glory,
to which your goodness raise's me, if since I had the honor to serve you, I
ever cherished, or considered my life, for any other reason, then because 'twas
yours, and if ever either fears, or difficulties have alienated my thoughts
from you for a moment. Both in my first felicities, and in my last misfortunes,
I always looked upon you as my only Divinity, and as my Divinity justly
provoked to wrath, and I consider you now as her who equally show's both the
power and the goodness, of that Divine nature. Continue therefore to be all
good, as you shall ever be all powerful, and if you think you are guilty of
any fault in having abased your self to a person so little worthy of your
affection, think also that if any excess be pardonable, it is that of
goodnesses; from that alone will I receive all your favors, and not from an
acknowledgment to which you are not obliged toward him, whose services were all
requited, by the glory of having don you them. I consider with you the
greatness of what you have don for me, and the obstacles the heavens oppose
against my highest happiness; but since they have hitherto favored me with
such extraordinary mercies, they will likewise assist me to the end, and I
from them hope for a conclusion of my love, as fortunate as the beginnings of
it have been wonderful; be but you pleased, Madam, not to oppose what they
shall do for me, (provided neither your virtue nor your dignity be engaged)
and suffer me to live with you as Orithia, till they shall produce occasions
whereby I may hope for a final change of my condition; I will live near you
with all the respect Orontes ow's unto Thalestris, from which Orithia, by your
consent, has sometimes been excused, and briefly I will remember I am Orontes,
that I may no longer pretend to those favors, which you heretofore granted to
Orithia. Orontes made an end of these words without stirring from the posture
in which he had still continued, and I found in them so much love, so much
respect, and (if I dare say so) so much justice, that I could refuse him
nothing he demanded. I should be too tedious in my story, if I should repeat
all our discourses upon that subject, the whole morning was spent in them, and
at last I consented he should stay with me under the habit of Orithia, since
his age might yet suffer him for some time, upon condition he should content
himself with seeing me, and talking with me, without hoping for greater
favors. After this permission, he appeared so well satisfied, that he could
hardly contain his joy, and having endeavored to express it a thousand ways,
he begged my pardon for the deceit of Hippolita; I was no longer able to
refuse it him, but granted it, after a gentle reproof. When we had conversed a
great while, I desired that Orontes, in stead of the feigned adventures he
formerly had told me, would then relate the truth of those that had befallen
him, as well before our acquaintance, as since our separation. As soon as I
expressed that curiosity, he was ready to obey me, and sitting down by my
bedside, began thus:

I shall not need to tell you again Madam, that my name is Orontes, nor that I
am Prince of the Massagets, and Nephew to the King of Scythia, upon whom that
Province depend's; You know these truths already; and concerning my birth, I
have nothing more to inform you. Neither will I enlarge my self in the
particulars of my infancy, which are not at all considerable, and whereof the
recital would be troublesome and impertinent; I will only say that I was bred
up in the Court of the King my Uncle, with his Son Orandates, a young Prince
whom the heavens have endowed with all the advantageous qualities they can
bestow, and who (if the effect answer to those hopes he has already given,
and to the beginnings of his life) must needs be now one of the most
accomplished men upon the earth. I was constantly with him all the time I lived
among the Scythians, and having been an inseparable companion in all his
exercises, I was so likewise of his first actions, and was so happy as to
receiv all the proofs of his friendship I could desire; to say the truth I bore
him such an affection as would not suffer me to part from him, and having no
father whose authority could recall me from the Court of the King my Uncle, I
there spent my younger years with a great deal of pleasure and satisfaction,
and was not yet sixteen, when the King having raised a mighty Army to go
against Darius, who had passed the Araxis with two hundred thousand men, took
his Son along with him in that expedition: I was too firmly tied to him, and
already too emulous of glory, to stay behind at Issedon while he went to
the wars, wherefore I departed with the whole Court, and the King putting me
(as young as I was) as the head of the Forces of my Country, gave me leav to
begin my apprentiship under him. I will not relate the particulars of that war,
there were two battles given, whereof the advantage was uncertain, and the lost
exceeding great on both sides; There passed many encounters, and many
skirmishes, and in those occasions Orondates and I made our first essaies, for
his part he did things whose memory still last's, and will for ever among the
Scythians; and I may say without vanity, that in my beginnings I had success
enough, and gained some reputation. In the end Darius weakened by the decay of
his forces, which were wasted by fighting and by sickness, repassed the Araxis
over many bridges of boats which he caused to be provided; and King Matheus
gave order we should pass it after him, and make the seat of the war in his
territories. I was one of the forwardest to obey him, and marching at the head
of my troops, I engaged my self with them in that passage, where I suffered (as
it has since proved) a happy shipwreck, and died in the opinion of all those
that knew me. Scarce had I crossed part of the river, when the boats whereof
our bridge was composed, being broak loos from one another, the planks sunk
under us, and the foremost of my men fell with me into the stream, which as I
believ devoured a great many of them. The weight of my arms, though they were
not very heavy, carried me to the bottom, and within a while after the force
of the water brought me up again; I had learned to swim from my very
childhood, and endeavored to make use of that skill to save my self. It
fortuned that I was armed that day rather for show, and easiness, then service;
and scorning arms of better proof, I had only a little Morion set with sto^es,
and a thin back and breast enriched on the same fashion; that lightness of my
arms was a great help to my safety, and though they were heavy enough to
trouble and hinder me very much in my swimming, yet did they not drown me, as
without question those would have don which I wore commonly upon service. I no
sooner saw my self above water, but I instantly employed the strength of my
arms, and of my breath, to reach the nearest bank; but the river was so broad,
and so rapid, that after having vainly attempted it, I lost the hope of getting
thither, and feeling my strength and my breath fail me, so that I was not able
to struggle against the violence of the waves, I suffered my self to be carried
away by the current without resistance, and swam with more eas, but with less
hope of safety; after I had striven a while longer for my life, my arms were
so tired, that they refused me their assistance, and the heaviness of my wet
clothes and of my armor, being no longer supportable, sunk me often to the
bottom, and made me swallow a great deal of water. I had nevertheless this
happiness that my senses forsook me not in that extremity; and being at that
time exempt from all those passions that can make one hate, or despise his
life, I had no other thought but how I might save mine. I was already in
despair of it, and was hardly able to stir any longer, when I was justled by
something that beat me under water, and presently after coming up again, and
casting my arms on every side, I met with a piece of wood, which I caught at
with all the strength I had left, and joining my right hand to my left, rather
through instinct, then reason, I laid hold of the edg of a board, and by that
help got my head and shoulders out of the water. Though that I had drunk in,
had taken away part of my understanding, yet had I so much still as to observe I
held by one of the boats of the bridge, which being untied from the rest, was
carried down the stream; I hung fast upon the edg of it along while, not having
strength enough to get into it, but when I had rested a while in that posture,
and recovered breath, I made a shift to raise my self a little, and recalling
all the vigor I had left, I escaped out of the water, and got into the boat; as
soon as I was there, not being able so much as to stand upon my legs, I lay
all along, and giving my self over to the conduct of the gods, and to the
current of the river, I began to take breath after my long struggling, and to
cast up part of the water I had swallowed; within a little after it grew night,
and that hindered me from seeing the banks, or the way I went. The river being
very impetuous carried me away exceeding swiftly, and having neither oar to
row unto the side, nor strength to make use of it, though I should have had
one, I was necessitated to let it follow the course of the stream, at the
pleasure of my destiny, till the return of day, and of my strength; I was so
extremely weakened that a good part of the night was spent before I was able to
stand upon my feet; but besides my weariness, I suffered very much in many
other respects, the wetness and coldness of my clothes, which I was fain to
endure all the night, together with excessive pains in my head and my stomach,
caused by the water which was got into my belly, and which I could not well
get up again, brought me to fainting, wherein I was like to have died for want
of help. In the mean time the boat went down very fast, and the night was not
quite spent, before I was above six hundred furlongs from the place where I
fell in. At last the day appeared, and with it my hopes returned, and some part
of my strength, I sat up, and looking about toward the banks on both sides,
could see no body; I was carried away in the same manner above an hour longer,
and in the end I perceived the smoke of a few chimnies, and casting my eyes
toward the shore on the side of Persia, I saw certain men walking; the sun was
already risen, and the day being fair, and clear, they easily discovered my
boat; I got up with much ado, and judging I was too far off to be heard,
besides, that the nois of the waves would not suffer my voice to reach to the
bank, I lift up my hands as high as I could, and then bringing them down again
with a beseeching action, I continued a long time begging help from them by
signs. In the end they understood them, and two men getting into a little boat,
which was tied to their bank, began to com straight toward me; as they drew
nearer I redoubled my signs, and though I was carried down very swiftly, they
rowed so hard that they quickly overtook me; They laid hold of my boat, and
taking me into theirs, turned back to the shore from whence they came: we
there found a venerable old man, who judging by my habit that I was of
quality, received me with a great deal of respect, and affection; I with a
few words in their language which I spoke reasonably well, gave him thanks for
the obligation I had to them, and promised them all the requital they could
expect from a grateful person; but the old man who was unwilling to oblige me
to the halves, seeing me benumbed with cold, and that I was hardly able to
stand, caused the two men who had brought me to land, to take me under the
arms, and lead me to his house, which was not above a hundred paces from the
place where we were. I was presently gotten to bed, and the good old man
having observed the richness of my arms, caused them to be carefully locked up
in my chamber, for fear the stones that were set in them, should tempt some of
his servants; when I was in bed he felt my pulls, and found me in a violent
fever, and though I was of a reasonable strong constitution, I had labored so
extremely to save my self, and had suffered so much by being cold, and wet all
night, that I think it not strange if my health was thereby impaired. My
charitable friend sent to the next Town, for Physicians to undertake my cure,
and assured me that he would be as careful of me himself, as if I were his
own son. The effects were answerable to his promises, and during all my
sickness, which was long and dangerous, I was waited upon as if I had been in
my own house, and amongst my most affectionate kindred; The good old man visited
me as often as I could admit him without inconveniencie; and he gave me his
assistance so civilly, and so courteously, that I shall never forget such
powerful obligations. He was a man of no inconsiderable quality, who having
spent his youth in the war with much esteem and reputation, was in his age
retired to that house, the situation, and building whereof was very pleasant,
and wherein he lived so quietly, that he scarcely heard so much as the noise
of arms; his discretion was such that he never asked me my name nor my
country, and I made no great haste to tell him them, fearing he would fall
off from his affection, and good usage, when he should once know me to be an
enemy to his nation. This doubt kept me from sending my own party word what
was become of me, not having any body whom I durst trust with such a message,
and I resolved to stay there till I were recovered, without saying any thing,
since the gods had made me fall into the hands of so charitable persons. I
will not hold you, Madam, in the tedious relation of my sickness, nor how I
passed my time while it forced me to keep my bed; all my thoughts which since
have nobly changed their nature, were then bent upon nothing but the recoverie
of my health; I will only tell you, that I kept my bed above six weeks, and
that of a month after I was not able to get on hors-back, nor to endure the
hardship of a journey. As soon as I began to walk about my chamber, my
Landlord, whose name was Araspes, often afforded me his company, and being
of a gentle conversation, he made me pass many days delightfully enough.
Although he enquired but little after the armies, yet being but a small days
journie from them, and having two sons there, he often heard news from thence;
I had been almost two months in his house, when he told me the Scythian army
was repassing the Araxis, to return home, and that the Persians were retiring
also. This news troubled me very much, seeing my self left behind alone in a
strange country, and that within our enemies dominions; but I was comforted by
my knowledge of Araspes his virtue, whom I believed so generous, that he would
not alter his former usage, though he should com to know me. When I was able
to leav my chamber, he carried me up and down his house, the lodgings whereof
were very fair, and the symmetrie skilfully composed. One day, which I ought to
call the first of my life, though it was the first of my pains, and of those
happy sufferings for which I now see my self so gloriously rewarded, the good
old Araspes led me into a gallerie beautified with diverse pictures, after
having viewed many rare ones that hung on the one side, we turned to the
other, where were the pictures of certain women drawn by the life, which
presently attracted my sight, and admiration; I asked Araspes the names of
those fair Ladies; you may see them all at the bottom of their pictures, (said
he) and to inform you how they came into my hands, know that I have a son in
Darius his army, who has don nothing but travel from his childhood; there
are few Provinces in the world, which his curiosity has not made him visit,
and because that among some of those qualities the gods have given him, he is
reasonable good at painting, he take's care to draw the pictures of the
fairest, and most considerable Ladies of those places where he made any stay;
and of those whose pictures he could not take himself, he found means to get
them of the most excellent painters in their several countries, and at his
return he dressed up this gallerie with them as you see. This discourse invited
me to look more intentively upon the faces of those eminent persons, and
casting my eyes upon the meanest, I saw a Lady full of Majesty, and in whom
notwithstanding the number of her years, one might observe remainders of an
excellent beauty, and underneath Sysigambis Queen of Persia. From that
venerable person I turned unto the next, in whose face I found a great deal of
handsomness, and an^ extraordinary sweetness, by the reading of her name, I
found it was Statira Queen of Persia, wife to Darius. A little below these two
Queens, I looked upon two faces, whose beauties were as different as brown and
fair can be, yet in that difference agreed to appear equally the Masterpieces
of the gods, who never formed any thing fuller of perfection, and if the
Painter flattered them not, 'twas necessary to confess that Nature had set
forth all her skill in the making of those two admirable structures; I was not
so far dazzled with the sight of them, but that I read their names, and saw they
were Statira and Parisatis Princesses of Persia. After these I saw Barsina the
Daughter of Artabasus, Roxana the Daughter of Cohortanus, and Aspasia the
Daughter of King Occhus, and of a great many other Persian Ladies. Araspes and
his son had placed those of their own country first, and next to them I saw a
Lady whose stately presence, and sparkling eyes witnessed the ambition of her
mind, and the vivacitie of her wit, it was Olymphas. Queen of Macedonia, and
by her Cleopatra her rival and Mistress to King Philip the father of Alexander.
When I had considered the countenances of these Ladies, I beheld two whom I
instantly knew, and whom the Painter had very justly ranked among the fairest
of all the world; they were Berenice Princess of Scythia, and Stratonice
Princess of the Issedons, I was much pleased with the sight of a person to whom
I had the honor to be very near, and looking heedfully upon her, I judged by
the resemblance of that picture to the true Berenice, that the Painter was
excellent in his art, and that without question he had made the rest very like
who were unknown to me. After these I saw Ada Queen of Caria, and Cleopha
Princess of the Massegnes, and truly I observed in those two Princesses all the
features of an exact beauty; but I fixed my eye more earnestly upon the face of
a woman armed at all points, and who discovering only a part of it through the
beaver of her Cask which was set up, showed me all the lineaments of a
pleasing fierceness, and of a look able to imprint both fear and respect; The
extraordinary fashion of her habit, caused an impatience in me to know her
name, which I saw to be Minothea, Queen of the Amazons, after I had read that,
I kept my eyes a while upon her; but O gods! scarce had I taken them off, when
I cast them upon the picture of my divine Thalestris; your age seemed not to
be above thirteen, or fourteen, and yet you were armed as the Queen your
Mother, except your head, which was quite uncovered, and whose fair hair hung
down in long tresses upon your shoulders, and so to the bottom of your coat of
arms. One of your hands was laid upon a table, where your helmet stood, and in
the other you held a dart, the point whereof rested upon one of your feet, I
will not tell you what my thoughts were of you at that time, being you are not
ignorant what they have been since, nor will I describe the beauty I found in
a picture, whereof by the favor of the gods, and by your goodness, I may
contemplate, and admire the Original; but I will unfaignedly assure you, that
from that very moment I began to be yours, and to frame designs to serve you,
all the other beauties, though they had drawn my admiration, had not yet won my
affection; and I looked upon them with an indifference, which I could no longer
keep, when I beheld you: It Is true my passion settled not it self in my heart
with violence at the first, nor do I believ a picture able to beget love so
powerfully, but in effect I in my opinion preferred you far before all the
rest, and I thought I should be most happy, if I could find the occasions to
see you, and serve you. I had often heard talk of your customs, and judging that
a man could not introduce himself amongst you without much danger, and
difficulty, I desired to know of Araspes which way his son had gotten your
pictures, since men were so strictly forbidden to enter into your territories
For all that, answered Araspes, this ventrous boy lived many months among them,
where his youth, and a woman's habit, wherewith he was disguised, made him pass
for one of their sex, and gave him all the facility he could desire to
satisfy his foolish curiosity. Araspes had no sooner said thus to me, but I
presently formed a confused, unsettled design of what I after executed, and
when I had discoursed a while longer with him, of what he had learned from his
son concerning your customs, and the severitie of your laws, I retired into my
chamber. After that time I saw that lovely picture every day, and when I was
from it, the remembrance of that object troubled my mind, and caused some
disquietness in me. I resisted a long while, and endeavored by diverse
arguments to oppose the birth of my affection; but either the force of my
destiny, or the fancy of my youth carried it against the consideration of all
difficulties; and knowing that our army was returned into Scythia, and that
there was no hope of overtaking it; I having no passion, nor powerful reason to
recall me into my own country, resolved to play a trick of youth, and take a
turn into your dominions, to see whether the Painter had not flattred you, and
whether the beauties of your mind, were correspondent to those of your body.
Since Araspes his son (said I to my self) has dared it, and executed it, what
should hinder me from undertaking it; shall I have less courage, and less
cunning then he, and shall not I do that for so lovely a Princess, which he
did to satisfy an unprofitable curiosity? What reason oblige's me to return
into Scythia, and what reason forbid's me to form my self in foreign
countries, to many things which are befitting persons of my quality? am I of
an age to make a retreat, and to do nothing but after a mature deliberation?
No, no, Orontes, it is a shame to fear, thou must be bold, and hazard something,
thou art of an age wherein follies are pardonable, and if thou foreseest any
difficulty in thy enterprise, thou shall also gain glory by overcoming it; if
thou must needs love, it is best to love something great, and extraordinary, the
gods favor adventrous designs, and they have given thee spirit enough to drive
all obstacles before thee. In this resolution I waited for my perfect health,
and for the recoverie of my strength, and when I felt my self in such a
condition, that I might undertake the voyage within a while, I was willing to
repay the kindeness I had received from Araspes, by a trust to which he had
sufficiently obliged me; his discretion had been very remarkable, in hiding
the desire it was probable he might have to know me, and I thought that
without being ungrateful I could no longer conceal my self from him, nor
distrust a man to whom I was indebted for my life. To that end being one day
alone with him in my chamber, after some other discourse. Father (said I) I were
the most unworthie of all men living, if I ever should lose the remembrance of
your favors, and I were most ungrateful, and uncivil if any fear, or any
consideration should withhold me from paying what I ow you, I confess I am
obliged to you for my life, but I must let you know that your generositie is
yet more commendable then you imagine; and that in thinking to save a man, you
have saved an enemy to your country, and one of those who came to bring the
war into your territories. Yes, Araspes, I am a Scythian, and not to frustrate
you of those advantages you may hope for by this encounter, I will tell you
that I am born a Prince; after the obligations I have to you, I will not make
you lose the rights you have upon your Prisoner: I am so, Araspes and I protest
to you by all the gods, that I will not depart from you without your
permission, and that if you restore me my liberty, I will pay you my ransom
with all the acknowledgment you can hope for from a Prince, whom you have
delivered from death. Araspes was astonished at this discourse, as he showed by
some alteration that appeared in his countenance, but his virtue was not shaken
by it, and having looked upon me with more respect then he had formerly; Sir,
(said he) though I had known all this, before those small services I have don
you, it should not have diminished any thing of that affection wherewith I did
them, but would only have obliged me to render more exactly, what is due to a
person of your quality. I will never consider you as a Prisoner, nor as an
enemy, neither will I pretend to any other advantage by this encounter then
the glory of having served a virtuous Prince, and one who vouchsafe's to
acknowledge it. After these words he spoke many others so full of generositie,
that I was troubled at my being so little able to requite him. We had a long
contestation, and seeing I could not overcom his civilitie, I took my arms out
of a trunk whereof he had delivered me the key, as soon as he saw me
something better; the stones wherewith they were enriched, were worth above
thirty talents, and having then nothing to offer him in requital of his
kindnesses, I, with very affectionate entreaties, prayed him to accept them,
but he obstinately refused, and dissuaded me with powerful reasons, that I
was compelled to moderate my present, and to keep back part of what I offered
him; I will never stir from hence, while I live (said I) unless you take
something of that I present you; That son, whose curiosity is so prais-worthie,
shall for my sake one day wear this curass which I give him, and since you will
limit the liberality of a Prince, far from his own country, and who perchance
may suffer some want in a journie he means to undertake, be pleased to send
one of your servants to the Town to sell some of the stones of my Ca^k, and to
buy me a horse, and arms of lower price; it is the only means I have to furnish
my self for a youthful voyage which I will make you acquainted with before my
departure. Notwithstanding all the reasons Araspes could alledg, to put off the
present I urged upon him, yet was he constrained to accept it, with
protestations to keep it for ever to him and his, as a mark of my excessive
acknowledgment, and of the good fortune he had to serve me. I told him my
name, my quality, and the accident that had brought me into his hands, and
then the desire I had, to take a different way from that of our army, and to
go by his son's example, to visit the Amazons, whose Princess had touched me
with an earnest longing to know her more particularly; he argued against that
design with very specious reasons, and represented those dangers which ought to
have dissuaded me, but when he found I was wilfully bent upon it, and that
he strove in vain to divert me, he would not suffer me to undertake that
voyage alone, but told me his youngest son should accompany me, since he
was then at home, and that his age was capable of a disguise like mine. I
received this offer very joifully, and being extremely satisfied with the
behavior, and virtue of that young man, I embraced him as the future companion
of my adventures, and gave way that his father should command him to go and
take order for our equipage, he carried my cask to the next Town, and returned
the day after with handsome arms, two good horses, and eight talents in gold. I
gave four of them to the servants that had waited on me during my sickness,
and left the other four to Lascaris, (that was the name of the youth who was to
go along with me) to defray our expenses. I had also some rings of good value,
which I reserved for my utmost necessities. After having taken this order for
my departure, I took leav of good Araspes, to whom I made a thousand
protestations of an everlasting friendship, and of a perfect requital of his
favors, in the person of his son, and of all that had any relation to him, if
it were in my power to oblige them. He shed tears at our going away, and
accompanied us with wishes, and prayers for our prosperity. We went on this
manner from his house, and took our way through Hyrcania, and Bactriana. Not to
trouble you with the particulars of my voyage, which are of no consequence, I
crossed over unknown countries without any considerable adventure, and during
all my journie, I entertained my self with the pleasing remembrance your
picture had left me. I sometimes thought with my self, that perchance the
Painter had flattered you, that perhaps I might find you very different from
your picture, this thought did not a little perplex me, but when I remembered
that of Berenice, and Stratonice whom he had so naturally represented, I
imagined that he had don as well in yours. But howsoever (said I) though this
Princess should not prove so fair as her picture, and that she be not
beautiful enough to confirm me in the affection her picture has begun in me,
my voyage will not be altogether unprofitable, and I shall instruct my self in
foreign parts, concerning many things I should not have learned in Scythia.
Our apparel was suitable to the habit of the countries where we passed;
Lascaris was perfect in the languages, and I had knowledge enough in them, to
pass freely through all Darius his Dominions. We came into Cappadocia, and
having traveled through part of it, we got at last unto your frontiers.
Before we entered into your territories, we bought our selves women's clothes,
and having put them on, went straight to the chief city of Themiscira, where
we arrived, within a short time, and took a lodging, not long before the Queen
your Mother began her march against the Cilicians. We had very little trouble
to dissemble our sex, neither of us being then eighteen years old, and being
both cunning enough in concealing our selves, and in avoiding those mistake's
that might have discovered us. The first time I saw you was at the Temple, but
I found your beauty such, that my eyes were dazzled with it, and my heart not
only confirmed in its inclinations toward you, but mortally wounded, or
rather utterly lost in that passion which till then had spared it; The changes
of my countenance were almost like to have given some knowledge of my inward pain
to those that stood near me, and when passing by me as you went out of the
Temple you afforded me a nearer view of those admirable features which the
painter had but imperfectly represented, I was not far from casting my self at
your feet, and discovering the nature of my love, by some strange effect of it;
yet I contented my self with kissing your robe as I saw others do, as you
passed by, and retired to my lodging as much confounded at that sight, as I was
satisfied with my voyage. I saw you again many other times, yet without giving
you any occasion to take notice of me, not being willing to make my self
known to you, but by some considerable service. I will not tell you at large
what my thoughts were then, the events have since given you sufficient knowledge
of them, and that recital would engage me in a tedious length. In the mean
time the Queen your Mother went forth with her army against the Cilicians, and
though I could not absent my self from your sight without an extreme trouble,
yet would I needs be one in that expedition, believing that in the war I might
find some occasion to make my self remarkable, and to endear my acquaintance to
you; I put my self in among the forces, without any command, and the gods
favored my good intentions so far, that in the first encounters, I did the
Queen services of some importance, which obliged her to take me near her
person, to keep me there with a great deal of goodness, and to present me to
you, at our return. Behold, Madam, all that happened to me before the glorious
hour, wherein you received me into your service, which I will call the first
of my life, since I never lived indeed, till I had the honor to be yours.

It was in these terms that Orontes told me the beginnings of his life, and I
lent him a mavelous attention to the end of his discourse; but after I had
talked a while with him, and Hippolita, concerning the things he had related,
eaten a light meal, and suffered my wounds to be dressed, I desired to know
what had befallen him, since the time of his banishment from me, hoping for no
less satisfaction thereby, then I had received by his first adventures, and
having sent all suspected persons out of my chamber, I prayed him to give me
that relation, and Orontes without staying for a more express command began
again in these terms.

My fault was so great, Madam, that as well as you, I judged my punishment to
be just, and when you pronounced my fatal sentence, I had neither cause, nor
desire to murmur against it; you saw with what tranquillity of mind I
received it, and the heavens that beheld my stay in the arbor after you were
gone, were witnesses that your severe decree, made me neither accuse you of
inhumanitie, nor complain of my destiny; yet having a heart which was not
impossible, and which being capable of all the torments of sorrow, could not
be more deeply, nor more justly afflicted with them, then in this encounter,
it sunk under so violent an assault, and gave no longer ear to constancy, nor
to Philosophy; my first motion tended toward death, and I judged that even out
of self-love I ought to die, thereby to deliver my self from a thousand
miseries more cruel then death it self, and that in reason I ought to give you
satisfaction for the fault I had committed; all my thoughts agreed in this
resolution, and I believed my love could not have a nobler conclusion, then in
giving you the remainder of a life, which I desired not to preserv after I had
made it unworthie to pleas you, and to be owned by you. It is most just (cried
I of a sudden) it is most just, Thalestris, that you should be satisfied, and
though you have not commanded me to die, that sparing of my life is an effect
of your goodness, which I ought not to abuse; you bad me live that I might be
sensible of remors for my offense, but you forbad me not to die, that I might
free my self from so great a torment, and you will pardon me this small
disobedience, which punishe's, and satisfie's me both together. I am unworthie
to live for you, and it is impossible I should live without you, consent
therefore to the loss of a life, which cannot be odious to you, without being
insupportable to me, and condemn me not to a great many lingering deaths;
since one alone, and a short one, is able to deliver me from them all. I spoke
many other words full of a just and a quiet despair, and rising up from the
earth where I had continued unmovable after your going away, I already had
put my hand upon the hilt of my sword to execute my last resolution, when the
Gods sent the officious Lascaris, to prevent it; 'twas that young man, Araspes
his son, whom I still kept with me, and who under the name of Lascaria had all
that while lived among the women the Queen your Mother gave me; and to whom
alone I had trusted the secret of my love, and indeed his discretion was
exceeding great, and though his years were hardly more then mine, yet was he
little inferior in prudence, to those of ripest age. As soon as he came into
the arbor he observed an alteration in my countenance, and considering my eyes
which had a wild, fatal look, and the suddenness wherewith I started up, and
had begun to draw my sword; he suspected my intention, and catching fast hold
of my arm, Ah! Sir, (said he) what will you do? I Will die Lascaris (answered I)
since Thalestris will not have me live. Die Sir! (replied Lascaris) the gods
forbid I should ever consent to that, while I have any life, and what so
weighty cause have you to desire death, and to give it your self with your own
hands? The anger of Thalestris (said I) and the impossibility of living after
having offended her. Ah! Sir (replied Lascaris pulling my hand with all his
force from the hilt of my sword and constraining me to sit down upon the seats
of green turf which were in the arbor) com to your self again, and consider how
much this despair is un^itting your courage, and how much it thwart's the
authority of the gods. He continued making me a long discourse to the same
purpose, to which I answered only by a few sighs, and seeing me insensible of
his arguments, and but little diverted from my resolution: At least Sir, (said
he) grant this favor to your faithful Lascaris, to let him know the cause of
your despair, and if it be a lawful one he will dispose himself to die with
you. Though I was but little capable of any discourse, I forced my grief, to
complie with with the desires of that youth, whose affection had strongly
obliged me, and having told him my adventure in a few words, he became as
sad, and as unmovable as my self. Yet did he alledg all he could devise for
my consolation, and endeavored by cunning expositions, to sweeten the sharpness
of your decree; but finding I was not moved with all he said, and that it
would be very hard for him to dissuade me from a resolution, which he saw
still written in my face, he cast himself suddenly at my feet, and pressing my
hands between his, Sir, (said he) if the affection of one who forsake's all
his friends to tie himself inseparably to your service, has deserved any thing
of you, and if the conjuration I use in the name of Thalestris be considerable
to you, grant me the favor which I beg, since it is not contrary to your
intention, and that you cannot refuse it, unless you will have me die here in
your presence. I only beseech you to delay your resolution for two days, that
those hopes I yet have for you, may be made clear by knowing the will of the
gods; you may leav this Court, since you cannot appear in it by reason of
Thalestris's anger, but as we go away we will pass by a Temple of Bellona's,
famous in this province, to whose Oracles, if the access were permitted unto
men, they would com from the furthest parts of the earth; there you may
instruct your self concerning the pleasure of the gods, and after their answer
follow your own inclinations, which I will never resist while I live. I was so
extremely obliged to this young man's fidelity, that I could not deny his
request, and having promised him that delay with an oath, I settled his mind
from that fear he was in for me. I was not willing to make a longer stay in
that country, and having sworn to him once more that I would not attempt any
thing against my life, and that I would stay for him at a place in the wood
which I appointed, he went back to the Palace, to fetch a couple of good
horses, and other things which he thought necessary for our departure. I
should never have don, Madam, if I would describe all the thoughts wherewith my
soul was combated, that recital would be of a tedious length, therefore I will
only tell you, that never heart was in a more deplorable condition, and that
the desire of death never was so peaceably confirmed. Lascaris returned within
a little while, bringing two good horses, arms, money, and jewels, which by the
Queens liberality and yours, we had in great abundance, and which he took
without my directions. I got on hors-back, and traveled toward a little Town,
two or three hours riding from Themiscira. But seeing with Lascaris one of my
women, in whom I had found a great deal of affection toward me, and whom he
had brought to help him to lead the horses, and carry the arms, I took her
along with me to the place where we lay that night, that from thence I might
write the letter you received from the hands of Hippolita, and so having made
her get up behind Lascaris, I went out of the wood with a sorrow which I find
my self unable to represent. We arrived at that little Town where I passed in
melancholy fits, or rather in mortal agonies, and rising by break of day, I
gave that woman my letter close sealed up, with express order not to deliver it
to any body but Hippolita, and took horse to go unto the Temple Lascaris had
told me of. We got thither before it was noon, and after I had prayed and
begged of the goddess to whom it was dedicated, to let me know her pleasure,
she returned this Oracle.

The Oracle.
Live, go, and com to the edg of Themiscire,
Ere the Sun's course a second time exspire,
Thou on her Empires borders shall recover,
The lovely object which made thee a Lover.
I am not able to tell you, Madam, in what manner I received this Oracle, and
which was stronger in me the grief to see my self reduced to a necessity of
living, of disobeying the gods; or the joy which their promises revived in me
by such pleasing hopes. I remained a long time without motion, wavering in the
diversity of those thoughts, and then of a sudden lifting up my hands and eyes
to heaven, Great gods (cried I) exact not an obedience from me which I no
longer am in a condition to yield you, or if you will have me live, restore
me new forces, or more evident hopes then those you have confusedly given me,
all things conspire to have me die, and she who dispose's of my fate with
you, has pronounced a sentence which you have not revoked. These words, spoken
with a loud voice, struck wonder in all those that heard them, and the
Priestess who took me for a woman could not imagine the cause of my despair.
Lascaris in the mean time came to me, and not being able to dissemble the
joy, which this Oracle, so conformable to his desires, had wrought in him, well
Madam (said he, using that term because of them that were present) will you
doubt still of the goodness of the gods, and will you without their consent
sacrifice a life, the disposing whereof they have reserved unto themselves? Ah!
Lascaris (answered I with a deep sigh) my fortune is but little altered, and
this command of the gods, is only an effect of their goodness, which would
banish a just despair by unjust hopes; they cannot force my soul to continue in
a prison, the abode whereof is no longer supportable; and they will pardon me
a disobedience which I am forced to by a power not inferior to theirs. What,
Madam (replied Lascaris) will you add impiety, and blasphemy to that attempt
against your life which has already hainously offended them, and do you
disdain both their express commands, and the promises they make you in words
that are so little obscure? did they ever speak less confusedly, or less
doubtfully, and can you yet be uncertain of a resolution, you should have
taken in a moment? To these persuasions Lascaris added many others, and
desiring the Priestess to assist him, in requiring that obedience I owed unto
the gods, and in confirming the hopes they gave me, they used so many
arguments that at last they made me conceiv some glimps of them, and defer my
design of dying, till I should see my self frustrate of my expectation. Behold,
Madam, which way I came to be content to live, and to pass the time of that
banishment which you, and the gods had enjoined me, in other countries; being
this part of my recital was most important to my love, I have enlarged my self
most upon it, and I will tell you more succinctly what has happened to me
since. I went out of the Temple, and got on hors-back, yet doubtful in what
kingdom I should pass my exile. I was resolved not to return into Scythia, and
consulted a great while with Lascaris, whither I should go. In the end I
determined to travel indifferently, and without design, into all those
countries where I could have free passage, and putting on man's apparel again
as soon as we were upon your frontiers, I entered into Ci^icia, which after the
time of your truce lived very quietly under Neobarzanes. I visited Tharsus
unknown, and all the fairest cities of that kingdom, from thence I went into
Paphlagonia, which I past through without any remarkable adventure, and having
also traveled about Lycia, Caria, and Pamphilia, I had a mind to see Greece,
and came into Europe six months after my departure from Themiscira. I relate
these things briefly, not being willing to keep you long in the recital of
events that have nothing memorable; but this I may assure you, that what
voiages soever I made, I was inseparable from you, and you were always so
present to my remembrance, that all the objects I met withal, were never able
to put you a moment out of my mind; My thoughts maintained a pitiless war
against me, and recalling into my memory those happinesses I had enjoied in
your company by my deceit, the consideration of their loss touched me so
nearly, that I have wondered a thousand times, how I had strength enough to
out-last eighteen or twenty months exile. O my divine Princess (cried I
sometimes) with how sweet a consolation should I be blessed, if I could hope
that the miserable Orithia had yet any place in your memory, and that without
hating her you could remember the favors she has stolen from you! How happy
would my destiny be, if you did but say yet once again to your self, My dear
Orithia, I envy thee not thy delightful thefts, and I pardon thy love, and thy
deceit in consideration of thy services! O! how welcome to me would this
knowledge of your relenting be! and how swiftly would it make the ages of
banishment run out! but, O just Thalestris, is it possible you should indeed
hate that Orithia, whom you have so dearly loved, and all whose crime is that
she loved you? Was that an offense worthy of the punishment you have
inflicted on me? and if such a divinity as your self can suffer the affection
of a man, could you desire a more pure, or a more discreet one? Ah! Thalestris,
you will one day return unto your self, and by the promises of the gods I hope,
will understand the nature of my fault, and that you will judge it punished
severely enough, by the pains I suffer for its expiation. These were my
ordinary thoughts, and when I talk with Lascaris, we never discoursed of any
thing but you. In these contemplations I visited part of Greece, I viewed the
stately Town of Athens, where I conversed with the great Phocion, and the
eloquent Demosthenes; I saw the famous Sparta, and from thence passed into
Achaia. There it was I learned that Agis, King of the Lacedaemonians, had shaken
off the yoke which Alexander had imposed upon them, and that taking advantage
by his absence, he had made an incursion into the territories of the Etolians,
and Achaians; That Antipater Governor in Macedonia for Alexander, was marching
straight toward him with his forces, and was at that time encamped near the
City of Megalopolis. I believed that war would afford me some matter of
divertisement, and that I might spend part of the summer there with more
pleasure and more glory, then in my indifferent voiages; I bethought my self a
good while before I made choice of my side, but in the end I remembered the
obligations you had to Alexander, and the consideration he had shown of your
Dominions, when he subdued those of your neighbors; and participating in that
engagement, I fixed upon the design of acquitting you, and of serving him at
least in my own person, who had dealt so civilly with you. Iwaver'd no longer
therefore in my election, but going to Antipaters Army, though at first I was
unknown to him, I made my self remarkable in some encounters, with success
enough to be taken notice of, and to make him desire to know me. Having
learned of me something of my quality, and seen me effect some enterprises
which were reasonably hazardous, he was pleased to esteem me more then I
deserved, and gave me imploiments in his army above my age, and above my
capacity. I nevertheless was so careful to discharge them tolerably, that he
thought not he had any reason to repent himself, and when he heard that Agis
intended to give him battle, he trusted me with the command of part of his
Cavalrie. My desire to cut this relation short keep's me from telling how the
two Armies drew near to one another, and how they were ordered, and disposed;
but it is hard for me to pass over the valiant actions that were don by the
King of the Lacedaemonians, since one may truly say, that never man fought with
more valor and generositie. I shall say no more then truth, when I tell you he
broke like thunder into our Battalions, and that he carried victory along
with him whither soever he went, he was of an extraordinary stature,
gallantly armed, and bravely mounted. Cassander Antipater's son, who led the
left wing of his father's army, would have opposed his fury, but he rushed
so imperiously upon him, that he made him tumble among the horses feet, and
charging into the very place where Antipater was in person, in spite of the
defense of all those about him, he wounded him so in two places with his
sword, that he fell to the ground, but being taken up again by those that
were n^ar him, I came to that place within a minute after, and seeing that
valiant King bloody all over, force his way into our squadrons, I flew upon
him, after I had defied him with a loud cry. Although I injure modesty in
speaking to my own advantage, after the praises I have given to the valor of
that Prince, I will nevertheless tell you that our encounter chanced to be
very equal, and we shocked each other so forcibly, that we came both to the
ground and our horses with us; we disengaged our selves presently from our
stirrups, and began a combat on foot, which caused some of those that were
fighting to hold their hands and look upon us, we quickly wounded one another,
but the number of mavelous actions he had don that day, having wearied his
body, though his courage was indefatigable, and the blood he had lost before
having weakened him, more then the wounds I had the fortune to give him, he
was almost unable to fight longer, and I hoped for the victory with
likelihood, when a great many of our men coming to that place would also have
fallen upon him; but I opposed their fury, and did so much by my entreaties,
or by my threatenings, that I kept them from it, and gave the Lacedaemonians
leisure to fetch off their King, and deliver him out of that throng, from which
he was no longer able to free himself. By his retreat the victory declared it
self absolutely for the Macedonians, and Antipater prosecuted it so hotly, that
almost all the Lacedaemonians were defeated; but their valiant King, being
unwilling to survive that loss, alighted out of a litter in which they had put
him, and though so weak that he was hardly able to stand, he caused himself
to be carried back into the fight, where after he had don things that surpass
belief, and raised a breastwork of dead bodies round about him, he sunk at
last, as his predecessor Leonidas at the strait of Thermophiles, and falling
tired with conquering upon the heaps of those he had slain, received a death,
which ought to make him live for ever in the memory of men. I have enlarged my
self, contrary to my design, upon this passage, because I was most sensibly
grieved at it, and that the memorable end of so great a Prince deserved a
particular mention of him. By that only victory Antipater settled Alexander's
affairs again in that country, and believing I had contributed something
toward it, he did me honors, and showed me kindnesses which were
considerable enough. I continued with him till having no more enemies to fight
withal, he began his march back into Macedonia. Then I took my leav of him,
and of his son, though they both were very earnest to keep me with them, and
offered me very advantageous conditions. A year was already expired since my
departure from Themiscira, and I had a desire to return into Asia, but I
traveled a different way from that I came, and was willing to spend the time
that still remained, in seeing those provinces which were yet unknown to me. I
went into Parthia, and the countries of the Mardes, and of the Bactrians,
whither the disloial Bessus was already retired after the murder of his King;
from thence I entered into Hyrcania, and in the end I came upon your frontiers.
There I put on woman's apparel again, and there the first news I heard was that
of your captivity. I need not tell you, Madam, the greatness of my sorrow, my
passion is sufficiently known to you, to give you some guess of it, and you may
well imagine that had it not been for the promise of the gods, and my belief
that in this encounter I might find some occasion to serve you, I should have
sunk under that affliction. I summoned all my courage together to employ it for
your service, and begging of the gods to grant me extraordiuarie forces, I
went with some confidence toward the place where your army was encamped. Before
I would discover my self to the other women, I desired to learn of Hippolita
whom I had ever known to be most discreet, in what estate my affairs were in
this country, and whether I might yet pass for Orit^ia. I was so happy that I
found a favorable occasion, as you have heard, and received comforts from her
which raised my hopes again. I learned of her (and be this spoken Madam,
without stirring up your anger) that you had bestowed some tears on my
departure, and that my memory was not indifferent to you, all my afflictions
were counterpoised, by the joy this knowledge caused in me, and it so redoubled
my courage, that I accounted all things too weak to retard the design I had to
deliver you. You have heard from Hippolita, all that passed from the time of my
arrival to that of your deliverance, and I will add to what she has told you,
that as we marched toward this Town, I prayed Menalippa, and the chief of
those women that had access to you, not to speak one word of my being
returned, but to stay till I discovered my self, before you heard that news
from any body else. This was it that favored the dissimulation which we used
so happily for me, and retiring after the fight, while the women did their
duties to you, I found means when you were in bed, to speak with Hippolita, and
to plot that with her, which she so cunningly has effected to my advantage.

Orontes ended his story thus, and by that conclusion of it made me blush
again, and fetched back part of my shame, and part of my anger, but being no
longer in terms to dissemble my affection, I gave him all the modest proofs of
it he could desire. From that day he carried himself toward me, very
differently from his former manner, and cutting off all those liberties I had
granted him as Orithia, never gave me any cause to blame him for want of
respect, or of discretion. I am too tedious in my relation, but I will shorten
the rest of it, and tell you that being carefully dressed, and looked to, my
wounds were quickly cured, and not being strong enough to keep the field in
Cilicia, against those supplies which in probability would arrive within a
while, I contented my self with putting a garrison in that Town, and as soon as
I was able to endure a chariot, I returned into my own territories, and took my
way toward Themiscira: But before I was gotten to my chief city, he that
succeeded Neobarzanes, sent to desire peace with me, and the misfortune I had
suffered by war, together with the counsels of Orontes, whose thoughts were
very avers from it, persuaded me to grant it him upon reasonable conditions,
and to establish an alliance with him which since has not been violated. I
shall not stand to recount the welcoms I received from my subjects, after a
sharp and dangerous captivity, nor the honors they rendered to my valiant
deliverer, whom they beheld as the protecting Goddess of Themiscira; she took
again her former lodgings in the Palace, and her former servants, and had a
great deal more authority amongst all our women then in times past, but she
abused it not, and managed their respect to her so discreetly, that she
inflamed them all with a violent affection; for mine own part I must confess to
my confusion, that I found so many amiable qualities in her, and had so many
causes to be pleased with her love to me, that I preserved not the least
remainder of my former inclinations, but gave my self to her as much as my
virtue, and the informations I had received from her self could permit me; we
had no more but one thought, and if I may say so without blushing, we had no
more but one soul, and one will; I made no longer any difficulty to open my
heart to him, and to confess that I loved him more then my self, but what
advantage soever he drew from that confession, he never emboldened himself to
take those liberties that were forbidden him; My women often admired, that they
no longer saw that familiarity between us they had formerly observed, and
though our conversation was more frequent then ever, they found, but knew not
the cause, that we had banished those kisses, and embraces, which in former
times were wont to make a good part of our entertainment. All the sweetnesses
that a modest affection can produce, were tasted by us with a perfect
tranquillity, we were inseparable except at those hours when decency forced
us to be asunder; we communicated our most private thoughts to one another,
and Orontes as he was discreet, and respectful, could desire no greater proofs
of my affection; But being we could have but one aim, and that only marriage
could give it a lawful conclusion, we had no small difficulties to overcom. I
loved Orontes enough (since in spite of his ingratitude I must avow it) to
forsake my kingdom, and retire into Scythia with him, being our laws were
enemies to our intentions, and would not suffer me to take him for my husband,
and keep my Empire; but he was troubled I should abandon it for him, and
before we came to that extremity, would endeavor to preserv it, and to
abolish those customs, whereof he had already made me see the errors; we
strove therefore both of us to make our most considerable women abhor the
infamy of them: whenever occasion was offered, we represented to them, how
ignominious it was to go and seek out men, for such shameful ends, and by such
reprochful ways; and when they alleged necessity which had left them no
other means to have posterity, we told them it was better to be the last
Amazones, then to make the race of them eternal by such strange means, and that
it was much more seemly to live like all the rest of the world, then to
maintain our selves by customs so contrary to honor, and virtue. Our authority
amongst them, stood us in good stead, at our first discourses upon that
subject, for they would never have suffered them from persons that had been
less considerable; but by little and little they grew accustomed to them, and
gave us some beam of hope, that in time some of them might hearken to our
propositions. In these emploiments we passed a whole year, and Orontes who
already was in his three and twentieth, and who used much industry to keep
the hair from growing upon his face, which quickly would have discovered his
sex, by reason of troublesome obstacle, which was like shortly to cross his
contentments, began to think of expedients either to make progress in the minds
of our women, or to convey us into his province of the Massagetes, which my
blind offection had already made me resolv upon, when our designs were
thwarted by a strange revolution.

Our neighbors of Cappadocia, who had always lived peaceably with us, having
received some slight discontents, by those women of ours who were nearest to
their frontiers, and having refused that satisfaction I offered them, declared
war against us, and began to raise forces to invade our Province. Seeing I could
not divert that storm but by re^istance, I also caused leavies to be made, and
in a short time set on foot an army able to oppose their intention, and to
carry the war, wherewith they threatened us, home into their own country. But
when our army was ready to march I found my self not well, and though my
sickness was but slight, Orontes, who believed the toils of that voyage might
make it wors, persuaded me by all means to give my self rest at home, and to
leav the conduct of the army to him; he had much ado to obtain my consent, as
well by reason I was desirous to go in person against them who made themselves
my enemies without occasion, as because I was troubled to let that part from
me, and be in danger, which at that time was dearer to me then all the
world. But he alleged so many considerations, and pressed me with so much
earnestness, that I was compelled to yield to his entreaties upon condition,
that as soon as my health would suffer me, I might follow him with new
supplies.

I will not spend time in the particulars of our farewels, he spoke the most
touching words that a real passion could bring forth, and I testified my sorrow
to him by my tears, and by all the modest kindnesses he could desire. Alas! I
knew not that our separation was to be for so long a time, and that ignorance
abated part of my affliction; he went away, and all my joy and consolation, or
rather indeed the better half of my soul departed with him. I remained at
Themiscira with all the grief which his absence, and the presages of my
misfortune could possibly cause, but yet with hope to go after him as soon as I
had recovered my health. I believ that desire hastened it, and scarce had he
been gone a month when I felt my self perfectly well again; I had also forces in
a readiness to go and strengthen his army, and was already preparing my self
with a great deal of joy for that design, when I heard news which retarded the
effecting of my resolution. Alexander, after he had subdued the Ma^des, was
com into Hircania, and his drawing so near my borders, caused in me some
suspicion, and disturbed the tranquillity of my mind. Though Neobarzanes, as
I have already told you, reigned effectively over the Cilicians, yet he
commanded only under the authority of Alexander, who, at the beginning of his
passage into Asia, had brought that country under his subjection; and I at
that time had notice given me, that he showed himself so concerned in
Neobarzanes his defeat, that he promised to take a remarkable revenge for it;
and to that purpose was crossing through Hircania, like a torrent to overflow
our Province, which till then was alone exempt from the yoke he had imposed
upon all the rest. This news gave me a hot allarm, and being conscious how
unable I was to resist a Monarch that was Master of the best part of the world,
and especially when I had sent most of my forces against the Cappadocians, I
was in a strange perplexity; for in effect it had been a manifest folly to
oppose that Conqueror with a handful of women, which were not able for one day
to stop that army, victorious over all Asia, and some part of Europe. These
considerations made me ask the counsel of our most prudent women, and after
having thought of all manner of expedients, to divert that storm from falling
upon our heads, they told me with one accord, they knew no other way to free
us, but my going in person to meet that potent King, to offer him my Dominion,
and to justify the defeat of Neobarzanes; his generositie, and his respect to
Ladies, were known all over the earth, and they believed that an assured means,
to keep my country in its first tranquillity: I did what I could to avoid
that journie, which hindered me from the sight of my dear Orontes, but there
was a necessity of yielding to the importunities of all my counselors, and to
the strength of all their reasons; besides, I was touched with some desire to
see that mighty Prince, whose fame was so advantageously spread through the
whole world. When I was resolved upon that voyage, I caused my equipage to be
prepared, and having sent to desire a passport from those that commanded in
Hircania, I set forward from Themiscira with three hundred women, gallantly
mounted, and richly armed; In this condition I went out of my own country,
under favor of the safe conduct which had been granted me, and having crossed
part of Hircania, without any encounter worth the relating, I came to
Alexander's army. Having sent ten of my women before to meet him, and
advertise him of my coming, and to demand audience, they brought me a
favorable answer, and assured me that the King would receiv me very civilly,
and with a great deal of respect: I was not deceived in my expectation, for
that great Prince came to meet me, and alighting as soon as he saw me
appear, he by that reception made me hope my voyage would be as successful
as I could wish. I and all my women were in the habit of our sex, and I had no
other arms but a silver cuirass enriched with stones of value, and a little
cask of the same, shaded with a great plume of several colored feathers, and
environed with a circle of gold made in fashion of a crown, my gown was of a
light cloth of silver, tucked up above the knee with diamond buckles, and my
leg being half naked, was also half covered with a buskin suitable to my
curass; In a skarf of rare embroderie I wore a sword which the unfaithful
Orontes had given me, and I held two javelins in my right hand. All my train
was in an attire little different from mine, and the King seemed to be very
much pleased with so unusual a ^ight; in stead of giving me that victorious
hand which I demanded, he kissed mine very courteously, and assured me, that
what design soever brought me to him, I should find he would be ready to
serve me; when I had looked a while upon him with admiration, I made him
acquainted with the cause of my coming, and not being ignorant of the Greek
tongue, which I had learned of Orontes, I declared my innocence touching
Neobarzanes his misfortunes, and protested that I came for no other end but to
lay my Crown at his feet, and offer him that little Empire, against which he
had not vouchsafed to employ his victorious arms. The King having heard me
with patience, answered extreme modestly, and civilly, assuring me he had no
intention to trouble my Dominions, nor to take the part of those against me,
whose crimes had been their own destruction; he likewise offered me his
assistance, and protection against all manner of enemies, and by a great many
noble promises freed me of all my apprehensions. After this first
conversation, he fell to complement, and leading me himself into costly tents
which he had given order should be made ready for me, he enlarged himself
upon the praises of our beauty, and of that martial virtue which raised us
above all other women, and expressed that he thought himself much indebted to
me for the pains I had taken, and for the honor I did him; My narration is too
long already to entertain you with all the particulars of our discourse; but
after that day the King carried me to view his forces in battalia, and caused
them to be exercised before me, endeavoring to give me all sorts of
divertisement. By his entreaties I stayed twelv or fourteen days in his army,
believing my self obliged to comply so far with a person of so extraordinary
merit. During that abode, I received all kind of honors, and civil usage, and
was witness of some of that Prince his actions, in which truly I observed
something more then humane, and I must tell you (though perchance not without a
blushing) that some of my women were so impudent as to tell me, I ought to give
them a Princess of the race of that great Conqueror; but I reproved that motion
so sharply, that they had not the boldness to speak of it any more. When I had
stayed the time the King desired me, and received all manner of satisfaction,
and marks of respect, I took my leav, and began my journie homeward, carrying
with me an esteem suitable to the fame of him, which before was spread amongst
us. I returned through Hircania with the same facility as I came, and entering
into my territories, I continued on my way with a reasonable quiet mind to the
city of Themiscira, where I arrived two months after my departure. The first
news I met withal, was a victory Orontes had obtained over our enemies, of
whom he had slain eight or ten thousand upon the place, not having lost above
six, or seven hundred of his women. I was exceedingly joied at this good
success, for many considerations, and by her that brought me the news I
received a letter from him, the words whereof were these, or not much unlike.

Orithia to Queen Thalestris.
THe justice of your arms, Fair Princess, has defeated part of your enemies,
and it is your destiny, both near and far off, to conquer all that dare make
trial of them. Orithia die's with a desire to see you, but to satisfy it, she
will make haste to overcom those enemies you have left, and will not purchase
the happiness of your sight, with the least danger that might threaten you, or
by the painfulnesse of a journie which might prejudice a health not well
confirmed; have a care of it, dear Princess, I beseech you, since it can
receive no alteration, but will be fatal to the repose, and to the life of

Your faithful Orithia.


These last marks of his affection, whether true or feigned, touched me very
tenderly, and obliged me to answer him in these terms.

Queen Thalestris to Orithia.
I Knew very well my dear Orithia was invincible, and that she would triumph
over my enemies, as she had triumphed over my self; if she had as little left
to subdue on that side, as on this, she would have nothing more to fight
withal; but because that conquest is not so entire, as this she has gained
upon my heart, her return will not he speedy enough to give me patience to
stay for her; nor to retard the desire I have to see her upon the field of her
victory, These are the impatiences, which my lovely, and dearly loved Orithia
causes in her unchangeable

Thalestris.


I sent back this answer by her that brought me Orithia's letter, which was
com to Themiscira a fortnight before me, and burning really with a desire to
see her, and partake in her victories, I prepared my self very cheerfully for
that second voyage. But O Gods! when I was busiest in setting things in order,
and in drawing forces together to depart, I received a second letter, by one of
Orithia's women, in whom she had greatest confidence; I opened it with some
apprehension, the cause whereof was unknown to me, and casting my eyes upon it
I read these words.

The abused Orontes to the faithless Thalestris.
IF I have been so simple as to hope for fidelity in a woman, a weakness is to
be accused of it, which appearances that were specious enough seemed to
autorise, and I believed I might conserv your affection, only because I had
well bought it, and well deserved it. Though I have been so unfortunate as to
spend some years in your service, I shall be wise enough to retire, now that
you have made your self unworthie of my affection, and of my esteem. I beg not
of the Gods to punish your fault, you have don it sufficiently already by the
undervaluing you have showed of your self, by the contempt you have deserved
from the whole world, and by the shame you have for ever fixed upon your
memory; Live in the infamy you have sought with so much pains, and since your
ambition is so nobly limited, lose the remembrance of mine, which so blindly
had bounded in you alone; I leav your armies, your country and your self for
ever, and I carry away nothing with me in this voluntary banishment, but my
repentance for having returned after my first: If the Gods send me my death I
shall prefer it before the affliction of seeing you again, and if they continue
my life, I will pass it wholly without so much us a thought of you.


When I read this letter, by good chance I had no body by me but Hippolita,
who seeing me grow pale, and stagger at the end of it, put forth her arms to
hold me up, and kept me from falling on the floor. Which way shall I be able
Sir, to describe the the greatness of my affliction, in so unexpected a
disaster, and how shall I make you to conceiv, what I find my self unable to
express? I cannot better compare my sorrow then to that of the Princess
Statira, when by the crafty deceits of Roxana, she received that fatal letter
which has caused all your misfortunes, and I believ that as there was a great
deal of resemblance between these two adventures, so also they produced the
same effects. I had fainting fits like Statira, I tore my hair, and wept like
her; and like her I sai'd all that rage and grief can inspire into distracted
persons; I passed all that day in restless startings, or rather in convulsions,
and if Hippolita had not carefully observed my actions, I should have used my
own hands against my life. The next day, after I had long tormented my self, I
called for her that had brought me that cruel letter, and having commanded her
to tell me in what place, and in what condition she had left Orithia, she
told me that within a while after the battle she had won, she was taken with
an excessive sadness which kept her for some days in bed, and that as soon as
she was a little better, she took horse, with no body but Lascaria, and
having commanded this woman to follow her till she was two or three hundred
paces from the camp, she gave her certain rings for a reward of the service
she had don her, strictly charging her to deliver that letter into my own
hands, which she would not trust into any bodies but hers, and bidding her
tell Menalippa she might take the command of the army, which she forsook for
ever; and that when she had given these orders, she took a way quite
different from that which led back to the Camp, where since that time she had
never appeared. This account perfected the settling of despair in my heart, and
put me into the most lamentable estate, that a soul was able to conceiv. I
began to reflect with repentance, upon the proofs of affection I had given to
that ungrateful man, for whom I would have abolished our laws, and forsaken a
kingdom, to run after meaner pretensions, and those uncertain ones too; I
examined all the actions of my life, which could possibly have given him any
suspicion, or discontent, and finding them but too full of innocence, and
affection to him, I plunged my self into an abyss of sorrow, and vexation. I
had some conceit that my journie to Alexander might have displeased him, but my
stay there had been so short, and all my actions had passed so openly, and been
eied by so many witnesses, that I did not believ, he could from thence draw
matter for all those high abuses, and that unworthie usage, To that
inconstancy wherewith he cast me off after having received so many
testimonies of my affection, he added wrongs, and upbraidings of shame and
infamy, the terms whereof I could not digest. Hippolita who had often read
over his sharp, injurious letter, could find no words to excuse him, no, nor
free her self from those reproaches I used to her for having favored his base
pernicious designs. I will not repeat Sir, what my grief and my resentment made
me say, that recital would be of a troublesome length* and I will satisfy my
self with telling you, that after having sufficiently wept, and deplored my
misfortune, I at last made hatred succeed my love, and took a firm resolution
to go and seek him to the world's end, that I might punish his perfidiousness,
and revenge the unpardonable injuries he had don me. I then contradicted all
that the consideration of that disloial wretch had made me speak unto our
women, to the advantage of men; and I then animated them to the aversion which
they naturally had to that sex, by such words as made them judge I had some new
occasion to hate them. My sorrow did not so little torture me, but that it
cast me into a sickness which forced me to keep my bed, or my chamber, above
two months; during all that time I heard not one word of that Traitor, and as
soon as I was recovered, after I had concluded a peace with the Cappadocians by
the mediation of some of our neighbors who interposed, I put the government of
my state into Menalippa's hands, and went from Themiscira, without other
company but Hippolita, and this other woman whom you see with me; we clothed
our selves in men's apparel as now we are, and to begin my search, I took the
right way toward Scythia, believing the disloial Orontes was retired thither,
and that I there might glut the rage wherewith I was so justly exasperated
against him; I will not trouble you with the particulars of my voiages, nor of
my encounters, I will not repeat the names of those places where I passed, nor
of the provinces I traveled through to go into your country, you shall only
know that after a long painful journie I arrived in the Province of the
Massage^es, but that people had heard no news of their Prince, from the time
he fell into the Araxis, and were then governed by an old Prince, to whom the
succession by nearness of blood did rightly belong; not being satisfied with
that I passed the mount Imaus, and entered into Europe, and into the Province of
the Issedons, to visit the Court of the King your father, where I believed I
might hear news of him. I stayed there in a vain expectation three whole
months, and it was at that time when you were in prison, and that a valiant
Commander named Arsaves, was gone with the army of the King your father, to the
frontiers of Scythia against Arimbas, who had invaded them; I was so deeply
buried in my passion, that it hindered me from informing my self of your
adventures, and I only heard what the meanest of the people could not be
ignorant of. I sometimes saw the Princess Berenice your sister, whom I thought
fair beyond imagination, but the resolution I had taken to keep my self always
unknown, was the cause I neither waited upon her, nor discovered my self to any
body; the instructions I had received from Orontes, gave me knowledge enough
in the language of his country, to make my self be understood of all the
world. When I had stayed at Issedon as long as I have told you, I departed full
of grief, and went toward Arsaces his army, where I thought desire of glory
might perchance have stopped him before his coming to Court. I got thither
within a few days, and was one of the first at that bloody battle, which was
fought upon the confines of your Kingdom, where I saw that valiant General do
actions of so rare a courage, that I shall ever preserv the memory of them, as
of a prodigy. I continued in that army without making my self known for other
then a young voluntier, till it began to march back toward Issedon, and then
seeing my self as unsuccessful in my last hopes as I had been in my first, I
returned into Asia, which I visited almost all, in a years time I spent in
traveling up and down there; in the end after long wanderings to no purpose, I
came into this country with some hope that among so many Princes, whereof
Alexanders Court was composed, I might learn some news of my faithless Orontes,
against whom I have preserved my indignation so strongly, that time shall never
be able to wear it out of my mind. Behold (continued Thalestris ending her
narration) the abstract of a life full of misfortunes, pardon me if in some
places I have too much enlarged my self, and if I have passed over others too
succinctly, since only the motions of my passion made that difference. See now
if my anger be not just, and if I have not a lawful cause to hate that Prince,
who by his infidelity, has rendered himself unworthie of the honor he has
to be allied to you.

The Queen ended her story on this manner, and Oroondates having hearkened to
it attentively, Madam (said he) I cannot choose but be Orontes his enemy,
after the knowledge you have given me of an infidelity without example; yet
when I remember the proofs which without Intermission he showed you of so real
a passion, after which we see him fall into a baseness without any probable
ground, and when I call to mind what subtlety and calumny have heretofore
don against mine innocence, I am forced to suspend my judgment, and believ that
either you have been deceived by others then Orontes, or that Orontes has been
deceived himself, by very strong appearances; for indeed so sudden, and so
unexspected a change is contrary to common sense, and passe's my imagination,
and I am fully persuaded, that there is more innocence in Orontes his
intentions, then there has been in the effects, either of his grief, or of his
inconstancy. The Queen would have replied, but Oroodates seeing it was
extremely late, and that so long a discourse might impair her health, took leav
of her till the next day, and having bidden her good night, retired into his
Chamber.

CASSANDRA. The fifth Book.
ORoondates passed that night as he had don many others, and the day following
was spent in those sad imploiments which his deadly griefs had already made
habitual to him, yet did he afford part of it to the entertainment of the fair
Amazon, and discoursed a great while with her, touching the causes of Orontes
his infidelity, which he could neither comprehend, nor excuse; the friendship
he had born that Prince made him seek out reasons to justify him, but the
Queens spirit grew so incensed against him, that he was fain to give over his
defense, and condemn him with her. The conversation of that Princess diverted
his sorrows for some few moments, yet no sooner was he out of her presence, but
he plunged himself so deeply in his afflictions, that without a most
particular assistance of the gods, or rather without an apparent miracle, his
life could not have subsisted in such violent assaults. Ah! my dear Princess,
(said he sometimes) how great is my patience, and how great proofs do I now
give you of the truth of my affection, certainly the most happy persons never
found more difficulty in resolving to die, then I do, in enduring to live;
receiv this last testimony of my love, as the greatest I ever showed you, and
by this severe constraint, judge how dear the desire of satisfying you is to
me, even after your death it self. In such like discourses, and in such like
thoughts, he lingered out five or six days, at the end of which his wound was
almost perfectly healed, but his strength was not so soon returned, and his
sadness had brought him so low, that a longer time was requisite for the
recoverie of it. He walked every day in the wood, where he sought out those
places that were most gloomie, and most conformable to the estate of his mind;
all objects of pleasure to him were fatal, and those that represented any thing
of woe, gave him the most real satisfaction. Thalestris's wound was quickly in a
good condition, and permitted her to leav her bed within a few days. The eight
after Lysimachus his departure, which was the same he had made them hope for
his return, was almost quite expired, and the Prince of Scythia began to be
troubled to see him fail of his promise, when his Squire Cleantes arrived;
Oroondates presently running to him enquired news of his Master. He is in
Ptolomeus his army Sir, (answered Cleantes) and you will see the cause of his
stay, in this letter he has written to you; saying so he presented him a
paper, and Oroondates having opened it, read these words.

Lysimachus to Prince Oroondates.
Our common affairs hinder me from seeing you again so soon as I intended, but
the cause of it will procure your pardon for a delay which trouble's me very
much. Those Princes my friends, whose assistance was needful for our revenge,
were all dispersed, and some of them were already upon their way to those
Provinces which are fallen to their lot, Ptolomeus and I labor to get them
together again, and that care will neither be unprofitable, nor unnecessarie.
Perdiccas and Roxana, whom our proceedings, and the remors of their crime have
made suspicious, draw forces toward them again, and by our example keep their
friends about them. The report of your virtue has gained you a great many
here, who will be as much concerned in your interests, as in their own, and
particularly Ptolomeus, who has prayed me to beg him apart in that
friendship, which you have don me the honor to promise me; I beseech you stay
for news of us in the place where you are, without any other disquiet then what
you receive by our losses, and moderate your grief, that you may recover your
strength; the gods promise us as great a satisfaction, as we can in reason
desire, and I promise my self the continuance of that goodness, you have showed
unto your faithful

Lysimachus.


After that Oroondates had read this letter in the presence of Thalestris, he
asked Cleantes more particular news of his Master, and Cleantes when he had
civilly presented his Masters humblest service to the Queen, as he had been
expressly commanded, answered that he had left him with Ptolomeus, from whom
he had received a welcome suitable to their ancient friendship; he said
moreover that Ptolomeus his army was out above three or four hours riding from
them, and that it consisted of ten thousand foot, and four thousand horse, that
Eumenes was marching toward Cappadocia with ten thousand men, but that they had
sent to call him back, as likewise Antigonus, and Polyperon, and many others,
who were beginning to take their way toward their several Provinces; he told
him also that Lysimachus conjured him, for many reasons, not to stir from
Polemon's house, since it was however necessary the army should draw that way,
and that he would wait upon him there, before he had gotten up his strength
again: Though Oroondates was exceeding sorry for Lysimachus his delay, he was
comforted by the hope of his revenge, which he already saw in a very good
forwardness; he asked Cleantes many questions, to which he answered very
pertinently, and the fair Amazon being already well instructed in their
affairs, was desirous to interess her self in them as in her own, and protested
to Oroondates, that she would run his fortune, and that she would second him
to the death in so lawful an intention. Oroondates, who could not slight her
assistance after the knowledge he had of her valor, returned her thanks with
great civilitie, and extolled her generositie in terms that satisfied her very
much. The next day he sent back Cleantes to his Master with this letter.

Oroondates to Prince Lysimachus.
MY trouble for your absence, is moderated by the cause that retard's you; it is
too just a one to be complained of, and your intentions too generous to be
disapproved; if your goodness has gained me considerable friends, it will
likewise keep me in their good opinion by the same ways, and will procure me
a place in the esteem of great Ptolomeus, the advantage whereof will be
totally mine; Besides those Gallant warriers you have armed to maintain our
quarrel, we have here Bellona, who engage's her self in our misfortunes, and
whose assistance will be both glorious, and beneficial to us; shorten our
discontents the most you possibly can, and be pleased to undertake nothing,
without giving a share in your glory, to him that bear's a part in your
misery.


Cleantes being gone, Oroondates continued with the Queen, intending to stay in
that house, there to expect news from Lysimachus, as also the recoverie of his
health, and the pleasure of the gods, who had confined him to the banks of
Euphrates. The servants Lysimachus had left were so careful of him, that within
a few days his wound was quite closed up, and within a few more perfectly
hardened; his strength began to com to him again, and though he recovered not
that fleshiness, and that lively color he formerly had, he got up a good part
of his wonted vigor, and within a short time found himself in a condition to
bear arms again, and to execute whatsoever his resentment could require from
him. Thalestris, whose wound had been much lighter, was cured as soon as he,
and she might have hoped to be suddenly strong enough to begin the search of
her faithless Orontes again, if the design of assisting Oroondates, and those
of his party, had not tied her to their interests with so much affection, that
she seemed to have forgotten her own. The Prince of Scythia acknowledging
himself infinitely obliged unto her goodness, repaied her all manner of
civilities, and took as much care to divert her, as the extremity of his
sadness would permit him. He walked often with her by the river side, and in
the wood, where his encounter of the names of Cassandra, and Euridice, whose
misfortunes, and whose characters, were so like to those of his Princess, moved
him again to a curiosity of learning news of those strangers, and remembering
that Araxes had seen Polemon, discoursing in his garden with unknown Cassandra,
he believed he might from him receiv the information he desired; to that end
having sent for him, he prayed him courteously, to tell him what he knew
concerning them, Polemon without staying for a second entreatie, Sir! (said
he) both the quality, and the adventures of those fair strangers are unknown
to me, and I can only tell you, that perchance the earth never bore more fair,
nor more lovely persons, they were in this house for some few days, but now they
are gone away, and as I was ignorant from what part of the earth they came
hither, so am I likewise to what place they are retired, this is all I am able
^o let you know, and I most humbly beseech you Sir, not to desire any more of
me. Oroondates judging by this answer, that either Polemon knew no more then
he had told him, or that he had some reason to conceal it, was not willing to
press him any further.

Polemon's servants went every day to Babylon to fetch provisions, and
Oroondates would needs send Araxes with them privately, to inform himself
concerning Barsina, and many other persons, who formerly had born him
friendship, but above all he gave him order to enquire after Toxaris, and
Loncates, of whom he had heard nothing, and whose loss he bewailed as that of
two most faithful servants. Araxes, acquitted himself very discreetly, of those
commissions he had received from his Master, and a^ his return, told him that
Barsina was not at Babylon, no more was Apamia, nor Arsinoe, who were gone from
thence with their husbands; that King Occhus his daughters, and all those
persons that had any affinity to the Blood Roial of Persia, had forsaken the
Town to avoid the cruelty of Roxana, Pendiccas, and Cassander, who menaced
them with a general ruin, that Perdiccas made the forces of his Allies to
advance on all ^ides, to defend him against those that were discontented, by
whom he was already threatened; that there was not so much as any mention of
Arideus, and that he had preserved nothing at all of that shadow of Roialtie
which had been given him; that a most exact guard was kept at the gates, that
they got in arms, and victual from all parts, and that in short they prepared
themselves all manner of ways for a war; that he had sought diligently after
Toxaris, and Loncates, but could hear no news of them in the world. Araxes
having given his Master this perfect account, furnished him with matter to
entertain himself for the rest of that day, and to drown part of his sorrows in
the thoughts of war. The next day he sent one of Lysimachus his servants to
him, to give him notice of his being recovered, and to pray him earnestly not
to leav him longer in a shameful idleness.

After the Messenger was gotten on hors-back to go toward Ptolomeus his Camp,
Oroondates went abroad and took his ordinary walk along the river, he had
long entertained his melancholy thoughts upon the banks of it, when having his
face turned toward Babylon, he saw a Cavalier armed at all points, coming
along the great road; the little desire he had to meet with any body, made him
step aside among certain sallows that grew by the edg of the river, yet he
went not so far out of the way, but he could observe, that the man whose beaver
of his helmet was down, was of a very fair stature, and that he carried a
woman behind him, whose face was covered with a vail, and her habit like that
of the two women, whom he had found asleep not long before, and out of whose
hands fell the letter of the unknown Cassandra. The arms of this Cavalier were
smeared in some places with blood, and his horse had some light hurts: The woman
embraced him very closely, and he turned toward her sometimes, and returned
her kindnesses with great demonstrations of affection. Oroondates did not much
consider it, but he was extremely surprised when in the discourse of those two
persons, he thought he heard the voice of his deceased Queen, he lent an ear
to that sound in a great amaze, but the hors-man was quickly a good way off,
and the poor Prince attributed that opinion to the preoccupation of his mind,
which had formerly produced the like effect. This belief having redoubled his
discontents, O grief! (cried he) is it not sufficient that thou troublest my
reason, but thou must also corrupt my senses; and must thou needs imprint thy
self afresh in my soul, by all the objects that com before my eyes, and all the
noises that enter into my ears? art thou not absolute enough in my heart
already, without seeking new sorts of tyranny, and do thou not torment it
with inhumanitie enough, unless thou aggravatest my misfortunes by new kinds of
cruelty? This reflection having much augmented his sorrows, plunged him into so
perfect a melancholy, that he continued on his walk along the river, not
thinking what he did, till he came within sight of the walls of Babylon; at
last he perceived he was gotten above fifteen or sixteen furlongs from
Polemon's house, and was already turning about to return thither, when his ears
were stricken with a doleful sound, and harkening to it with some attention, he
discerned the voice of one that lamented. His grief had not extinguished that
generositie of mind, whereof he had ever made so high, and so regular a
profession, and his fortune at that time, by a most fantastical caprichio gave
him a very strange occasion to exercise it; he saw a horse hard by him, which
having broken the reins of his bridle, fed at liberty upon the grass that grew
on the bank of the river, and casting his eye a little further off, toward the
place where he had heard that mournful voice, he perceived a trace of blood
upon the earth, and having followed it a while, he at the foot of a tree
beheld a man completely armed, and the grass about him died with the same
blood, wherewith the field was sprinkled; his charitable humor made him draw
near that wounded stranger, and asking him presently both how he felt himself,
and who had put him into that condition, without staying for an answer he
pulled of his cask, and taking his curass off likewise, he began to search for
his wounds. This man by that assistance breathing a freer aer then before,
began to look upon Oroondates, with a feeble voice prayed him to try if he
could stanch his blood. The Prince of Scythia was already endeavoring to do
it, and having torn part of the linen he wore, made rowlers of it, wherewith
he began to bind up his wounds with much dexterity and pity; he had one
upon the thigh, and two in his body, from which he had lost so great a
quantity of blood, that he was hardly able to move; when by the help of
Oroondates the course of it was a little stopped, the stranger finding eas, and
looking upon him from whom he had received that relief; Whosoever thou art
(said he) that so charitably assist's me, know that thou have don this office
to neither an ungrateful person, nor one unable to requite it; I have some
credit in this country, which thou may make use of, if the gods grant me
my life, and if thou can make me be carried to the city. These words
obliging Oroondates, to eye this man a little more intentively then he had yet
don, he observed a great deal of Majesty in his countenance, and features
which were not utterly unknown to him; he began to promise him all manner of
assistance, when the stranger to stir him up to it the more; To the end (said
he) thou may not believ thou have employed thy charity upon an ordinary
person, and one from whom thou could exspect nothing but common hopes, know
that I am called Perdiccas. Never did thunderbolt, falling at the foot of some
young shepherd, strike him with so strange a surprise as that did the Prince of
Scythia, when he heard pronounced that hated, that detested name of Perdiccas.
At so great an astonishment, all his blood retired to his heart, his face grew
pale, the linen he yet held, fell out of his hands, and sinking down, he was
near losing his senses, and his understanding; all the words in the world, and
all the most natural, and most powerful expressions, are too weak in this
place, and can but unperfectly represent Oroondates his thoughts, and the
estate he was in at this adventure. That Perdiccas, that Monster, whom he
could not consider as other then a murderer, yet stained with the richest
blood that was so dear to him; and he whose death he had not only sworn, but
whose death alone was the only aim of his life, and the only cause why he had
preserved it; that horrible parricide, against whom thousands of men were at
that time taking up arms for his quarrel, by a miraculous decree of the gods,
is delivered into his hands, yet delivered in such a condition, that he cannot
give him the death which ought to limit both his life and his misfortunes, but
without honor, and without resistance. It Is true, the nature of the offense he
has received, may well excuse his revenge, which way soever he execute it,
and that now he no longer has to do with that glorious enemy, for whom so
many illustrious actions, and more lawful jnjuries, had heretofore given him,
more generous resentments, and more particular considerations; but with this
Tygre, who violating all divine, and humane laws, had newly stabbed his dagger
into the bosom of his lovely Statira, of the Queen of his soul, nay of his own
Queen too; that abominable murderer of the widow of his King, and the greatest
of all the Kings that ever were, and with him in short into whose breast he
ought to send a thousand deaths, if he were capable of suffering so many,
without any respect to his weakness, and without regarding a generositie which
was no longer seasonable, nor decent in those terms, to which so just a despair
had reduced him. Indeed any other soul but his would have run headlong to that
revenge without pondering the fitness of it, and any other Lover but he would
have embraced that occasion to satisfy so lawful an anger, without having any
consideration of honor, for him that had extinguished them all, in the horror
of so dreadful a crime; but Oroondates his mind was of another temper, and
though he was a man, though he was a Lover, though he was desperate, he was
not capable of killing a wounded person, nor of taking away a life which he
was not able to defend against him; yet would he not pardon him neither, but
how firmly soever he was resolved upon Perdiccas his death, he could not
resolv to take so shameful a time to give it him, and in those deadly trances
wherewith he was cruelly combated, the motions of his eyes, and the
alterations of his countenance discovered his perplexity. Perdiccas was not so
far spent, but that he perceived his change, and would have forced himself to
ask the cause of it, when Oroondates broke his mortal silence, and stepping back
some few paces from him, crossing his arms upon his breast, and lifting up his
eyes to heaven. O gods! (cried he) what strange inhu^anitie, or rather what
strange injustice do you use against me? you have a thousand times disarmed
this hand, which I had armed against the first ravisher of my happiness, and
now you take from me the liberty of punishing the infamous butcher of my
life, and of the most perfect creature you ever sent into this world! you will
have me see this cruel man, but see him in a condition which forbid's me to
give him that death I was preparing for him, and which could not but be too
gentle for the expiation of his crimes: How, (said he again) am I then
forbidden to give him his death? what, shall not Statira then be revenged?
shall that pure blood which crie's against this barbarous villain, and that
dearly beloved spirit which wander's incessantly about me, have no
satisfaction? and shall this monster, by the justice of heaven, fall into my
hands, only to receiv assistance? Ah! no my virtue, no my generositie, I no
longer know you; you were noble toward Alexander, but toward this Tiger, you
would be base, you would be condemnable; he must die, and I must die with
him, but this sword that ought to cut the thread of our two lives, must begin
with the more guilty, and end with the more innocent. At these words he put
his hand upon the hilt of his sword, and advanced a step or two toward his
enemy, but seeing him stretched out, at the foot of a tree, and almost
fainting, he stopped, full of grief and confusion; Ah! miserable man, (pursued
he) what will thou do? and by what an action will thou dishonor all those of
thy life? thine enemy lie's all along, sorely wounded, and perhaps ready to
expire, his baseness cannot excuse nor authorize thine, and if Perdiccas be
still Perdiccas; remember that Oroondates is still Oroondates; if the Traitor
escape these wounds, he shall not escape thy lawful fury; and if he die of
them, thou ought to expect that from them, which thou can not give him
without cowardice; thou shall take away his life with more glory, when thou
shall take it in the midst of his guards; and when he shall be able to
dispute it with thee; let him live then, the infamous wretch, let him live,
since the gods and my cruel destiny do so ordain it; I do not pardon him a
crime, which is not of a nature to hope for any, but I defer his punishment, to
the end I may give it him without shame, and that I may die without repentance.
When Oroondates spoke these last words, he was so near unto Perdiccas, that
he could easily hear them, and he was not so far gone, but that he understood
part of them, and had observed part of his actions. He was ignorant of their
cause, and desiring to know what it might be, he strove to raise his voice, and
looking upon Oroondates; I know not (said he) what injury I have don thee,
that thou should so soon change thy former goodness into bloody reproaches,
and designs against my life; I never saw thee that I remember, and this first
sight had wrought in me a desire to requite thy good offices, which should not
oblige thee to hate me. Ah! Monster (cried the Prince, turning away his eyes
through horror) butcherer of the fairest Princesses in the world, do thou
believ there is yet a man that can know Statira's Murderer, and not be his
enemy, must thou escape me, thou barbarous fellow, me, I say, who am more
concerned in her loss then all the earth together? Oroondates would have
continued his reproaches against Perdiccas when he interrupted him, and
stretching out his hand, Friend (said he) let us make peace I pray thee, the
assistance thou have given me, make's me desire it with thee, and I declare
unto thee truly, that if thy hatred be grounded only upon Statira's death,
thou ought to ceas to be my enemy. Statira is not dead, and would it
pleased the gods that ungrateful -- Oroondates suffered not Perdiccas to proceed
further, and if his first words had surprised him, this second astonishment,
which his lust caused in him, was infinitely above the former. How! Perdiccas
(cried he, retiring two or three steps) is not Queen Statira dead? Ah! try
not to prolong thy days by that deceit, the estate thou art in secure's thee
from my just indignation, and thou need not invent lies to save thy self.
Perdiccas making an utmost attempt against his weakness; I do not lie, (said
he) and I protest to thee by all the gods, not only that Statira is living,
but that she is living only by my means; ask the inconstant Cassandra news of
the ungrateful Statira; thou shall know that I saved her, to the prejudice of
my own fortune, and of my establishment, and thou shall know also that for a
recompense of that good service, she has cast her self into the arms of a
Lover, whom she adore's, whom she kissed, whom she embraced before my face,
and who has left me in the case you see. Perdiccas would have said more, if
his weakness would have suffered him, and if the vehemence of his speaking had
not moved him so that he fell into a swoun. It is impossible to represent the
strange inward motions that assaulted Oroondates in a moment; though he had
but an uncertain belief of Perdiccas his words, that joy as imperfect as it
was, had like to have been his sudden destruction. He remained a great while
without being able to express his several thoughts, and that strong surprise
had so amazed him, that he was hardly capable of any understanding. He had
much ado to dispose his mind unto that hope, and his soul was so prepossessed
with his former opinion, that it was very difficult to bring it to a belief of
that miracle; the excess of his happiness stupefied him, and he formed so high
an Idea to himself that his imagination was not able to reach it; he had some
trouble to believ even that he was alive himself, or at least to believ he
was not asleep. When he had a little recovered himself, Ah! (cried he of a
sudden) the gods have not revived my Princess, Perdiccas is a lier, and what
base fellow is but too capable of all manner of vices; he made a stop, after
that first exclamation, and having floated a long time in an uncertaintie full
of confusion. It Is no matter (pursued he) our condition cannot be wors then
it is; let us drive on our destiny to the uttermost, and let us learn from the
same mouth, either the end of this lie, or the perfect truth. With these words
he drew near to Perdiccas again, to clear his doubt, but he saw he was in a
swoun. Although he did not yield an absolute belief unto his words, yet was
he not so far from it, but that he suffered his mind to incline toward it a
little, and begun to look upon that man, with thoughts different from those he
had of him some few minutes before; insomuch that being excited either by his
natural generositie, or by a desire to learn the rest of his fortune, he ran
to the river, and taking up water in Perdiccas his cask, he cast some of it
many times upon his face, to bring himself again; but seeing that he labored
with small success, and that his weakness was such as required better remedies,
he resolved to assist him to the uttermost, and to return to Polemon's house,
to fetch those that might carry him softly away; but scarce had he gone an
hundred paces with that design, when he saw a great many men on hors-back
coming from the Town, who riding very fast, went straight to the place where
he had left Perdiccas. Oroondates got behind certain trees, being desirous
to know what they would do, and from thence saw that some of them having
alighted, laid the wounded man upon a Bier which they had brought, and took
their way toward Babylon again. Oroondates seeing himself eased of that
trouble, saw himself also deprived of the hope of learning more certain news of
his Princess, and after their departure he remained leaning against an oak, in
the posture of a man whom powerful causes of admiration had utterly stupefied.

All the different thoughts, that different passions could store up in mind,
assaulted him then in a throng, and so confounded him, that left him not the
liberty of any choice, nor of any distinction. At first his imagination
following his desire, he believed as he wished, that Statira was alive, and
in that first belief, joy so strongly possessed his soul, that there was hardly
any footsteps of his grief remaining in those delightful motions: but as his
happiness had seemed probable, by the conformity it held with his desires, so
by its excess it appeared incredible, and made him find impossibilities in
that, to which he had lent faith so easily. Statira had been stabbed, cast
into a well, and covered with stones in the presence of Tyreus, who had
reported it, and her death was so generally confirmed, that there could no
longer be the least doubt of it, nor the least glimps of hope. This reflection
precipitated him in a moment, from that highth of bliss, to which his first
opinion had raised him, into that gulf of misery wherein he was already
buried, and put him again into his fatal thoughts with more sensibilitie then
ever. Ah! (said he) Perdiccas is a Traitor, and a parricide, and I should be
the simplest of all men living, if I gave credit to the word of a man branded
with so many crimes: that mean spirited fellow was afraid of death, and by that
cunning believed he might prolong his life, let us not therefore flatter our
selves any more with vain, and ridiculous hopes, which would but render our
death more sorrowful and more sensible. Statira is dead as certainly as the
King her father, and Fortune has only sent me this encounter to make her
self sport with the destiny of a miserable man. After this thought succeeded
many others, which fortified the first, and gave light again to those hopes he
had conceived, he remembered that Perdiccas had mentioned Cassandra in his
discourse, and that name recalled many things into his memory, which might serve
for the clearing of what he desired. Those words upon the trees, and rocks,
with the names of Cassandra and Euridice, which he had so often read, the
characters whereof were so like those of Statira, and the sense so conformable
to her fortune, and her humor; That letter which was fallen into his hands, out
of Cassandra's, the writing whereof differed not at all from that of his
Princess, and which in those terms it was couched, could not be addressed to
any other then himself under the name of Orontes which he had ever born, and
by which she for the most part was wont to call him; Those visions which
Lysimachus and he had seen at Polemon's house, both upon one day, and which in
stead of being those beloved spirits, might be the real bodies of their
Princesses, the opinion he had, that he heard their voices in the wood, some
few minutes before he found those women asleep; and the same conceit he had
that very day, of the woman whom the horsman carried behind him, who according
to the computation of time, and the marks he bore upon his arms, and upon his
horse, was like to be the very same who had wounded Perdiccas, and who
answerably to his report, had likewise in his presence expressed those
kindnesses to that woman which he complained of. In short all that could
confirm what Perdiccas had said, came into his mind, and made it so likely,
that he hardly found any thing at all to doubt of. Well, (cried he of a
sudden) let us hope, Statira is without question alive, and if I am not the
blindest man in the world, I cannot but know my happiness. O gods! if you
should have wrought this miracle in favor of me, what should I offer upon your
altars, and what should I do to acknowledge a mercy of that nature? After these
words, and some others full of transport, he repeated all those passages in his
mind, from whence he could draw any assurance of his good fortune, and
examining his last encounter particularly, he found it so agreeable to
Perdiccas his words, that he no longer doubted but that woman which rid
behind the Cavalier, whose apparel was so like Cassandra's, and whose voice
was so like Statira's, was really Statira her self; Being fortified by these
last considerations, in that opinion, he gave himself over to his joy, with
such excess as might have caused his death, if in the same encounter he had
not met with strong occasions to repress it: True it is, that after having
heedfully considered all things, he believed he had found Statira again, in
the person of Cassandra, and of the woman who had passed by him that very day;
but he could not give way to that thought, without making room for another,
which was able to counterpois a good part of his happiness, nor believ Statira
to be living, without believing her to be in the power of that Lover with
whom Perdiccas reproched her, and whom he had seen her embrace in his own
presence; This opinion settling it self with the other, produced little
different effects, and as joy had banished all fatal thoughts out of his mind,
the jealousy that accompanied it, banished the greatest part of that joy out
of the same mind; Statira is alive, (said he with a discontented look) but
she is not alive for me, that ungrateful Princess is in the arms of a new
Lover, and she who after so many years service, hardly granted me the
slightest favors, hugg's and embrace's a new-com servant without modesty, or
discretion: Suffer not thy self therefore to be carried away with the
excessive joy, thou feltest for the recoverie of that inconstant woman, the
gods restore her not to Oroondates, though they restore her to the world, and
it is but for the interests of a rival, that thou have made thy vows; and that
thou rejoicest without sense or reason. His jealousy increasing by the
strength of appearances, grew then so insolent, as to dispute for superiority
with his joy; and indeed it had not so little power, but that it held his mind
for some time wavering in suspense; but in the end the excellency of his
nature, and of his affection, which was absolutely pure, and disinteressed,
gave joy the upper hand, and made him more satisfied with the life of his
Princess, then afflicted with her inconstancy; he thereupon repented his
former thoughts, and striving to suppress them; O! my affection (said he
again) pardon me this weakness, I am not yet loosned enough from humanity, to
forget all my interests, and 'twas base in me to consider my self in the
safety of my Princess; let her live, for me, if it be possible; and if that
hope be forbidden me, let her live however, and let only Oroondates die,
since he is incapable of living without her. How! Let only Oroondates die?
(added he within a minute after) Ah! that design is unjust, Oroondates will
not die alone, that happy rival who triumph's over so many sufferings, and over
so many years service,shall infallibly accompany him to his grave; I Will follow
him into what part of the world soever he shall go, and carry death into that
same breast where he has lodged the image of my Princess. As he brought forth
these words, his face was inflamed with an excessive color; and anger and
hatred came to mingle themselves among the other passions which had found place
in his soul. He then turned over a thousand different thoughts, and that
change of his fortune, putting him into a condition of taking new resolutions,
and of crossing the order Lysimachus and he had agreed upon, plunged him into
a deep study which kept him above an hour upon the bank of the river where he
was set down. At last he arose from thence, as much confounded and unresolved
as before, and walked again toward Polemon's house, but leaving it upon the left
hand, he followed the course of the river, till before he was aware, he got
above a dozen furlongs from it, when he began to com to himself again, he
found he was close by the side of a wood, the shade whereof suiting well with
his pensive humor, begot in him a desire to visit it; he sought out the
thickest, and most retired places, to which he communicated his new causes of
joy, and his new causes of sorrow; and after having wavered a while in the
diversity of his thoughts, he resolved in the end, to give Lysimachus notice
of that adventure, and to follow the track of his rival to spend the last drop
of his blood, in disputing with him for a conquest he had so easily, and so
unjustly obtained; with this design he had already turned about to find his
way home again, when from one of the remotest places of the wood, he heard the
voice of certain persons who spoke with a great deal of vehemence, and these
last advantages having taught him to neglect nothing for the knowledge of his
fortune, he lent some attention to them, to see if from thence he could draw
yet something more toward the clearing of his doubts: for that purpose he
directed his steps that way where he still heard that nois, and had not gone
far, when through the boughs he perceived a man armed completely, except his
cask which lay upon the grass, fitting by a Lady, to whom he talked with very
much action; as soon as he was near enough to hear what they said, he thought
he knew their voices, and that conceit made him creep a little nearer, under
favor of some trees which hid him. From that place he overheard their discourse;
and endeavored to get a sight of their faces, but scarce had he cast his eye
upon them, when he was strongly confirmed in his suspicions, and forced to
contradict all probability to give credit to his eyes and ears; yet though
these voices, and faces were perfectly known to him, he accounted that
adventure so exceeding strange, and so surprising, that he could hardly believ
it; in this confusion he heard the conversation of those two persons, and
quickly lost his doubts by a most assured confirmation, the attention he lent
permitted him to understand their words distinctly, and to observe all their
actions, so that he heard that fair Lady, after she had roughly pulled away
her hand from the man who held it between his, speak to him on this manner;
Think not unworthie man, thy threats can terrify me, no more then thy
flatteries have won me, I cannot love thee, nor will I be afraid of thee, and
as thy wickedness give's me an aversion against thee, so the hope I have in
the justice of the gods, free's me from the fear thou would strike into
me. I speak no longer to thee, as to a man that had yet some sens of virtue,
but as to a faithless subject, who violate's all manner of Laws in the person
of his Princess, and who cannot be touched with any other consideration, then
the apprehension of those punishments that hang over his head. It Is by them
therefore that I will repress thy insolence, and it is by the terror of heavens
thunder, that I will divert thee from thy abominable intentions. Consider yet
once again (if thou have still any remembrance left of what I was, and of what
thou were thy self, and if the change of my fortune, have not raced out of my
forehead the character, which my birth had there imprinted) consider that I am
the daughter of thy King, and that thou art my father's subject, that from an
unreasonable ambition, thou passest to a most horrible attempt, and that in
short thou ought to remember I am still Berenice, and that thou art still
Arsacomes. This Princess, whom after these words Oroondates could not but know,
would have said more, if Arsacomes had not insolently interrupted her. I am now
no more in a condition (said he) to be satisfied with these kind of words,
and if I commit any faults, the violent passion I have for you may excuse them
all, you know that I have suffered with patience enough, and that in spite of
the indignity of your usages I have served you with respects which are neither
due to the daughter of ones King, no nor to the gods themselves; nay with
respects which you ungratefully have abused. Those gods wherewith you threaten
me, are the irreprochful witnesses of it, and they likewise know that I fly
not to this extremity against you, till after I had rendered you all that I
owed both to your birth, and to my love, and after having combated your mind
by duties and submissions able to have mollified a Tygress, you have repaied
them with scorn, with injuries, and with indignities, and have ever used me
not only as the vilest of all men living, but as some aspick, or some savage
beast. Think it not strange therefore, if I try the last means I have left,
and if having no more hope to make you relent by ways of gentleness, I make
use of the power the gods have given me, to obtain those favors, which you may
make legitimate when you pleas. Arsacomes ended these words in taking
Berenice's hand, but she rose up furiously, and looking upon him with eyes
sparkling with anger, To thee, traitor (said she) favors to thee? Ah! know I
can die to keep thee from them, and that I am not so forsaken by the gods, but
that I hope for their assistance against thee. The gods (replied Arsacomes,
holding her by the gown, and rising after her,) are not concerned in your
fantastical humors, and since you urge my patience to extremities, know that
they shall not deliver you to day from the design I have for my satisfaction;
your obstinacy from henceforth is unprofitable, and you must either consent to
my utmost felicities, or dispose your self to see me take them by force,
saying thus, he took her in his arms, and having kissed her whether she would
or no, he prepared himself to give her more sensible displeasures, when
Oroondates, who had not been able to contain himself so long without a violent
constraint, stepped forth from the place where he was concealed, and showing
himself to that guilty man, with a face kindled by a just indignation,
Arsacomes (cried he) thou traitor Arsacomes, hold thy hand; These words were
to him like a thunderclap, the forerunner of the bolt that threatened him, and
getting loos from Berenice's nails, who had already marked his face in diverse
places, he turned briskly about to Oroondates, and drawing his sword, put
himself in a readiness to punish the obstacle of his intentions. At first he
knew him not, but Oroondates coming up to him with a fiery eye, before he
assaulted him, struck terror into him with these reproaches. Look here disloial
man (said he) look upon this face, and acknowledge the justice of the gods, who
reserv unto thy Prince, the rescue of thy Princess, and the punishment of thy
offenses unto him whom thou have mortally offended. He had not the leisure to
enlarge himself in a longer discourse, and though Arsacomes had no part of him
unarmed except his head, and that he had no other arms but his sword alone,
he stood not considering whether he should undertake that unequal combat, but
setting himself in his guard he made at him with more judgment, then it was
probable his boiling anger should have left him. Arsacomes knowing him, was
surprised with an astonishment which cannot easily be represented, and seized
with a mortal apprehension which made him tremble from head to foot. He
repented himself instantly of what he had attempted, but being truly valiant,
and judging that his remors was unprofitable, he banished it together with his
fear, and placing his safety only in his valor, he resolved to prosecute his
crime to the uttermost. Berenice was so surprised with so strange an adventure,
and so unexpected a relief, that she had scarcely understanding enough left to
make prayers for her brother. Oroondates stirred up by so lawful a resentment,
desired to make a speedy end of the combat, and taking the advantage of
Arsacomes his astonishment, who if he had not been in such an amaze, was one
that would have troubled the valiantest man in the world, he very actively
avoided the first blows he made impetuously at him, and watching an
opportunity to get under his sword, he engaged the point of it, and bearing
it up with the midst of his own he slipped along the blade, and thrust it up to
the hilts, where the defect of his curass afforded way. Arsacomes fell with the
wound, and weltring in his blood, his life streamed out with it at a double
passage. Oroondates whose wrath was appeased by the fall of his enemy, had some
kind of sorrow for his destiny, and though his crime made him unworthie of
any pity, he could not see him struggle with death, and not be touched with
some sens of compassion; He had not time to show any marks of it, and the
Princess his sister, who ran to him after his victory, withdrew him from all
other thoughts save those of testifying his joy to see her, by all the
endearments of a most affectionate brother; they had not the leisure before, to
make known the astonishment their encounter had mutually caused in them, but as
soon as they were at liberty to express themselves, they suffered their love to
break forth into all manner of proofs, and having ever been most sincere, it
discovered it self by excessive evidences; and the joy of Berenice, who in the
person of her brother had found a deliverer, and by his assistance had newly
escaped so great a danger, could not manifest it self but by actions full of
ecstasy and wonder. After many several long embraces, O! dear Brother, O dear
Sister, (cried they both together) is it you? and not being able to bring
forth any other words, they begun their kindnesses afresh, with such raptures
of affection and tenderness as are not easy to be represented. Oroondates
held Berenice in his arms, giving her a thousand kisses, notwithstanding all
his discontents, and the alteration of his humor; and Berenice who had nothing
more to wish for after meeting with him, hung about his neck, to which she
seemed to be fastened with indissoluble chains. In the end they gave some
respite to their embraces, and their first amazement beginning to vanish by
degrees, O dearest Brother (cried the Princess) by what strange mercy of the
gods have I so favorably met with you, and how is it possible I should have
found you in this country in so strange an equipage? But you, Sister, (said
Oroondates) you whom I left in Scythia, and to whom such voiages are not usual
as they are to me, by what strange adventure came you into these parts, and
which way fell you into this danger, from which the gods have miraculously
freed you? The adventures indeed (replied the Princess) are not a little
extraordinary whereby I am fallen into these misfortunes, but the recital of
them deserv's a fitter season, for though Arsacomes be dead, he has left
those very near this place, who, in the estate you are in, may make you run some
hazard, put on his arms therefore since you have the leisure, as well to deceiv
their knowledge, as to be able to defend your self if they assault you.
Oroondates approved his sisters counsel, and coming to Arsacomes he began to
take off his curass, and the rest of his arms; but not without showing marks of
trouble, and repugnancie in that action, nor without accompanying them with
words that testified his compassion of him. Unfortunate Arsacomes, (said he)
have the gods made use of my hands to punish thy faults; and have they
destinied me to deprive thee of a life, for which I would willingly have
hazarded mine own, if I had found thee in another condition? but it is no
matter, with what crime soever thou have armed me justly against thee, I wish
thy spirit an eternal repose, and I will have my sister pardon thee an offense,
for which thou by thy death have made her sufficient satisfaction; the Princess
whose anger was but too much extinguished in the blood of her enemy, conformed
her thoughts unto her brothers, and keeping no hatred at all against dead
Arsacomes, she desired his ghost might enjoy a perfect tranquillity.
Oroondates had already put on his curass, and having by Berenice's assistance
fitted himself with the rest of his arms, he took up the cask which he saw
upon the ground, and having covered his head with it, he appeared little
different from Arsacomes. Scarce had he made an end of arming himself, when
the Princess seeing a man com toward them, armed likewise at all points, and
mounted upon a gallant horse, Ah! brother (cried she) see yonder the perfidious
Astiages, who, by his pernicious counsels, has alone brought me into the
danger, from which you have delivered me. Fear him not sister (said the
Prince) and believ that the gods send him only to receiv the recompense of his
good advice; and to furnish us with a horse, which was necessary for us: After
these words he went to meet Astiages, and as soon as that wicked fellow saw
him, Well Sir, (cried he) have you any need of our assistance? Oroondates
answered nothing, but the beaver of his cask being down, he let him com up to
him in a place, where he could not discover Arsacomes his body. The Prince
was a little taller of stature then Arsacomes, but Astiages who was far enough
from suspecting the truth of that adventure, took not notice of it, till he
had seized upon his rein; that action caused him to consider him, and observing
some difference, he began to pull away his bridle, when Oroondates holding it
with an extraordinary force, Traitor (said he) thou must die, and give an
account of thy crimes, to him whom the gods have sent to punish thee. Astiages
finding he was mistaken, would have repaired his fault, and putting his hand
upon the hilt of his sword, he at the same time clapped spurs to his horse to
trample Oroondates under his feet, but the Prince stopped the horse with his left
hand, and seeing that Astiages had bowed down his head almost to the saddle
bow, he clinch'd his fist, which had a good gantlet on it, and discharged so
weighty a blow with it upon his cask, that Astiages thought himself
overwhelmed under the ruins of some tower; the cask indeed saved his life, but
it kept him not from being so stunned, that after a while, he opened his
arms, and fell without sens under his horses feet. Oroondates judged that he
was but in a swoun, but he disdained a more perfect victory, and being
unwilling to dispatch an enemy, who was no longer able to make resistance, he
contented himself with taking his horse, which he led toward the Princess, who
came toward him to partake in his second victory. Brother (cried she) you are
still invincible, and running to him with open arms, she began her endearments
anew, which the Prince returned with alike affection. Berenice then thought her
self at the end of all misfortunes, but that day, which was to be a day of
wonders to Oroondates, was not yet passed, and it pleased the gods that while
the Princess was most busily employed in her kindnesses to her brother, a
Cavalier attended by his Squire, came passing hard by her, he made a stop to
behold her face and action, which after he had don a while, he lift up his
hands to heaven of a sudden, and after a loud cry, he ran to his Squire, who
held two javelins, and having taken them out of his hand, he cast one of them
at Oroondates his feet, crying to horse, to horse, I defy thee to a mortal
combat; Oroondates seeing himself defied by a man whom he knew not, and whom
he had not injured, was inflamed with anger, and taking up the dart he had
thrown him, he leapt upon his horse, which he held by the bridle, while his
enemy having turned his back, went to take his carrier, that he might run at
him the more impetuously; and while the Princess Berenice afflicted at this
last encounter, had cast her self upon the ground, where she made war against
her beautiful face, and her fair hair. They were not now in that part of the
wood, where Arsacomes was killed, and where the thickness of the trees might
have hindered the liberty of their course, but near the river, and the great
high way, and in a place spacious enough, for the combat of a greater number.
These two warriers having taken sufficient room for their carrier, turned about
their horses, and setting themselves firm upon their stirrups, they came at one
another with a fury like that of an impetuous wind, and a swiftness that
might be compared to that of an Eagle stooping to her prey; the earth trembled
under them, and the banks of the river ecchoed at their meeting; they were both
such Masters of their trade, that they equally frustrated each other's designs,
and receiving the blows upon their shields, which were aimed at the sight of
their helmets, they splintred their darts in a great many pieces, without any
effect, and ended their carrier, no more shaken by that powerful encounter,
then two rocks by the dashing of the stormy billows. At the end of their course
they drew their swords, and wheeled about with a fierceness able to strike fear
into the most resolved persons. Oroondates lifting up his terrible brow,
covered with the cask of the unfortunate Arsacomes, and measuring his enemy
with his eye, thought he beheld the same Cavalier who had passed by him some
hours before, and whom he suspected to have carried away Statira, and to have
left Perdiccas in the case he had found him. In that belief he held up his
hand, by that sign making show that he desired to speak to him e're he
proceeded further: though the stranger had much ado to grant him that delay,
he made a stop for a few moments, and Oroondates without putting up his
beaver; if requests are decent amongst enemies (said he) tell me I pray thee,
if thou did not fight with Perdiccas to day. I have no design at all to pleas
thee (replied the stranger) but if thou art Perdiccas his friend thon may
revenge his quarrel against me, who both fought with him, and beat him. I
defy thee then thy self, (cried Oroondates furiously) unto that mortal combat,
to which thou first did challenge me, and which shall neither have end, nor
respite, but by death; He accompanied these words with a dreadful blow, which
coming with that force which nothing yet had been able to resist, and falling
upon the strangers head, made him sink almost to the bow of his saddle, and was
like to have made him fall among his horses feet. Never Lioness touched with
the hunters spear, turned with such a fury against him that wounded her, as
did the stranger after so dangerous a salute; he had been so little accustomed
to receiv such like favors, that his anger as violent as it was, began thereby
twice as much inflamed, and grasping the handle of his sword, and at the same
time grating his teeth, he lift it up as high as ever he was able, and
brought it down so heavily upon his enemy, that his arm, which with his shield
he had opposed against that tempest, yielded under so weighty a burden, and
his shield was thereby struck so forcibly against his forehead, that it made
him reel in his saddle, and bend backward to the very crupper of his horse;
After this mighty blow, the stranger desiring to take the advantage of his
enemies disorder, closed up suddenly to his right side, that he might run the
point of his sword between the joints of his arms, and overthrow him upon the
sand by a shock which he could not avoid. But Oroondates, who was none of
those that could so easily be vanquished, was already in a posture to hinder
his intent, and making his sword glitter in his eyes, caused his thrust to
glance along his shield, and pass away without effect; but they rushed against
each other so violently with their shoulders, that the petrels broak; the
horses sunk in the hams, ready to set their hanches to the ground, and the
Masters by the surie of that encounter, were almost disabled to continue their
combat; yet did they com up again to one another more terribly then ever; and
by those first strokes, knowing their valor mutually, they employed all their
vigor and dexterity to seek out their best advantages. O my pen! in this place
thou must confess thy disabilitie, and that thou feel thy self too weak to
represent this dreadful combat, the description whereof passe's both my
language, and my imagination; but to give some slight knowledge thereof it will
suffice thee to say, that the most violent of all passions, animated the most
valiant of all men, and that with it Fortune conspired, to make what ever was
greatest, and most to be redoubled in the whole world, dispute a matchless
victory on that small piece of earth. The studs of their arms were beaten out
in many places, pieces of mail lay scattered in the dust, and the blood ran
down from diverse parts of their bodies, and yet their choler was not at all
abated, nor did their forces seem at all diminished; on the contrary their
wrath was the more inflamed by the fight of their blood, and their animositie
was redoubled by resistance. 'Twas in that season of the year when the days
were at the longest, and yet the sun began to decline, before one could observe
any advantage or decreas of strength on either side. The desolate Berenice
spectatress of that combat, poured forth a deluge of tears at the foot of a
tree where she waited trembling for the success of it, and begged of the gods,
with most fervent prayers, accompanied with two torrents gushing from her eyes,
that either they would grant her brother the victory, or send some charitable
persons to separate them. The stranger's Squire earnestly made the like
requests, and remembering former successes, admired that one man could so long
contest the victory against his Master; he was too well acquainted with his
humor to dare to help him in an equal fight, and was not ignorant that he must
never hope for pardon after such an action. But in the end the bodies of these
two gallant men being neither of brass, nor marble, they began to grow weaker,
and their loss of blood, and want of breath, made them find less force in
their blows, and less nimbleness in their motions; their horses wearied with so
long toil, and wounded with some strokes otherwise intended began to fail first;
they no longer understood the spur, and answered but little to their Masters
designs, when being joined very close, and being hardly any longer able to
lift up their swords, they let them fall both at the same time, and catching
hold of one another bodies, they began a wrestling on hors-back, in which they
spent almost all the rest of their forces, but yet had not the success they
hoped for; their strength was then so equal, that they could not shake one
another out of their seat, and though each clapped spurs, to drag his enemy
along with him, their tired horses proved weaker then themselves, and with the
remnants of their vigor, they so firmly crushed their flanks, that so long as
they kept their hold, it was impossible for them to move forward; the girths
began to crack, when these two invincible warriers, enraged at the length of
that combat, at once remembered the daggers that hung behind their backs; they
put their hands thither hastily, and having drawn them to end their quarrel,
while with the left arm, each held fast about his enemies middle, with the
right they struck a great many blows at one another, and fighting then with a
blind, heedless fury, most of them light upon their armor, but some having
found the defects of it, with new streams of blood, drew also the remainder of
their forces; then being no longer able to keep it, they let go their hold,
and their horses being no longer stopped by that potent obstacle which had made
them till then unmovable, parted and carried away their riders above an
hundred paces from one another. That of Oroondates stayed first, and his Master
turning him about with much ado toward his enemy, saw him totter in his
saddle, and presently after fall upon the sand; proud of this victory he
would have cried, I have conquered, but he had not so much strength as to
speak those words, nor to keep his seat, so that tumbling from his horse with
very weakness, he had no other comfort in his fall, save that of seeing his
enemy down, a moment before him. The disconsolate, or rather the despairing
Berenice, ran to him quite besides her self, and pulling off his cask in all
haste, she saw him faint and pale, losing his senses with his blood, which
flowed out at many wide passages. O gods! how great was her affliction then;
and what lamentations she made over the body of that dear brother: it seemed
as if inconstant Fortune had only given her him some minutes before, to make
her the more sensible of his loss after so unexpected a recoverie, and if the
conversation of her honor, which she had saved by that encounter, had not been
a thousand times more considerable to her, then that of her life, she would
have detested it a thousand times, since the gods seemed to have sent it her
for no other end, but to overwhelm her in the most killing sorrow her heart was
capable to receiv; in the person of Oroondates she not only lost a brother,
but a brother who was really the gallantest of all men living, a brother that
had ever most dearly loved her, a brother to whom she had such fresh
obligations, and a brother in whom she had found her only refuge, in a
country where she was abandoned to all manner of disasters; and destitute of
any sanctuary, or any acquaintance; she cast her self upon him without
moderation or regard, and stained her self with his blood as she washed him
with her tears; her beautiful face wherein Nature had carefully set forth her
chiefest rarities, and which in spite of her long afflictions, shined like a
fair star, but some few minutes before, was then the true image of desolation
and despair, or rather the very picture of her dying brother, her hands which
would have respected it in her ordinary luster, knew it not in that condition,
and were so sacrilegeous as to carry themselves insolently against it, and leav
marks in it of the power grief had over them; As soon as her voice had forced
the passage which her sighs had long made good against it, Fortune (cried she)
injurious Fortune, by what crimes have I so hainously incensed thee, and what
advantage can thou draw from thy merciless persecutions? did thou seem to
be reconciled with me so lately, for no other end but to make me the more
sensible of thy cruelties? and did thou restore me this dear brother only
to take him from me again with so much inhumanitie? Dear brother, (continued
she, closely embracing him and joining her face to his) the greatest, and most
lovely Prince in the whole world, must so brave a life have so short a thread,
and so deplorable an end; and have the gods brought us together after so long a
separation, for nothing else but that I might close thine eyes, and pay thee thy
funeral rites? will you forsake me then in an unknown country, where I had no
other refuge but in you? and since you have lived for my honor, will you not
live still for my happiness? As she spoke these words, after she had
unbuckled his curass, she laid her hand upon his heart, and finding there yet
some remainder of warmth, Ah! dear brother (cried she) there is still some life
in you, and perhaps the gods will yet preserv you; assist me then you gods,
you that are all good, and all powerful, and let not the perfectest of your
creatures perish for want of succor. With that she rose up from her brother,
and running through the wood, she called for aid, even to things that were the
most insensible; while she was in this sorrowful imploiment, the stranger's
Squire made most bitter lamentations over his Master, and judging that alone
he could not give him that assistance which was necessary, left him to beg
some help at the nearest houses. He was already gone, and the night that came
on apace, redoubled Berenice's confusion and despair, and plunged her soul into
inconceivable frights and terrors, when her good fortune brought them to her,
from whom she quickly received assistance. It was Araxes, Polemon, and some of
Lysimachus his servants, whom the Princesses cries had drawn unto that place:
Araxes was in pain by reason of his Master's long stay abroad, and had been some
hours in search of him with much disquiet. No sooner did Berenice see him
appear, but she ran affrighted to him, and stretching forth her hands in a
beseeching posture, Whoever you are (cried she) if there be any pity in you,
succor a dying Prince, and your assistance will be bestowed on one that well
deserv's it: Scarce had she spoke these words, when Araxes thought he knew
that voice, and though the little probability there was in that encounter,
made him very uncertain in his belief, yet did it cause him to look heedfully in
her face, where, notwithstanding, that darkness began to steal away the light,
he observed so much resemblance to that of Berenice, that his suspicions
redoubled, and were strong enough to make him cry, O gods! Madam, what do I
see? can it be you my honored Princess? These words, and her having met with
Oroondates, made his faithful Araxes known to Berenice, who received no small
consolation by his sight; she was not able to dissemble it, but forgetting her
greatness, and her ordinary gravitie, in a time when so many accidents had
perplexed her, she embraced him, and gave him a reception, he could not have
hoped for from her in another season. Araxes (said she) it is even I Araxes,
and the gods have put me again into the arms of my dear brother, only to make
me a witness of his death. Behold him here (continued she drawing near him)
behold your poor Prince, yielding up his life with his blood, through a great
number of wounds. If Araxes was surprised with the unexspected encounter of
Berenice, he was more sensibly stricken with her words, and not losing time to
answer her, he ran to him, so lost and blinded with sudden grief, that he
almost trod upon him, in his haste to find him: When by the light of the moon
which began to shoot forth reasonable clear beams, he saw his dear Master in
so woeful an estate, he was seized with such a violent sorrow, that he was
like to have kept him company, he was going to fall into bewailing
complaints, when he remembered that his help was more necessary for him then
those unprofitable testimonies of his affection, and summoning all his courage,
to make himself capable of doing something in an affliction that put him besides
himself, he stood up, and while Berenice, and Polemon having quite disarmed
him, applied handkerchiefs to his wounds, to stop the blood he had yet left in
his body, he busied himself with the rest, in cutting branches, and making a
kind of hand-barrow to carry him away, Lysimachus his two servants less
possessed with grief, wrought so fast, that they quickly made one fit to serve
their turn, and having spread their cloaks, laid the Prince upon it, and began
to bear him gently toward Polemon's house. Although Araxes was generous and
charitable, his being so powerfully prepossessed, hindered him from taking any
care of the stranger, who by the absence of his Squire was left alone, and
stretched out upon the place, without sens, or appearance of life, and thinking
only upon his Master's safety, in all his actions he did not ill second the
mourning of the afflicted Berenice. They had not gone above half way, when
either through that stirring of him, or some other cause, Oroondates came out of
his swoun, and by some little moving, accompanied with a weak sigh, he raised
their almost quite dejected hopes, and restored some serenitie to Berenice's
countenance, she stepped close to him in a suspense between joy and grief, and
having called him twice or thrice, she saw him turn his head toward her, and
give her that token he had some understanding left. Ah! my dear brother (said
she) you shall not die, your virtue is too dear unto the gods, to lose hopes
of something to your advantage. In the mean time Polemon was gone before, to get
ready all things necessary, and before they arrived at his house, they met the
Amazon Queen, attended by Hippolita and Amyntas, who came toward them in a
fright at the news she had heard of that accident; having vowed a real
friendship to Prince Oroondates, her grief was not slight for his disaster, and
drawing near him, she gave all the proofs of it he could desire from the
Princess his Sister; they went into the house together, and having put him
presently to bed, Amyntas looked upon his wounds; he had two in his body, two
in his thighs, and one in his left arm: All that were present exspected the
Chyrurgion's opinion, with apprehensions which were easy to be observed in
their countenances; but O gods! how great was their joy, when having searched
them, he gave assurance that none were mortal, that only loss of blood and
weariness had caused his sounding, and that if he would but be more tractable
then he was of his former wound, he promised them an infallible cure within a
short time. This judgment brought joy again amongst persons so affectionate to
him, and they altogether showed marks of it proportionable to the friendship,
which nearness of blood, obligations, and the consideration of merit, had
established in their hearts; color returned into their faces, and Queen
Thalestris, who in her first trouble had not considered the Princess Berenice
attentively, cast her eyes upon her with more curiosity, and hearing her call
Oroondates by the name of Brother, she called to mind some lineaments of that
beauty she had seen in Scythia, but desiring a more perfect assurance of it,
she drew it from the mouth of Araxes. As soon as he had fully informed her,
she used complements to the Princess, full of respect, and civilitie, and
Berenice who at the same time learned Thalestris's quality from Araxes,
repaied them with all manner of submission; the disquiet they yet were in for
Oroondates, would not suffer them to hold any long discourse, and they concluded
with protestations of a perfect friendship, and mutual promises to tell their
adventures, and let each other know the cause of their arrival in that country,
as soon as they should have a more convenient time. In the interim Oroondates
was so far com to himself, that he spoke, and knew every body, and seeing
Berenice at his bed side, I am wounded sister (said he) but my rival is slain,
and the ungrateful Cassandra shall have but little satisfaction by her
infidelity. These words, the cause whereof was unknown to all that were
present, made them believ he was lightheaded; but after them he spoke others
of so good sens, that they partly lost that opinion. Madam (said he to Queen
Thalestris) see there the Princess my sister. I know it Sir, (answered
Thalestris) and since that knowledge, have vowed my affections to her, with a
great deal of respect, and desire to merit hers by my services. That offer
(replied the Princess) is too advantageous to me, to receiv it as other then a
mere favor, and since with so much goodness, you grant me what I could not
justly hope for, I will not abuse it further, then to beg the continuance of
it. Their civilities had not ended so soon, if they had not been in another
place; but Amyntas, who already had dressed the Prince, imposed them silence,
and having more expressly enjoined it to his patient, he persuaded them to
retire. The two Princesses, whose friendship was quickly grown, went into
Thalestris's chamber, where having given each other new confirmations of it,
resolved not to part beds while they continued together. After supper, they
mutually expressed their desires to know one another more particularly, and
Berenice having told Thalestris, she desired to make her the relation of her
life in the presence of the Prince her brother. Thalestris offered to begin
with hers, and for that purpose going to bed together within a while after,
they spent a good part of the night in the recital she before had made to
Oroondates. Berenice infinitely taken with the wonders of her life, with her
detested Orontes his infidelity, and having promised to requite that favor, as
soon as her brother should be able to hear her, those two great Ladies fell
asleep when it was almost day, and rose not till it was very late. In the mean
time Oroondates (whose thoughts returned to him with his forces) was in a
condition different from that wherein he had passed many days, he rested all
night reasonable quietly, and the next morning he reflected upon his fortune,
and after long contestation judged it to be rather better then it was before.
Statira is inconstant (said he to himself) but yet at least she is alive, and
unless in my affection I considered only mine own interests, I cannot equally
consider her death and her infidelity; I had rather she should ceas to love
me, then ceas to live; and it is enough that my jealousy arms my hands against
my rivals, without arming my wishes against my Princess; let us satisfy our
selves with having displeased her in the death of her favorite, and if my love
demanded reparation from her inconstancy, let us believ that that we have
received is no light one, since with our own eyes we have seen him fall dead,
whom she loved more then her life, being for him, she in so short a time had
lost the memory of our services and of her illustrious husband. But miserable
man, (said he again) what do thou rejoice at? can thou be pleased to
have offended thy Princess, and can thou have sent him out of the world, whom
she loved, without becoming her mortal enemy? and can thou become her
enemy, without becoming a more cruel enemy to thy self? But, (added he for
his justification) 'twas that rival himself that defied me, and assaulted me
upon that quarrel; I can suspect no other cause of it, and he without question
knew me for Statira's servant, and for him that had heretofore obliged her to
some good will; perchance also he is not dead, but may have received from his
friends, alike assistance to that which has brought me back from the grave;
if it be so, O Rival! in spite of all my repentance, and in spite of all
Statira's interests, prepare thy self for a second combat, and dispose thy self
to lose thy pretensions with thy life, or to tear away these remainders of
mine; there is no part of the world able to conceal thee from the pursuit of a
desperate lover, and thou art too brave a man, to hide thy self from him
against whom thou so valiantly have defended thy advantages. This thought
having drawn on another, he opened the curtain of his bed, and calling for
Araxes, commanded him to send to the place where they had fought, and if his
enemy were found there capable of any assistance, he charged him to give it
him as to his own person, and to use his utmost endeavors to recover him into a
condition of terminating their quarrel; He took care also for Arsacomes his
burial, and having given these orders in a few words, and obeyed the command
he received from Amyntas, to keep silence all that day, The two Princesses
left it him wholly free, and being got up late, they contented themselves, at
the Chirurgians desire, with going but once into his chamber, to give him the
good day, and to enquire how he did. He had already told them his encounter
with Perdiccas, and had as much astonished them with those last effects of his
generositie, as he joied them with the news of Statira's safety, whose loss
they had deplored as well as he. In the mean time Araxes being returned from
the place whither his Master had sent him, brought backward that he had vainly
sought the bodies of the stranger, and of Arsacomes, and that some one having
taken them away, had hindered him from rendering them the last offices of burial.
Oroondates expressed some trouble at it, and the next day the Princesses
obtained permission of Amyntas to stay with him, and keep him company upon
condition they should not make him speak too much. As soon as Oroondates saw
them by his bedside, addressing himself to the Princess Berenice, Sister (said
he) we have not yet had time to entertain one another, since our meeting; I
burn with an impatiencie to learn your adventures, and the cause of your coming
into this country, I beseech you to satisfy it in the presence of this fair
Queen, who need not be suspected to us. Brother (replied the Princess)
provided your health may receiv no prejudice by your attention, nor by the nois
of my speaking, I am ready to content you, and to tell you wonders that are
unknown to you, and wherewith as you may remember, I never had the liberty to
entertain you during your imprisonment. The Princess then turning toward
Amyntas to ask his approbation, and he having assured her that Oroondates
might hearken to her for some time without danger, she began the relation of
her adventures thus.

The History of Berenice.
HOw shall I be able, dear Brother, to avow my faults and weaknesses to you,
and what account shall I give you of a life, which you must needs think
criminal, if you judge of my actions with severitie, and if you have not some
regard to a dear memory, to reasons that are specious enough, and to the
frailty of our nature: Indeed this consideration abashe's me, and make's me
fear as many changes of my countenance in this relation, as you will find
changes in my fortune; but Brother, to reassure me, I will remember not only
that you have loved, since decency prescribe's us different rules; but that
this fair Queen who hear's me, has not been exempt from this passion, and
that by the height of yours, and the qualities of your person, you obliged a
great Princess, whose virtue was without blemish, and whose example may
authorize part of my faults, to slacken something of her severitie for your
sake, and to conceiv inclinations full of a real affection. After this
preparation to my discourse, I will make you a naked confession of the accidents
of my life, whereof you have till now been ignorant, and with part whereof I
had entertained you in Scythia, but for the strictness of those spies which
were set over you in prison, and the order that was taken about your departure.
I will therefore begin my recital from the time of the first voyage you made
into Persia, and will neither tell this fair Queen my birth, which she cannot
be ignorant of, after the knowledge of yours, nor the particulars of my
infancy which have nothing considerable, and whereof the remembrance is but
too deeply drowned in that of my more important adventures.

You know I was but in the thirteenth year of my age, when you marched against
Darius, with the King our father, and all the forces of Scythia, and I hardly
began to enter upon the fourteenth, when the King returned to Issedon with his
army, and yet even when I was so young, I did not escape the assaults of
Fortune, nor of those sorrows wherewith I have since been overwhelmed. The
first I received of weight enough to make it self be felt, was that of your
going away, and though I saw marks of your remembrance, in a letter which was
given me from you, that testimony of your affection served only to make me
more sensible of your departure, and I, with my particular affliction,
accompanied that general excessive sadness, which seized upon the whole court
for that occasion; The King expressed an extraordinary grief, and condemned
the lightness of your youth, by words which sufficiently made known how really
he loved you at that time. That kind of mourning, took off much from the
divertisements of that winter, and moderated those rejoicings which were
prepared for the Kings return, and for the success of his arms; and then it was
that the sorrow which by your absence had begun to possess my heart, sought
occasions to settle it self there for the remainder of my life. But because I
cannot enter upon my story without the mixture of another, which make's a good
part of it, I must follow the thread thereof according to the order of time,
and before I tell you my misfortunes, I must discover the cause of them unto
you. You know that the King was ever of a very amorous complexion, and that
after the death of the Queen our mother, he had already expressed love to
many Ladies of the Court, but all those first affections had been without
fixing any where, and without continuance, and it was believed that all that
should succeed them would have alike success, when for our unhappiness, and by
the cruelty of the destinies, he fell desperately in love with Stratonice,
Sister to the unfortunate Arsacomes, and daughter to the Prince of the
Issedons. She was bred up with me, as many other Princesses of Scythia
although I was younger then she by five or six years, and I may truly say
that her beauty, the excellen^^e of her wit, and a great many good qualities
she possessed, had produced in me a real friendship toward her. I will not
describe a beauty to you Brother, which heretofore you were very well
acquainted with, and I will only call to the remembrance of this fair Queen,
who perchance may have seen her during the stay she made at Issedon, that all
the features of Stratonice's face are very handsome, that her skin is white and
delicate, her eyes and hair black, her stature tall, and that in all her
actions, and the motions of her countenance, she has a great vivacitie, and
something very attractive. True it is that she never made use of her wit to add
new graces to it, and that having one of the most crafty, subtle ones, that
can be known, she often employed it with success to seek her own advantage.

It was upon the day when the feast of the goddess Tellus was celebrated, that
she received the first testimonies of the Kings affection; or at least of his
particular esteem, and of his preferring her before all the Ladies of the
Court. There was a sacrifice made unto that goddess in a large open field, in
the midst whereof an altar was raised, upon which the King for an offering,
was to cause a basin of the finest flowers, and fairest fruits the country
could produce, to be presented by some Lady, who for her beauty, virtue, or
quality, by his choice, deserved to be so preferred above all the rest. This
honor was so considerable, that it was envied by the fairest; and those that
distrusted the obtaining of it, found commonly some pretenses, not to be
present at that ceremony. Stratonice who certainly had a great deal of reason
to pretend to it, was one of the first there, and of the nearest to me; If
she had any hope of it she was not deceived, for the King never wavered in
his choice, but looking upon the rest with a kind of disdain, addressed
himself presently to her, and giving her the basin with his own hands, Fair
Stratonice (said he) receiv this authentic testimony of the advantage you
have over all beauties, and present unto the goddess, this offering of a King,
who acknowledge's you worthy of more noble, and more solid offerings yourself.
Stratonice whose ambition had not yet deprived her of the knowledge of her self,
could not hear these words of the Kings without blushing, and very modestly
receiving what he held forth to her, she answered only with a profound
obeisance, and acquitted her self exceeding gracefully of what she had to do
for the accomplishment of the ceremony. After that first knowledge of the Kings
particular esteem of her, she received many others of an affection taking
birth, and within a while after of a settled passion. Being she at that time
had no other designs, then what she might with reason conceiv, she made no
great foundation upon it, and knowing how truly I loved her, she declared
unto me all the King's proceedings, and desired me to set down the order she
should follow, if that fancy should run on. I approved her discretion, and
thanked her for the respect she showed me, but not believing that the course
of the King's affection to her would be of any importance, I referred the
conduct of it to her own prudence, as being younger then she, and more
ignorant in matters of love. In the mean time the King persisted so in that
passion, that by little and little the world began to lose opinion of his
inconstancy, and Stratonice to change part of her modesty into an ambition,
which made her raise her thoughts to unjust hopes; she then left off speaking
to me any more touching the King's prosecutions, and concealed that from me,
which had formerly made part of our entertainments. I carried my self with so
much innocence toward her, that I dived not into her intentions, and I never
thought her desires aimed at that dignity, which since she has attained. The
King who loved her most ardently, served her with great discretion, and I did
not believ she grounded any thing upon his love, till I received an assurance
which would no longer suffer me to doubt of it; One day when she was in my
chamber, I put her upon that discourse, and asking her some questions about the
King's affection, she spoke of it as of a thing she had no thought of, and
whereof she could hardly endure the remembrance, and disapproved the King's
courtships in such terms, as made me believ she gave no consent to them at
all: I praised her discreet inclinations, and modest carriage, but within a
while after, as she went out of my chamber, a paper dropped from her clothes,
and one of my waiting women having taken it up unseen to her, brought it to
me. I was familiar enough with Stratonice, to take the liberty to see her
secrets, and upon that confidence having unfolded the paper I found three
letters, by the first of which I knew the Kings writing, and presently after
read these words.

The King of Scythia to the Princess Stratonice.
WIll you be ever insensible of my affection, fair and lovely Stratonice, and
will you still oppose me with that tyrannical duty, whereby you defend your
self against it with so much inhumanitie; give over these unjust inclinations
Stratonice, and divest your self of that old error, which perswade's you that
it is a greater crime to love, then to murder a King.


The reading of this letter discovered unto me part of Stratonice's
dissimulation; but I was better confirmed in it by the sight of the other two,
which like that was o^ the Kings own hand; the first of them was much after
this manner.

The King of Scythia to the Princess Stratonice.
I Can hold out no longer, Stratonice, and you have at last reduced him to beg
mercy of you, who never needed it from any body; you have don enough for your
justification, and that severitie for which you pretend to be praised,
become's blameable by its object. You can no more with glory give death to him
who never defended himself against you, nor can you give him life so long as
you shall refuse him your affection.


In these two first letters I saw nothing that could make me condemn
Stratonice for her dissimulation, but in the third I found some words that
displeased me, they were these, or to this purpose.

The King of Scythia to the Princess Stratonice.
WHy do you tell me, that I am not indifferent to you, since by your actions
you testify the contrary? and why do you suffer me to conceiv hopes, if your
intentions be otherwise disposed? I have given my self wholly to you, and I
have yet obtein'd nothing from you, it is time, fair Stratonice, that you
should do something in my favor, and that of an unfortunate man as he is, you
should make him the happiest of all the Princes upon earth, whom of your King,
you have made your slave. Matheus.


The reading of these letters caused in me an extreme spite at the cunning of
Stratonice, from whom till then I had never concealed my most secret thoughts;
and I began to believe, that she had unfitting designs, since she had not
discovered them unto me; not that I doubted her virtue, I had too much
knowledge of it to contradict my former opinion, and certainly she never gave
any occasion to have it suspected; and I ought to confess, since it is a truth,
that in all the course of the Kings affection to her, she ever behaved her self
exceeding modestly, and never exceeded the strictest rules of chastity. I was
displeased at her dissimulation, and I expressed my resentments to her, though
with much gentleness; At our next meeting, I drew her to a window, where our
discourse could not be overheard, and giving her the letters, Here cousen (said
I) I restore you, what chance and your negligence have caused to fall into my
hands, and I am very sorry they have discovered to me, what you with so much
prudence have disguised. Stratonice was so confounded at these words, and at
the sight of her letters, that as cunning as she was, she could not dissemble
her astonishment; her face changed color twice or thrice, but when she had a
little recovered her self, It is true Madam, (answered she) of late I have not
told you any thing concerning the King's obstinacy to torment me; but 'twas
because I feared I could not make my complaints to you, without falling into
anger against a person to whom you are so near, and to whom both you and I ow
all manner of respect. I was but little satisfied with that answer, and replied
smiling; you are not so tormented by him, but that you give him hopes. It is
not, Cosen, that I would go about to disapprove your actions, you are discreet
enough, both to measure your self, and to know the Kings intentions; but I am
so much your friend, as to take the liberty to tell you, they cannot be
advantageous to you; although you are worthy of an extreme good fortune; no
body believe's he has a design to marry you, and all other thoughts he can
have, must needs be ruinous to you. Stratonice could not forbear showing some
confusion at this discourse, but having a great deal of wit, she was not long
e're she reassured her self, and answered, I will endeavor Madam, to draw
benefit from your good advice, and what design soever the King can have upon
me, I will ever have that, of neither doing or suffering any thing that can
make me unworthie of your affection, or of your good opinion. She brought
forth these words with an alteration which made me know she was not pleased
with what I had said, and presently after, our conversation being interrupted,
we no more sought occasions to begin it again, and I contented my self with
having made Stratonice see her artifices were not unknown to me, without
pressing her any further. She in appearance bore my reproof modestly enough,
and carried her self toward me, as she was wont; but within a few days
after, the King meeting me in a gallerie near my lodgings, took me by the
hand, and drawing me aside from my maids that followed me, Berenice (said
he) you are two young to instruct those that have more age, and knowledge then
your self, and I do not like that you should counsel my Mistress to my
prejudice. These words so surprised me, that I remained a long time silent;
and full of confusion, and fear of having displeased the King, by the liberty
I had taken, but settling my self as soon as I could, Sir, (said I) I never had
any intention to give counsels to your Majesty's prejudice, and I shall never
instruct any body, but to pay those services and respects that are due to you.
Berenice (replied the King) you understand me well enough, without explaining
my self any further; In short, Stratonice has no need of your lessons, and you
ought either to give her advice quite contrary to that she has received from
you, or else to give her none at all. The King afforded me not the leisure to
make answer, but having led me back to my company left me at liberty to
digest his discourse. I was not so much amazed at the sharpness of his words, as
at the intelligence they discovered between the King and Stratonice. I could
never have believed she had so much intimacie with him, as to tell him what I
had said to her, but this assurance would not let me doubt any longer of the
progress the King had made in her mind, by his courtship, and by the hopes he
had given her. I observed the Kings command exactly, and from that time
forward, I never took the liberty to censure Stratonice's deportments, she
behaved her self toward me with very much respect, but with more coldness then
formerly, and I always showed her an equal countenance, and an extraordinary
civilitie. The King, who no longer concealed his affection from any body, made
many entertainments for her, and raised all manner of gallantries, to a greater
height in the Court then ever; he commonly wore her colors, and apparelled
himself with more spruceness, and braverie, then he had don in his youth, and
by a thousand actions made all the world know he had bounded all his thoughts
in her alone. He neither gave, nor granted any thing but by her intercession;
the most important Offices of the Kingdom were bestowed upon her kindred, and
her brother Arsacomes was presently raised to the highest dignities he could
wish. Yet found he difficulties in his intentions, which he had not
apprehended, and Stratonice, who as ambitious as she was, was nevertheless
very chaste, never gave him any advantage over her, which could wound her
reputation, and contented her self with having great compliances for him, and
receiving the honor he did her, with all manner of submission, and modest
respect, without letting her self loos to blameable liberties, and such as
might have stopped her passage to that greatness, which she has since attained.
I believ indeed that in this discreet, and virtuous way of proceeding, she
followed the incitements of her own nature; but it is also true, that she was
confirmed in it by the counsels of her mother, who was one of the most politic
women in the world, and who often represented to her, that by that manner of
carriage, she might change the nature of the King's passion, and engage him in
an affection full of esteem, and respect, which might raise her to the highest
dignities. Stratonice hearkened to these instructions, and practiced them with
so much prudence, that the King, whose thoughts at that time perchance were
different from those he has had since, began to fear the success of his love,
and to despair of possessing her by any other then lawful means, which yet he
was not resolved to make use of; for notwithstanding the excess of his
affection to that Princess, he was too great a Politician, to prefer the
motions of his love, before the consideration of his State, and to run on to a
marriage, that would be condemned by his neighbors, and murmured at by his
people.

Behold in what condition were the affairs between the King and Stratonice, and
I thought fit to tell it you in a few words, before I engaged my self in a
recital, which has a great dependence upon that I have made you. Now I must
acquaint you, that while the Sister stood upon these terms, the Brother I know
not by what blindness, found something lovely in me, and whether it were by the
rigor of my destiny, or the cruelty of his, engaged himself presumptuously in
that affection, for which I have suffered so much, and for which he himself
has suffered a death, which by his last actions he deserved. Arsacomes was
then about two or three and twenty years old, and I may tell you Madam, that
he was of a fair stature, a handsome person, expert in all manner of exercises,
and had the reputation of a valiant man. He by birth held the rank of a Prince
amongst the Scythians, but by the King's favor he was raised above all
dignities, and considered, by the absence of the Prince my brother, as the
second person of the Kingdom. The King, who, besides that he loved his sister,
had observed a great many recommendable qualities in him, had placed him in the
highest degree of Fortune, that any Favorite had yet been seen to rise to, and
every day redoubled his favors toward him, with so many demonstrations of
friendship, that his happiness quickly drew the envy of the Courtiers. It is
true that Arsacomes carried it with pride enough, and being of a very haughty
nature, he found matter enough in his fortune to become insolent, and
insupportable by his vanity. He was liberal, but he gave with ostentation,
and when he had don any one a courtesy to the King, he would set so high a
value upon it, as took away part of the obligation. I repent me that I said
he found something lovely in me, since now I think better on it, I believ it
was only his pride that made him raise his eyes to the daughter of his King,
and that seeing nothing in Scythia, which according to the vanity of his
conceit, was not below him, he believed that without abasing himself, he
could not address his thoughts to one of meaner quality. It was a long time
e're I discovered them, but the reflection I have made since, put's me in mind
of many actions I saw him do in the beginning of his love, which were
sufficient to have made me observe it, if I had been so much concerned at that
time; in the Temples, in all assemblies, and in the visits he made me, his
eyes were always fixed upon my face; he sighed, he changed color, and by all
his actions gave me cause to suspect him of having particular thoughts of me,
he sought out and affected occasions of being near me, and when he met with
any of doing me service, he embraced them with cares, which his high,
ambitious humor would not have permitted him to take for any other Princess,
except her to whom he had given his affections; I valued my self enough to
receiv all his services, as the duties to which my birth obliged him, and
seeing in him every day new marks of complacencie, and civilitie toward me, I
witnessed my sens of them by all manner of good usages, and accompanying the
King's esteem of him with the proofs of mine, I by the innocent testimonies of
my acknowledgment, fortified him in her thoughts, and in those hopes, he had
unjustly conceived. Certain it is I continued a long time without suspecting
him to have any design I could condemn, and that I should have considered his
actions a great while longer in the same manner, if in the end he had not lost
his respect, to acquaint me with what I should, and would have been ignorant
of. His quality, the King's favor, and his many good parts, gave him a very
familiar access amongst us, and a free entrance into our chambers, and into our
conversations. Having one day attended the King into my lodgings, with many
others, while the company stayed in my chamber, where I entertained the King,
he passed on into my closet where were some of my maids, and having talked with
them a while, he saw a standish and paper upon the table, and finding that
opportunity to his imagination, he resolved to make use of it, for a thought
that came into his mind upon the sudden, and sitting down by the table, he
began to write. My maids, who respected him for many considerations, not daring
to interrupt him; He had been so employed a good while, when the King went out
of my chamber, leaving him behind. After the King was gone, I went into my
closet, where I found Arsacomes leaning still upon the table with a pen in his
hand. As soon as he saw me com in he start up, and hastily hiding the paper
he had written, he seemed to be in a great confusion for having been
surprised in that action, and stepping back a little, he beseech'd me to
pardon his imprudence, in having taken a liberty in my closet, which he did
not think should have been known to me. I easily excused it, but knowing he
had a very good wit, I out of curiosity desired to see what he had written,
and making use of his accusation of himself; If you will have that pardon you
demand (said I) you must buy it with an obedience I desire from you, and must
show me what you have written upon my table, and upon my paper. The subtle
Arsacomes counterfeiting modesty, Ah! Madam (answered he) do not desire to
see these marks of my folly, and be pleased to require some proof of my
respects, that may be more advantageous to me. This unwillingness increasing
my curiosity, made me obstinate in my first intention. No, no, Arsacomes
(said I) you shall not escape me so easily, I believ you have written nothing
in my closet against the State, nor against decency, and if my curiosity be
not prejudicial to you, I entreat you to satisfy it. Madam (replied Arsacomes)
I have made so solemn a vow never to disobey you while I live, that I know
nothing that can remit me from it, and of what importance soever my secret is,
it is impossible for me to conceal it from you, since you have expressly
forbidden me. But Madam (continued he, drawing forth the paper he had put
up) before you cast your fair eyes upon this writing, I must tell you the
subject of it, and confess that I have set down in this paper, the true
declaration of my passion for a Princess whose divine qualities, ought to place
her above the rank of mortals, and my respect to whom, has hitherto kept my
tongue tied up with an extreme tyranny; I have suffered for her without
accusing her; I have suffered in her presence without declaring my torments
otherwise then by my looks, and other mute expressions of my passion; I have a
thousand times called for help from my courage to unloos my tongue, which in
this only adventure is deprived of his ordinary function; but that sovereign
Mistress of my life, has as often imposed me silence, by that profound
respect I bear her, and has reduced me to the necessity of tracing out those
words with my hand, which fear will not suffer my mouth to bring forth. She
shall read them her self, that absolute Queen of all my thoughts, and with
those same eyes, which burn the whole earth as well as me, she upon this
paper, shall see my real adorations of her. I was surprised at this discourse of
Arsacomes, and not having learned before that he was in love, I wondered to
hear him speak with so much vehemence, of a passion which was unknown to the
whole world, and being desirous to gain a fuller knowledge of it, I replied to
his last words. Your discretion is not common Arsacomes, in having so well
concealed from all the world, so violent a passion as you describe yours to
be; but since you have confessed so much of it to me, give me leav to ask
more, and tell me for the interest I take in your satisfaction, what assurance
you have, that she from whom you have always hid your thoughts, will see them
upon that paper? she will see them (answered Arsacomes) because she has
desired to see them, and that in presenting them to her my self, I shall only
obey the absolute command she has imposed upon me. If it be so (added I
innocently) you are not ill in her favor, and you ought to hope, that she will
not disapprove your designs, since she make's use of the power she has over
you, to oblige you to declare them to her. Alas! (replied Arsacomes with a
sigh) that is a thing to which I cannot lawfully raise my hopes, and that which
I love is so high, that Arsacomes is unworthie to look upon it, yet it is
certain, that I take not this liberty without an express order from my
Princess; but I am ignorant what the success will be, and I may learn it,
Madam, from your self, after you have read this paper, your thoughts will be
the thoughts of this divine person, and your fair mouth will without doubt
pronounce the sentence I shall receiv from her. If in the condition I now am,
one should hold such a discourse to me, I am not so dull of capacity, as that
I should need more ample expositions of it; but at that time I was so young,
and to say the truth so simple, and so innocent, that I understood not
Arsacomes his subtlety, and without sounding any deeper into his intentions,
or reasoning any longer with him, I took the paper he presented to me, and in
it read these words;

YOu have desired, O divine Princess, to know my most secret thoughts, accuse
therefore only your own commands of my temeritie, and remember I obey you, in
declaring that I die for you. That same respect which has made me dumb whole
years together, had yet concealed from your fair eyes this presumptuous paper,
where you now read this criminal discovery of my passion, if your own mouth
had not expressly forbidden me. Give me leav therefore, since you have so
commanded me, to make confession of a fault, whereof I neither can nor will
repent my self. It is true most divine Princess, that Arsacomes adore's you,
and that to those many powerful reasons which tie him to your service, he has
added an inclination yet more powerful; condemn it not as a crime, since it is
of the same nature with that we have of the gods themselves, and that in
considering you as the most lovely Princess in the world, he consider's you
also as her, whom of all the Princesses in the world he is least worthy to
serve.

Think, if after the discourse which had past before, I could still doubt
whether these words were addressed to me, and yet I was so simple, or rather I
found so little likelihood of Arsacomes his presumption, that I gave no way at
all to that belief, and with the same innocence I had showed before, I prayed
him, if he might, to tell me the name of that Princess for whom he had a
passion so full of respect. I dare not (said Arsacomes) though my Princess has
already commanded me, pronounce her name before you, but since I cannot
resist her will, and that you have neither learned it by the reading of these
words, nor by our conversation, you will be pleased that my pen, having
already don the office of my tongue, prosecute its crime to the utmost, and
write it upon the letter, which I will leav in your hands, upon condition you
will not read it till after I am gone from you. I promised what he desired, and
then taking the pen again, he put a superscription upon his letter, and having
given it me with a low reverence, went out of my chamber. As soon as he was
gone I cast my eyes upon it. but, O Gods! how great was my astonishment when I
read

To the Princess Berenice.
I Am not able Brother, to make you comprehend the trouble that seized me at
this encounter, and the displeasure I received at Arsacomes his presumption, I
fell into a sudden, and so violent anger, that I had not words to express it,
and after having torn the letter all in pieces, I sat down in a chair so
stricken, and confounded, that I had hardly confidence to look upon my maids.
Cillenia, whom I loved best of them all, stepped to me, and asking me the cause
of that sudden change; Let me alone Cillenia, (said I) let me pass over my
ill humor, and believ that if I thought thee an accomplice of Arsacomes his
temeritie, I would banish thee out of my sight for ever* Cillenia astonished at
that threat, made great protestations of her innocence, and persuaded me so
far, that I discovered my trouble to her, but in such terms as made her judge
that Arsacomes was extremely in my ill opinion; after I had said all against
him that my resentment could suggest; What, (continued I) shall I then endure
that a subject of my fathers should speak to me of love, and that he should
fool me, like an ordinary, simple girl? and shall his presumption remain
unpunished, because the King love's him, or rather because he is Stratonice's
brother? Ah! no Berenice, suffer not this injury without resentment, at least
endeavor to take satisfaction, and ask justice from the King thy father,
against the insolence of his subject; I was even upon the point of going
instantly to complain of him to the King, but when I remembered the
considerations he had for him, and the power Stratonice had over him, I
forbore that design, judging I should not obtain all the reparation I might
lawfully desire, and I resolved, without begging assistance, to keep off that
audacious man by all manner of scorn, and ill usage. Till then I had beheld him
without aversion, and had as others observed some good qualities in him, but by
this action he changed the nature of all my thoughts, and all that was most
advantageous in him, took then another form in my opinion; his courage begun in
it to pass for rashness, his dexterous wit for cunning, and treachery, his
liberality for vanity, and ostentation, and the confidence he had in his
conversation, and in all his actions, for an insupportable pride. This sudden
Metamorphosis made him instantly odious to me, and desiring to free my self of
him for ever, I commanded Cillenia to forbid him my chamber, and to give him
express order never to appear before me. She performed that charge the next
day, but I learned from her that Arsacomes seemed but little moved at that show
of my displeasure, and having patiently hearkened to all she said to him from
me, Cillenia (said he) the offense the Princess has received from me, is
not so great as she has fancied it, and if she will hate all those that love
her, she must dispose her self to hate all the world; If I never commit other
crimes I shall never have any repentance, and so long as she has no other
reason to accuse me, I shall not believ my self guilty to her; tell her
therefore, that if I had injured her in the smallest thought, I would wash my
fault off with my blood; but that in a condition full of innocence, she cannot
without injustice inflict pains upon me a thousand times sharper then death it
self; nor can Arsacomes hinder himself from loving her, so long as the gods
shall give him life, and knowledge. This was that he said to Cillenia, and she
having told it me, I found so much irreverence, and want of respect in his
words, that the hatred I had already conceived against him was thereby fully
redoubled. He received proofs of it at the first visit he would have made
me, and my maids having had such order from me, refused him entrance into my
Chamber, telling him I was not well, he was used on the same fashion, as often
as he came, and any other body would without doubt have been repulsed by so
many marks of my disdain; but though he was so proud as to support them
impatiently, he was likewise so vain as to hope he should overcom me at
last, and to be whetted by the difficulties of a Conquest, which by that
resistance would yield him more glory, and more satisfaction. Seeing therefore,
that his admittance into my Chamber was forbidden, whensever he came alone,
he disposed the King to visit me often, and coming with him, forced me to
suffer his presence against my resolution; but by that manner of proceeding,
wherein he showed so little obedience, and so little compliance with my
desires, he incensed my anger and my spite so violently, that I was hardly
able to dissemble it. I often received such like importunities, but I always
avoided him so warily, that I never afforded him the means of entertaining me
in particular. One day being com into my Chamber in his ordinary company,
he drew near to a window, where the King was talking to me, and within a
while after, the King stepping a little aside to speak to some of the Princes
that were com with him, left me alone with Arsacomes, whom he commanded to
make me the relation of something that had passed at Court a few days before.
I detested that spiteful occasion: but seeing my self reduced to the necessity
of either hearing him or speaking to him, I took that time to declare my
resentments, and as soon as ever he opened his mouth, whether it were to obey
the King, or to give me new causes of dipleasure, Arsacomes (said I) consider
who I am, and remember who you are your self, and since you have preferred my
hatred before the esteem I had of you, dispose your self to suffer it
eternally, and all the disdains that are due to a disobedience, and to an
insolence like yours. As confident as Arsacomes was, he was so dashed with
these words, that he was not able to dissemble it, he changed color twice or
thrice, but when he prepared to answer, I left him, and having found some
pretext to join with the company again, I no more gave him the conveniencie to
speak to me. After that day, knowing how much his carriage had displeased me,
he behaved himself with more moderation and more fear of offending me, and
seeing how carefully I kept him from all occasions of entertaining me, he
contented himself with showing me his perseverance, or rather his obstinacy
by his looks, and all his actions: While he stood upon these terms with me,
the King was upon those with Stratonice, which I have already told you, and
that crafty, ambitious woman having already raised her hopes to the Crown,
had extinguished all those the King had conceived by other ways. He labored
every day to overcom her, yet she yielded but very little, and following her
mothers counsels, she opened her way toward the Throne by her gentle cunning
resistance. The King having spent some time in this employment, turned his
thoughts upon the war with Darius, and having made great preparations, and set
that potent Army on foot, against which you fought in person upon the
Frontiers of Persia, he caused it to march toward his enemies Country, whose
ruin he aimed at in that expedition. I will not enlarge my self upon the
order the King took for his departure, upon the numbering of his Forces, nor
upon many other particularities which are not necessary to my Relation, and
which are above my element and my knowledge. I will only tell you, that the
King took his leav of Stratonice with all manner of expressions of trouble, and
that before he went away he made protestations to her of an eternal
affection. He used me with kindnesses suitable to the love he had ever shown
me; but though I was deeply afflicted at his departure, I found some
consolation in that of Arsacomes, who made the voyage with him. They went from
Issedon, and marched toward the Araxis with Forces that had drained a good part
of the kingdom, and which in probability were like to defeat his Enemies, you
know better then I, brother, the progress they made, and the circumstances of
their first actions, when they entered upon Darius his territories.


This part of the Princesses Discourse, bringing into Oro^ndates his mind, the
remembrance of Artaxerxes his death, drew sighs from the bottom of his breast,
and tears from his eyes in great abundance, and the Princess not knowing the
cause of them, asked him if he felt not some new indisposition; but the Prince
having wiped his eyes, and settled himself a little, prayed her to continue her
recital, which she did in these terms.

After the King's departure we remained at Issedon very melancholy, and
passed all the time of his absence very sadly; most of the principal men of
Scythia being with him, amongst whom all the Ladies of the Court had some body
to griev for. Stratonice visited me often, and paid me great civilities, but
we lived no more together with our former freedom, and the interests of that
ambitious Lady, had taken away part of the friendship she had born me. She
received many Letters from the King, and Arsacome^ was so impudent as to write
some to me; but they that delivered them from him were so ill received, that
they had no more the boldness to com to me with such like messages. As I have
excused my self from the discourse of the war, so I hope you will excuse me
from the recital of what passed amongst us during the King's absence, which is
indeed of no great consequence; and will be pleased I may pass it over, to
tell you, that having long wished for him, we saw him return to Issedon, four
Months after his departure; the condition he came home in, put all Scythia in
doubt what they should think touching the success of that war; of that great
and flourishing Army, we had seen march away a short time before, with such
gallant hopes, he brought back nothing but pitiful relics, laden with
wounds, and which hardly made up the tenth part of what he carried with him;
but these few shattered Forces boasted that they had cut all Darius his Army in
pieces and slain his own son, and all his chief Commanders upon the field which
they had won. However it were, the King was received as if he had returned
with his whole Army, victorious over all Persia, and those that had accompanied
him in the danger and hardship of his voyage, had their part also in his
reception. He showed as much kindness to me as I ex^pected; but without doubt
I had received more from him, if Stratonice had not possessed his thoughts, and
if he had not believed he owed part of that time to her, which in another
season he would have given to me alone. I will not lengthen my discourse, with
relating his new expressions of affection to her, they went beyond the
exspectation of the whole Court, and they, for many days, were the whole
entertainment of it; but I was the less troubled, because by the visites he
made her, he freed me from those of Arsacomes, who never came into my Chamber
but with him. He, as they said, had made himself remarkable in that war by
many valiant actions, and that reputation he had gained, had raised his pride
to a greater height; I had but too much knowledge of it by the continuation of
his importunities, and in all manner of encounter^ he lost no occasion of
letting me see, he persisted in the design of vexing me all his life. I took
not more care to avoid his company, then he did to seek for mine, and the
assurance he had that it displeased me, was never strong enough to divert him
from it. I was one day in the Temple of Mars, in the place appointed for me,
when the King passing by me, followed by Arsacomes, Theodates Cidaris, and
many others; after he had spoke some few words to me, went on to Stratonice
who was with her mother on the other side of the Temple, and all those that
accompanied him going thither also, only Arsacomes staid behind with me. This
action kindled me with spite and anger, which might have been observed in my
countenance, if any body had taken the care to look upon me; I turned not my
eyes toward him, but keeping them fixed upon a prayer book I held in my hand, I
used him with such a scorn as I was not wont to show to any body else; yet was
he not repulsed with it, but bowing down his head that he might be heard by
none but me, he said softly, I dare not, Madam, ask justice for your usage of
me, in any other place then before the god's; since only they are not below
you, and that only they know with how much injustice you have condemned my
zeal to serve you. He had said more without question, if I would have suffered
him to proceed, but though the consideration of the place where we were, and
of the assembly, kept me from breaking forth as I should have don, if he had
spoke to me otherwhere, yet did it not hinder me from replying with a look of
resentment and indignation. Arsacomes, if you continue to offend me, I will
require justice my self of the King my father, for the insolency of his
subject, and since my own consideration is not strong enough, to bring you into
the respect you ow me, I will know from him whether he approve's this
carriage which so much displease's me Arsacomes appeared a little stricken
with these words, but within a while after, he answered; The King is so just,
Madam, that I cannot fear his condemnation, nor believ that my zeal to serve
you, will pass in his opinion for an offense. These words redoubled my anger,
and made me reply: I account every thing an offense that com's from you, since
you have forced me to it, and I cannot receiv a more sensible one, then that
you do me in interrupting my devotions, to entertain me with your follies.
Arsacomes who had not utterly lost all respect, would not importune me
further, and bowing down to the very ground, he went to wait upon the King,
who was discoursing with Stratonice.

In many other encounters we had conversations of this nature, and as he
persisted in the design of displeasing me, I persevered in the resolution I
had taken to despise him all my life. In the end, his obstinacy tired but my
patience, and seeing with how much presumption he continued to give me marks
of his love by all his discourses, and by all his actions, I determined to do
what I had long de^err'd, for fear of enraging him; and knowing no other
remedy to cut off the course of the vexations I received, I made my complaints
to the King of his insolent persecution, in terms that made him see I was
deeply incensed. He had already some suspicion of it, upon light appearances,
whereon he had grounded no assurance; but at that time he seemed surprised
with the news, and made show to disapprove Arsacomes his boldness. I do not
intend (said he) that Arsacomes shall thus abuse my goodness to him; and if I
have considered him hitherto as one of the first men of my kingdom, and as one
for whom I have a particular friendship, I will not have my favors hinder him
from knowing himself, nor am I so blinded with my esteem of him, but that I can
abase him as much below what he is, as he would raise himself above what he
ought to be* I will make him know that I am not ignorant of his fault; and if
I had not particular considerations of him, I would let him see, by an
exemplarie punishment, how much his presumption has offended me. The King
spoke to this effect, at that time, and by many of his actions, made me find
that Arsacomes his boldness had displeased him; but the power his sister and
he had usurped over him, was the cause he slackned much of his first motions,
and because either less sensible of my interests, or more fearful to declare his
mind, in effect, he said nothing to him concerning it, whether it were that
he doubted he should fall into passion against a man whom he considered* and
was not willing to lose; or that he was afraid to offend his sister, to whom
his passion was then risen to the extremity; and without inflicting other
punishment upon him, he only complained to Stratonice, and prayed her to
represent his fault to him, and to bring him gently to a knowledge of himself.
That crafty woman, put on wonder at the King's discourse, and in show for a
while disapproved her brother's boldness; she protested to the King, that she
never knew any thing of it, and when she saw he was appeased by her
compliance; It is true Sir (continued she) that Arsacomes has don amiss, nor
will I allege unto your Majesty for his justification, that if the Princess
might be served by any one below a King, Arsacomes might with justice dispute
that advantage against all those who do not wear a crown; since he is born a
Prince, and that by your goodness, and by his birth, he hardly see's any but
your Majesty above him, within the limits of your Empire. This consideration,
Sir, cannot exempt him from blame, since it is true that he is born your
subject; but Sir, the offense he has committed is not a wilful one; and the
Princesse's beauty has not left him reason enough to consider the inequality
there is between them. In short Sir, if your Majesty will give me leav to
speak freely to you, Arsacomes his faults have taken president from yours, and
it is perchance by yours, he believed he might authorize his, since the
disproportion is no greater between Arsacomes and the Princess your daughter,
then between your Majesty and Arsacomes his sister; and that Arsacomes does
not exalt himself more in serving the daughter of his King, then his King
abase's himself in honoring the sister of Arsacomes with his affection. I know
that this comparison make's nothing for him, and that Arsacomes his sister
receiv's as great a favor by your Majesty's abasement, as his Kings daughter
receiv's injury by Arsacomes his elevation. Since Sovereigns cannot look upon
their Subjects without honoring them, nor Subjects lift up their eyes unto
their Sovereigns without offending them. But what shall become then of this
guilty man, and what punishment shall we appoint, (since your Majesty
leave's me the disposing of it) for this brother, who has ever been the
better part of me, and whom your Majesty has honored with a particular
esteem? If we banish him, I must accompany him in his exile, since our
friendship has made us inseparable, and if he continue still at Court, I do
not believ he will recover his wound. Only your Majesty can teach him by
your example, to become master of his passions, and show him by ceasing to abase
your thoughts unto your Subject, that he ought and may ceas to raise his unto
his Princess. Stratonice had not said thus to the King, but that she was
certain he would not take her at her word, and that his passion was no longer
in terms of being disengaged, nor of so much as suffering any opposition to his
desires. To these words full of cunning and flattery, she added so many
others, and used her power over the King so dexterously, that if she could not
make him approve Arsacomes his passion, she at least disposed him to tolerate
it, or rather to connive at it, and feign that he perceived it not, expecting
till time, and reason should give him more fitting thoughts.

This patience of the King's, caused the continuation of my misfortunes, and
Arsacomes believing he had broak through one of the most dangerous passages
that could be met withal in his design, nourished his hopes more then ever,
and redoubled his prosecutions with an insupportable insolence; having no body
left to whom I might utter my complaints after the King's sleighting of them, I
made my addresses to Stratonice her self, and desired her by all the remainders
of our friendship, to deliver me from her brother's importunities, and to put
a thought out of his mind whereby he would reap but little satisfaction; but
she craftily used the same discourse to me, she had don to the King my
Father, and gave me a perfect knowledge, that all assistance being denied me,
I was destined to those miseries I since have felt.

My affairs and those of the Court were in this condition, when the valiant
Arsaces first appeared there; Arsaces the deliverer and the support of Scythia,
Arsaces who to the advantage of our Country, has acquired an immortal
reputation amongst men, and Arsaces briefly, who appeased not more troubles in
Scythia, then he has raised within my soul. O my remembrance! thou cruel
enemy to my repose; must thou, here in the arms of my brother, where I thought
I had found a sanctuary, com to afflict me again, and must thou represent the
course of my misfortunes to me with such a sens of them as hardly leav's me
strength to relate them! yet will I however do my endeavors to proceed, since
what I have hitherto told you is but a little prelude to my adventures, or a
preparation to the recital of those that are greater, and of more importance.

CASSANDRA. The sixth Book.
THE fair Princess of Scythia was preparing her self to go on with her
Narration, when she saw her Brother's face grow pale, and in it found some
marks of an extraordinary indisposition: She in a great trouble asked him how
he did, and the Prince confessed that he felt himself extremely weak. Amyntas
was presently called, and coming to the bedside, made him take some strengthening
cordial, and prayed the Princess his sister, to defer the remainder of her
discourse till the next day. Berenice who preferred her brother's health before
her own, obeyed him willingly, and going out of the Chamber with the fair
Amazone, that he might be in quiet, she went with her to seek some
divertisement for the rest of the day. When the enemy was com, they went again
to visit the Prince, and finding him reasonable well, kept him company till
by Amyntas his persuasion they retired: but because in that season, which was
the hottest of all the year, the nights were very pleasing, in stead of going
into their Chamber, they went down into the garden to take the cool air by the
brightness of the Moon, which shone clear enough to give light unto their walk.
Their conversation was very sweet, and all their words were confirmations of
friendship. It was already strongly settled between them; the mutual knowledge
they had of their excellent qualities, had without difficulty introduced it
into their hearts, and even beauty it self, which work's so imperiously upon
the minds of men, had produced effects little different in their's; nor were
they indeed of those common beauties, which draw only a bare approbation, or
at most a light good will; but of those sparkling regular ones, in which the
severest Judges can find nothing, but causes of dazzling and admiration; both
of them were exactly perfect, but that of Berenicie's was the more delicate,
her skin whiter, her features milder, and more suitable to her sex; she had
something in her eyes so bright and piercing, that a heart must of necessity
either be stupid or strongly prepossessed, if it could bear her looks without
alteration. As she was neither fair nor brown, so were her eyes neither gray
nor black, but their color holding something of both, accompanied that of her
hair, which likewise being neither fair nor black, had borrowed a shadow of
each, that made a clear a^bourn color, incomparably more beautiful then either,
her face was little, but it had naturally all the fullness that was necessary
to form a complete oval, and though she was slender, her neck and her hands
were plump, and marvellously well proportioned; her looks and all her motions
were accompanied with a natural sweetness, which showed it self plainly in the
smallest of her actions, and though her countenance were truly full of
Majesty, yet was it one of those which strike less fear then love, which
seldom arm themselves with lightnings and thunders, able to cloud their
ordinary serenitie, and which ill accommodate themselves to the motions of the
soul, when they are set a work by anger. That of Thalestris was composed of
another fashion, if there were not so much sweetness in her presence, it was
more stately and imperious, but through her natural fierceness, one might see
something break forth so pleasing, or rather so attractive, that 'twas
impossible to defend ones self from it; her li^eaments though a little bigger
then Berenice's, were yet completely finished, and her complexion though not
altogether so delicate, was nevertheless, very clear, smooth, and lively; her
eyes were of a bluish gray, wide opened, and in all their motions had nothing
that was not very taking, and full of vivacitie; her hair was of a pale flaxen,
and though her stature was a little extraordinary for her sex, yet was it
shaped with most exact proportion. These two fair Ladies on whom heaven had not
bestowed so many advantages, without an equal number of misfortunes able to
counterbalance them, being united with a tender and inviolable affection,
found a real consolation in communicating their thoughts to one another.
Thalestris had no longer any that were unknown to Berenice, but the fair
Amazone, to whom this new friend was already extremely considerable, would not
put her to the trouble of presenting her story, wherein the Prince her brother
was to partake, and which had been deferred but for a little time; she
contented her self therefore with discoursing with her of those passages she
had already related, and in that conversation they had already visited most
of the allies in the garden, when coming near unto the fountain, they through
the boughs which hindered part of their sight, perceived a woman sitting upon
the grass, and leaning against a tree, which with three others made a square,
covering the fountain with their branches, which sheltred that place from the
Sunbeams, even when they were most hot and scorching. The two Princesses by
the fashion of her apparel, and by many other signs, knew it to be Polemon's
daughter, but being their own affairs, furnished them enough with matter of
entertainment, so that they needed not to seek it in the encounter of that
woman, they were going to walk on, not intending to amuse, themselves with her,
when they heard her sigh twice or thrice, and bring forth sorrowful words, with
a voice so sad and so pleasing together, that it touched them with some
compassion. Thalestris stopped first, and pulling back Berenice by the arm: Ah!
Madam, (said she softly) how like is this adventure to that which made me
first discover my lovely faithless Orithia, and how powerfully it bring's into
my mind, that fatal day which was the last of my repose! If this object
renew's your griefs (answered Berenice) we may withdraw from it, since however
this woman is not necessary to our conversation, and that her discontents can
have no very important cause. Thalestris consented to this motion of Berenice's,
when they heard her begin her complaints again and so mournfully, and in words
so different from what they expected from her, that it moved them to some
curiosity, and imposing silence to each other at the same time, they set
themselves attentively to hear her; she was so taken up with her sorrowful
thoughts that she perceived them not, and believing she discovered them only
to the heavens, and to witnesses without ears or understanding, she freely
disburthened her heart of a part of its affliction. How long, (said she) how
long, O arbitrators of our destinies! will you protract this miserable life,
which you have ever set for a mark to all misfortunes? have I not suffered
enough to satisfy all the hatred you can bear me, and though you were
insensible of pity, have you not wearied your selves with tormenting me? I am
no longer she I was heretofore, I have now the least remainder of that beauty
you once gave me to my unhappiness, and this languishing body now linger's
out its miserable days, only as a punishment which I have not deserved, and
which you most cruelly prolong. These first words of this afflicted woman,
obliged the two Princesses, to lend her more attention then before, whereby
they distinctly heard her complaint which she prosecuted on this manner. O
dear! and lawful memory of him who was ever the better part of me: O dear!
and less innocent memory of him who vainly strive's to take from our first
possessor what was so lawfully his; either join your forces to make me die, or
else forsake me for ever; if one of you be criminal, the other is inhumane,
and if in receiving you both, I testify both my weakness and my constancy,
know that neither my weakness nor my constancy can last any longer, and that
they have fought too long within me, to be still in a condition to maintain
themselves. This desolate creature made a stop at these words for some moments,
and as her grief transported her, and drew her reason by little and little out
of its ordinary seat, she turned toward insensible objects, and addressing
her self to those which then presented themselves unto her sight, clear waters
(continued she) which I trouble daily with my tears, you who as a
looking-glass have so often represented to my eyes the image of two bodies who
were animated with but one soul, and who now reflect unto my sight but one
only figure, and that a figure hardly to be known: Places who heretofore were
so delightful to me; places who still in spite of me are dear to my
remembrance; either make your selves again as pleasant to me as you have been
formerly, or vanish from my sight for ever. She accompanied these lamentations
with so great a number of sighs, that the two Princesses moved with a real
compassion, were not able to suffer the continuance of them, and Berenice who
was of the softer humor, and more inclined to pity, ran to her first, to give
her consolation, and to offer her assistance. She was so deeply buried in her
sorrows, that the two Princesses had already spoken to her before she
perceived their coming. She started in a fright, as soon as she discovered
them, but presently knowing them to be her Fathers illustrious guests, she
settled her fear; and being risen from the place where she was set, she made
a very low obeisance, and out of respect would have gone away, to leav the place
free to them. But Berenice stopping her by the arm, Stay Mistress (said she)
and believ we have not so little sens of the kind entertainment we receiv
here, as that we can know your misfortunes without trouble for them; your
moans have nearly touched us, and if your miseries can be any way eased by our
assistance, you shall find us most readily disposed to afford it you. Polemons
sad daughter putting a hankerchief to her face to wipe away the tears wherewith
it was all bedewed, received Berenice's words with an humble submission, and
after that Thalestris had spoken to her to the same purpose: Most honored
Ladies (said she) it is the only comfort I have left in my miseries, that
they have begot pity in all that ever heard them; and if I ought to hope for
it from any body, it is especially from those who have generous souls like your
selves; My misfortunes are greater then my quality, and they are so well known
in this Country, that you alone can think the words strange, which their
remembrance made me to bring forth. This answer, gave the Princesses a
curiosity, which made them desirous to learn her history; and Berenice who
was most forward in it, having embraced her, Dear friend (said she) we
participate too much in your fortune to be ignorant of it longer, and if you
have not some private reason to conceal it, you will oblige us infinitely by
telling it. Madam (replied she) I should make a conscience of entertaining
such persons as you are, with so trivial and so tedious a recital, and besides
it is not so short a one, as that you can hear it in this place without
inconveniencie. We will go into our Chamber if you pleas (answered Berenice)
as well that we may see your face by a clearer light, which hitherto I have
not very well observed, as to receiv the favor we desire. Ending these words
with a most obliging look, she with Thalestris walked toward the house, and
Polemon's daughter not willing to disobey their commands, waited on them into
their Chamber. As soon as they were there, they cast their eyes upon her face,
and drawing her near unto the lights, beheld her very intentively. She was
pale and lean, and had a languishing eye, but in that alteration of her face,
one might easily observe remainders of an excellent beauty, which grief had
decayed, and which joy might yet recover; the two Princesses by this sight were
more deeply touched with compassion and good will to this afflicted person, and
having expressed much kindness to her, they forced her to sit down by them, and
pressed her so civilly that to satisfy them she related the history of her
life in these terms.

The History of Alcione.
ALthough our quality be not of the highest in this Province, yet neither is
it of the lowest, and though in our habit, and in the simplicity of our life,
we differ little now from mere country people; I may nevertheless tell you,
Ladies, that we are of Noble blood, that Polemon my Father, has in his time
born arms with honor, and that heretofore he had a very plentiful estate: But
the disasters of our House, having only left him sufficient to keep his Family
from necessity, and the greatness of his discontents having made him distaste,
or rather abhor his former condition, he forsook it with so absolute a
resignation, that he has scarcely preserved so much as the remembrance of it,
and my own misfortunes (which truly have caused the chiefest part of his) have
so loosned my mind from all that luster whence we are fallen, that I have
found no difficulty in disposing it to this solitude he has chosen, and
wherein I with him have bounded my last contentments. Before our miseries, we
lived at Babylon in some rank, and with happiness enough, etc. Mazens the
Governor of the Province did not disdain to employ my Father often in
businesses of importance; the heavens had given him a reasonable numerous
Issue, but of five brothers I once had, four lost their lives in Darius his
Armies for the service of their Prince; and the fifth of a weaker constitution,
and of a more peaceful humor, keep's company with us in our innocent retreat.
I spent my childhood very quietly in pastimes, that are not of consequence
worth relating, but I was hardly fourteen years old when with the rest of our
Family I bewailed the loss of my eldest brothers, who with many thousand
Persians were slain in the battle of Granicus, that was the beginning of
Polemon's afflictions; and within a while after I saw the birth of my
particular ones, which make up a good part of the discourse you desire to hear
from me. If after the sight of your admirable beauties, I dare to speak of
moderate ones, and if it were handsome in me, to say that of my self, which
flatterers heretofore have published, I I might tell you Ladies, that Alcione
in those days passed for fair in their discourse, but whether this beauty were
only in their words, or that there were any really in me, if I may say so
without blasphemy, I am but little beholding to the gods for it, since they
gave me that small portion I received of them, only for my ruin, and that by
the confession of my persecuters it has been the sole cause of all my
misfortunes. I in an early youth found many men that expressed affection to
me, and diverse amongst them, whose alliance was advantageous to Polemon, had
already sued in vain for his, when the gods gave me him, to whom both for my
happiness and my unhappiness, I was destined by their supreme decree.

Bagistanes that treacherous Governor of the Citadel of Babylon, who since
basely quitted the party of his Prince, and without resistance delivered up
into Alexander's hands, that Fortress of high importance, and the treasure
which had imprudently been trusted to his keeping, briefly, that Bagistanes of
whom you have heard speak, if Alexander's actions are not unknown to you, had a
nephew endowed by the heavens with qualities, that obliged me to an affection,
which duty afterward established in my heart. Theander (so was he called)
began to love me when I was scarcely out of my infancy, and witnessed his
affection to me by so many proofs, that without blindness I could not be
ignorant of it, nor without ingratitude, refuse him the advantage over all
those who had the like intentions; yet I depended so wholly upon my Father, and
had left him so absolute a power over my will, that I did nothing but by his,
nor gave Theander any hopes but by his injunction; he found no cause of
complaint in my proceedings, and having none but very lawful designs, he made
no difficulty of discovering them to Polemon, and of asking his daughter with
submissions full of the testimonies of his love. Polemon received him with all
manner of civilitie, and seeing manifest advantages in that match, could not
dissemble his satisfaction, Theander was of a handsome person, a man of courage,
and well bred, and though we were noble, his Family was of a rank something
above ours; and to say truth, might have pretended to higher fortunes; besides,
as I have told you, he was nephew to Bagistanes, who next to Mazens was the
most considerable man in all this Country, indeed he was a good while
backward in granting his nephew the consent he demanded for our marriage, and
Theander who honored him exceedingly, and who besides the consideration of
blood, was tied to him likewise by that of fortune, waited for his approbation
with such respects as were due to none but his Father, or his King; in the end
Bagistanes was mollified by his nephews patience, and by other motives, and
after delays which it would be tedious to recount, he gave him that
permission he had long expected. In all the time of his wooing there passed
nothing considerable, and I will only tell you Theander having no more
difficulties to overcom, after the consent of those that had the disposing of
us, married me publicly in Babylon, before I was full fifteen years of age.
As soon as he had me in his possession, he took me home with him to his
house, where he began to live with me in a most kind and loving manner;
besides his affection to me, he had naturally a great deal of goodness, nay,
even to an excess which his friends have often blamed: I was not ungrateful to
his love, and receiving manifest proofs of it every day, I became so wholly
his, that I may safely swear before all the gods, whom I have so often invoked
in my adversities, that never woman loved her husband with a more ardent, nor a
more entire affection: I gave him a thousand innocent testimonies of it, which
inflamed him still more and more, and in the first year after our marriage, we
tasted all the delights that a perfect union can produce in two souls knit
together in a lawful love; whithersoever Theander went, Alcione would always
accompany him, and if the necessity of his affairs, or the service of his
friends parted us for some few moments, that separation was born with much
disquiet, or rather with most sensible discontents. In this mutual felicity a
whole year ran out, but when he had given that time to his affection, Theander
was likewise desirous, to give some to his duty, and remembering that he was a
subject to Darius, whose Territories Alexander after his victory at the
Granicus, overran with a prodigious success, he for some time buried the
consideration of his love, in those of his honor, and of the service of his
King and Country, and taking an imploiment suitable to his quality among
those Forces that were raised by Mazens, he left me a prey to grief, and to
those miseries which his absence prepapared me. I made use of my prayers, my
tears, and of all the credit our affection gave me with him, to keep him with
me; but he defended himself against all my importunities, with such just and
powerful reasons, that without offending him, I could no longer persist to
require proofs of his love to the prejudice of his honor. He marched from
Babylon with those Forces, but before his departure recommended me to the care
of his Brother Astiages, who under some pretense exempted himself from that
voyage, and to his Uncle Bagistanes whom he considered as a Father, and to
whom he submitted himself with a dependencie which many persons have
condemned. True it is, that the respect Theander bore him was to be excused by
many reasons that were not to be slighted; Bagistanes who was extremely rich,
had no children that were legitimate, and being then of an age which forbad him
to hope for any, only Theander as his nearest kinsman, could lawfully pretend
to be his heir; and though he was generous enough to be little tied by such
a motive, yet was a plentiful fortune necessary to maintain the expenses into
which he was carried by his liberal nature; and his Unkles wealth was not so
inconsiderable, but that it might oblige to an observance, and the dignity of
Bagistanes were sufficient to autorise. After Theander's departure, his good
Uncle and his good Brother strove who should be forwardest in showing me
their mindfulness of the charge he had left them, and by all manner of
kindness and good usage, they endeavored to drive away some of my melancholy
hours; they made meetings, and invented sports to divert me, but I was long
insensible of all the diverti^ements they gave me, and during my husbands
absence, I spent part of my time at my Fathers, and in this house whither we
came often to take the aer; when I was at Babylon, I saw Bagistanes every day,
and though he lodged in the Citadel, there passed but very few that he came
not to see me, and when he failed, Astiages to satisfy him, and as he told
me, to perform his Brothers desires, carried me to his lodgings, where I was
welcomed with infinite demonstrations of kindness.

Berenice interrupting Alcione in this part of her story, you have spoken
twice (said she) of one Astiages, that name is but too well known to me, and
but that he whole mean is the wickedest of all men living, I should ask if he
were not your Brother-in-law. Ah! Madam, (answered Alcione) you give the best
character of him, that I can receiv to know him by; he was the most pervers,
and the falsest man that ever lived, and you will see by the continuation of my
discourse, that I ow the greatest part of my miserie's to his wickedness; but to
give you other marks of him, I will tell you, that he was reasonable tall of
Stature, that his hair was something reddish, and if he be yet alive, his age
may be about two or three and thirty. Ah! Dear Alcione (said Berenice) it is
the very same and that perfidious man has but too great a share in my
adventures, as you may learn in time; but if I be not deceived, you and I are
both revenged, I will tell you news of him, when you have ended your Relation,
and you shall hear, that he has carried his crimes a great way further then
Babylon. I ever believed (replied Alcione) that wicked fellow was incorrigible,
but I did not think fortune ha^ made use of him to persecute so illustrious and
so accomplished a person. I will tell you then, that this false man, and his
Uncle as perfidious as himself, when I was first married, and after when
Theander was newly gone, gave me all the testimonies of friendship I could
desire from those that were so near allied to me: I ascribed their good usages
only to lawful causes, and received them with an innocence, which without
doubt fortified their detestable intentions. Bagistanes made show of so great
an affection to his nephew, that I should never have suspected him of falsehood,
and Astiages disguised his ill nature so cunningly to me, that I could not
attribute the services he did me, to any thing but the friendship he bore
his brother; I continued in this error, as long as they continued to have any
sens of honor, and I left it when they left the terms of decency, and the
considerations of alliance and of their reputation; why should I detain you
longer in the most tedious part of my recital, since I have things of more
importance to relate? in short, when I least expected it, Bagistanes declared
to me his pernicious design, and violating all manner of rights in the person
of his nearest kindred, he spoke to me of love in terms which I will not
repeat, because I am not able to do it without blushing, or rather without dying
for grief at the remembrance of his impudence. I will therefore pass over what
he said, as well out of that consideration, as to avoid prolixitie in my
narration, and will content my self with telling you, that after I had
expressed my astonishment by a long silence, I broak forth against him in such
manner, that his surprise was little different from mine, I laid before his
eyes by a vehement, or rather by a fiery discourse, both the injury he did
unto his nephew, and the shame he would bring upon himself, and having put him
into a great confusion, I left him, and retired into my Closet, so troubled
that I hardly knew where I was. There I reflected upon all the actions of that
faithless kinsman, and recalling them to mind to examine them a little more
strictly then I had don before, I found so many signs of his wicked intentions,
that I wondered a thousand times at my innocence, which had forced him to
declare that to me by word of mouth, which by a thousand proofs I ought to
have discovered. There it was that I vented my anger, and deplored my
misfortune by my tears, there I called upon absent Theander to assist me
against the persecutions of his disloyal Uncle, and there briefly I took a firm
resolution to die, rather then give ear to that perfidious man, or to endure so
much as the sight of him. It was nevertheless very difficult for me to keep it
in private, and my fear of discovering my misfortune, and of divulging the
shame of our house to the whole world, was the cause I would not escape him in
general meetings; but when he sought opportunities of entertaining me in
particular, I shunned them so warily, that as cunning as he had been in the
whole course of his life, and especially in such like matters, I put his craft
to a stand, so that he could never overcom my circumspection, nor the care I
took to avoid his subtilties; when he met me in company, he would often
offer me his hand, to draw me aside as he had don formerly; but I still
found pretenses to avoid him, and got free without making them that were
present acquainted with my misfortune; he often wrote to me, and caused his
letters to be delivered, by such as were ignorant of our ill correspondence,
and if, least I should give them knowledge of it, I was forced to receiv some of
them, 'twas only to ^^ar them in pieces without reading them; and to cast
those guilty lines into the fire, which with their author were worthy of a
greater punishment. I supported this persecution with sufficient strength of
mind, expecting Theander's return, which I daily begged of the god's with most
fervent prayers, but my constancy was like to have forsaken me, by a bloody
surcharge I received in my affliction. Astiages being one day in my chamber,
and seeing himself alone with me, took me by the hand, and holding it between
his, when he had looked upon me awhile without speaking, sister (said he)
will you not confess one thing to me, which I desire to know of you? And after
I had assured him, I would conceal nothing from him; You are a dissembler
(replied he) and how great a freedom soever you fain toward me, you never
told me that Bagistanes courts you, and that he has long persecuted you with
his love; Blush not (continued he, seeing my color rise) nor go not about to
disguise that from me, which I have learned from his own mouth. Though the
confusion I was in had till then kept me silent, I could hold no longer at
that discourse, and looking upon him with a spiteful eye; How, (said I) Astiages
have you heard it from Bagistanes his mouth, and are Theander's Brother?
Astiages without being moved at that demand; fall not into passion, Sister
(replied he) but be pleased, that as your nearest kinsman, I give you my
advice in this encounter. I am Theander's Brother, and being so, I shall only
seek his advantage and your own; You know how much Bagistanes is able to do for
him, or rather you know how little he is able to do without Bagistanes, all
his support, all his supplies, and all his pretensions are in him, and it is
only by the credit of our Uncle, that our house can maintain it self in its
dignity, and raise it self to the chiefest of this Province. After this
knowledge, you ought not to estrange his affections from us, to make them pass
unto some other Family, who will profit by our losses, and enrich themselves,
with that which we ought lawfully to hope for; you may use him better then you
have don, without violating the faith you ow your husband, and though his
deportments may have caused some aversion in you, our pretensions are not of so
small reckoning but that Theander himself, if he be wise, would counsel you
to dissemble it, for the confervation of them. Besides, Bagistanes is so old,
that you need not at all fear your reputation, and your compliance with him
cannot be of any long continuance. This pernicious Counselor was going to
seek out reasons to persuade me to his base designs, when my patience forsook
me, and my resentment made me break forth with violence. O gods! (cried I) is
it possible it should be from my husband's Brother, that I hear this strange
proposition? Go base, heartless man, get thee gone, submit thy self to infamous
things out of servile considerations, and believ that if thy family be capable
of such basenesses, Alcione ought not to have been matched into it; these
riches which thou unworthily preferrest before the reputation of thy friends,
nay, and before thine own too, these advantages, and these dignities thou
would purchase with the price of honor, shall never be for thee nor thine, if
they must be procured by that vile, shameful compliance thou proposest to me;
and if Theander were so base as to have thoughts like thine, know that perhaps
I should be courageous enough to punish that in his person, which my contempt
of thee, make's me to neglect in thine. I spoke many other words to him full
of scorn and anger, but that disloyal fellow who had already prepared himself
for my reproaches, and whose impudence could not be paralelled, was but little
moved with all I said, and would have continued his arguments, if I had not
left him, and gone away so transported with passion, that it was very hard for
me to dissemble it.

For all I was so much incensed at Astiages his last proposition, he was not
at all dismayed, but as often as he found opportunity to hold the like
discourse to me, he bore my reproaches patiently, and showed me his
obstinacle in his pernicious designs. Then it was that I saw my self reduced to
great extremities: In my husband's house there were none but such as were
suspected, or odious to me, and I had no body to whom I could impart my
trouble, or complain of my misfortune. The women that served me were corrupted
by Bagistanes, and that wicked man who had been diligent in such practices, had
always kept some in pay for the like emploiments. Upon all occasions they were
speaking good of him, and represented to me the interest we had in the
conservation of his friendship; and in short, I was persecuted in such manner,
that my husband's house was as an hell to me, and a place of torment. I was
often upon the point of leaving it, and of retiring to my Fathers, until
Theander's return, but I feared to make a nois, and to publish a thing which
might bring a stain upon the Family I was matched into, and to cause such
sensible afflictions to Theander: My mother, to whom I opened my heart, and to
whom I discovered my misfortune, gave me this counsel, and persuaded me to
wait patiently for the return of my husband, who by his presence would blow
over that storm; and settle my mind again in its first tranquillity. I obeyed
her directions, wherein I found a great deal of reason, and the gods, who were
pleased with my patience, though they sent not an end unto my discontents, at
least sent me some consolation in them, and in the beginning of the winter,
they brought me home my dear Theander, for whom I had so long and so often
sighed. You cannot doubt, great Princesses, of the greatness of my joy, so that
I shall not need to describe in what manner I received the greatest happiness I
then could wish for, nor the welcome I gave to an husband whom I loved really
more then my self, and in whose return, besides the interest's of my affection,
I found also that of my quiet, and my refuge against the persecution of my
enemies. All that a lawful innocent love like ours can produce, appeared in us
without dissimulation; and if I expressed a satisfaction to Theander for his
return, Theander made his known to me by a thousand proofs of a real passion.
Whole days stole away in these first raptures, and I may say that my sorrows
were then lulled asleep, and that I thought my self in the haven, toward which
I steered by my continual prayers. Astiages ceased to importune me as he was
wont, and the perfidious Bagistanes came not amongst us, but to express
kindness to his nephew. Not that he lost any occasion to make me know his
pervers obstinacy, nor that he forbore to speak with his eyes, since I had
forbidden him to do it with his tongue, but either I took not the pains to
observe it, or else I did but laugh at it, seeing my self fortified by the
presence of my Defender. I knew not well what Astiages his thoughts were at
that time, and whether he was not afraid I should discover to his Brother the
ill offices he would have don him; but he showed me so few signs of such a
fear, that I was confident the excess of Theander's goodness encouraged him to
despise his resentments, and armed him against what in reason he ought to
apprehend from a Brother so unworthily offended. Neither was I willing to
entertain Theander with my discontents, and notwithstanding the threats I had
used to his perfidious kinsman, I concealed their infidelity from him, as well
that I might not disturb the tranquillity of his mind, by a recital that
would be unpleasing to him, as not to set dissension in his Family, and make
my self odious to those among whom I was to pass the remainder of my days.
These considerations made me silent in my misfortune, but within awhile after
it was redoubled by very remarkable accidents.

Cleonimus, one of Theander's nearest kinsmen, and the most faithful of his
friends, arrived about that time at Babylon, where he had been but little
since his childhood, having spent many years in the Armies and in the Courts of
Kings, and in foreign Countries; and in his several voiages, he had gained
qualities which we had not yet seen amongst our Barbarians. I know not whether
in the continuation of those things I am to tell you, I may speak to his
advantage; but if you will give me leav to declare the truth without passion,
I will say that Cleonimus was no common person, and that it was not without a
great deal of justice, I gave him the first place in my esteem, above all those
I had formerly known; besides, the gracefulness of his person, and of his
presence which were very advantageous, he had both a most generous heart and a
most excellent wit, and as he had made himself remarkable in war by a thousand
valiant actions, he had also made such benefit at Athens, in the conversation
of Philosophers, as gave him the prioritie of all those of his profession, by
most particular endowments. He was but three and twenty years of age when he
returned to Babylon, and Theander presented him to me as one of his nearest
kinsmen, and was dearer to him then any man in the world. O gods! with what
words, did he at that first fight express the contentment he found in our
alliance, and how handsomely did he begin to introduce that esteem into my
mind, which has since been so fatal to our repose. I received him as a man
nearly allied to me, and as a man of an extraordinary merit. I had heard
Theander speak of him a thousand times, and many others to whom his virtue was
not unknown, but I thought that fame of him infinitely below what his sight
persuaded me he deserved. After that first visit, he made me diverse others,
and the nearness of blood that was between him, and Theander, or rather their
friendship rendered them inseparable, giving him a free access to our house, I
saw him every day, and within a short time was familiarly acquainted with him.
Theander and he lived as brothers, and Theander would needs have me live with
him as his sister. I confess I found no difficulty in disposing my mind to
it, and that as well to obey my husband as to follow the incitements of my own
inclination, I gave him really all the friendship a brother could require from
me; Yes, I loved him as if he had been my brother; but if my affection ever
exceeded those limits, by any guilty or unlawful desires, you gods to whom all
hearts are known, strike this unfortunate woman with your thunder, who call's
you to be witnesses of her most secret thoughts. I will not tell you that in
all manner of exercises either of the mind or body, and in a thousand matches
of activitie, he still bore away the prize from all those that would dispute
it with him, neither will I say that by his lovely qualities he gained that
affection from me, which he gained from all those that conversed with him;
but I will tell you freely once again that I loved him, as our near alliance,
his virtue, and my husband's command enjoined me. In the mean time, if
Theander's return was favorable to me in some things, it was quickly hurtful to
me in many others, and Bagistanes who during his absence never met me but in
public, by his means recovered his first conveniences, and saw me every
day, either at our house or in the Citadel, whither his innocent nephew carried
me himself, notwithstanding all the repugnancie I showed against those visits;
and that which was most insupportable to me, was that this good nephew having
brought me to that wicked Uncle, went often a hunting or otherwhere, and left
me with him for the rest of the day; true it is, that I forbad the women that
waited on me, to leav me at any time alone with him, and that by that order I
saved my self a great while; but one day, which I will count for one of the
most disastrous of my life, I could not avoid my misfortune, and I saw my self
reduced to the greatest perplexity, I till then had fallen into. Theander
having according to his custom brought me into Bagistanes his Chamber; that
wicked man who knew my husband had that day made an appointment to hunt, found
means to send away the woman that came along with me, and who held
intelligence with him, and within awhile after Theander having left us, I
remained alone with him, and saw my self subject to the mishap I had so long
avoided, and which I had so much apprehended. I should have much ado to
describe the confusion I was in at this accident, a chilness ran through all my
veins, and I began to tremble from head to foot changing color, and being in a
manner beside my self. That lustful old man, easily found the alteration that
was in me; but he desired to settle me, and though his eyes sparkled with a
light that was extraordinary, and that his face became one spread with a
lively color, which years had almost driven away from thence, he was willing
to moderate himself for a few minutes, to quiet my mind from the fear he had
observed in me; for that purpose, he at first talked to me of nothing but
indifferent matters, and having insensibly brought me upon the discourse of his
riches, he entertained me awhile with it, and then taking me by the hand,
and rising from the chair where he was sitting, Dear niece (said he) I will
let you see treasures which yet I have not shown to any body, and by that
sight you will know into how wealthy a Family you have matched your self. With
these words he unlocked the door of a closet, whither I was constrained to
follow him, and having showed me a great many rare and curious pieces
wherewith it was beautified, he opened his trunks and made me see jewels of
an inestimable value* and heaps of gold able to satisfy the avarice of the
most insatiable person. When he saw that I appeared astonished at those immens
treasures, he looked upon me with an inflamed eye, and pressing my hands
between his, O Alcione! (cried he) all that thou see is thine; and if thou
persist not in thy obstinate resolution to hate me, thou may dispose of all
my riches, and of my life. Fly me not (continued he seeing I would have got
away, and that I did all I could to pull my hands from between his) but with
some sens of pity behold him that love's thee better then himself, see how
disadvantageous thy ingratitude is to thee, and consider the prize thy
inhumanitie make's thee to loos, neither am I so odious, nor the prize I
propose to thy affection so vile, that thou need disdain us, and thou may
by one effect of love, or if thou will but of compassion restore quietness to
my mind, and become the happiest woman in the world. The detestable old fellow,
brought forth these words stammering, and looking upon me with lustful eyes,
wherein his horrible desires were lively represented; and while he was
speaking them and many others without order or co-herence, he held my hands
so fast that 'twas impossible for me to escape from him; then was I seized
with mortal apprehensions, and my fear kept me from falling into such a rage
against him, as I should have don if I had been in another condition, yet had I
courage enough to call my reason to my assistance, and to represent
considerations to him, which were capable to have dissuaded the wicked wretch
from his evil designs. O Bagistanes (said I counterfeiting a fearlesness) what
do you do? have you forgotten the god's? have you forgotten your blood? and
have you forgotten your own honor? do you not remember that you are Theander's
Uncle, or rather his Father, and that Alcione is the wife of your nephew, and
of him you have ever accoun^ed as your son? do you not fear remors of
conscience? do you not fear infamy? and do you not fear heaven's thunder, which
hangs over guilty heads? Open your eyes Bagistanes, and consider your crime
with horror, such abominable thoughts are unworthy of a noble mind, nor can
you continue in them without fixing an eternal shame upon your memory. I had
said more, if the pernicious old man would have suffered me to go on, but he
stopped his ear at all my words, and believing he should touch me more easily
in a beseeching posture, he fell down upon his knees, and embraced mine with
all his strength, Oh Alcione! (replied he) ceas to set these remonstrances
before his eyes, who is no longer in a condition to profit by by them, but give
me life, unless thou will have me die here presently at thy feet. Die then
(said I with eyes sparkling as much with anger, as his with another passion)
die detestable old man, and never hope for any mercy from thy mortal and
irreconcilable enemy; At these words I dis-engaged my self from his arms with
so much force, that he not only let go his hold, but being roughly thrust,
in a posture wherein he had but little strength, he fell all along upon the
floor. I stayed not to see what became of him, but finding my self free, I ran
out at the Closet door, which I clapped against him, and crossing through his
Chamber, I got hastily to the stair-head. As I was running down with a speed
which sufficiently expressed my fear, I met Cleonimus, who being also
Bagistanes his nephew, was coming then to visit him; The knowledge I had of his
virtue, and of the friendship he bore us, made me prais the god's for that
encounter, and not being in a condition to consider strictly all I did, I cast
my self upon him, and closely embracing him, Dear cousin, (said I) dear
Cleonimus save me. My action and my words amazed him so, that all he could do
was to put forth his arms to me, and ask me in a great trouble what accident
was happened, and what service I desired from him. Carry me from hence,
(answered I) and when you have brought me home, I will tell you my misfortune.
Cleonimus without questioning me further, assured me that he would die for
Theander's interests and mine, without considering those of Bagistane's, and
going down the stairs with me, he by the credit he had with the Soldiers of
the Citadel, caused the gates to be opened, and delivered me out of that
hateful place where I had suffered so violent a persecution. When I saw my self
at liberty, I recovered my fear a little, and being got into the street, my
countenance became less affrighted then it had been a few minutes before. After
I was come home, I repented I had discovered so much to Cleonimus, and I was
very sorry I had obliged my self to declare to him the shame of his nearest
friends, and my particular disaster; yet my knowledge of his discretion, and the
need I had of his counsel and likewise of his assistance, in the extremity my
affairs were com to, made me break through the difficulties I found in my
mind, and forced me to confess my misfortune, and to tell him with my last
adventure, all the execrable prosecutions of Bagistanes, and of the unworthie
Astiages. During that Discourse, Cleonimus shrunk up his shoulders, and lift up
his eyes to heaven with demonstrations of astonishment, which made him hardly
able to speak a word when I had told him this last accident; Ah! the monster
(cried he) ah! the abominable man; if the god's be just, can he survive such
a perfidiousness as this? Having said thus, he continued a while silent, and
then dear cousin (pursued he) I was too blame to fall into so great a wonder
at the hearing of actions which are ordinary with Bagistanes, and I ought to
have remembered, that wheresoever the interest of his pleasures or of his
fortune came in question, he never considered nearness of blood, nor his
honor, no nor the god's themselves. This last treachery of his to Theander, is
not the first he has committed of this nature, and proximitie never made him
forbear the like designs, upon any of his kinswomen that had any thing of
hansomness in them; if he persist in his horrible intentions I offer you my
life for the defense of your honor, and of Theander's interests. Bagistanes if
he were bold enough, would be wicked enough to attempt any kind of villainy;
but he will remember that he is not exempt from the severitie of the Law,
that he has not an absolute power in Babylon, and that Theander is too
considerable to fear any violence from him. After this Discourse, he told me a
thousand of his Unkle's wickednesses, and when I asked him how I should carry
my self to my husband in the business, he advised me to conceal it yet
awhile, seeing it could bring nothing but discontent to him, and disorder into
his Family, and that I might discover it at any time, if I should be further
pressed. He gave me this counsel with so much freedom and affection, that I
resolved to follow it punctually, and having known him in all his actions to
be endued with a miraculous wisdom, I was willing to be absolutely guided in
this misfortune according to his orders and instructions. By his advice
therefore I dissembled it, and gave no notice at all unto Theander of any thing
that happened; true it is, that he never had the power to carry me any more to
Bagistanes, and though to oblige me to that visit, he told me he had hurt
his forehead with falling down a pair of stairs, I still put it off by faining
my self not well whenever he spoke to me of it; Bagistanes abashed and
exasperated at what had passed, came not to our house, and I had some days of
respite, which were very pleasing to me being freed from his persecutions.
But base Astiages a few days after this accident, meeting me alone in the
Garden, and coming up to me in the corner of an allie which I made haste to,
that I might shun him; Madam, (said he, with a disdainful and a discontented
look) cruelty is very well becoming in handsome Ladies like your self, and if
you persevere in your generositie, you will without doubt advance our house
exceedingly. I presently understood the meaning of his words, and looking
side-waies upon him, I had rather (said I) your house were swallowed up in an
eternal destruction, then ever I should have so much as a thought, to endeavor
its greatness by those ways you propose to me. You do very well Alcione
(replied Astiages) but since you despise other considerations, you ought at
least in charity to visit those whom you have wounded in the body as well as
in the mind. This discourse vexed me to the very heart, and made me answer
sharply, Astiages, I will let Theander know the good offices you do him, and
if you continue still in your infamous prosecutions, you shall see that I am
not insensible of the wrongs you do me. I believ you are not insensible (said
Astiages, going away) and your last friendships begin to give some notice of it.
He left me as he brought forth these words, which I did not greatly heed at
that time, though I have found since but too much to my cost, with what
intention he spoke them.

In the mean time Bagistanes either out of shame, or resentment had given over
his visits, and I praised the gods for that last adventure, which for one
displeasure gave me many advantages. Theander often prayed me to go to see
him, but finding me very unwilling, he had so much goodness, that he never
went about to force me; but though that wicked man saw me not, he had those
near me, that told him sufficiently what I did. Astiages tied to him by the
sordid consideration of riches, and by the promises he made him to leav him
all he had, basely forsook the interests of his Brother, and the honor of his
Family, to serve him in his detestable intentions, and besides the torments I
received from him, the mai^s that served me were my most dangerous enemies,
and as I have learned since that infamous fellow had them at his devotion, and
kept one of them in pay, to spy out all my actions. That disloial wench
observed with Astiages, the friendship I had with Cleonimus, and believed that
he being truly generous, and truly a friend to Theander, was more capable to
cross them then any body else. I do not deny but that I lived with Cleonimus
as if I had been his own Sister; my husband had commanded me to do so, and I
had no repugnance to obey him; There was a great deal of familiarity between
us, but all our actions were in sight of the whole world, and we never retired
together, but when we had a mind to talk of Bagistanes his persecutions. I
know not whether our deportments wrought a jealousy in our enemies, nor
whether they believed themselves, what they desired to persuade others; but in
effect though they knew I was virtuous enough, not to love another man to the
prejudice of what I owed my husband, and that in their own hearts accounted my
actions to be innocent, they meant to draw matter from thence, to drive away a
man whom they suspected to cross their designs, or else to ruin me, when once
their hopes of gaining me were ruined. For this purpose they carefully watched
my actions, and caused others to watch them, and interpreting all I did, as
might serve best to their intentions, they laid snares for me, which without a
particular goodness of the gods, it was impossible for me to escape. Besides
the considerations I have told you, they were set on likewise by that of their
own justification, and fearing I should at last discover their detestable
proceeding to Theander, they resolved to prevent me, and to prepossess his
mind in such manner, that I might find no more belief in him, when I should
com to make my complaint. Astiages having plotted with Bagistanes, how he
should manage this design, began to set it on work to Theander, and though he
had particular obligations to Cleonimus, and that having been bred up together
with a great deal of friendship, they had ever lived in as good intelligence as
the virtues of the one, and the vices of the other could permit, he endeavored
to render him odious to his brother, by all manner of calumnies. Theander who
had a very good impression of his friend, made a jest of Astiages his first
attempts, and attributing those ill offices to some particular aversion, made
all the designs he used unprofitable. Astiages was not repulsed by these first
difficulties; but carefully laying hold of all occasions to make him observe our
familiarity, he did not despair of working some effect in his mind at last.
One day as we rose from dinner, during which time I had long entertained
Cleonimus who sat by me, and had often whispered him in the ear, I drew near
to a window, where Astiages seeing me alone, came to me, though of a long
while I had given over speaking to him, but in Theander's presence, and when I
knew not how to avoid him; at that time his Brother was discoursing with
Cleonimus, at another window which looked toward the Garden, whereupon coming
close to me, Madam, (said he) I will talk no more to you of Bagistanes, but
if you pleas I will speak of Cleonimus, with whom your fortune will be much
better. I gave not my self time to examine his Discourse; but without harkening
to his last words, I answered briefly; If you speak to me of Cleonimus, you
will speak to me of a man who by his virtue deserv's both the general and my
particular esteem. I knew very well (replied Astiages impudently) that that
virtue which despise's fortune, was not proof against his merit; but we will
break the course of this affection, and will teach the innocent Theander to
discern his real friends. This discourse nettled me so, that without doubt I
should have fallen openly upon him, but that having nothing more to say, he
went out of the room, where I remained so troubled, that if Theander's face had
been toward me he might easily have read in mine, what a confusion Astiages
had left me in. I leaned upon my elbow in the window, where reflecting upon
those malicious words I had newly heard, I was seized with the most violent
grief I yet had felt. I recollected my self, and examined all my actions with
Cleonimus, and found them so full of innocence, that I judged Astiages his
suspicions very ill grounded, and his jealousy very unjust; yet presently I
had a thought to absent him from me for ever, and to deprive my enemies either
of the occasion of their censures, or the pretext they had taken to torment
me; but it was followed by another quite contrary, and the rigor of my
destiny made me look upon Cleonimus at that time more advantageously then
ever I had don before, and observe his good qualities and his friendship, with
an eye which would not permit me to consent to what I was resolving against
him. I know not Ladies, whether I am faulty in this confession, and in avowing
ingenuously, that at that time I had an affection for him that could not suffer
his baninishment, which the care of my reputation, and that of my repose was
preparing for him; but I will tell you also to justify my self, that perchance
it would not have been strong enough to hinder it, if I had not judged that
Astiages made use of that subtlety to deprive me of a man, who he knew would
oppose his intentions, and whose assistance was necessary for me, to defend
my self against his persecutions. This consideration as truly as the other,
made me resolv both to see Cleonimus, and to live with him as I had don
formerly, knowing well that Theander, whose approbation I valued more then any
body's dislike, was not offended with it, and that if I abated any thing of my
usal freedom with him, Astiages might have occasion to suspect me of cunning,
after what he had said to me. I went out of the dining room where I left
Theander with Cleonimus, and walked into the Garden alone to entertain the
pensiveness which Astiages his words had caused in me, but scarce had I taken
a turn or two, when they came out to me, and within awhile after, Theander
being called away by some business or other, left me there with Cleonimus. He,
at his first coming, observed some trouble in my face, whereof he asked me the
cause, and notwithstanding he was concerned in it, I was so innocent as to tell
him Astiages his discourse, and how he had reproached me upon his occasion.
Cleonimus hearkened to me without being moved, and when I had made an end, he
lift up his eyes to heaven and crossing his arms upon his breast, he walked
above twenty paces with me before he spoke a word, then of a sudden making a
stop, and looking upon me with an action more passionate then ordinary; Cosen
(said he) your enemies have reason to drive me from you, and the knowledge
they have that I will oppose their pernicious designs to the last moment of my
life, does in a sort autorise their proceeding. Besides I confess to you, that
if they accuse me for loving you, they accuse me very justly, since it is not
truer that I am Cleonimus, then it is that I love Alcione more then all the
things in the world; Do not wonder at this declaration, cosen, it is true, I
love you more then my self, but I protest to you by all the gods, that this
affection is most innocent, and that it shall never give me desires for
Theander's wife, which I might not communicate to Theander himself: but as
innocent as it is, it nevertheless is faulty, since it is made use of to
disturb your quietness, and my presence is hurtful to you, since it is
suspected to them that are near you, and that it gives them jealousies which
are to your disadvantage. The gods forbid that from henceforward they should
find that occasion to afflict you, and that I should prefer my happiness in
seeing you before your tranquillity; I will absent myself therefore, since I
must, and how great grief soever I suffer at this separation, it will certainly
be less then that I should receiv by the discontents my presence may cause to
you* Cleonimus ended these words with so sad a look, that I was sensibly
touched with it; I have confessed to you, that my good will to him was as
strong as it could lawfully be, and I will avow that it was increased by this
discourse, and that the goodness wherewith he forgot himself for my interests,
caused in me a tenderness of him, which I never had till then. To say truth, I
was willing to let him see, both how I received his offer, and to what degree
his person and his company were dear to me, for that end giving him my hand,
Cosen (said I) I neither doubt of the greatness, nor of the nature of your
affection to me, I know it is such as a virtuous man may conceiv to one of his
nearest kindred, and to the wife of his best friend, and upon this assurance I
will make alike confession of mine to you, and will protest truly (though
perhaps I am to blame in this declaration) that after Theander, there is
nothing dearer to me then your self. I will not therefore deprive my self of
you, for the suspicions of Astiages and Bagistanes, and so long as Theander is
pleased I should see you, I will never consent to this absence you propose to
me. If he become of their humor, you will not then take it ill, if I refrain
your company, and force my own inclinations to perform my duty to my husband.
Till this misfortune happen to us, we will live as we have don, and provided
Theander be satisfied, I shall but little regard the satisfaction of others.
By this answer, I drove away part of the sadness that appeared in Cleonimus his
countenance, and with it the design he had to forsake me, when I had most
need of his assistance.

We continued hereupon to live as we had begun, and on purpose to spite
Astiages, I used Cleonimus more kindly then ever; That disloial Brother was
stark mad at it, and presently after he had a companion that bore it as
impatiently as he. Bagistanes for all his anger had not ceased to love me,
and being not able to resolv to see me no more, he had forced his shame and
choler, to give me visites, which I was fain to receiv whether I would or no,
but yet I received them all in the presence of Theander, and often of
Cleonimus, and others whom I would ever have to be witnesses of our
conversation. If I had much ado to suffer him, he had no less to suffer
Cleonimus, whose presence was become insupportable to him, having changed all
the affection which alliance formerly had caused in him, into a most violent
hatred; yet being the greatest dissembler of all men living, he disguised his
ill will under a loving countenance, and knowing his courage durst not declare
his animositie. Astiages for the same consideration carried himself toward him
in the same manner, but he did otherwise toward me, and passed by no
occasion of showing me how black his suspicions were, and how wicked his
intentions; his rage grew to such an extreamitie, that he caused a note to be
put one day in my dressing cloth, which I found as I was getting me ready,
and wherein I read these words.

Astiages to Alcione.
YOu have received too great an honor by our alliance to consider that of our
house so little. Take heed to it Alcione, and know there want's neither sword
nor poison, to repair the disgrace of a Family like ours.


I read these words with an astonishment which I am not able to represent. Till
then I had been patient and had held my peace, but at that time I resolved to
be so no longer, and to speak; and I was going instantly to carry the note to
Theander, and make him the relation of all that had passed, if Cleonimus had
not com into my Chamber, he wondered as much as I at the threats he used to
me, but he desired me to defer the complaints I meant to make to my husband
for a few days, and counseled me to go with him to visit my Father at this
house we now are in, where I might at more liberty entertain him with my
misfortunes, and free my self from the sight of my enemies. I approved the
advice he gave me, and within an hour after, having proposed it to Theander,
I easily disposed him to it. Theander and I came hither to visit my Father and
my Mother, who had been some days here to divert themselves, and we spent many
delightfully in their company. Bagistanes and Astiages remained at Babylon,
where their rage made them take recours to ways of revenge, worthy of their
courage and of their virtue. Cleoni^us came to see us almost every day, and
for the most part gallopt over alone, the way being but short from hence to
Babylon. One day going from us when the Sun was ready to set, without any
other weapon but his sword, as he went out of the wood which is near this
house, he was assaulted by three men on hors-back, who threw three darts at
him, from a good distance, and their haste, or the will of the gods having made
them miss, they drew their swords, and ran up to him with full speed; though
that number of enemies might with reason have caused some apprehension in
Cleonimus, their cowardice made him despise them, and being resolved to sell
his life as dearly as he could, after having avoided the shock of the two
first by a little carrier he took, he closed so luckily with the third, that
having made his sword slip over his shoulder, he ran his own up to the hilts
in his right side. Scarce was that enemy down, when the two others came back
at Cleonimus, but their companion's horse was in their way, which hindered them
from coming straight upon him, and while one of them turned a little aside, to
set upon Cleonimus behind, he was so fortunate, that with a back blow he cut
off his hand, which fell presently to the ground with his sword. The third
having seen this second stroke, turned about, and seeking his safety in the
swiftness of his horse, began to fly with all possible speed; but Cleonimus
pursued him, and being mounted upon one much fleeter, overtook him in a very
little time; He could have thrust his sword into his reins if he would, but
he contented himself with seizing upon the guard of his as he passed by, and
having easily wrested it out of his hand; he threw it on the ground, and
opposing his passage laid hold of his bridle; wherewith having quickly stopped
him, Friend (said he) what have I don to thee, that should make thee desire to
kill me? This man in a terrible fear, held up his hand, and beseeching him to
spare his life, I have no intention to take it (answered Cleonimus) but I will
know of thee by what offense I have made thee my enemy, thee whom I never
disobliged, nor ever knew in my life. The fellow being a little assured by
these words, Ah! Sir (said he) I have no cause to hate you, and doubtless I
have deserved that death, which I and my companions would have given you out of
a vile consideration; Astiages hired us for that purpose, and Bagistanes
promised us ten talents, to kill you. Though Cleonimus was astonished at that
treachery, yet had he no difficulty to believ it, and knowing the baseness
of his enemies, he easily gave credit to that confirmation of it; he cared
not to draw any greater proofs, and giving the man his liberty, he exhorted
him to avoid such like occasions of infamy; the other touched with a true
repentance which he witnessed by his tears, protested that only the extreme
poverty to which of late years he had been reduced, was the motive that had
incited him to a wickedness which he had ever detested. You might have freed
your self from that (replied Cleonimus) by honester means; but to the end it no
more may serve you for a pretext to evil actions, you shall not lose the
recompense you hoped for, and you may com to morrow to my lodging, and fetch
your share of the ten talents Bagistane's promised you. This man ravished with
Cleonimus his generositie, would have cast himself at his feet, but he would
not suffer him, and sending him away, I desire no other requital (said he)
but that you would be an honest man, and that by speaking of this business,
you would not dishonor two men who are nere allied to me, and one of which is
brother to Theander: I have told you this passage a little more at large, to
make you know of what temper Cleonimus his mind was, since he himself paid
his murderers the hire which they were to have had only for his death; and that
after causes of complaint of this nature, against Bagistanes, and Astiages, he
had yet care of their reputation, and forbad that fellow to defame them. True
it is that in this last effect of goodness there was some little mixture of
interest, and that he was glad to smother that attempt, fearing the cause would
break forth with the report of it, and that I might be too much spoken of in
that discourse. Being com to Babylon, he retired to his lodging, where he
made no mention at all of what had befallen him, and passed the night, as I
have heard since in his wonted tranquillity; but the next morning, as soon as
he was ready he went to Theander's house, and going up into Astiages his
chamber, who was not yet stirring, he came to his bed side, and drawing open
the curtain, he showed himself to him. Astiages dissembling his hatred, bade
him good morrow, as he was wont to do, but Cleonimus seeing there was no body
with him, after he had looked a while upon him without speaking, Astiages
(said he) your design has not taken effect, and the ministers of your
intention, by the justice of the gods have received another payment then that
you made them hope for; I com hither neither to take revenge for an intended
murder, nor to reproach you with it, but to make you know that without
difficulty, and without dishonor I could punish your baseness, and to put you
in mind, that in the quality you profess, you had handsomer ways to free
your self of an enemy; I should not want them to free my self of you, if you
were not as unworthie of my resentment, as you are to be Theander's brother;
but since his consideration make's me suppress it, it shall also make me
suppress the report of this action, not to save a reputation which you have
abandoned; but to keep a noble blood, in which both friendship, and alliance
make's me concerned, from a stain which could not be gotten out of it.
Cleonimus having ended these words, deigned not to stay for Astiages his
answer, but going forth of the chamber, left him in a mavelous confusion. We
had already learned by certain country people, that Cleonimus had fought a
combat as he was going back to Babylon the day before; and as soon as
Theander heard it, he took horse and went presently to him; having asked him
the particulars of that encounter, Cleonimus confessed he had been assaulted
by three men, against whom the Gods had so well assisted him, that he had
gotten the better of them, but could not com to the knowledge of his enemies.
Theander without sounding any deeper into that adventure, rejoiced at his good
success, and within a while after, going to his house, he found Astiages there,
so confounded with Cleonimus his words, that he hardly knew in what place he
was. That treacherous fellow, believing his wickedness could not be long
concealed, resolved to prevent those that might inform his brother of it, and
having already prepared himself for the discourse, he was to make to that
purpose, desired a time to speak with him in private. Theander retiring with
him into his closet, gave him the liberty he demanded; and then that
perfidious wretch, after long preambles to testify his trouble, that he was
to acquaint him with so ill a business, told him openly, what he before had
confusedly strove to make him believ, and protested to him that I loved
Cleonimus with passion, and with scandal to all their race; that Bagistanes and
he had perceived it with a great deal of grief, and that they had endeavored
to divert me from it by entreatie, and even by some threatenings, which the
interest of their blood might autorise; but that I had been insensible of their
remonstrances, and that abusing with Cleonimus the facility of so good an
husband, we by a thousand scandalous actions, had made known our passion, even
to those that were least quicksighted. Astiages said so many other things to
Theander, that he was weary of suffering him longer, and looking with disdain
upon him, You are too zealous, Astiages (answered he) and I have already told
you, how well known Alcione and Cleonimus are to me; I should be very much
satisfied with them both, if their friendship were yet a little greater then it
is, and since that only I am concerned in it, I will desire them to augment it
for my sake; These words spoken with a disdainful tone, troubled, and
exasperated Astiages, and obliged him to reply with an angry accent. If you
are so little sensible of the dishonor of your house, they that may be
blemished with it are not so tame as you are, and your nearest friends shall
never be reproched for having tolerated a mischief of the nature of this they
have discovered; since it is an extreme one, it ought not to be thought
strange, if they apply extreme remedies to it, and if the honor of their family
arm them against the destroiers of it. Theander was so deeply touched with this
discourse, that against any body but a brother, he would violently have
expressed his resentment, and in his last words observing the hatred, and the
evil designs he had against Cleonimus, he presently believed that it was he,
who had laid that ambush for him, which he had escaped by his valor; and in
that opinion looking sidewaies upon him, Wicked man (said he) thou have
discovered thy self too much, and I no longer doubt, but that thou thy self
did set on those villains to assassinate Cleonimus. Astiages grew pale at
that accusation, and by a manifest trouble made Theander see his reproaches were
true. That belief having enflamed him with anger, Ah! thou unworthie Fellow,
(continued he) that art the shame and dishonor of our blood thy self; what
examples have thou amongst our kindred of such a baseness? ah! I need no longer
doubt it, and the knowledge I have ever had of thy wicked inclinations, does but
too much fortify me in that conceit. Theander accompanied these words with a
torrent of others, which so dashed Astiages that he was a long time e're he
could get out of his confusion, but at last striving to recover himself, and
laboring to show a confidence; If you were not my brother (said he) I would
make you know how sensible I am of calumnies of this nature; and if Cleonimus
persist's in this opinion, he shall see I am not ignorant of the means to
disabuse him. Theander laughing at that bravado, despised him more then he did
before, and after having used a thousand reproaches to him, with express
threats, which Astiages answered only with a confusion that absolutely
confirmed his brother in his former belief, not being able to stay longer with
him, he went away directly to Cleonimus. As soon as he saw him, he ran to
him with open arms, saying, Dear Cleonimus, if my brother be wicked, if my
brother be base, we are neither guilty of his crimes, nor of his baseness;
and you ought not extend your resentment unto me, who will no more consider
him as my brother, but as a traitor, and as a murderer. Cleonimus was much
surprised at this discourse, and believing that Theander by other means had
learned the whole truth of the business, did no longer disavow that which by an
admirable discretion he had resolved to conceal, both from him, and from all
men living. Theander being assured of his brother's crime, first by Cleonimus
his silence, and then by his confession, desired to know the particulars of it,
and Cleonimus having told him all, made him change color a thousand times, and
a thousand times detest his destiny, which had made him be born of so wicked
a race. After this discourse, he ingenuously made him acquainted with all that
Astiages had said to him, and informed him of his jealousy in terms, and with
an action whereby he found that though he had the greatest interest in the
business, he was not moved with it at all. Cleonimus nevertheless shrunk up
his shoulders at the hearing of it, and looking upon him with a countenance
extraordinarily troubled; I knew (said he) Fortune would be jealous of the
happiness I enjoy in your friendship, and that I must be fain to follow the
usual course of my destiny, which never granted me a lasting felicity; After
the suspicions of Astiages, and Bagistanes I cannot be innocent, since I have
given them occasion to conceiv them; but that they may take no more, neither
from my presence, nor from my imprudent carriage, I will absent my self both
from Alcione, and from you, and will moderate the grief of that separation, by
the remembrance of a repose which I will never trouble. Theander would not
suffer Cleonimus to go on, but embracing him with much affection, I had rather
(said he) that Astiages, and Bagistanes were in their graves, then that you
should continue an hour in that thought, let them avoid your sight themselves,
if it be suspected to them, and let them not envy a happiness they are
incapable to give me; Alcione, I will follow you if you go away, and though
you will shun our company, we will tie our selves inseparably to yours.
Theander spoke these words with so passionate an aer, that Cleonimus was moved
with them, and considering Theander's good nature, and the hearty affection
he bore him, he could scarcely withhold tears, which the force of his
friendship was like to have drawn from his eyes, and embracing him with an
excess of love, O Gods! (cried he) should I not be a thousand times more
faithless then our slanderers, if I could ever have a thought to betray such a
friend as Theander? I will never fear it added Theander, and if this calumny I
have told you of, make's you abate any thing of your familiarity toward
Alcione, I shall believ you have ill interpreted my intentions, and that you
are become my enemy. I will rather become my own (replied Cleonimus) and being
your will shall ever be mine, I will live both at your house, and every where
else as you shall enjoin me, but to give you further proofs of my innocence,
Alcione shall tell you the true cause of the hatred of Astiages and Bagistanes;
'twas by my entreatie she has deferred to acquaint you with it all this
while, and by my consent you should never have heard any thing that could
trouble your contentment, if my enemies had not brought things to an
extremity; now it were no longer wisdom to conceal the truth of it from you;
but you shall learn it from the mouth of Alcione who is the most concerned in
it, and in whom it will be more handsome to tell it you, then in a man who may
be grown suspected, by reason of a treachery, the memory whereof is yet so
fresh. Theander protested to him a thousand times that he would never suspect
him, and pressed him a long time to draw that confession from him, which he
referred to me; but he defended himself so well against his importunities
that he gave them over, and desiring to com back to me that day to give me
account of all these adventures, and to satisfy his own curiosity, he left
Cleonimus, after having made him promiss that he would com and see us the next
day at the furthest. Before he returned hither he saw Astiages again, and
when he had laid his crime before his eyes, with words full of reproaches, and
invectives, he protested to him that if any evil happened to Cleonimus, no
body should be questioned for it but he and Bagistanes, since their ill
intentions had discovered themselves, both by witnesses, and proofs that were
irreprochable. I believ this threat secured Cleonimus his life, which would
have been in great danger, if his enemies had not feared to be accused of it
after such manifest appearances. In the mean time having got loos from a good
number of his friends, who were com to see him, and from whom he carefully hid
the Autors of his adventure, he went abroad to make some visit, but as he
passed through the street, he chanced to see the man to whom he had given his
life the day before, and to whom he had promised the reward, which he was to
have received from Bagistanes for his death; although Cleonimus had given him
order to com and fetch the money at his lodging, he had not the impudence to
go and demand a recompense which he so ill deserved, and contented himself
with the mercy he had received, without daring to present himself before him;
but Cleonimus having spied him, remembered his promise, and being a most
religious observer of all those he made, he called him, and carrying him to
his chamber his own self, gave him the sum he had promised him. The fellow
confounded with so extraordinary a liberality, cast himself at his feet, and
speaking to him, as to a man whose virtue was little less then divine, he
beseeched him to dispose of his life, and to command him something whereby he
might have occasion to hazard it. Cleonimus acknowledging his good will; since
you are so thankful (said he) you must needs do me a service, which I can
receiv from no body but you, and that is to give a letter into Bagistanes his
own hand, which I will write to him, and which cannot well be delivered but by
yours. Fear him not, I shall be able to defend you against him, and against
all those whom my consideration shall make your enemies. The man having offered
himself with a great deal of joy, to perform what he desired, Cleonimus called
for paper, and wrote to Bagistanes in these terms.

Cleonimus to Bagistanes.
THis minister of your generositie, come's to demand the recompense you
promised him, it was not his fault if he has not served you to your mind,
and if your design has not taken effect, it is because Fortune does not always
second great and noble enterprises. This last, wherein you employed this
bearer, is of a nature that may leav you a gallant reputation; he for his
payment desired a letter of recommendation to you, and he believed he could
not address himself better, then to him who has the happiness to be your
Nephew, and to whom you have showed so fresh, and so obliging proofs of your
friendship; if nearness of blood tied me to you before, the remembrance of
that favor give's you the disposing of a life whereof you have a great deal of
care, and which cannot be lost with more glory, nor with more advantage, then
when it may facilitate your possessing of that cruel Lady whom you so
virtuously honor with your affection.


Cleonimus having written this letter, gave it to the man who carried it to
Bagistanes. This was all the revenge he would take of him, being of an age
which forbad him any other, and I believ it was not so light a one as he
imagined, and Bagistanes already vexed that his design had succeeded so ill,
was like to have burst with spite at such just, and such jeering reproaches; but
being very subtle, he made no show of it, and within a few days after, he
that had been the bearer of them vanished, and never could be heard on since,
whereupon we belived that Bagistanes and Astiages had caused him to be made
away, that the world might no longer bear so undeniable a witness of their
villainy. In this interim Theauder was com home to us, and had told me the
particularities of Astiages his treachery, and of Cleonimus his generositie;
and after he had related the discourse he had with his brother, whose rage he
described to me in the terms wherewith I have represented it to you, he made
me acquainted with what had passed between him and Cleonimus upon that
subject, and prayed me to make the recital which he had referred to me. I
was before sufficiently disposed to give him that satisfaction of my own
accord, as soon as I knew Cleonimus disapproved it not, I staid not for a
second entreatie, but told him at large of all the persecutions I had suffered
from Bagistanes, and his perfidious brother, even to the smallest particulars,
in the same manner as I have related them to you. I know not what judgment you
will make of Theander's proceeding in this encounter, but for mine own part I
was very ill satisfied with it; He indeed detested the treachery of Astiages,
and called him a hundred times base fellow, and unworthie to be born of
noblebloud; but he seemed not at all touched with any resentment against
Bagistanes, and instead of falling into anger against him, he did nothing but
laugh at his weakness, and when he saw I was but little pleased with his
coldness in that business, What, Madam (said he smiling, to vex me the more)
are you cruel then to those that love you? I had suffered too much by Bagistanes
his importunities to be able to turn them into jesting; but Theander made
himself sport with them, and after he had laughed at them a while, Alcione
(continued he) you have told me nothing of Bagistanes, which I have not seen
him practice toward all his nearest kinswomen, and I believ that no degree of
proximitie ever freed any of them from him who were handsome enough to move his
love, but I never saw any body jealous of him; and he is now of an age to
cause more pity of his weakness, or more mirth at his follies, then fear of
any danger by him. For my part Alcione I protest to you this jealousy shall
never break my sleep, and that it shall ever be the smallest of my
afflictions. If you had sooner communicated your troubles to me, I should
without doubt have diminished them, and perchance I should have made you find
divertisement, in that which has been matter of vexation to you. I could not
approve of this humor of Theanders, and yet I was very much eased by having
disburdened my self of part of my cares, and within a while after Cleonimus
being com, joined in our conversation, and seconded Theander's opinion in such
manner, that I began to believ my misfortunes were less then I had fancied
them. After we had for some time discoursed merrily upon that subject, Theander
falling again to be serious, prayed me, or rather commanded me before
Cleominus, to love him still as my brother, and as his second self, and
protested to me that the most sensible discontent he could receiv, would be
to see me diminish any thing of that affection he required from me, upon any
consideration whatsoever. Afterward they resolved, that for the short time
Bagistanes according to the course of nature had to live, I should not use him
ill, and that I should receiv his follies as matters of pastime. In these
entertainments, and other pleasing divertisements, we spent yet some few days
here with my father and mother, after which we returned to Babylon. Astiages
had left his lodging at our house, and was gone to lie in the Citadel with his
uncle; Theander, to whom his crimes, and the attempts he had made upon me
for Bagistanes his satisfaction, had rendered him odious, was not able to endure
him longer within his doors, and Astiages himself was better pleased to be
with a man of his own humor, then among persons that detested him.

It was about that time that our country was almost every where full of
soldiers, and that Darius after the loss of the battle of Issus, recruting his
forces in these parts to prepare himself for a third, retired himself into our
city; The Court there was very great, and fair, though the Queens and
Princesses who were wont to make up the rest, part of it were absent at that
time, by a cruel servitude.

Since it is only my particular history you desire, I will not recount that
of the State, nor the things that passed then at Babylon, in which I have no
interest at all. Yet can I not forbear to tell you, Madam, that among those who
were most considered near Darius, I often saw the Prince Oroondates your
brother, his admirable actions, and the King's favor had made him so
remarkable, that it was hard for the meanest persons to be ignorant who he
was. And indeed my brother and I had preserved the Idea of him so well, that
though four or five years, which are run out since, have made some alteration in
his face, yet was it not enough to make us mistake him, and if we till now
have dissembled that knowledge of him, 'twas because we found his intention was
not to discover himself. I saw him exercise the troops he had sent for out of
Scythia, after the manner of their country, in a Plain near the city, and in
all his actions he had so mavelous a grace, that it was hard to loos the
remembrance of it. I will tell you likewise that Theander and Cleonimus had the
honor to be known to him, and that the report of their virtue which was very
great in this country, made them often receiv those favors from him, which he
was wont to show to all virtuous persons. As concerning my self, I remember
that at the King's first coming thither, my persecuter gave me some respite,
and the multitude of his affairs, or his diligence in waiting at the Court,
freed me for some time from his visits, which Theander made me suffer whether
I would or no, and wherewith he still would mock me, which sometimes made me
angry, and in the end made me resolv, to afflict my self less then I was
wont, and to take (if I could possibly without contributing to it) my part in
his divertisement; but the first month being past, the wicked old man fell
again to his old courses with more eagerness then before, and telling Theander
what he was able to do for the advancement of his fortune, he made so good
use of that advantage, that I was more troubled with him then ever; though I
took his persecutions no more to heart, as I had don formerly, yet could I
never constrain my self to give him a good look, as Theander would have had me
to make sport with him, and not understanding any jesting in matters of that
nature, I made him know by all my actions, that I could never be capable of
any thought to his advantage. This assurance wherein he had a thousand
occasions to confirm himself, exasperated him in extremity, and believing that
Cleonimus was the chiefest obstacle to his intentions, he resolved to set his
last engines a work, either to ruin him, or to drive him away from me; He
wavered a long time, thinking what counsel he should take, and if he spared
Cleonimus his life, against which he might have made a second attempt, 'twas
not so much any sens of virtue, or consideration of alliance that restrained
him, as his fear of the Laws, from which he was not exempt, not doubting but
that after what he had already don, he should be called to account if any
mischief should befall Cleominus. This apprehension stopped his violent
resolutions, and made him betake himself to other inventions to banish him from
me. He at first sought out means to set dissension between my husband and
him, without engaging me in the business, but having vainly endeavored to make
them fall out, his rage grew to such an extremity, that he no longer
considered me, but determined blindly to try all ways to advance his
revenge, and his other pernicious designs. He had already made so good use of
his power with Theander, that he had persuaded him to be reconciled to
Astiages, and though that disloial man lodged still with his uncle, yet came
he often to visit his brother, but he never spoke word of Bagistanes, and
carried himself toward me with a very great coldness, he still avoided
meeting with Cleonimus, and Cleonimus shunned him, and Bagistanes so carefully,
that he never met either of them at our house. These two wicked wretches united
together, labored jointly to destroy me, and when they thought they had
recovered all the credit they were wont to have with my husband, they forgot
nothing that could ruin us, and strove to make Theander observe our
familiarities, with such an industry as might without much difficulty have
perplexed any other husband; but his friendship to Cleominus, and his goodness
to me were so great, that for a long time, he either laughed at what they
said, or else received it as from suspected persons. These traitors seeing
themselves deceived in their expectation, resolved to prosecute their crime yet
further, to leav nothing unattempted to take revenge of a man, that hindered
their designs, though with the loss of my honor, and that of our house. For this
purpose having well contrived their treachery, and given instructions to the
person they were to employ, and whom they had bribed a long time before, they
made use of the plot I now will tell you, to deceiv Theander.

As he came back one night from the Palace, where he had spent part of the
day, and from whence he returned not till after the King was in bed, he had
an encounter hard by our door, which has since cost me so many tears, and
which without doubt will make me pour them forth all the rest of my miserable
life. When he was close by his own house, he by the light of a torch which one
of his servants carried before him, saw one of my maids com out, who was the
very same my enemies by their presents had corrupted. The wench came forth
without a light, and seemed to go in great deal of fear, when the footman
holding his to her face, helped his master to discover her. Theander wondering
to see a maid com out of his house at midnight, and without a candle, called her
by her name, but she being thus known, first by crying out made show to be
much surprised, and then having made as if she would have run away, O Gods!
(said she) I am undon, and at the same time, she tore a paper which she had
in her hand, and thrust the pieces of it hastily into her mouth. This action
which was but too heedfully observed by the abused Theander, caused a chilness
to run through all his body, and gave him apprehensions which he had never
felt before. He came close to the wench in an extreme trouble, and stopping
her by the arm, whither go thou (said he) and whither were thou carrying
that paper which I saw thee tear just now? The maid faining a deadly fear, sunk
down at his feet, and embracing his knees, Ah! Sir (said she) I beseech you
pardon me; and repeating those words twice or thrice, she appeared to be
stricken with so great an astonishment, that Theander's was redoubled by it.
Speak (said he) and if thou will have me pardon thee, confess thy fault to
me presently. That subtle wench wiping her eyes, and seeming to tremble, Ah!
Sir, (replied she) my obedience is very guilty, but yet both my Lady, and I
are more innocent in effect then in appearance, and if I tore this letter, it
was my fear that made me imprudently commit that fault. But from whom, and to
whom were thou carrying it? demanded Theander hastily. My Lady (answered she)
sent it to Cleonimus. Theander quite confounded, or rather quite besides
himself, eying the wench from head to foot, Did Alcione (said he) send thee to
Cleonimus at this time of the night, and in the dark as I meet thee? Ah! Sir,
(replied that wicked wench) I wish to the gods that I were dead, since my
imprudence is so hurtful to my Mistress, and perchance cause's suspicions in
you against her, which you ought not to conceiv. Theander who began already to
swallow the poison that was prepared for him, would not talk longer with her in
the street, but commanded her to be gone to her chamber, and to be silent as
she loved her life; He neither threatened her, nor asked her any thing more,
fearing to make his servants acquainted with the cause of his trouble, and to
learn news himself, which his growing jealousy made him already to apprehend,
and coming up into my chamber, where I was already in bed, he bad me good
night, but 'twas in a way very different from his ordinary manner, and with a
countenance so changed, that presently I believed he was not well. Having
asked him hastily how he did, he told me he found himself a little
indisposed, and being undressed, he came to bed in so deep a sadness, that if
the cause of it had been known, it would have moved pity even in those that had
been most insensible; the disquiet I was in for fear of his health, having kept
me awake a good part of the night, made me know likewise how he rested, and
made me hear the sighs he drew from the bottom of his heart in so great
abundance, that I believed his body had less part in that indisposition then
his mind. I asked him often how he did, but he hardly answered me, letting
me know I should oblige him if I left him at quiet. As soon as it was day he
arose, and going out of my chamber, he came not home again till evening, I
found him as sad as the night before, and pressing him to tell me the cause,
Madam (said he) I pray you pardon my ill humor, it will pass over if it pleas
the gods, and I my self am ignorant of the cause, in the mean time I need only
a little rest, and I beseech you to grant it me. Having said so, he expressed
a desire to lie in his own Chamber for some few nights, and when I had given
order to have it made ready, he bade me good night, and left me in a
greater confusion then I am able to represent. He was so little accustomed to
speak to me, in a style like that of his last words, and to conceal the cause
of his afflictions from me, that by this unexpected change, I was like to have
guessed part of my misfortunes. True it is that I had ever seen him so far from
the thoughts that then tormented him, that I had much ado to suspect him of
them; and I knew my self so innocent, that I did not believ he in my most
faulty actions could find any reasonable pretense for his ill humor. In this
confusion of thoughts I passed the night, and as soon as I was up, I went into
his chamber, where I found him walking with his arms across upon his breast,
and lifting up his eyes to heaven, with all the actions of a person mortally
afflicted, I could not forbear running to him with open arms. Dear Theander
(said I) have I not interrupted you? yes, (answered he coldly) and you would
oblige me if you will leav me alone, since solitude is the greatest eas I can
give my trouble. These words, and the accent wherewith he spoke them, froze
me with a deadly apprehension, Ah! Theander (cried I) I fear you have left
loving me. He answered me at first only by a deep sigh, and after he had
looked a while upon me without speaking, Madam (replied he) I pray you leav
me. And turning his back he went to lean upon a window that was toward the
garden. I would not trouble him further, but retired into my chamber, stricken
with a mortal grief. There it was that reflecting upon Theanders words and
actions, I found occasion enough to esteem my self unhappie, and could make no
other conjecture, but that either I by my deportments, had drawn my husband's
hatred upon me, or that some new affection made him weary of my company. I
resolved nevertheless upon the worst events that could happen, and to bear his
ill humor, or his inconstancy, without murmuring. Cleonimus was as much
puzzled in it as I, and not being able to draw any knowledge from him of his
discontent, he only comforted me, and confirmed me in the resolution I had
taken. Many days passed on this manner, in which I received not any mark of
Theander's former affection, nor any other ill usage from him, then what I
found in his silence, and in his coldness; both of them increased every day,
and Theander being become insensible of the discourse of Cleonimus, and of his
other friends, plunged himself more and more into that pensive sadness which
quickly changed his countenance, and became powerful enough to have sent him to
his grave, without the assistance it received. I talked often with Cleonimus
touching my misfortune, and our friendship which our enemies maliciously caused
the unhappie Theander to observe, redoubled his jealousy very vehemently, and
made it in the end so strong that it was no longer in a condition to be shut
in.

I was one day in my bed, where my watchings and my sorrows had made me
drowzie, when I know not with what intention he came into my chamber, where I
had not seen him of many days, the desire I had to observe his actions made me
keep still in the posture I was in, and feign my self asleep. He walked a
great while up and down without speaking, or without coming near the bed, but
in the end he came on the further side of it, and having half opened the
curtain, he believed I was asleep, and sat down, beginning to look upon me,
with motions which only he was able to represent. He continued long in that
posture, keeping his eyes fixed upon my face, and mine were not so close shut,
but that through the fingers of one of my hands which lay upon my che^k I could
easily observe him; his looks grew inflamed, and mild again by fits, but in
their different motions, they naturally expressed the different agitations of
his soul. And he contented himself with making them speak for him, but at last
his passion was too strong for his resolution, so that by the violence of it
forgetting his determination to hold his peace: Ah! Alcione (said he softly)
is it possible thou should be falls to me? I was so nearly touched with
these words, which he spoke loud enough to be heard by me, that losing the
remembrance of my feigned sleep, which might have given me a fuller knowledge
of my misfortune, I sat up of a sudden, as he rose from the bed side, and
stopping him by the arm, with a kind of a distracted action. I? Theander (said
I) am I falls to you? Theander seeing himself held so, strove to turn away his
face from me, and putting his hand up to his eyes, to restrain some tears which
would have broken forth with violence. Alcione (replied he) I do what I can to
justify you in my thoughts; but Alcione it is impossible. And without speaking
or harkening to me any more, he pulled his arm away from me, and going out
of my chamber, left me in the condition you may imagine. It would be both
superfluous and tedious Ladies, to repeat my lamentations after this assurance
of my misfortune, I said all that a violent grief can make one say, and in the
pangs it put me in, I spared neither my hair nor my face. What, (said I, half
out of my wits) shall thy husband accuse thee of infidelity, and will thou
survive that accusation? shall that husband who is so dear to thee, and in whom
thou have bounded all thy thoughts, with so entire a resignation, believ thou
have betrayed him, and reproach therewith it himself, and thou not endeavor even
with the peril of thy life, to justify thy self? Ah! no, Alcione, either die,
or blot so sinister an opinion out of his mind, and suffer not that ungrateful
man, whom thou have too dearly loved, to confirm himself in it by thy silence,
and by thy patience. In this thought, I leaped out of the bed, and without
consulting any further, I ran into Theander's chamber, whither they told me
he went in when he came out of mine; As soon as I saw him I could not forbear
crying out Theander, My dear Theander, is it possible you should believ me
falls? Theander answered me without being moved. I know not what you are, but
I would give all my blood that you were innocent. Ah! if I am not so (replied
I) kill me; but if I be not faulty, restore me that affection which I have
lost, and without which I cannot live. The abused Theander, half distracted
with ill impressions, was not at all touched with what I said, but getting loos
from my hands, Madam (said he) you take me without doubt for Cleonimus. These
words were like a thunderclap to me, and he had no sooner spoken them, but
(whether it were to get out of my sight, or that he repented he had said so
much) he went out of the chamber, and left me there alone. I was instantly
overwhelmed with an infinite number of sorrowful thoughts, and I deplored my
disaster by a deluge of tears, and by words full of distraction; I called the
gods who knew my innocence, to my justification, and reflecting upon whatsoever
I had don with Cleonimus that was most criminal, I could not forbear accusing
Theander of injustice and inhumanitie. Then it was that with a great deal of
grief I saw my self reduced to a necessity of banishing the innocent, and
generous Cleonimus, and I confess to you Ladies, that I could not dispose my
mind to it without much violence. I loved him since I must own it, and since I
have loudly declared it, I loved him more then all the persons of the world
except my husband, but the continuation of my discourse will justify my
affection, and make you see, that it yielded (as it was fit it should) to
another that was more legitimate; Alas! scarce had I taken this resolution,
when I saw him com into my chamber; That sight caused a beating at my heart,
and fetched tears from my eyes, knowing his friendship to me was such, that
he could not without trouble, hear the news I had to tell him. The condition
he found me in grieved him very much, and though of late days he began to
be accustomed to it, he asked me, what I ailed, and being set down by me,
he from my silence drew an omen that was ill enough. I kept it still a great
while, and felt so much constraint in the action I was to do, that I knew not
how I should be able to discharge it. In the end I took courage, and forcing
my sorrow. Cleonimus (said I) hitherto my miseries have but little touched me,
but now they have changed their nature; and I may say they are com to the last
extremities, since they reduce me to the most cruel of all necessities; It is
time (dear Cleonimus) to put you in mind of our bargain, I observed it
regularly while our friendship gave suspicion only to Astiages and Bagistanes;
I have seen you with as much joy, and satisfaction, as it was lawful for me to
have; but now, -- guess the rest (continued I) O! Cleonimus, and spare me the
pains of telling you what you may easily conjecture. Cleonimus who changed
color at these words, not suffering me to proceed, I understand you cousin
(said he) Theander himself is become jealous. He is so but too much (replied
I) and it is from his own mouth I have received that declaration. It Is
sufficient dear cousin (added Cleonimus lifting up his eyes to heaven) it is
sufficient, and I know well enough what I am obliged to, it is a misfortune,
which I already have both apprehended and begun to prepare my self for of
late. I will free my dear Theander of the occasion of his discontents, and by
my absence will restore him a repose, which shall ever be dearer to me then
my own. To say the truth I began already to think my self faulty toward him,
and I innocently gave him offense, which caused in me a real remors; although
my affection to you, never bred any desires in me to his prejudice, I feel
nevertheless that it is too strong for one that neither is, nor can be your
husband, and by a long conversation perchance it might become so powerful, as to
give him true causes to condemn it. I never declared so much to you before; and
though this confession be innocent enough, I would not make it to you if I
were not upon the point of repairing that fault, by an exile sufficiently
rigorous to a person that has thoughts like mine. I leav you my dear cousin,
and if I cannot say I leav you without grief, I will at least protest truly to
you, that in my sorrow the consideration of the grief I restore you, will bring
me an exceeding great consolation. I ask no longer time of you, for my
departure from Babylon, then till to morrow, in the morning I will go out of
these walls, and will bid them farewell, perhaps eternally. In the mean time, O
my too dear cousin, if without offending Theander, I may beg some part in your
memory, remember that though Cleonimus loved you with a most pure affection,
he loved you yet more then himself, and that neither length of time, nor
distance of place, which shall separate us, can never be able to cure him of
his thoughts for you. Although Cleonimus brought forth these words with a great
deal of constancy, I confess all mine vanished, and I was seized with so
violent a grief, that it made me forget part of my duty, and shed tears,
which I vainly endeavored to restrain. After I had wiped them away, Cleonimur
(said I) I will for ever remember you, and you also may remember that Alcione
loved you as much, and perhaps more then she could without offending her
husband, and that if the gods had not engaged her to a husband worthy of her
affection, she would prefer Cleonimus, before all the Monarchs of the earth,
and would bound all her felicities only in him. The trouble I was in made me
speak these words, wherein there was something more then was fitting, and which
without doubt I should have had much ado to get out, in another season, but I
was more carried away when I gave him the last farewell, and did actions which
could not be excused but by a like encounter nor repaired but by those which
followed them, and which will without doubt make you pardon part of my faults.
Cleonimus parted from me on this manner, and in that parting, he appeared
more lovely to me then he had don in all the other actions of his life; and
indeed to speak truly of it, this last had something in it extreme obliging, and
that perfect resignation wherewith he forsook his country, and used perhaps
some violence to his own inclination to contribute to my repose, and to that of
my dear husband, expressed a most real generositie, and a most powerful
consideration of me. He was no sooner gone but I went into my chamber, where
joining that grief to my former afflictions, I passed the rest of the day in so
woeful a condition, that the obdurate Theander himself, could not have seen it
without being touched with compassion. I spent all that night in the saddest
thoughts, which a misfortune like mine could possibly produce, and I do not
deny, but that the departure of the innocent Cleonimus made some part of my
sorrows, and that his last words, and his last actions came into my remembrance
with strength enough to work most sensibly upon me, but his consideration
vanished before that of my reputation, and of my husband's contentment; and I
was so nearly touched with these two last, that I took a firm resolution to
die, or to recover the affection I had lost, either by my misfortune, or by my
imprudence. In this design as soon as it was day, and that I was dressed, I
went into unfortunate Theander's chamber; where as I have told you, he had
lien for some nights before, but the entrance whereof was not forbidden me, for
all he was so much incensed. As soon as I came in, I went close to his bed, and
having found him asleep, I kneeled down by the side of it, where I considered
him with inward motions, full of grief, and affection, I had not patience to
stay till he was awake, nor had I boldness enough to waken him, knowing well
that in the terms I then stood with him, my former liberties were not permitted
me; I continued on this manner till he awaked, but he no sooner opened his
eyes when seeing me by him, he sighed vehemently twice or thrice, and turned
his head the other way; O gods! (said he) will you never let me rest? I was
prepared for such a welcome, and not being at all terrified by it from my
design, No, cruel man, (aaswered I) I will never let you rest, till you restore
me him, you have unjustly taken from me. Turn not away Theander, but if you
have yet the least remembrance of that affection you once bore me, tell me by
what fault I have deserved your hatred. He with whom you reproched me, and
who without doubt has disturbed the tranquillity of your mind, shall give you
no more disquiets, nor no more suspicions, and she who in your opinion is most
criminal, will either ceas to be so if you pleas, or ceas to live, if you
continue your late usage to her. While I spoke these words, I did all I could
to make him turn toward me, but that poor abused man, whose reason was half
lost by the violence of his jealousy, was not at all moved with them, and
pulling one of his hands away from me, which I had taken; Fear not, (said he)
fear not any wors usage from my resentment then what you have already received;
my grief may well send me to my grave, but it shall never make me injure her
I have too dearly and too perfectly loved; whatso^ver is fatal in my
resolutions shall be turned against my self, and you may live with security,
but live without my friendship, which you have so ungratefully disdained. These
words utterly banished from my soul, that small desire of life which yet
remained in me, and believing I should pass the rest of it, only in torments
that would make it a thousand times wors then death, I resolved to end it in
the sight of that ungrateful man, both to satisfy his resentment and to blot
out of his mind, by the last of my actions, those jealousies he so unjustly
had conceived. In this design, without consulting further, I arose from the
place where I was, and seeing a knife upon the table I went thither, and taking
it in my hand, while Theander having his face turned on the other side, gave
me sufficient conveniencie, I drew near the bed again, and throwing open the
Curtain with an action that testified my despair, Ungrateful man (said I)
hardhearted, and perhaps disloial Theander, turn thy eyes upon her, whom thou
accusest of falsehood, and thou shall see the satisfaction she will give thee
for that infidelity wherewith thou reproachest her, if I have betrayed thee
it, is just I should perish; between my innocence, and my crime I know no mean,
nor will I make use of that goodness which make's thee spare her whom thou have
too dearly but not too perfectly loved. Thou dare not give me that death
thou desire I should have, but I can tell how to find it since thou wishest
it; yet know Theander, that thou art the most cruel and most ungrateful of all
men living, that by thy ingratitude, and thy inhumanitie thou have made thy
self unworthie of the most pure and most real affection that ever was, and that
by thy unjust suspicions thou loosest both the best friend and the most loial
wife in the whole world; I die to gain thy belief of this protestation, or
rather I die to please thee, since death is the only expiation thou can
demand for the crimes thou suspectest me of.

Although Theander was most obdurate, he could not hear these last words
without being moved, the fear they put him in made him turn toward me, and
sit up in his bed; but though he saw me lift up my arm, and that with a great
cry he leapt into the floor to save me, he got not to me so soon, but that
I had already stabbed the knife into my breast with all my strength. I fell
down presently all bloody, and the sorrowful Theander who had not been able to
prevent my fall, cast himself down by me, and joining his face to mine, he by
his cries and actions of despair, made me know, as weak and fainting as I was,
that my loss gave, him thoughts very different from his last expressions. After
having spoken some words full of rage, he drew the knife out of my wound and
raising his voice that I might hear him. Dearest Alcione (cried he) thou have
been but too faithful, to thy barbarous ungrateful husband, I esteem thee as
innocent, as thy murderer is guilty, and my last affliction is that I can
give thee nothing for thy life, but that of thy executioner. As he made an end
of these words he lift up his arm, and though his cries had already called
some of his servants into the Chamber, that encounter amazed them so, that they
had neither wit enough, to divert his resolution, nor readiness enough to
hinder him from striking the fatal knife, yet died and warm with my blood up to
the very haft in his own body.

Here Alcione's Narration was interrupted by a flood of tears, which ran from
her eyes at that sad remembrance, and which caused such a tenderness in the two
Princesses, that their compassion forced them to keep her company in that
mornfull exercise. After they had a little settled themselves, and that
Thalestris by some words of consolation had endeavored to abate Alcione's
sorrows, she at her entreatie wiped her eyes, and went on thus with her
discourse.

My poor Theander fell down by me, and his last care was to testify to me by
his embraces, that he believed me innocent, and worthy of his affection.
Although I was exceedingly weakened, I had not lost my understanding, but having
enough to discern that action, I felt redoublings of my grief more cruel then
that death, which I thought my self very near. I used all the strength I had to
sit up, and looking upon my poor husband whose blood mingled it self with mine,
and who by his last endearments strove to express his lost thoughts to me, I
opened my mouth though I was half dead, and forced these words out with a great
deal of pain. Theander (said I) dear, cruel Theander, was not my death painful
enough, without your making it a thousand times more sensible, by being
guilty of yours. My pale weak husband, looking upon me with dying eyes, and
endeavoring to press me between his arms with the little strength he had
remaining. Dear Alcione (said he) it was not just that the innocent should
di^, and that the guilty should continue in the world. Ah! (replied I with a
tone like his) I am no longer innocent, since I am guilty of your death. We
should have endeavored to say more, if Theander's servants and my women, who
were all com about us, and in whom this accident had imprinted the true image
of death, had not taken us up, and laid us both upon Theander's bed: We were
all bath^d in blood, and while some of them were busy in stanching it, the rest
ran to fetch Chyrurgians. They came within awhile after, and my Father and
Mother came almost as soon as they. At this woeful spectacle they sent forth
cries, which redoubled the desolation of the house, they wept over me in a
terrible fright, and brought forth words full of distraction and despair. After
I had let the first brunt of their sorrow pass over, putting them back with a
feeble hand, Leav me (said I softly) it is I that have killed Theander. Theander
turning at these words, Griev on, Polemon (cried he) it is I that am the
murderer of Alcione. At this the general bewailing redoubled, and presently
after the Chyrurgians, having enjoined us silence, desired to see our wounds.
Think only upon Theander's (said I) if you would have me recover, save
Alcione (cried Theander) and let me die. They may save both perchance (said
Polemon) but for gods sake, and for the affection you bear to one another,
suffer them to endeavor it. We consented to my Father's entreaties, and the
Chyrurgians having searched our wounds could not make any certain judgment of
the success of them; but as I have heard since they had much more hope of me,
then of my husband who having struck the knife almost upon his naked flesh, and
with a greater force then I, had made a deeper wound, and in a more dangerous
place. When they had dressed us both, they would have parted us, but Theander
never would consent to it, and I opposed it with an obstinacy as great as his.
I know that I must die (said Theander to them) and though you flatter me, I
feel well enough in what condition I am; suffer me therefore to pass the small
remnant of my life with Alcione, and envy not my last moments this last
consolation. After he had obtained this of them, he turned toward me, and
though he was forbidden to speak, he asked me pardon, for his late usage of
me, in terms able to have cleft the most savage hearts with pity. Ah!
Theander (said I interrupting him) you have too fatally repaired it; but it is
the loss of that blood which was so dear to me, and perchance of that life
which was ever mine, that I cannot pardon you. I would it pleased to the gods
(added Theander) that I had thousand others to loos, and that by loosing them
altogether I could secure thine; it is I that tear it from thee, I who lived
only by it, and who with the price of my own, ought to have defended thee,
against my unjust suspicions. Theander (answered I) I know not what was the
cause of them, but I beseech you let me know it, that I may endeavor to
justify my self, if you would have me to die satisfied. You are but too much
justified (replied Theander) both by the first, and by this last proof of your
virtue, and your blood does but too much speak your innocence, to him that most
wrongfully suspected it; yet to justify my self of part of my cruelties, and
to obey your will* I will tell what you desire to know of me. At these words
though he spoke with pain, and though he was put in mind that he did himself
hurt by talking long, he told me his encounter that fatal night, when he saw
one of my maids carrying a letter from me to Cleonimus, and then added other
marks that Astiages had given him of our intelligence, which after that last
adventure had made some impression in his mind. Although I was exceedingly
moved at this discourse, I hearkn'd to it to the end, and when he had left
speaking, You had reason to hate me (said I) after so great appearances of my
infidelity, but to let you see we have been betrayed, command the wench to
be called hither. I had scarcely said so when she came in of her self. As
wicked as she was, her wickedness went not so far as to desire our death, and
though she had served Astiages in his perfidious intentions, she had not
thought her treacheries would have produced such bloody, and such fatal
effects. Whatever it were, she was then touched with so great a repentance,
that in stead of flying, as she easily might have don, she fell down upon her
knees at the beds feet, melting into tears, tearing her hair, and doing all the
actions of a desperate person. Make me be put to death, Madam, (cried she)
and I shall be too gently punished, if I suffer but one death in the sharpest
torments that ever were invented; I have basely betrayed you, Madam, the
promises and threats of Astiages and Bagistanes, seduced me to the prejudice
of my duty. Astiages instructed me in this last adventure, which has caused
all your misfortunes. I did nothing in all that action, but what he directed
me word for word, and while I spoke unto his brother, he stood concealed
within the Porch, to keep him from hurting me, as I ought to have feared he
would in his anger. The wench said many other things, to which I lent no
attention, and while she called to be put death, and that by all her actions
she expressed a hearty repentance, I turned toward Theander who lifting up
his eyes to heaven testified his astonishment by his silence: Well now,
Theander (said I) have you any thing more to desire for my justication? I would
have desired (answered he) that instead of turning the knife against your
self, you should have stabbed it into the heart of this credulous ungrateful
man, it is the only fault you have committed, and the only one which I ought
never to pardon you. He made a stopped at these words, and of a sudden lifting
up his hands, O gods! (pursued he) since you suffer me to die, without
punishing Astiages for his perfidiousness, Will not you take that care for me,
and will you not revenge upon him and Bagistanes, this blood which they have so
treacherously and so inhumanely shed? Then after he had held his peace awhile;
And Cleonimus (said he) the innocent Cleonimas, what is become of him? He is
gone (answered I) after he once knew that you suspected him, and to free you
for ever from that occasion, I have given him an eternal farewell. What (replied
Theander) shall I die then without seeing Cleonimus, and shall I die justly
hated of Cleonimus? This thought touched him so deeply that it fetched tears
from his eyes in great abundance, and he would yet have continued to discourse
longer, but my Father and Mother, and many of his nearest friends and mine, who
were already com into our Chamber, did so entreat him and me also, that to
satisfy them we gave our selves to rest, and to that silence they desired of
us, for the remainder of the day. My Mother kept still close by us, to make us
observe it, and the mutual assurance we had of each others affection and
innocence, having banished part of our despair, persuaded us the more easily to
that compliance. Astiages was gone from Babylon a day or two before, and
Bagistanes though he heard of our misfortune, durst not present himself before
us. The maid that had been the cause of all our sorrows was turned away, and
though many judged it fit she should be punished, I prayed them to pardon
her, and to content themselves with putting her from us, without other
punishment then the remors of a guilty conscience. Our silence and repose that
day was interrupted only by the disquiets we had reciprocally for one
another, and by our often enquiries how each other did. They watched by us all
night with a great deal of care, but before it was day, Theander had lost the
better part of his strength. When it was time to dress our wounds, he would
needs have the Chirurgians begin with me, and after they had looked upon mine,
they liked it so well, that they could not forbear saying to him, Cheer up,
Sir, Alcione shall not die. She will not die (said I interrupting them) if you
assure her of Theander's life, but if that be in danger, you can be but
uncertain of mine. You shall not die, my dear Alcione (said Theander with a joy
which appeared in his face as pale and dying as it was) no, you shall not die,
and the gods were too just, to make you suffer the punishment of my crime. In
the mean time they visited his wound, but at the sight of it, the bystanders
observed such an alteration in the Chirurgians countenances, that they drew a
very ill presage from thence. Polemon my Mother, and others of our kindred who
stirred not from us, could not dissemble their trouble, though not to cause a
fear in us, they did all they could possibly to keep it from breaking forth,
and Theander who perceived something of it, and who felt how he was himself,
appeared the least moved, and prepared himself courageously for death. His
wound was newly dressed, when (having his understanding yet very perfectly)
he saw among those that were in the Chamber, a man that belonged to Cleonimus;
he presently called him, and embracing him kindly for his master's sake, What
(said he) shall I not see Cleonimus then before I die? The man not being able
to withold tears at that doleful sight; Sir, (said he) Cleonimus is gone out
of this Country, but at his departure, he left me a Letter for you, which
may perchance tell you news of him. Theander putting forth his hand received
the Letter, and because he was in no condition to read it, Polemon, who was by
his bedside, eased him of that pains, and having opened it at his entreatie,
read words much to this purpose.

Cleonimus to Theander.
I Would it had pleased the gods, O my dear Theander, that I had followed the
first thoughts I had to absent my self from you, while I was yet innocent in
your opinion: I should then have only felt my own misfortune in my departure,
and I should have gone from you with this consolation, that I had still left
that repose in your mind, and in your Family, which I now unhappily have
disturbed. I know not which way I may persuade you of my innocence, and if by
your own inclinations, you make not some judgment of mine, I shall vainly seek
to just^fie my self by oaths and protestations. It is true nevertheless, that I
have loved my dear Cosen, as much as my self, and perchance I should say
something more, if I said I loved her as much as you; but, O Theander! I never
made that affection a secret to you, and to what degree soever it reached, I
never disguised its nature, nor its greatness from you, and both your self, and
honor (which I considered alone as much as I did you) were too dear to me to
suffer my soul to give way to any thoughts that could offend either. Yet I
neither complain of your suspicions, nor of my banishment, and I confess, that
though my intentions were innocent, my actions were imprudent. I will endure
the punishment of them without murmuring, O my dear Theander, provided you ceas
to hate me, and that you do me the favor to believ, I neither in the course of
your friendship to me, have betrayed you, nor in the loss of it have
diminished any thing of my desire to be always faithfully yours.


If Theander's danger had not put all other thoughts out of my mind, I should
have been very sensible at the reading of this Letter; but Theander was so
deeply touched with it, that after having sighed and sobb'd many times, he
took the Letter, and kissing it with an ardor that cannot be expressed; O!
Cleonimus (said he) if I were not dying for the expiation of my crime, what
pardon could I ever hope for? I am unworthie of thy friendship, and I have made
my self unworthie of thy remembrance; but since the gods permit me not
otherwise to repair the offense I have don thee, receiv this blood, and receiv
this life which I bequeath to thy just resentment. He brought forth these
words with such a tenderness as made the whole company weep, and awhile after
straining himself to turn toward me, Dear Alcione (said he) I feel my last
hour drawing on, and for all the resolution I hitherto have shown; I must
confess that the knowledge of thy real affection, make's me lament our
separation, the same knowledge likewise make's me hope that thou will remember
my last requests that after my death thou will preserv a care to oblige me;
The first thing I desire of thee, is, That thou would live for my sake, and
that thou would never attempt any thing against a life, which by thine own
confession is wholly mine, and whereof I resign the disposing only to the gods;
The last is, That if the gods restore thee Cleonimus, thou would give him
all the affection thou bear Theander, and receiv him by the same ways that
brought me to a place he is more worthy to possess then I. Theander would
have gone on, and I was preparing my self to answer him in terms which would
have let him know how little disposition I had to obey him, when he fell into
a fainting, which made those that were present believ that his soul was going
to forsake his body. I keep you too long, Ladies, in this tedious doleful
Narration, I must therefore shorten it, and to bring it to an end in a few
words, will only tell you that these were the last words my poor Theander
spoke with any sens, and that coming out of his swoun, he lost his
understanding, and that (since it so pleased the gods) the end of that day was
the end of my dear husband's life. Alas! my dear Theander, (continued the
desolate Alcione bursting forth into tears) my most loved and my most lovely
husband, thou breathedst out thy soul in mine arms, and she that killed thee,
remained alive after thee, neither was that fatal deplorable spectacle, nor the
remembrance of what I had contributed to thy death, nor the loss of my blood,
nor that of my hopes, able to draw my soul along with thine, thou remainedst
cold and pale by my side, and that mortal ice which froze thy whole body
stiff, could not drive out of mine that little warmth which was left in it.
'Twas in vain I called thee to comfort me, and that fixing my mouth upon thy
dead lips, I endeavored to keep thy spirits in them, or to breathe out mine own
through thine; thou were deaf to my cries and insensible of my kisses; and the
gods as well as thou, were pleased I should still continue in the world, to
make thee a living tomb in this heart of mine, where thou have chosen an
eternal abode. In this place it is, O great and illustrious Princesses! that I
must beg of you if you pleas, to give a free course unto my tears, and that you
would permit me to solemnize a remembrance, which years cannot hinder from
being always present to my mind. It Is only by them, and by the marks which
grief has left in my face, that I will endeavor to make you comprehend what an
one it was, at that time when it was so much fresher, nor will I repent what it
made me say, since that recital would be tedious to you, and put me to a
pain, wherein your goodness without doubt would make you suffer with me. I did
all the actions of a despairing person, and when coming to my self again, out
of a swoun of many hours, I missed the body of my dear Theander, I gave my
self over to a passion, that came little short of rage, which made my friends
believ a good while that I had lost my reason. I tried a thousand times to tear
off what they had put upon my wound, but my Father and Mother held my hands,
and dissembling their own grief to hinder the effects of mine, they protested
to me that my despair would send them to their graves, and when I told them I
was my husbands murtheress, they assured me I should also be theirs if I
persisted in my obstinate sorrow, and that by it I should not only cause my own
death, but also that of my nearest friends; Although I was but little in
capacity to relish their persuasions, these last wrought something upon me,
and it is not to excuse my faint-heartedness, that I say their consideration
alone, kept me from doing all that I could, and all that I ought, to die; in
short, whether it were by that reason, or by my cowardice I lived, and gave way
that my cure should be endeavored. They paid Theander funeral Rites, in the
performance whereof a good part of the Court assisted, and Prince Oroondates
honored them with his presence. That poor man who truly had very lovely
qualities in him, was generally lamented of all those that knew him, and the
news of this woeful adventure being quickly spread abroad, moved pity in all
virtuous persons; The rumor of the share Bagistanes had in it was a little
smothered in Babylon by his authority, but Astiages whose wickedness was
loudly published, became so defamed, that he had not the confidence to com
back again thither, and has never appeared there since, at least that we
could hear. In the mean time, since I must avow it to my confusion, I was cured
by the troublesome care of Polemon, and as soon as I was fit to go abroad, I
left that unfortunate house, where I no more could see what I had loved so well,
and without grief, forsaking all the pretensions I might have had upon my
husbands estate, I retired to my Fathers. It was about the time that the King
departed from Babylon to march against Alexander, with whom a few days after
he fought that bloody battle of Arbella, where he lost the remnant of his
Forces, and his Empire with them; within a very short time we had the
Conqueror at our gates, and Mazeus having submitted the Country to his
obedience, cowardly Bagistanes, who might either have made a long resistance in
the Citadel, or have buried himself in the honorable ruins of it, followed a
shameful example, and contrary to the counsel of Polemon and of many other
loial persons, in whose hearts fidelity was not quite extinguished, he set
open the gates, delivered up the Citadel with fifty thousand talents, and
under-went the yoke of the Macedonians. As soon as Alexander was in the Town,
Bagistanes who bore a mortal hatred to my Father by reason of the hindrances
he thought he had received from him, in the foolish passion he had for me,
accused him to Alexander of having gone about to stir up the people, and to make
a faction against him, and by his practices he wrought so far with the King,
that Polemon was declared criminal, his estate given to Bagistanes and his
other accusers, and he was commanded to be gone from Babylon He bore this
blow of Fortune with a great deal of moderation, but presently after he
received another assault from her, which utterly dejected him, and that was the
certain news that the two brothers I had in Darius his Army were killed in the
late battle, with so many thousand gallant men, who would not survive the ruin
of their King. My poor Father was like to have died with this last affliction,
and absolutely lost all thought of taking any more pleasure in the life of
persons of his quality, whereupon he resolved to abandon it for ever; and
gathering together the doleful Relics of his Family, he forsook Babylon, and
retired to this house which had been left him, because it belonged to my Mother,
whose goods were not confiscate, our enemies not having been able to find any
pretense to accuse her; Bagistanes also obtained Theander's fortune for
himself, or for Astiages if he should return, but within a while after being
deprived of his command by Alexander, who put Agathas in his place, and
receiving an order from the King to make his appearance before him, he died of
grief and age, and left a report amongst all that knew him, which will make his
memory be detested for ever. For our own parts, we were no sooner in this
retirement, but we put off our habit with our ambition, and framing our selves
to a manner of life very different from our former, we began to taste some
sweetness and delight, whereof our minds were not capable before the ruin of
our family. My Mother has yet as much as is necessary for us to live quietly,
and conformably to the condition in which we have ranked our selves, and we
daily find reason to confess, that we enjoy a consolation in this
solitariness, which we could never have hoped for in another estate. Not that
my sorrows are lulled asleep in the space of four years, which are run out
since we retired hither, the image of my dear Theander is ever present to my
memory, and whether I walk upon the banks of the river, or visit the remotest
places of our wood, or bound my steps within the allies of our Garden, that
lovely Idea com's incessantly into my memory, and afford's me an
entertainment, from which I neither can nor ever will separate my self. Yet
will I confess, Ladies, and doubtless with some kind of shame, that with these
lawful thoughts, the remembrance of Cleonimus mixeth it self for some moments,
and that some spirit envious of this shadow of repose, bring's all that was most
lovely in him, and the last words of Theander now and then into my memory. I
also call to mind his innocent friendship, what he did, and what he suffered
for my sake, and that exact obedience which made him absent himself from me
for ever; all these reflections trouble me sometimes very much, but I banish
them by the fatal remembrance of those sad effects of our friendship, and by a
belief that I ought no longer to suffer him in my memory, who for all his
innocence, was yet the subject of that treachery, whereby those wicked
wretches deprived me of my husband, and moreover having passed so many years,
without seeing him again, or hearing any news of him, I am uncertain whether I
can have an affection for him of any other nature then that I ow unto Theander,
or any other thoughts then those we have for persons that are no longer in the
world Behold, great Princesses the present estate of my soul, and that of my
fortune, which how deplorable soever it be, is yet glorious, since it has
wrought compassion in you, and given me an occasion to obey the command you
were pleased to lay upon me to recount it.

The fair and sorrowful Alcione, ended her Story on this manner, and the two
Princesses, who had lent her a mavelous attention, began to comfort her with
expressions of a real esteem, and of a real affection: she found some
consolation in their kindnesses and in their discourse; and Berenice having told
her that the next day she would give her some news of Astiages, and let her
know his last wickednesses in the relation of her life, at which she meant to
have her present, Alcione seeing it was very late, bade them both goodnight,
and retiring into her Chamber, left them in theirs, where they went to bed
together, as they had don before.

The end of the sixth Book, and of the second Part of Cassandra.
The AUTHOR To CASSANDRA.
I Speak to you, my dear Cassandra, after the example which one of the
sublimest wits of our latter ages has given me of a like conversation; and by
the right I challenge in this second life you ow to me, I take the liberty to
entertain you familiarly. You are now less bashful then you were, when
Calista's commands made you hazard your first coming abroad, and the civilitie
you have found amongst the French, make's you hope for the same reception in
this third you recieved from them in your two former visits. It is true, (if I
may say so without interessing your modesty) they have found something lovely
in you, and they have favorably judged, that considering you were bred up in
your earlier years, a great way from the^r Court, you have learned to speak
their language passably, and to recount your adventures tolerably well. Yes, my
dear Cassandra, there are many amongst them that expect you, and Calista her
self whose will is to us a Law, has a desire to see you again, and call's upon
me f^r your return by all the power she has over me. Let us obey her, my
fair Princess, and present your self before her, since she has absolutely
commanded it; she will receiv you with that generous goodness, which together
with her other divine qualities winne's her the adoration of the whole world,
and gain's me as many Rivalls, as there are persons, whose thoughts are
capable of a noble elevation. She will behold you with those eyes, which
inflame all, except your self, and you shall have this advantage above us, to
look upon them, if not without dazzling, and envy, at least without fear of
being wounded incurably as we are. Appear before her then with confidence but
that you may do so, forget none of your ornaments, and since the ambition of
pleasing Calista may excuse all, seek that in Art, which Nature may have
refused you. Strive to sweeten to her whatsoever may be more fierce, and rough
in this third visit, let her see you are not the less s^ciable for being the
more warlike, and tell her you will not tie your self so rigorously to the
blows which are given, and to the blood which is shed for your interests, but
that you will endeavor to entertain her with some more passionate, and more
delightful adventures. Take care also if you pleas* to excuse me to her, and
if she think it strange, that having kept my self hitherto enough within
probability, I take a little liberty in the description of some particular
actions, and that in stead of following the manner of writing used by Plutarch,
Quintus Curtius, Justin, and other Autors, from whom I have drawn the
foundations of your History, I make my Heroes march unto the fight, in a way
something nearer to that of Homer, Virgil, Tasso, and other Writers of that
nature, who have beautified the truth with some ornaments rather more pleasing,
then confined to a strict and regular likelihood; say for my defense, ^^at
having for your quarrel assembled so many great men famous in Antiquity, and
renowned amongst all the Autors that have written the history of their age, I,
in favor of them, have exempted my self from that severitie, and believed that
in taking a diversion by that kind of recital, I might represent some
particulars of that valiant Dame, who has made them known to the whole earth.
Moreover, our Narration is much more fixed upon the especial actions of our
Heroes, then upon those of wh^le Nations, and we much rather seek the
reputation of Oroondates and Arsaces, then that of the Medes, Persians and
Macedonians in general, but yet without making them remarkable by impossible
actions, or extravagant inventions. You will find many other occasions to
speak in my justification, but I leav the care of it to you my dear Cassandra,
and I leav you your self in Calista's arms, since other imploiments oblige me
to part from you. I cannot give you a more glorious nor a more safe retreat,
while I go to see that upon the ground, which for you I have represented upon
paper; but in this sanctuary to which I recommend you, fair Princess, repaie
me part of what I have don for you, and since that in going from you, I absent
my self also from Calista, endeavor to preserv me in her memory, as I have
restored you into that of men, amongst whom two thousand years had already
made you to be forgotten. In requital, I promise you my dear Cassandra, that
neither the difference of exercises, nor toil, nor danger, shall hinder me
from thinking of you, and that if it pleas the heavens I escape both, I will
not com back to Calista again, without bringing her some marks of my remembrance
of you* I by the presence of objects shall form the Idea which is necessary to
me for the conclusion of your History, and will draw the siege of Babylon by
the siege of Graveline; This slip of my pen is perchance against modesty, but
it is to be pardoned in my Nation, and in the desire I have by declaring my
trade, to find excuse for many faults, which perhaps would not be pardonable
in a Doctor, nor in a man of another profession.

THE THIRD PART OF CASSANDRA. The first Book.
THe Princess Berenice, and the fair Queen of the Amazones, having given a part
of the night to the relation of the sorrowful Alcione, passed the last hours
thereof, and the first of the day following, in a reasonable quiet sleep.
Berenice whose thoughts though more tender, and whole cares though less
violent, then those of Thalestris, had yet a fresher cause, awakened first, and
opening the curtain of her bed, she saw Alcione in the chamber, who with
Hippolita, waited till the Princesses were awake, that she might give them the
good morrow; The countenance, and humor of that woman, having begot a great
deal of good will in her, moved her also to some desire of interessing her in
her fortune, and of putting her into the place of those persons, whom she had
lost, and to whom alone she had formerly trusted her most secret, and most
important thoughts; As soon as she saw her, she called her to her bedside,
and began to testify her affection to her, by words full of sweetness, and by
kindnesses which carried a charm along with them, against which it was
impossible for even the most savage hearts to defend themselves. Thalestris
wakened while they were talking, and Berenice finding she could be content to
sleep a little longer, would not disturb her, but getting her self ready by
the help of Alcione, and Hippolita, she went out of the chamber with them. Her
first care was to call for Araxes, to enquire after the health of the Prince
her Brother, and having heard by him, that he had passed the night indifferent
well, and that he was not yet awake, she would not interrupt his rest, but
going down the stairs with those two women, she let them lead her into the
wood, and from thence to the river side to take her morning walk. There she
asked Hippolita diverse questions, concerning her Mistresses adventures, and
learned whatsoever the Queen had forgotten in her relation. There likewise she
confirmed the first assurances of her friendship to Alcione, and gained her
absolutely, both by the advantage of her offers, and by the inevitable
allurements which were naturally in the least of her actions. They were in this
entertainment, when they saw a litter com out of the wood, conveied by certain
men on hors-back, which keeping the great highway toward the City, were of
necessity to pass close by them. Berenice's present, condition making her
apprehend all manner of encounters, she was already turning her back, when
the other two, who had more curiosity reassured her, and alleging that those
persons went in an equipage, which showed no evil intention, they persuaded her
to stay till they were gone by, having only put down avail, which without
hindering her from the sight of any object, served to de^end her face a little
from the eyes of those passengers; she nevertheless retired under certain
trees, fifteen or twenty paces from the road, but by reason the litter went
very softly, and that it was open on their side, that distance hindered her not
from observing the person that was in it. 'Twas a man of so good presence, that
the like was hardly to be found, and though his sickness, or his wounds had
diminished part of his fresher looks, and caused some alteration in his face,
Berenice had the image of it too present in her memory to be mistaken. She
was so extremely surprised at that sight, that her color going and coming twice
or thrice in a moment, she sunk down upon Alcione, and remained almost without
knowledge in her arms. She, and Hippolita seeing her faint, turned up the vail
which covered her face, and there reading the marks of a powerful change, they
asked her the cause of it. Berenice was so troubled, that she was some time in
recovering her self, and when she was a little settled, before she answered
them, she cast her eye upon the way the litter had taken, and seeing it was
not yet far off, and that it went slowly enough to give her hopes of overtaking
it, she turned toward them; I must (said she) I must necessarily see the man
again, who is in yonder litter, if you pleas to com along with me Alcione, you
Hippolita may return unto your Mistress; I pray you tell the Prince my brother
that this encounter draw's me from him for a few moments, and that I desire
him not to be troubled at my departure, for I will quickly return to him with
so good news, as shall make him excuse it. With these words, she walked after
the horses, leaning upon Alcione, who esteemed her self most happy to serve,
and accompany her. Hippolita would have gone with them, but Berenice refused it
in such manner, that she believing her self suspected to her in that design,
pressed it no further, but to obey her, returned unto (...) house. Oroondates
and Thalestris were awake when she came in, but she went to wait upon her
Mistress, before she performed her commission to the Prince. The Queen was in
a great wonder at the recital of Berenice's departure, who being already very
dear to her, she was exceedingly concerned in what might befall her by that
encounter. She was no sooner ready but she carried the news of it her self
to Prince Oroondates, and making Hippolita tell the particulars of that
adventure again in his presence, put him into a strange astonishment, and into
as strange a perplexity; This precipitate departure of a sister whom he loved
most tenderly, at a time when he was unable to follow her, and to give her any
assistance, afflicted him very sensibly, but he drew some consolation from her
words to Hippolita, and hoped for something at her return which might make him
bear her absence the more patiently; when he had mused a while upon the
noveltie of that encounter, and having vainly studied to find out the truth of
it, he by the alterations of his countenance, and by a silence full of
confusion had expressed the diversity of his thoughts; at last by lifting up
his eyes toward the Queen, I give over the care (said he) to the immortal
gods, of whatsoever from henceforth shall concern me; and in the condition to
which my own affairs are reduced, I should be too blame, if I remitted the
conduct of Berenice's to any other providence but theirs; They wrought a
miracle in her favor, when they sent me to rescue her, and neither their power
nor their goodness, I trust, will be shortened to her. I Will go hasten after her
(replied the Amazone Queen) and will never give over that pursuit, till I have
used my endevors to give her that assistance, which your present estate
forbid's her to hope for from you. At these words she called for two horses
and arms, and though Oroondates out of civilitie would have spared her the
trouble, it was not possible for him to dissuade her from that resolution, so
putting on her arms in his presence, as soon as her horses were ready, she
took leav of him, and bade Hippolita guide her after Berenice.

Oroondates being left alone in his chamber, made a long reflection upon the
past events of his life, and upon the estate of his present condition, and
making a stop upon his later days, he had scarce thought upon his Princesses
being alive, but he called to mind her infidelity. That hard curb, which
the rigor of his destinies had given unto his joy, kept it in with an excessive
cruelty, and that unworthie remembrance brought a confusion into his soul,
which hardly left him his reason free. Ah! (cried he in the violence of that
thought) Ah! unworthie daughter of Darius, unworthie sister of Artaxerxes,
unworthie wife of Alexander, and (if I dare say so my self) unworthie Mistress
of Oroondates; would you then give so shameful a conclusion, to so many noble
actions? and did you defend your self so virtuously against persecutions so
just as mine were, only to yield so lightly in favor of a new commer? But
without question, I deceiv my self (said he again) and this affection is not
new as I believed; I begin to find, it took birth before I came from Susa;
'twas that infallibly which caused your sudden change, which made you in a
moment repent the modest favors you allowed me, and which in short drew from
your mouth that cruel farewell which you gave me with so much inhumanitie; and
though the services I had don you deserved as much as I received from you, this
rival could not suffer that innocent, and moderate felicity, but you must
banish me to satisfy him, and 'twas that new passion which hardened your
heart, so that you could see me swouning, and dying at your feet, without
showing any mark of compassion. O my memory, how did thou forsake me all
this while, and how came it thou were so long before thou foundest, that a
former affection, cemented with so many services, and so many obligations,
could not be destroyed but by a second? If it be so, Statira; as without
doubt it is, you are both more faulty, and less to be valued then I believed,
and during the life of so brave a husband, you ought not to have been capable
of another love, since you had so many reasons to defend your self against
mine. He discoursed thus to himself in the violence of his resentment, and a
while after falling into another thought. But (said he) must I so soon accuse
her of infidelity, she who perchance is no longer in the world? I have but a
light assurance of her life, and I ought at least to be certain she is alive,
before I can be certain she is inconstant; it is to this miserable extremity
I am reduced, and one of these two necessities is imposed upon me, either that
Statira is not, or that Statira love's me not.

He would perchance have spent the rest of the day in these sad
considerations, if he had not been withdrawn from them by Araxes, who came
into his chamber, leading a woman by the hand; Oroondates presently began to
know her, but as soon as she came near his bed, and that he fixed his eyes
upon her face, he no longer doubted but that it was Cleone, the dear, and
faithful confident of his Princess, and she who had inseparably accompanied
her in her first, and in her last adventures. The unexpected arrival of her
whom he believed dead, and on whose memory, the remembrance of her former
good offices had made him bestow some tears, surprised him so, that he became
mute, and unmovable at the sight of her; but when he began to recollect
himself, and that he prepared to show some testimony of his joy, for her
safety; the fear of receiving from her mouth the confirmation of one of his
misfortunes, suspended all his thoughts, and he was more stricken, and
confounded then before. Cleone more confident then he, forcing the severitie
of her sex, and of her humor, to receiv welcoms full of transport and
affection, which a long, and particular acquaintance might excuse, broke
silence first, and while he embraced her with tears of kindness, Sir (said
she) have I deserved you should still remember you have known me? The Prince
giving some respite to his endearments, Sweet Cleone (answered he at last) I
will never lose a remembrance which was ever dear to me, and the grief* I have
been in for my Princess, did not so totally possess my soul, but that my sorrow
for you found also a place in it; but O! Cleone since you are risen again, is
not my Princess also alive, and do not you com to bring me news of her
safety? The Queen is living (replied Cleone) unless she be dead within this
three days. O gods! (cried the Prince, without permitting her to go on) gods,
all good, and all powerful, I give you the thanks I ow you for the life of my
Princess, and since by this assurance, you have taken away the fear of my first
misfortune, I will prepare my self for the second without murmuring against
you. His natural generositie, or the goodness of his disposition, made him
instantly bring forth these words, according to the real incitements of his
heart, and certainly his joy in this encounter, equalled the grief he had felt
at the sad news of his Princesses death; but that living and lawful grief was
no sooner driven out of his mind, but his jealousy, before constrained, and
locked up in a kind of servitude, broke loos into its place, and extending it
self with tyranny into all those parts it quitted, began to reign there alone
with such an Empire, that it produced as violent effects, as could have been
apprehended from both passions united; his mournful, tender thoughts, gave way
to furious, desperate ones; and briefly, that cruel and imperious passion,
which had established it self but with uncertaintie, finding it self now
lawfully grounded, seized upon all his soul, with a most absolute authority.
Let us not bewail Statira, (cried he) Statira is alive, Statira is satisfied;
but let us with tears of blood, bewail, and deplore the misfortune of
despairing Oroondates, whom the gods, after a thousand sorrows wors then the
most cruel deaths, have saved from a thousand kinds of ordinary death, only
to make him fall by an end suitable to the miseries of his life. After these
first transports, having held his peace for a few moments, he turned toward
Cleone, and seeing her silent by his bed side; Well, Cleone, (said he) the
Queen is living, but O Cleone, the Queen love's me not. Yet not to love me,
Cleone, is but a small matter, and her fault would be but light, if her
forgetfulness, and her ingratitude, were the only things wherewith I could
reproach her; but to love another man to the prejudice of what she owed to me,
to the prejudice of her faith, and even to the prejudice of her honor, to
forsake him, who has forsaken all, who has dared all, who has don all for
her; to give her self to a man that had rendered her some slighter services, and
to hang about his neck in my presence, both against the laws of decency, and
against the laws of modesty, is an infidelity, is a meanness, is a lightness,
unworthie of a Princess of Persia, and is a crime which deserv's all the
thunders of heaven, and the detestations of the whole earth. Oroondates brought
forth these words so impetuously, that Cleone was quite abashed at them, and
had neither the time, nor the confidence to open her mouth for the defense of
her Mistress. The Prince ^e^eing her without reply, I knew very well
(continued he) that you had nothing to allege for the justification of that
ungrateful woman, your silence utterly condemn's her; but however you cannot
disavow that which I know by the testimony of my own eyes; I saw her in the
arms of that happy rival, a man neither greater, nor valianter then I, and one
indebted only to fortune for all the advantages he has over me; I with the
same sword, which has often shed blood for the service of that inconstant
Princess, drew some of his, and if the Gods have made him perish to expiate the
injury he has don me, I do no longer pretend to open my way to her by that
advantage; it is for my revenge alone that he is fallen, and not for the
establishment of my fortune; let her cherish his memory still, since his
leavings are not worthy of me, and if she can love her life after the loss
of his, let her expect also the end of mine, that she may be perfectly
satisfied. The Prince his weakness not suffering him to go on with his
reproaches in that vehemence, he was constrained to give some truce to them, in
which interim Cleone had the leisure to settle her self, and desiring if it
were possible, to draw him out of those violent motions, which might utterly
ruin his health, Sir (said she at last) I should be confounded at your
reproaches against the Queen my Mistress, if with her, I were not accustomed to
hear them from you; I will not justify what may be blameable in this change
you upbraid her with, nor will I deny but that your own eyes saw those favors,
and those kindnesses which give you so much cause of complaint against her, but
that in the condition wherein she granted them, they did offend either
decency, or modesty, is a thing I cannot yield to. Of all the women that ever
bore a love to virtue, perhaps never any yet raised it to so high a degree. If
humane weakness, the treachery of your enemies, powerful obligations, your
absence, and the uncertaintie of your being alive, made the Queen take
resolutions to the prejudice of what she owed to you, yet has she never
forgot what she owed unto her honor, and if she afforded advantages to
another which she refused to you, 'twas because when he sued for them, she
was in a condition to grant him them without offending a husband, and without
wounding her reputation. Give some credit Sir, unto my words, of all the women
that were near the Queen, I am she without doubt, in whom she ever had most
confidence, and she who can give the most exact account of her most particular
thoughts; but I can protest to you by all that I acknowledge to be most sacred,
that so long as she was free, and undeceived, she always had the most
advantageous opinion of you, that you could lawfully wish; and when she
yielded to this last action you complain of, or (as you say) to forsake you for
another, she did it with so much violence, and such strong reasons, that you
cannot justly accuse her for it. Cleone would have proceeded, when the Prince
who hearkened to her impatiently, and who saw nothing in all she said, which in
stead of altering, did not confirm him in his conceit, he could not forbear
interrupting her. Ceas Cleone (replied he) ceas to allege excuses for crimes
that are not capable of any; my miseries are not so light as to be sweetened by
so weak a consolation, nor the loss I have suffered so small, as that it can be
satisfied with reasons of so little weight; say, with more truth that I was a
burden to the Princess, that my constancy wearied her, and passed in her
esteem for persecution, or rather that she found a person more lovely, and
more worthy of her affections. This is all that can be reasonably said in
favor of her; and all this I will confess with you; and provided I may but
reproach her once more, for the last time, and yield up a soul at her feet,
which her infidelity cannot make her lose, I will no longer murmur against
her. You are so prepossessed (answered Cleone) and (if respect will give me
leav to say so) so incapable of reasoning, that I will lose no more time to
convince your opinion; but to justify my Mistress to you, and to make you
confess your self that you cannot have these thoughts of her without
ingratitude, I will content my self with relating her last actions plainly to
you, and making you a true recital of all that has happened to her since your
separation; and indeed it was for that design I came to seek you, and to have
begged your succors, if I had found you in better health. Oroondates changed
color at these last words, and his soul in spite of the despair wherewith it
was taken up, let it self be carried away to some motion of joy, when he heard
say that his Princess had need of his service, and suffered it too be demanded
of him. Ah! Cleone (cried he) I have neither resentment, nor wound that can
detain me, if Statira's service com in question. Let her be a thousand times
more ungrateful, and a thousand times more faithless if it be possible,
nothing can dispense me from my oaths, nor force my inclination; I will serve
her, even in the arms of my rivals, to the last drop of my blood, and I for her
will employ a life to its last moment, which shall never be but hers. Speak, I
pray you, how great so^^ver my impatience is, believ I will give a quiet
attention, and that for all her inconstancy, you cannot talk of my Princess,
without touching my heart at every word of your discourse. Cleone having brought
him to this pass, drew the chair a little nearer, in which she was set down by
his entreatie, and seeing no body in the chamber to hear her but Araxes, who
was not suspected to them, she began her narration thus.

The History of Cassandra.
WHen by the cruel laws of her duty, the Queen saw her self constrained to
banish you from her for ever, and to give a sharp conclusion to enterviews that
were incompatible with the severe rules of her virtue; she submitted her self
to that rigorous necessity, with deadly grief and inconceivable repugnancie.
With how great resolution and constancy soever she had armed and fortified
her self for so difficult an action, she showed many signs of it before you,
which it was impossible for her to retein; and notwithstanding the
insensibilitie you would tax her with, if you did consider both her face and
actions, you could not but observe violent changes, and powerful alterations
from her ordinary modesty; but if in your presence she could not possibly
dissemble part of her sorrows, when she was gone from you, she let them break
forth, in such tender, doleful expressions, that the condition we had left you
in, was not much more worthy of pity, then that we saw her reduced to by
that bitter separation. Her face was altered from that very moment, and if it
lost not its loveliness, it at least from that first day, lost all the
cheerfulness it had recovered, and within a few more, all the plumpness it had
regained since the change of her condition. In her journey to Babylon, she
appeared always so languishing and so dejected, that the Queen her mother, the
Princess her sister, and all those that were most dear to her, labored but in
vain to divert her, and when she was com thither, and that the presence, and
affection of the King her husband, obliged her to a forced compliance, that
violence she used to hide her grief, made it the more sensible, and visibly
impaired her health. And indeed it was to the want of it she attributed all
the marks of her sadness, and the body was accused of a sickness, in which it
had no share but by its communication with the soul. The King, whose love to
her was ever exceeding great, employed whatsoever was most magnificent, and
most diverting of all that he had drawn from so many conquests, to charm part
of her discontents, and the whole Court, whose hearts that great Princess had
infinitely won by her goodness, and by the sweetness of her conversation,
sought means by shows of pomp, and rejoicing to bury that sadness in which it
was totally concerned, and which deprived it of much of its beauty; but all
these attempts were unprofitable, to pull up the roots of it, out of a soul, in
which it was too imperiously settled, and these pomps, and divertisements, gave
her only new occasions to deplore her condition, which made her alone
incapable of those delights, in which the meanest persons enjoied a part. Yet
did she receiv the king's kindnesses, with a great deal of respect, and truly
with a great deal of affection, and if his presence could not wipe all the
marks of grief out of her face, she at least endeavored to disguise them from
him, by words full of sweetness, and acknowledgment, and disposed her mind to
render him what duty obliged her to without repugnance; but when she was
alone, or without any other company but mine, she freely discharged her heart
of some of those discontents that overwhelmed it, and when I endeavored by words
of comfort to give some intermission to her sorrows, Let me alone Cleone,
(would she say) let me alone in quiet, since I have nothing else but tears to
give poor Oroondates; all else is forbidden me, nay, and this cruel duty may
also be offended with these innocent marks of my affection; let us no longer
weep therefore for Oroondates, since his remembrance is criminal, but let us
weep for my own miseries, and for the rigor of my destiny, which rend's that
violently from my heart, which my inclinations would eternally preserv there.
After she had continued a while in these thoughts, and that by my silence, or
by actions as sorrowful as hers, she saw me keep her company in her grief;
Ah! Cleone, (would she go on) perchance at this instant poor Oroondates is no
longer in the world, and though I have not deserved he should have an
affection for me violent enough to bring him to his grave, the assurances he
has given me of it in smaller occasions, may make me without vanity believ,
he loved me well enough to die for me. No, no, Oroondates is certainly dead,
unless spite and resentment have saved him, and if he live still by their
assistance, it is only to hate me, and to detest my cruelty. She could not
end these words, without a flood of tears, which for some while disabled her to
say more, but when by time, and my assistance, she was a little settled, she
would seek out reasons to justify her self to you, and to wash her self from
your reproaches. What could I have don; Oroondates (would she say) and by what
means could I have preserved my self for you, and preserv my self in your
esteem? Alexander, to whom the whole world raise's Altars, is he a man, is he
a husband so little considerable, that his wife, (nay and a wife whom after the
fall of her house, he from misery, and captivity exalted to the Throne, and
to the highest place upon earth) should not entirely give him her affections?
Ah! Oroondates, complain of me no longer, and if death be to be sought,
after our mutual losses, let us die both together, rather then make my soul
incline to an unworthie, to an unjust repentance, that is a satisfaction I never
refused you, and if all those you might have hoped for, were as easy to me,
and as lawfully permitted, you should be satisfied, my dear Oroondates, and I
should be no longer miserable.

She was wont to speak many other words, which by reason of their length, and
of the effect they work upon your mind, I will not repeat, and lived on this
manner, while the King received the Ambassadors at Babylon from all parts of
the world, and while the Court was in such a splendour as till that time had
never been known to man. Yet the Queen not being able to endure that abode,
and believing she might find some abatement of her afflictions in
solitariness, caused her Physicians to tell the King that change of aer was
necessary for the recoverie of her health, and having with much adoo obtained
permission to retire to the Castle of Calcis for some days, she went from
Babylon, accompanied only by the Princess her sister, who never would forsake
her, my self, some of her maids, and her most necessary servants. The Queen
having thus got her self free from that great world, found indeed some sweetness
in that retirement, and if the charming conversation of the Princess Parisatis
was not able to blot out of her mind these discontents which overwhelmed her,
at least it partly lessened them, and made her avow, that though she was
incapable of pleasures, at least her sorrows did not torment her with so much
violence. You nevertheless were still in her remembrance, and I confess that
seeing her one day in the same trances, and in the same grief for your absence,
I had seen her in at Babylon, the pity (if I dare say so) which I had of her,
and of your self, obliged me to propose your return to her, in case she would
consent, and to revoke a sentence whereby she had condemned her self to so
many torments, but that great Princess stopping my mouth as soon as ever I
mentioned it; It is just (said she) that I should suffer, since I have
committed faults which deserv the punishment the gods have sent me; but it is
unjust that Oroondates should return, and I know very well both how to suffer;
and how to die, if it be necessary, rather then revoke a sentence, which my
duty alone has pronounced. This indeed was the Queen's own resolution, but
she was also confirmed in it by the Princess her sister, to whom she had
totally opened her heart with all manner of freedom, and who having in all her
actions but particularly in the applications made to her by Prince Lysimachus,
and Hephestion, appeared as a prodigy of sublime virtue, gave no counsels to
the Queen that were not most conformable to what she had practiced all her
life. We spent our time thus in solitude, and in ignorance of all that passed
other where, when the whole earth almost changed form by the Death of Alexander
the Great, to whom the Queen his wife, had at her departure innocently given
her last farewells, receiving from him his last embraces. I believ it was by
the express order that was taken in it, that we alone were ignorant of a loss
wherein the whole world was interested, when one of the King's guard came to
the Castle where we were with a letter from his Master.

Cleone would have prosecuted her narration, and have told the Prince what he
already had learned from Lysimachus, but Oroondates, who hearkened to her with
impatience, and who was willing to spare her the pains of relating what he
knew before, interrupted her in this place; I am not ignorant (said he) which
way you were deceived, nor how you were brought before the wicked Rox^na, and
died in the opinion of every body; but I know not how you were saved, nor how
the Queen has lived since, and that is it (if you pleas) which I desire to
learn, without troubling you in the recital of things I have heard already.
These words shortened Cleone's relation, and Oroondates telling her what he
knew, when she had confirmed it, she proceeded thus.

I will add to what is com to your ear from the mouth of Tireus, that after
Perdiccas had put the Queen, the Princess her sister, and me into the chariot,
and was com into it himself, with his brother Alcetas and another of his
company, he made it take the way toward Roxana's house, and seeing those poor
Princesses express their grief, and their apprehension by tears, and cries full
of despair, he whispered the Queen in the ear, so low that he could not be
overheard but by his brother, and the Princess Parisatis. Be not afraid Madam,
(said he) they would destroy you, but I will save you, with the peril of my
fortune, and of my life. The Princesses were so troubled, that they scarcely
understood those words, which were sufficient either to reassure them, or
fright them more, and in the mean time, they drove so fast, that within a short
space, we arrived at Roxana's house; I will not tell you again the Queens
encounter with her, nor the words of that cruel woman, which in spite of
Perdiccas his promise, were enough to have struck a mortal terror in persons,
whose love of life had not been quite extinguished, but the Queen in whom the
fatal news of the King's death, had absolutely taken away all desire of it,
hearkened to her threats unmoved, and not hoping for any safety, she followed
Perdiccas, and Alcetas, who led us out of the great chamber, down a back stair,
while cruel Roxana placed her self at the window to feed her eyes, with a sight
she had so inhumanely prepared. 'Twas with much ado that Perdiccas kept her
from going down into the Court her self, and her interest in the death of
Darius his daughters was so great, that she could not believ it certain,
unless she were present. We were half way down the stairs that led into that
fatal Court, when coming to a chamber door, Perdiccas made us go in, and
leaving us there in the custody of his brother, he took certain women out
from thence with him, which he before had put under the guard of three or four
of his men in whom he had a great deal of confidence. They were slaves (as we
have heard since) which he had clothed in habits little different from those
the Princesses were wont to wear, and having plotted with his brother, and
those whom he trusted most, how he might abuse the eyes of Roxana's sight,
whom he was necessitated to obey, for very important reasons, he had caused
them to be brought into that chamber secretly, by men of whose fidelity he
was most assured. With these miserable wretches it was, that those cruel
murderers went down the rest of the stairs into the Court, stopping their
mouths with hankerchiefs, for fear their cries should discover the deceit, and
'twas by the blood of those unfortunate creatures that they contented Roxana's
in humane ambition; and deluded her sight; true it is that the darkness, and
distance contributed very much, though Roxana stirred not from the window till
the end of the execution, and that there were lighted torches in the Court; but
it is certain, that in open day, and in another place, it had been very
difficult to carry the enterprise on that manner.

In the mean time we continued in the custody of Alcetas, and of some of his
men, and for fear the nois we might have made, should discover the Princesses
to their enemies, they led us out of that first chamber into another further
from the stairs. We were in so great a trouble, that neither fear nor hope had
leisure to take place in our souls, and we remained for some time so stupefied,
that neither the apprehension of death, nor the desire of safety could work
any thing upon us; but in this confusion the Queens grief was more powerful
then all her other thoughts, and remembering the news cruel Roxana had told her
of the death of the King her husband, she was so nearly touched with it, that
she hardly had strength to stand upon her legs; and indeed she cast her self
presently upon the side of a bed that was in the room, and the Princess
Parisatis, and I being set down by her, she began to solemnize her loss, with
a river of tears, which could not draw its source from any thing but a most
sensible, and a most real sorrow. No, Sir I know you will not be offended,
when I tell you the Queen was in as great an affliction for the death of that
Illustrious husband, as could be expected from so virtuous a Princess, and
that she was as deeply stricken with it, as if that affection had been settled
in her heart from her earliest years, and had neither been crossed by the
remembrance of her losses, nor by her thoughts of you. Neither the fear of
death, which she did not believ she had utterly avoided, and the object
whereof was still before her eyes; nor the ruin of her affairs, which this
change brought into a manifest declining, found any place at all in her
imagination, when she settled in it the remembrance of that great man whom the
gods had given her for her husband; and in all her actions she made it appear
that her interest had no share at all, in what proceeded from a pure, and
hearty affection. The Princess Parisatis, whose greatest trouble, at that
time, was caused by her compassion of the Queen her sisters grief, showed more
assurance then she, and did all to comfort her that could be looked for from
so great a friendship as hers. We were thus mournfully employed, when Alcetas
drew near the bed, and addressing himself to the Queen, Madam (said he) fear
not, the greatest danger is past, and if you will but keep silence a while in
this chamber, my brother, and I will save you, or perish with you. Roxana has
been as happily deceived as we could wish, and we only stay for my brother's
return, to carry you away from hence, and put you into a place of safety; if
you be discovered, we have those here at our devotion, with whom we can
defend you by open force; but if we can save you without nois, both your
condition, and ours will be much the better. While Alcetas spoke on this
manner, the Queen turned her head toward him, and in stead of answering to his
offers, Is it true Alcetas (said she) that the King is dead? He is Madam
(replied Alcetas) and Roxana to secure the kingdom to the child she is now
big withal, would have extinguished all the race of Darius after him, and all
those persons that might bring any obstacle to her power. If the King be dead
(added the Queen) why do you oppose Roxana's will? and why do you prolong a
life wherein I shall find no sweetness after the loss of such a husband? let
them perish, let them perish, these miserable relics of Darius his family,
and if Roxana be so thirsty of the blood of those who heretofore were her
sovereigns and her Mistresses, sacrifice to her rage, this unfortunate woman
who will live no longer; and save only my sister; she never was Alexander's
wife, and though she was Darius his daughter, she is not in a condition to
contest for those Dominions that once were his, against so many successors of
your King. The Princess Parisatis interrupting the Queen at this discourse, Ask
nothing for me, Madam, (said she) since life ought not to be dearer to me
then to you, my losses are of the nature of yours, and though they be neither
so fresh nor so considerable, by the difference of the persons we enjoyed,
know that affection may equal them in our minds, and that the part I bear in
your affliction, absolutely take's away all the advantage, it could have over
mine. The Queen not being in an estate to dispute it with her, only pressed
her between her arms, and bathed her face with tears which ran from her eyes in
great abundance; yet did she draw strength from her courage to enquire of
Alcetas concerning the King's death, and he having given her an exact account
of it, that sorrowful Queen at the end of his discourse, fell into faintings,
wherein for want of help, she was like to have died between our arms. After
she was com'n to her self again, she began to bring forth the most woeful
lamentations, that the greatness of her affection and the merit of the person
she bewailed could put into her mouth. Alcetas prayed her in vain to be
silent for her safeties sake, she was not capable of that consideration, and I
think verily her cries would have discovered us at last if Perdiccas had not
com into the Chamber. He instantly prayed the Queeen to rise from the bed
where she was set, to go along with him to a place of security, whither he
would carry her, but she made little reckoning of what he said, and if the
Princess her sister, and I had not raised her up almost by force, she would
have continued there to expect her destiny. We went out of the Chamber
without any lights, and passed through a Gallerie, at the end whereof there was
a little pair of stairs, which we went down, and so out of that detestable
house; we found a Chariot at the door, into which Perdiccas making us get up,
took his place there with us, and his brother and one of his friends with him,
and then the Charioteer who had his directions what to do, drove presently to
his house where we now are, and where the Queen as well as you, has passed a
part of her exile.

Here Oroondates interrupting Cleone's Narration, O gods! (said he) is it
possible my Princess should have so ingratefully concealed her self from me,
if she knew the place where I was, the condition I was in for her sake? Is it
possible she should have been able to lodge with me under the same roof,
without giving me at least the news of her being alive, since that of her
being dead, had brought me so near unto my grave? O what an excess of
cruelty! O what a prodigy of ingratitude! He ended these words with a deep
sigh, and Cleone going on with her Relation; Stay but for the end of my
discourse (continued she) and then if you find reason for it, you shall be
permitted to condemn her. 'Twas not under the same roof we lodged, but at the
end of this Garden, there is a little house containing only a couple of
Chambers, and a closet or two, where we made our abode. Perdiccas, who by one
of his followers that was Polemon's kinsman, had made an agreement for our
retreat hither, thought it ^ittest for us to lie in that place, as being
further out of the way, less in sight, and less subject to those encounters
which may happen in a house where a whole Family is lodged. He proposed it to
the Princess and me as we were coming, seeing the Queen was incapable of all
conversation, and desiring for the interest of his own affairs, and as he told
us, for that of their safety, that it should be unknown to the whole world,
he prayed us to conceal our selv^ very carefully, since our ruin was
inevitable if we were discovered, and that Roxana was so absolute over the
Macedonians, that it would be impossible for us to escape, if the place of our
retreat were known. He told the Princesses likewise that he could not
undertake their protection openly against Roxana, being joined in interest
with her, and having been declared governor of the child that should be born
of her; but that if they would assist on their part, and keep themselves hid as
he desired, he promised to divert all the dangers that threatened them; He
then endeavored to set a high value upon that obligation, and represented to
them, that by what he did in their favor, he manifestly hazarded his fortune
and his life. The Queen was so cast down, that she answered nothing to his
discourse, nor so much as hearkened to it; but the Princess her sister, and I in
whom despair was less active then in her, endeavored to supply that defect, and
to receiv Perdiccas his advice, for the preservation of our lives. We were
very respectfully received by Polemon and his wife, into the quarter prepared
for us, and those good people studied to serve their Princesses with great zeal
and affection. As soon as they were going to bed Perdiccas bad them good night,
and retired to the Town to take order for those important affairs that lay upon
him, having told them he would com again the next day so secretly, that his
visits should never be known to any body, and that by all manner of services
he would strive to merit pardon for the fear he had put them in. The Queen
passed the rest of that night in continual sighs, and Parisatis and I not
being able to hinder the course of them, and scarce could she by her weariness
with extreme tormenting her self get a little sleep, or rather a little slumber
toward the next morning; she kept her bed that day, and all her imploiment was
to deplore her loss by most doleful words, and by a sea of tears, whose flowing
it was impossible for us to stop hardly for a moment; Alexander's name was
perpetually in her mouth, and his Idea alwais present to her remembrance; she
by the greatness of her virtue had so clean wiped out all the causes she had
formerly had to hate him, to imprint in the place of them, all that he had don
in her favor, and all that was great and lovely in him, that she had nothing
remaining of him, but a most dear memory full of love and veneration. I should
not have don of a long time, if I would repeat all the complaints she made for
the greatness of her loss, and I believ your jealousy would make that discourse
unpleasing to you, since you are already sufficiently disposed to be ill
satisfied with her; I will pass them over therefore, and content my self with
telling you, that when by the height of her courage, which had already
resisted so many losses without being dejected, and by the persuasions of the
Princess her sister, she was become capable of little reason, we began to make
some propositions to her, touching her safety, and the establishment of her
affairs. Amongst Alexander's Successors there was a good number, in whom she
had found much affection to her service, and from whom she might have hoped
for great assistance; of them Prince Lysimachus, who for his quality, for his
virtue, and for his credit, held one of the first places, was not only at the
devotion of the Princess Parisatis, but by a thousand actions which had
resounded loudly at the Court, had given sufficient testimony, that he
desired no more advantageous fortune, then the occasions of sacrifizing himself
for her. Prince Oxiartes, and old Artabasus had yet some authority among the
Persians, and I counseled the Queen to imploie them all, and make use of them
in the necessity of her affairs, to maintain her self against the power of her
enemies, but after we had reasoned a good while, we considered that we
should find few Princes among Alexander's Successors that would dare to take
up arms against Roxana, knowing she was with child of him, who was to command
them one day, and by that reason, so absolute among the Macedonians, that they
no longer followed any bodies will but hers; As for Lysimachus, the Princess
Parisatis who till then had defended her self against his love with an
admirable virtue, would not imploie him, whether it were that she was of too
high a spirit to give matter of obligation to a man that was so much in love
with her, and who according to the common report had obliged her to be
something sensible of it, or whether it were that with likelihood she feared to
loos him, in hazarding him alone against so many other Princes. For Oxiartes
and Artabazus there was no doubt of their good wills, but they were alone, and
retired into the Provinces which the late King had assigned them. These
considerations made them resolv, to wait the pleasure of the gods, without
stirring any thing in a condition wherein they were so little able, and to make
use yet of Perdiccas, who alone knew where they were, and who could hurt them
more then all the rest. With this design we put off a habit which might be
hurtful to the intention we had taken to lie concealed, and having received
other clothes from Polemon's wife and daughter, we had a mind also to
accustom them to call the Princesses by other names then their own, which all
the world knew belonged particularly to the roial house of Persia.

Sure you have heard that the deceased King Darius came not to the Crown by
Succession; and that though he was Son to Arsanes the chief among the
Persians, the Kingdom had not appertained to him, but that the roial line was
quite extinct in the person of King Occhus. His first name was Codoman, and he
was so called, when by a single combat, which he fought at the head of two
Armies, he decided the fortune of two Empires, and added Armenia to that of
the Persians who had trusted their fortune to his valor alone. The remembrance
of this action, and of many others he had don in their favor, obliged them
with a common consent to choos him for their Sovereign, especially considering
his birth was indeed the highest of all the Kingdom, and that he was an allie,
and a near kinsman of the deceased King Occhus and of his Predecessors. Codoman
having thus attained the Empire, thought fit according to the example of former
Kings, to take one of those names which used to be peculiar to the roial
family, as Cyrus, Artaxerxes and Darius, so retaining the last for himself, he
gave that of Artaxerxes to his Son, and those of Statira and Parisatis to the
Queen his wife, and the two Princesses his daughters. These names also are held
in such reverence among the Persians, that they have never given them but to
their Queens, and to their Princesses, who hardly ever bore any others. The
former names of the Queen, and of the Princess her sister, who were born awhile
before their Father came unto the Empire, were Cassandra and Euridice; 'twas
under those they past the first years of their age, and seeing themselves
reduced to the necessity of forsaking those for some time, which the change of
their quality had made them take; they believed that in that second
revolution, they could not do better, then to return to those they had born
during their former fortune, when they were in so tender an infancy, that few
were likely to have preserved the memory of it; they having also lost the hope
of commanding the Persians any more, and with it the desire of keeping those
names which appertained only to their Sovereigns. It was therefore by those of
Cassandra and Euridice that Parisatis commanded Polemon to call them, and I
accustomed my self so well to it, that whenever I spoke to them since, I
always called them so. Polemon and his Family, who served them with an
exceeding great zeal, and who knew what they owed unto their Princesses, could
not get the habit of it, but the Queen commanded them so expressly, that they
were constrained to obey her, and to use themselves to forget respect, that they
might not say any thing that could discover them to their domestics. Part of
that second day was passed, when in stead of Perdiccas whom we expected, we
saw his brother Alcetas enter in a great trouble, and bearing marks in his face
of a very sensible grief, the Princesses having asked him the cause, he told
them that Perdiccas, as he was coming to visit them alone, to the end his
visits might be the less taken notice of, had met Lysimachus who had defied
him, and fought with him upon their quarrel, and that after a long combat which
had been parted by stranger Passengers, Perdiccas had received two very deep
wounds, but that the Chirurgians gave assurance they were not dangerous, not
capable to keep him long in bed, and that his brother seeing himself by that
accident deprived of the means to wait upon them, had commanded him to supply
his place, and in his default, to do them all the services they could hope for
from himself. The Princesses who had ever believed that Lysimachus would not
leav their wrongs unpunished, and that he both loved Parisatis enough, and was
generous enough not to forsake their interests, for any consideration of his
own, by this news received a strong confirmation of it; but though this action
was very obliging to them, and that they valued the person of Lysimachus much
more then that of Perdiccas, yet did they testify to Alcetas that they
participated in his trouble, and were extremely sorry for his hrother's
misfortune, they prayed him to assure him of it, and within awhile after
Alcetas being gone, they began to discourse upon that adventure, and to
deliberate between them whether they should discover themselves to Lysimachus,
and let him know the condition they were in; but while they were in this
conversation, Alcione Polemon's daughter came into the Chamber, and put a new
disquiet into the Queens mind, by the news she brought. The Princesses made
some reckoning of that woman by reason of her beauty and of many marks of
discretion, and virtue they found in her, and at that time having received her
with a great deal of goodness, We have in the house (said she) a new guest
very much wounded; I am not certain that I know him, but if the change which
some years, and the loss of blood have caused in his face, did not race out some
of the old Ideas, I should believ it to be that great Prince of Scythia; whom
I have seen heretofore at Babylon near the late King Darius, whom the whole
Court adored for his virtue, and who gained the reputation of the bravest and
valiantest man in the world. Scarce had Alcione spoke these words when the
Queen touched at the heart with them, fell into a cold sweat all over, and
began to tremble from head to foot, like a person quite beside her self. The
Princess her sister and I observed it, and knowing the cause well enough, did
what we could to hinder Alcione from perceiving it, and having sent her upon
some errand to get her out of the Chamber, we remained alone with her at more
liberty. Then by her wandering looks expressing the agitation of her soul,
Sister (said she) consider but my fortune a little, and if this news be true,
see by what a redoubling of disasters she overwhelms me. She accompanied
these few words, with two or three sighs, and while Parisatis full of thoughts
like her, mused upon that adventure without answering, I could not dissemble my
opinion, and not seeing those misfortunes in that encounter which she
complained of, Madam, (said I) I know not what occasion you have to afflict
your self at this news, and in the condition of your affairs, I do not believ
you ought with trouble to receiv the return of him, from whom of all men living
you may hope for most assistance. Hold thy tongue (said the Queen) hold thy
tongue Cleone, and better understand a mind, which cannot suffer any memory
but that of Alexander, scarce have I begun to weep for that deceased,
ilustrious husband, but Oroondates com's back to me, Oroondates that dear
scourge of my days, from whom I cannot receiv that succor thou proposest to
me as from other men; do thou believ I can with an indifferent eye see that
man whom I have loved so well, and that man who in spite of all my
considerations, and of all my losses, I can not yet keep my self from loving?
and do thou think I ought, or can see him otherwise, I who am widow to
Alexander the Great, I who began but too days since to shed my tears for the
loss of an husband, the greatest of all men living, and I who ought to admit no
other remembrance but his, unless I will make my self worthy of my miseries,
and become the scorn of the whole earth? besides these considerations of honor,
do thou believ that these tender thoughts of love, which I really have for
the memory of my dear husband, will be dispersed by the return of Oroondates?
and do thou judge also that the powerful character of my first affection can
be blotted out by the remembance of what I ow to the ashes of Alexander? The
Queen pronounced these last words with tears and sighs, which put her sister
and me into a perplexity little different from hers, and afterward she
brought forth others which were so moving, that persons the least capable of
pity, would have been deeply touched with them. I protest to you Sir, with a
great deal of truth, that I was as joyful for your return as it was possible
for me to be for any thing, and that I employed all the credit I had with the
Queen to banish those scruples out of her mind, which opposed your
re-establishment, I represented to her that those reasons which during the life
of her husband she with justice might have alleged to defend her self against
your love, ceased with their cause, and that the gods in taking Alexander from
her, had also taken away all the obstacle they had placed between you and your
felicity; that it was true the loss she had suffered was very fresh, but that
also in the misfortune of her affairs, and even in the peril of her life, she
might lawfully make use of a man, to whom she had so many former obligations,
and to whom she had been given by the King her Father, without being accused
of a lightness with which perchance one might have reproached her, if after the
death of the King her husband, she had continued in her former fortune, or but
so much as in any safety; and in short, I urged all that I thought reasonable
in your defense, and the Princess her sister, who all her life time, had
approved a strict severitie, finding a great deal of reason in what I said,
contented her self with hearing it without arguing for it or against it; and
having always perfectly esteemed your person, though her thoughts were the
same with the Queens, she would do nothing that might prejudice you. The Queen
was not at all shaken by my words, but after she had given me liberty enough
to speak my mind, Know Cleone (said she) that besides the interests of mine
honor, and of my dignity, Love is as powerful in my soul for Alexander, as it
was heretofore for Oroondates, these two afflictions combat in my heart with an
equal advantage, but duty which take's part with the later, and the more
legitimate, make's the victory turn to that side. Alexander is dead, it is
true, but my affection is not dead with him, and having been really such as it
ought to be, I have no difficulty to accommodate my duty with it. But,
Madam, (said I) what shall become then of this poor Prince, whom you precipitate
more then ever into that sea of misfortunes, out of which after so many
crosses, the goodness of the gods seemed to have delivered him? In this
(replied the Queen) the gods labor for his repose and mine, he shall live in
the same error with the rest of men, and the belief of my death will make him
retire into his Country, where he will live with more tranquillity then he
has don formerly. Ah! Madam, (cried I) how full of inhumanitie and ingratitude
is this discourse! you know Oroondates, and the love he bears you too well, to
believ he can live after the news of your death; What, will you have the heart
to hear he is so near you, without letting him at least know that you are
alive, to prevent by that knowledge the violent resolutious, which that error
wherein you would have him live would doubtless make him take? If you could
answer for Oroondates (said the Queen hastily) that he should love me no
more, or that he should no more require an affection from me, which I no more
can allow to man, I would see him, and draw a great deal of consolation from
that sight; but Cleone, do you think you could obtain this of him for our
common repose? In this proposition (replied I) thereis so little likelihood,
and so little justice, that I will never make it to him while I live. Talk to
me no more on it then, (answered the Queen) since there is less of both, in
that you desire of me. The Queen spoke these last words in such an imperious
way that I durst argue no longer, and I believed it not best to set my self so
soon to overcom her will, in which perchance time would more easily make an
alteration; wherefore I only said, Do not torment your self so much, Madam,
with the persecutions you apprehend from that poor Prince, perhaps Alcione may
be deceived; and if it should be really he, what do we know but that his
wound may be mortal, and that he may quickly be in a condition to leav you in
that repose you so much desire. The Queen was not well pleased with that reply,
as I found by her looks, and falling of a sudden into a fatal thought, If
Oroondates die (added she) I will infallibly die with him, and though my
sister disapprove these violent passions, I will nevertheless confess before
her, that I should find less difficulty in dying for him, then in consenting
to see him again. We were in this discourse when Alcione came back from the
errand she had been sent on, and having enquired of her concerning their new
guest, she told us that according to the Chirurgians report his wound was not
mortal, that she had seen his face a second time, and that though he
endeavored very carefully to keep himself from being known, she was more then
ever confirmed in her opinion that it was Prince Oroondates. The Queen trembled
at this confirmation, but she dissembled her sense of it before Alcione, and
calling me to her bed side, she talked with me a great while of you, in
terms full of the marks of a violent passion, but of a passion that was subject
unto her duty, and that feared, and trembled at the memory of Alexander; she
passed all the night in cruel agitations, and these new disquiets mingled
themselves so strongly with the former, that they banished out of her mind all
the hope of quiet which yet was left there; If the remembrance of Alexander
came into her thoughts, with its most powerful advantages, you presently
appeared before her in the most lovely charming form you ever had, and if that
figure wrought any effect upon her heart, the memory of Alexander again
banished it as a criminal seducer, or as an enemy whose very approaches were
dangerous to her reputation; if in the most violent of her thoughts she cried
out, O Alexander! O Oroondates! would she add instantly after it; yet she
brought forth that last name, but as it were by stealth, and that constraint
she used upon her self in favor of it, made it more dear to her, then if she
had pronounced it in a perfect liberty. The whole night was spent on this
manner: neither her weariness, nor her former watchings being able to bring
sleep upon her eie-lids, and the Sun no sooner appeared in her Chamber-window,
but her cruel disquiets making her hate her bed, she called to me to bring
her clothes; I gave her those that were destined to her since the change of
her name, which were Polemon's daughters, and which as plain as they were, took
off nothing from the Majesty of her ordinary luster. She was hardly ready,
when being desirous to clear her doubts with more assurance, she sent for old
Polemon, in whom she had already found a great deal of understanding,
discretion, and zeal to serve her; and as soon as he was at her Chamber door
she rested her self upon his hand, and went down alone with him into the
garden, where she sought out the most private walks to entertain him with more
liberty, and less danger of being discovered; but scarce had she begun to
propose her doubts to him, when she saw her self close by two men, who as we
have learned since, were Lysimachus and Araxes, she was surprised at that
sight, and being unwilling to be known, she turned away of a sudden, and
leaving Polemon, went out of the garden at a little door, which led her into
the Wood. Within awhile after, Polemon being com into our lodging, told the
Queen, that he was no more able then his daughter to inform her touching what
she desired to know of him, but that his thoughts agreed with Alciones, and
that he believed as she did, that the wounded stranger was the Prince of
Scythia; that he had not been able to learn any thing of it from them that
served him, whether it were that they were ignorant, or that they had order to
conceal it; that all he could guess at by their discourse, was that possessed
with some violent grief he had given himself that wound, and that those that
looked to him had all the difficulty in the world to persuade him to live, and
suffer his cure to be endeavored. No sooner had Polemon given the Queen this
information, but she guessed at the truth of that adventure, and judged by her
former knowledge of your love, that the news of her death had cast your soul
into that despair; this belief redoubled (if it were possible) her affection to
you, and made her think of finding out some means to see you without being seen
of you. What (said she to her self) shall I have thrown my dear Oroondates
into this danger, and shall I have received this last, this potent mark of his
love to me, and shall I know him so near me, without seeing him? Ah! no my
duty, you shall not be so severe; I will not forget you, though I see my dear
Orontes, and I will be so circumspect in this action, that you shall be sure
to receiv no offense by it. But miserable Statira, what would become of thee, if
Alexander's ghost should present it self to thee in this visit and reproach
thee with thy lightness in a threatening voice? My body (would it say to thee)
has not yet received the rites of burial, and do thou run ungrateful woman,
to new affection? Do thou seek occasions to forget me, thou whom I have so
dearly loved; while the whole earth, whereof I have been the terror, is in a
general desolation? Ah! dear and glorious spirit, give some truce unto thy just
resentment, and consider that I am not guilty of infidelity, for being a
little sensible; I reverence thee much as I ought, and as thou can wish; but
I am so much indebted to poor Oroondates, that if thou were alive, thou
would not forbid me thy self to see him for some few moments, in a condition
to which I alone have reduced him. After having long contested on this manner,
she resolved in the end to see you, if she could do it without danger of
being discovered; and for that design, having conferred about it toward the
evening with Alcione, and told her that very important reasons obliged her, to
certify her self with her own eyes, whether or no it were the Prince of
Scythia, she was long contriving ways with her, and having found them all too
dangerous, she hearkened a little to the last Alcione proposed. Madam, (said
she) at the end of a gallerie to which I can lead you by a back stair, there
is a little door which open's into the space on the far side of his bed, close
to the head of it, it is seldom made fast but toward the gallerie, and if to
morrow morning before those that wait upon him com into his Chamber, your
Majesty will have me bring you in at that door, it will not be hard for me
to do so, and if any body should com in while you are there, you may easily
get out the same way and not be perceived by any body; it will only be
needful to learn if he be asleep, and for that purpose I will go in first,
and looking in at the curtain will bring your Majesty word. The Queen found a
great deal of hazard in this proposition, and was long before she could
approve of it, but at last, the ardent desire she had to see you, made her
pass over all manner of difficulties, and resolv blindly to follow Alcione;
she would not venture upon it without communicating it to the Princess her
sister; and that scrupulous Lady, not being able to yield to it, argued long
against that design, with many specious reasons; but in the end knowing how
much she displeased the Queen in opposing her intention, she agreed to her
desire, and would needs accompany her to the door her self.

The day hardly began to appear, when the too Princesses were ready, and
Alcione being their guide, led them through the garden while every body was
yet asleep. The Queen went trembling up the stairs, and if by the accidents of
her life she had not been accustomed to great and dangerous things, she would
never have had courage enough to execute that enteprise; when she was in the
Gallerie, Alcione opened your Chamber door very softly, and went gently to your
beds head; though the place was something dark, it received light enough by the
opening of that door, to let Alcione see your face was turned toward her, and
that you were asleep; when she was certain of it she came back to the Queen
who stayed for her with fears and impatiencies which are not imaginable; she
went in nevertheless, but with inward shiverings, and apprehensions which put
her almost besides her self; when she was by your bedside, and that by the
opening of the curtain she discovered the face which she had so extremely
loved, and which neither loss of blood, nor the darkness of the place could
hinder her from knowing, her affection transported her in such manner, that
she was like to have gone beyond the bounds of modesty, to follow the violent
motions which that sight awakened; yet was she Mistress of her self in that
occasion, as she had been in all the actions of her life, and that constraint
made her fall into a wondrous great perplexity; she looked upon you, as much
as the light would give her leav, with thoughts enflamed by her former passion,
and with raptures of love, which she has since confessed to me as crimes;
she was often even upon the point to waken you, and to discover her self to
you, by all the modest proofs you could desire of her affection; but she was
as often dissuaded from it by those severe scrupulous considerations I have
already told you. Must it needs be so (said she very softly) must it needs
be so, my dearly loved Orontes, that you should be longer ignorant of the
estate of your present condition, and that for weak considerations, I should
use a violence upon my self which kills me? must I conceal my face from him,
to whom my heart was never concealed, and must I refuse him my very sight, to
whom I have totally given my soul? Ah! no, vain shadow of an unjust reputation,
oppose thy self no more against such just, and such powerful motions, thou
tyrannizest over me too inhumanely, my dear Orontes must see me, and must
receiv at least this satisfaction, for so many services as he has don me: In
this thought she put forth her arm to waken you, but at that very instant the
remembrance of Alexander came into her mind, which not only diverted her from
that design, but also made her blush at that intention, and at the estate in
which she saw her self. What, (said she again) is it then the wife of
Alexander the Great, and of Alexander dead but three days ago that run's
impudently to seek a man that has loved her in his very bed? This reflection
confounding her, and stirring her up against her self, made her rise up from
the chair where she sat, to go out of the Chamber, which she began to look
upon as a place of shame and reproach to her, Let us fly (said she in anger)
let us fly from a place fatal to our reputation, and make amends for the fault
we have committed, by a firm resolution never to do the like again while we
live. But at the moment of that separation, she could not forbear casting back
her eyes upon you, and that object insensibly dissipating her severer thoughts,
pulled her back with more weakness, and more tenderness then before. Oh!
Orontes (added she with a deep sigh) how hard it is to keep ones resolutions
against you, or rather how difficult it is to see you, and remember you without
loving you? In this confusion of mind she floated so long that the Sun
beginning to appear, brought light into the whole Chamber, but she forgot her
self so sweetly near you, that she took not notice of the stay she made, and
her several disquiets had so distracted her, that I believ she would have
stayed there longer, if she had not heard you sigh twice or thrice, and seen
you awhile after stretch forth your arms, and open your eyes. Nothing but your
wakening was able to make her go out of the Chamber, but besides that, she at
the same time heard the other door open, and being unwilling to be surprised,
she ran hastily away, and shutting the door after her, went back to Alcione,
who waited for her in the Gallerie, from whence the Princess Parisatis was gone
away before, having perceived a man at the other end of it.

This discourse of Cleones, recalling into the Princes mind the remembrance of
his Vision, O, Statira (cried he) I saw you for all the suddenness of you
departure, I saw you vanish like lightning, but my thoughts never reached the
truth of this adventure, I took you your self to be but the Ghost of my Queen,
that came to demand the revenge I owed her against her barbarous murderers;
and Prince Lysimachus, who had a glimps of Princess Parisatis in the Gallerie
had the same conceit; I was far enough from imagining, that at that same
instant while I bewailed your loss with tears of blood, and while I preserved
the remnant of my miserable life to revenge your death, you could be so near
me, as not to vouchsafe to draw me out of that error which had brought me so
near unto my grave; the gods would have me ignorant of it then, but it is their
pleasure I should learn it now, that I might receiv confirmations of your
hard-heartedness toward me.

If you have found her so in other encounters (replied Cleone) I do not think
you have any cause in this action to complain of her, nor ought you to take it
as a light mark of affection in a person of her quality and humor; and to say
truth, she esteemed it one of the boldest and most dangerous she had ever
ventured upon in all her life, and if you had desired part of her blood from
her, she would more easily have granted it then such a visit; She came away
so troubled, that I feared some strange accident had happened to her; and she
told me all with such tender moving expressions, that she drew tears of
compassion from me. I have seen him Cleone (said she) I have seen poor
Oroondates, but 'twas only to redouble my grief the more heavily; as pale as
he is, he is yet as lovely as ever he was, and I would it pleased the gods,
that either he had ceased to be so, or that I could ceas to be sensible, or
ceas to live, since it is not their will that I should live for him. After many
discourses of that nature, she went forth into the Wood, where she sought out
the most gloomie secret places to trust her sorrows to them, and that they
might bear a share in them, she took a bodkin which I gave her, and under the
name of Cassandra engraved part of her discontents upon the Rocks, and upon the
barks of the trees. After that day she passed some others in these sad
imploiments, without being able to resolv to discover her self to you, nor to
attempt the hazard of a second visit, and I know not whether she could have
persisted in that mind, but she received a surcharge in her affliction which
cast her utterly down, and which joined to her other sorrows put her into a
fever which made her keep her bed, almost all the time that you did so; it was
the news of the death of Queen Sysigambis, whom their loss together with her
grief for that of Alexander, had brought unto her grave, which she voluntarily
preferred before the life she could lead after the death of those that were so
dear to her: The two Princesses, were so infinitely sorrowful for the loss of
that great Queen, that they were hardly to be comforted, and if Princess
Parisatis had not striven against her grief, to take care of her sister in her
sickness, she would quickly have been in a condition little different from
hers. During all the time the Queen kept her bed, all her thoughts were divided
between you and her deceased husband, she never said any thing that could show
any trouble for the loss of Darius his Empires, nor of those which she had
since possessed with Alexander in more glory then any Princess of the world;
she never thought of the fall of her house, nor of the prosperity of her
enemies, and the little power she had to revenge her self on them; she never
envied Roxana's fortune, nor ever made any complaint against her, but she
appeared afflicted only for having lost Alexander; and for having lost the hope
of possessing Oroondates without blame. She asked me how you did a hundred
times a day, and I informed my self of Alcione and Polemon, that I might tell
her. We quickly heard that Lysimachus was with you, and the Princess Euridice
learned that news with inward alterations able to show that he was not
indifferent to her; but such was her humor; that after that which had passed
between them, and which was commonly known, she would have been more unwilling
to discover her self to him then to all the men in the world. That high
severitie, caused a great deal of constraint in her, and 'twas not without much
ado that she concealed her self from him to obey that regular virtue, yet did
she take such care to hinder all communication between your lodging and ours,
that your people never suspected any thing of our abode, and Alcetas who
visited us often, but always by night, never had the least suspicion of
Lysimachus his being in the house; true it is that Polemon, and his family
showed a most discreet fidelity, and the Princess represented the importance
of the secret to them with such a charge, that they kept it inviolably on both
sides; nor was the danger small; for if those of Perdiccas his party had known
where Lysimachus was, they would have taken arms to revenge themselves upon him,
and if Lysimachus had not been ignorant of Alcetas his coming hither; he would
have discharged part of the hatred upon him, which he bore unto his brother;
but the order the Princess took in it, and Polemon by her command, prevented
all the mischiefs that might have happened by those encounters, if the business
had not been managed with a mavelous care. The Queen assisted her sickness as
much as possibly she could, that it might have strength enough to make an end
of her, yet did she recover whether she would or no, and left her bed the
same day that you did; her fever having neither been long nor violent, she
lost not much of her strength, and within a few days after her being up
again, she had no need to keep her Chamber; But as that was the time of her
recoverie, and of yours, so was it likewise of Perdiccas and that same evening
he came to visit her, accompanied only by his Brother; the Princesses
received him very civilly, and after some ordinary discourse, Perdiccas
represented to the Queen that this place of retreat was too near to Babylon,
and that she had made a longer stay here then was fitting for her safety, but
that the Queen's sickness, and his wounds had been the cause of it, and that it
was necessary to think of retiring to some other house, that was both stronger
and further from Roxana. The Queen trembled at this proposition, and though
she had not resolved to let you see her, yet could she not without grief,
think of going away from you, but because she saw a great deal of reason in it,
and that she had but little power to contradict Perdiccas, she opposed it
not, and only told him, that her life was too full of miseries to take so
great a care of it, and that whither soever she retired, she still should
carry her unfortunate destiny along with her. Perdiccas went away presently
after; and the Queen more disquieted then she was wont to be, passed the rest
of the night without speaking hardly so much as a word to us; I heard her sigh
in her bed with a more then usual vehemence, and the next morning as soon as I
was up, she called me to her, and taking one of my hands, which she pressed
between hers; Cleone (said ^hee) thou see me now both in the greatest
troubles of mind, and in the greatest weaknesses, that ever I was in since I
was born. In short, Cleone, my constancy is at an end, and do I what I can to
draw it out a few days longer, it is impossible for me to conceal my self
from poor Oroondates; besides the incitements of mine own inclination, which
are powerful enough to make me break through very great difficulties, when I
remember what that poor Prince has done, and suffered for me, and the
condition to which he is yet reduced by his love to me, I feel a remors which
tele me I am to blame, which robs me of my rest, and which deprive's me of
the means of resisting my inclination; yet will I not let it carry me beyond
what I ought to do, and I shall be enough Mistress of it, to persevere in the
design I have taken to shut up all my love within Alexander's tomb; but O!
Cleone, I can no longer conceal from him that I am alive; the news of my death
has already drawn much of his blood, and if he continue in that belief, he
will at last breathe out a soul, from which mine cannot be separated by any
reason, nor by any violence; I would have him know I am still in the world, but
in telling him that news, I would dispose him never to hope any thing more from
me; this knowledge shall make me loos nothing of the Empire I always have had
over him, and I am certain he is obedient and submissive enough, to regulate
his will by mine; he love's me too well, and my reputation is too dear to
him, to desire any thing of me that may blast it; and if I can do nothing in
favor of him but actions of lightness, and inconstancy, he is too generous
himself to persuade me to them. Before we go away from this place, whence
Perdiccas thinks it necessary we should remove, I will leav him some assurance
of my life, and of my remembrance of him, but I will not have him conceiv
unjust hope by that mark of my affection, and I will use such caution in it, as
shall declare my want of power, without giving him occasion to complain of me.
When she had ended this discourse which I hearkened to without interrupting it,
the Queen called for her clothes, and withdrawing into a little closet, she
began to write part of her mind to you; within awhile after she came forth,
and commanding me to follow her, though she was yet but weak, she went down
the stairs, and leaning upon my hand, she took her walk into the wood, where
she sought those places that were most remote from the abode of men; when she
had walked awhile she sat down upon a green bank by the side of a little
brook, and having commanded me to sit down by her, she drew forth the paper
wherein she had begun to write, but before she read it, Cleone (said she) I
have left my Letter unperfect, because I had not the courage to finish it, and I
had begun it in a style which is little suitable to the resolution I have taken;
although I make some mention of it, me think's it is in terms, which seems to
slacken much of its strictness. I write to Oroondates under the name of
Cassandra which you have given me again, but I will give charge to Alcione,
who shall deliver it to him after our departure, to clear all those doubts this
alteration of my name may work in him. Having said thus, she gave me the
paper, whereby her command I began to read these words:

THe unfortunate and happy Cassandra; unfortunate by the change of her
fortune, and happy by the fidelity of her dear Orontes, to her too faithful
Orontes.

Ah Cleone! (cried Oroondates interrupting her) it is enough, I know every word
of that Letter, which fell miraculously into my hands, and which I have dearly
preserved by reason of the resemblance the style, and characters bore to those
of my Princess; my belief of her death, opposed that I might else have had that
it came from her; and yet it left doubts in my mind, accompanied with some
beams of hope, which I could never clear till now. With that he told her how
that Letter fell into Araxes his hands, how he had read the words which
Cassandra had engraven upon the Trees and Rocks, and the effects that encounter
had produced in his mind, and having related all that adventure to her at
large, Cleone continued thus.

It is true, Sir, that letter might very well com to your hand, on the manner
you speak of, for the Queen after having heard me read it, and discoursed with
me a while upon that subject, was so drouzie with her former watchings, that
she stretched her self at length upon the grass where she insensibly fell
asleep, and within a while after I kept her company, holding the letter still
open in my hand, but when I wakened again I missed it, and having vainly sought
it with the Queen, who wakened also presently after, we returned the same way
we came, and retired into our little hermitage. The Queen was very glad she
had put neither the name of Statira, nor that of Oroondates in the letter,
knowing that nothing could be drawn from the reading of it, that could
discover her. She resolved to write another before she went to bed, but she
had scarce supt when she saw Perdiccas, and his brother com into the chamber.
After he had saluted her in his usual manner, Madam (said he) you are in very
great danger if you stay here any longer, let us away I beseech you, and go
without deferring, to a more assured retreat, you have a chariot here at the
door, which will carry you thither in a little time, and there perchance you
shall be in such a condition, that you shall but little need to fear your
enemies. These words surprised the Queen extremely, and though she had
prepared her self to go from you, she did not think it should have been so
suddenly, and with so little leisure to effect her intentions of writing to
you; she had some thought to give Alcione order to tell you by word of mouth,
what she could not write; but she knew her not enough to trust her with a
business of that importance, nor had she so much time as to instruct her in
it, and Perdiccas pressed her so earnestly, that seeing her self at his mercy,
standing in fear of him, and not yet knowing his designs, she could not in
that haste take any other resolution, then that of following him blindly,
remitting the conduct of her destiny and yours unto the gods. We went on this
manner from Polemon's house, which the Queen could not leav, without testifying
by some sighs, how sorry she was to go from the place where you were; and the
Princess her sister, as great constancy as she feigned at that departure, was
not without trouble for having so carefully concealed her self from Lysimachus.
The chariot we got into, traveled with such speed that within a short time it
carried us to a Castle some two or three hundred furlongs from hence, upon the
bank of the Euphrates, which washes the walls of it on one side, and on all the
rest it is encompassed with a deep mote, and so well fortified both by art and
nature, that it would be very difficult to force it. It formerly belonged to
Bagistanes, who had been Governor of the Citadel of Babylon, and since was
fallen into the hands of Peucestas, who was wholly at Perdiccas his devotion.
Thither we were carried, and there we found a great many soldiers for the
guard of the Castle, and of us; Perdiccas likewise had taken care to send
Grecian slaves thither to serve the Princesses; but after having considered all
things and in what manner they were kept, they found that they were prisoners,
and that Perdiccas in stead of their Protector, was become their Master. They
were waited on with much respect, and because Perdiccas, by reason of the
multitude of his affairs, could not make his ordinary abode there, he left
the care and custody of them to his brother, and contented himself with
visiting them often, but exceeding secretly; he for some days carried himself
to them, with all the respect, and all the modesty they could desire, but
afterward he began to take a greater liberty, and by some looks, and speeches
made the Queen perceiv, he had some intention toward her, which he had not yet
declared, she was extremely troubled at that knowledge, but her want of power
made her dissemble it, while the Princess her sister who had the same cause of
complaint against Alcetas, behaved her self on the same manner. By little and
little the two Brothers confirmed these suspicions by all their actions, and
they began to be no longer in doubt, when Perdiccas took off his mask, and
impudently declared unto the Queen, the design he had upon her; they were
alone one day in her chamber, and Perdiccas, after having entertained her a
while with indifferent talk, changed his style of a sudden, and spoke thus unto
her. I do not hope, Madam, you should without some surprise, nor perhaps without
some anger, receiv the declaration I am forced to make to you; neither will I
wonder, if the daughter of Darius, and the widow of Alexander the Great, think
all men below them unworthie to serve her. It is true Madam, you have held, and
may yet hold the first place among all the Princesses of the earth, and that
you cannot consider any man with particular inclinations, without falling from
your former dignity; but the world has no more Alexanders, and unless the
gods would raise him again whom they have taken from you, you must never hope to
find an husband of equal merit. As long as he lived, my respect to him made
me smother the thoughts I have ever had, and the concurrence of a rival to
whom I owed all my fortune, made me lay aside those pretensions, which with
justice I ought not to have quitted but for him. Now that the destinies have
deprived us of him, and that since his loss I may say without vanity or
falsehood, that I know no man greater then my self, I may Madam, I may with less
presumption own the passion I have for you. I know Madam, that this confession
offend's you, and I doubted not but you would think it strange from a man whose
Queen you once were, and still are so, but if among all men living you can make
a choice without abasing your self, do me but the favor to name me one, with
whom I may not justly dispute for prioritie. It Is true, I am not a King by
birth, yet am I of Roial blood; and besides your Majesty is not ignorant that
I have empires at my disposing, that common Kings are but petty slaves in
respect of Alexander's successors, and that amongst them all he picked out
none but me to possess part of that place he had enjoied; that election was
so glorious, and so authentic that it ought to be envied by all the monarchs
of the earth, and it is from it alone, I have taken courage enough to open my
mouth before you, and to raise my ambition to a glory which cannot worthily be
pretended to by any body; if you judge my temeritie criminal, accuse not that
vanity of it, which I might draw from some advantages I have, but a violent
passion which a most profound, and a most due respect has made me cover with
a silence of many years. I do not represent to your Majesty the state of your
affairs, nor the need, or rather the necessity you have of a powerful support
against a world of interessed enemies, who find their quiet, and can find
their safety in nothing but your ruin; this consideration is too weak to use
any violence upon your inclinations, but I will add that to it if you pleas,
which you may have for a zeal full of respect, and submission, which will make
me sacrifice my fortune, and my life it self for your interests, and for your
contentment.

The Queen stood in need of all her patience, and of all her ordinary
moderation, to hear this long discourse without falling into anger, but having
ever been of the greatest temper of all the persons in the world, and being
prudent enough to consider the misfortune of her condition, and the power
Perdiccas had over her, she restrained part of that indignation, which in
another season would perchance have broken out in another fashion, and looking
upon Perdiccas with disdain, she witho^t being much moved replied; Have you
so soon forgotten, (O Perdiccas) what you ^a wed unto your King, and have you
by this change of your fortune, which you allege to me, lost the knowledge of
your self? can that particular esteem which he showed of you at his death, and
wherewith you seem to autorise your fault, justify the offense you do him? and
in short do you no longer remember you are Perdiccas, and that you speak to the
widow of Alexander? I know (answered Perdiccas) both wha^ I ow unto the
memory of my King, and what I ow unto the presence of my Queen, but by giving
her a second Empire over me, of a more noble nature then the first, I commit
no offense perchance, whereof I may not, hope for pardon. I content my self
with the first (replied the Queen sharply) nay and if you will Perdiccas I Will
quit that too, upon condition you will but leav me in quiet, and that you no
more will force me to hearken to words which are an equal injury to us both.
I will obey you (added Perdiccas) as much as possibly I can, but you may be
pleased, Madam, to let me conjure you to have consideration of the small
service I have don you, and to remember that but for Perdiccas whom she
disdain^s, the widow of Alexander had not now been in the world. That reproach
incensed the Queen yet more, and not being able utterly to dissemble it, what,
Perdiccas (said she) would you then have me think my self highly obliged to
you, for not having cut my throat as you had promised Roxana? had I any way
offended you, or had you any right over me, that should make me receiv my
life from you as a favor? Did you defend me against any other enemies but your
self, and is there any man in the world that may not challenge the same
obligation? Do you believ, that to have pulled the widow of your King, from
whom you never received any thing but favors, by violence from amongst her
servants, to have carried her by force unto her enemies, to have brought the
knife to her very throat, and not to have made an end of her, are such services
that you should upbraid her with them, and demand recompenses for them? do you
know any body among all the most cruel enemies of our house, from whom I have
not received at least as good offices as these? If all men (added Perdiccas)
had been as deeply interessed in your death, if they had hazarded what I have
don in saving you, and if a good part of the world had been proposed to them
for a reward, perchance few would have been found that would have preferred
your safety before all these considerations. Yet is it dearer to me then all
the Empires of the earth, and it is not to reproach you that I put you in mind
of it, but to give you some knowledge of the advantage your interests have in me
above mine own, and to gain some credit with you, for him who will not be
useless to you in this alteration of your fortune. He would have said much
more to the Queen upon this subject, but she commanded him to hold his peace,
and that with so imperious, and so majestic a look, that at that time he had
not the confidence to prosecute his discourse, but going from her with a low
obeisance he returned the same day to Babylon. He was no sooner gone, but the
Queen sent for the Princess her sister and me into her chamber, and told us
all these passages, but with so great indignation, that in my life I never saw
her so extremely moved. We are slaves (pursued she) I see it plainly, and
this number of persons here about us, is only to keep us fast, and not to
defend us; If I were free I would not stay a minute in a place where this
insolent fellow has any power, and if he persist to offend me thus, I will
leap over these walls rather then endure his persecutions. O Alexander
(continued she, letting fall some tears) if after the loss of thee, I were
capable of a second affection, thy memory would be less injured, in having him
thy successor in my heart, to whom I had given it before thee, then in seeing
this place which was thine, unworthily possessed by this ungrateful man. The
Princess at the Queens discourse, only shrunk up her shoulders, and by that
action made her comprehend, that she thought her fortune was very little
different; The Queen who had begun to take notice of Alcetas his carriage,
guessed at her sisters destiny, and entreating her to let her know the truth
of it, she at last confessed that that presumptuous man had entertained her
with discourse almost like that of his brothers, and that to autorise his
pretensions he often alleged that Hephestion's birth was not higher then his,
nor his person more considerable, and that the Queen and she after their
losses, and the utter ruin of their house, could not find any surer support
then those two Brothers, who had all the Macedonians, and the greatest part of
the Princes at their disposing. After this mutual knowledge of their
displeasures, these two great Princesses began to deplore their misery, and
showed a greater sens of this last assault of fortune, then they had don in
their apprehensions of death; then it was that they both together condemned
their scrupulous severitie, and that they repented they had so obstinately
concealed themselves from you, and from Lysimachus; They would willingly have
repaired that fault if it had been possible, but they were utterly deprived of
means, I could not be permitted to com out of the Castle, and for a business
of that nature, there was no body else there whom they durst trust. They
studied in vain to find out ways, either to get at liberty, or to give you
notice of their captivity, and in the end they saw themselves reduced to the
necessity of hoping for no assistance but from heaven, which till then seemed
to have forgotten them; Alas, Sir, with what discourses did the Queen then
entertein me concerning you; and with how many tears did she deplore your
miseries, and how many charges did she lay upon me, to justify her memory
to you after her death; for she was resolved to suffer a thousand deaths if it
were possible, rather then abate the least title of what she owed to
Alexander, and to your self, in favor of Perdiccas. If it pleas the gods (said
she to me) that thou ever see him again, tell him O Cleone, that of all the
women in the world I have been the least ungrateful, and the least insensible;
that I loved him to my grave, with the most pure, and most real affection that
ever was, and that I die his as much as I can possibly, after the gift I have
made unto my husband; but represent to him, that I could not carry my self
otherwise, without being unworthie of that perfect affection which was all my
glory, and which after so many misfortunes, wherewith my life has been
crossed, would make me die satisfied, if I believed I had deserved it; put him
in mind of that action, which against his own interests he did through
virtue, and generositie for the safety of Alexander, and make him comprehend
(if thou can possibly) that the same reason, ought to make me conquer my
inclinations, that I might not do any thing unworthie of Oroondates his
fidelity. This was her talk to me oftentimes, and in the interim Perdiccas
and his Brother not being repulsed with the first answers they had received,
continued to persecute them with a great importunity, but they found so little
satisfaction by it, and so many proofs of their displea^ure, that they would no
more have troubled their quiet, with such like prosecutions, if they had
preserved any respect at all to them. One day Perdiccas having indiscreetly
pressed the Queen, she was kindled with such an extraordinary anger, that
looking upon him with eyes full of indignation, Perdiccas (said she) either
ceas to torment me, or put me again into Roxana's hands, that condition will
be much more tolerable then your persecutions, and I shall endure her
cruelties with more patience, then the indignities to which you have destinied
me. As confident as Perdiccas was, he was struck mute with that reply, but
his brother was not at all more gently used by the Princess Parisatis, for he
having once again represented to her, the advantages he pretended above the
deceased Hephestion, that brave spirited Princess, whose affections had been
exceeding strong unto her husband, seeing his memory injured, had not power
enough over her self to forbear answering sharply, Hephestion (said she) was
more considerable then you in all things, besides that, his birth was better
then yours, he by his virtue was worthy of his Kings favor, and of mine, but
you will never deserv either while you live. The two Brothers supported these
scorns with patience enough, and the Queen having one day demanded liberty of
Perdiccas, that she might retire to those of her nearest kindred that were
left, Perdiccas refused her openly, and feigning to be officious, Madam (said
he) I have more care of your preservation then you your self, and I too well
know the danger you would run, if I should forsake you, I ought to give account
of you to my passion, and to the memory of my King, and I consider both too
much to expose you to such manifest perils. The Queen knowing certainly by this
reply, that all hope of liberty was taken from her, had recours unto her
constancy, and to her ordinary resignation, and with the Princess her sister,
sought for comfort in them alone: Besides the interest I had in their
discontents, I was not quite exempt in what concerned my self, and as unhandsom
as I am, I had found a persecuter of Nicanor, a near kinsman to Perdiccas, and
he of all his friends in whom he had the greatest confidence; this man,
whether it were that out of complacencie he would imitate Perdiccas, or that
he thought to oblige me, by showing an esteem of me, or that he found
something in me which he out of a blindness thought lovely, expressed a very
particular affection to me, but it was with much respect and discretion. We
lived on this manner till that very day, when according to what I have heard
from Araxes, you fought the combat in which you got those wounds which keep
you now in bed. That same day the Queen being in her chamber, accompanied
only by the Princess her sister and me, Perdiccas came in completely armed
except his headpiece, and after having saluted them with a countenance more
troubled then ordinary, Madam (said he to the Queen) you have hitherto showed
so much aversion to this place, and so much desire of a more perfect liberty,
that I no longer can resist your will, and if you be yet of the same mind, I
will deliver you from this place you hate so much, and will carry you where
you have been sovereign, and where you shall b^e freed from my importunities.
The Queen, who whithersoever they carried her, could not believ her condition
wors then it was, received that proposition joifully, and looking upon him with
more cheerfulness then usually, Yes Perdiccas (said she) you will do us an
extreme good office if you take us from hence, and if you set us at liberty,
we will ceas to complain of a captivity in^upportable to all free persons. As
soon as ever you are ready (added Perdiccas) you shall be permitted to
depart, and we will only convey you to the places where you may be in
safety, and where you will have no more need of us. The Queen was instantly
ready, and instantly resolved upon that departure, and going out of the
chamber with Perdiccas, while the Princess and I did the same with Alcetas, and
Nicanor, she went down stairs, and so out of that detested house. At the door
we found a chariot with good horses, and a dozen or fifteen horsemen well armed
to convoy it. Perdiccas having desired the Queen to get up into the chariot,
she placed her self in the hinder end, and was no sooner set, but Perdiccas
stepping in after her, the boot was presently put up, and the Charioteer, who
had order what he should do, lashed on his horses, and drove away full speed.
Alcetas, Nicanor, and all the rest remained with us, except only one servant
mounted npon a gallant horse of Perdiccas his, who carrying his cask galloped
after the chariot. I am not able to tell you how great our astonishment was at
so unexpected an adventure, we turned our eyes, and stretched forth our arms
toward the chariot; whence we still heard the Queens cries, and saw her thrust
her self out at the sides, striving all she could to cast her self down
headlong, but Perdiccas was strong enough to hold her with eas, and the horses
ran so fast, that within a short time we lost sight of the chariot. The
afflicted Parisatis seeing her self kept back by Alcetas, who would not suffer
her to follow the chariot on foot, turned courageously toward him, and looking
upon him with eyes sparkling with anger, Traitor (said she) Is this then the
liberty thou give us, and does thy brother (more base and disloial then thy
self) use the wife of Alexander, and the daughters of Darius thus? Ah! Monster,
if thy rage and his be not glutted, prosecute thy crime to the utmost, and
with that sword which thou wearest unworthily by thy side, pierce this heart
which shall never be capable of any thing for thee but hatred and detestation.
The despairing Princess would fain have said more, but the impetuousness of her
anger, which was not to be restrained, hindered her from expressing her self
distinctly, and weakness succeeding that first vehemence, her forces forsook
her, and she sunk down upon the grass, where I would have held her in mine
arms, but my grief and my amazement being no less then hers, I was not able to
do her that service, and she was fain to receiv it from Alcetas whether she
would or no. Her grief for the Queen, being carried away, and her apprehension
to see her self at the mercy of those whom she held for her most cruel
enemies, made her fall into a swound, in which she lay half an hour before
she came to her self again. I then used force upon mine own affliction, to
give her assistance, and with often throwing water in her face, we made her
spirits return at last. As soon as she opened her eyes, and saw her self
encompassed by Alcetas and all those armed men, she fell into her former
anger, and the violence of her sorrow transporting her beyond the limits of her
ordinary moderation, she poured forth a thousand imprecations against them.
Wicked fellow (said she to Alcetas) never hope that either the gods or men
will leav thy villainy unpunished, we are not so utterly abandoned by them,
but that the thunders of the gods, and the arms of men may do something in favor
of us; thou shall know that neither all the race of Darius, nor all the memory
of Alexander is quite extinct among the Persians, nor amongst the Macedonians,
and that we are not so absolutely forsaken, but that we may yet arm both for
the ruin of thee, and thine. She said many other things to which Alcetas made
no reply, and when he had let her vent part of her fire, he drew near to
her, and striving to put a gentleness in his countenance, and to fain
compassion of her afflictions, Madam (said he) be not afraid for the Queen,
nor for your self, she is with him who of all men living has the greatest
passion to serve her; and you have them with you who of all the men in the
world, have the most zeal and respect for the Princess Parisatis, it is the
indiscretion of the Charioteer, or the madness of the horses which ran away
with him whether he would or no, that deprive you of the Queen's company for
a few moments, but I protest to you by all the gods, and by whatsoever I
acknowledge to be most sacred, that within a very little time you shall be
with her again, and I only stay for a Chariot to carry you thither presently;
this delay shall not be above half an hour, and I wish that all those thunders
wherewith you threaten me, may fall upon my head, if I do not punctually
execute what I promiss you. Though by this adventure the Princess had lost all
the confidence she might have had in those persons, and that by Perdiccas his
deceit she had all manner of occasion to mistrust his Brother, yet did she
seem to clear up a little at that promiss of Alcetas, and she suffered me to
endeavor as much as possibly I could to give her some consolation. We had not
been thus employed longer then the time Alcetas had demanded for the arrival of
a chariot, when we saw one appear indeed, the Princesses mind getting a
little assurance at that sight, and at the protestations full of oaths which
Alcetas made to pacify her, she rose up from the place where she was
sitting, and at our solicitation went to the chariot, but for fear of being
deceived like the Queen, she would needs have me get in first, and as soon as
she had taken her place, only Alcetas and Nicanor came up to us, and the rest
followed the chariot, which Alcetas caused to drive after the other, and about
an hundred paces wide of the great road to Babylon. We waited trembling for
our destiny, and Alcetas and Nicanor endeavored to reassure us with the
mildest words their passion (whether true or feigned) could suggest; but our
affliction was so heavy, that we gave little attention to their discourse. We
had traveled about an hour at a good rate, when we saw coming the way we
went, a man on hors-back completely armed, who carried a woman behind him, we
did not much consider the fashion of his arms, but when he was near enough to
be discerned, we knew the woman to be the Queen, we were yet in doubt of
the truth of it, when we were confirmed by a cry she sent forth at the sight
of us. Ah! See yonder is my sister, cried she to him that rode before her; this
encounter troubled Alcetas, and he was ready to have leapt out of the
chariot, but he was afraid to lose the Princess, whom he had much ado to
hold, wherefore he contented himself with crying out to his people to stop
that horsman. Those words affrighted not the stranger, who getting the Queen to
alight instantly drew his sword, and flew upon our guard with a fury which
made them quickly find that number was not able to terrify him. Nicanor
seeing the beginning of that fight, leapt out of the chariot, and I who had
already seen the Queen my Mistress alight, having no longer any body that
held me, threw my self presently after him, and ran to the Queen, who being
stepped a little aside, beheld that unequal combat with mortal apprehensions.
Alcetas who saw her in that condition, and who was loath to let go his hold of
the Princess, or to fail in Perdiccas his design, cried out to two of his
horsemen to take the Queen, and to bring her into the chariot, they obeyed him
instantly, and seizing upon her, while her valiant champion was busied against
their companions, in spite of all the resistance they could make, put her into
the chariot, Alcetas commanded them to com in with her, and the Charioteer
presently after drove away so swiftly, that he was gone in a moment. Ah! Sir,
how infinite was my grief when I saw my dear Mistress carried away, and that I
could not possibly wait upon her, I never staid to see the issue of the fight,
the beginning whereof was very glorious for the stranger, and running after the
chariot, like one in despair, I quickly was gotten a good way from that place,
but my pursuit was as vain as my cries, and I grew so tired with running, and
tormenting my self, that after having lost sight of the chariot I fell down,
quite out of breath, and so extremely weak, that I was not able to get up
again. It would be to no purpose, Sir, to repeat the lamentations I made after
such a loss, my sorrow was so great that it would be very hard for me to
express it, but I continued there more dead then alive, till the Sun was almost
ready to set, before I so much as thought of rising from the place where I
lay, and I know not what would have become of me, if a good honest countrie-man
and his wife, who passed by that way, and saw me in that condition, had not
taken me up, after they had wiped away my tears, and endeavored to give me
some comfort, they prayed me to go with them to their house for that night; My
fear of being left without help in the dark, which came on apace, made me
accept their offer, but I was so weary and so weak, that without their
assistance it was impossible for me to go. Their little house was not far from
thence, and as soon as we were com thither, I entreated them to put me to
bed, which they did with a great deal of charity; but the labor, heat and
sorrow I had endured, cast me into fever, and I was so ill all night, that
without the help of those good people, I verily believ I should have died. All
the day following, which was yesterday, I continued in the same estate, and
though I remembered you, and would have striven to com, and bring you this
unwelcom news, I found my self not able to leav my bed. The next night my
fever abated, and this morning finding it was almost quite gone, and that my
strength was a little recovered, I arose, and having made the goodwoman
acquainted with my intention to go to Polemon's house, she told me it was not
above twenty or thirty furlongs from hers, and that she and her husband
would guide me thither, as soon as he returned from the Town, whither he was
gone to get some provisions; I staid for his coming back, and presently after his
wife making my desire known to him, he offered himself with her to accompany
me; so by their assistance I came hither, where I presently met Araxes, who
was not a little surprised at that encounter, and from whom I learned your last
combat, and the condition of your health; Behold (continued Cleone) the life
the Queen has led since your separation, and the estate I left her in, I have
made you the true recital of it, upon your complaints against her, and though
indeed by your misfortune and hers, you have not received the recompense which
was due unto your services, yet do I not believ she is so faulty toward you,
as that you should fly to reproaches which have something of cruelty in them;
and I am most assured that you have too much generositie, to refuse her your
assistance, in the distasters she is fallen into, and perchance partly through
her love to you.

THE THIRD PART OF CASSANDRA. The second Book.
CLeone ended her relation on this manner, and the Prince who had hearkened to
her with great attention, finding the conclusion of it less conformable to his
belief then to his desire, could not forbear by shaking his head to show how
little credit he gave to part of her discourse, and having looked awhile upon
her without speaking, Cleone (said he) you do ill to flatter my misfortunes,
or to deceiv me cunningly your self; I believ you have told me the truth in
your Mistresses disasters, but in mine you have totally concealed it from me;
in this Cleone you are to blame, and if you know me as well, as perhaps you
may, you cannot doubt but that I will serve the Queen, as inconstant as she is,
unto the last minute of my life, but O Cleone, you know I am a thousand times
more unfortunate, then you have expressed in your discourse, and if I had no
other causes of complaint, then those you have mentioned, I should have no new
occasion at all. I had already given over murmuring at the advantages
Alexander had above me; but those of a stranger, those of a new commer, are
insupportable; you have not spoken so much as a word of that in your recital,
though you avowed it to me sufficiently in our first conversation, and that is
the thing Cleone wherein I accuse you of little freedom, and of holding a
blamable intelligence with that faithless Princess, which has so unworthily
forsaken me. Cleone was extremely surprised at this discourse, and after she
had continued a while without replying; Sir (said she lifting up her hands to
heaven) if I know any thing more of the Queens fortune, and yours, then what I
have told you, I beseech the gods to add all sorts of miseries to those I
already suffer. Ah! Cleone (replied the Prince with an action wbich testified
his incredulity) it is not possible you should be ignorant of the Queens
loves, and of that new champion who freed her out of Perdiccas his hands, never
seem astonished at this discourse, I was so as much as you feign to be, at that
cruel proof I received of it, and I should have accused my own eyes of
falsehood, which saw her in his arms giving him kisses, and showing him
kindnesses unworthie of her quality, and former virtue, if that truth had not
been confirmed to me by the mouth of Perdiccas. With that he succinctly
related the encounters he had with the Cavalier who carried the Queen behind
him, and with Perdiccas wounded, who with the news of his Princesses being
alive, gave him also the news of her infidelity, and seeing that Cleone
continued silent at the hearing of them, and only called the heavens to
witness her innocence, protesting she was ignorant of all he told her, and
that she had avowed all those things which had confirmed his suspicions, out
of a belief that his complaints were only against Alexander; No, no, Cleone,
(pursued he) it is not possible that so strong an affection, and which by the
proofs I have received of it, goe's far beyond that which she formerly bore to
me, should have escaped your knowledge. The birth and progress of it has not
been so sudden, and but for it, the Queen would not so cruelly have banished
me at Susa, and since the death of her husband, she would not have concealed
her self from me as she did, upon vain weak considerations; you have alleged
nothing that can justify her for it, and if she had not been prepossessed
with that new passion, she would not have avoided my sight in a condition to
which, my love to her had reduced me, and at a time when she stood in need of
the assistance of all her friends. No, no, Cleone, her infidelity is but too
much confirmed, by all manner of circumstances, and unless I would flatter my
self, against all kind of reason, and against common sens, I can no longer
doubt of it. But it is no matter, Cleone, this knowledge shall nos disarm my hand
against the Queens enemies, I for her service will give even the last drop of
this blood, which I never was thriftie of for her, nor hers, and if when it is
no longer necessary to her, there be any yet remaining in my veins, I will
finish the shedding of it with mine own hand before her, and if my rival be
living, I by my death will facilitate his possession of a happiness, whereof
he can be but little assured while I am alive.

The Prince spoke these words with so much vehemence, that Cleone, and Araxes
feared with reason, those impetuous motions would impair his health, and he
was ready to go on, when they came to tell him that Prince Lysimachus with some
others, were newly alighted in the court, and coming up the stairs; this news
caused a joy in the Prince which dissipated part of the boilings of his choler,
and brought back some calmness, and serenitie into his mind, and countenance.
Lysimachus entered into the chamber, and with him Ptolomeus and Eumenes, two
Great men, whom the reputation of Oroondates and made lovers, or rather
Idolaters of his virtue, and who came with Lysimachus to see him, to mingle
their interests with his, and to offer him their new Estates, their friends,
and their very lives; their age was little different from that of Lysimachus,
and for graceful fashion, and greatness of courage, they yielded little to him,
or any other person in the world. Ptolomeus was something brown, but his face
was exceeding well shaped, his eyes sparkling, and his stature marvellously
exact, and in all his actions he showed marks of an extraordinary greatness,
and such as were worthy of that renoun he acquired afterward, by many
gallant victories, of one of the most valiant Princes that ever lived. Eumenes
was of a fairer complexion, and had more sweetness in his eyes, but one might
observe a vivacitie in them, which testified that of his mind, and to say truth
he was esteemed above all Alexanders successors for the prudence wherewith his
valor was accompanied, and 'twas with a great deal of justice, that he had the
reputation amongst them, of one of the best commanders in the world. Oroondates
seeing Lysimachus com in, stretched out his arms to him, and Lysimachus
receiving his welcoms with much affection, and with a respect which he had
never had to any body but Alexander. Sir, (said he) shall I never see you but
full of wounds, and have the gods given me the honor of your acquaintance,
only to overwhelm me with new sorrows for your sake? This goodness of yours
toward me (replied Oroondates holding him still embraced) make's mine more
sensible to me, by your participating in them, but it is with some kind of
justice, since your fortune shall ever make the best part of mine. After these
first endearments, Lysimachus presented his two friends to him, and he had no
sooner named them, but Oroon^dates having those famous names in veneration, and
remembering some good offices he had received from them, would have raised
himself upon his bed to receiv them, but they opposed a formalitie that might
be hurtful to him, and looking upon him with an admiration, accompanied
already with a great deal of love, they in the most obliging terms they could
make use of in such a like encounter, declared the intention which had brought
them thither, and beseeched him to accept the passion they had to serve him, and
to give them some part in his friendship after that of Lysimachus. Oroondates
highly obliged by this civilitie, being one who in that had never yielded to
any body, bowed himself very low, and receiving their offers with great
submission, and acknowledgment, he made his to them so gracefully, that by
that action alone, he perfectly gained them, and confirmed the opinion
Lysimachus had already given them of him. The passion I had for Prince
Lysimachus (said he with an aer full of sweetness and majesty) could not be
augmented but by a favor of the nature of this which I receiv, and I should be
much less obliged to him for the gift of all Asia, then for that of two so
considerable friends. Your virtue (replied Ptolomeus) will gain you through all
the world as many friends, and admirers, as there are virtuous persons, but if
such as we are be for their own persons inconsiderable to the greatest, and
most generous of all men, yet perchance they may not be so, for the zeal full
of respect, and freedom which they will bear eternally to you. I should be
much too blame (answered the Prince) if henceforth I should esteem my self
miserable, since fortune repair's the harms she does me by so great and
important a happiness; but as I have little deserved it, so will I likewise
acknowledge it as a mere favor, which I hold from your goodness, and whereof I
will endeavor to make my self worthy by the desire I have to be inviolably
yours. These complements lasted yet awhile, and those two gallant men beholding
Oroondates with a mavelous heedfulness, remembered the great things they had
seen him do at the battles of Issus, and Arbela, his admirable enterview with
Alexander, and many other passages of his life, which they had heard related as
prodigies, and Oroondates at the same time called to mind the obligations he
had to them, and particularly to Eumenes, who at the last battle had caused him
to be taken from among the dead bodies, to be carried to Arbela with a great
deal of care, and given so good order for his cure, that he owed his safety
only to his assistance. The memory of that good office in a mind like that
of Oroondates, wrought a most powerful effect, and that grateful Prince having
made a reflection upon it, turned toward Eumenes with an humble countenance,
full of that sweetness which was natural to him, and putting forth his hand to
him after he had kissed it, you could do no less (said he) generous Eumenes,
then visit one of your creatures, and take some care of a life which you have
acquired to your self, ever since the time that you preserved it. Eumenes
received this complement exceeding modestly, and taking the hand with much
respect which he presented to him, That small service (replied he) was not
worthy of your remembrance, but such as it was, I am prouder to have don it
you, then if I had conquered the best part of Asia. Oroondates having again
returned Eumenes his civilitie, and given those two new friends new occasions
to admire him, turned toward Lysimachus, and with a look more cheerful then
ordinary. Which way (said he) O my dear companion, shall I be able to acquit
my self of this last obligation? certainly (pursued he a while after) the gods
have taken care of it, and in making me receiv this last favor, they have
furnished me with the means to requite it, with the only recompense whereby
it can be equalized; it is with one word alone I pretend to pay you, and
without taking any thing from the value of the engagement you have laid upon
me, I believ I may give a full satisfaction, by telling you, if you have not
heard it already, that Parisatis is alive. The effect of this news appeared
instantly in Lysimachus his countenance, and he had no sooner heard those
words, but suffering himself to be transported with the first motions of his
joy, he was like to have lost his senses, and his understanding; but within a
while after reflecting upon the impossibility of it, he fell back into his
former condition, and crossing his arms upon his breast, with a sorrowful
gesture, Ah! Sir (said he to the Prince) what contentment can you find, in
abusing my grief on this manner, it is the same with your own, and I do not
think you are so fortunate your self as to make sport with those that are
miserable. I knew (replied Oroondates) that the happiness I bring you was too
great to be believed, but if I am not worthy of faith, learn more certain
news of it from Cleone. These words made Lysimachus, and his friends turn their
eyes upon Cleone, whom they had not yet taken notice of, and Lysimachus no
sooner knew her, but he was half persuaded of his good fortune; he ran to her
with open arms, and conjuring her presently to tell him true if his Princess
was alive, he received a confirmation from her, which was like instantly to
overcom his Spirits, and to say truth, he stood in need of all his Forces to
resist that pleasing surprise, and he remained above half an hour so stupefied,
that he was neither capable of reasoning, nor of harkening to the discourses
of his friends,; when he was a little settled, his joy broke forth in actions,
which nothing but his youth and passion could excuse. Ptolemeus and Eumenes
were so concerned in it, that their expressions came not far short of his, and
running to Cleone, they begged of her all together, to make them the relation of
that admirable adventure, and to let them know by what prodigious assistance of
the Heavens, the Princes who had been seen stabbed, and cast into two Wels could
possibly avoid death, and deceiv the belief of so many persons, who had been
sensibly interessed in their loss. Cleone who was willing oblige them all, and
engage them further in the Party of the Princesses, began the recital again,
which she had made to Oroondates, and while he was at dinnner, she told him
all she had before recounted: it is true that her narration was much shorter
then the former, because she cut off all the discourse of the loves of the Queen
and Oroondates, which made the best part of it, and contented her self with
relating these adventures that were common to both the Princesses, without
particularising their most secret thoughts. Lysimachus his joy was a little
moderated when by the end of that story, he knew his Princess was still in
the power of her enemies, and that she had not absolutely escaped a death,
which they yet might give her, but he drew matter of consolation from that
which would have caused discontent in many others, and he hoped with
probability, that the love of the two brothers would secure the lives of the
two Princesses; that belief made his jealousy supportable, and permitted his
joy to dissipate part of those sorrows which had caused a great alteration in
his face. Brave Prince of Scythia (cried he) let us revive our hopes, since it
so please's the gods; our Princesses are prisoners, but yet at least they are
alive, and we are potent enough to pull them out of the hands of our enemies,
and make them perish in so just a quarrel; those arms we meant to turn against
them for their revenge, shall now be employed for their deliverance, and you
shall see so many gallant men embrace our interests, that you will not disdain
our party. It cannot choos but be most powerful (replied Oroondates) being
composed of such persons as you and your friends, and if you have the goodness
to receiv me into it, I hope I shall become valiant by your examples, and by
the remembrance of the justice of your quarrel. In the care you have taken to
conceal your self from men (added Ptolomeus) your virtue has deceived you, and
if you desired your valor should be unknown to them, you ought to have forborne
those proofs you have given of it, which have acquired such a fame through the
whole earth, that no body can be longer ignorant of it. You must not enter
into a party (pursued Eumenes) whereof you ought to be the head, all our
companions will voluntarily submit themselves to you, both as to him that is
most concerned, and as to him that is most worthy to command them, I know they
will make good what I say, and that they will march under you with the same
confidence as they have heretofore marched under Alexander. Oroondates was
almost confounded at so obliging a discourse, and seeing so many great Princes,
and at that time so many great and potent Kings, yield an honor voluntarily to
him, which without dispute they might have carried from all the other Monarchs
of the earth, he seemed in a manner stricken at so extraordinary a civilitie,
but desiring to show them he was not of an humor to abuse their offers, nor to
be puffed up with them; I know too well (said he) what the whole world ow's to
its conquerors, and to its Masters, not to render them with it, what all men
render them with justice, and the condition of a poor Prince without forces,
without support, and without means to serve in your party otherwise then in his
own person, cannot be more advantageous then to follow the bravest and the
most valiant Princes upon earth. He accompanied these words with many others,
to which the Princes replied with the same humility, and after an
entertainment full of most obliging contestations, Lysimachus desired to hear
the circumstances of Oroondates his last adventures, whereof he had heard
nothing but a little confusedly, and the Prince to satisfy him related his
encounter with Perdiccas, that of the Princess his sister, and his combats
against Arsacomes, and against the stranger who had put him into that
condition. The three Princes having hearkend to that recital with admiration,
Lysimachus told him how he had learned the state of his health, and something
of his combats by one of his servants who came to him to the Camp, and how
Ptolomeus, and Eumenes, seeing him ready to go to visit him, would needs bear
him company, to offer him their services, and to satisfy the desire they had
to know a man of so infinite merit. After this conversation they fell upon the
discourse of their affairs, and Lysimachus giving Oroondates an account of what
he had don since his departure from him, made him acquainted that Ptolomeus,
Eumenes, and he had sent to make levies in the territories that were fallen to
their shares; that they had advertised all their friends who were gone away to
retire to theirs; that at the first sending they all had voluntarily joined
themselves with them in a league offensive, and defensive, and that within a
fortnight all their forces were to meet at a little Town but half a days
journie from Babylon; that Perdiccas and Roxana made no less preparations on
their side; that all their allies met daily at Babylon; and that the body of
their army was formed on the other side of the Euphrates, whereof they had the
passage free, by a great many bridges there were within the city. Oroondates
trembled with a generous impatiencie at this discourse, and expressed to
Lysimachus his fear of being kept by his wounds from making one in the first
occasions, to which he wished for some delay, lest there should be any thing
don without him. But Lysimachus satisfied him with an assurance, that before
his recoverie all the forces could not be com up, and in a condition to
attempt any thing, and that on the other side Perdiccas his wounds were a great
obstacle to their enemies designs, and that if they did not ruin their
affairs, they would at least retard them, and give a great deal of facility,
and furtherance to theirs. They would have conversed longer if Amyntas had not
put his Master in mind, that Oroondates had disordered himself very much that
day for a man so wounded as he was, and that so long talking was very
prejudicial to his health, Lysimachus being in fear for a friend of that
importance, carried the rest out of his chamber, though Oroondates did his
endevors to retain them, and going down into the garden, they began to walk
there with an intention not to see Oroondates again till the next day.

In the mean time the impatient Thalestris, who guided by Hippolita was gone in
quest of Berenice, had vainly employed part of the day in seeking her, she
overran all the plain near to Babylon, and there was not a place either upon
the bank of the river, or in the neighboring woods, whither her affection had
not made her direct her steps; she met no body of whom she did not inform
her self, and she had been at the very gates of Babylon to enquire for her,
but seeing her search was unprofitable on that side, she had turned back the
same way, toward Polemons house, and leaving it upon the left hand, she kept
still along by the river side. The separation from such a friend was so
sensible to her, that she could find no consolation. O gods (said she) did
you give the acquaintance of so lovely a Princess, to take her from me so
suddenly? and must you needs deprive me of a happiness, which sweetened part of
my sorrows, and which I had hardly begun to taste? were you not satisfied with
the pains I have taken in prosecution of my faithless Orontes, without exposing
my body to new toils, and my mind to new discontents? In uttering these, and
such like words, she came into the walk which beginning at the temple of
Apollo, reached unto the river side, and turning her head upon the left hand,
she saw the gate of the Temple at the end of the alley; She had often heard
speak of those Oracles, and lately of that which Lysimachus had received there;
that remembrance gave her a desire to consult the god, as well concerning the
present design which had brought her abroad, as the success of her own fortune,
and she believed she ought not to neglect that encounter, since it was not
without some care of her interests, that contrary to her intention the gods had
guided her steps unto that place. In this thought she turned her, and went to
alight at the gate of the Temple; being it was not any curiosity that led her
thither, she spent no time in viewing the beauties of it, but making her
prayer unto the god, both for the recoverie of Berenice, and for her own
interests, she expected his answer awhile, which at last was delivered to her
by the mouth of the Priest in these terms.

The Oracle.
Heaven to thy rest no more avers will be,
To it refer the sisters Destiny,
Since thine, back to the brother summon's thee,
Where thou thy heart, and fortune changed shall see.
This answer pleasingly surprised the fair Amazon, and finding in it more cause
of consolation then she had looked for, she humbly returned her thanks unto
the god for the hopes he gave her, and rising from the place where she had
prostrated her self, she went out of the Temple much more satisfied then she
was before. Hippolita observed some alteration in her face, and having asked her
the cause of it, the Queen repeated the words of the Oracle to her, and getting
on hors-back took her way toward Polemon's house. She by the command of the
god saw her search at an end, and since heaven reserved the care of Berenice
expressly to it self, she could not without incensing it, persevere in her
intended prosecution; wherefore in obedience to it, she gave over that
thought, and was confirmed in the design of returning to Oroondates, since that
besides the desire she had to serve him in his affairs, 'twas there she was to
expect the change of her fortune. She made a long reflection upon that promiss
of the gods, and having mused on it a great while; what change (said she) can
I hope for in my condition? Is it the forgetting, the repentance, or the death
of my faithless Orontes? Ah! for forgetting him, I should look for that but in
vain, and I ought never to think that my soul can lose the remembrance either
of its first passion, or of the offense I have received; both of them are
engraven in everlasting characters, and except I ceas to live, I can neither
ceas to hate, nor to remember Orontes. Shall it be from the repentance of that
disloial man, that I shall draw my satisfaction? Ah! I ought much less to hope
for that, and the offenses I have received from him are not of a nature to be
repaired; Though he should begin again to love me with as much violence, as
he expressed in his first passion, I should lose nothing of that hatred I bear
him, and my soul is so hardened against that ungrateful man, that it could
never be touched by all the marks he could show of his repentance. It Is then
in his death alone that I ought to ground my hopes, and it is that infallibly
which the gods do promiss me; it is the greatest of all the favors I can
receiv from them, and when I am once revenged of that perfidious man, I will
return into my territories, where I will pass the rest of my days in
tranquillity; he shall die (continued she) he shall die, the traitor, who
has used me so ungratefully, and so unworthily; if my injuries are deadly,
the reparation of them shall be deadly also, and it is in blood I will drown my
shame, and the remembrance of my faults. The Queen at first found some
sweetness in this cruel thought, but within awhile after she began to tremble,
and some remainder of affection having softened her for a few moments, her heart
seemed to incline to some compassion, but she quickly opposed that criminal
pity, and struggling against those tender motions; what, (said she again)
do thou waver still, O weak Thalestris, and does the image of the false
Orithia return into thy mind, only to banish thence so lawful resentments?
Art thou then still capable of those base suggestions which have made the
greatest part of thy misfortunes, and do thou become pitiful to that cruel
Orontes, who without any pity abandoned thee to thy despair? Ah! mean spirited
woman, stifle those unworthie thoughts, and recall the remembrance of thy
wrongs, to banish that of thy weaknesses. He must die, that monster of
perfidiousness, and thou must pierce his dis^oial heart with this same hand he
has so often kissed; and with this same mouth which has so often protested
that thou lovedst him, must thou pour forth the last reproaches against his
infidelity. In these violent thoughts, the fair Amazone went on her way, till
she came near a little valley within a few furlongs of Polemon's house; from
that place she heard certain cries, which caused her first to stop her horse,
and then hearing them continue with a very pitiful sound, her generositie
obliged her presently to succor those miserable wretches, who seemed to stand
in need of her assistance; and for that purpose marking carefully from whence
the nois came, she gallopt thither as fast as she could, followed by
Hippolita, and had not gone far in the Vallie before she met with a very
doleful spectacle. She saw five or six horsemen completely armed standing about
two miserable creatures, who were tied fast to two Trees, and whom two or three
men on foot tortured in many several fashions; they squeezed their fingers
between cleft sticks, wrung their foreheads with twisted cords, and made them
suffer all the torments, which are commonly used to force confession from the
mouths of guilty persons. Thalestris could not well discern all their actions,
but when she was near enough she heard him that command the rest, who
drawing near those unfortunate wretches: Since you are so obstinate (said he)
and so resolved to die, you shall die; hang them therefore (continued he) let
them remain upon those branches to feed the crows; The ministers of that rigid
Offices, were already beginning to put ropes about the necks of those unhappie
creatures, when the Queen abhorring that cruelty, took a dart out of
Hippolita's hand, and rushing in amongst them, presented the point of it to
their faces, threatening them with death if they effected that cruel commission.
Fear made them hold their hands, but the horsemen incensed by that boldness
clapped theirs upon their swords, and he who appeared to be the chief of them
addressing himself to Thalestris: Whosoever thou art (said he) unless thou
bring'st an express order from the Queen, thou art very insolent to oppose her
pleasure. If it be a Queen (replied the Amazone) who has commanded this
execution, she has the ways of justice open to punish malefactors, and this
extraordinary manner of proceeding against these poor wretches is an
infallible mark of their innocence, and shall be the cause of their safety.
The horsman exasperated by that answer, and by the hinderance Thalestris
brought to his intentions, looking upon her with eyes sparkling with anger, If
thou persistest longer (said he) to retard our design, thou thy self shall
keep company with them whom thou would save. As he ended these words, he
drew his sword, but the Amazone whose patience was at the utmost, staid not
till he began, but falling suddenly upon him, she struck the point of her
javeline in at his throat, and it came forth instantly behind him, so that he
tumbled dead among his horses feet; she lost not time in pulling out her
javeline, but drawing her sword flew among the companions of him she had
killed, and seeing the nearest of them had his arm up to strike at her, she
prevented him with a back blow which cut it off above the elbow, and made it
fall with his sword upon the ground. Hippolita seconded her Mistress
vigorously, and of three enemies which yet remained on hors-back, she charged
one with a great deal of courage, the other two made furiously at the Queen, but
her choler being stirred up to the extremity, she quickly showed them proofs
of her admirable valor, and having received some blows upon her arms, she aimed
her sword at the more eager of them so unfortunately for him, that having light
upon the space between his headpiece and his Cuirass, it took his head from
his shoulders, and made it roll upon the grass; the last dismayed with that
strange blow, turned about his horse to save himself by flight, and the Queen
who thought she had shed blood enough, troubled not her self to follow him,
but turning toward Hippolita, she saw her victorious over her man, who wounded
in many places, lay biting the earth with his companions. After this execution
the valiant Queen having no more enemies to fight withal, commanded Hippolita
to untie the two men and set them at liberty. Hippolita alighted to obey her,
and she had no sooner cut the bonds wherewith they were fastened to the Trees,
but they fell upon their knees before their valiant deliverer, and embraced her
legs with actions full of respect, and acknowledgment. Whosoever you are (cried
they) whose valor so well represent's the image of our Master to us, hope that
heaven will recompense you for so good a deed, and believ that your arms were
never employed for more innocent persons. The Queen finding something that
pleased her in the behavior of those two men, had a mind to know their names,
and the cause of the persecutions they had undergon, and she no sooner had
expressed that desire, after she had bidden them rise, but they readily obeyed
her, and one of them speaking for both, Sir, (said he) we are of a Country
far remote from this, and we have nothing more considerable in us, then the
honor of having passed the best part of our lives in the service of the
bravest, and most generous Prince in the world. Scythia is our Country, our
names are Toxaris and Loncates, and since so high an obligation forbid's us to
conceal any thing from our valiant Defender; we will confess that the Prince
whom we have served is the great Oroondates Prince of Scythia. The man would
have gone on, but Thalestris remembering she had heard the Prince and Araxes
speak of those two faithful servants, cast her eyes upon Hippolita, and
praising her destiny, which in the persons of men had made her do service to a
Prince for whom she had a very great esteem, she appeared extremely satisfied
with this encounter, and stretching out her hands to them, you are not unknown
to me, (said she) but now I have don you this good office, I will also restore
you to your Master, who affords me a place in the number of his friends, and
in whom your fidelity has caused an exceeding trouble for your loss. Toxaris
and Loncates, who had not hoped in so short a time for their lives, their
liberties, and their Master, who was dearer to them then both, were transported
with joy at this promise, and having cast themselves once again at Thalestris's
seet, testified by their actions of what nature the affection was which they
bore unto their Master. The Queen having confirmed her promise, commanded them
to follow her, and the two Sythian's being mounted upon two of their slain
enemies horses, took her way again to Polemon's house where she arrived within
a little after.

Lysimachus, Ptolomeus, Eumenes and Araxes, were in the Court when she came
in, and as soon as Lysimachus saw her appear he ran to meet her, and helping
her from her horse, kissed her hand with much humility, and received her
affable salutation with great respect. After the first words of civilitie,
Lysimachus presented his companions to her, of whom he had spoken to them in
terms which had stricken them into an admiration of her valor, and the names of
those great personages were already so well known through the whole world,
that the Queen by hearing Lysimachus pronounce them, presently knew what she
ought to pay them. Araxes no sooner saw Loncates and Toxaris appear, but he
ran to them full of joy for their return, and embraced them with an extreme
affection. The fair Amazone having staid awhile with the Princes in a
respectful and obliging conversation, was desirous to see Oroondates; both to
give him an account of her little voyage, and to present him his two servants,
but Lysimachus by the counsel of Amyntas prayed her to deferr her visit till
the next morning, because the Prince had that day committed such excesses as
were able to impair the health of one less weakened then he was. The Queen had
much ado to consent to that delay, but in the end did it as well by reason of
their entreatie, as in consideration of the Prince, who was infinitely dear to
her; and to pass the rest of the day less tediously, Lysimachus desired
Hippolita to favor both his friends and himself with the recital of her
Mistresses adventures, and the Queen having given her leav, she recounted them
almost in the same manner as they had been told to Oroondates; but as that
discourse wrought great admiration in the Princes, so did it waken sad
remembrances in Thalestris, and put her some time into a melancholy, which made
them almost repent their curiosity.

In the interim Oroondates joining his sisters departure to his other
afflictions, and seeing the day pass without hearing any news of her, fell into
very sensible disquiets; he often enquired after her of Araxes who alone came
into his Chamber, and seeing he could learn nothing when night came on, he
was excessively afflicted at that accident. The next day as soon as the
Physician gave way he should be seen, Thalestris went into his Chamber,
followed by the Princes, and by the faithful servants which she brought back
unto their Master. Oroondates no sooner saw her enter, but he raised himself
upon his pillow as much as he was able, and welcomed her with great respect
and submission, he received the Princes with the same civilitie, but when
after them he saw the two servants he had lost, upon their knees by his
bedside, he was surprised with astonishment, and seized at the sight of them
with much joy and tenderness. He cast his arm which lay out of bed about their
necks, and asking the Queen who presented them to him, which way she had
happened to find them, she told him the truth of it in a few words. At the
knowledge of that obligation the Prince broke forth into the most acknowledging
expressions he could invent to give her thanks for so great a favor, and she
received them so modestly that she engaged him almost as much by the civilitie
of her discourse, as she had don by the effects of her valor. He afterward
would have enquired concerning Berenice, but she prevented him, by relating
the success of her short journie, and repeating the words of the Oracle that
had been given her, Oroondates thereby received a double consolation, one by
the promise the gods made him to take care of his sister, which ought to put an
end to all the trouble he was in for her; the other by the hopes they gave
Thalestris whose interests were extremely dear to him; When he had talked with
her awhile about the words of the Oracle, and had endeavored to find the
gentlest sens of them, and a less cruel exposition then that she made, he
entreated the company to pardon the desire he had, to learn in their
presence, the cause that had so long retarded the return of his servants, which
was like to have some important reason; and asking Toxaris what it was, he
stepped back in the presence of so many persons whom he knew not, and made some
difficulty of speaking in so much company touching his Masters secret
affairs, but he knowing the cause of his silence, and being willing to take
away his jealousy, speak (said he) Toxaris, and disguise nothing before these
illustrous friends, who are not at all suspected to me, and from whom I never
will conceal any thing. Toxaris having received this command came forward
again, and thus began his Narration.

The History of Roxana.
We were within a days journie of this place, when your Highness after having
heard of Alexander's death, commanded me to go to Babylon to enquire news of
Queen Statira, and of other persons in whom you had an interest. I rode thither
with speed enough, and arrived at the City when it began to grow dark, I found
all full of mourning, disorder, and confusion, and in that general hurliburly I
had much ado to get a lodging I will not detain you with the condition in which
the King's death had put all things at Babylon, you are better informed of that
then I, and these great Princes whom I see with you, whose interests were the
most considerable, and whose sidings made part of those disorders, may have
acquainted you with the circumstances of them. I will only tell you, that at
the first news I asked concerning the Queen, I heard she was at the Castle of
Calcis, whither by reason of some indisposition, she had retired with the
Princess her sister a little before her husbands death. Not being able to
learn any thing more particularly, I went out of my lodging, and in the
darkness, and general trouble I resolved to make use of all my industry, to
instruct my self in all those things which you desired to know, and which might
be advantageous to your intentions. By the abode of four or five months you
had formerly made at Babylon with King Darius I was perfect in all the streets
of the City, and knew particularly all the lodgings of the Palace beyond the
Lake, where Darius commonly kept his Court, where King Alexander died, and
where Queen Roxana lay at that time. I walked a great while up and down the
streets where I saw a thousand images of desolation, sorrow, and universal
affrightment; the windows of all the inhabitants were full of lighted Torches,
which burned in a mournful fashion; there were heard in many houses as loud
cries as if in his death they had found their general loss; all the passages
were chained, and there were fires, and Corpse de guard in every Market place,
and all the cross streets were full of armed men, who ranked themselves
according to the different parties, and whereof the greatest number desired
nothing but sedition and disorder. One might see the Princes who stood for
great Offices, and for the Sovereign Authority pass up and down, severally
guarded, either according to their credit or according to their quality, and
in short, all things represented a new ^ace of affairs. I considered them no
further then I thought they might be useful to your interests, and after
having wandered about a long hour to no purpose, I came to the Palace where
Roxana was lodged, and whereof all the corners are as well known to me as if I
had dwelt there all my life. I found so great a number of Guards about the
Gate, that I presently despaired of getting in, and indeed I was thinking to go
my way, when I saw Perdiccas com followed with so great a train, that the
street was even quite filled with it. As soon as he was named, the Guards made
a lane to give him passage; and though there was order given to suffer but few
to enter with him, the crowd was too strong for the resistance of those that
kept the Gate; and I thrust my self so close among the rest, that I was of the
number of those that got in. Perdiccas having asked where the Queen was, heard
that she expected him in the Garden, whether she was gone down by reason of
the excessive heat which had been that day, and where, upon the Bank of the
River which washes the side of it, she was taking the cool aer with some of her
women. Perdiccas having crossed through two Courts, came to the Garden Gate,
where we likewise found a very strong Guard, and where, with as much ado as
before, I at last got in with him. The Torches were all left without in the
Court, and the Moon which gave light enough for the Queen to walk by, served
also for the discourse between her and Perdiccas. I will not describe the
fashion of her habit, it was so dark I could not well discern it, all that I
was able to observe was that she had already put on her night dressing, and
that the rest of her apparel was black, suitable to the condition she then was
in. Perdiccas went up to her alone, and all those that came in with him staying
at the end of an Allie, Roxana's women did the same, and left her at liberty
to talk with him. We could not hear any thing they said, but within awhile
after seeing them take their walk in an Allie, upon the edg of the stream,
close by which I knew there was another that was covered, wherein I might
follow them step by step, and hear all their conversation, I resolved to
hazard something, that I might find an occasion to do you some service. That
which made me have such a desire to hearken to them, that to satisfy it I put
my self in danger, was the knowledge I had of the mortal hatred Roxana bore to
Queen Statira; and my belief that in that revolution of affairs, and in those
enterviews with Perdiccas by night, she might perchance contrive something
against her. That suspicion, which within awhile after I should have thought
had been inspired into me by the gods, if they had suffered me to make use of
it to prevent those mischiefs, incited me to play the spy, and for that
purpose slipping along a pail without being taken notice of, or having my
intention so much as dreamt of, I stole into that covered Allie, on the outside
whereof Roxana and Perdiccas were walking. My design succeeded as I could have
wished, and thinking no body overheard them, they spoke not so low, but that
having nothing between them and me except a few boughs, I could easily
understand all they said, I walked just as they walked, and turned at the end
of the Allie as they did, but with as little nois and as much circumspection as
was possible. I knew by the first words I heard that my suspicion was not
causless, for after a little silence Perdiccas spoke on this manner. How great
a design soever I have to pleas and serve you, Madam, I cannot but feel a
repugnancie against the proposition you make to me, and I cannot without
horror remember that to obey you I must imbrue my hands in the blood of two
women, of two great and virtuous Princesses, whereof one was the wife of my
King, and the other is the widow of my friend; their sex, their quality, and
the memory of their brave illustrious husbands, divert both my arm and heart
from that atempt, and I could willingly wish some other more gentle and more
fitting expedient might be found to satisfy you, and to establish that
security you demand. It is not (and I call the gods to witness) that I would
refuse the most dangerous occasions to obey you; nor, but that the honor your
Majesty does me to link my interest with yours, is more considerable to me
then all the fortune I can pretend to by other means; but yet I cannot overcom
those difficulties in my soul, which some remainders of virtue produce there
against this enterprise, and in this execution even my hand it self refuses to
serve in the design I have to obey you. Perdiccas without doubt would have said
more, if the Queen had not interrupted him thus. One may be scrupulous as you
are Perdiccas, when the question is concerning less then the Empire of the
World; and I protest to you, I feel little less repugnance then you do against
this cruelty to which we are compelled by the necessity of our affairs; but
do you think there can be any security for the son and for the widow of
Alexander, or for the Macedonian Princes, so long as Darius his daughters are
alive? do you believ that this calm which Alexander settled with so much blood,
and with so much difficulty can last after his death, and that the Persians
who submitted but by force to the Macedonian yoke, will not take arms now for
their lawful Princes, and use their endevors to restore the blood of their
first Masters to the Throne? If the cruelty of this enterprise strike horror
in you, remember Perdiccas, that it is not without example in all Monarchies,
and that both amongst us, and amongst our Neighbors, we have no Age that
cannot furnish us with a good number of presidents. Did not Artaxerxes whom the
whole world held for a very good Prince, and his Successor Occhus, both
Predecessors to Darius, secure their Estates by the blood of their children,
and of their brothers? and if you would have fresher ones even in your own
Country, did not Queen Olimpias who is yet alive, the Mother of our deceased
King, after King Philip was dead, cause her rival Cleopatra to be put to death,
having first made a daughter she had by him, to be killed in her presence,
because she might possibly have one day raised some trouble in her dominions?
And did not Alexander himself our dear husband, and most honored King, whose
memory is most sacred to us, and all whose actions ought to be the rules of
our life, begin his so glorious Reign by the death of those that were nearest
to him? and when he came out of Macedonia, did he leav one of them alive who
could disturb the calm he left there? Consider now Perdiccas whether these
persons whom I have alleged had so important reasons as ours are, and whether
they upon light surmises and occasions of small weight, did not execute that,
which we do out of pure necessity, and for the conservation of our lives, and
of the Empire of the world. Those persons (replied Perdiccas) have by those
actions left blemishes upon their lives, which all the most gallant ones they
ever performed, will never be able to wipe out, and all the blackest deeds
they ever did, can no way parallel the infidelity you enjoin me to, me I
say, who am not only a kinsman, and a subject of Alexander's, but who amongst
all about him, received the last glorious marks of his affection, and of being
preferred before so many other Princes worthy of the kingdoms he has left. In
this action (added Roxana) you will be so far from offending Alexander's
memory, that you will give him proofs of your fidelity, since it is only to
secure the Empire to his son, that you take them out of the world who might
dispute it with him; And if to this consideration, it be permitted to add that
of your own interests Perdiccas, remember what you do for your self, since the
least recompense proposed to you, is the sovereign authority, which you will
have over this son whose Guardian you shall be, and which you shall share with
his Mother whom you will have established in it. Perdiccas demurred awhile
before he answered to this last discourse of Roxana's, and they walked almost a
whole turn in the Allie without speaking, but in the end Perdiccas breaking
silence, I wish to the gods, Madam, (said he) that you could content, and
secure your self by milder ways; these methinks are such strange ones, that I
cannot dispose my self to follow them, but I desire this nights respite to
finish the overcoming of those difficulties, I find in my self; to morrow as
soon as you are stirring, I will let your Majesty know my last resolution, and
I will rather die then give you occasion to repent the trust you repose in me,
and the favors you do me. Well, Perdiccas (replied Roxana) I grant you the
time you demand, and I hope that by your last resolution, we shall both have
cause to be satisfied. After these words, Perdiccas bade the Queen goodnight,
and retiring to his followers went out of the Garden. I might have gone away
with him, but I was so surprised, and astonished at the things I had heard,
that I thought not of my departure, and seeing that the Queen without stirring
out of that Allie, called Hesione whom she loved best of all her women, and
commanded the rest to stay where they were, I had a mind to hear that second
conversation, whereby I believed I might fully instruct my self touching that
detestable design which was in agitation against those poor Princesses. Roxana
sat down upon a green sodded bank, and as soon as Hesione came near her; I
have much ado (said she) to persuade Perdiccas to what I desire for our common
security, and he sticks at considerations, which the ambition of reigning
ought to have extinguished in his mind. I do not think it strange, (replied
Hesione) and that which your Majesty requires, has something so cruel in it,
that I cannot remember it without horror, nor without wondering, as at a
prodigy, how the thirst of reigning, can have choked in you that pity which
is natural to women, and have carried you to such bloody resolutions against
Princesses who have a near relation to you, whom heretofore you accounted dear,
and who have no way offended you; Pardon me, Madam, if I speak with too much
liberty, I am so affrighted at this horrible change of your humor, that I have
not understanding enough left to approve these inhumane reasons of state, which
demand such violent executions. Roxana hearkened to these words of Hesione,
without interrupting her, and having remained awhile without answering
otherwise then by two or three sighs, Ah! Hesione (said she at last) how just
would thy wonder be, if thou were not well instructed in my most secret
thoughts, and with how much reason might thou appear affrighted at this
change of my humor, if I had not trusted thee with the cause of it a thousand
times; thou know O dissembling Hesione, that my inclinations to cruelty are
not strong enough to move me to such bloody tragedies, merely out of maxim
of state, and out of a desire to reign; that only servs for a pretext to more
powerful incitements, and to cover a passion more violent then ambition; nor do
I love the crown enough to violate both divine and humane Laws for it alone.
Alas! Hesione, thou art not ignorant of this truth, thou know that love has
blotted out of my soul, all that was good and reasonable in it heretofore, and
that my jealousy arms my hand more potently against my rival, then ambition
does against my competitor for the Empire; the remembrance of ungrateful
Oroondates kindles my indignation against her that took him from me, and his
image never com's into my memory without enflaming my anger against that proud
beauty which triumphed over me in the soul of that inhumane Prince; While the
hope of her lawful possessing him was forbidden her by the life of the King her
husband, I bore my misfortune patiently; but now that by the death of Alexander
the way to it lies open for her, and that I see them upon the very brink of
that felicity, which I have vainly opposed, I had rather she should perish,
and that the whole world should perish with her, then that I should become
subject to those sensible afflictions; I know by the report of Arbates, who is
returned out of Scythia whither I had sent him, that Oroondates is still alive,
and he has quitted his own Country to return again into ours; he sees her
perchance every day, that victorious enemy of Roxana's, and contrives with
her the last effects of that ingratitude which he always was guilty of to
me; Here it is O Hesione! that I confess my weakness, and that I am
constrained to avow, that neither time, resentment, nor duty, have been able
to prevail against my former passion, and that notwithstanding I am Alexander's
widow, notwithstanding that Oroondates is ungrateful, I love him still more
then my self, and that sleeping or waking that insensible man, too lovely, and
too much beloved, come's incessantly before me, and that inveterate passion,
has taken too deep a root in my soul, to be ever pulled up but by the end of
my life. After this confession, Hesione, do thou think I will suffer my
everlasting rival, to enjoy a happiness, which she cannot build but upon the
ruins of my repose, and that I will permit that insolent woman, who during the
life of my husband, deprived me with tyranny of the better part of his
affections, should make her self sport with my miserable destiny? Ah! no
Hesione, hope not for such mean spirited effects of my patience, and believ
that to free my self of that bitter enemy of my life, I will trample underfoot
all the considerations of blood, of duty, and even of the fear we have of the
gods: After her destruction, let the ungrateful man persevere in his
hard-heartedness toward me* and let him be unsensible both of the proofs of
my love, and of the advantages I can offer him in the condition of my fortune;
I shall however have this satisfaction, that if I can not make his disdains to
ceas, I shall at least have taken away the cause of them, and that Statira shall
not brag, she triumphed over Roxana unpunished. Roxana brought forth these
words with a vehemence, which sufficiently showed the violence of that passion
that animated her, and Hesione who had given ear to her without interruption,
said thus at the end of her discourse; But Madam, what is your last intention?
and if you will permit my zeal to beg of you the continuation of that trust
wherewith your Majesty has ever honored me, what do you pretend to by the
death of those Princesses? I thought (replied Roxana) that I had explained my
self enough, and that I had left thee no occasion to be ignorant of my
intentions, but since thou demandest a more ample declaration, know, that I
will first dispatch that rival out of the world, which has gotten those
advantages over me both in the heart of Oroondates, and in that of Alexander,
whereby I have been dishonored; and when Oroondates with her, has lost his
utmost hopes, I do not think he will be so blind as not to know his fortune,
nor so disdainful as to contemn those greatnesses to which I can raise him; In
the condition I now am, I am not so ill savored, but that with a good part of
the world whereof I can offer him the disposing, I may pretend to some part in
his affection, and perhaps there is not a Prince in all world, that would not
buy his condition even with the hazard of his life; to this consideration, I
by the by, join those of the state, and in contenting my passion I secure my
own authority, and that of the son which may be born of me; that reason was
not strong enough alone to persuade me to an action against which
conscientious people would have some repugnance, but if I be so unfortunate as
to see my self deceived in my first hopes, and to strive in vain to change
Oroondates his inclinations, I shall at least have this pleasure to have
wreaked my hatred, and satisfied my jealousy, in destroying her, who has
destroyed my repose, and in depriving that ungrateful man of the object of his
hopes, and of the occasion of his scorn; and since there is a necessity of
shedding blood to secure the Throne to my son, and to my self, I shall have
this consolation, to have sacrificed no body to those maxims but those
persons whom by more powerful reasons I was compelled to hate.

I believ Roxana would have said more; and I had continued to hearken to her
with the same attention, if I had not been unfortunately surprised in that
imploiment, I had thrust my head almost quite among the boughs which grew
along the side of the Allie, and was so attentive to her discourse, (though
there was great occasion to fear, and to mistrust in an enemies place as that
where I then was) that some of Roxana's maids were com into the same Allie, and
were gotten close to me before I perceived them; As soon as I turned my head,
I saw my self encompassed with them, and the more fearful of them crying out of
a sudden, the Guard that were in the Garden, and who by Roxana's express
command stood but at a little distance from her, came running presently, and
entering at both ends of the walk, deprived me of all possibility of escaping;
I would have attempted it, which made me the more suspected, and the more
guilty, but I was instantly laid hold on, searched and examined; they found no
other arms about me but my sword, and to their examination, I answered that I
was a voluntier in Perdiccas his Troops, that I came into the Garden with him,
and that having wandered through curiosity into that Allie, I had not seen when
he went away. They to whom I gave this account not being satisfied with my
answers, and suspecting me of some wicked design began to threaten me with
death if I told not the truth, and presenting the points of their javelin^s at
me, they indeed struck me with some apprehension. I was in fear of my safety
among those men to whom I was unknown, and who with probability might accuse
me of some evil intention, and 'twas easily to be observed in my face, and in
my words; when Roxana who had heard the nois, and who began to learn the cause
of it, commanded me to be brought before her. They quickly fetched in a great
many Torches out of the next Court, and they that held them putting them near
unto my face, gave the Queen and those that were with her, means to consider
me intentively. She asked me the same questions, and I answered in the same
manner as I had done the rest, but the estate of her affairs, and that of her
conscience making her fear all things, she sent to Perdiccas to see if he
would own me, and seeing me faulter in my answers, she began to have a
very ill opinion of me, and was ready to give some fatal order against me,
when one of those who stood near her, having known me by the light of the
Torches, made himself way, and coming to me, O Toxaris (said he) is it you? I
instantly lift up my head, overjoied to meet one of my acquaintance in that
necessity, and fixing my eyes upon his face, I knew the man who had spoken to
me, to be Arbates, that faithless servant of yours (that had been) who
corrupted by Roxana's presents, stole the Bracelet from you at Damascus, which
you had received from Statira; who a great while after carried it to her with
the Letter you write unto Roxana; and who in short, had managed all that
treachery, which caused such bloody effects, and from which almost all your
losses have proceeded. Although his infidelity made me to abhor him, I
confess I was glad to see him at that time, hoping that by reason of our old
acquaintance, he would be a means to procure my safety and my liberty, as
soon as I had perfectly called him to mind, and gotten a little confidence by
that encounter; Yes, Arbates (said I) I am Toxaris. Then I presently saw that
falls man draw near unto Roxana, and having desired audience for two or three
words, he spoke to her awhile so softly that no body could over-hear him, and
when they had don talking, Roxana turning toward one of the Captains of her
Guard, Carry this fellow (said she) to a place of security, and use him
according to the directions of Arbates who shall let you know my pleasure. At
that command they took me from before her, who went out of the Garden at the
same time, and Arbates guiding him that led me out of the Palace, I was
brought to a house which was appointed for my prison, where they set guards upon
me, whose lives were to answer it, if I escape.

I continued that night, and the next day in great apprehensions and disquiets,
among which the fear of death was not my chiefest trouble; Not but that in
effect I was afraid of it, and had a sens of the punishment which uses to be
inflicted upon Spies, especially those who hearken after the secrets of
Sovereigns, and principally of such as are in the condition Roxana was, since I
might have been suspected to have had some design against her person, and to
have been dealt withal by some of the contrary party, and by those who had an
interest in her death; but to that apprehension, I joined my sorrow what I
could not make use of the mercy the gods had showed me, and that I could not
prevent the murder of those great Princesses, by the notice I should have
given them of that conspiracy if I had been at liberty; I was also very much
afflicted that I could not return to your Highness to give you an account of
the Commission you had employed me in, not doubting but you were impatient of
my delay. That day I was visited by Arbates, who highly endeared the good
office he had don me, and protested to me with oaths, that, but for his
intercession with the Queen, my ruin had been inevitable; he afterward
promised me the continuation of his endeavors on my behalf, and made me hope
for all manner of good usage. To say truth that I received was not ill for a
prisoner, and the next day I saw a companion brought into me when I least
expected him; It was Loncates whom your Highness had sent after me to Babylon
by reason of my stay, and who having unluckily met Arbates, was known by him,
and by his direction seized upon by Roxana's guard who brought him presently to
the same place where I was. In that Arbates was imprudent, for if he had kept
us in several prisons, he might much more easily, have drawn from us what
Roxana had a mind to know, then by putting us both into the same chamber,
where we had leisure enough to instruct one another, and to conform our
answers, that we might not be intrapt if they examined us apart. When I had
given Loncates an account of the cause of my imprisonment, and of the words I
had heard from Roxana and Perdiccas touching the design they had against the
Queen Statira, and the Princess her sister; Loncates with a sorrowful look told
me he began to hear a whispering in the Town, that those poor Princesses were
dead already, and that he having been at the Palace of Queen Sysigambis had
heard cries, and seen faces that had confirmed him in that opinion. That news
surprised me with a mortal affliction, and considering how it suited with the
words I had overheard, I no longer doubted of the lamentable destiny of those
poor Ladies. We spent all the rest of the day and the next in bewailing a
loss, wherein we knew you would have the greatest share, and we had not yet
dried up our tears, when Arbates followed with a Guard came into our Chamber,
and told us he had order to bring us before the Queen, and that we ought to
hope for a good success from the sight of her. We were so dejected with grief,
that we received that message with an indifferent countenance, and without
informing our selves of Roxana's intentions we followed Arbates to the Palace.
It was already a good while within night, and Roxana was in her bed, the Guard
brought us to the Chamber door, but only Arbates, and some of her women went in
with us, and bringing us on the far side of the bed, showed us Roxana in a
condition able to have caused love in persons that had not been prepossessed
with powerful reasons to hate her; the season being very hot, she was almost
half naked in her bed, and her arms and neck quite uncovered set forth such
beauties as in the opinion of other Judges would have found few equals in the
world; her head dressing though negligent was not unbecoming, and her whiteness
in a place where all things were black, had a very extraordinary luster; Only
Hesione stayed at her beds feet, and her other maids being retired into the
next room with Arbates, Roxana after having looked awhile upon us spoke on this
manner. If I d^d not believ you to be civil men, and that you have gained
virtue and discretion by being near the Prince whom you have the honor to
serve, I should not use you in a fashion quite extraordinary for persons of my
quality, since however you cannot disavow but that you are faulty, and that
one of you has been taken in an action, which in all customs, and all Nations
make's him worthy of death; but the breeding you have had with a Prince who is
an Enemy to all evil thoughts does partly justify your intentions, and
although they should be criminal, his consideration is sufficient to make me
forgive the most unpardonable offenses, and to move me to forget all the
designs you could have had even against my life it self; I will therefore
pardon you, whatsoever you can have attempted against me, but I will have your
Master thank me for it, and after this small proof of the continuation of my
good will to him, he shall receiv others that are greater, and of more
importance; I see my self now in a condition, wherein I can make the greatness
of my fortune, supply the defect of those qualities of my person which he has
disdained, and wherein nevertheless after his disdains Alexander found something
he thought considerable. I am ashamed to make you this confession, but my
weakness has showed it self but too much already, and my opinion of you is
good enough to believ, that you will not abuse the confidence I have in you;
it is by it, and by advantages which are not despicable that I would oblige you
to tell me news of your Master, and to let me know the place of his abode;
desiring no other requital of you, but that alone, both for the pardon I grant
you, and for the presents I intend you. The subtle Queen spoke to us in words
to this effect; but we heard nothing from her, which we had not expected, and
being we had prepared our selves for the answer we should make, I found no
great difficulty to reply. Madam, although the fault I have committed be full
of innocence and stupiditie, my Companion and I receiv the pardon your Majesty
grants us as a mere mercy, and as an effect only of your goodness, and I
would it pleased the gods, that in acknowledgment, you required such proofs of
our obedience as were in our power, and that we could tell where to give our
Prince an account of the honor you do him to keep him still in your
remembrance; but the place of his abode is unknown to us; since the time he
left Scythia, after the defeat of Zopirio, we have wandered in vain from
Province to Province to enquire for him; 'twas only that design which brought
us into this Country, where he has formerly had occasions of stay, and will
make us prosecute our search unto the worlds end. Roxana was not satisfied with
this answer, and having expressed as much by shaking her head; If I did not
know (said she) that you are not ignorant of the affection I have born to
Oroondates, I should believ you apprehended some danger to him in this
encounter, but since (by my misfortune) it is but too well known, you cannot
fear that the sight I desire of your Master can be disadvantageous to him. You
know already that I have loved him but too much for my quiet, and you must
still know whether I will or no, that I love him yet more then my self; you
constrain me to a confession that make's me blush, but it also secures you
from all the mistrusts you might have for your Master, and you are but two well
assured, that it is only to share my fortune with him, that I so much desire to
see him again; do not therefore any longer conceal what I so fain would know of
you, since I am better instructed in your affairs then you imagine. It is true,
Oroondates went out of Scythia after the defeat of Zopirio, but I know whom he
took along with him, and that only Araxes, and you two attended him in that
journie. We were a little surprised to hear that the Queen was so well
informed, but we lost not our confidences and persisted so firmly in our
resolution, that she could draw nothing else from us though she joined threats
to the promises she had made us; when she saw we could be shaken by
neither, she commanded us to be carried back again, and only said to us
before Arbates, you are unworthie of the usage you receiv from me, and by your
indiscreet obstinacy, you do your Master a very ill office. But know you
ought not longer to abuse my goodness, nor the consideration I have of you for
his sake; I give you yet a few days to bethink your selves, go, and remember
that you are criminals, and prisoners to them that have you wholly in their
power. With these words she commanded us to be carried away, and Arbates
guarded as before, conveied us back unto our prison; when we were there he
reproved us very sharply, and told us that our death was unavoidable if we
persevered in our stubborness; promising us on the other side, mountains of
gold if we would obey the Queen, and alleging what she had don for him, in
reward of his infidelity, but that example caused a horror in us, in stead of
an encouragement to what he desired, and our aversion to that Traitor was too
great to hearken to his counsels, or to imitate his actions.

The multiplicitie of Roxana's affairs forced her to allow us a few days
respite, during which we were reasonably well used, and received no other
persecutions save those of Arbates, who setting himself continually to torment
us, hardly afforded us any time of intermission; but within awhile after, he
came to fetch us again, at the same hour, and with the same Guard as the time
before, and brought us to Roxana in the same Chamber where we had seen her;
she being resolved to try all the ways she could, to sift that out of us
which she desired, received us with a great deal of gentleness, and as soon as
we were com near her; Well Toxaris, well Loncates (said she, for she had
learned our names from Arbates) will you not at last be sensible of the
request I have made to you? and if the consideration of interest cannot move
you, will you not out of generositie oblige a Queen who has trusted you with
her most secret affections, and who demands nothing of you, that is not
advantageous to your Master? for briefly that fidelity he stood so much upon
to the deceased Queen Statira is no longer now in season; and since the
cruelty of her destinies has taken her from us, he ought also to take her
out of his remembrance; he has too good a judgment to fix himself obstinately
upon the love of that which has now no being, and to disdain a fortune in
mine, which perchance no other Prince in the world would contemn. Consider
friends, what I represent unto you, and be no longer wilful in concealing the
retreat of him whom I love more dearly then my self; you are cruel in this
action, and I am confident he will not justify you in it himself; for this
small service I require of you, you may certainly hope for excessive
recompenses, and you shall find me so sensible of this obligation, that your
fortune shall be envied by persons of the highest quality. To these words,
flattering Roxana added many others which were all without any effect, and
Loncates answering, protested with many oaths that we knew not where you were;
I accompanied his protestations with mine, and we might safely swear it
without offending the gods, or wounding our consciences, being well assured
that you stayed not for us still in the same place where we had left you, and
not being able to guess what way you had taken afterward. Roxana was no more
satisfied then the former time, but because she, by common fame, knew the
nature of Scythians, among whom death is so little considered, that the fear of
it shake's them not from the slightest of their resolutions, she would not so
soon fly to extremities, but contenting her self with telling us, that by her
good usage she would force us to oblige her, she commanded Arbates to carry
us back again, and to give us, except liberty, whatsoever we in reason could
desire. We for some days after that had a better table, and were less strictly
looked to then before, but all the courses that were taken could never get any
thing out of us. The reasons that made us so firm in our resolution were
sufficiently powerful; We knew the hatred which with so much justice your
Highness bore unto that woman, from whom you had received such ill offices
through the whole course of your affection, and whose treachery alone, by
depriving you of Statira, had deprived you of your rest for ever, and to
complete the occasions of detesting her, we knew by her own confession (though
she was very careful to conceal it from all the world) that she was the
murtheress of that fair Queen, by that knowledge we were assured, that you
would prefer the most cruel deaths, before the vexation of falling into the
hands of that bitter enemy, and moreover by those bloody testimonies of her
cruelty, we judged her to be of a spirit dangerous enough to run to
extremity, to break forth into a violent rage against you, when she should
once be certain that she could not move you by her artifices; these
considerations confirmed us in the design of suffering any thing rather then
submit you to such sensible afflictions, expose you to such manifest dangers.

Arbates visited us every day, and that traitor to seduce us flattered us a
thousand ways, and feigned to have a wonderful confidence in us, he
discovered those affairs to us which seemed to be of greatest importance; and
gave us account of part of those matters which passed at court, and in Roxana's
cabinet. One day being in our chamber, he by chance let fall a paper;
Loncates took it up as soon as he was gone, and though it was close folded up,
and fast sealed, we considered him so little, that we made no difficulty to
break it open; it had no superscription, but the words were to this effect.

IF to adore you, if to die for you, be crimes worthy of those thunders
wherewith you have so often threatened me, dart them (my Sovereign) at this
guilty man, who cannot ceas to adore you, and who cannot repent his design of
dying for you; but if that silence your Majesty has enjoined me, be not
religiously enough observed, expect the punishment of it from that same death,
from which I expect both my remedy, and my recompense; it is in it alone I have
bounded my most glorious ambition, and I have no thoughts that are unworthie of
it, since I have none but such as tend wholly to you. In commanding me to hold
my peace, you make use, Madam, of the double Empire you have over me, and I
should obey you with a perfect resignation, if you had left me any power
either to command or to obey my self; not that I groan under the yoke you have
imposed upon me, I received it without murmuring, and I have born it without
complaining of its weight; but why is it insupportable to you, since it is I
that undergo all the pain of it, and that having defended your self against
compassion, it has made you suffer nothing that can render it burthensom to
you? It has made you suffer, my complaint, indeed, alas, if a discreet
complaint like mine be so criminal, where will you find innocence? and if you
will pardon it in none but Alexander's, or in persons worthy of you, where
will your clemency find matter to exercise it self?

The reading of this letter wrought some curiosity in us: and Loncates and I
endeavored in vain to guess at the author of it; we conjectured easily that it
was addressed to Roxana, and that Arbates who served her only in affairs of
that nature, had there some new practice in hand, but we could not imagine
which of the Princes was bold enough to speak to her of love before the
obsequies of Alexander. We were thus busied, when Arbates who had perceived
what he had lost, came back into our chamber in a great deal of trouble. He
seemed to be much stricken when he found that letter in our hands, and he
was in doubt which way he should receiv that trick of familiarity, but
Loncates stepped to him, and restoring it with a smiling countenance, be not
offended at our curiosity Arbates (said he) our design was only to instruct
our selves in your loves, to jest with you a little, and not at all to do you
any disservice; but if that desire has made us commit an incivilitie, you have
at least this satisfaction, that though we have read it, we are not a jot
wiser then before. Arbates his face began to clear up a little at these words,
and taking the letter again from Loncates, after he had bethought himself a
while, I should have been very sorry (said he) if this letter had fallen into
the hands of other persons less discreet then you are, but the knowledge I have
both of your fidelity, and constancy in keeping a secret, would even oblige
me to declare this to you, if you would promiss me not to abuse the
confidence I have in you. The desire we had to learn that business, invited us
to make him all the protestations he could wish for, and when he believed he
had secured himself enough, we sat down, and he spoke to us on this manner.

I hazard not so small a matter in discovering, what you desire to learn of
me, that you should think it a light obligation, and in revealing this secret
I offend a man of great authority, and one that would never pardon me if I
should disserv him; but besides the assurance I have in your promises which I
believ inviolable, I see this man carrie's matters into such terms that they
cannot much longer be concealed, and that the Mistress whom I serve condemn's
his follies, and would be much displeased that I had meddled in them. You have
heard speak of Cassander the son of Antipater whom Alexander when he came into
Asia, left Viceroy in Macedonia, and in all those territories he had conquered
in Europe, where he acquired so great credit and autoriti^, that among the
Greeks, and Macedonians, Alexander himself never was more absolute then he.
We know very well (said we) the reputation of Cassander and of Antipater, and
we are not ignorant, that among the Princes of Alexander's Court, there were
very few that held so lofty a rank as they. It Is that Cassander (replied
Arbates) who write's this letter you have read unto the Queen, he is most
desperately in love with her, and he has given her testimonies of it which
have mortally offended her, and redoubled the aversion she has naturally
against him; 'twas almost by force that he obliged me to take charge of
delivering this letter, and I foresaw so little satisfaction to my self in this
commission, that I have not been very hot in performing it; but because Hesione
has made me acquainted with some particulars of that love, and of the first
knowledge he gave of it, I will show you an example of freedom in relating them
to you.

It was a little before the voyage into the Indies that Cassander came to be
near Alexander, having been bred up in Greece with his father Antipater, who as
I have told you had an absolute authority there. The consideration of the
father who by many victories obtained to the advantage of the Macedonians, had
made himself necessary, and almost terrible to the King, placed the son in one
of the foremost ranks about him, and he at the very first was used in the same
fashion as the nearest, and most considerable Princes. I know not whether it
was then that he fell in love with the Queen, but the first knowledge she had
of it was but at Pasargada, where a sickness she had detained her for some
time, while Alexander arrived at Susa, where he married Queen Statira in the
absence of his former wife. The King taking his way toward Susa, where all
things were quiet, and peaceable, left Cassander, and Seleucus to guard the
Queen with some part of his forces, and those two Princes never went from her
till she was returned to Susa. I had been her servant from the taking of Tire,
and your departure from Sidon, which was five or six months before the battle
of Arbella, and that great Princess was pleased so much to value some small
service I did her, that from an ordinary condition, she had raised me to a
considerable rank amongst those about her. During the Queens indisposition,
Cassander stirred not from her, but when his presence was incommodious; and in
all his actions he showed a disquietness which could not proceed only from
his zeal, and fidelity to his King. When he was near her, his eyes were
perpetually fixed upon her face, but 'twas with troubles and distractions of
mind, which took away part of his understanding, and if he was obliged to
speak to her, he did it with so much confusion, and disorder, that it was
easy to judge he was prepossessed with some very strong passion. One day when
the Queen asked him if he had heard any news out of Greece, since the return
from the Indies, in stead of answering to that question, It is a decree of the
destinies (said he) who dispense not all things with justice. The Queen by
that reply easily knew the preoccupation of his mind, she had begun to
observe it in many such like encounters, and at that time not being able to
forbear laughing; Behold (said she) a very satisfactorie answer, and very much
to the purpose. Cassander coming to himself perceived the fault he had
committed; he excused it as well as he could, but though he had a very good
wit, he did but entangle himself the more, and by that last trouble showed
greater marks of the confusion of his mind then before. At such hours as the
Queen took her rest, or was not in a condition to be seen, he stirred not
from her chamber door, and as soon as any of her maids, or necessary officers
of her chamber came forth, he ran to enquire how the Queen did, with such a
care, as visibly testified the particular interest he had in her health. The
Queen who was told of it, and who knew not the true cause, was very well pleased
with him for his diligence; she writ the King word of it her self, and many
times expressed her acknowledgment to Cassander in very obliging words. As soon
as she was able to leav her bed, and that within a while after she began to
go out of her chamber, he would never suffer any body but himself to wait
upon her as Gentleman usher, and in doing that office he had the advantage to
hold her by the hand, and the liberty to entertain her almost all the day. One
time being in chamber with her, and some of her maids* the Queen went to the
looking-glass to mend her head dressing, and in the interim the blinded
Cassander seeing her back turned toward him, and not considering that by the
reflection of the glass she saw all that was don in the chamber, could not
forbear stretching out his hands by his side, bowing down his head with a
beseeching action, and doing postures, which had something in them very
ridiculous, if considered by persons without passion: the Queen who easily
discerned all he did, turned toward him quite surprised, and that so suddenly
that she found him still in the same condition. What Is the matter Cassander
(said she) are you foolish, and do you take notice what you do? Cassander was
abashed at this encounter, for which he was not prepared, but seeing himself
forced to reply; I am not very wise Madam (answered he) but your Majesty
see's but the lightest marks of my folly. These words caused some suspicion in
the Queen, which kept her from pressing him further, and reflecting upon many
other actions of that nature which she had observed, began to doubt something
of the truth, but that same day she discovered more evident proofs of it. She
received unwelcom news from Susa, by one of her servants she had sent thither,
who brought her word that the King more then ever, in love with the Princess
Statira, was determined to marry her, and that the business was gone so far,
that there was very little means of hindering it. This touched the Queen with so
sensible a grief, that 'twas impossible for her to dissemble it, she wept all
the rest of the day, and complained of the Kings inconstancy, in terms which
sufficiently testified how much she was afflicted. Cassander hearing of it,
went to wait upon her, and seeing some tears fall from her eyes, he could not
so far command his passion, but that it forced him to say aloud, Those precious
tears Madam, cannot be recompensed but by all the blood of those that are the
cause of them; but if your Majesty be offended, why do you not make use of the
power you have over Cassander? The Queen, who knew not at first how she should
interpret those words, turning toward him; And what would you do for me (said
she) in a misfortune to which the gods alone can give remedy or consolation?
I would do all (replied Cassander briskly) that can be expected from a man to
whom Empire, to whom life, to whom even honor it self is not considerable, in
respect of your commands, and of the occasions to serve you; I would neither
regard blood, nor sex, nor dignity, and to obey you I would violate the faith
that is due to men, the most sacred rights, and all the laws of Nature.
Cassander pronounced these words (which were violent enough of themselves) with
such a violence, as did sufficiently discover the passion that animated him,
and the Queen from thence drawing a confirmation of her suspicions, would not
give him any occasion to clear them more fully, but contented her self with
replying. You would be able to do nothing for me, Cassander since that in
this misfortune I am injured only by my Master, and my King, against whom I
ought not so much as to complain. Cassander was ready to make answer, and
perhaps such an one as would no longer have suffered her to doubt of his
passion, if the Queen, who had a mind to break off that entertainment, had not
removed out of her place, and began another discourse. In the mean time seeing
her self strong enough to undergo the voyage, and being desirous to take her
way toward Susa the next day, she commanded that order should be given about
her equipage, and prepared her self for a departure which she believed she
had deferred but too long already. That evening she went down into the garden,
where she walked in a covered alley with Seleucus, and Cassander, but
Cassander having found means to free himself of Seleucus, by some occasion which
he put him in mind of on the sudden, remained alone with the Queen, and
seeing that Hesione, and her other maids were far enough off not to overhear
what he said, he thought he could not find a more favorable opportunity to
discover his passion to the Queen, then now she was in an ill humor against
the King, judging with reason that nothing is so powerful to alienate the
affection of a wife from her husband, and make her capable of another, as her
knowledge that she is undervalued by him. 'Twas this opinion that made him the
bolder, and drawing an occasion of discourse from the Queens trouble, after he
had continued a while in some disorder; Madam (said he at last with an
unassured voice) the King must needs be very much blinded, since he for
another beauty forsake's the most charming, and the most accomplished one the
gods ever created. Ah! if they had but granted such a fortune as his to other
men -- He made a stop at these words, and the Queen whom they had displeased,
being willing to cut them off; The King (said she) Cassander know's me for
such as I am, nor is it necessary you should take further knowledge of it. I
would it had pleased the gods (cried the passionate Cassander) lifting up his
eyes to heaven, I would it had pleased the gods that I had never had that fatal
knowledge which has drawn me from that of my self, which has deprived me of
my reason, and destroyed my repose for the whole remainder of my life. The
Queen needed no more to make her comprehend, that he had utterly lost the
respect he owed her, nor indeed did she suffer him any longer, but thrusting
him back with the hand he held her by, after she had looked upon him with
eyes kindled with a just indignation, Get you gone insolent man (said she) go
die for the expiation of your fault, and believ that only my contempt of you,
save's you from those punishments you deserv, and spare's the Kings ears from
hearing of the impudence of his subject. At thest words without staying for a
reply, she left him quite confounded, and besides himself, and calling
Hesione, and the rest of her maids, she went to the other side of the alley so
nettled at the offense she had received, that of all the rest of the day, it
was impossible for her to settle her self again.

The next morning she departed from Pasargada, but Cassander came not near her
chariot that day, nor did he so much as appear before her during all the rest
of the journie, but when she was com to Susa, and that he no longer was in
office about her, he passed by no occasion of seeing her, yet had he never
the boldness to speak to her, nor com near her, and he only fed his sight,
without contenting himself any other way. At the Temple he always took a
place from whence he might behold her at liberty, and be seen by her, and as
often as she lift up her eyes, she perpetually met Cassander's fixed upon
hers, and saw him do an hundred actions that were sufficient to make his
passion observed by any body that had been concerned in it. The Queen who had
other occasions enough to be in ill humor, and who since the Kings last
marriage was fallen into a deep discontent, was exasperated at this
perseverance of Cassander's, and was often ready to let her indignation break
forth, but she was withheld by many considerations, and satisfied her self
with only complaining to Hesione, and giving her express charge to rid her of
him. Tell that insolent fellow (said she) that I forbid him my sight for ever,
that I will ruin him, if he shun it not as carefully to obey me, as he has
sought it to displeas me, and that in short I will make the King acquainted
with his folly, at the first sign he give's me of its continuation. Hesione
told Cassander what the Queen had commanded her, and he was thereby reduced to
great extreamities. He was afraid of Alexander, who in some encounters had
already showed an aversion to him; he feared Roxana upon whom his life
depended with a much more absolute power, but he had much ado to dispose his
mind to that tyrannical obedience she required of him. The Queen (said he to
Hesione) is not satisfied with having forbidden me to speak to her, but she
also forbid's me the sight of her, Ah! Hesione, this is a strange kind of
usage, and though I am not ignorant what I ow to Alexander's wife, I am
ignorant what I shall be able to do upon my self to show my obedience; her
anger is much more terrible to me, then that of Alexander, and I love my life
too little to be touched with any other fear, save that of displeasing her.
From that time forward nevertheless, he was more wary then he had been
formerly, and as much as possibly he could avoided the occasions of offending
her. But not long after she went from Susa to Babylon, and Cassander to whom
the cause of her departure was not unknown, meeting Hesione a little before her
going away, Tell the Queen (said he) that I am still the same; that her
rigorous usage cannot make me change; and if in the discontent that carrie's
her from hence, she has need of a bold and trusty person, either to revenge,
or free her self, she may remember the power she has over me, and the
offers I made her at Pasargada. This message was told the Queen, but it served
for nothing at that time, and has served for nothing since but to strengthen
her in the suspicions she has against him. The Queen being com to Babylon,
led a very melancholy life, and the remembrance of those advantages which
Queen Statira had over her, in the mind of the King her busband, fretted her
with so insensible a vexation, that she could not possibly dissemble it; I
know not whether that resentment awakened the memory of Prince Oroondates in
her, or whether she had preserved it all the time of his absence, but however
it were, when I least thought of it, she sent for me into her closet, and did
me the honor to say, Arbates, I cannot conceal from you the thoughts I still
have for the ungrateful Prince of Scythia, and though I have so many just
causes of complaint against him, and that I am not ignorant what I ow unto the
King my husband, yet can I not oppose that dear remembrance, and the image of
that insensible man com's still into my mind with as much power as ever; not
but that I am resolved to keep my self within the strictest rules of my duty,
nor but that I would pay unto the King, (as changeable and inconstant as he
is) whatsoever he could have expected from me in his most ardent affections;
I have not any intention to draw that ungrateful man hither to me, nor to
endeavor yet to win him, but I must learn what is become of him, and I cannot
be satisfied, till I know whether he be yet alive, what his fortune is, and
in what climate he make's his abode. It Is the cruelty of my fate, which even
in my highest prosperity opposed that rigorous remembrance, to moderate all my
felicities, and the gods have been pleased to counterbalance the greatness
heretofore they bestowed upon me, by a misfortune which has hindered me from
tasting the sweetness of it. To these words, and some others, the Queen added a
command she laid upon me to go into Scythia, to enquire after the Prince,
demanding no other fruit from my voyage, but that I should bring her back word
in what place, and in what condition he was. I went from Babylon with this
intention, but I will not trouble you with the particulars of my journie, all I
shall need to tell you is that I arrived in Scythia, without any considerable
encounter, and that having spent some time secretly in the Court, which I found
desolate for the Princes absence, and for that of the Princess his sister who
had been stolen away, not long before, and whose loss the King had not been
able to bear without an extreme displeasure, nor without having armed all the
men for her recoverie, which were capable to serve him in that occasion, all the
news I could learn of the Prince was, that a while after the defeat of Zopirio,
he had secretly left the army he commanded, and had past over at Byzantium,
without any other company save Araxes, you two, and a man that had been
brought to him during the siege of Orchilachia. Not being able to get a more
ample information, I returned the same way, and arrived not at this Town till
two days after the King's death. Although I found the Queen as deeply buried
in grief, as it was fit she should be for the greatness of her loss, yet
would she hear the success of my voyage, and her sorrows were augmented by the
account I gave her of it. From the time of her departure from Susa, she had
received no new importunities from Cassander, but after the Kings death, he
did her exceeding good offices, and being one of the most powerful among the
Princes, as well for the consideration of his father Antipater, as for his own,
he declared himself loudly for her in all the assemblies that were held for
the election of a successor, made parties in favor of her, and embraced her
interest with much affection, and with much success. The Queen whose ambition
never was the least of her passions, and who naturally love's to reign, took
his services kindly, yet I do not believ she has any design to requite them
with a particular affection, but that she received them* without any intention
of engaging her self to him by these obligations. The multitude of Cassander's
businesses have hindered him, as yet, from beginning to pretend to her again,
though by reason of the King's death, and of the alteration of affairs, he
has some cause to hope for more success then before; but of some late days, the
Queen, and many other persons with her have had suspicions, which I may not yet
discover, and which do not only redouble the aversion she had to him, but
make her abhor, and detest his very name; his quality, and the condition he
is in, oppose a clearer sifting of the matter, but though it be dissembled,
and not spoken of, there are some presumptions against him, which begin to
convince him of the blackest perfidiousness that ever was. He had don me the
honor sometimes to speak to me when he came to the Queens lodgings, yet not
with so much familiarity as that I should expect the imploiment he has given
me. But this morning as I was standing at the Palace gate, one of his servants
came to seek me from him, and brought me to his chamber* I will not repeat
all the kind words he used to me, nor the hopes he gave me of a greater
fortune, in earnest whereof he forced me to take a diamond of good value, but
in the end all his endearments, and all his liberalities ended in praying me
to take the charge of delivering the letter you have seen. I refused it as much
as possibly I could, and represented to him the danger I was in of being
turned away by the Queen, and perchance more severely punished for that action;
but notwithstanding all I could allege to put off that emploiment, I could not
get away without promising that I would use my endeavors to serve him. Behold
all I know touching his loves, wherein I have no design to entangle my self for
him; the difficulty he found in winning Hesione, made him address himself to
me, knowing that the Queen has some confidence in me, but I love my self too
well to seek my ruin in this business, and I shall find some way or other to
eas my self of it.

The treacherous Arbates, made us this relation of Cassander's loves, and after
having ended his discourse with new, unprofitable conjurations to obey the
Queen, he took his leav, and left us in quiet for the rest of that day. He
solicited us often from her after that with a great deal of mildness, but we
having still resisted with the same constancy, she grew so incensed that she
commanded they should put put us in irons and offer us the rack, to force that
from our mouths by violence of punishments, which she had not been able to
skrue from us by other means; Her cruel ministers obeyed her, and although the
disloial Arbates showed a feigned compassion of us, we were tormented with
great severitie, but we had the same firmness of resolution in tortures, and
those that persecuted us, were almost in despair of success by their
persecutions. After that cruel day we had seven or eight of intermission, but
that time being expired, they began to torment us again; they used us as
spies, and as persons that had some design against the Queens life, but me
especially who had been surprised in the manner as I have told you. It is
certain also that in that accident there was occasion enough to suspect me,
but I believed that that which would be more hurtful to me, was the having
heard by the Queens discourse, the cruel intention she had since executed
against the Princesses, and I thought with reason that being desirous to
conceal to all the world the share she had in their death, which she caused
to be reported in a way very different from the truth, she would infallibly
dispatch me out of the world, if she suspected me to be a witness of her
designs. I believ indeed it was that which made her resolv upon it, for
yesterday the Captain that had us in his custody, being com into our chamber,
took off our irons, and telling us that he would set us at liberty, he made
us get up behind certain armed men, and brought us out of the Town; I know not
for what reason the Queen caused us not to be put to death in Babylon, as she
might easily have don, but whatsoever it was, they carried us a great while
along the River side, before we could guess at any thing of our destiny; but
at last we came into a Vallie, not far from hence, where those cruel men
having tied us to two Trees, after having in vain tormented us, to force a
confession of what we had so carefully concealed, they were going to execute
their last resolution, when the gods sent us this valiant Queen, who by the
effects of her admirable courage, saved our lives and restored us our liberty,
and our Prince who is dearer to us then both life and liberty.

Toxaris ended his narration thus, and the Princes, and the Amazone Queen who
had hearkened to him with wonder, remained sad and pensive at the end of his
recital. Prince Oroondates found much matter of thought in it, and after having
been a good while silent, I know not (said he at last) by what crimes I can
have moved the gods to stir up this woman to torment me, her cruelty ought to
be satisfied with the ills she has already made me suffer, and when I
thought I had been secure from all her practices, she revives again to
persecute me more then ever. It is probable (said Lysimachus) she will not
stop at these beginnings, and since she knows you are out of Scythia, and that
by great likelihood she may conjecture you are in this Country, she will
leav nothing unattempted to find the certainty, and to have you in her power.
I should think it convenient, if you were of the same opinion, that to keep
your self from being known to her, and to many other persons who might hurt
you, your true name should not be declared but among those whom you shall judge
worthy of your friendship, and that among others you should be made to pass
for Arsacomes, or for some other stranger Prince whose name may abuse those that
are less interessed. All the company approved Lysimachus his motion, and
Oroondates himself having consented to it at the entreatie of the Princes, I do
not think (added Lysimachus) that in the condition Roxana now is, it is hard
for her to discover you, and to do you a miscief if you continue longer here,
where I do not believ you are in safety, being in a place without defense, and
so near to Babylon; and if your health would permit, I should think it good to
remove you into one of those Towns which are at our devotion, or into the body
of our Army. It would be very dangerous (said Ptolomeus) to carry the
Prince far in his present estate; I know a more easy expedient for his
safety, and one that is almost necessary for us; we must draw our forces
hither, and encamp our Army about this house, by that means we shall guard him
till he be cured, and bring our men from a place where they have hardly any
thing left to subsist on. You know that where they are, victual or forrrage
begin to fail them, and that on this side all things are in a better condition;
some of the neighboring Towns are at our disposing, and the open Country will
make no resistance against us; the situation of the place is fair and
advantageous for us; the nearness of the river is commodious for our Camp, and
since we yet are Masters of the field, we ought to make use of our time to
take all these advantages. Our Army is not so far from hence, nor the days so
short, but that sending order thither to day, our Cavallerie and part of our
Infantrie may be here to morrow. Eumenes and Lysimachus presently confirmed
Ptolomeus his advice, and only Oroondates opposed the care they took of him,
but when he saw that it was advantageous for them however, and that that order
was almost necessary, he consented to their opinion, and approved the choice
they had made of that place for the encamping of their Army. It was thereupon
resolved that Eumenes should instantly go away to the Camp to fetch the forces,
and such provisions as could be gotten, and that Ptolomeus, whose credit was
great, and whose virtue was much con^idered in that Country should take horse
attended by Araxes, Cleantes, and some of his own followers to spend the rest of
that day, and part of the next visiting some neighboring places from whence
they hoped for subsistence. This resolution was no sooner settled, but it was
put in execution, and the two Princes taking a short leav of those they left,
at the same time went two different ways, and only Lysimachus, the fair
Amazone, and some servants remained still with Oroondates. Then it was that he
begun his endearments again to Lysimachus with more liberty then before, and
then these two generous friends gave one another a mutual account of their
particular adventures, and of their most secret thoughts. They both asked
Toxaris and Loncates many questions, but they could tell them nothing of their
Princess, and protested to them, that till their coming thither they never
heard of their being alive, that in Babylon every body believed them dead,
and that their loss had so stirred up the people, that nothing but their fear
of the forces of Roxana, Perdiccas, and their associates kept them in
obedience; that Roxana declared her self innocent of their death, and disavowed
all that Tyreus had reported before he died. Lysimachus having asked Loncates
concerning the order that was observed in the Towns he told him their guards
were very strict, and that the wounds Perdiccas had lately received, hindered
not Cassander, Seleucus, Alcetas and the rest from keeping all things in a good
condition, nor from drawing forces together on all sides; this was all the two
Princes could learn from those two men, whose imprisonment had deprived them of
a more particular knowledge of things. Part of the day was spent in this
conversation, and the remainder of it was given to the wounded Prince his
repose, but scarce was he awake the next morning, when he saw Lysimachus com
into his Chamber with a certain herb in his hand, and with an extraordinary
joy in his countenance. Oroondates after he had received, and returned the
good morrow, asked him the cause of it, and Lysimachus sitting down by his
bedside, I believ (said he) that I bring you a speedy cure, and if I am not
the most deceived in the world, I shall see you in perfect health within this
week, and to make you give credit to my words, Know that in our voyage to the
Indies, Ptolomeus our dear friend having been dangerously wounded in a fight
we had against the Barbarians, Alexander who loved, and considered him very
much, was so extremely grieved at it, that he could receiv no consolation; he
caused him to be put in his own bed, and lying there with him, saw his wound
dressed with strange disquiets. The Chirurgians were in despair of his life,
when the gods to whom it was dear, s^nt the King a miraculous dream in favor of
that Prince, for he was no sooner asleep, but dreamed that he saw a Dragon
holding an herb in his mouth, which was to serve for Ptolomeus his cure. When
the King awaked he told his dream to those that were present, and described
the form of that herb, whereof he had preserved the remembrance, and some of
the inhabitants of that place having assured him, that there grew such a one in
that Country, he caused it to be sought for every where, and those that
were sent about it, employed their time so successfully, that they brought him
that wonderful herb he had seen in his dream; it was presently applied to
Ptolomeus his wound, and by an unheard of prodigy the pain was instantly
assuaged, and the wound quite healed up within three days. The mervellous
effect of this herb, made us all observe it carefully that we might be able to
know it again, to make use of it in the like occasions, but I never found any
of it in this Country till this morning, when as I was walking the wood, I
thought I saw something very like it growing by the side of the brook, I
gathered it with an excess of contentment, and I am the most deceived of all
men living if it be not the very same which produces those miraculous effects.
Amyntas came into the Chamber as they were talking, and Lysimachus having
showed it him, he cried out joyfully, confirmed his Master in that opinion;
He straightway took the herb, and having prepared it, he applied it to
Oroondates his wounds. That new remedy quickly drew sleep upon his eie-lids,
and Lysimachus retiring went to tell the Queen of his happy encounter, and of
the hope he had conceived, Thalestris was extremely joied at it, and coming
into the Princes Chamber some hours after, he told them at his awaking that he
felt himself strangely eased, and that he hoped his remedy would be as
successful as he had promised. Ptolomeus came in within a little after, and
having presently heard that well-com news, he by his testimony redoubled the
Princes hopes. Oroondates his fear of being kept in bed by his wounds while
others were fighting, made him sensible of this good fortune, and 'twas that
rather then any love of his life that made him with joy expect his cure,
without which he could not second hit generous friends in his own quarrel.

The Sun was beginning to decline, when Lysimachus looking out at Thalestrises
Chamber window, observed a dust which rose from under the feet of the Cavalerie
which Eumenes brought, within awhile after they discerned the Troops, and saw
Eumenes himself arrive accompanied with some Commanders of the Army.
Thalestris, Lysimachus and Ptolomeus went out of the house to meet him, and
having received him according to the friendship that was among them, they went
forward toward certain Chariots that came after him, wherein were the two
Princesses Apamia and Arsinoe the daughters of Artabasus, and Wives of
Ptolomeus and Eumenes, with many other Ladies whose husbands were in the Army.
Thalestris who was instructed in the quality of those Princesses welcomed them
with much kindness and civilitie, and Cleone who was com out with her, no
sooner saw them, but she ran to them with open arms, and receiving them with
an excess of joy, by her encounter gave them a mervellous consolation. They had
heard by Eumenes that the two Princesses were alive, to whom they had a very
near relation, and to whom they had ever been most dear, and their gladness at
that news was easily to be observed in their faces. While the Princes gave
order for the encamping of the Army which began to arrive, the Princesses
under the conduct of Thalestris went into the house, and so up into Oroondates
his Chamber; The Prince who was advertised of their coming, and who considered
them extremely both for the sake of Barsina their sister, and for that of their
illustrious husbands, gave them a reception full of respect, and by all manner
of ways testified how great a sens he had of the honor they did him. After
the first complements, their discourse was of Barsina, whose goodness the Prince
commended in terms which made her sisters see he was not ungrateful for the
good offices he had received from her; They told the Prince who asked where
she was, that she had been detained at Susa by some small indisposition, and
by the nois of those cruel revolutions that had happened at Babylon; that she
had lately sent them word she would ere-long set forward on her journie toward
them, where by reason of the authority of their husbands she believed her
retreat would be more assured. They were in this conversation with Oroondates,
when the other Princes after having disposed the Camp, and taken such order in
all things as was necessary, came into the Chamber, and mingled altogether in
a very pleasing entertainment. It was resolved by Oroondates his advice, that
as soon as he was recovered, and the other Ladies arrived who were to com with
their husbands to the general rendezvous, the men should leav Polemon's house to
the Ladies, and retire to lie in far commodious Tents, which the Princes had
caused to be brought along with the Army, since the house could not be bigg
enough for so great a company, and that the Princes had a great deal of
convenient room in their Tents. When they had spent part of the night in these
discourses, the company withdrew to their several Chambers, where they were
accommodated as well as possibly they might, and where they all rested with
much tranquillity.

THE THIRD PART OF CASSANDRA. The third Book.
POlemon's house was seated at the foot of a little hill, about five or six
hundred paces from the Euphrates; on that side toward the River it was sheltred
with a high Wood, which reached from the Garden walls almost to the Bank of it;
on that toward the hill there were many Vine-yards, and on the other two an
open plain of a vast and spacious breadth; on the side toward Babylon it
spread it self to the very Gates, and on the other as far as the Temple of
Apollo. It was in that, the Princes caused their Army to encamp, covering
themselves on the side toward their Enemies with the Wood, and with the Hill. By
break of day all their Tents were set up, and part of the field was possessed
with Soldiers who made an end of hutting themselves reasonable commodiously;
yet were they shut up within certain limits, and the greatest part of it was
reserved for the forces that were still to com up, whose number also was like
to be much greater then that which was already quartered.

Oroondates having rested very well all night, at his wakening found himself
visibly amended; and as a prodigy admired the wonderful effect of Ptolomeu's
his herb; the Princes no sooner heard it, but they went into his Chamber to
congratulate the beginning of his recovery. After some discourses they had upon
that subject, they fell to deliberate of their affairs, and causing those to
withdraw who were not of the Council, Ptolomeus asked the Prince of Scythia's
advice touching the beginning of that War. Oroondates received that respect
very civilly, and for a long time desired to be excused if he told not his
opinion before so many experienced Commanders; but being willing to gain time
for his cure, and to retard the progress of those things which might be don
without him, when he was forced by the entreatie of the rest to speak his
mind, he declared that he thought it not fit to make any attempt before
their Allies were com up, thinking them yet too weak to undertake any thing
against so many Princes as were of their enemies party; but to this
proposition Ptolomeus answered, that it was true they were weak, but they were
sure their Enemies were not stronger in the field then they, and that the
supplies they expected could not arrive before theirs. Oroondates seeing
himself stopped by that reply. However (said he) you ought to make known the
reasons you have to begin this war against men who heretofore were your
friends, as well to keep the reputation you have gotten, as to interess all the
world in the justice of your quarrel; it I be not mistaken it is the ordinary
course; and many persons who would cast themselves into your enemies party if
you made an unjust war, will without doubt embrace yours when they shall know
the equity of your cause. Since it is only for the liberty of the Princesses
you take up arms, you should first send to demand them of your enemies, and if
they refuse to deliver them, you may then denounce war against them; thus you
will shun the reproach they might cast upon you, of having surprised them under
the shadow of your ancient friendship, and by this declaration you shall make,
they can learn nothing of your designs which is not known to them already, and
for which they are not already prepared. After this caution which free's us
from blame both before the gods and men, we shall march to the battle with
more confidence and more approbation; and if the gods bless our enterprise with
a happy success, Lysimachus and I by your assistance shall recover our
Princesses, and so many gallant men who so charitably engage themselves in our
fortune, shall by their Armies enlarge their Dominions, and obtain the
Territories of those we conquer. The gods know with how much trouble I shall
remain almost useless amongst you, being unable to augment your numbers with
more then a single man, who perhaps will be one of the most inconsiderable of
your party, but you will be pleased to pardon my want of power, in regard of
the di^^ance of my Country, and of my inabilitie to do any thing there, by
reason of the severe humor of the King my Father. Lysimachus interrupted the
Prince at these words, We hope for more advantage (said he) from your single
person then from a potent Army, nor shall we ever doubt of the victory so
long as we shall fight near you. These words were accompanied with many
others which the Princes uttred in prais of Oroondates, and they presently
approved the counsel he had given, of sending to demand the Princesses. To
that end having thought upon it awhile, they made choice of Cleantes and
Lycastes the Squiers of Lysimachus and Ptolomeus, whom they judged proper for
that Commission, as being known for two men of courage, wisdom, and conduct;
they were instantly called, and when they were fully instructed what they
should do, they took horse together, and went to Babylon. Within a little after
Apamia, Arsionoe, Cleone, and the other Ladies came into the Chamber, and
finding Oroondates so well that he might endure company without
inconveniencie, they sat down by his bed, and began a pleasing conversation.
Thalestris who knew that Cappadocia whereof her Kingdom made a part, was now
the lot of Eumenes, and who had need of his support and friendship for the
conservation of her Estate, laid hold of that opportunity to make her self
sure of both, and sitting down by him, after that by a look full of sweetness
she had prepared him for the alliance she desired with him, Sir, (said she)
we have hitherto preserved our little Dominion either by arms or gentler
means, and all those that have been Masters of Cappadocia, have by one of those
ways suffered us to live within our limits; I know that the Province where my
Predecessors and I have reigned, make's a part of what is now at your
disposing, but Darius and Alexander who had the same right, have let us enjoy
them peaceably, although our forces were too weak to defend them against such
potent Monarchs, and you are worthily their Successor, not to have the same
civilitie toward women who will esteem you as they ought to do, and whose
neighborhood shall never give you any just cause of complaint against them.
Eumenes who was exceeding generous and civil received the Queens discourse very
respectfully, and answered her, with that grace which accompanied all his words
and actions. I would it pleased the gods, Madam, that I could as easily imitate
Alexander the Great in the rest of his actions, as while I live I will surpass
him in the consideration he had of you; the honor of your neighbor-hood make's
me prefer my part before any of all the rest of Alexander's Successors, and if
I could merit that of your alliance, I would employ the credit of this company
to help me to obtain it. The Queen replied to this complement with a great
deal of submission, and having treated an alliance with him upon the sudden,
she offered to encreas the Army of the Princes with some Troops she would
cause to be raised in her Territories, to which Eumenes should give passage,
and let them march with those he exspected out of Cappadocia; for that purpose
she prayed him to lend her a servant of his to accompany one of her women
whom she meant to send into Themiscira, with order and Commissions to
Menalippa to leavie ten thousand Amazones, and march the same way with his
forces. The Princess who could not undervalue such a supply gave very great
thanks to Thalestris, and that fair Queen not being willing to defer the
effect of that resolution, went presently into her Chamber to write her
Letters, and get her dispatch in such a readiness, that her messenger might
depart the next day after, part of that having been spent in these imploiments,
the nightbegan already to draw near when Cleantes and Licastes returned from
Babylon; As soon as Lysimachus saw them come in, How now friends, (said he)
what do you bring us? War Sir, (answered Lycastes) and it is for war you must
prepare your selves. We receiv war then (replied Ptolomeus) and it is war for
which we are already prepared. At these words the Princes rose up, and having
encompassed the two Squires, they desired to know the circumstances of their
negotiation, and to give them an account of it, Cleantes began on this manner.

By your command, my Lord, we went to Babylon, where we arrived without any
encounter; we found an out-guard on this side the gate, the soldiers whereof
having presently stopped us, we desired him that commanded them, to cause us to
be brought unto Roxana and Perdiccas, to whom we were deputed by the
confederate Princes. The Captain who knew the Law of Nations, having given us a
guard unto the gate, we there met Pencestas to whom we declared the same, you
could not com more fitly (said he) to do your Embassy, the Queen is now at
Perdiccas his Lodging, where the Counsel is held to day by reason that his
wounds will not suffer him to go the Palace. At these words he made us pass
between two long files of Soldiers which stood on both sides of the street,
and led us himself to Perdiccas his Lodging, where we found a guard little
different from that which was wont to be about Alexander. We went up the
stairs, and entered into Perdiccas his Chamber, where the Council was already
assembed, Pencestas being gone in before, and having given notice of our
business, all the Princes rose up, and coming close about us to hear what we
would say, put us into the midst of a half circle which they made about
Perdiccas his bed, at the head whereof Roxana was sitting. The company
con^isted of Seleucus, Cassander Leonatus, Alcetas, Pencestas, Neoptolemus, and
some others whom I could not well discern. After having showed our Letters
sealed with your seals, and declared the power we had to speak to them from
you, Lycastes addressing himself unto Roxana began thus. The Princes
Lysimachus, Ptolomeus, Eumenes, and their Associates, armed for the same
quarrel (we made no mention of the Prince of Scythia because you had forbidden
us) protest that their keeping those forces on foot which they commanded during
the life of the late King, and their calling the assistance of their friends,
has neither been out of any particular enmity, nor out of any design to
invade the Territories of those who were heretofore their Companions, but to
render what they ow unto the memory of Alexander, and to settle Queen Statira
his wife in her due Authority, restoring her to liberty, and the Princess
Parisatis her Sister, whom you have cruelly and unworthily used, and whom you
keep Captives contrary to all justice; it is to demand them at your hands that
they have sent us to you, and to promise you, that as soon as you shall free
and satisfy them, they will draw their forces out of these parts and retire
into those Provinces which belong unto themselves. After that Lycastes had
spoken on this manner, we were carried into another room to give them time to
deliberate what answer they should make. We staid there above an hour and then
we were called in again to the same place, where Roxana speaking by the
consent of all the Princes. We have heard (said she) the proposition of your
Masters, which we account as strange, as we well know that it proceeds not
from the motive you have alleged; the Princesses whom you demand neither are
nor ever were in our power, and we cannot take their raising of Arms for other
then a manifest rebellion, against those to whom they yet ow obedience, and for
a remainder Meleagers sedition; yet are we ready to pardon them this fault if
they presently depart out of our Territories, without putting us to the trouble
of driving them out by open force. These words of Roxana's were followed by
murmur of the whole assembly, which expressed how much they approved that
answer, Lycastes having asked Roxana if she had nothing more to say to him,
and receiving only a command to retire; Since you will give no other
satisfaction (said he) to the Princes that have sent us, I denounce war
against you on their behalf. He no sooner had uttered these words, but all
that were present, cast forth a loud cry, and by clapping their hands testified
that the word WAR was not capable to terrify them who had been bred up in it,
and Perdiccas putting one arm out of bed, and striking his thigh with an angri^
action, We accept the war with joy (replied he) from them whom we desire not
for friends, and we will make it with them on such a fashion, that without
doubt they shall be weary of it first. At these words calling for a javeline,
he broke it in our presence, and cast the pieces of it at our feet; and
Seleucus and Neoptolemus drawing near unto Lycastes, Tell Ptolomeus (said
Seleucus) that we shall now have a fair Field to decide our ancient quarrel.
And tell Eumenes (added Neptolemus) that we will quickly make appear the
difference there is between a man of counsel like him, and a man of action like
me. I well perceived that all the company to whom Eumenes his valor was
sufficiently known, did but smile at Neoptolemus his Rodomontado, and we were
ready to have made him a reply, but presently after Roxana commanded us to
retire, and Alcetas following me to the stair head whispered me in the ear
and said so low that no body could over-hear him; Cleantes, I did not threaten
in public, but you may tell Lysimachus in particular, that at our first
encounter, we will change a blow or two for Parisatis. He staid not for an
answer, and our guard leading us instantly from the house, accompanied us out of
the Town, where we were not suffered to make any stay, yet as we passed by
we saw all manner of preparations for the war.

Cleantes gave this account of the business they had been employed in, and
Oroondates looking upon the faces of his three friends at the end of this
discourse, saw them all kindled with a just indignation; Ptolomeus who knew
Seleucus his virtue, and esteemed him extremely though he had been his enemy,
received his challenge very modestly, but Eumenes whose hatred to Neoptolemus
was of another nature, could not dissemble his choler nor keep himself within
the terms of his ordinary moderation. We Will see (said he) whether that
valiant man of action can make this Counselor fly in the open field as he
braves and injures him within doors. And Lysimachus whose jealousy was revived
by Alcetas his message and who died with grief to know his Mistress was in the
hands of that indiscreet rival; And I (cried he) swear by all the gods, that
Alcetas shall have the satisfaction he desires, and that the death of one of
us shall assure other of the possession of Parisatis. To this talk of theirs
Oroondates added, Perdiccas and I are not in a condition to threaten one
another, and I am so destined to do him good offices, that I can hardly hope
he should ever receiv any ill ones from me. The Princes had some other
discourse, the conclusion whereof was that now they ought to stand upon their
guard since the war was declared, and that they must content themselves with
making little excursions till their Allies came up, and not undertake any
action of importance, before all their forces were united. The next day was
employed in fortifying the Camp, and in drawing a line on that side toward the
Town, from the hill unto the River; Lysimachus took that care upon him, while
Eumenes with certain Officers, and five hundred horse went to the neighboring
Boroughs and Villages to make them in a gentle way contribute to the
maintenance of the Army; yet would they not use their power tyrannically, and
though those towns belonged unto their enemies, not being willing to oppress a
people that were innocent of their displeasures, they liberally gave the money
they had to pay for part of what they took, and by this order, or by the terror
of their Armies, they brought all the places on this side the Euphrates under
their subjection, and those that were on the other remained still in the power
of their Enemies. They had a particular care to hinder good old Polemon from
receiving any damage in his fortune, and in stead of burthening him with any
charge, they, to recompense the inconveniencie he suffered, made him presents
of sufficient value to satisfy the ambition of a man more in love with riches
then he was. In the mean time Oroondates recovered visibly, and Ptolomeus
having taken care himself to seek some of his herb for him (for it had retained
his name in the Court of Alexander) had luckily found a good quantity of it;
he was by his bed side with the Amazone Queen, the two daughters of Artabasus,
and Araxes, when certain Troopers having obtained permission, brought a man of
reasonable good fashion into the chamber, whom they had seen walking above
their Camp, and whom they had taken for a spy, after they had learned from his
mouth that he came from Babylon, and that he was of the enemies party,
Ptolomeus asked him gently who he was, and what he came to look for so near
their Camp? I look (said he) for that which we lost upon the bank of this
river, and I am the Squire of the valiant est man in the world. Thalestris
having prayed him to explain himself a little further, you must not know what I
look for (replied he) since by a sovereign power I am forbidden to tell you,
and that I can protest to you that you have no interest in it; but if you would
know my Master's name, it is too glorious to be concealed from you, and I will
confess I have the honor to belong to the great Arsaces. At the name of
Arsaces, Oroondates thrust part of his body out of bed, and desiring to learn
news of him to whom his country was so much obliged, and of whom he had heard
so many wonders; My friend (said he to the Squire) is it possible that the
valiant Arsaces should be in the party of our enemies? He is so without
doubt (answered the Squire) but he is there in a condition which suffer's them
not to draw much assistance from his valor, and which free's you from the
damage you might receiv by it. Tell us I pray you, (replied Oroondates) in
what condition he is, and fear nothing from us, who will give you all manner
of good usage. My poor Master (said the Squire) is kept in bed at Seleucus his
lodging, by five or six great wounds, whereof the Physicians, and Chirurgians
do yet fear the event; he received them a few days since upon the bank of
this river, in a single combat, which he fought against a stranger, whose
valor was little different from his, their advantage was equal, and those two
valiant enemies falling from their horses at the same time, my poor Master
having lost his senses, and understanding with his blood, had also lost his
life in my arms, if I had not bethought my self to seek for help, and if by the
goodness of the gods, my cries had not been heard by a company of horsemen who
passed near me, and as we have known since were Seleucus and Cassander, with
their followers, some of them out of pity caused my Master to be carried away
from thence at my earnest entreatie, and afterward to be brought to Babylon,
where having learned his name, and that reputation which spread's it self over
all the earth, they caused him to be so carefully looked too, that out of
gratitude he has engaged himself in their party, and is sorry for his want
of health only, because it hinder's him from requiting part of their good
offices in those occasions which are like shortly to present themselves. While
the Squire spoke on this manner, Oroondates mused deeply upon his discourse, and
judging by so many probabilities, that he with whom he had fought was
certainly Arsaces, he felt a chilness which ran through all his body, and
caused extraordinary alterations in him. Ptolomeus, and Thalestris perceived
it, but the Prince being desirous perfectly to clear his doubt, Tell me
(pursued he with a tone something different from his former voice) what day
this combat was, what arms thy Master wore, and if he had not fought with
Perdiccas before his meeting with that stranger? This is the eighth day
(answered the Squire) since that fatal encounter, my Master's arms were russet,
and before that last combat he had fought two others, in the first whereof
he left Perdiccas on the ground, and in the second he beat half a score
horsemen; but though he won the honor, and the field, he lost a person whom
he had taken from Perdiccas, and whose loss he was as sensible of as he
could be of that of his own life. Oroondates needed no more, to perfect his
assurance that it was in the person of Arsaces he had found the rival, who had
so unjustly robbed him of his Princesses affections, and who had so valiantly
disputed them with him; this knowledge grieved him very much, and remembering
what that man had don in favor of his friends, he was afflicted that the gods
had not raised him up another enemy, against whom he might without
ingratitude let loos all his resentments. His sadness appeared in his
countenance, and his thoughts were known to Ptolomeus, and to the fair Amazone;
he continued a good while in this perplexity, which discovered it self by his
silence, and by the motions of his eyes. He considered as much as possibly he
could, how much his country was indebted to Arsaces his services, and called
to mind that friendship he had conceived himself, at the recital of
Lysimachus, and of all those he had heard speak of him, and that reflection
was strong enough, to griev him very sensibly; but it was too weak to resist
the impetuousness of his jealousy, and at the first assault it made upon him,
all these powerful remembrances vanished out of his mind. What! (cried he
furiously) is it Arsaces then who steal's from me the heart of my ungrateful
Princess? and have the gods decreed, that he, who was so officious to my
country, should be cruel to me alone, and should now be the unjust ravisher
of a happiness I had so lawfully acquired, and so dearly bought? Ah! he shall
die, that injurious supplanter, who has robbed me of a prize which was due to
none but me; he shall die, that Arsaces, that pitiless enemy, for whom I had
more gentle, and more grateful thoughts, and since he tear's away my ^ife with
so much injustice and inhumanitie, let him know that our enemies walls are not
able to defend him against a rival whom he has precipitated into despair.
Oroondates brought forth these word with such a transported action, that they
surprised the whole company, and Arsaces his Squire was so astonished at them,
that he durst not open his mouth in the defense of his Master. He afterward
rowld over a thousand violent thoughts in his imagination, and when they had
kept him silent a reasonable while. Friend! (continued he, addressing himself
to the Squire) thou may tell Arsaces that thou have seen his enemy, who
reduced him into the condition thou leftest him in, and who received these
wounds which keep him now in bed, from no body but him; that I prais the gods
for having inspired him with the design of putting himself into the party of
our enemies, and that to what part of the world soever he retire's, I will
infallibly either bring him death, or receiv it from his hands; let him know
that our lives are incompatible, that our combats shall be eternal, and that
our war shall never have an end, till either he die to satisfy my just
revenge, or that I fall to secure his conquest. Bid him recover his health, and
his strength, to make an end with me; and tell him that though I am his
mortal, irreconcilable enemy, I will contribute to his cure, that I may the
sooner see him in a condition to give me satisfaction; and indeed it is not
reasonable I should make use of that advantage which chance, and the care of my
friends have given me, since our wounds were equal, it is just our remedies
should be equal too, nor should an herb put any difference between the estates
of two men, in whom valor left none at all at the issue of our combat. Take
that herb thou see upon the table, cause it to be applied unto his wounds,
and be most certain that thou shall quickly see him as well as I am; if thou
distrust the present of an enemy, thou need but look upon my wounds, where
thou shall see some of the same, and perchance it will be known by some about
him, who are not ignorant of the effect it wrought heretofore upon Ptolomeus;
but tell him that I neither pretend to any acknowledgment from him, nor do him
this courtesy with any intention to be reconciled to him, but with a firm
design shortly to begin the fight again, which our wounds have interrupted.
Oroondates when he had ended these words, commanded Araxes to give the Squire
part of the herb that had been gathered for him, and prayed Ptolomeus to cause
him to be conducted safely out of their quarters. All the company wondering at
this action, could not sufficiently admire the greatness of his courage, and
generous Ptolomeus himself, who was ravished at it as well as the rest, could
not forbear crying out. O Gods! for whom do you reserv the Empire of the world
if you give it not unto this Prince, who by so many admirable actions
testifie's to men, that he hold's more of your nature then of theirs. After
this exclamation, he confirmed the Squire in the knowledge the Prince had given
him of the virtue of his herb, and the Squire who would show something of
generositie as well as they, received it upon their word, without demanding
further proof, and thanking Oroondates with much submission he went out of the
chamber, and took his way toward Babylon with the convoy Ptolomeus had
appointed him. But Araxes who knew his Masters intention, would not leav him,
for fear he should learn Oroondates his name of some of those that convoied
him, and took so good order amongst them, that though he often enquired, he
could not possibly inform himself. Within a while after Lysimachus coming into
Oroondates his chamber, and having heard the recital of what had passed,
expressed a great deal of trouble, that Arsaces with whom he had made a
friendship, and of whom he had a mavelous esteem, was in the enemies party,
and was himself Oroondates his particular enemy; but in the end the interests
of that Prince, and his own together, stifled part of his grief, and disposed
him to bear that advantage of his enemies with patience. After that day the
Princes made some little excursions toward Babylon, and began the war with some
slight encounters, but because the enemy kept close, waiting for the succors of
their Allies, and that the parties which were sent forth had order to hazard
nothing, there happened no memorable encounter.

It would be tedious, and superfluous, punctually to relate all the
discourses, and all the actions of less importance which passed during the time
that Oroondates his wounds detained him in his bed, and before the arrival of
those forces the Princes expected; it will suffice to know that his cure went
on with a prodigious success, and that his health returned so suddenly, that
within a week after his encounter with Arsaces his Squire, he was well enough
to leav his bed, as he did with the Chirurgians permission. Some three or four
days after that, the Princes seeing that of their general Rendezvous draw
near, and having had notice that their allies advanced with great marches
toward the Town appointed, Lysimachus, and Eumenes went from Polemon's house
with a thousand horse to meet them, and bring them to the place where they were
already encamped. Oroondates who saw them go away, and who felt the return of
his forces, began to take up his former fierceness, and as a young lion waken's
his anger with his tail, he animated his courage by the remembrance of his
losses, and excited himself with motions of joy, unto the war he saw already
kindled. Yet did not that object smother the remembrance of his love, but as
often as he was alone with Cleone, he renewed the discourse of it with a
vehemence able to ruin a health not well confirmed. Cleone to cure him of
those violent thoughts, justified her Mistress as well as possibly she could
against his accusations, protested to him with a thousand oaths, that she did
not so much as know Arsaces, and that she had waited constantly enough upon
the Queen her Mistress to swear for her, that she had never been in his
company but some few moments, and 'twas very unlikely, that great and virtuous
Queen, who in the sad estate of her fortune, and even when she thought her
self forsaken by him, had so long resisted the suit of Alexander, should so
suddenly, and so lightly cast her affections upon that stranger. Oroondates saw
a great deal of probability in what she said, and but little ground for his
suspicions, but when he remembered the testimony he had received with his own
eyes, and the conformity thereof with the report of Perdiccas, with that of
Cleone her self, and with that of Arsaces his Squire, he was constrained to
fall again into that cruel belief, which struck him into despair, and deprived
his reason of all the power it was wont to have over him; to fortify that
opinion he alleged to Cleone, the wonderful effects of inclination, and what
he heard Lysimachus, and many other speak, touching the good qualities, and
graceful person of Arsaces. The election Arsaces had made of the other party,
joined it self also to that remembrance. It is not likely (said he) that after
having fought against Perdiccas, and put him in a condition which promises him
but little security, he should cast himself on his side, if he were not
moved to it by some stronger consideration then his friendship to Seleucus; No,
no, he is advertised that Statira, or Cassandra, (call her which you will) is
now in Babylon, and 'twas to be near her, that he forgot his resentments, and
the peril which threaten's him near so dangerous an enemy; but be it how it
will, Cleone, we shall see the success of it after the end of this war, and if
it pleas the gods that Arsaces survive me, the Queen shall possess him in
tranquillity, which she ought never to hope for while I am alive. These were
his ordinary thoughts, wherein he was often comforted by the fair Amazone
Queen, and by the dear wives of Ptolomeus, and Eumenes, who knowing most part
of his discontents, and having succeeded their elder sister in her good will
toward him, endeavored to moderate his trouble, by reasons like those which
Cleone represented to him, and which he himself could not disapprove. He was
in this conversation with them, at one of the windows of his chamber, when
casting his eye over the nighboring field, he observed an extraordinary
shining a great way off. All the company looked that way after him, and when
the objects were a little nearer, they discovered that the Sunbeams produced
that effect upon the arms of the troops that were advancing, and within a while
after, they distinctly perceived the first squadrons, and the first battalions
of that great army which had been so much expected, and which Lysimachus and
Eumenes were gone to meet. He likewise saw Ptolomeus take horse, with Queen
Thalestris, and some of the Officers of his Camp, to welcome those Illustrious
friends, who disbanding themselves from their several commands, came galloping
also to receiv those dear embassies, and made a little body of the greatest
men that were in the world; This reception was made between the two armies, who
at that sight sent forth shouts and cries of joy, and of alliance, which made
the banks of Euphrates echo to the very gates of Babylon. A thousand flying
banners, a thousand standards displaied, and the glittering lus^re of well
polished arms were discerned by Oroondates, and even the sound of the trumpets,
and the neighing of the horses already came unto his ears. The Princesses who
stood by him grew pale at these objects, but they absolutely rouzed up the
Prince's martial humor, and made him with some kind of shame, and repentance
remember his glorious apprentiship in that trade, his good beginnings in it,
and the progress he might have made if it had not been interrupted by his
love. This reflection drew some sighs from him, and kindled an extraordinary
color in his face. He burned already with a desire to know all those valiant
men, whose fame was spread through the whole world, and amongst whom he was
sure he should yet find a good number of his friends, and without doubt his
desire had been satisfied that very day, if Lysimachus who had a mind to show
them to the Prince in all their gallantrie, which so well became them, had not
prayed them to defer their visit, and to rest themselves the remainder of that
day in tents that were prepared for them, while he busied himself with Eumenes
in making their forces encamp, whose quarters were all appointed* and their
places set out for them; The order that had been taken many days before
facilitated their encamping, and that great number of men was in a short time
lodged commodiously, and without disorder or confusion; the provisions were
already com, as well those they brought along with them, as the other which by
Eumenes his care were gotten from the neighboring places, and from the open
country; and those forces which were hutted already, received them that were
newly arrived, and accommodated them with such as they had, so that contrary
to the ordinary custom, that army was lodged almost at its very arrival, and
passed the night very contentedly. Ptolomeus, Lysimachus, and Eumenes, after
having employed the rest of the day, and the beginning of the night in lodging
their friends, and accommodating the soldiers, returned to Oroondates, and
having excused themselves that they could keep him company no better, by reason
of the necessity of their affairs, they gave him account of what they had don,
and of the order in which they had put the camp. Oroondates received their
civilities with much respect, and Lysimachus having asked him, if he would not
see their army in battalia, and all the commanders at the head of their men,
the next day in case his health would permit him to be carried in a litter as
far as the plain, he showed an extreme desire to do so, and the Surgeon
having assured him that he might without danger, he prepared himself for that
sight with great satisfaction. He passed that night very impatiently, and the
next morning getting himself ready, he no sooner heard that the army was in
battalia, but he went out of his chamber with the Ladies, and when he was com
down the stairs finding a litter which waited for him, he got up into it, with
Queen Thalestris, who as well and as warlike as she was would needs keep him
company; the other Ladies seated themselves in the chariots prepared for them,
and all of them together under the conduct of Cleantes and Araxes, crossed
through the place where the forces had been encamped, camped, and from whence
the Commanders had drawn them out that morning to imbattel them in the plain a
few furlongs below. The Prince found them in excellent order, and presently
admired the Grecian discipline, and the Macedonian Phalanxes. That which had
facilitated the leavie of so many men, and their so sudden arrival, was that
all they who commanded them at that time, and who had raised them partly in
those territories that were fallen to their share, had commanded in those same
Provinces in Alexander's life time, in the quality of Governors, and many of
them resided in them already, and had there received the request of
Lysimachus, and Ptolomeus, to arm those in their favor, who since the King's
death were become their subjects. Those people who were accustomed to obey them,
acknowledged them gladly, and followed them without difficulty in that
expedition; and in those Provinces where the Princes were absent, as those of
Lysimachus, Ptolomeus, and many others, the Lieutenants they had left there,
take arms at their first summons, and had found no trouble in making those
people obey them, who adored them for their virtue, and who hoped to enjoy the
same happiness under their reign, which they had tasted under their government.
The forces were not drawn up in battalions and squadrons fit for a battle, nor
was the Cavalrie upon the wings separated from the infantrie, but they were
ranked according to their nations, and followed their several Commanders, who
without such order as is proper for service, marched at the head of their new
subjects. The first that appeared to Oroondates his eye, were those of the
greater Phrygia, under the conduct of their Prince Autigonus, consisting of
four thousand horse, and eight thousand foot, they had something of the
effeminateness of their country, but they began to grow warlike under their
new Master, and to learn a trade of him, wherein he had passed his
apprentiship under King Philip, and had acquired so great reputation under
Alexander. Antigonus was mounted upon a very large bay horse, all his body was
covered with well polished steel, heightened with gold upon the edges, and his
hair which began to turn gray, was pressed with a little headpiece after the
fashion of the Greeks, shaded with a plume of feathers; he had two
steel-headed darts in his right hand, and with the left he bore a weighty
shield, the workmanship of the most industrious Masters in Greece. The comely
presence of Antigonus, and that high renown of him, which spread it self every
where abroad, would have obliged Oroondates to consider him with a long
attention, if his sight had not been withdrawn from him, to fix it self upon a
more pleasing object; It was his son the young Prince Demetrius, who rode by
his fathers side, with a grace able to attract the eyes and hearts of all the
world, his beauty was nothing inferior to that of the fairest Ladies of Asia
and his eyes had a charming sweetness in them which gained affections
insensibly; if he was handsome, he was yet more valiant, and though he was
scarsly full eighteen years old, he in the last exploits of Alexander, had
given proofs of a growing valor, which even in its beginnings yielded not to
that of the most renowned warriers; but if he was handsome and valiant, he was
yet more amorous. Never was soul more capable then his of the sweet impressions
of Love, and in the whole course of his life, which was one of the most
glorious, and illustrious that ever was, the severest minds never found any
other blemish, save a too great propensitie to that passion which criminal
Philosophers have condemned. He was upon the back of a white horse full of
little black spots, who by his proud carriage, and stately trot, set off the
graceful fashion, and pleasing garb of his Master, all his armor glittered with
gold, and stones of value, his coat of arms was all covered with an embroderie
which did not ill accompany the richness of them, and to show that soft
inclination was predominant in him, he in his shield had the image of the God
of love, painted by the hand of the admired Apelles. The sight of this young
Prince, did marvellously delight the great Oroondates, and the generous
Thalestris; but presently after they were not less satisfied with that of two
renowned Captains, whom Fame had already make known to the whole world, they
were Craterus, and Polypercon; Craterus who by his admirable virtue, was
worthy to share Alexanders affections with Hephestion, and who lost nothing in
his inclination, which he gained not with advantage in his esteem; Craterus
who alone obliged that great King to respects, and honors, from which his
greatness excused him toward all the world, and Craterus briefly, who only by
his virtue did till his death preserv the chief authority among the
Macedonians, and the chief place in the hearts of all the ^oldiers. Polypercon
for his valor was not less considerable then he, and he kept up his
reputation so well among Alexanders succesrors, that not long after, he in the
opinion of the great Pyrrhus was preferred before all the rest. These two brave
men together, led the half of those thirty thousand Macedonians, which
deceased Alexander had caused to be raised for his guard, and which he had
drawn about him a while before his death, the rest of them had refused to
follow their companions, and had taken part with Perdiccas; they were all foot,
but their arms were light, their persons well chosen, and their discipline so
good, that the Princes grounded the better part of their hopes upon them. After
these appeared the Syrians under the conduct of Laomedon, they were heavily
armed, and never fought but standing still, yet though they did little
incommode the enemy by going out upon parties, and were exempted from all
duties or light armed men, they made profession to fight in their ranks to
their last breath, and to suffer themselves to be cut all in pieces, before
they would let their battalions be broken; their number was three thousand
horse, and seven thousand foot, and their valiant Leader was able to show an
hundred scarrs, received under Alexander in a thousand encounters wherein he
had made himself remarkable. The Scyrians were followed by the Cylicians under
their Prince Philotas, who worthily bore the name of the first Philotas
Parmenio's unfortunate son that ended his life in torments by the command of
Alexander, whose favorite he had been a while before, they were two thousand
horse and six thousand foot; After which appeared the brave Eumenes, at the head
of the Cappadocians, and Paphlagonians; he from the territories of Amasia, and
the banks of the Iris; and the Thermodoon had drawn six thousand horse the best
of the whole army, making use of that advantage which Cappadocia has above
all the Provinces of Asia, to breed such as are extremely handsome, and
excellent good for service, and out of Paphlagonia he had six thousand foot,
who were armed only with little morions, and light corslets, and who quite
contrary to the Syrians fought little standing still, but tired out an army
by continual excursions, and thought no passage difficult, nor any strait so
dangerous, but they would get through it with a wonderful nimbleness. Menander
came next to them, followed by six thousand Lydians, a tender, effeminate
people, and little able to endure the hardship of war, but yet were very apt
to learn, and obeyed the commands of their Officers, with much dependence, and
fidelity. Those that drink the waters of Nilus, and the scorched inhabitants
of those parts of Africa, and Arabia which are near to Egypt came after them,
under their valiant Prince Ptolomeus; but they marched with a pride which they
drew from the glory of their Prince, and seemed by their bold, and statly pace
to promiss that they would be invincible so long as Ptolomeus was at the head
of them; and certainly the military presence of their Commander, suited not
ill with their fierceness, for Queen Thalestris who showed him to Oroondates,
compared him to those images of the god Mars, which she had often seen in the
Temples of his country; if he had his garb, he also had his virtue, and
among the most valiant in the world, there were few that fought in their own
person with more courage, nor led men on to battle with more prudence. His
forces as well, those he commanded during Alexander's life, as the others
which Cle^menes had brought him out of his Province, consisted of eight
thousand horse, and twelv thousand foot. Scarce had the Prince taken off his eye
from Ptolomeus, when he fixed it upon an object, which wakened his old
remembrances with much tenderness. It was Prince Oxyanes, who for the quarrel
of his Nieces had armed the Bactrians, and marched at the head of them with a
countenance which sufficiently expressed with what affection he still
considered the relics of his Brother's family; he was in the flower of his
age, and in the majesty of his face one might easily see, both the greatness
of his courage, and that of his quality. With him was the good old Artasus,
whose forces were mingled with his, and what with Bactrians, and Zogdians made
the number of six thousand horse, and ten thousand foot, armed with boiled
leather, and upon their left arms bearing large targets, wherewith they covered
most part of their bodies. Oxyanes was on hors-back, and that gallant old man
Artabasus was carried in a litter, not being willing to make his age an excuse
to exempt him from what he owed unto the blood of Darius, and to the interest
of his sons in law; By him rode his own two sons Cophes, and Illioneus, all
that were left of a greater number, who first for Darius his quarrel, and then
for Alexander's had nobly lost their lives in war. Oroondates considered these
dear, and ancient friends with very affectionate motions, and would have gone
straight toward them, if the Amazone Queen had not told him it would be better
to defer his endearments, which else would disturb the order of those things
that still were to be seen. Oroondates forbore at the Queens entreatie, and
next saw Philip pass by with four thousand Hyrcanian horse; Phrataphernes with a
like number of Armenians, and Archesilais with six thousand more, drawn from
the further parts of Mesopotamia. The last that appeared at that famous review
was the brave Lysimachus, and certainly it could not end by a person, that
could more worthily fill his place, nor that could leav the spectators a more
pleasing Idea of the last objects of that day; among so many thousand men,
there was not one that knew better how to use a sword, or javelin, but neither
in so great a number, was there any body, whose fierceness in arms was so
becoming, and whose presence was so majestic. He mounted an able chestnut
horse, which Alexander had given him at the last battle he fought against the
Cosseans; that noble beast, whom the sight of other horses, and the sound of
the instruments had stirred, was all white with foam, and went with a proud
sprightly action, which seemed to express the contentment he had to be
subject to none but such great Masters. Lysimachus since the news of his
Princesses being alive, no longer clouded his arms with black as he was wont
to declare the sadness of his heart, and the loss of his hopes, but that day
they were covered with green, and enriched with emeralds of great price, which
gave an extraordinary luster, being set in antic heads upon his shoulders,
in those upon his buskins, and in other places, where they seemed to stand with
some show of necessity; The crest upon his headpiece was a serpent of the same
metal with his arms, which streched it self with long windings round about his
head, and darting out a triple-pointed sting, seemed by the industry of the
workman to send forth real hissings; his shield was of the same matter, but
Lysimachus by Alexander's command, had laid aside his former devices, to cause
the dreadful Lion which he had slain with so admirable a valor to be engraven
in it, with these words underneath in Greek. Parisatis conquered it. His
cassock (the sleev whereof appeared under his poldron, and the skirt came down
as far as his knee) was of the color of his arms, embroidered with little suns
of gold, and emeralds like those upon his arms, fastened in certain places of
it. He had a long javelin in his right hand, and by his side a rich sword
hanging in a curious skarf wrought by the hands of Parisatis, who by the
intercession of Alexander himself, and the command of Sysigambis, had given it
him when he went with the King to fight against the Cosseans. In this equipage
marched Lysimachus at the head of the Thracians, of the inhabitant of Pontus,
and of the Bosphorus, valiant, warlike nations, out of which their new Prince
had drawn six thousand horse, and twelv thousand foot. This was the number of
their forces, the names of their nations, and of those that commanded them, but
besides them, there was also a great many eminent men, who without any command
served in their own persons with their friends, or kindred. Among these were
Prince Oxidates, Mithranes, young Pharnabasus, Leostenes the son of
Ariobarsanes, Menelaus brother to Ptolomeus, Leocaris, and Dioxippus the sons
of Mentor, Callicrates the son of Philotas, Demochares the son of Laomedon,
young Alexander the son of Polypercon, Trasillus the brother of Menander, the
valiant Tyridates, Cambyses, and Araspes the sons of Mazeus, Cleobulus son to
the unfortunate Orsines, Listander the son of Phrataphernes, Philistratus the
son of Archesilaus, and many others, who in virtue, and greatness of courage
were no way inferior to those whose fortune was more advantageous, then theirs,
both in the savor of the late King, and in the sharing of the Provinces.

This stately review being ended, all these famous warriers alighted, and
under the conduct of Lysimachus, drew near to Oroondates his litter. That
gallant Prince received them with civilities worthy both of him, and them, and
paid them such respects as were only due to the chiefest and most illustrious
persons upon earth; he gave a most courteous, and submissive reception to
Antigonus, and his son, to Craterus, to Polypercon, to Laomedon, and the rest
whose reputation had produced in him a high esteem of their merit, but as soon
as he saw Oxiartes, and Artabasus com toward him, he did his endeavor to have
gotten out of his litter, and embraced them with tremblings of heart, and sighs
which stopped the course of his speech; Prince Oxiartes and old Artabasus,
expressed the same tenderness to him, and remembering together their first
acquaintance, the fall of Darius his house, and the change of their fortunes,
they solemnized that enterview with many tears, in which a good part of the
bystanders were interessed. The number of so many considerable persons hindered
Oroondates at that time from saluting every one of them particularly, but that
hindered not all the Princes from looking upon him with the admiration which had
already seized them, at the recital of his gallant actions, Craterus put him
in mind of the encounter he had with him at the battle of Issus, and of the
disadvantage the gods had sent him, for offering to oppose that valor, to which
all humane valor ought to yield. Oroodates received Craterus's discourse with a
great deal of humility, and excused his fall, by the disorder of a throng
wherein valiant men, and cowards com down together. These words drew on a
noble, and a pleasing conversation among so many persons of note, from whom the
fair Amazone Queen (who was known to many of the company that had retained the
Idea of her from the time of her voyage to Alexander) received the honors that
were due unto her merit, and to her quality; all the eminent persons in that
great army desired to partake in that acquaintance, and the press which began
to incommode the Princes, obliged them to think of retiring, when from mouth to
mouth there came a rumor among them, that there was some disorder at one end of
the Camp. Lysimachus, Eumenes, Demetrius, Laomedon, and many others with them,
turned toward that side, and caused room to be made for them to go and appeas
that tumult, while the rest with Oroondates, and Thalestris went toward
Polemon's house. The cause of the nois that had been heard was this; five or six
Troupers being three or four hundred paces from their body, and following the
bank of the river either by order from their captain, or for some particular
intention, saw coming softly toward them, a Cavalier attended only by one
Squire, his garb, and the pace he rode showed that he was either very weary,
or deeply buried in his thoughts; but whatsoever his posture was, one might see
he was of a very fair stature; the color of his arms was near to that of
withered leaves, but they were scattered over with black spots, and with some
sparks of fire in many places; his coat of arms was of wrought steel, and his
cask was covered with plumes of the same color, and with a long black horse
tail, which waved upon his shoulders; with his left hand he carried a shield,
where in he also bore fables, a man's heart torn by many vultures, and these
words in Greek, Or ceas to tear me, or make me ceas to live. In his right
hand he held a strong javelin, whereof having set the end of the shaft upon
his foot, he seemed to lean upon it with all his weight. These horsemen having
looked awhile upon him, and seeing him com still nearer to their camp in that
melancholy fashion, whether it were that they took him for a spy, or that
they had a mind to know who he was, advanced toward him uncivilly enough, and
asked him bluntly, What he was, and whither he went? The stranger lift up his
head at the nois they made in coming to him, and seeing himself encompassed and
examined by those fellows; Friends (said he) I follow my way; I know not who
you are, and you have nothing to do to know who I am. The forwardest of the
Troupers nettled with this disdainful answer, Whosoever you are ( replied he)
you shall com before our Generals, to give them an account of what I have asked
you, and what business bring's you so near unto our camp. Saying these words
he seized upon his bridle, and presenting the point of his javelin at him,
commanded him to follow him. The stranger who naturally was none of the most
patient, could not suffer the violence that was offered him, and without
considering the number of his enemies, he rushed against him that had laid
hold of his rein, with his shield, and with the breast of his horse so
impetuously, that he sent him and his, tumbling breathless to the ground; the
rest stirred up by the fall of their companion, ran all furiously to revenge
him; and the stranger who had already prepared himself to receiv them, made at
the first so unfortunately for him, that he struck his javelin in at his
throat, and laid him dead among the horses feet. After this action, letting go
his javelin, he drew his sword, and falling in among them with an incomparable
fierceness, he made them quickly know, that they had vainly hoped to get the
advantage over him by their number; the third of his enemies was already
gnawing the earth, having received a thrust which ran him quite through the
body, and those that were left began to think of running away, when the nois
of the fight so near the camp, was heard by the nearest Troops; some of the
Troopers ran presently thither; who seeing their companions dead and wounded,
betook themselves to their side, and without considering the laws of honor fell
all together upon the stranger, who received them with an assuredness able to
strike that terror into them whereof he himself was incapable. Com base
cowards (cried he) com, and believ that though I care but little for my life,
I Will sell it you at as dear a rate as if I loved it very much. Speaking these
words he flew amongst them like a thunderbolt, and covering himself with his
shield with an admirable dexterity, he dealt his blows to the boldest of them
with so great a force, that every one of them carried either death, or an
incurable wound along with it. But the number still increased, and how valiant
soever he was, yet being neither immortal, nor invulnerable, he began to
know the danger which he could not fear, and though stoutly assisted by his
Squire, he must infallibly have sunk at last, if Menander, Phrataphernes,
Oxidates, Ilioneus, Tiridates, and a great many more had not com to the place
of that unequal combat. Menander when he saw those horsemen to be his, made
himself known to them by a loud cry, and commanding them to retire, he
disengaged the valiant stranger, from the imminent danger that threatened him.
When he was delivered from the assaults of so many enemies, he put up the
beaver of his cask a little to take breath, and Menander coming up softly to
him, after having considered the number of men he had lost, and observed the
greatness of their wounds, and the force of the hand that had made them, looked
very heedfully upon him, and through the opening of his cask perceiving
something in his face that was extremely handsome; Whosoever thou art (said he)
I know not upon what occasion thou have killed my men here before my eyes, and
in sight of the whole Camp. I am obliged to ask satisfaction of thee for their
death, but I will take it fairly without odds, and though these bloody marks
of thy valor were enough to terrify common persons, they shall not move me to
commit a baseness, nor make use of any companions otherwise then as spectators
of our combat. Menander had newly ended these words when Lysimachus, Eumenes,
and the rest that were with them came unto that place, and having in short
learned the cause of that fight, and the former successes, they disposed
themselves to be witnesses of the event, and to hinder that valiant man from
receiving any foul play. The stranger gave no answer to Menander, but taking a
javelin from his Squire, he turned his back to his enemy, to fetch a carrier
by his example. Their illustrious spectators with impatiencie expected the
issue of their course, and the braverie of it deceived not the opinion they had
conceived. The two warriers struck each other with their javelines, and shocked
one another violently with their shields, but their forces were unequal, and
the stranger being only a little shaken in his saddle, thrust Menander out of
his, and made him fall over the crupper of his horse. Menander got up again, and
having an undanted courage, he drew his sword, waiting for his enemy in the
posture of a gallant man; but the stranger, who saw he was hurt with his fall,
and who esteemed the frankness of his proceeding, coming to him, I pray you
(said he) let the combat end between us, I have been more happy, but not more
valiant then you, yet if your companions will run your fortune, I shall
willingly give them this divertisement, and perchance in their destiny, you
may either find your revenge, or your consolation. Menander was so bruised,
and so little able to prosecute the combat, that he was constrained to accept
the offer, with a grief which he could not dissemble, and leaving the list to
others, I yield to thee (cried he) O valiant man, but it is with hope that I
shall quickly have companions in my disgrace. These words and those of the
stranger pricked some of the bystanders with point of honor, and not enduring
the bravado of that stranger, they all in a cluster demanded the combat, but
bold Ilioneus was first ready, and ran swiftly against the stranger with an
invincible courage, but his fate was no better then Menander's, and having
vainly encountered his enemy he was thrown upon the ground so impetuously,
that he was hardly able to rise again. Tiridates presently took his place, but
his fortune was the same, and Menander had also great matter of consolation in
the falls of Oxidates, Cambyses, and Phrataphernes. Then it was that Lysimachus
and his companions lost patience, and the brave Laomedon, not being able to
suffer the public affront, spurred on his horse toward the stranger, and
sending him the choice of two javelins, we must either repair our dishonor
(cried he) or thou must absolutely carry away the glory from the companions
of Alexander. As he ended these words he shook his javelin, and setting
himself stiff upon his stirrups, he went to meet his enemy with a mavelous
suddenness, their shock was worthy of the valor of them both, and the stranger
was so disordered by it, that he lost his stirrups, but he overthrew Laomedon
with such violence, that he made him and his horse roll together upon the sand.
The fall of Laomedon, whose valor had been tried in a thousand encounters,
caused all that were present to cry out; but it filled Lysimachus his mind
with grief, and indignation; he advanced before all the rest, and holding back
young Demetrius, who full of a generous ambition was already beginning his
carrier against the stranger, he drew near him, and saluted him with much
civilitie. After having a while considered his behavior and his arms; I would
willingly (said he) make trial of your forces, if the weariness of so many
courses had not lessened them, and though after the fall of my companions, you
can get but little honor upon me, I would do my endeavor either to revenge
them, or keep them company, if you were not in a condition wherein you may
have need of rest. The stranger by this discourse knew the humor of Lysimachus,
and being unwilling to lose any of his advantages against him, I think indeed
(answered he) that I shall stand in need of all my forces against you, but
such as they are I protest to you they are as entire, as at the beginning of
the fight, and that I have neither wound nor weariness that hinder's me from
contenting you. I fear (replied Lysimachus) I shall abuse your generositie, but
I commit this fault upon your word, and upon the knowledge that I have need of
this little advantage against you, therefore since you pleas, I will venture
the hazard of a combat which I am ashamed to demand of you, with protestation
that this shall be the last you shall be obliged to. I do not hope (said the
stranger) to get out of your hands in a condition to fight another combat, and
I shall account my self happy, if I can keep that glory against you, which I
have gotten against your friends. After these civilities they turned their
backs to take their carrier, and clapping spurs at the end of it, they met with
such a violence, that their shock was little different from that of two ships
driven one against one another by the impetuous waves; their javelins broak
without effect, and were shivered even within their very hands, but their
shields, heads, and shoulders dashed against one another so forcibly, that such
an encounter could not happen without mischief; the strangers horse wearied with
the former courses, not being able to resist so powerful a charge, fell with
his Master upon the dust, that of Lysimachus being more fresh, kept upon his
feet, but his Master came to the ground with the saddle between his legs. The
two warriers equally ashamed of their mishap, got up at the same time, and
drawing their swords, laid on two such weighty blows as they closed, that they
were both like to have kissed the ground the second time; these two trials of
their forces, having changed their former civilities into a real anger, they
were preparing to prosecute their combat, when Laomedon, Menander, Eumenes, and
the rest desiring to prevent the danger that threatened those valiant men,
opposed their intention, and hindered them from passing further. If these
combats must be made an end of (cried Laomedon) let the stranger then make an
end with me, I was not disabled to fight though I fell by my horses fault. Some
of those that had been dismounted said as much; but Eumenes, Demetrius, and
those that were disinteressed, judged that the stranger was free, that the
glory was equal between him, and Lysimachus; and that it was not fit to oppose
his passage longer, nor to detain him by other ways then those of civilitie.
After this resolution Lysimachus putting up the beaver of his Cask went to
embrace him, and the stranger, in doing the like, made the whole company see
that few men in the world were equal to him in gracefulness of behavior.
Lysimachus as much satisfied with that sight, as with the trial of his forces,
desired infinitely to engage him in his party, and with that design, Sir (said
he) you have here see adorers of your valor, and you shall quickly know the
esteem and the affection, which your virtue has already produced among them,
if you refuse not to be their companion in a most just quarrel, and to put
your self into a party, wherein your generositie alone is able to engage you.
I know not (said he to Lysimachus) whether these be the forces of Perdiccas,
Cassander, and their friends which are drawing together at Babylon. We are the
mortal Enemies (replied Lysimachus) of those you have named, and of their
party, and it is only against them, we have raised the forces which you see
cover this field. I cannot be your friend then (answered the stranger) and
though I particularly esteem your virtue, a more ancient obligation calls me
to your enemies, it is only to serve them against you, that I am going to
Babylon, and if you be so generous as to afford me passage thither, we shall
every day have occasions to end the combats we have begun. Lysimachus his
anger was a little kindled at this reply, but he dissembled it the best he
could, and said to the stranger with much moderation. You are too gallant a man
not find free passage every where, and though your assistance be very
considerable, we fear not our enemies so much, as to go about to weaken them
of the succor they will receiv from you. We shall see you upon service, since
you desire it, and if you be remarkable in the throng by that impres of the
voltures, it is by that of the Lion you may always know Lysimachus. At these
words, without desiring further conversation with him after the declaration he
had made, he caused the strangers horse to be led to him, and presently gave
him a convoy to bring him through the Troops, and to conduct him within sight
of the gates of Babylon. The stranger departed on this manner, and taking his
way toward the City, left Lysimachus, and his companions a high esteem of his
valor, and matter enough to talk of him all the rest of that day. If our
Enemies (said Lysimachus) have many men in their party like this stranger, and
like Arsaces who has already embraced it, we shall not be without
imploiment, but I know not why the gods should permit so unjust a quarrel to
be supported by such valiant persons. After this discourse, and some orders they
gave to make their Troops draw back into their Quarters, they went to find the
rest of their friends who were retired to Polemon's house with Oroondates. There
with more leisure, and more liberty then in the field, Oroondates expressed
his endearments to his old friends, and perfected the making of an acquaintance
with the new Oxyartes and Artabasus, could not tell which way sufficiently to
testify their ardent affection to him, and the young Princes Oxydates,
Ilioneus, Cambyses, and many others, who had formerly seen, and adored him in
the Court of Darius, considered him as a demie-god, and kissed his hands with
submissions, and respects, which they could not have showed to any other man
without Idolatry, and to which he answered with a confusion worthy of his
modesty. Artabasus made him remember his first being in arms against Darius,
his arrival at the Court, and the bloody battle of Selen^, where he had
fought in person against the forces of the King his Father. Oxiates and
Craterus put him in mind of the battle of of Issus; Ilioneus spoke to him of
Damascus and of his encounter with Artaban and Parmenio. Ptolomeus and
Antigonus of his passages with Alexander, Eumenes of the battle of Arbella and
Polyperchon of what he had don for the saving of Alexander at Susa. In that
illustrious company there were few, who though they never knew him till then,
had not been witnesses of some of his mervellous actions, and by that
recapitulation of his life, they called things into his memory, which in stead
of comforting, did most sensibly afflict him. When that entertainment broke
off, Laomedon had time to tell the company the encounter of the stranger who
had dismounted him with so many others, and who had found no resistance but in
Lysimachus, and spoke of his valor in terms, which made them all sorry to hear
he had chosen their contrary party. The day having been thus spent, all the
men retired into their Tents, and left Oroondates alone in the house with the
Ladies whose number was augmented by the arrival of the Wives of Polyperchon,
and of some others, the most considerable of them lodged in the house with them
that were there before, and the rest went down into the Tents with their
husbands. That night as many others was passed by our Lovers in violent
disq^iets, Oroondates tormented with his jealousy, was little capable of rest,
and Thalestris was racked with the same passion, but with more vehemence, and
with more furious resentments against what she formerly had loved. Lysimachus
free from that torture, and delivered from his former grief, suffered now only
for the absence, and for the captivity of his Princess. True it is, that to
the sorrow for that separation which deprived him of a sight so earnestly
longed for, he likewise added fears grounded upon very reasonable
probabilities; he was in fear for the life, and he was in fear for the humor
of his Princess; he was afraid that Roxana would vent her utmost cruelties
against her, and if the love of Alcetas who for his own interest was like to
be watchful in the preservation of her, had not a little secured him, that
apprehension would have been sufficient to deprive him of all repose. And
moreover, he feared least Parisatis, from whom he had received none but very
light testimonies of affection, should have changed with her fortune, and have
taken a general aversion to men, by those accidents which might have incensed
her against them; this was his mistrust, for to suspect her of any other
lightness after the knowledge he had of the firmness, and soliditie of her
mind, was a thing that could never fall into his thought; that which augmented
these cruel doubts, and made him the more unsatisfied with fortune, was little
reckoning his Princess had made of him since her misfortunes, having neither
daigned after so many, and so great proofs of his affection, to command his
service, nor so much as to make her self known to him, in the strange occasions
she had, and in the dangers she had run. Not being well able to digest this
effect of her severitie, he took it for an effect of ingratitude, and this
thought plunged him into a deadly affliction. After he had don all he could
possibly to flatter himself, and to banish that killing opinion out of his
mind, he set himself to search out means to see her; or to hear some news of
her, not having patience in that condition to stay till the end of a war which
might be of a tedious length, and whereof the events as yet were doubtful. In
these agitations of mind he passed a good part of the night, and the next
morning came betimes into Oroondates his Chamber: Finding no body with him
but* Araxes, he presently communicated his disquiets to him, and the desire
he had to attempt all things possible to see Parisatis, or to learn something
of her. The Prince of Scythia who for all his jealousy was more inflamed then
ever, declared unto Lysimachus first by his sighs, and then by discourses which
were all fire, that he was racked with the same desire, and that
notwithstandiug he was betrayed, abandoned and forgotten, he could not
possibly take any rest in that ignorance of his Princcesses condition. What do
we know (said he) but that they may be fallen again into the hands of
merciless Roxana, or that our enemies may with tyranny, and indignity make
use of their power over them? Ah! without doubt, if I were in a condition to do
it, I would go through a thousand swords but I would see my ungrateful Statira.
I should already have attempted the same (said Lysimachus) if I could
undertake it without ruining our affairs, but my face is so known to all that
are at Babylon, that 'twould be impossible I should be a minute concealed
among them. Araxes coming to them during this discourse, If you think me
capable to serve you (said he) why do you not put me upon this imploiment, you
cannot choose any body, that will perform it with more fidelity, nor that can
do it with more facility, I am unknown to all your enemies and provided I can
but hide my self from Arbates, I may be amongst them without danger whole
years together. Ah! Araxes, (cried Oroondates) after Toxaris his adventure, I
should be in too much fear of thy life, I should never be at quiet, if I had
cast thee into so manifest a peril. I am not worthy Sir, (replied Araxes) of
the care you have of my safety, and since it is dearer to you then I have
deserved, I will manage it so well, that I will run no hazard. Toxaris his
misfortune shall make me take care to shun Arbates, and all other persons that
might discover me, and you may be certain I will bring you news of the
Princesses, if it be possible to learn any, and will give you a reasonable
good account of the condition your enemies are in. Araxes to these words added
so many others, that he at last obtained the Commission he desired from his
Master; he promised Lysimachus the like service, and that Prince who
acknowledged himself obliged to him, returned him thanks, with extraordinary
kindness and civilitie; The Princes would not give him any instructions,
knowing he was capable of more important businesses, and they relied
absolutely upon his prudence for the whole conduct of that enterprise. Araxes
counseled them to hazard two Letters, which should be delivered to their
Princesses, if he could be so happy as to get a sight of them, or be brought
back to their hands again, if he returned without having been able to do them
that service. Oroondates in the estate he believed himself to stand in
Statira's mind, and in that she her self stood in his, found great
difficulties before he could resolve to write to her, but in the end by the
persuasions of Lysimachus, who sweetened his discontents as much as possibly he
could, and who was not much better satisfied himself, he took a pen and write
these words unto the Queen.

Prince Oroondates to Queen Statira.
YOu might think this meanness of spirit strange, if for your sake I were not
accustomed to be guilty of the like. I reproach you with nothing, O
Cassandra, but I com to die for you, since you have judged me unworthy to live
for you; I will endeavor by my blood to establish your repose, but with that
blood, I will also ingrave in your heart an eternal remors of your infidelity
to me. As much cast off and as much forsaken as I am now for the last time, I
will without trouble give that life for you, which you have used to sacrifice
to despair; But pardon me O Statira, if in the service I do you in general, I
offend you in particular, and if in the number of your enemies, I comprehend my
cruel and pitiless enemy; he shall fall if the gods favor the justice of my
quarrel, but if I be capable to injure you in his person, I shall be so
without doubt to satisfy you in mine; and you shall not have the displeasure
of seeing Oroondates outlive the offense he shall have committed against you.


This was Oroondates his Letter, and that of the discontented Lysimachus was in
these terms:

Prince Lysimachus to the Princess Parisatis.
He from whom you concealed your self so carefully cannot conceal himself from
you, O Parisatis, and you may know him by his ordinary marks, he come's to do
you a service, which you will not vouchsafe to receiv from him, rather then to
make complaints of your disdain; I ought to drown that sorrow in the joy of
your safety, and since it please's the gods that you are alive, I ought
without murmuring to suffer that you should still be insensible, and that you
should still be Parisatis. The unchangeableness of your humor cannot be truly
compared to any thing but that of mine, and you are not more firm in keeping
your ordinary insensibilitie toward me, that I am in keeping within the terms
of an inviolable fidelity toward you.


They had newly made an end of writing their Letters, and had given them to
Araxes with most pressing recommendations, when the Chamber was filled with
Princes that came to visit Oroondates, and while they were drawing near unto
his bed, Araxes who had no further orders to receiv went out of the room, and
so directly about the executing of his Commission. After that the Princes had
paid their civivilities to Oroondates, and enquired concerning his health, they
entered into Counsel about their affairs, and Antigonus having demanded audience
to propose some thing of moment spoke to them on this manner. Besides the
knowledge of your valor, that of the justice of our quarrel, gave me very good
hopes of the issue of our enterprise; and I believed that in prosecuting our
enemies before as those that had murdered, and now as those who unjustly
detain the widow of our deceased King, and their own lawful Queen, we had a
pretext reasonable enough, to arm all our forces against them; but yet as if
the gods had judged that cause too light to devide so many Princes who
heretofore were friends, and make them turn those arms against one another,
which they have made use of for the conquest of the whole earth, they have been
pleased to bring to light the crimes of our enemies, and complete our taking
arms against them by reasons able to arm all virtuous persons with us. Amongst
the false murderers of Statira and Parisatis, we assault the true murderers
of Alexander; our suspicions are now but too much confirmed, and I cannot aver
that Perdiccas and Roxana have meddled in this parricide, yet are they criminal
enough to be detested both of the gods and men, since they uphold the
perfidious Cassander, who has taken away the life not only of his King, but of
the greatest of all Kings. Do not believ it is upon light conjectures that I
discover this fact to you, it is not upon the jealousy we had of it, nor upon
the knowledge many of us have had of his love unto Roxana: and his aversion to
Alexander, from the time he took him by the hair and beat his head against the
walls in our presence; no, we have a certain assurance of it, and I can
produce two men, who very innocently served as instruments in this horrid
treason; they are two Macedonians who were bred up with Antipater, and who by
Cassanders command brought unto the Court that poison which put an end to the
gallantest life that ever was, 'twas of the water of Nonacris a fountain in
Macedonia, which is of such an excessive coldness, that it extinguishes all
natural heat, and cannot be contained in any thing but a horses hoof. These
two Macedonians having brought it to Cassander, he found means to procure them
places about the Kings cup-bord, and within awhile after discovering himself to
them, as to two old servants of his house, he by hope of extraordinary
recompenses would have persuaded them to pour this water into the Kings
drink's; but they affrighted at that horrible design, refused to obey him, and
strove to divert him from that cruel resolution. Cassander having vainly
solicited them again, made use of his brother Iolas, whom for that design he
got to be made chief Cupbearer, and for fear those two men should declare his
wickedness, he caused them to be taken by others of his dependents, who under
some pretense carried them out of the Town, with a command to kill them; The
villains followed the order they had received from their Master, and having
brought these miserable wretches into a by place, they stabbed them in many
parts of their bodies, but it so pleased the gods that they had not time to
make an end of them, and that seeing certain persons coming toward the place
where they were, they fled away leaving these poor men half dead; they were
taken from thence by Country people who carrying them to their houses caused
them to be dressed so carefully, that they at last recovered, and but
yesterday being able to walk abroad, they came to me desiring I would protect
them against Cassander, making me the relation more at large, of what I have
told you in a few words.

Antigonus had no sooner ended his discourse, but he sent for the two
Macedonians, and in the mean time all the Princes, began with imprecations to
detest Cassanders wickedness, and by so powerful a motive, were more strongly
animated in the hatred they bore his party; they had suspected Iolas before
upon many conjectures, but having noble, and generous souls themselves, they
could hardly imagine that others were capable of a crime of that nature. In the
interim the two men came, and having made a deposition every way conformable to
what Antigonus had said, and answered many questions which were asked them
about that matter, they left the whole company ^ully confirmed in the belief
of that Parricide. All those great Princes whose hearts did most sacredly
reverence the memory of Alexander, trembled at this confirmation, and sent
forth threat's against those monsters full of a true zeal and lawful anger.
Even Oroondates himself, who honored the remembrance of that mighty King as of
a miraculous person, was highly concerned in their resentment, and with them
swore to revenge the death of that illustrious rival. The Princes not being
contented that the justice of their cause, should serve for their own private
satisfaction, were desirous to manifest it to the whole world, and to make all
men know, it was not for light occasions that they had taken arms against their
Companions and ancient Allies. With that intent after they had agreed upon it
among themselves, they set forth a Declaration which Artabasus, and Eumenes drew
up in these words:

The Princes joined in League for the revenge of Alexander, and for the
liberty of the Queen his wife, and of the Princess his Sister.
AS we have ever believed, that without very powerful reasons, men could not
with honor unloos themselves from the bonds of friendship, and violate their
ancient alliances; so have we also desired, that all those to whom our actions
shall be known, might be made acquainted with our intentions, and might have
no occasion to expound them according to the sens our Enemies would give them.
We protest therefore both before the gods and before men, that it is not any
discontent about our shares in the lately divided Empire, nor any design to
make our selves greater, that has put arms into our hands against those who
heretofore were our friends and companions, but much juster causes and such as
ought to make all the generous persons upon earth to rise up with us. It is for
Alexander that we have taken arms, and we have at last discovered that that
demi-god, who found none but adorers through the whole world, has found
monsters amongst his own subjects, who by an execrable parricide, have deprived
mankind of the greatest Personage that ever lived. Cassander whose name ought
to be abhorred by all the Princes upon earth, and of whom no body ought
henceforth to speak without detestation, the base poisoner of his Master and of
his King, does not only find safety amongst those who were nearest to him,
and amongst those who hold all their honor and all their fortune from him, but
also a support against those that were his faithful servants, and a protection
that would be refused him even among the greatest Enemies of his memory.
Roxana whom he honored with his bed, and with the participation of his Crowns,
whom from the daughter of Cohortanus, he raised to be the wife of Alexander,
and whom from Captivity, he exalted to the highest degree of honor that ever
woman attained; Perdiccas whom he favored during his life, and whom he
honored at his death with the chiefest marks of his affection and esteem, and a
great many others who are little less indebted then they to the ashes of their
Master, arm themselves in the defense of his poisoners, of his parricides. But
was there any less to be expected from those who by actions of the same nature
have sufficiently testified that they were of the same inclinations, and that
they would yet prosecute Alexander in the person of them that were as dear to
him as his life. Did not Perdiccas and the rest of Roxana's accomplices, by a
violence without example, force the great Queen Statira, and the Princess her
Sister, out of the hands of their attendants to murder them before the eyes of
that pitiless woman? Did they not even bring the knife unto their throats? And
if Perdiccas out of consideration of his own interest spared their lives, has
he not changed the pain of their death into that of a cruel and unworthie
Captivity? Those great Princesses who were so dear and considerable to our
mighty King, now languish in slaverie to his subjects, who impose shameful
Laws upon them, and who from the blood of Darius and from the alliance of
Alexander would make them stop to that of the meanest of his Followers. These
are the only considerations that make us take up arms, with a firm
protestation before all the world, and at the foot of our Altars, that we will
never lay them down till Alexander be revenged, and the Princesses freed and
satisfied. And if our Enemies would persuade indifferent persons, that we make
use of these pretenses to cover our ambition, or other less lawful causes of
division, let them do justice themselves upon the murderers of Alexander, and
restore the Princesses to their liberty and to their former authority, and
they shall find us most ready to withdraw our forces from these Countries,
and leav them in a perfect tranquillity.

The Princes having caused a great many copies to be taken of this
Declaration, and made them be spread abroad through the Army, and were careful
to send them to all places where they desired the justice of their quarrel
should be known. The next day they proceeded to the election of a general, and
to make choice of a Prince among them, that should give orders, and command the
rest with an absolute power; but in this enterprise there was no small
difficulty, and their contestations were very different from those which are
usual in the like occasions; all of them equally avoided that advantage; and
that glory which elsewhere is wont to be so much envied, found nothing but
aversion and disdain among those generous souls. All with a joint consent
yielded that honor to Prince Oroondates, and protested to him with great
submissions, that they would not march with him unless they might obey him.
Ptolomeus, Lysimachus, Oxyartes, Eumenes and many others, pressed him to it
with most ardent entreaties, but he resisted them with so much modesty and
constancy, that 'twas impossible for them to move him. It is enough (said he)
that you do me the honor to suffer me amongst you, and I receiv that favor
with great acknowledgment, I who am useless among you, and who am here utterly
destitute of forces, in the midst of so many Princes, the weakest of whom have
brought whole Armies. Although I had with me all the strength of Scythia, I
should still make it my glory to obey men so worthy to command me, and I
should be as firm as I now am, in refusing an honor, which you cannot offer
me without making me remember my want of ability. By such like reasons
Oroondates rejected the command, but not one of the Princes could be persuaded
to take it from him, and Ptolomeus, Lysimachus and the rest were no less
obstinate then he in denying to accept of that authority. At last by voices of
all the Officers, the supreme power was put into the hands of six among them,
who should command by turns every one his day. These were Prince Oroondates,
Prince Oxiartes, Ptolomeus, Lysimachus, Craterus, and Antigonus. Eumenes,
Polyperchon, Queen Thalestris, Old Artabasus, and Laomedon, who might with
justice have pretended to the same dignity, refused it so absolutely, that
'twas impossible to make them com into the number. Artabasus excused himself by
his age, Thalestris by her sex, Eumenes by his humor which was an Enemy to
command, and by the union between him and Ptolemeus to whom he remitted the
whole care, Polypercon and Laomedon by other considerations. The six Princes
seeing themselves constrained to submit to that election, condescended to it at
last, protesting to their companions that they accepted nothing of that charge
but the care and trouble, and that for the honor of it, they would always
yield it totally to them. That day being spent in this election, all retired
to their Tents, and the next morning certain Scouts that had been sent abroad,
brought word to Craterus (to whom by reason of his experience, of his credit
with the Souldierie which he still preserved since Alexander's time, and of
Oroondates his indisposition, all his companions had given the first day) that
they had seen a body of seven or eight hundred horse com out of the City, who
made as if they would draw near unto their Camp, byasing toward the side of the
hill. The young Demetrius thrust forward by a generous boiling heat, asked leav
of Craterus to go with alike number of men, to drive the Enemies back into the
Town, or draw them to a fight, and having with some difficulty obtained it from
his Father Antigonus, who loved him with an extraordinary tenderness, and who
could not without great repugnance see him go into danger, he took horse with
eight hundred of his men, proved to have the honor of striking the first blow
in that war; he would not take a greater number with him for fear the
inequality of the party should make the Enemies retire without fighting, and
rob him of the glory he sought; besides that the place was proper for his
intention, and that in an open Campagn he could not fear any ambushes, which
in another place the Enemy might have had a design to draw him into. The
beautiful Paris never had such a grace in Arms as the young Demetrius, his eyes
shot darts of love, and war so equally, that it was hard for his Enemies to see
him in that Equipage, without fearing and loving him both together. Young
Alexander, brave Ilioneus, valiant Tiriclates, the two courageous sons of
Mazeus, and many other youthful Princes without command, would needs accompany
Demetrius in that first occasion. They marched all together, and in excellent
order guided by them that had brought the intelligence, and Craterus who would
not hazard them carelessly, caused two thousand horse to advance out of the
Camp, and be in a readiness to second them in case of necessity. Queen
Thalestris who was present when this order was given, desired Craterus to grant
her the conduct of them, which he did with great civilitie; and that new
Bellona eager of that occasion to make her self remarkable called for her arms,
and being covered with polished steel, she put her self at the head of those
men, who submitted themselves joyfully to her command, and felt their valor
redoubled by the presence of that fair Amazone, whose reputation was spread
over all Asia. Demetrins was already a good way from the Camp, and marched
before his men with a joy that was easily to be observed in his countenance;
Alas! he was ignorant or his destiny, and knew not how many sighs and tears
that day would cost him. He met not the Enemies so soon as he imagined, for
they being com from Babylon only to burn some Village from whence the Camp drew
great conveniences, had already don their execution, and were retiring toward
the City in great diligence. Demetrius discovered them upon a little hill that
rose up in the plain, and being inflamed at that sight with a youthful anger,
he exited his companions to the fight by words that breathed nothing but fire.
My friends (said he) how great will our glory be, if among so many thousand
gallant men, we bring home the first honors of this war; it is from this
beginning the omen of the future success will be drawn, and all our Camp
look's upon it as an infallible prognostic of the general event. Saying these
words he advanced a pace, and endeavored to cut off the Enemies passage to the
Town, thereby to force them to an encounter whether they would or no; but there
was no need of that industry to engage them to it, for they were led by a man,
who for a greater number then his, would not have quitted the Field without
fighting. 'Twas Leonatus, whose courage was little short of rashness, and who
in the Court of Alexander had always past for one of the boldest, and most
adventrous. Neither did he continue his way to Babylon, but seeing Demetrius
advance, whose forces he judged by the eye to be little different from his,
he faced about, and after having sent out a couple of horsemen to view his
strength, he marched straight toward him, and commanded his Trumpets to sound
a Charge. Never did a more pleasing nois then that, fill the ears of the young
son of Antigonus, he made them to be answered by his at the same time, and
seeing Leonatus at the head of his squadron, he spurred on at a good distance
before his, and holding up his Javeline, he ran fiercely at him, being
covered with that shield whereon the god of Love was painted. Leonatus met him
with a courage not inferior to his, and their Javelines breaking in the
Encounter, they ended their carreer without being thrown out of their Saddles,
but Leonatus lost his stirrups, and was so shaken in his seat, that he
tottered a good while in great danger of falling. The crowd of those that fell
on after them, hindered the prosecution of their combat, and rushing each into
his Enemies Squadron, they instantly showed proofs of an extraordinary valor;
the earth was covered with dead bodies in a moment, and both sides fought with
so much courage, and obstinacy, that the victory remained long uncertain; but
in the end Demetrius, who in those beginnings of his arms was resolved either
to overcom or die, and his valiant Companions who fought close by him, animated
their men so bravely by their words, and by their examples, that Leonatus his
party began to give ground. Deometrius who saw them waver, pursued his
advantage fiercely, and continued his charge with so much vigor, that at last
he made the firecest of them turn their backs. Leonatus strove to stop his men
by entreaties and threats, but when once fear had seized them, it was
impossible to make them face about. Cambyses, Araspes, Tiridates, Alexander and
Ilioneus second^d their young leader so gallantly, that in the end, their
Enemies were utterly routed. Leonatus not being able to rally, fought like a
desperate man, and having overthrown Tiridates, he came up to Demetrius a
second time, but fortune was contrary to him at that last combat, and having
received two wounds, he with much ado was rescued by some of his most faithful
Soldiers, out of the hands of that young Warrier, for whom Victory had
already declared her self. Leonatus was carried off by his men whether he
would or no, and the rest of his party fled toward the City without order and
without resistance. The Conquerors prosecuted their Victory eagerly, and were
already within sight of the walls of Babylon, when there came forth a body of
horse consisting of three or four Squadrons. Demetrius at that sight made a
halt, and all his friends counseled him to retire, while he had a free
retreat; but he having a fiery courage could not dispose himself to hearken
to their advice, and would rather perish then turn his back to them who fled
still before him. The remainder of Leonatus his squadron taking heart began to
face about to amuse him, and without doubt his youthful order was going to
precipitate him into a manifest danger, when some of his souldie^s casting their
eyes toward the Camp, perceived the Amazone Queen, who with her two thousand
horse came up at a large trot to have her part in Demetrius his glory. That
young warrier finding his men recover spirit at the sight of that supply, could
no longer contain himself, but utterly defeating those who yet made head
against him, (as it were to rough-hew the victory before the Queen came up) he
ran fiercely to give a charge to those new enemies; Cassander was at the head
of them, and with him the valiant stranger, who a few days before had
dismounted so many gallant men upon the bank of the Euphrates. Demetrius knew
him by that dreadful impress of the vultures, and animated with a desire to
seek honor where the danger was greatest, he took a javelin, and gave his horse
a loos directly toward him, but Cassander opposed his design, and coming to
receiv that encounter, constrained him to employ those arms against him, which
he intended against another; but he was quickly punished for his presumption,
for having only shaken Demetrius a little, he was met with so furious a
shock, that he tumbled amongst the horses feet, which had trampled out his
brains, if the care of his safety had not caused many of his soldiers to
alight, who drew him out of that danger, and set him again on horsback, though
extremely bruised with his fall. In the mean time the unresistable stranger had
overthrown Ilioneus, and Tiridates, and falling in amongst the rest, cast fear
and death into all places whithersoever he turned. Demetrius sought him with
his sword in his hand, and strove by his valor to make his small party
subsist, but his endeavors were unprofitable, and he could no longer defend
himself against those vigorous enemies, whose number was four times as great as
his, if he had not been seconded by the Amazone Queen, who presently stopped the
enemies impetuousness, and made the combat equal. Amongst those that
accompanied Cassander were the young Aristander brother to Leonatus, Cleophon
the son of Cenos, Cleomedes the brother of Egelochus, and many other men of
courage, and of noble blood. The brave Thalestris had laid Aristander and
Cleomedes on the ground with two several blows, Aristander with one of her
javelin, which ran him through the shoulder, and Cleomedes with another of her
sword, which made him fall under the horses feet, she seconded those two
mighty strokes with many others, which soon made her to be taken notice of,
and forced the boldest of her enemies to turn the point of their arms against
her, but she behaved her self with such a fury as made them believ she could
not possibly be wounded. The nois of this supply, and of her valor came
quickly to the ears of the furious stranger, whose reputation, and the
slaughter he had made in another place was already com unto the Queen; this
mutual report animated these two valiant persons with a desire to get to one
another, and forcing their passage with their swords, they sought the way that
might soonest bring them together. The two courageous sons of Mazeus, who had
made themselves remarkable that day by a thousand gallant actions, and who
bloody all over had don things truly worthy of the memory of their father,
opposed the strangers passage before he could com up to the Queen, and
Cambyses defying him with a loud cry, discharged such a weighty blow upon his
cask, as made his head sink almost to the saddle-bow, and scarce had he
recovered his seat when Araspes, vigorously seconding his brother, laid upon
him again in the same place with such a force, that being shaken before, he
was like to have reeled out of his saddle; the two brothers, proud of those
mighty blows, already promised themselves a happy success, but fortune
seconded not their hopes, and the strangers anger was raised to such a pitch,
that iron and steel were thenceforth too weak to resist the violence of his
arm; the first he met withal in that fury was the unfortunate Araspes, at
whom making a thrust with such a strength as had few equals, his sword finding
the defect of his curass, died it self in his blood to the very hilts, and
appeared all crimson on the other side of his body; Araspes dying opened his
arms, and calling upon the name of his brother, fell without life among those
heaps of dead bodies wherewith the field was already quite covered. What shall
the grieved Cambyses do at that woeful object? anger, and pity touched him
equally; on the one side he would fain lend a hand to his dying brother, who
called for his assistance, and on the other he fear's to los^ his murderer in
the throng, if he employ himself in that office; he was yet wavering in his
choice, when his irresolution was determined by the same sword, which taking
his head from his shoulders, made him fall with a river of blood upon the pale
body of his brother. The Amazone Queen was near that place, and being present
at that sorrowful spectacle, she was touched with compassion for the
lamentable death of those two noble brothers, and with an ardent desire to
revenge them. Ah! cruel man, (cried she to the stranger) this inhumaitie shall
not remain unpunished, and rushing toward him at the same time, she found him
most ready to receiv her; their first blows, showed marks to all those that
were about them, both of their force, and of their animositie, and they
redoubled them with such a fierceness, that many soldiers of both parties, gave
over fighting to become specators of their combat. In the mean time the Troops
on both sides were weakened by more then half their men, and young Demetrius
while the brave stranger was otherwise employed, encouraged his so vigorously,
and charged the enemies with such valor, and good fortune, that they began to
give back a little. They of Babylon were sending new squadrons out at their
gates, but casting their eyes toward the plain, they saw other Troops coming
from the camp, which Craterus sent to succor those of his party, and fearing
to engage themselves insensibly in a battle which they were not in a condition
to give, they changed their design, and sending to Cassander to retire,
contented themselves with drawing up those forces without the gates, to favor
his retreat. In the interim the stranger, and the high spirited Queen had
vainly sought their advantages with the sword, and not being in a place, where
they could freely bring their combat to an end, they let their swords hang by
certain chains wherewith they were fastened to their wrists, and seizing one
another about the body, they at the same time clapped spurs to their horses, and
firmly keeping their hold, pulled each other out of their saddles, and began to
roll upon the ground. The stranger had the advantage of the Queen a little in
strength, and perchance might have got the better in that struggling, but they
were not in a place where they could continue it, and fearing to be trodden
under the horses feet, they rose up with an equal nimbleness, and betaking
themselves to their swords again, were again beginning their combat on foot,
when Cassander came thither, and knowing the stranger, spurred on his horse upon
the Queen, and rushing against her shoulders, threw her all along at her
enemies feet, he would also have ridden over her, but the stranger caught
hold of his bit, and giving his horse a sudden stop, made him run back almost
like to have reared quite over, and at the same time covering the Queen with
his shield, Ah! Cassander (cried he) will thou dishonor thy self, and the best
of thy friends to day? In this interim the Queen got up, so furious, that if
Cassander had staid for her, he had been punished for his incivilitie, but at
that very instant he received the order from the Town, and commanded to found
a retreat. The Queen casting her eyes upon the stranger, saw her self separated
from him by a crowd, which it was impossible for her to break through, yet
getting upon a masterless horse, whereof there was a great number in the field,
she rode after him a good way, and seeing it would be hard for her to join
with him, I will remember (cried she to him) that thou art generous, but do
thou remember also, that at our next encounter, thou must end this combat with
me, wherein all the advantage thou had was by the baseness of thy friend.
The throng was so great before she had ended these words, that she could not
hear the strangers answer, only she observed that he put forth one of his
arms toward her, and followed Cassander who led him away by the other. The
reinforcement which came from the Camp was already near, and that was it which
made Cassander hasten his retreat the more. The Queen, and young Demetrius
would have followed them to the very gates, but the most prudent Commanders
dissuaded them, and showing the Troops which stood to sustain them, and which
advanced gently to receiv them, they hindered them from engageing themselves in
the pursuit. The valiant stranger retired softly in the rear of his whole
party, and as often as he faced about he sent terror into that of his
enemies. Demetrius already obeyed the counsels of those that dissuaded him
from advancing further, when a Cavalier of the enemies side, galloped single
from the Troops that came last out of the Town, and advancing straight toward
him with his sword drawn; For my part (cried he) I Will have no quarter, and
ending these words he struck at Demetrius, yet with so little force, that the
blow having hardly made any mark upon his arms, slipped thence upon his horses
head, where it left a very inconsiderable hurt, but so was not that he
received in exchange from Demetrius, for running imprudently upon his sword,
which he held forth against him, it gave him an exceeding deep wound in the
body, at which he cried out, and being but of a weak constitution, sunk from
his horse upon the ground. O Death! (cried he as he was falling) how sweet do
I find thee, and how much have I desired thee. In these like words, he spoke
something so lamentable, as touched young Demetrius with compassion; and causing
some of his soldiers to alight, he commanded them to take off his cask, and see
if he were yet in a condition to receiv help; his men obeying him, disarmed
the head of the wounded person, but scarce had they don so, when by long hair,
and a delicate complexion they discovered that it was a woman. Demetrius first
by the report of his soldiers, and then by the assurance he had of it himself,
being com close to them, was seized with an unparallelled astonishment, and
leaping from his horse he ran to the fair wounded stranger with an
extraordinary perplexity. Ah! (cried he coming to her) whoever you are, you
are most cruel in having made me imbrue my sword in the blood of that lovely
sex, to which I am a slave, and an idolater. In bringing forth these words, he
looked more nearly upon her face, and though it began to grow pale with loss of
blood, he found such beautiful, such taking features in it, that compassion
continued not long alone, in a heart so ready to receive the impressions of
love. This young afflicted Prince, sitting down by her, and unbuckling her
curass to try to stanch her blood, did her that service with a flood of tears,
and with sighs which powerfully enough expressed the greatness of his sorrow.
What crime (said he) O great gods, can I have committed against you, that you
should inflict so severe a punishment upon me? and why did you not suffer this
unworthy sword, to find a passage rather into my own bowels, then into this
fair body? He spoke these words with a despairing action, and the woman, who
understood the one, and observed the other, was moved with them her self, and
turning her eyes upon her enemie's lovely face, which she saw drowned in a
river of tears, whosoever thou art (said she) O pitiful conqueror, do not
envy me the glory of dying by thy hand, my crimes deserved not so noble a
destiny, and I am unworthie of the tears thou shedst upon my occasion, I
sought for death, and I have found it, but since thou art too full of pity, to
hasten it, though I should entreat thee, suffer it to com of it self without
opposing the satisfaction I receiv by its approches, and the repose I could not
hope for during my life. These words pronounced with a tone which though
mournful, had something in them very sweet and pleasing, pierced the heart of
the afflicted Demetrius; He was of a most excellent nature, and pity having
at first possessed every part of his soul, prepared it quickly for that
master-passion, to which he had an exceeding strong inclination. He was about
to show marks of the new effects it began to produce in him, when the Amazone
Queen who was present at that spectacle, and in whom compassion had wrought
very powerfully, counseled him to break off his complaints, to think of the
wounded Ladies safety, and at the same time calling soldiers, caused them to
take her up gently upon their bucklers, that they might carry her to the Camp
more easily then on horsback. She seemed to suffer that assistance only to
satisfy Demetrius, whose grief was so obliging to her; and by all her actions
she showed such an aversion against life, that they who did her that office,
knew they labored but in vain for her. Demetrius walked by them on foot, and
though he was completely armed except his cask which he had thrown off, and
his sword which he had broken in a thousand pieces, it was impossible to make
him get on horsback, or stir one step from her he had wounded; he forbore to
make her speak for fear of hurting her, but he kept his eyes full of tears,
incessantly fixed upon hers, and by their looks drunk in great draughts of that
poison which insensibly took possession of his soul. He vouchsafed not so much
as to speak to Eumenes, who had brought up the reinforcement for which the
enemies were retired, and when he was com to the Camp, he hardly looked upon
Prince Antigonus his father, and many of his friends who came to congratulate
the glory he had gained that day; though he had great cause to be satisfied
with his good success, he was not capable of tasting the sweetness of it, in
that extreamitie of sorrow, and not so much as harkening to those that talked
to him of it, he went directly to his tents, where laying the fair wounded
stranger in the best room, he called the Chirurgians, and promising them
extraordinary recompenses for that cure, he, to make them labor the more
carefully, protested that his life depended absolutely upon it.

The end of the third Book.
The Continuation of the third Part of CASSANDRA. The fourth Book.
THe encounter which Queen Thalestris and young Demetrius had with Leonatus and
Cassander, was not so light, but that of Roxana's party there were fifteen or
sixteen hundred slain upon the place, and on the side of our Princes above a
thousand, yet won they the field, and the whole advantage, and from that
glorious beginning, drew most happy presages for the continuation of that War;
nor did they neglect to show their thankfulness to the Gods by sacrifices which
they made throughout the Camp, both to the Gods of Greece, and the Divinities
of Persia: presently a hundred Altars were seen to smoke, and a hundred
Victimes slain, whose intrails were observed, and gave no cause of apprehension
to the Priests. The fair Amazon received a thousand praises from the whole
Camp, and most particular endearments from those with whom she had more
familiarity; they who had seen her that day in the thickest of the fight, made
reports so much to her advantage, that they had some difficulty to gain belief,
and when they went about to seek Comparisons to express her, could find
nothing so proper as Thunder and Lightning. Croondates embracing her all armed
as she was, Pardon me (said he) Madam, if I cannot hate Croontes, since his
infidelity has brought us so powerful an assistance. Nor can I (added
Lysimachus) repent the sacrilege I committed, in lifting my sword against you,
since from that crime we have drawn advantages which can never be sufficiently
valued. The fair Queen replied to these discourses exceeding gracefully, and
the Princes themselves would needs disburthen her of her Arms, and look upon
some slight hurts from whence they saw the blood trickle down; she had two upon
her body, but such inconsiderable ones, that they had much ado to persuade her
to keep her bed for two or three days. By the recital she made to Prince
Croondates of the strangers valor, she gave him an ardent desire to try his
forces, and to revenge the two brave sons of Mazaeus, whom both for the
consideration of their father, and for their own, he had always particularly
esteemed: and indeed they were lamented through the whole Camp, their loss much
abating the joy for that fortunate beginning. As the Amazon Queen received
great praises, the whole Army was not sparing of them to young Demetrius, and
all the World extolled the Actions, which in so early a youth, he had been seen
to perform against men of great experience in War, and known reputation, in
terms able to have stirred up joy in him, if at that time he had been capable
of it.

That poor Prince was then in no condition to taste his Victory, and though his
Tent was full of Princes, and Commanders who were come to visit him, he had
forgotten all his civility, and left all the care of receiving the company to
his father, while he stirred not from the feet of her he had wounded, and by
whom he was likewise wounded himself in a most sensible place. When the
Chirurgians were searching her Wound, he kept his eyes fixed upon their faces,
to draw an Omen thence, of what he ought to fear, or of what he ought to hope;
and when after they had done, he saw them look upon one another with something
a doleful countenance; O Gods! (cried he) she is a dead Woman, and your faces
promise me no good: Well, Philip: (continued he turning toward his fathers
Chirurgian) no life, no safety, neither for her, nor for Demetrius? Sir, (said
the Chirurgian) we cannot so soon settle an assured judgment, but to morrow at
the second dressing, we shall speak with more certainty; let her rest for four
and twenty hours, if you have any care of her health, and come not into her
Chamber till that time be expired. Poor Demetrius, nearer death than life at
this discourse, kneeled down by her, and taking her by the hand, which he
bedewed with his tears; Madam (said he) I protest to you by all the Gods, that
if you die, I Will live no longer, and that you cannot take a more cruel revenge
upon your Murderer, than in neglecting your Cure; the shame of having killed a
Woman, as you are, were enough alone to send me to my Grave; but since that to
so lawful a grief, the Gods to punish my crime, have added the passion I have
for you; know, that now your life is mine, that by all my blood, I cannot
recompense that which I have drawn from your fair body; and that no man shall
ever see me outlive the grief of having deprived the World, of that which now
is dearest to me of all the things that are in it. Demetrius brought forth
these passionate words so movingly, and his beauty added so great an advantage
to what he said, that the Lady, as great an Enemy as she was unto her safety,
and as much prepossessed as she was with another passion, could not keep her
self from being nearly touched with them. Sir, (said she) you make me receive a
death with grief, for which I had prepared my self with joy, and I protest to
you by those same Gods you have invoked, that your sorrow does most sensibly
aggravate my former afflictions, and that if they left the disposing of it unto
me, I, to cure you of your grief, would still endure this life, which my
remorse, and my misfortunes make me to abhor. Afflict not your self any longer
for me, who am unworthy of these marks of your goodness, and suffer me to die
without other sorrows, than those which have brought me to a just despair.
Demetrius would have replied, if the Chirurgians had not persuaded him to
retire, after having imprinted a fiery kiss upon her hand, and used some other
blindly transported actions. As he went out of her Chamber, he gave order that
Women should be fetched to serve her, and presently some were sent for to
Polemons house, who came readily to do their best endeavors; Antigonus who was
acquainted with his Sons nature, and who according to the report of all those
that have spoken of his life, was the most tenderly affectionate, and the most
perfectly indulgent, that ever father was to a son, instead of reproving him,
and blaming his passion, was really afflicted with him, and gave him the
gentlest consolations he could desire, then having gotten him to suffer two
light wounds he had received, to be searched and dressed, he at his entreaty
left him to his rest, and dismissed his friends who came thronging to visit
him. When Demetrius saw himself alone, and that in that solitariness, he made
reflection upon the strange caprichiousness of his fortune, he fell into such
violent thoughts, that he was like either to lose his senses, or suddenly to
end his days. Men have been often seen to love (said he) and Lovers have often
been seen to lose by death the person whom they loved, but that a Lover should
in the same day, love, see, die, nay and with his own hand kill her whom he
loved, is a thing which never happened to any body but Demetrius. It was shame
enough to Demetrius, to dishonor his first attempts by the death of a Woman,
without adding this bloody surcharge unto his shame, to make him kill a Woman
whom he was to love, or to make him love a Woman whom he had killed; My crime
was before my love, my love is the punishment of my crime, and both my crime
and love will have an equal destiny. O Heavens! did you ever see a fortune that
could have any resemblance unto mine, and could you not have made the face of
it less strange, less cruel? If you had so decreed, that I must love this
Woman, could I not have loved her without killing her? and if you needs would
have me kill her, could I not have killed her without loving her? Others may
have killed, others may have loved, but never any except Demetrius, loved, and
killed both together. Love every where else begins, and declares it self by
Services, only mine begins, and declares it self by death, nay and by a death
which fore-ran both its declaration, and its birth; Ah Demetrius! How cruel
are the marks of thy affection, and how strange a revolution has thy condition
suffered in a short time? This morning thou were both free from love, and
innocent of Murder; this evening thou art guilty of the one, and mortally
wounded with the other; there remains only since thy love, and thy crime are
inseparable, that thou prosecute both to the uttermost, and that in this heart,
the seat of thy affection, thou give the last blows to that unfortunate Image,
which is engraven in it by thy crime alone. These were the discourses wherein
the disconsolate Demetrius passed the whole night, and if he interrupted them
many times, 'twas only to leap out of his bed, run to the wounded Ladies
chamber door, and inquire how she did of those that waited on her; she, to whom
they related his disquiets, to oblige her to desire life, and endeavor her
recovery, seemed to be deeply touched with them, and speaking with much
moderation to those that were about her; Entreat Demetrius (said she) to take
his rest for my sake, and if he will have me pardon him my death, let him not
redouble her griefs, who wants not other causes of affliction. These words
being told Demetrius, wrought some light effect in his mind, and testified
this to him at least, that the marks of his love were not indifferent to her.
As soon as day began to appear, he would have risen, and run to her Chamber;
but the Chirurgians not having been able to hinder him by the consideration of
his wounds, which held him at last by that of the person whom he loved, and
made him, with great impatience defer the sight of her, till the hour her wound
was to be dressed, and that sentence pronounced, which he waited for with
mortal apprehensions. During that tedious space, the conversation of his
father, together with that of Lysimachus, Ptolomeus, and Oroondates himself,
who hazarded his health so far as to come and visit him, were not able to
divert him so much as a moment from his violent disquiets. These Princes who
from the Chirurgians had learned how little cause of hope there was in the
strangers wound, endeavored to prepare him insensibly for the worst event, but
they found him so little disposed to hearken to them, that they were fain to
give over their design. At last the hour he so much desired being come, he
caused himself to be made ready; and going into her Chamber with all the
company, he came softly to her bedside, and kneeled down against the opening
of the curtain, without being able to speak one word. The wounded Lady who saw
him in that posture, and who could no longer be ignorant of his passion,
Demetrius (said she) if my life were as innocent as yours, our fortunes would
have some resemblance, and if you will love me after my death, there will be
much conformity in our destinies. I would love you after your death, (replied
Demetrius) if I could possibly survive you, but I should be unworthy of life,
if I were of so mean a spirit as to preserve it after the loss of you. These
words struck Antigonus into a very great fear, and upon this discourse, the
Chirurgians being come in, began to go about their business; Demetrius trembled
all the while they were dressing her, and looking upon the wound he had made, O
cursed, and sacrilegious hand (cried he) why did not the Gods suffer the sword
of Cassander, or of Leonatus to take thee from my body before this fatal
encounter? Philip and Amyntas having taken off the plaster, and seen the
wound, knew presently that it was mortal, but because they were forewarned by
Antigonus, would not deliver their opinion before him, and only said, that the
success was still doubtful, and that it was to be hoped for from the Gods, and
from the virtue of the remedies applied. Their Patient asked them leave to
entertain Demetrius, and the Company, and they told her she might do it without
any danger; which liberty so freely granted, made her soon know, that her cure
was despaired of, and Demetrius, if he had not been so much blinded, might
easily have judged with the rest of those there present, that that permission
had not been given her, but that rest and silence were no longer available for
her recovery. She entreated Demetrius to sit down by her bedside, and
Oroondates, Antigonus and the rest placed themselves round about, which done,
addressing her speech to Demetrius, she spoke in this manner.

The History of Hermione.
I Know very well that I shall die, but I feel I have yet strength enough, both
to live some few days, and to make a long discourse; which obliges me,
Demetrius, to give you the recital of my life, and in this you receive no small
mark of the esteem I have of you, since it is so guilty, that I ought in reason
to conceal it to all the world; but I pass over that consideration, because you
from thence may draw the knowledge of many things, which will be advantageous
to you; the first, is that of the crimes of this unfortunate Woman whom you
love, which without doubt will cure you of this affection, whereof she
acknowledges her self most unworthy; the second, that of my hearts being
prepossessed, which though the gods should prolong my miserable life, would not
leave me any power to answer to this friendship, you express to me; and the
last, that of the disasters which make life odious to me, and which making you
see with how much reason I ought to detest it, will comfort you as well as me
for the loss of it. Besides these considerations which concerns you, O
Demetrius, I have others for my particular interest, capable to oblige me to
this relation before persons, who having perchance known my crime, are ignorant
of the excuses it may have, and who by this naked confession of my life, will
have a perfect knowledge of the one, and of the other.

Although I have in arms received this favorable wound, which by one death
alone delivers me from many, yet am I neither an Amazon by birth, nor of a
stronger, and more warlike constitution than the rest of women; 'twas only
despair that put a sword into my hand, and a curass upon my back, under which
my death has been my first assay. The beginnings of my life were very
different from this last profession, and if my misfortunes had not altered my
face, perhaps it would not be unknown to some among you, since it has
heretofore appeared to my shame, and confusion, in places where you have past
part of your life, and from which my body, or my mind has never been absent,
since that fatal engagement of my heart, to which I owe the greatest part of
my miseries. The unfortunate Cradates Prince of the Caspians was my Father, his
name, I am sure, is not unknown to you, nor what he did against you in all the
Battles Darius fought against Alexander; he was born his subject, and I may
truly say, he was held in some consideration both by him, and by all the
Princes of his Court; he also served him with an inviolable fidelity till the
end of his life, and till after his death, never yielded to Alexanders fortune.
But I am to blame (continued she) to say it was to his fortune, since to say
truth, it was to his merit that he yielded. Ah! who was able to resist him,
that Conqueror of men, that Master of bodies and of souls, and that sovereign
Arbitratour of our destinies? Oh that it had pleased the gods, that fatal
merit, which has drawn me into this labyrinth of disasters, had been less
known to us, and that they had suffered poor Cradates to fall in that famous
battle of Arbella, wherein he showed so many proofs of his valor, and of his
affection to the service of his King, without prolonging his days to entangle
his wretched family in those miseries which accompanied it to the very last. It
was, I say, after the death of great Darius, that my Father with his household,
and the remainder of those Troops he had commanded, came to cast himself at the
Conquerours feet. Alexander received him very graciously, and by the kindness
of his reception, did in part abate his sorrow for the lamentable end of his
Master, and wrought an ardent desire in him, to serve him also with a fidelity
like that, which he had born to his deceased King. I have begun my Story in
this place, without making any mention of the first years of my life, wherein
there is nothing considerable enough to be told you; and the rather, because
the condition I am in, forces me to be thrifty of my speech and strength, that
I may be able to relate the more important accidents of my life, and not spend
them in the recital of those, which are but of small importance. I had lived
till those years quietly enough in the Province my Father commanded; but at
that change of our condition, mine also received a particular change, and by a
fatal sight I lost that repose which I had still preserved in all the troubles
of our Country. I am going to make a confession to you, my Lords, which
perhaps will rather draw mockery from you than compassion, but if my folly
cause some laughter in you, the sad effects of it will in the end oblige you to
some pity, and will make you impute both my folly, and my misfortunes to the
cruelty of my destinies. I will tell you then, that even in the remotest part
of our Province, the reputation of Alexander had begun to cause some disquiet
in my mind, and that being born with high spirit enough, and bred up with a
fame of some beauty, and of some qualities which made me be accounted to have
something lovely in me, I had also lofty thoughts, but lofty with excess, and
even with blindness. The flatteries of those which called themselves, my
adorours, had so puffed me up, that I disdain them all, to fix my whole esteem
upon that Alexander, whose person was yet unknown to me, but whose reputation
was already spread over all the earth; I heard his exploits recounted with
admiration, and when they talked to me of the greatness of his courage, of that
boiling, and generous ardor which made him rush headlong into the thickest of
his enemies, of his moderation in victory, of his gallant fashion, of his
youth, and of the grace which accompanied all his actions, I felt my heart
insensibly won, and became an enemy to my Country, lest with it I should pray
for the ruin of that lovely enemy, who began to extend his victory as far over
my heart, as over our territories. This esteem settled it self in my soul with
some disquiet, and began to work desires in me, which as, innocent as they
were, robbed me of my former repose; I could not forbear to take the part of
that great King, even before those who wished his destruction, nor to set forth
his praises in the hearing, even of his mortal enemies. I remember I was often
reprehended for it by those who had power over me, yet by their going about to
suppress my desires, they did but kindle them so much the more. In these terms
I stood, when my Father called me to him, and when he communicated to his
family the design he had to cast himself at the conquerours feet: I was the
first, who (with a more specious pretense, covering the desire I had to see
that Prince) embraced Cradates his knees, and said all that my passion could
suggest to fortify him in that resolution. If these beginnings of my folly
were so powerful, judge what the progress of it was after the sight of
Alexander. I believed him more handsome, and more lovely than he had been
presented to me; me thought fame had done him wrong, and that, what she
published of him, was infinitely below the truth. O Gods! with what a Majesty
did he receive our submissions, and with what a grace did he raise us up, when
we prostrated our selves before him? I know not whither my heart prepossessed
with its former opinion of him, received that impression through the powerful
inclination it had to it, or whither it were an effect of the merit of that
Great man, or a decree of my destiny; but whatsoever it were, that moment was
the last of my liberty, and from an adorour of Alexanders gallant actions, I
really became Alexanders captive, his great employments would not suffer him to
hold any long conversation with us, yet was it not so short, but that I heard
him discourse a good while with my Father, and had leisure enough to swallow
great draughts of that poison, which by degrees seized upon my heart, and
quickly left no part of it untainted. When we were come away, his image
remained still present to my remembrance, and when by reasoning I would have
made some attempt to drive it thence, it settled it self there with a more
absolute Empire, and tormented me with more violence, and Tyranny. Foolish
Hermione, would I say (for that is the name of this unfortunate woman that
speaks to you) foolish, and miserable Hermione, what a blindness is this of
thine, to precipitate thy self with so little reason, and discretion into an
unruly passion? and what a weakness it is to yield thy self with so little
resistance to an enemy, from whom thou have no expectation of mercy? thou
love without any hope of easing thy passion, nay, and even without hope of
discovering thy passion; thou that art but the mean daughter of Cradates,
love Alexander the Master of potent Kings, that conqueror of all mankind,
and the terror of the world, he to whom the greatest Princesses living are
slaves, and who nevertheless would not deign so much, as to turn the least of
his thoughts upon them; Thou groundest thy hopes perchance upon the knowledge
that Alexander is a man, that he is young, and that he is not unsensible; that
thou art born of no contemptible family, and that thy lookinglass, and thy
flatterers persuade thee thou art fair. Alas! though Alexander be a man, though
he be young, he is a Warrier, he is fixed upon his conquests; and if he be not
unsensible, he will be touched with love to another rather than to thee; and
thou would yet be a veryer fool than thou art, if the persuasions either of
thy flatterers, or of thy glass, could make thee imagine thy beauty were in the
least degree comparable to that of the Princesses of Persia. By this kind of
arguing I strove to defend my self against my growing passion, and I thence
easily drew the knowledge of my blindness, but not the power to withdraw my
self. I perceived, with as found a judgment, as one unconcerned, could have
done, that 'twas utterly in vain to hope for any thing by my love, and yet that
knowledge could not cure me of it, and I saw my self in the end constrained to
love without all hope, and to love, because my reason had not power enough over
my Soul to keep me from loving. At the second sight of Alexander my passion
grew twice as strong as before, and at last it became so potent by my
indulgence, that it made me absolutely besides my self. We followed the Army
certain days, but the King being desirous, by obligations to engage my Father
to his service, and testify the trust he would have in him, sent him to the
City of Maracanda, whereof, as of the neighboring Province, he gave him the
Government with equal Authority to what Governors were wont to have under
Darius. My Father received this favor from the King with great submission, and
with an earnest desire to sacrifice himself for his service; but I received it
as a sentence of death, since it absented me from my lovely Conqueror, and
when Cradates, after having received his orders and dispatches, departed from
the Camp, I was like to have ended my life at that cruel separation.

Yet was it necessary to obey without murmuring, and without discovering any
thing to my Father of a disquiet, which in stead of pity, would only have
caused his contempt, and aversion toward me; I went with him to that City,
which obeyed the Kings Orders without resistance, and I looked upon it as the
place of my imprisonment, or at the least as the place of my banishment. Alas!
how many days did I pass there, which to me were more gloomy than the darkest
nights, and which I should have blotted out of the number of my life, if all
those that succeeded them, had not been languish'd out in the like or greater
misfortunes! that adored Idea came always into my imagination, with charms
against which my reason was no longer proof; sometimes I fancied Alexander at
the head of his forces, pressing the flanks of Bucephalus with his sword in his
hand, his head shaded with Plumes, and his body glittering with polished steel,
except in some places where the dust, and his Enemies blood had dulled part of
its luster; otherwhile I represented him to my self at the top of a scaling
ladder, laying hold of a battlement, and throwing himself over a wall, whither
he alone carried terror and ruin to his Enemies; I often set him before my
eyes swimming on Horseback through an impetuous river, holding two darts in
his right hand, and casting up a terrible look toward the bank extremely steep,
and covered with a million of men in Battalia, and in all these forms I
imagined him always with a divine aspect, and with an air breathing something
above humanity; but from these reflections falling into my sadder thoughts,
Alexander (would I say sighing) is yet more lovely, is yet more sparkling than
thou can fancy him, but alas! he is not for thee; and the higher he is, and
the more elevated above the common sort of men, the less cause have thou of
hope, the less cause of consolation. I never ended these words without tears,
and when I hear tell of the daily progress he made, whereof my Father often
received news, and the perils, into which he did precipitate himself, I
trembled and quaked at the recital, and hardly made any prayers unto the gods,
but to conjure them to divert all those darts, and all the points of those
swords which might offend my lovely Conqueror. I kept my disquiets a long time
concealed, though they might have been observed in my very face, and in the
alteration of my health; but in the end I discovered them to old Theano my
Nurse, in whom alone I could with reason have any confidence. That good woman
blamed my folly, and did all that she could possibly to cure me of it; but when
she found she labored but in vain, and that my passion grew sharper by her
opposing, she resolved to follow my inclinations, and to seek some redress for
my discontent, as well by her endeavors, as by her consolations.

I lived on this manner, till Spitamenes came to Maracanda; Spitamenes (pursued
Hermione with a sigh) was not unknown to any of you, and they that have passed
their lives with Alexander, as well as they that have lived near Darius, may
often have seen him in both Courts; you know that he was friend to the
treacherous Bessus, and that after the detestable parricide of his King,
whereof he was not absolutely clear, he followed his fortune into Bactria; but
when Alexander was come into that Country, and that by the force of his arms
he had made himself master of it, Spitamenes, a false friend to that disloyal
man, betrayed the Traitor in favor of Alexander, and to make his peace with
him, after he had caused his forces to revolt, he with Catenes and some others
seized upon Bessus, and carried him bound hand and foot to Alexander. Having
found favor with the Conqueror by means of this treachery, he continued for
some time to follow him, but afterward growing weary of the quiet he enjoyed
under him, and abusing the favors he had received from him, he sowed new
seditions in the Camp, and making the Dahaes rise, he levied seven thousand
Bactrian Horse, and with them marched toward Maracanda, to get my Father to
follow his example, and rebel against his benefactour, and his Master. Pardon
me, O Spitamenes, if I renew the remembrance of thy perfidiousness, and believe
that it is neither to injure thy memory, nor to seek to justify my self that I
accuse thee, but to make the truth known unto these noble persons, who are as
little ignorant of part of thy life as I my self. Spitamenes being arrived at
Maracanda, and having made himself known at the Gates, was received by my
father his ancient friend, with all testimonies of affection; and concealing
his rebellion from him, he made him believe that by Alexanders order, and for
his service he was to lead those forces upon some expedition on whither he had
sent him; my father received him into the Town, and into his house with all
manner of welcome, and used him as a Brother, and as a man in whom he perfectly
trusted; nay, he was so imprudent, that he quartered some of his Troops within
the Town, and the rest hard by as commodiously as he could wish. The subtle
Spitamenes had already taken good order, to keep my father from being
undeceived, and sent Horsemen abroad upon all the Highways, to stop all those,
who by order from the King, or otherwise, might come to give him notice of his
Revolt; by this means it was concealed from him, and poor Cradates never showed
the least mistrust. In the interim Spitamenes from the second day became in
love with me, or at least feigned to be so, to advance his designs; and
presuming upon the friendship my father bore him, and upon the power he
believed him to have with Alexander, who according to his report, gave him
Armies to command; he discovered unto him his intentions toward me, and
demanded me of him in marriage. The abused Cradates gave ear to the
proposition, and really believing that Spitamenes was in a high degree of
fortune, and in great credit with the King, judged that he could not hope for a
more advantageous match for his daughter, and without further deliberation, or
informing himself, how I stood inclined, gave him his word that I should be his
wife. Spitamenes having had this promise, began to cast loving glances at me,
and to discover his affection; but alas! how little was I in a condition to
hearken to him, and with how great a coldness did I receive his protestations!
That very evening my father made me acquainted with his pleasure, and commanded
me to resolve to marry him. The Gods know in what manner I received both that
declaration, and that command, how many tears I shed at my fathers feet, and
how many entreaties I used to get him change his resolution; but that poor
abused man, who believed himself engaged by his word, and who fancied imaginary
advantages to himself by that alliance, was inexorable to my prayers, and being
offended at my resisting of his will, redoubled his command, and to them added
threats full of severity. I passed all that might in deadly griefs, and a
thousand times invoked my adored Alexander, to ask satisfaction for the
violence used against me. Theano could find no way to comfort me, but
representing to me that I could not pretend by lawful means to the possession
of him I loved, counseled me to take Spitamenes, and obey my father. I had no
mother to whom I might address my complaints, she was dead many years before,
and having made my moan to two young brothers I had, they blamed my resistance,
and laid before mine eyes the duty I owed my father; they were ignorant how my
heart was prepossessed, and believing as well as Cradates, that I should have a
very great fortune in Spitamenes, could not approve the difficulty I made in
submitting to his will. Till then I had lived, without knowledge of any crime,
and in that innocence of life, I believed, that without being extreme faulty, I
could not disobey my father, to whom besides my respect, I had ever born a very
tender, and perfect affection, to which he had obliged me by all manner of
kind usage, and by testimonies of a most indulgent love. How great difficulty
soever I found in withdrawing my thoughts from that lovely object whereupon
they were fixed, and how great an aversion soever his tyrannical proceeding had
made me conceive against the Husband destined for me, I felt my self too weak
to resist those that had an absolute power over me; I was destitute of all show
of help, and not so foolish as to hope for any success in my passion for
Alexander. The knowledge of these things, after having sufficiently wept, and
tormented my self, made me at last resolve to undergo the yoke, which they
strove to impose upon me, and to dispose my self by that cruel necessity, to
contend against my first affection, and labor to introduce that into my heart,
which duty ought to establish in it. Why should I keep you longer in this
tedious part of my life? Cradates at last found me obedient; Spitamenes by a
hard violence, and by the despair of my former passion, drew from me the
consent he demanned, and my father who loved me dearly, and who would not have
forced my inclinations, but out of a hope it would be much to my advantage,
expressed a great deal of satisfaction at it. The wedding was celebrated with
pomp, and magnificence enough, but Lucina, the Goddess of Marriages, presided
not at ours; only the furies held forth their Torches at that fatal alliance,
and about our nuptial bed, whether I was lead as a sacrifice to the altar; nor
was there any thing heard but night-ravens, schreech-owls, and such birds of
fatal presage. In those first days of our marriage Spitamenes strove, at least
in appearance, by all manner of kindness, and testimonies of love, to make me
approve of that by inclination, which I had done out of obedience or
constraint, and notwithstanding all my repugnancy, he would at last have
obtained it, and I should have forced my self with reason to drive away that
passion, which was so great an enemy to my repose, and to my duty, if by most
horrible crimes, he, instead of the coldness i had toward him, had not
introduced that bloody hatred into my heart, which has since produced such
dismal effects. Here I shall only recall many things into your memory, which
without doubt you have heard before, but since that for the most part they are
not unknown to you, I will pass them the more lightly over. Cradates now lived
with Spitamenes as with his son, he trusted him with his most secret thoughts,
and referred himself to him, both for the government of the Town, and for his
most important affairs; and indeed who would have suspected such a horrid
treachery, or who would have imagined that so much dissimulation, and
perfidiousness could lodge in the soul of a man nobly descended. The eigth day
after our marriage was hardly passed, when Spitamenes found means to bring in
a great part of his forces at several gates, and when he had made himself
strongest in the Town where the Garrison, and the Inhabitants were very weak,
after he had given those Orders to his men, which he resolved should be
executed, he came attended by a great many followers, to find my Father in his
Chamber; he the day before had told him that he intended to march about the
expedition Alexander had employed him in, saying, it had been retarded by his
Marriage, and my Father, who saw how much the Country was burdened with his
Forces, was content to let him depart, upon hope of a speedy return; at that
time seeing him come into his Chamber, he believed he came to take his leave of
him, but Spitamenes quickly put him out of that error, and having desired to
speak with him; Cradates (said he) I have hitherto dissembled my intention,
because I was not yet in a condition to declare it to you, but now I must lay
open my heart, and by my example oblige you to do what you ought, since our
ancient friendship, and the alliance we have contracted, persuades me to move
you to it by such ways as I should not have made use of toward another. Know
then I am Alexanders enemy, that the Forces which follow me have taken Arms
only against him, and that if you have any love to your Country, and any
consideration of your Son in Law, you ought to take Arms for the one, and
follow the fortune of the other. I was present at this discourse of Spitamenes,
and saw that my Father, not being able to suffer the continuation of it, How
Spitamenes (cried he) have you betrayed me then, and was it only with this
intent that you sought my alliance? I asked your Daughter of you, (said
Spitamenes) because I loved you, and it is because I love you, that I yet once
again entreat you to embrace our party, and not to make them your enemies, who
do yet consider you, and who are stronger in Maracanda than your self. By these
words, poor Cradates plainly found he was betrayed, and instead of answering to
Spitamenes his proposition: Ah! Traitor, (cried he) the just Gods will punish
thy perfidiousness, and if I must fall, they shall see me die like a man, that
was faithful to his Masters till his latest breath. With these words he laid
his hand upon the Hilt of his Sword; but cruel Spitamenes having already drawn
his, ran him through the body, and made him fall dead at my feet, weltring in a
stream of his own blood; my two Brothers were eager to have revenged him, but
those that accompanied Spitamenes killed them presently upon the place, and at
the same instant the signal being given, they began through the whole Town to
drive out, and cut the throats of the Garrison. I make you Judges, my Lords, of
the condition I was in at that time; I saw my poor Father breath out his life
in my arms, and my two poor Brothers fall murdered with diverse wounds, the
blood of them all spouted forth upon me, and made me all over in a gore, but I
was not long a beholder of that dreadful spectacle, for having scarcely had
the strength to give a shreek, I fell upon those dear bodies, without sense, or
understanding. I knew not then, what was done in the Chamber where these
cruelties were committed, but when I came out of my swound, I found my self
upon a bed, encompassed with a great many women, unto whose charge I had been
delivered. As soon as I opened my eyes, I remembered the woeful objects I had
seen, and you may believe, that at that horrid rememberance, I neither spared
my hair, nor my face, and that by all my actions, I gave sufficient testimony,
that in the condition I was left in the world, I had but little love of life
remaining; I had seen those persons murdered before my eyes, who were the
nearest, and who ought to be the dearest to me in the whole world; and I had
seen them murdered by the hands of him, who in spite of all his treacheries
and cruelties, was still my husband; besides the force of blood, and the
considerations of friendship, the condition I was in by that horrible
revolution of my fortune, was very lamentable, I in those dear persons had lost
all the support, and all the protection I had, and I saw my self miserably
exposed, and abandoned to the mercy of that monster, from whom I expected as
bad a destiny. At that time, I thought not of all these things, as being
capable of very little sense in that extreamitie of trouble, but fixing my self
only upon those so late objects, and upon the bloody Idea's, which I had still
fresh before my eyes, I suffered my self to be totally possessed with grief,
and with astonishment. As often as I named my poor Father, and my poor
Brothers, I detested their treacherous murderer, and I made not more
complaints for them, than I powered forth imprecations against him: I kissed the
blood which was yet upon my clothes, and left horrible marks thereof upon my
face. I should fear to weary you, my Lords, and perchance I should not have
life enough to make an end of my recital, If I endeavored to repeat all the
words which my despair made me bring forth; and it will suffice me to tell you,
that I passed all that day, and all the night following like a person utterly
out of her wits, and had it not been for the hinderance my women used when I
was so violently transported, I had infallibly attempted upon my life: I had
continued above thirty hours without taking any nourishment at all, when I was
forced to it by the tears of my old Nurse, who hanging about my knees, and
sighing by me, touched even me my self with pity, whose condition was woeful
enough to move compassion in all the world. That second day was passed just as
the first, and the next after, impudent Spitamenes presented himself before me.
O Gods! with what a violence did that cruel sight waken my resentments, I felt
my strength redoubled, and leaping from my bed, I ran to strangle that Paricide
with my hands, and without doubt, in the fury that transported me, I should
have perished by his, or should have made him run some hazard, but that I was
stopped by those women, who having held me back with much ado, carried me by
force, and laid me again upon my bed. Cruel Spitamenes was not at all moved at
my action, and being set down at a distance from me, he gave ear a long time
without reply to the reproaches, and imprecations I vented against him: after I
had said all that rage could put into my mouth; Perfect thy crime (continued I)
thou murderer, stained with illustrious blood, and with blood, for which thou
ought to have shed, all that whichh runs in thine own veins; send the
disconsolate Hermione after her Father, and her brothers; piercet his heart, an
enemy to that Parricide hand, which but few days before, thou joynedst to mine
for a pledge of thy love, and which thou gave to poor Cradates for an
assurance of thy fidelity; since it is with this noble recompense, thou have
re-paid the favors he did thee, and with these gallant Characters that thou
have engraven in the memory of mankind, the alliance which thou made with
him, spare not this remnant that is left, and nourish not for thy ruin, a
serpent that will devour thee, unless thou stiflest it; know that thy life
shall never be secure, so long as Hermione is in the world, and that she
preserves hers only to assault thine, by all the most cruel ways she can
invent. At this discourse disloyal Spitamenes fained to be touched with
repentance, and compassion, and having looked a long time upon me without
reply, Hermione (said he at last) I am afflicted with thee for thy loss, but
for the conservation of my fortune and of my life, it was necessary for me to
seize upon Maracanda; and though I was already advertised that thy Father had
betrayed me, and that he had already promised to deliver me up to Alexander, I
protest to thee that for thy take I would have pardoned him, and that I would
not have drawn my Sword against him, if he had not laid his hand upon his
first, with an intention to have killed me, since he could not give me up alive
into the power of my merciless Enemy; I contributed not to the death of thy
Brothers, but they themselves ran headlong upon the Arms of those that
accompanied me. However it were, Hermione, if Cradates was thy Father,
Spitamenes is thy Husband, and thou art more nearly tied to me, than ever thou
were to him; our interests, and our fortunes are henceforth inseparable, and
thou ought to become an Enemy to all those that were so to thy Husband. The
faithless Spitamenes spoke on this manner, and to jnstifie himself in some
sort, strove to blemish the memory of my Father by a horrible calumny; but his
innocence was too well known to me, and I could no longer suffer the scandalous
slanders of that disloyal wretch. Ah! Traitor, (cried I) Traitor a thousand
times; Traitor to Darius, Traitor to Bessus, Traitor to Alexander, and most
of all Traitor to the unfortunate Cradates, and to his deplorable Family;
Spare at least the honor of them, whose lives thou have inhumanely destroyed;
and content thy self with murdering their bodies, without murdering their
Reputations in the grave; our blood never suffered any reproach of
perfidiousness, and all that ever it can apprehend, is the having received
faithless Spitamenes into a Race, that till then was without any blemish; but
let the thunder of the Gods bury me with the rest of our poor Family, rather
than thou should ever see Hermione acknowledge thee for her Husband; thou
thy self shall acknowledge her to be a revenging fury, chained unto thy life by
an unshaken resolution, and which will either give thee thy death in the
midst of a thousand Guards, or receive her own from those abominable hands;
yet stained with that blood, to which thou were so unworthily allied. I said a
great deal more to him with the same vehemence, but he grew weary of hearing,
and went out of the Chamber, telling me that his love made him pardon my being
transported, and that time would restore me reason, and bring me comfort. I
continued many days in this condition, disposing my self to live no further
than I was forced by the urgent entreaties of many that loved me, and testified
much compassion of my misfortunes. Spitamenes was peaceable Master of
Maracanda, where he had quartered most part of his men, and where Alexander, by
reason of his weighty employments otherwhere, let him alone quietly for that
time; but he was not in the least degree master of my heart, and
notwithstanding all the industry he used to make me forget my resentments, it
was impossible for him to effect it, and I had conceived so violent a hatred
against him, that I could not consider him as other than the Butcherer, not
only of Cradates, and of my Brothers, but even also of my self; I fancied him
always dyed with that blood which had been so dear to me, and I continually
framed horrible and dreadful Idea's of him to my self, which waking and
sleeping came eternally into my rememberance; in short, all that a most just
anger can produce in a heart already prepossessed with some aversion, imprinted
it self most deeply in mine, and I then took a firm resolution to live for
nothing else, but to take revenge, and to sacrifice to the Ghosts of my Father,
and Brothers, that barbarous Fellow, who had inhumanly massacred them before my
eyes. He visited me every day, but I still received him as a Dragon ready to
devour me, and if he forced me to speak to him, I only uttered such bloody
Reproaches, that any other soul but his must needs have been touched by them*
and which so wicked an one as his would never have endured, if it had not
before been really touched with a violent passion. I was a Prisoner, though in
appearance I was free, and if I had not known how much I was observed, and how
carefully I was kept, I should have endeavored to get out of Maracanda, and
escape out of the hands of that barbarous man. The Gods know, and I call them
to witness, that though I had married Spitamenes without any affection, I had
done all I could after we were married to banish from my heart the love I bore
to Alexander, and that I had done all that a discreet Woman could do to settle
it entirely upon that disloyal man; I could not hope to effect it easily, but
at least I had taken a strong resolution to die rather than suffer the smallest
thought that could injure it. I continued that design as long as he abstained
from murdering my nearest Friends; but after that he with their blood had
washed out all the Characters of that alliance, which tied me to him, I
believed my self free from that engagement; and afterward when my losses were
no longer so fresh, and that time suffered me a little to unlose my thoughts
from them, the image of Alexander came again into my mind, but it came in such
a way as made me instantly observe the difference there was between him, and
Spitamenes; I made no opposition against its return, but drove out of my heart
all the thoughts I had formerly had to love that Monster, placing more noble
and more glorious ones in their room. O Gods! (cried I) how beautiful is
Virtue in respect of Vice, and how lovely is my Alexander in respect of
Spitamenes? Depart from me, O you unworthy rememberances of the most unworthy
of all men, and return to me, O dear Idea's of my gallant Conqueror; we may
submit our selves to him without baseness, since the whole earth submits it
self with us, and may kindle as much love in our heart for him, as we do hatred
against the faithless Spitamenes. I said many other things in the return of my
passion, which my duty had labored to suppress, but now my resentment had
fortified twice as much as ever. In the mean time Spitamenes endeavored to
reconcile me to him, and caused me to be persuaded, that by all manner of
considerations I ought to forget all that was past, and give him the same place
as formerly in my affection, and in my bed; but 'twas impossible for him to
obtain it; and one day when he pressed me to it extraordinarily. Cease
Spitamenes (said I) to desire what thou demandest, and believe that it shall
only be to kill thee in thy sleep, if I receive thee into my bed. Spitamenes
was touched with such a threat, and changing color at that answer. This cruel
obstinacy (replied he) deserves a very different usage from that you receive of
me, and you would find few men in the world, who would not secure their own
lives, by the death of so dangerous an Enemy. Why do thou not secure thine
then (said I) since thou have no other way left to do it? I will first
(answered he) try if reason, and the knowledge of my love, can resettle you in
your duty, and will not come to extremities against you, till my hopes are
quite extinguished, and till I have cleared my self of all those Reproaches you
might use against me; but remember Hermione, that you ought not to thrust a
Husband upon these last Resolutions, who loves you too well, and who by your
ingratitude may be driven from one extremity to another. The cruel man knew
that I wanted not matter of Reply to such a Discourse, but he would not stay
for it, and going out of my Chamber, left me at liberty to digest his
threatening. I was even as much moved with that as with his flatteries, and
neither the one, nor the other were able to divert me from the resolution I had
taken.

Whilst I lived thus with him, like an Ulysses in the Cyclops Cave, he
received intelligence that Alexander was sending Forces against him, and that
he was preparing to follow them at the heels himself, to punish his
perfidiousness, and make him an Example to those that might abuse his mercy, as
he had done: this news produced two very different effects in us; it much
perplexed Spitamenes, though truly he was valiant, and a good soldier; but in
me it caused some mixture of hope and joy; I hoped that Alexander would revenge
me, and set me at liberty, that out of those detested hands, I should fall into
hands that were most dear to me, and that in that revolution of my fortune, I
by avoiding the sight of Spitamenes might enjoy the sight of Alexander. These
thoughts restored some cheerfulness to my countenance, which was taken notice
of by Spitamenes, and though he had no suspicions of my inclinations to
Alexander, he nevertheless was much displeased with me, for the joy I showed at
the disorder of his affairs, and not being able to dissemble it; You rejoice
(said he) Hermione, but be not too hasty in your contentments, your fortune is
yet very unsecure* It cannot choose but be very good (replied I) provided yours
be bad, and if Spitamenes perish, Hermione cannot be unhappy. By the like
discourses I exasperated Spitamenes against me, and if he had not indeed had
some passion for me; whereof I can neither tell you the name, nor explain the
nature, it is probable that being wicked, and cruel, as he was, he would not
have spared me. My good Nurse was my only consolation, I trusted her alone
with both my hatred, and my love; for though my hatred was public, my love was
known to no body but the faithful Theano. Alexander made a great part of our
conversation, and seeing her alone with me one day in my Closset, a thought
came into my mind which I neither could, nor would conceal from her; What
danger is there, Mother, (said I) since I have given my heart to Alexander, and
that I have more right than others to call him to my relief, if I implore that
assistance which he grants to all persons that are miserable; He Will lend an ear
to me without doubt, when he shall know that I am Daughter to Cradates, who
died for his service, and whose fidelity alone has been the cause of my
misfortunes. This rememberance will be considerable to him, and perhaps he will
not disdain the inclinations I have for him, when he shall once come to know
them: he has showed civility, nay, he has showed affection to Women, whose
birth was neither more illustrious, nor their person more lovely than
Hermione's, what do we know, but that the Heavens, after such cruel
influences, may look upon us with more pity, and may have inspired me with the
Design I have, to deliver me out of all my miseries at once; Let us hazard what
Love, and the necessity of my affairs put into my mind, and by writing to
Alexander the state of our present condition, let us give him some notice of
that of my heart; he will without doubt be pitiful to the one, and perchance
not inexorable to the other. I am forced unto this Action by a Power which I
cannot disobey, and since that in the condition I am in, my life is very
unsafe, I should die unsatisfied, if I died without giving my Conqueror some
knowledge of the Victory he has obtained over me; I will have him know, that
even the least of his Conquests is not shameful, and that the Daughter of
Cradates has a more noble ambition than to be the Wife of Spitamenes; yet will
we manage what love shall make us write, with such a discretion, as shall
secure us from his disdain, and will make these adventrous Lines, speak in such
terms, as shall not make us blush for their presumption. Only dear Mother,
think of some trusty Servant whom we may make use of in so important a
business; I Will put both my life and honor into his hands, and in recompense of
the service he shall do me, I offer him a good part of that fortune the Gods
shall send me; it will not be hard for him to get out of this Town, while
Spitamenes Enemies are yet afar off, and that the Guard at the Ports is not too
strict, and he may easily find out Alexander by the noise of his Conquests,
and by that Reputation which brings him near to the remotest places. After I
had said thus to Theano, she alleged some Difficulties that were not without
color, but my passion broke through them all, and at last made the good Woman
consent to my desires, and seek some faithful person to serve me in them, she
judged the matter of such consequence, as was not to be trusted to any, but
such an one as we had great assurance in, and therefore having studied long
upon it, she bethought her self of her only son, my foster-brother, who had be
en brought up with care enough in my Fathers house, and who had ever born me an
inviolable affection. The good woman was willing to hazard him for my service,
and as soon as she had propounded the business to him, he with a most ardent
zeal offered to effect it for me. Theano had no sooner brought him to me, but I
received him with expressions worthy of his fidelity, and having told him once
again of what nature, and of what importance the service was that he should do
me, I begged of him with tears in my eyes, to be careful of what I trusted him
withal; I instructed him at large in his Commission, and having given him a
good many of my Jewels, dismissed him to take order for his departure, while I
shut my self up in my Closet, to write that Letter whereof he was to be the
Messenger; but then I was even at my wits end, and I found my self in the
greatest trouble of the world to seek out terms to express my self, I repented
my Design a hundred times, and as often resolved upon it again; Love had no
sooner inspired me with words, but presently shame strangled them again, and my
courage had no sooner made me write a little, but my fear made me strike it
out; I never spent so much time about so few Lines, but in the end after a
thousand blottings, and a thousand Consultations, I at last finished these
words.

The unfortunate Hermione to Alexander the Great.
IT is not the Wife of false Spitamenes, but the Daughter of faithful Cradates
that presumes to write to you; If you abhor the name of her Husband, you have
some consideration of her Fathers memory, and if her Husband has betrayed you,
her Father died for your Majesty's service; it is therefore by the blood of my
Father, that I implore your justice against my Husband, and since it is the
destiny of Cradates his Family to die for Alexander, be pleased that the
remainder of it may die free from any other yoke save what you have imposed. It
is your Captive Sir, that beggs her liberty, not that you have taken from her,
but that which pitiless Spitamenes refuses her; she counts no other Prison but
yours supportable, and if she must live inchained, it is only in those brave
Chains, and in those gallant Bonds wherewith her heart is tied; her Body can no
longer endure to be separated from her Soul, that is the most cruel of all my
Torments, and I suffer less in the presence of a Monster imbrued with my blood,
than I do for the absence of Alexander; Alas, Sir, how bold, and how strange is
this Confession, but your goodness without doubt will pardon it in a mind
equally perplexed with its misfortunes, and with its passions, and that same
goodness will arm your hand with those thunders, which it uses to dart at
guilty heads, and will make you demand that from a barbarous man, which he
detains from you, and which can be no bodies but yours. Those victorious Arms
of the Conqueror of all the World, and of my particular Conqueror, can never
be employed with more justice; and that infallible success which waits upon
them, cannot shun so lawful a Design, nor be refused by the Gods unto the
Prayers of the unfortunate

HERMIONE.


When I had ended this Letter, I found it so far from that modesty which I had
proposed unto my self, that I was going to have writ another, and have torn
these words, which made me blush with reading them, and perhaps I should never
have resolved to send them, if Theano and her son had not come in to me; they
utterly overcame all my scruples, and that poor young man, who burned with a
desire to serve me, urged me in such manner, that after having instructed him
in his Commission, and in the Relation he should make unto the King touching
the misfortunes of our Family, I put that fatal Letter into his hands, and
dismissed him. He went his way, after he had promised, that he would either
procure my satisfaction, or die for my service, and I remained in a great
confusion, both for the boldness I had taken, and for the uncertainty of the
Event. I trembled in so doubtful an expectation, and good Theano endeavored
to settle my fears, and laid aside her own to give me some consolation: part of
the day was passed in this employment when I was surprised with a most
dreadful spectacle. I saw (O Gods, I tremble at this horrible rememberance) I
saw cruel Spitamenes come into my Chamber in a posture, which cannot return
into my memory without making me quake with terror; his eyes, and his whole
face glowed with a color like fire, his Clothes were all bloody, in one of
his hands he held the Letter I had written some few hours before, and in the
other the Head of my unfortunate Messenger. Consider, my Lords, what an
astonishment I was in at so strange an encounter, and supply my weakness, which
will not suffer me to represent it to you. I was stricken cold, and unmovable,
like sorrowful Niobe at the loss of her deplored Family, and at the first was
neither sensible of grief for the mischief I had caused, nor of fear for the
danger that threatened me. In the interim inhumane Spitamenes coming toward me,
when he had put the Head which he held by the hair close to my eyes to make me
know it, he threw it at Theano's feet, and at the same time showing me the
Letter, See here (said he) Hermione, see the recompense thou give to those
that serve thee, and behold the gallant marks of thy fidelity to thy Husband;
thus it is I use those that undertake such honest employments for Spitamenes
his Wife, and it is by proofs of this nature that I can know chaste and modest
Women like Hermione. I was so troubled both by the sight of such fright full
objects, and by the cries of Theano, who kissing her sons bloody Head, filled
my Chamber with most lamentable exclamations, that I had neither strength nor
confidence to answer Spitamenes. Consider (said he to me) whither this Husband,
to whom thou daily usest bloody Reproaches of Cruelty, ought now to stand in
fear of them, for having punished a double perfidiousness like thine; and
whither thou can disavow thy being convinced both of an adulterous Design,
and of a Conspiracy against thy Husbands life; see, how to satisfy thy hatred,
and to content thy shameful passion, thou do not only give up my life, and
thy honor, but to sacrifice the one, and unworthily to prostitute the other,
thou wooest, (base, and mean spirited Wretch) thou suest to an Enemy that
despises thee; Know that it is not to dishonest, and disloyal Women that
Alexander gives his esteem, and his affections; and that as much his Enemy as I
am, I must acknowledge him to have a virtue which opposes all thy hopes. He
that punished the Murderers of Darius, more cruelly than those of King Philip
his Father, will never approve of Treachery, although it be to his advantage,
and the destiny of Bessus, should have served for an Example to the Wife of
Spitamenes. With such like Discourses Spitamenes aggravated my sorrows, and
having by the length of them given me time to shake off part of my
astonishment, I at last recovered courage, and looking upon him with a more
assured countenance than before; Think not (said I) to confound me by thy
Reproaches, nor to terrify me by thy Threats; these Crimes thou accusest me of
are not new unto thy knowledge, this is not the first day thou knew that
Cradates his Daughter was the mortal Enemy of his Murderer; this Attempt thou
upbraid'st me with, is only against the Butcherer of my nearest Friendst, and
not against my Husband; The Gods forbid that ever I should acknowledge thee by
that name, their Blood has washed out all the marks thou had of it, and if I
were guilty of that affection thou condemnest me of, it should be to the Gods,
and not to thee, that I should justify my self for it; I ow no fidelity to
him, who by horrible Paricides has extinguished all those Obligations, and I
ceased to be thy Wife, from the time that thou divestedst thy self, both of the
nature and quality of my Husband. After the misfortune of Cradates, who was
neither more guilty, nor less in thy power than I, thou need not think it
strange, that I try all manner of ways to get out of thy hands, and that I call
for help to him who of all men living is best able to give it me, and from
whom, being interessed in our misfortunes as he is, I may most lawfully hope to
obtain it: if thou have shed the blood of a faithful servant, and of the
innocent Messenger of thy intentions, be neither the more fierce, nor the more
satisfied for that, and believe thou aggravatest thy Crimes only for thy
greater punishment, and that if thou let me continue in the world, I will
be revenged for him, as also for my Father, and my Brothers. This Torrent of
words which I poured forth impetuously, and in which Spitamenes, for all his
rage and fury, saw a great deal of justice, abated his violence a little, and
if they were not able to make him more mild, or more choleric than before,
they were powerful enough to strike him to confusion, yet did he strive to
dissemble it, and laboring to put himself into his former terms, Think not
wicked Woman (said he) to justify thy self by these weak Reasons thou
alleadgest; thou art but too plainly convinced of two crimes, the least whereof
is worthy of Death; and persevering as thou do to work my ruin, thou
would perchance scarce find one in the whole world, from whom thou could
hope for so much mercy as thou receivest from this cruel, this barbarous man;
I will let thee outlive thy Crime, to the end thou may have no advantage
over me, and that henceforward our Reproaches may be equal, since our faults
are equal: when thou tellest me of Cradates, I Will put thee in mind of
Alexander, but know thou hopest in vain, both for his help, and his affection;
I am content to let thee live, so long as thou live for none but me; but if I
sink under Alexanders fortune, thou shall be sure to keep me company to my
Grave, nor will I leave thee in the World, in a condition to laugh with thy
Lover, at the Defeat of thy Husband; pray therefore to the Heavens for my
prosperity, if thou will pray for thine own safety. I give thee this wicked
Woman's life (continued he, pointing to Theano) and though she deserve Death, I
am satisfied with having punished her by her sons, for the counsel, and
assistance she has given thee. Having said these words, he went out of my
Chamber, and left me little moved with his threatenings, but deeply afflicted,
both with fear of never seeing Alexander, and grief for poor Theano, whom for a
reward of her services, and of the nourishment I had received from her, I
unfortunately had deprived her of her only son. The poor Woman lay upon the
floor, keeping the Head in her hands, and mingling her tears with the blood
which still ran from it, was a hideous and horrible sight to behold. I took her
in mine arms, and adding my tears to hers with much affection, Mother (said I)
I am not able to give you any valuable comfort in this loss I have caused you,
and unless I could restore you what I have robbed you of, I know not how in the
world to make you amends, but I protest to you by all the Gods that hear us, by
the soul of Cradates, and by the tender affection I have ever born you, that
your interests shall from henceforth make the best part of mine, that I will be
as eager to revenge you as my self, and that I will perish very shortly, or
appease the Ghosts of my Father, and of your son, by the blood of their
Murderer. Though these words were not sufficient to quiet that poor Woman, yet
did I perceive they had wrought something upon her, and that she found some
sweetness in the promise I made her; I spent the rest of the day with her in
condoling the disaster of that poor young man, whom I unhappily had sacrificed
to my misfortunes, and the day after we had employments of another nature.

Spitamenes having notice, that Alexander had sent Menedemus against him, and
that he was already upon his march toward Maracanda with his Forces, resolved
to go forth with his, to meet him, and to wait for him in some advantageous
place, fit for an ambush which he meant to lay, and into which Menedemus must
necessarily fall. The Troops were no sooner ready but Spitamenes, compelled me
to go out of my Chamber* and putting me with certain women into a Chariot
encompassed with Guards, took me along with him the way he marched; he had with
him four thousand Bactrian hors-men, whom he caused to carry behind them as
many Dahaes lightly Armed, and expert Archers, who yielded little to horses in
swiftness, and who had order to alight at the very beginning of the charge, and
to enclose the Enemies on the right side, and on the left; That day having made
a very long march, we came to the place of Ambush in the beginning of the
night, and the very next morning imprudent Menedemus arrived there; I will not
entertain you, my Lords, with the particularities of that business, I have
already told you that I am but a Soldier by accident, and besides those
passages are as well known to you as to my self. You have heard that Spitamenes
his Stratageme took the effect projected, that the Macedonians were shut up on
three sides, and that the sudden surprise of the Dahaes deprived them of all
means to fight, that Menedemus, seeing himself overeach'd, and ashamed to have
an Enemy more subtle than himself, made amends valiantly with his own person,
and after having slain a great many of his Enemies, fell dead amongst them with
an infinite number of wounds he had received, that after the great defeat, a
small number of your men, having gained a place of reasonable strong situation,
capitulated with Spitamenes, after which that faithless fellow, contrary to
his word given, put them all to the sword.

Here Antigonus speaking to help Hermione's weakness. We saw the bloody marks
(said he) of what you succinctly related, within a few days after, where we
found all the Macedonians, and their valiant Commander Menedemus, (who had been
our friend and companion) full of honorable wounds; and the King, who viewed
the place of that defeat in person, after having given some tears, to their
deplored end, and loudly sworn to revenge it, caused tombs to be raised for
them, and funeral honors to be performed with great magnificence.

After that defeat (continued Hermione) Spitamenes returned to Maracanda, but
would not stay for Alexander there, knowing himself to be but weak in that
Country, where he had little credit and Authority; wherefore having given
order that the Troops which he had left behind should follow him, he marched
toward Bactria, which Casenes, and he had caused to revolt, and where he knew
he should find a retreat, with men and Towns at his devotion. In the mean time
he carried me along like a Captive, though he was careful enough of my person,
and that sometimes by flatteries, and sometimes by threats, he endeavored to
alter my inclinations, but they were still firm, and instead of mollyfying me
toward him, I was every day solicited by the afflicted Theano, to take the
revenge I had promised her, the desire whereof was too deeply engraven in my
heart to stand in need of any solicitation. This thought, and that of
Alexander, took up my memory perpetually, and whatsoever should become of me
after the defeat of Spitamenes, I begged nothing of the gods but the arrival of
his Enemies; I blamed their slowness every day, and complained against
Alexander for being so careless in revenging the injuries that were done him,
and considering that he had other matters enough in hand, which were sufficient
to retard him. We wandered a long time up and down Bactria, where Spitamenes
recreuted his Army, and when he thought he was able to defend himself, he
stayed at Nicea the best Town in all the Country, and encamped his Forces
about it. He had not been there long, but he heard that Alexander was coming
with great marches toward him; that intelligence did not much affright him, and
not being willing to fly before him any longer, he resolved to expect him
boldly, and bury himself in the ruins of that City; he caused the
fortifications to be carefully repaired, furnished the place with Arms and
Victuals, made Forts, and drew a good line round his Camp, forgetting no part
of an expert Commander. This news joy'd me very much, and Spitamenes, in whom
jealousy already was very powerful, finding the marks of it in my face,
reproached me with it every day. Thou know not what thou rejoycest at (would
he say to me sometimes) for if thou foresawest thy destiny, thou would curse
the very approach of Alexander. He often threatened me on this manner, and then
within a while coming to himself again, and letting himself be overcome by some
remainders of passion, he would begin to flatter me, and changing his voice and
countenance; Hermione (would he say) our injuries are equal, let us forget them
equally; do not thou any more remember that I killed Cradates, and I will never
more think of thy being in love with Alexander. Sometimes I deigned not so much
as to answer him, otherwhile I replied so sharply, that he would fall into a
rage, and to his furious humor. In the interim, the time so much desired by
Hermione came at last, and we saw those Arms appear, that were victorious over
the better part of the world. Fierce Spitamenes resolving to go forth with some
of his Cavalery to meet the foremost Troops, came into my Chamber completely
Armed, and rolling his eyes, which breathed nothing but blood, and slaughter:
Hermione (said he) I am going to make thee sport, and perhaps thou will know to
day, whether I can defend my self both against my foreign, and domestic
Enemies; Arm thy prayers in favor of them thou love best, and if thou will,
behold from the top of our walls the sacrifice I prepare for thee. He went out
of my Chamber with these words, and I was not at all unwilling to grant what he
demanded. Our house stood upon the skirts of the Town, and from the highest
windows, one might discover the neighboring fields, as far as the sight was
able to reach; Spitamenes had no sooner left me, but I went up with Theano, and
casting my eyes upon the plain, I saw my cruel jailer go forth at the head of
his men, and march in good order toward his Enemies. Go perfidious man (said I
seeing him ride on) go, find a too glorious funeral under the Arms of my
gallant Conqueror, and make him blush at so shameful a Victory; thy destiny
will be too noble if thou fallest in this occasion, and even thy very death
will work an envy in Hermione. He was not yet far off, when Theano made me
observe the dust which rose under your horses feet, and within a while after, I
discerned the shining of your Arms; yet were you at so great a distance, that
we could see you but very confusedly. At that sight I felt a beating at my
heart, which testified the inward alterations of my Soul, and celebrating your
approaches with sighs. O Theano (cried I) see yonder is he we have so much
desired; that Master of my heart, and that odored object of all my prayers, and
of all my thoughts; without doubt he is at the head of those Troops which we
begin to perceive, there it is, he is most commonly found, and there it is,
that by his presence he constantly leads on victory; see how the Sun, to add
luster to his Triumphant Arms, is more beautyfull and sparkling to day than
ordinary, all things contribute to his glory and advantage, and Fortune her
self, in whom common persons find nothing but inconstancy, has changed her
nature in favor of him, and has yielded her self a slave unto his virtue. In
the mean time I saw Spitamenes draw up toward you, and within a while after the
dust rose thicker than before, and the sky was so obscured, that we lost sight
of both parties; Then we were confident they were fighting with the
Macedonians, and then we most ardently redoubled our prayers, and wishes.
Within an hour we found that darkness draw nearer to us, and afterward when we
could more easily distinguish objects, we saw Spitamenes fly full speed, with
his men toward the City, and the Macedonians at their heels eagerly
prosecuting their victory. That sight begot an unperfect joy in me, as soon as
the wicked fellow was near enough to be known, and though his shame gave me
some contentment, I could much more earnestly have wished, that some Macedonian
Javeline might have stopped his flight, and that he had lain gnawing the earth,
upon which he had left a good many of his companions. Look there, (said* I
Theano seeing him enter the Gates) behold the Valiant man that prepared me such
bloody sacrifices! Oh how pleasing would this sacrifice have been to me, if he
had been the Victime; In this interim he was retired into the Town with some of
his men, and the Macedonians, who but for that obstacle would have forced their
entrance, at their coming up were stopped by their Enemies entrenchments. That
hinderance kept them in the plain, judging that those outworks could not so
easily be taken, and in the mean time all their Forces arrived, and the
Commanders disposed the order of their encamping. In that employment my eye
still sought for Alexander, and me thought I knew him by the brightness of his
Arms, by the number of Macedonians that followed him, and by his performing the
Office of General; I saw white Feathers wave upon his cask, whose shining,
opposed to the sunbeams, could not but dazzle the eyes of those about him; I
saw him come through a cloud of Arrows to the very edge of the works, where I
am confident he froze a thousand hearts, and by his presence struck a terror
into thousands of men, whom the depth of their moats were not able to defend
against so dreadful an Enemy. O Gods! how did that sight renew my wound, and
how graceful did I think him in that encounter, though the distance was a
little too great to make any particular observations; I sighed, I trembled, I
changed color a hundred times in a moment, and by all my actions I let Theano
see that I was no more my self. Ah! Mother (said I) 't is he without doubt, and
though he were not to be known by so many marks, my heart shows me him better
than my eyes, that slave to an illustrious Master instantly felt his
approaches, and by a miraculous instinct, found him out in the midst of all
his Troops; do but consider that divine presence of the Son of Jupiter Hammon,
behold that brow (proud of so many Laurels) which he lifts up toward us with
such a lovely fierceness, observe how he puts forth his right hand toward the
ramparts, and by that threatening action, sends mortal terror into the Soul of
these revolted wretches: the brave Achilles never looked like him, when on the
deck of the Grecian ships; he by his presence alone deprived the Trojans, both
of courage, and of victory, and made them forsake the fire, which already was
devouring their men of War. Ah! my gallant Conqueror (continued I) thou art
ignorant of part of thy victories, nor know thou that the advantages thou
winnest upon our outworks, are much less entire than those thou have already
got within our walls; I had no rampart able to defend me against thee, nay, I
even yielded my self to thee, without putting thee to the trouble of a blow.
Ah, would it pleased the gods these Gates were as open to thee as my heart is,
and that without incurring any danger, thou were as much master in this City,
as thou art in this Soul of mine. I brought forth these words with so much
vehemence, and Theano's eyes and mine accompanied my thoughts so fixedly, that
we perceived not Spitamenes his entering into the Chamber. He had harken'd to
the last words I spoke, and not being able, (in that confirmation of my love,
and in the ill humor he was in for the loss he had sustained) to retain the
furious motions of his choler, he ran to me with his sword drawn, and
preparing himself to take away my life: Now it is (cried he) O disloyal woman,
that thou shall receive the reward of thy infidelity, and that thou shall give
that impure Soul unto thy Alexander, which thou already have abandoned to him.
I confess I was more surprised at this accident, than I can tell which way to
represent, and though till then I had not much feared death, his presence made
it so ghastly to me, that I was quite void of courage, or reply. Spitamenes
caught hold of my hair with his left hand, and lifting up his right, wherein
he held his sword, was going to part my head from my shoulders, when he felt
his arm laid hold on behind, he turned about furiously toward him that hindered
the effecting of his resolution, and saw Timocrates standing by him, in whom of
all his Captains he had greatest confidence. What will you do S^, said
Timocrates. Let me alone, (replied Spitamenes more furious than before) let me
kill this faithless woman, before she rejoice in my utter defeat, and in the
shame she prepares me. With those words, he got loose from Timocrates, and
would infallibly have executed his design, if many others of his friends had
not come into the Chamber, and opposed his intentions, they altogether had
enough to do to dissuade him, and he still dragged me by the hair, who was
nearer death than life, abating nothing of his obstinacy for all their
entreaties.

Hermione in this part of her recital was interrupted by the passionate
Demetrius, who cried out, O gods! where were all the thunders at that time, or
if you wanted thunders, where was Demetrius? The young Lover said only these
few words with an enflamed look, and Hermione prosecuting her story; The more
earnestly Spitamenes his friends (continued she) importuned him to spare me,
the more inexorable did they find him, but when they had long pressed, and
conjured him, not to be so hasty in a business which he might execute another
way, I grant you (said he at last) some part of what you desire, not the life
of this false woman, who shall surely die for the expiation of her crimes, but
the delay you beg, and a change of the kind of her death; my revenge would
neither be handsome, nor perfect, if I should foul my hands in her impure
blood, therefore I will have her die by hands that are dearer to her, to morrow
I Will make a sally upon the Enemies, where she shall march at the head of our
party, and receive the first storm of their encounter; she shall either fire
her Alexanders Tent her self, or fall under the Arms of the Macedonians; and if
she give back, or refuse to advance, this sword shall still be ready to execute
what you have deferred. Prepare thy self for this kind of death (pursued he
turning toward me) and freely offer to Alexanders sword that heart, which thou
have given him; I cannot do thee a more acceptable service, than to deliver
thee to thy Lover, and I my self will take care to conduct thee to his Tent.
This was his last resolution, and notwithstanding all the attempts of his
friends to divert him from it, 't was impossible for them to obtain any more of
him. Before he went out of the Chamber, he put me into the hands of the Eunuch
Strato, Captain of his Guards, a Valiant man, whom he commanded upon pain of
death, to watch by me all night, with a hundred of his Soldiers. Until this
part of my life, I had never showed too much apprehension of death, but I must
confess my weakness, nor do I think it shameful in a woman, I was then
extremely affrighted at it, and formed so cruel an Idea of it in my
imagination, that I was not free from some of those thoughts, which are usual
in persons that are much in love with life. As soon as Spitamenes was gone out,
Strato brought me to my Chamber, where presently all objects appeared fatal to
me; by Spitamenes his command all my women left me, and scarcely were they,
that had been dearest to me, permitted to take their leaves of me; they by a
weeping farewell made my griefs more sensible, and my terrors greater, the
face of all things became dismal, and my lodging looked no longer as other,
than as the prison of a criminal condemned to suffer; Only Theano continued
with me, because she was destined to the same punishment, and that she was to
loose a life with me, the better part whereof she had already bequeathed to my
service; one of my most sensible griefs was, that I should die without seeing
Alexander, and without letting him know at my death, that I suffered it only
for his sake. At least (said I) if he had but any knowledge of the cause of my
death, and if he might but one day learn with what constancy, and firmness I
die his, I should not be utterly unhappy; he would certainly shed a great deal
of blood for my revenge, and perchance some tears out of compassion. O!
Alexander, how glorious would my destiny be, if I could make thee shed but one,
and if thou did but say at the relation of this news, I lament the fortune of
this poor woman; but alas how different are our thoughts, thou without doubt
involvest Spitamenes his whole family in his perfidiousness, and will it equally
bear the ruin of those that have betrayed thee, and destruction of those that
have loved thee. I was buried in these thoughts, and preparing my self with all
the constancy I had left for that death, which I believed inevitable, when
Strato, whose guards were at my Chamber door came toward me, and seeing he could
not be overheard by any body but Theano, who was not suspected; Madam, (said
he) you may save your selves, but you must have courage to undertake a daring
enterprise. I had ever observed some good will in that man toward me, and I
then called to mind that he had received some Obligations from Cradates,
whereof he still had preserved the rememberance; This freed me of any suspicion
I might have had, that he talked so to sound me, and therefore I replied. Oh!
Strato, there is nothing I would not do, to hinder Spitamenes from having the
satisfaction to destroy Cradates his whole family, you must then kill
Spitamenes, (said Strato) I see no other way open to your safety, and by that
you may both save your life, and take the revenge you have so much desired. I
was surprised at that proposition, and though according to my opinion, I ought
to have received it with joy, I was stricken when I heard speak of taking away
my Husbands life: how great hatred soever I bore, him; I did not naturally love
blood, and though I wished his death, I found not my self bold enough to give
it him. Theano seeing me in this confusion, was troubled at it, and coming
toward me with something a furious action. What, Madam, (said she) do you
consult still upon this proposition, and when as to so many reasons of revenge,
you may join that of your own safety, do you forget your gallant resolutions?
Ah! Theano, (replied I) I am no less an Enemy to Spitamenes than I have ever
been, and I could wish he were out of the world, so I had not the guilt of
killing him, he is the Murderer of my Father, and of my Brothers, but yet he is
my Husband, and I cannot resolve to imbrue my hands in his blood, without an
exceeding great violence upon my self. Ah! Madam (answered Theano) drive away
these Chimera's from your mind, and fear no remorse for a courageous and a
virtuous Action; you ow this Revenge to your Father, and to your Brothers, nay,
and you ow it even to me also, who have sacrificed my only son unto your
interests, and who yet bear in my heart every drop of that blood which he shed
for you; and moreover remember that if you do it not, you must die to morrow,
and die as an infamous Woman, and as an Adulteress at the head of two Armies.
Theano besides these, used so many other Arguments to me, and did so aggravate
the Causes I had to free my self of that barbarous man, that in the end I
consented to all she desired, and asking Strato what order we should take in
the business, he instructed us in the manner, you shall hear by the
continuation of this Discourse.

As soon as Spitamenes was retired to take that rest in his bed, which he was
capable of in that condition of his affairs, Strato, who commanded all his
Guards, went to those that were wont to watch about his Person, and having an
absolute credit and authority with them, he told them that Spitamenes had
commanded him to send them to another part of the Town, about a business which
he invented, and giving them charge to go thither presently, and to expect his
Orders there, he feigned that in their stead he would put some of those
soldiers which had me in their custody; they obeyed him without Reply, and
left Spitamenes his Quarter destitute of any body that could defend him; within
a while after he returned to them that guarded me, and reserving to himself
only four or five of whom he was assured, and to whom he had in part
communicated his Design, he sent the rest to some other place by the same
deceit, and so having freed himself of all those that might hurt us, he came
into my Chamber to me, accompanied with them that were to assist us in that
Design. I trembled from head to foot when I saw him enter, and felt so great a
repugnance against that Enterprise, that but for the instigations of the
revengeful Theano, I should never have resolved upon it. Madam, (said he) now
it is that your courage is needful, and that you must diligently lay hold of an
occasion, which can never be recovered if you let it escape. Ah! Strato (cried
I) my courage fails me in this Execution, pray let us seek some other way to
get out of Spitamenes his hands. If you had longer time (replied Strato)
perhaps something might be thought on, but you have only the remainder of this
night, all the Gates are guarded, and the Walls so thick set with Soldiers,
that we have no passage open. When Spitamenes is killed, and his Death
concealed, provided I be at the head of my Guards, I Will make you as free a way
as you can desire, and I have credit enough among those that watch at the
Ports, to persuade them that I do nothing without Order from Spitamenes; but
lose no time, I beseech you, if you let the night slip away, there is no more
hope of safety for you. After these words, and many others, Theano made me rise
from a Chair where I was sitting, and going out of my Chamber by Torch-light,
he lead me pale, and trembling toward Spitamenes his Lodging, O Gods! how
troubled were my thoughts at that time, and with how great agitation of mind
was I distracted, between the desire of Revenge, and that of my safety. I had
strong inclinations to compassion, and I could not forbear to consider with
pity, the misfortune of a man betrayed by his own people, and even upon the
point of paying so cruelly for the injuries he had done me. I told Strato often
that since he bore me so much good will, he might execute his Design, without
my being present at that bloody spactacle, but he refused to go one step
without me, and having brought me through a Gallery to an outward Room, where a
Groom of his Chamber lay alone, he knocked softly at the Door. The Fellow being
got up, and having asked his name, opened the Door, but Strato instantly
muffling a Cloak about his Head, stabbed him twice or thrice with a Dagger, and
made him fall dead at his feet, without being able to cry, or stir; from thence
we went into the next Chamber, where Spitamenes lay fast asleep. I was so
besides my self that I was hardly able to stand, calling in vain upon my anger
to strengthen me; the first thing Strato did was to seize upon Spitamenes his
sword, but by the noise we made he wakened, yet was so extremely surprised,
that he had not the confidence to cry out, neither did they give him time, for
covering his Head presently, as they had done his Servants, they took away his
life with a great number of Wounds. Thou diedst, O Spitamenes, and thou diedst
a Death which indeed thou had well deserved, but I confess I was exceeding
cruel in having given my consent unto that Action, and that as wicked as thou
were, I ought rather to have submitted my self to the punishment thou
intendedst me, than to have forgot the loss of all my Friends, than to have
dishououred my Sex by a Cruelty of that nature. I had withdrawn my self into a
corner of the Chamber, and turned away my eyes from that horrible sight, but so
did not Theano, and he was no sooner dead, but she took Strato's sword, and
with the help of the Soldiers she cut off his Head, which she took by the
hair, in the same manner as she had seen him hold her sons not long before, and
having looked upon it a while, she put it into his night-bagg, and would needs
carry it away with her, for a Design which she said she had to my advantage.
After this bloody Execution, Strato drew the Curtains about the Bed, and going
out of the Chamber, made fast the Doors, and so we retired through the Gallery
to my Lodging. Theano was of opinion that I had all the reason in the world to
be contented, but I was not of her mind, and felt such a remorse for that
Action, to which I had consented, that it took away all the satisfaction I
might have had by my Revenge, and by the procuring of my own safety: My trouble
and confusion was so great, that they could not get me to speak one word; I was
deaf to all that Strato and the joy'd Theano said to me, and the only
consolation with which she could touch me was, that I should make my self
considerable to Alexander by the service I had done him, and that I could not
any way address my self to him with more advantage, than by carrying him the
end of the War, and the Keys of all Bactria, with the head of his Enemy. I
confess, my Lords, with shame, that I was sensible of this Discourse, and that
this hope dissipated some part of my frights and troubles, Strato gave order to
two of those who had assisted him, that all their fellow soldiers should be in
Arms before day at the Gate of our House, and to another he gave charge to have
a Chariot and good Horses in a readiness. Theano and he spent the rest of the
night in preparing for our departure, and I in bethinking my self what I should
say to Alexander; I was as fearful of that Action, as of the other, at which I
had been newly present, nor was I less apprehensive to appear before that great
man, than if I had been once again to have undertaken something against the
life of Spitamenes. I trembled for the success of that Enterprise, and I began
to fear some part of what Spitamenes had foretold me. In the mean time day
appeared, and we no sooner perceived it, but we went down to the Gate, where
the Chariot, and the Guards waited for us. As soon as they saw me, they were
all moved with compassion, and Strato dissembling before them, got up into the
Chariot with Theano and me, and after him, those men in whom he trusted. All
the soldiers, and all the inhabitants, who saw me pass through the street
followed by so strong a Guard, and who had heard speak of Spitamenes his cruel
resolution against me, beheld me with pity, and when we were come to the Gates
of the City, Strato telling the Captain of the Watch, that he had order from
Spitamenes to carry me out of the Town, they were opened to us without any
difficulty. We passed in the same manner through our Camp, and being come to
the Trenches, Strato commanded the Guards to return into the City, and causing
the Horses to be lashed on with speed, we went toward Alexanders Tents without
other Convoy, save those that were with us in the Chariot. At the first Corpse
de Guard we came to, I desired we might be brought to the King, to whom we were
going to make Propositions of Peace. Those that commanded, took care to do so,
and having learned of them that were with me, that I was Spitamenes his Wife,
that Rumor ran from one to another through the whole Camp, and was already
come to Alexanders ear, before we came near unto his Tents. Ah! my Lords, how
great were the disturbances of my mind at that time, and with what inward
trouble did I prepare my self for that so much desired, and at the same instant
so much dreaded sight; fear and joy divided my thought equally between them,
and when I fancied to my self that I was going to see the only object of all
my affections, I also called to mind, that I was going to appear before my
Master, and before a Master who abhorred those Actions, whereof mine had the
outward appearance. I was no sooner come to the royal Tents, and alighted out
of my Chariot, but Leonatus came forth to meet me, and asking me, if I were not
Spitamenes Wife, gave me to understand, that they had already notice of my
coming. After I had told him that I was she, he took me by the hand, and led me
to the Kings Chamber, between two long Rows of soldiers. I had no sooner cast
my eyes upon him, but my passions were violently awakened, and my love making
me bold, drove away part of my fears, and weaknesses. He was attended by a
great number of Princes, and perhaps my Lords, by some of you, which makes me
believe I shall tell you no new thing, and that this Recital will be tedious to
those who are not unacquainted with this Adventure.

Ptolomeus answering to this part of her Discourse; It is true, Madam, (said
he) I was then at Court, and present at your coming to the King; your beauty
ravished all the beholders, and we began to flock about you with admiration,
when Alexander being willing to give you a more particular audience, commanded
us to retire, we heard not what you said to him, and some of these that hearken
to you, have never heard speak of this Adventure.

I will tell you then (continued Hermione) that I drew a good Omen from that
courtious particular audience it pleased the King to afford me, and seeing I
had all the liberty to entertain him, that I could have wished, I forced my
self to recover a little courage. Before I spoke to the King, I cast my self at
his feet, but he raised me up very civily, and and with gentle words, prayed me
to tell the cause of my coming to him. I saw well that he had utterly forgotten
my face, and that he did not so much as know that I was Cradates his Daughter,
but his kind Reception having perfectly re-assured me; Sir, (said I) behold
your slave, who comes to lay her life, and fortune at your feet. This is not
the first day I am subject to your Empire, and I make it my glory, that I have
been yours ever since I was capable of understanding; Spitamenes his tyranny
has not been able to disingage my affections, from that sublime pitch to which
I had raised them, and though I was his by the violence of my Friends, I was
always Great Alexanders, both by a just knowledge, and by a most powerful
inclination, and to say truth, that noble prepossession of my heart, made the
Vices of Spitamenes in supportable to me, and that difference of our manners,
caused an incompatibility between us, which left us no other thoughts save
those of destroying one another, Spitamenes is at last sacrificed to your just
indignation, and your Captive was unwilling to come before you, without a
considerable Present. With that of her prayers, and homages, she brings you
Victory, she presents all Bactria to you, and with it the Head of faithless
Spitamenes. At these words Theano drew it out of the Bagg, and presented it to
the King all bloody, and ghastly. He lent me a favorable attention till that
part of my Discourse, but he had no sooner heard those last words, and seen the
cruel Present I offered him, when of a sudden he turned away his eyes from me,
and from Spitamenes his Head, and flying away to the other end of the Room,
testified by all his Actions that he could not endure the sight of me without
horror. What (said he) are you Spitamenes his Wife, and do you bring me
Spitamenes his Head? He spoke the words twice or thrice over, without ever
looking toward me, and struck me into a strange confusion by that cruel
revolution of my fortune. I strove nevertheless to resettle my self, and was
preparing to tell him the Causes I had to hate Spitamenes, by which perhaps I
might have justified my self to him; but he would not give me the leisure, and
turning at last toward me with a furious look, Go, (said he) get thee gone thou
wicked and detestable Woman, and pollute not Alexanders ears with the Relation
of thy Paricides; I have till now defended my self from any such shame as this
thou would fix upon my Reputation, and I have conquered my Enemies by open
War, without destroying them by the treachery of their Wives; carry thy
horrible affections other where, and hope not to find Monsters amongst us,
that will approve of thy Disloyalties; it is only in consideration of thy sex
that I spare thy life; but lead it so far from me, that the glory of mine may
never be troubled by thy detestable remembrance. When he had ended these words,
which were to me like Thunder, or something yet more dreadful, he commanded me
to be put out of his Tent, and carried out of the Camp, without suffering me to
stay there any longer. Leonatus executed his Command, and making me get up
again into my Chariot, caused me to be conducted out of the Macedonian
Trenches. Judge (my Lords, of the condition I was in, at this utmost of my
misfortunes, and supply my weakness, which will not suffer me to express it;
then it was that I saw my self cast headlong into the greatest of all my
disasters, and that I fell into my extremest despair. Till then, though I had
lived miserable, I had yet lived innocent, and though my life had been
persecuted, I had at least preserved my hands, and my conscience clean; but
then I saw them defiled by the murder of my husband, and my shame divulged
amongst those persons, from whom I ought most carefully to have concealed it. I
had dishonored my self by a crime, which notwithstanding the excuses it might
have, was still exceeding great both before the gods, and before men, and I saw
my self ignominiously driven away from him, in favor of whom I had committed
it, and in whom I had grounded all my hopes. I was without any retreat, or
support in the hands of a few men, in whom, by reason of the fresh proof they
had given me of their infidelity toward their master, I was no way induced to
have any confidence. These considerations were so bitter to me, that they were
like presently to have put a period to my life, and but for the hinderance of
Strato, and Theano, I had cut off the course of my miseries with my own hand. I
caused my self to be helped out of the Chariot, when we were got a little from
the Camp, and casting my self upon the ground, I said words, and did actions
which could not proceed from other than a Soul given over to despair; my
remorse began to accompany my love, and they both joined together to make a
pittyless war against me. Then I remembered Spitamenes his predictions, and the
knowledge he had given me of Alexander's humor. All that was terrible in his
death, came then before my eyes, and though I could not bewail him, yet could I
not comfort my self, because I had been accessory to the taking away of his
life. Ah! Spitamenes (cried I) thou had deserved death by thy crimes, but
thou ought to have received it from the justice of the gods, and not from
the cruelty of thy wife, and she ought to have suffered that which thou
intendedst her, rather than let any thing be attempted against the life of her
husband; but complain not of thy destiny, I shall not make sport of it with
that Lover, concerning whom thou did so justly reproach me, and mine will be
so miserable, that even in Hell it self thou will not envy it; that beauty
wherein thou sometimes foundest charms, able to soften thy Barbarous humor,
found nothing from thy proud rival but disdain, and scorn; he whom thou
betrayedst, takes care thou should be revenged, and so thou art much more
severely for thy death, than I am for the death of Cradates. After this
discourse, Alexanders cruel words came into my rememberance, and I in them
found so many causes to seek for death, that Theano and Strato never could
divert me from that resolution; my passion nevertheless was so full of respect,
that I spoke not one word, nor had so much as a thought of resentment against
him, and though I knew it with grief, I believed it was with justice that he
thought none but monsters would approve of my horrible affection. At the
importunity of those that were with me, I got up again into the Chariot, and
they resolved to go toward a Town, in which a near Kinsman of my Fathers did
still command; I suffered my self to be guided by their will, having no other
thought, save that of deploring my miserable fortune. Our horses travailed at a
good rate, but it pleased the gods that in the evening we were met, and taken
by some of Catenes his Scouts. Catenes was Spitamenes his nearest friend, and
the companion of his revolt; Haustenes, and he had an Army within two days
march of Spitamenes, from whence they made excursions upon Alexanders Camp.
Strato, and Theano knowing into what hands we were fallen, began to tremble;
and make large offers for our liberty, but 't was impossible for them to obtain
it, and having been carefully kept that night, we were brought before Catenes
the next evening; my face was not unknown to him, and if I had then had any
remainder of desire to live, I should have had cause enough to fall into mortal
apprehensions. When I was presented to him, he had newly heard of his friends
death, and scarce had he begun to lament it, when he saw his murderers
delivered into his power. He was not a little joy'd at that encounter, and
resolved to make us end our lives in torments, I was indifferent to all that
could happen to me, but Strato would needs prevent the punishments to which he
was destined, and seeing his hands at liberty, he seized upon the sword of one
of those that brought us, and striking it up to the hilts in his own breast,
fell presently dead at Catenes his feet. By this speedy vengeance for
Spitamenes his death, I saw that the gods cannot approve of treacheries, of
what nature so ever they be, and that infidelity, even to the wickedst men, is
never pardonable, but I also found new occasions in it, to detest this life,
for which I had seen so much blood unfortunately spilt. Catenes commanded that
Strato's companions should be ^lea'd alive, and he was ready to have pronounced
some cruel sentence against me, when looking undauntedly upon him, Revenge the
death of thy friend (said I) Catenes, as I have revenged the deaths of my
Father, and of my Brothers. Catenes found something in these words that
expressed a courage, and in my face saw something of beauty that checked his
indignation, wherefore he was satisfied with making me be strictly guarded, and
for my sake Theano received the same favor. Within some few days after, he
talked to me of love, and told me he would marry me, but he found me so little
plyant to that proposition, that he despaired of effecting it by gentle means;
he caused me to be well enough attended by some women he put about me, and in
that manner of life I continued above three months, without being able to
withdraw my thoughts from Alexander, hardly for a moment. That Tyrannical
passion was so deeply rooted in my heart, that it left no care, nor no
remembrance in it of my other miseries, and being become indifferent, or
insensible of all other things, I passed three or four months in Catenes his
power, as a person that knew not what condition she was in. Catenes in the mean
while began to press me, and to threaten me with the power he had over me, but
one day when he mentioned the violence he could use to me; Do, revenge thy
friend, if thou will (said I) but learn by his example not to desire the
alliance of Hermione. These words cooled him for a few days, but I think at
last he would have come to extreamities, if he had not been prevented by his
destiny. You know that Alexander sent a flying Camp against Haustenes and him,
under the command of Craterus, and Lysimachus, and that in the Battle which was
given, Hastenes was taken, and Catenes slain by Lysimachus.

At this discourse all the Company cast their eyes upon Lysimachus, whose
modesty made him blush, but they would not interrupt Hermione's story, which
she continued on this manner.

I tell you the last accidents of my life succinctly, because the recital of
them affords little matter of diversion, and that the wasting of my strength
will not suffer me to enlarge my self further in this narration, you shall know
therefore that after Catenes his death my condition was altered, and that
Craterus having had a command from Alexander to bring all the prisoners before
him, sorrowful Hermione was one of that number. Alas! with what sudden
transports did I receive that occasion, of seeing my pittyless Master once
again, and of justifying my self before him, touching some part of my crime.
Perhaps (said I) the gods may have mollified his heart, and that the knowledge
of those provocations I received from Spitamenes, may have abated some of his
cruelty toward me; Heaven does not always look upon us with anger, and
perchance Hermione shall not be the only person of the world, whose fortune is
subject to no revolutions. In this hope I was carried along with the prisoners,
and we were presented to Alexander just at the time when he was going into the
Indies. I did not much observe his usage of the rest, but casting my self at
his feet, and looking upon him with eyes drowned in tears, Sir, (said I) either
hear me, or command me to be put to death. The King having looked earnestly
upon me, thought he knew me, yet desiring to be certified of the truth, Is not
this Spitamenes his wife, said he, to those that were about him, who having
confirmed his belief, Give her her liberty (said he) and take her away, for
fear her conversation teach the Macedonians crimes which are yet unknown to
them. This was all the satisfaction I received by my last sight of Alexander,
and I was so dejected at that eternal continuation of my miseries, that I
utterly lost all hope, and courage. Ah! Cruel, (cried I to Alexander, who had
turned his back, and was going away) stay but one minute, and at least behold
the death thou give me; though I was thine Enemies wife, I never was thine
Enemy, all my friends have lost their lives for thy service, and all the
offense that I have done thee, is that I freed the world of thy most
treacherous, most implacable Enemy; If thou will fly from me with so much
inhumanity, fly from my heart which thou tyrannically have usurped, and restore
me the liberty thou have robbed me of, and not that which thou offerest me. My
crimes are not infectious as thou believe, and if the Macedonians learn any
thing by my example, it shall be to prefer death before an unfortunate life,
and it shall be to love thee a thousand times more than their lives, nay, to
love nothing in the world more than Alexander. As I made an end of these words,
which were heard by no body that regarded them, I fell in a swown in Theano's
arms, and they that were present at what I said, believed without doubt that I
was out of my wits, hearing me speak such strange things, and with so little
discretion. We were near unto a City called Edessa, upon the bank of the River
Ganges, whither Theano, seeing me very ill, found means to have me carried, and
got me lodged conveniently; there I was taken with a violent Fever, and fell
into a dangerous sickness, while Alexander set forward toward the Indies.
Theano, in her clothes had quilted up some Jewels of reasonable good value,
which I had put into her hands when we came from Nicea, and which by good
fortune, or for fear of their Commanders, Catenes his Soldiers had not taken
from us; with them she at that time, and afterward procured money enough to
supply our necessities, and during the whole course of my sickness, she looked
to me with so careful, and tender an affection, and expressed so great a
desire of my recovery, that her consideration alone kept me from assisting my
disease, and made me take those remedies that were given me to regain my
health. I say, her earnest entreaties, accompanied with her tears, which in
regard of my Obligations to her I could not resist, hindered me from
contributing to my death, and when I thought my sickness would save me that
labor, I found great consolations in that belief. Now, I shall die (said I)
and by that welcome remedy shall free my self from Alexanders Tyranny; that
cruel man, who despises and tramples me under his foot, shall no longer have
any power over me, and death will deliver me now from his inhumanities; yet
will I return into the world to visit him again, and my Ghost, driven by a
just desire of revenge, shall follow him continually, to sting him with
remorse, and vex him with reproaches. These were my hopes while I lay sick, but
at last I began to mend, and was not a little troubled at my recovery. When I
was well again, I frequented a society of women in that City, who lived
separated from the world, and had dedicated themselves to the service of the
goddess Cibele; I found so much sweetness in their conversation, and so much
innocence in their life, that I thought among them I might find some quietness
of mind, and some truce from the per^ections I received both from my love, and
from my conscience, which did every where torment me with a cruel war. With
this hope I put my self amongst them, and Theano with me, taking their habit,
and embracing their manner of life; and truly I was not utterly deceived in my
expectation, their pleasing company diverted part of my sorrows, and I received
visible favors from the goddess whom I served, I remained there a whole year,
not without disquiets, nor without love, but yet with some extraordinary
firmness of mind, which made me resist my afflictions more courageously than in
former times. I enjoyed this little tranquillity, till the news came to us,
that Alexander, victorious over the Indies, was returned to Susa, where from
all parts of the world he received homages, not much short of adoration. This
news, through the anger of the gods, which my crime had stirred up against me
with an irreconcilable hatred, wakened those passions with more cruelty than
ever, which before were in a kind of slumber; I in that long absence, had
supported my misfortunes more patiently, but at this return, my hopes returned
also as ridiculous as before; and to fortify my self in them the more, I
called to memory the examples of all those, who by long perseverance had at
last conquered their ill fortune. I resisted these troublesome solicitations
for two or three months, and used all imaginable endeavors to banish
Alexander out of my heart, but when I found they were to no purpose, and that
by a cruel necessity, I submitted to my pityless fate, I gave way to my
misfortune, and took my leave of those sweet companions, whose tranquillity I
began to disturb with my afflictions, and to whom I was not tied for the
remainder of my life by any vow, or other engagement. Before I took my journey,
I thought it best to disguise my sex, to avoid those accidents it might be
subject to, and causing Theano to buy man's apparel, and horses for us both, we
accoutred our selves, and began our voyage. At first I had much ado to endure
the toilsomeness of travel, but I hardened my self to it by little and little,
and the desires of my mind at last overcame the tenderness of my body. It is
neither necessary, nor easy for me to entertain you with the particulars of
our journey, it was very long, and had nothing in it considerable, but when we
were on our way to Susa, we heard that the King was departed thence, and that
having defeated the Cosseans, he was gone to Babylon. We altered our Road, with
a purpose to follow him thither, but within a few days after, we received the
only news which remained for the conclusion of my fortune, and that was the
death of my adored Alexander. After the Relation I have made to you, it is
needless for me to weary you with my complaints, the discourse of them would be
troublesome, and therefore I will tell you, that I continued for many days void
of Reason, or understanding, and when I came to my self again, all that Theano
could obtain of me was, that I would prolong my life till we came to Alexanders
Tomb, upon which I vowed to sacrifice the miserable remainders of it; I found
some sweetness in this resolution, and going forward with that Design, after
many days journeys, I at last arrived at Babylon. I stayed there for some time,
but could not obtain the satisfaction of seeing the Body of my dear Lord, and
Master, which is kept locked up in a certain place of the Palace, to which all
access is forbidden, by a great number of Guards, seeing that in the depth of
all my miseries that consolation was refused me, and that Theano was still
obstinate in dissuading me from dying by my own hands, I resolved to seek Death
in the War, and Theano was ready to accompany me in that Design, not persisting
any longer to make me languish out this miserable life. Two days ago we were
enrolled in Perdiccas his Troops, where to conceal our sex, we still kept
retired from all company as much as possibly we could, and Theano
notwithstanding her Age, loaded her weak shoulders with Armor as well as I.
The other night unfortunate Spitamenes appeared to me in a Dream, all bloody,
and hideous to behold, and looking upon me with a threatening eye; I expect thee
Hermione, (said he) and thou shall shortly come, to decide the remainder of our
Quarrels with me. I abhorred my life so much, that me thought I was not at all
terrified with his threats, but stretching out my hand to him without any fear,
Yes, (said I) Spitamenes, expect me, we will go together, and end our
Differences before Alexander. After this Vision I wakened in a start, and the
next day, which was yesterday, we came out of the Town, with those that went to
second Cassander, but poor Theano going to put forward her Horse amongst the
rest, fell down at the feet of those that came after her, who advancing
hastily, trampled her to death in my presence. I should have been very sensible
of that loss, but that I was ready to accompany her, therefore instead of
staying to weep by her, whose affection did well deserve my tears; O Theano,
(cried I) stay for me, I Will quickly keep thee company, and spurring on my Horse
before all the rest of my Fellows, who had newly received a Command not to stir
further from the Gates, I ran alone to you, Demetrius, from whom I received
this favorable wound, which has so much afflicted you, but has given the
unfortunate Hermione, the only satisfaction she now could hope for.

Behold the life of this unhappy Woman, on whom, Demetrius, you blindly have
bestowed your affection; now that you know her better, you will without doubt
be delivered from those disquiets, which you express for her Death; the Gods
are my Witnesses, that that is the strongest of all those considerations, which
moved me to this recital, and the last fruit I hope for from it, is, that by
this knowledge I have given you of my miseries, which perchance never had such
an interrupted succession in any other life, you will bear the loss of mine
without any trouble, and confess with me, that in the condition, to which my
Disasters have reduced me, Death is the only happiness I could now desire.

Thus did Hermione conclude her sad Relation, which begot both astonishment and
compassion in all that heard her. They began to pass their opinions of it, and
to justify her, with a general consent, for the Death of Spitamenes, by those
powerful Reasons she had to deliver her self from him, when amorous Demetrius,
who had hearkened to her with strange impatiencies, interrupted their
conversation, and replying to Hermiones last word, You have told me nothing
(said he) that can diminish the passion I have for you, and you were infinitely
deceived, if you believed you should make your self criminal in my thoughts, by
your Narration. That Monster, with whom the Gods had so unfitly matched you,
that barbarous, that faithless Spitamenes, did not only deserve the Death,
which he received, but a thousand worse Deaths altogether, and if you be
faulty in any thing, it is in that you so long deferred the Revenge you owed
your Father, and in that you so long persisted to love a man, who did so ill
requite your affections; as much greater as he was than other men, he was too
happy in the thoughts you had for him; and if he had known you as well as I do,
he would have forgot the care of all his Conquests, to give himself totally to
you. Ah! I would it pleased the Gods, that some small part of that passion, he
unworthily received, had been reserved for the unfortunate Demetrius, and that
he might die for love alone, without the mixture of his griefs, and of his
remorse, which makes his Destiny most terrible to him. The passionate Demetrius
spoke on this manner, when he saw Hermiones face grew pale, and within a while
after her eyes closed up with a fainting fit that seized upon her. Her
afflicted Lover seeing her in that condition, and believing her to be either
dead, or dying, cast himself upon her bed, notwithstanding the presence of his
Father, and of the other Princes that were with him, and forcing the obstacles
they used to stop his transports, and the respect, which in a less extremity he
would have had for the person whom he loved, he imprinted her pale Lips with a
thousand ardent kisses, able to have restored that heat, which had forsaken
them. And indeed so they did in part, for Hermione coming out of her swown,
found her self in his arms, whereof she was much ashamed, and putting him back
with a feeble hand, Ah! Demetrius (said she) add not shame to the other
passions which accompany me to my Grave, and content your self that I know your
affection by other marks than these, which are very indecent, and which so
little become a dying person. Demetrius seeing himself reprehended by these
words, retired into his place, but he was so full of trouble, that it almost
deprived him of understanding. Hermiones strength decayed visibly, and the
Chirurgians, and Women that tended her, seeing it was almost night, desired the
Company to withdraw. Demetrius obeyed them with great unwillingness, and all
Antigonus his authority was necessary to persuade him to it; he would not eat
one bit, but going to bed by his fathers command, passed that night in much
more violent disquiets than the former. The next morning, his body being come
into that Chamber from whence his mind had never stirred, he found Hermione so
weak, that he no longer doubted but she would die, and the Chirurgians had no
longer confidence to disguise the truth from him; he saw but too well that his
fair star was going to be eclipsed, and to bring into his soul a gloomy night,
and a night of mortal darkness. Alas, with what an excess of grief did he
receive this assurance, and with what passionate fits did he express his
despair; he walked up and down the Room in a frantic manner, with wild and
wandering looks, pulled off his hair, tore his Clothes, and did nothing but
furious Actions. Antigonus vainly employed his words, and even his tears to
quiet him, he was as deaf to the one, as blind to the other, and Tiridates,
who was then in the Chamber, coming toward him, and taking an unseasonable
liberty, Why, how now, Demetrius (said he) will you die then for a Woman, nay
more, for a Woman of the Enemies party, and for a Woman unworthy of the tears
you shed? Demetrius had not patience enough to endure these words, but running
to lay hold of a sword, was going to revenge Hermione with the blood of
indiscreet Tiridates, if he partly of his own accord, and partly by the
persuasions of those that were present, had not gotten suddenly out of the
Chamber. Do thou think (cried Demetrius, seeing him go out) do thou think
cruel man, that I will suffer the injury thou do me; and can thou not be
satisfied with Hermiones Death, and mine, without abusing us also by thy words?
Ah! would it pleased the Gods that by a thousand such Lives as thine, or as
mine own, I could restore her that which I have taken from her. As he spoke
these words, he drew near Hermiones bed again, and leaning over it embraced her
Knees with so much tenderness, and yet with so much violence, that he forced
all that were in the Chamber to weep, and lament by his Example. O Gods, (cried
he) must Hermione die then, and will you not grant unto my tears, and and
prayers a little of that life which you cruelly cause to perish by my sword?
Shall Death seed upon that, which to me seems the most lovely thing you ever
sent into the world, and will you grant no delay to the ardent supplication of
a despairing Lover? Can you not for my sake renew the destiny of Alceste, and
will you not be appeased, if I sacrifice Demetrius for Hermiones safety? While
he spoke on this manner, Hermione though weak, and dying, suffered deeply with
him in his afflictions, and looking upon him with eyes that began to dazzle, and
to lose part of their luster by the approach of Death; Demetrius, (said she)
you force me to confess to you, that I die not so absolute a slave to
Alexander, but that I am very sensible of your affection, and that I have
certain motions in these last moments of my life, whereof my whole life was
never capable; spare this dying mouth a more ample confession, and if it be
true, that you love me, moderate your sorrows by Reason, and by my desire in
this necessity that parts us; it is the only proof of it I can, or will beg of
you, for a recompense of the last protestation I make, that I give you all the
share in my heart, which I now can possibly give you. This was all that
Hermione was able to bring forth distinctly, and within a while after she grew
so exceeding weak, that she could hardly speak a few interrupted words; she
struggled yet some hours with Death, but about the shutting in of the day, her
spirits departed, and she remained pale and cold in the arms of Demetrius, who
in that accident appeared little different from her, and who losing his senses
and understanding with his strength, was carried away to another bed, making
the Phisicians doubt, whether those swownings proceeded from a bare fainting,
or from a real death.

The end of the fourth Book.
The Continuation of the third Part of CASSANDRA. The fifth Book.
IN the mean time Araxes returned from Babylon the fourth day after his
departure; as soon as Oroondates saw him come into his Chamber, he ran to him
with open arms; Lysimachus who at that time was with him did the same, and both
with equal haste inquired news of their Princesses. I am still as ignorant of
their condition (said Araxes) as when I went from hence, and yet I may truly
swear, I have not spared any kind of endeavor to inform my self. All the
world at Babylon believes yet that they are dead, or if they have heard any
thing of their being alive, 'twas only by your denouncing of war, and by your
Declaration. The Princes were all afflicted at this discourse, and looked upon
one another with a confusion, which was easy to be observed in their very
faces. O Lysimachus, (cried the Prince of Scythia) we are not yet at the end of
our disaster, and you are extreme unhappy in having any intermixture with the
fortune of Oroondates, this communication will be no ways advantageous to you,
for I shall infallibly draw you into those eternal miseries to which the Gods
have condemned me. Fortune (replied Lysimachus) has not been wont to use me
more gently than your self, and if our sufferings are contagious, you will gain
no more than I in this union of our interests. Alas! (added Oroondates) perhaps
our Princesses may be dead indeed, and that the Gods have only flattered us,
to make us the more sensible of our Losses, by the hopes they have given us.
The Loves of our Rivals (replied Lymachus) may secure us on that side, they
will perish without all question themselves, rather than consent to their
destruction; yet I doubt not but they will do all they possibly can to conceal
them a while longer from Roxana. They were in this discourse when Ptolomeus,
Craterus, Oxyartes, Polyperchon, Artabasus, Eumenes, and Queen Thalestris came
into the Chamber, the noise of Araxes his return had brought them thither, and
all of them together desiring to learn the success of his journey, he gave them
an account of it in these terms.

After I was departed from hence, I got within a short time to Babylon, and
telling those that were upon the Guard at the Gates, that I was come over to
their party, I found no difficulty to obtain entrance into the Town. I had
called to mind as I was upon the way, that I had formerly had a particular
friendship with Damocles one of the chief Citizens of Babylon, who at my
request, had by my Masters favor, gotten an Office in Darius his Court, during
the abode we made in that Town. That good turn which he had received from my
Prince, and from my self in part, had engaged him to us with a strong
affection, and we had received some proofs of it, which made me believe at that
rememberance, that I might trust him without fear of being betrayed. As soon as
I was in the Town I went straight to his house, where I had been many times,
and having happily found him without company, I made my self known to him; he
gave me an exceeding kind welcome, seconded with some tears, in which joy and
grief were equal sharers, and at the first declaration I made of the cause of
my Voyage, he offered to do me all the service I could hope for from an
affectionate friend. I told him not in what place, nor in what condition I had
left the Prince my Master, making as if I knew neither, and only confessed
that I came to Babylon, with a Design to learn news of Queen Statira, that I
might tell it my Prince in case I were so happy as to find him. Damocles told
me he had heard nothing of her since the report of her death, and that he had
yet seen no body that doubted of it. After this first Discourse, I prayed him
that I might remain a few days concealed in his house, thereby to inform my
self more certainly, and letting him know I was in danger of my life if I were
discovered, I engaged him to as strict a silence as I could desire. Having
stayed in his house the rest of the day, as soon as it was night I went out
into the streets, and walked a long time both about the Palace, and about
Perdiccas his Lodging, but all my labor was in vain, and though I often stole
near to those whom I saw talking together, and that I hearkened to what they
said with as attentive an ear as I could without giving them suspicion, I
learned nothing that could give me any satisfaction. The next day, I entreated
Damocles by the remberance of our ancient friendship, and of the obligation he
had to my Prince, to assist me in this Design, and to go to the Palace, into
the houses of the Princes, and all other places where he could inform himself
of what I had a mind to know. Damocles endeavored with a great deal of care
to effect my desires, but with as little success as I, and having been among
all companies, and in all the Lodgings of the Great Persons, returned from his
inquiry as before. He brought me home word that the death of the Princesses was
but too certainly confirmed, that since the Kings decease they had never
appeared at Babylon, and that every body laughed at your error, when they saw
your Declaration, whereof there were many Copies in the City. Two days, and
almost two whole nights were spent in this employment, and seeing my self so
unfortunate in one part of my Commission, I strove to acquit my self in the
other, and for that Design I prayed Damocles to tell me some news concerning
the War. He freely imparted all to me, that was come to his knowledge, and when
it was something late he carried me to visit the Magazines, and view the
Fortifications; I found all things in as good a condition as your Enemies can
desire, great abundance of Arms and Victual, and the Town exceedingly well
stored with men to defend it; the new Forces they expected from their Allies
came up every day, and encamped near the Town on the other side of the River;
the number of them was already so great, that they covered all the field, and
having learned yesterday that the last of them were arrived, and that Perdiccas
being already recovered, threatened every day to give Battle, I went into the
Camp with Damocles, where I saw an infinite number of Men, of Tents, of
Chariots, and according to what one might judge by the eye, their Forces are
not inferior to yours; but I was desirous to have a more particular knowledge
of them, and wrought so well with Damocles, that this morning he brought me the
Computation of them. If my memory serve me, these are the names of their
Commanders, and the numbers of men their Army is composed of. Seleucus has
drawn thither, and commands there fifteen thousand Macedonians, the companions
of these that are here under Craterus, and Polyperchon. Alcetas out of the
lesser Media has gotten four thousand Horse, and five thousand Foot; and
Acropates out of the greater Media three thousand Horse, and eight thousand
Foot; Nearchus from Lycia, and Pamphilia, four thousand Horse, and six thousand
Foot; and Cassander out of Caria eight thousand Foot, and four thousand Horse.
Leonatus leads three thousand Horse, and seven thousand Foot drawn out of the
lesser Phrygia; Neoptolemus a like number of natural Persians, and Peucestos
six thousand Babylonians. Sinus has brought a thousand Horse, and three
thousand Foot out of Susiana; Axiarchus two thousand Horse from the foot of
Mount Caucasus. Scytheus, and Amyntas from those parts of Bactria, and Logdia,
which they commanded eight thousand Foot, Stratanor four thousand Horse
Draches, and Argeans. Arthous three thousand Pelasgians; Nicanor, and
Andiagoras four thousand Horse, and eight thousand Foot levied in Parthia; and
Antigenes, and Teutamus six thousand Argiraspides of those famous Troops who
gained so great a Reputation under Alexander. This is the number of their
Forces, whereof the Commanders have with a common consent chosen Perdiccas for
their General, he out of civilty would have yielded that honor to Seleucus,
Cassander, and some others, but they refused it, and Roxana having confirmed
that choice, made him accept of that Authority over his Companions. This
Election was made but this morning, as I heard by Damocles, of whom I
afterward enquired concerning Arsaces. He was able to tell me nothing, but
that he was believed to be still at Seleucus his lodging, where he lay
recovering of his wounds; that the Town was full of the reputation of his
Valor, and that they had mervellous hopes in him; that they expected little
less from a Valiant stranger, who had been but a few days in Babylon, and who
had done wonders in the late encounter. He told me afterward, that Cassander
had very impatiently born the accusation made against him in your Declaration;
that he had endeavored to justify himself to all the Princes, and that he had
loudly sworn he would prosecute his slanderers with fire and sword, that many
of their party believed him innocent, but that among many others he was much
suspected; that that hindered him not from beginning to declare himself openly
to be in love with Roxana, and that notwithstanding the resentments she
expressed against that boldness, the confidence he had in his Authority had so
puffed him up, that he no longer disavow'd his passion. When I had learned this
news of Damocles, I heard by him that Neoptolemus was to go out of the Town
with some of the Cavalry, and being desirous to lay hold of that occasion to
get away, I told Damocles that I would make one in that party, and taking
Horse, within a while after I went to the Gates with Neoptolemus his Troops, I
came forth among the rest without any difficulty; then presently seeing them
take a different way from that which led to our Camp, I alighted, feigning to
have something to mend about my saddle, and so having given them time to go a
good way from me, I took my opportunity to escape hither with reasonable
facility.

Araxes spoke on this manner, and all the Princes who had hearkened to him
attentively, began to discourse upon the news he had brought them; they found
by the computation of the Enemies forces, that they consisted of near forty
thousand Horse, and more than four-score thousand Foot, and though the number
of theirs was little different, their Enemies being strengthened with such a
City as Babylon, with such a River as Euphrates, and with a great many
Commanders not inferior to theirs, they might with reason make them doubt of
the success of that war, yet did they not sink at all from their greatness of
courage, nor from the confidence they had, both in their valor, and in the
justice of their quarrel. They caused the Chief Princes, and Commanders to be
called to the Council of War, and all, that were wont to be of it, came thither
presently except Antigonus. He was too much taken up at home to stir from
thence, and the condition his Son Demetrius was in would not suffer him to
forsake him. That young Prince, after he had used all imaginable endeavors to
follow his Hermione, and tired all those that were about him, whose strength
had hardly been sufficient to withhold his despairing fury, was at last become
a little less violent, being moved with the tears and Authority of his Father.
He had passed a whole night by his bedside, and part of the day following,
without being able to dissuade him from his desire of dying, which he saw him
obstinately bent upon, and when he found his entreaties were too weak to move
him, he presented him his naked breast, and putting his hand upon the hilt of
his sword, here take this sword, (said he) O cruel, and ungrateful Demetrius,
but thou must first run it through thy Fathers body, and then thou may
execute thy desperate resolutions against thy self. These words pronounced with
an extraordinary tone, and with a Fatherly Authority, wrought something upon
Demetrius, and put him partly in mind of the duty he owed him; he abated
something of his despair, though he could not abate any thing of his grief, and
fearing to shorten the days of a Father, to whom besides that of his birth, he
had many very particular obligations, and to whom he bore a most tender
affection, he became a little more pliable to his persuasions, and changed his
first violences into tears, sighs and complaints, able to soften the most
rocky hearts in the world. The most mournful, and most lamentable effects that
ever grief produced, were eminently to be seen in that young Prince; his eyes
quite drowned in tears, cast not one look; his mouth, a perpetual thorough-fare
of sighs, spoke not one word, and his face, with sorrow made yet more
beautiful, carried no countenance, which was not like to make all persons die
with pity that were not utterly unsensible of it. Antigonus for his sake caused
Hermione to be buried with a great deal of pomp, but when the body was carried
out of the Tent, Demetrius fell into as long, and as dangerous a swown as the
former, and though the respect he bore to his Father, hindered him from using
violent hands against himself, his grief, which acknowledged not the same
Authority, brought him very near unto his grave. The Princes, who knew the
excess of his sorrow, came to visit him when they rose from Counsel, and
spending the rest of the day by his bedside, sought both by arguments, and
examples to give him consolation; at first their endeavors met with little
success, but being naturally of a most gentle disposition, Antigonus did not
despair of resettling him by length of time, together with the power he had
over him.

The next day all the Princes being met in Lysimachus his Tent, who cammanded
that day, word was brought them, that five or six men being come out of the
Town, were at the entry of the Camp, and desired a safe conduct, to speak to
the Commanders from their enemies. All the security they could require was
presently sent them, and within a while after they came together into the Tent.
Clitophon, Perdiccas his Squire was instantly known by many of the Company, who
stepping forwarder than his companions, and having obtained audience from the
Princes, spoke to them in these words. My Lords, we are come hither from Queen
Roxana, and Prince Perdiccas, on whom the rest have conferred the Supreme
Authority, he has stayed hitherto both for the recovery of his health, and for
the arrival of his Forces, but now that the gods have restored him the one, and
his friends have brought up the other, he will no longer retard the desire you
may have to end this war, the length whereof would be tedious to both parties,
and therefore has sent us to offer you Battle. All that were in the Tent sent
forth a cry of joy at the hearing of this message, and by a clapping of their
hands expressed how welcome that news was to them; but because Clitophon showed
he had something more to say, they kept silence to listen to him, and he went
on in this manner. I did not doubt my Lords, but that you would receive this
proposition like gallant men, but there must be something done to facilitate
the execution of it. The Euphrates separates our two Armies, and there is a
necessity that one of them must pass it before they can fight; if you desire it
should be yours, Perdiccas offers you all the security you shall demand for the
passage of it, during which you shall receive no impediment from our Forces,
nor whilst you shall draw yours into Battalia in the field you shall make
choice of, until the day appointed for the decision of your quarrels. If this
condition please you, you shall have hostages sent, and if you find any
difficulties in it, which are not on our side by reason of the convenience of
bridges we have in the Town, give us but liberty to come forth, and to encamp
between our ports and your entrenchments, and I promise you Battle within ten
days; so much time will be necessary for the preparations on both sides, and
to stay for the perfect recovery of some persons, who desire to have a share in
the glory of their companions. Clitophon, having proposed this offer, was
carried into another Chamber, while the Princes entered into deliberation about
the answer they should make. They all thought his proposition very free and
reasonable, and many believed this motion had been inspired into Perdiccas by
Selemus, Arsaces, or the Valiant stranger; they judged nevertheless that it
would be better for them to suffer their Enemies to come forth of the City,
than to pass over to their side, as well by reason of the difficulty they would
find in making bridges of boats, as of the inconveniency they would receive, by
quitting a place where they were provided of all things necessary, and where
all the neighboring Towns were at their disposing, to go into another where
they had nothing, and which was wholly within the Enemies quarters. When they
had resolved upon their answer, Clitophon was called in again, and Lysimachus,
at the entreaty of the rest, spoke to him on this manner. All the Princes, with
whom I have the honor to be allied, think Perdiccas his proposition very just,
and are glad of the desire he has to end our differences by a Battle; and to
facilitate the means, they give way that he may come forth with his Army in all
security, and put it in order in the plain on this side the Town, promising to
forbear all acts of hostility, during the time you have demanded; In this
agreement your advantages are at least as great as ours, for if we have a few
Villages on our side, you have Babylon behind you, and the passage of the River
free. Perdiccas has only forgotten one condition in this Treaty, to make it
the fuller of freedom, and that is, since he knows the principal end of our
taking up Arms, is for the liberty of the Princesses, he ought either to give
it them, or put them into the hands of indifferent persons, who should deliver
them to the Conquerours after the Battle, or at the issue of the War.
Lysimachus holding his peace after these words, Clitophon told him, that demand
was beyond his Commission, and that Perdiccas could not deliver the Princesses,
since they neither were, nor ever had been in his power, and that he and his
friends believed, that if they were alive, they were with Lysimachus and his
confederates, and that they made use of that pretext, to cover others which
moved them to that war. In this (replied Lysimachus with anger) Perdiccas shows
that he cannot vary from his nature, and that he follows his own inclinations,
rather than those of his generous friends, who have inspired him with the
design of a Battle; if he would confess the truth to them, I assure my self
they would counsel him to do what I demand, but because it would be very hard
to make him wave his particular interests for any consideration of virtue, this
difficulty shall not break our Treaty, and to have a Battle, we would descend
to conditions much more unjust, out of the hope we have, that the Conquerours,
shall give the law to the Conquered, and that after the event of the war, if it
be to our advantage, we shall make them give account of the Princesses, which
they now refuse. This was Lysimachus his answer, who for hostages offered
Alexander the Son of Polyperchon, and Cophes, and Illyoneus the Sons of
Artabasus. As soon as they had concluded the Treaty, one of Clitophores
companions stepped forth, and the Company having cast their eyes upon him, he
was known by Oroondates, Ptolomeus, and many others to be Arsaces his Squire,
who some few days since, had been brought before them, and had carried some of
Ptolomeus his herb to his Master from Oroondates. He looked about to find out
the Prince of Scythia amongst the rest, and adressing himself to him with a
resolute countenance, Sir, (said he) Arsaces has received your medicine, and
has recovered his health by the present you sent him, he made use of it
without any suspicion, and with no other fear save that of being obliged to you
whither he will or no; if your differences were of another nature he would
become your friend, but since that change is impossible, instead of his
friendship he will give you his esteem, and that he may not be ungrateful for
the favor he has received from you, he will shortly bring you thanks upon the
point of his sword. This confident servant of a gallant Master having spoken on
this manner, all the Company looked heedfully upon him, and Oroondates drawing
near him, with eyes that sparkled with choler; Friend (said he) thou may
tell Arsaces, that I expect neither thanks, nor favor from him, and that my
intention in obliging him, does sufficiently acquit him from any obligation;
that yet I cannot disdain the esteem of so brave a man, and that I think my
self better requited by it, than by that friendship which I neither can, nor
will receive from him; that at our first meeting we will decide these
differences, which even unto death oppose our reconciliation, and that to
defend my self from that sword wherewith he threatens me, I wear another by my
side, which he has no reason to despise. This was the reply Oroondates made to
Arsaces his Squire, and presently after Clitophon having been dispatched,
returned to Babylon with those that accompanied him.

This news being spread through the whole Camp, all the Army began to provide
in good earnest for the Battle, the Commanders spared no care, to keep their
forces in a good condition, and the Soldiers of themselves inured to war, did
by the hope of a Battle, rouse up that warlike humor, which during the life of
Alexander, had continually possessed them; some of them employed themselves in
exercises necessary for the fight, others in making clean their Arms, and
altogether prepared for that great day, that was to determine such important
differences. The Princes, with admirable diligence sought whatsoever might be
to their advantage; they visited their magazines most carefully, and took care
to deliver Arms to those that wanted, or had such as were unfit for service.
Laomedon, and Menander had the charge of getting ready Chariots of War armed
with Sithes, and blades of iron, like those Darius was wont to use in his
Armies, and Polyperchon, as a most expert Commander, had that of instructing
the Officers, and training the Soldiers for the fight, by exercises that had
the form of real encounters. Nor had the sun shined thrice upon the Towers of
Babylon, when out of the Gates there began to appear Battalions, which they
continued to pour forth for two whole days together; they encamped within
thirty furlongs of their Enemies, and covered a great part of the plain with
men, arms, and horses; the distance between the Camps was not so great, but
that it was within reach of the eye, and the mutual confidence they had in the
Truce, made diverse men of both Parties, come within a flight-shot of one
another. Oroondates had absolutely recovered his strength, and felt himself
better in case than ever to dispute his lawful pretensions, both against
Arsaces, and Perdiccas, and against all the world; he already waited
impatiently for the day, and prepared himself to let his new Companions see,
that he had wanted nothing but fortune, to raise his Reputation above that of
Alexander; they were already inclined to that belief, and by his conversation,
discovered every day new Greatnesses in him, which made them consider him as a
God. Lysimachus was little less eager in his expectation of the Day he had so
much desired, but his joy for that was moderated by some new disquiet, which
his friends took notice of in his face. He was troubled that Arsaces, whose
Person he infinitely esteemed, and with whom he had made a friendship, was of
their Enemies party, and after he had long studied what course might be taken,
to deprive them of so considerable an assistance, he resolved at last to see
him, to talk with him, and to endeavor to draw him over to his side, and
reconcile him with Oroondates. The difficulties he foresaw in that Design, were
not able to make him desist, and while he was musing upon it, the fair Amazon
Queen being come to him, he made her acquainted with his intention. Thalestris
to whom the virtue and Person of Arsaces were well known, and who had a
mavelous esteem of both, since the time she had fought under his command in
the Battle, he gave against Arimbas upon the Frontiers of Scythia, approved
Lysimachus his Resolution, and labored to confirm him in it by many Reasons
she alleged. You will do our Party no small service (said she) if you can
weaken our Enemies by the loss of such a man as Arsaces, and you will have no
small satisfaction, if you can make him Oroondates his friend; there must needs
be something in their Quarrel which I cannot comprehend, nor can I tell how
Arsaces, who was never in this Country, should in a few moments have robbed
him of Statira's affections. I am so confounded in this encounter (replied
Lysimachus) that I could never imagine any apparent cause of it, but I will
endeavor to sift out the business, and to morrow will go near the Enemies
Camp, whither I will send in a Trumpet to Arsaces, and if I have the Liberty to
talk with him, I may perchance draw some knowledge that will not be
unprofitable. I Will bear you company (added Thalestris) and shall be glad to see
again the face of him that was my General, although mine be utterly unknown to
him, and that at this time I do not intend to make him acquainted with it.
Lysimachus having accepted of the Queens company, with much civility and
respect prepared himself with her for that interview, and presently went his
way to write a Letter to Arsaces, which he did in these terms.

Lysimachus to the Great Arsaces.
HE to whom you promised the honor of your friendship in the Temple of Apollo,
and since upon the banks of Euphrates, did not believe you should come to be in
the number of his Enemies, and cannot be yours what choice of party soever you
have made; if you be pleased with this protestation, you will not refuse him
your sight, since he desires it only to assure you, that his interests are
below the affection he has vowed you, and that though you be a friend to
Seleucus, you ought not to hate Lysimachus.


The next day which was the eighth of those ten Clitophon had demanded, and
after which there was to be but one more before the Battle, Lysimachus, and
the valiant Thalestris being armed, mounted on horseback without imparting
their intention to any body, and taking a Trumpet with them, rode toward the
Enemies Camp, they made a stand within three or four hundred paces of the first
Corpse de Guard, and having instructed the Trumpet in his Commission, staid
there waiting for his return. Their expectation was not long, and their message
having had as good success as they could wish, within less than half an hour
they saw the great Arsaces appear, and with him another Cavalier, who having
heard by the Trumpet how Lysimachus was accompanied, would not leave Arsaces,
and was very glad to take that occasion of seeing Lysimachus again, with whom
he had already had a former encounter. As soon as the two friends knew one
another, they advanced upon a Gallop, and they that had accompanied them kept
back out of discretion, and were willing to give them the opportunity of
entertaining each other a while, before they mingled in their conversation.
Arsaces and Lysimachus being come close together alighted, and giving their
Horses to the Trumpet, after they had put up the Beavers of their Helmets, gave
one another many embraces full of a real affection; they often began their
kindnesses afresh, before they spoke a word, but in the end Arsaces breaking
silence first, with a majestic, and attractive grace, and with a sweet manly
voice; What (said he) is he Lysimachus then, to whom without knowing him
otherwise than by sight, I so entirely gave my affections, and is he, who made
so much account of some small Actions of Arsaces, the man who by a thousand
others, a thousand times more famous has spread his Reputation over all the
Earth? Lysimachus blushed at these praises, and not being willing to suffer
Arsaces to go on with them; It belongs to none (replied he) but to the great
Arsaces to distribute glory unto men, and they that have the happiness to be
beloved by him, may hope for that by his affection, and esteem, which they
cannot procure by their own actions. I once pretended, O Arsaces, to some part
in that affection, which I never merited but only by your goodness, and the
hopes you had given me of it, made me expect you would have lent that
assistance to me, which now you give unto our Enemies; I will neither cry down
their Actions, nor the Justice of their Quarrel before him that declares
himself their Friend, and the consideration I have of you, makes me not mention
that which I publish to all the world, but I cannot dissemble my grief to see
you turn those Arms against us, which commonly are attended with Victory, and
though Seleucus, and many others, who are with you be worthy of your
freindship, I cannot but envy them the happiness of it, and redouble my hatred
toward them by reason of this advantage they have over us. Arsaces embraced
Lysimachus at this discourse, and giving passage to a few sighs, I am
infinitely indebted to you, (said he) for the value you set upon my friendship,
and this testimony I receive of yours is one of the chiefest consolations I can
have in my unhappy fortune, therefore I protest to you by those same Gods, who
every day overwhelm me in new disasters, that I neither am nor ever will be your
Enemy; I have most powerful inclinations to you, and particular reasons to love
you, and if you see me now engaged by my promise, and by some other
considerations among them who are not your Friends, accuse not me Lysimachus,
but lay all the fault upon my cruel destiny. It Is true I ow my life to
Seleucus, and Cassander, and that I have obligations to Perdiccas himself,
which are not inconsiderable, but a more weighty Reason forces me to be an
Enemy to your party, and in what part of the world soever that cruel
Tormentour of my days shall happen to be, thither will I turn my revenging
sword, even to the last drop of my blood. I would kill him, if I could
possibly, even in my fathers arms, if the Gods had still left me one, and would
make my self a passage through what is dearest to me in the whole world, to
destroy him, who with a cruelty full of injustice, robs me of that, which I
thought I had purchased, by services which are not to be valued, by the best
part of my blood, and even with the price of mine own honor. No, no,
Lysimachus, in the deplorable condition of my life, I am no longer Master,
either of my Designs, or of my Actions, and that ungrateful Woman, who has so
unworthily forsaken me, has taken away all my hopes, and with them the power of
disposing of my self. I must be uncivil, I must be unthankful, because I am
miserable, because I am desperate, and the Gods give me every day new
occasions, to show that all the good I had in me is extinguished, by the
inhumanity of my ^ate; nay, they will have me indebted for my life, even to my
most bitter, irreconcilable Enemy, because they know, I cannot be other than
guilty of ingratitude, and that the bloody injury I have received from him,
sti^les in my heart all the acknowledgment I ow him for it; heretofore I should
have passed Seas to acquit my self of a less Obligation, and now I would go
down as far as Hell, to sacrifice him to my just Resentments, to whom I have so
great an engagement. This misery of my life, Lysimachus, ought to move pity in
you, and obtain pardon for a choice, which my love, which my jealousy, which
my rage forced me to make against my former inclinations, and against my
affection to you. Arsaces uttered these passionate words with an action which
fetched tears into Lysimachus his eyes, but his astonishment was redoubled by
them, and considering that Arsaces could not justly use those Reproaches to
Oroondates, who better than all the men in the world, had deserved the
possession of Statira, in whose service Arsaces could not have spent more than
some short moments of his life, he was in a mavelous confusion, and being
desirous to draw more particular light from Arsaces his mouth; I am as sensibly
touched with your displeasures (said he) as with my own, but either I cannot
comprehend their cause, or else I can see but little justice in them. This
Rival, against whom you have so violent an indignation, complains of you with
more appearance of Reason than you can have, unless there be some mistake in
your affairs; and there are few persons but know, that he has spent his whole
life in the service of that Princess, whom you have won from him in an hour;
his despair is much better grounded than yours, when he remembers the admirable
Actions he has done for her, and that being just upon the point of receiving
the recompense, which was due to him, he sees her, by a prodigious inconstancy,
in your arms, and finds himself ingratefully forsaken for you, who have done
her but very little service, and who are hardly so much as known to her. How!
(cried the impatient Arsaces) have I done my Princess but little service, and
am I hardly so much as known to her? Lysimachus was going to reply, and they
were like to have come to a more perfect clearing of businesses, if an
unexpected accident had not interrupted their conversation, the cause thereof
was this. The Amazon Queen, when she had stood a while at a distance, listening
to their discourse, at last resolved to go up to them, and Arsaces his
companion, by her example, moved from the place where he made his stand; when
they were come a little nearer to one another than they had been before,
Thalestris casting her eyes upon that Cavalier, saw upon his shield the
dreadful Impress of the Vultures, the reputation whereof was already as much
known, by the valor of him that bore it, as his name was unknown by his so
late coming into those parts, and his having been ever since in the Enemies
Quarters. The Queen presently remembered her Combat with him, and with what
generosity he had defended her from the soul play offered by Cassander; being
glad of this Encounter, she had a mind to make a more particular acquaintance
with him, with that intent she spurred on her Horse, and putting forth her hand
as she came up to him; Valiant Sir, (cried she) since I have tried your force
in fight, I desire to be better known to you, and to make a friendship, if it
be possible, with so brave and so generous an Enemy. The stranger, who for
civility yielded to no man in the world, advanced toward the Queen at this
discourse, and seeing that she put her hand toward the Beaver of her Cask to
discover her face, he thrust up his, and let her see his face at the same time.
The aspect of the dreadful Gorgon never wrought more strange effects than this
sight produced mutually in these two persons, and if the stranger was surprised
to see the Queen, the Queen was stricken with the height of amazement, when in
the strangers face she beheld all the Lineaments of her faithless Orontes. They
instantly were seized with so strange a confusion, that they seemed like two
Marble statues, being neither able to speak nor stir; they continued a great
while looking upon each other, with inward motions very different from their
ancient tendernesses, and by the fiery glances of their eyes, gave one another
knowledge of the violent thoughts that stirred them up. They could not
absolutely believe their sight, and that uncertainty kept them for some time
irresolute, silent, and unmovable. In the end they no longer doubted of the
truth of this Encounter, and the Queen, less Mistress of her furious Resentments
than Orontes, took hold of the handle of her sword, and casting a look up
toward Heaven with a most terrible action, O Gods! (cried she) at last you have
brought me that disloyal man, who has so impiously invoked you in the falsness
of his Oaths; and drawing her sword, after she had often called Orontes
Traitor, she flew upon him with a fury, like that of a Tygress, when she is
robbed of her young. Orontes at last came to himself, and flying both the
looks, and approach of Thalestris; O! my eyes, (cried he) must you then behold
this faithless Woman again? Yet though he was no less moved than she, he was
more moderate, and having still a respect to the sex, and even to the person of
her whom he had so dearly loved, he left his sword still in the scabberd, and
only held forth his shield, retiring from the blows she made. Leave me, (cried
he) leave me false ungrateful Woman, and discharge not thy rage against a man,
who is innocent of the loss thou have sustained. The Queen replied not with any
distinct words, but rushing upon him with confused cries, and redoubled abuses,
made him quickly see she either meant to give him his death, or receive hers
from him. Arsaces and Lysimachus turning about at this noise, were quite
surprised at so unfore-seen an adventure, and Arsaces, observing the manner of
that combat, was something ashamed, and troubled to see his Valiant Companion,
who had so brave a reputation, retire, or rather fly before an Enemy. He leaped
upon his horse, and advanced toward him, by Lysimachus his example, who ran
presently to the Queen, when Orontes seeking sanctuary by him; deliver me O!
Arsaces (cried he) deliver me from the sight of this perfidious woman, who is
much more cruel to me than that death she strives to give me. Ah! monster of
infidelity (replied Thalestris, quite besides her self) hope not that the
assistance of Arsaces, nor of all the men in the world shall save thee from my
just indignation. As she spoke these words, she made her self passage between
Arsaces, and Lysimachus with such a fury, that those two Valiant men were too
weak to withhold her. Both of them, because they had heard something of their
adventures, began to suspect the truth, and being desirous to try some remedy
against so sudden and so violent a mischief, they used all their strength, and
all their persuasions to stop, and pacify the incensed Thalestris; but though
their strengths were employed with some success, all their persuasions were
utterly fruitless, and the Queen's wrath grew so enflamed by their hindrance of
her intentions, that she had much ado to forbear discharging some part of her
anger upon them. These things were done so near Perdiccas his Camp, that the
noise made them instantly taken notice of, and Cassander, who was seldom from
Orontes, believing there was some fowl play offered to his friend, and being
ready Armed for some other design, got hastily on horseback, followed by a good
number of his men, and ran full speed toward Thalestris and Lysimachus, crying
out, that they broak the Truce, and that they deserved death. Orontes, who by
the means of Arsaces and Lysimachus was beginning to retire toward the Camp,
strove in vain to stop him, and Cassander, seeing the Queen, who with her sword
up, endeavored to get from them that held her, calling Orontes Traitor, and
Coward, advanced toward her, and without considering his odds, laid on with his
sword upon her cask with all his Force, the Queen staggered at the blow, and
Cassander was going to second it, when Arsaces, fearing least he might kill her
in his arms, would hold her no longer, and the impatient Thalestris, whose
anger needed not that new provocation to swell it to the height, no sooner felt
her self at liberty, but she ran at Cassander with an action, which made him
grow pale, and think already of retreating amongst his men; when the Queen,
raising her self upon her stirrups, struck such a weighty blow upon his Helmet,
that she sent him headlong to the ground. After this action she turned her
looks, and cries again toward Orontes with more fierceness than before; but
they that had accompanied Cassander, were beginning to bend their Arms against
her, and against Lysimachus, who with his sword in his hand, had placed himself
by her side for her defense; when Arsaces did all he could possibly to keep
them from it, and Orontes himself, who was already a good way off, faced about,
and drew his sword for the preservation of his Enemy. But at the same time
Seleucus came thither, who had so great an Authority amongst those Soldiers,
that at Arsaces entreaty, he made them hold, and while they took up Cassander,
who was hardly come to himself, he got Lysimachus to carry back the Amazon
Queen. All the credit he had with her was necessary to overcome her to that
retreat, yet she yielded to it at last, when she saw her self in an
impossibility to satisfy her revenge, and seeking out her false Orontes with
her eye; Thou prolongest thy destiny but in vain (cried she) and if thou
escapest me at the Battle, I Will seek thee in the most hidden places of all the
world. Lysimachus pulled her from thence at last, and was constrained to
accompany her, without being able to finish his discourse with Arsaces: This
Valiant couple returned into the Camp, and during the little way they had
thither, Lysimachus could not draw one reasonable word from Thalestris. Since
this sudden alteration of her humor she was hardly to be known, her face was
all on fire, and her eyes seemed to cast forth live sparks; all her motions had
a mixture of rage and fury, and all her ordinary moderation had given place to
most impetuous transports. You have seen him (said she at last, to Lysimachus)
you have seen that Traitor, whose quarrel you defended with so much Valor,
and so little justice, and if his life were guiltless of infidelity, perchance
you would think him handsome enough, to excuse some part of the passion, a maid
may have had for him. She made a stop at these words, to give Lysimachus
leisure to deliver his approbation of what she said, and within a while after
going on with another tone; How true, and just are the gods (said she) and how
well do they begin to perform their promise, in bringing me this disloyal man,
whom I will sacrifice to the God of Love, and to the God of Hospitality, the
Laws of both having been basely and unworthily violated by him, they expect
this reparation from me; and my Traitor, obstinate in his treachery, brings me
that head himself, which I ought to have sought to the furthest end of the
whole world. With these and some other words she came into the Camp, where she
would not alight till she came to Oroondates his Tent. Oroondates since his
recovery had left Polemon's house to the Ladies, and Prince Oxyartes had
presented him with a Tent, the Rooms whereof were very spacious, and
convenient. As soon as Thalestris was come into his Chamber, Oroondates (cried
she) that Valiant stranger, that did so many admirable actions upon the bank of
Euphrates against Lysimachus, and his Companions, and in our last fight against
me, and the rest of our party, who do you think it should be, but my perfidious
Orontes? the justice of the gods has at last brought him to the foot of those
Altars, upon which he must be sacrificed. Oroondates at first was surprised
with this discourse, but presently after Lysimachus having confirmed what the
Queen had told him, he admired the fantastical effects of Fortune, and those
strange events whereby she seems to make her self sport with our destenies. He
is with Perdiccas, (continued Thalestris) my particular Enemy is among your
Enemies, and that monster of perfidiousness thinks himself not yet black enough
with that he has showed toward me, unless to aggravate his crimes, he embrace
an unjust quarrel, and take up Arms against the party of his Prince. It has not
pleased the Heavens that I should engage my self in this war without other
interest, than what I take in yours, but they will have hatred, and resentment
execute part of that, which honor and friendship made me undertake to serve
you. When Oroondates had replied to this discourse, the Queen fell again to
threats, and poured forth the most violent, and furious words against Orontes,
that her passion could put into her mouth. Oroondates, knowing her impetuous
humor, went not about to justify Orontes to her so soon, but giving way to
her impatience, he only said, that he hoped the success of that adventure,
would prove advantageous to her repose.

While he was in this entertainment with her, the sorrowful Demetrius wept at
the River side over the Tomb of his deceased Hermione; since the time he had
been able to leave his bed, that had been his usual imploiment, he spent almost
whole days there, and as soon as the Sun began to cast his light upon the
earth, that desolate Prince, whom his sorrows had made hardly to be known, went
forth of his Tent with a dejected countenance, and a feeble pace, and drawing
near to those dear ashes, paid them his homage, and sought no consolation but
in that mournful exercise; his tears made a stream, which did almost mingle
themselves with the waves of the River; the embraces he gave to cold, senceless
stones, would have put life into any thing that had been less frozen, and less
insensible than marble, and his moving complaints, might without doubt, have
obtained any thing else from the gods, save the return of Hermione. The Tomb
was raised with a magnificent structure, and upon a plate of brass the
afflicted Demetrius had caused an inscription to be engraven, which contained
these words.

PASSENGER THOU WILL BE CRUEL These sorrowful Entertainments settled this
young Prince in such a melancholic humor, as made him little different from
those that have no life at all, and the society of his friends, who formerly
had found a charming sweetness in his, was no longer able to give him any
contentment; as all things were black in his soul, so would he have all his
clothes, his furniture, and his Arms, and if he still bore the God of Love upon
his shield, 'twas in a posture very different from the former; before he
appeared triumphant, but now he lay grovelling upon a Tomb, his Arrows broken,
his Skarf torn from his eyes, and his Quiver overturned negligently at his
feet. The deadly marks of a grief so tender, and so violent both together,
infecting the soul of Antigonus, made him almost incapable of executing the
functions of his Charge, and the day, which was to be the next before the
Battle, being come, scarce was he able to go with the other Commanders into
Oxyartes his Tent, to take, and to give Orders in so important a necessity.
There it was that the Princes met together to dispose of all things against
that bloody decision of their fortunes, the term whereof was already so near at
hand; when they had received an exact account from all the Officers touching
the condition of their Force, they began to deliberate in what order they
should draw them up for the Battle, and resolved to put all things in such a
readiness that day, that they might have nothing else to do but to fight the
next; They employed it all both carefully, and profitably about those matters,
the field of Battle was visited from side to side, and many Commanders of both
parties meeting in that Action, saw, and talked to one another, witho^t showing
any mark of animosity in that Encounter. Afterward they offered sacrifices
through the whole Camp, and the Princes, behaving themselves there with much
zeal, and affection to the Gods, made their Soldiers know that the Victory was
not to be expected from their Arms, but rather from the will of the Gods, whom
they by Actions of Piety ought to win unto their party; the entrails of the
sacrificed beasts were visited with great care, and with great anxiety, the
smoke, and the flight of birds were curiously observed, but though the
South-sayers by those signs knew the great abundance of blood that was to be
shed, they were utterly ignorant of the success, and could not by any token
judge to which of the two parties the Gods intended the advantage of that
bloody day. The night was spent by the soldiers in different employments, some
of them took their rest to be the fresher for the toil they were to undergo,
others dressed their Horses, others mended the defects of their Arms, and all
together prepared themselves for that memorable Action, which was to be the
Decider of so many Quarrels.

Scarce did the day begin to appear, when from all parts of the Camp, the sound
of Trumpets roused up the fastest sleepers; the morning was fair and clear, and
the noise of all those warlike instruments, seeking out the nearest hollows
both in the Woods, and on the banks of the River, made the Echo answer with
redoubled sounds, which even in that terrible confusion had a mixture of
something very delightful. They that came first abroad, saw upon Ptolomeus his
Tent a Standard displayed, which they knew to be the signal of the Battle, and
among so many thousand men, there were few in who^ that sight did not produce
co^tentment. Prince Oroondates, being one of the first awake, saluted that day
with a joyful cry, and after having called for his Clothes; Today (said he) we
are to fight for you Cassandra, and you shall be delivered out of Perdiccas his
hands, either for Arsaces, or for Oroondates. But (pursued he within a while
after) it will neither be for Arsaces, nor for Oroondates; for you have
forsaken Oroondates in favor of Arsaces, and you shall see Arsaces fall by the
hand of Oroondates As he spoke these words, he leaped out of Bed, and scarce
had he begun to put on his Clothes, but he called for his Arms. Let Us see (said
he) if in this long idleness I have not forgot which way to put on a Cuirasse,
and if with the practice, I have not also lost the Theory of the first
profession to which my life was destined. He was saying thus, when Qu.
Thalestris (whose cruel passions had wakened her with the first) came into his
Chamber, and after her Prince Lysimachus, Eumenes, Ilyoneus, Tiridates, and
many others. Oroondates praising their diligence, and particularly the Queens;
I should blush Madam, (said he) to see my self out-strip'd, and hastened on by
a Lady, to go to fight for my own interests if you were not the divine
Thalestris, who both in Peace and War has all manner of Advantages over us.
The motives of my diligence (replied the Queen) deserve not to be envied by any
body, and my Revenge lies too near my heart, to hope that it will allow me a
moment of quiet sleep. Then Lysimachus putting into their discourse; I have
seen your Enemy, (said he to the Queen) and both the sight of his face, and
that of his gallant Actions has begot in me an affection, and an esteem for
him, which could make me wish, that either you were less revengeful, or that he
were well disposed to satisfy you. My satisfaction (answered Thalestris) is in
the point of my sword, and in the blood of that faithless man. I would it
pleased the Gods, Madam (added Oroontades) that he might be found innocent, and
that I were able to contribute to your repose, by the best part of that little
I have left. The Queen, to whom this discourse was not very pleasing, forbore
not however to answer it with much civility, and in the mean time Oroondates
his Arms were brought; They were a Present Lysimachus had made him, and the
workmanship of the admired Hyperion; formerly they had been Hephestion's, who
having given them to Lysimachus after their Reconciliation, he thought he could
not put them into better hands than the Prince of Scythia's. His shoulders were
first enclosed with a Cuirasse of Damascus Steel so excellently tempered, that
it was proof almost to the most dangerous Weapons, and enriched with a graving
worthy the hands of its famous Artificer, heigthened with Gold by mavelous
industry, and spreading it self in leaves over all the Cuirasse, with a
pleasing and skillful confusion; from the body of the Cuirasse, upon Bases of
Cloth of Gold, hung Plates of the same Steel graven in the same manner, which
reached almost to the knee, ending with Tassels of Gold twist interwoven with
Pearl; those which (coming forth of a Lions mouth upon his shoulder) fell over
the sleeve of his Cassock were wrought and beautified on the same fashion, and
those of his B^skin which covered from the middle of his Leg unto his Toe, were
all suitable, and glister'd equally with the polishing of the steel, and with
the Gold which set it off; his good Sword hung at a little Gold Chain, which
seemed to come out of the mouths of two small antic heads of Gold before and
behind his Cuirasse, and when he was fitted with all the rest of his Armor,
Toxaris covered his head with a Cask, whereon the workman had set forth the
utmost of his skill; besides that the graving was more delicate, and the
polishing more beautiful, the forepart of it was adorned with an Eagle, whose
out-stretch'd Wings, and all his Plumage were richly gilt, and from the hinder
part the the re^rose a little Pipe of Gold, out of which came a long sprig,
encompassed with a score of black and white Feathers set thick with spangles.
In this habit, with a lofty walk, and a garb which breathed forth nothing but
War, he went out of the Tent with his Valiant companions. At the door stood
ready a brave Cappadocian horse, which Eumenes had sent him, except Bucephalus
there had not been seen one better shaped, nor of a more advantageous stature,
his color was black, spotted all over with white spots in so great order, as
made that to be suspected for art, which proceeded only from nature; his tail
swept along the ground, and his main, which fell confusedly over his shoulders,
came waving loosely down below his knee. Oroondates being got lightly upon his
back, and having tried him before his companions with a skill, vigor, and
grace that was peculiar to him alone, Armed his right hand with a strong
Javeline, and upon his left arm took a shield little different from that of
Telamon's Son, and which perchance would have made any other arm, but his have
sunk under its weight, in the midst of it was represented a Cupid, who
trampling under foot a great many trophies of Arms heaped up together, was
environed with storms, and flashes of lightning, in his right hand he held one
of those bolts, which Jupiter alone is wont to dart at guilty heads, and near
him were these words written in the Scythian tongue. Nothing against Love. In
this equipage Oroondates would have appeared little different from Mars
himself, if amidst that which was terrible in him, he had not had far more
sweet and lovely features, than those we commonly see in the pictures of that
god of Battles. Nor is he much unlike him in the fight; woe be to them that
shall oppose his force this bloody day, each blow of his carries a certain
death along with it, and his hand makes the most sovereign herbs to loose their
virtue. He marches in the midst of these Valiant friends, toward the place
where the Troops were already drawing up, according to the orders resolved on
the day before; There he found Ptolomeus, Craterus, Antigonus and the rest all
busy in the duties of their several Offices, but though that day the Army by
course should have been commanded by Ptolomeus, he divested himself of all his
Authority amongst his friends, and would needs have them share equally with him
in the honors of that action; it began with sacrifices which were redoubled
with a most ardent devotion, and then having taken a light repast, all the
Officers retired to their charges, and placed themselves at the head of those
Forces they were to command. The Army was divided into four bodies, the weakest
of which was of ten thousand horse, and twenty thousand foot; The first was
given to Prince Oroondates composed of Egyptians under the command of
Cleomenes Lieutenant to Ptolomeus, of Syrians under their Valiant Prince
Laomedon, of Lydians under the brave Alexander their sovereign, and of
Cylicians under the obedience of Philotas. At the head of these, and by the
side of Prince Oroondates the Valiant Amazon placed herself, having on the same
Arms in which she had done the former actions, and so visibly breathing forth
revenge, that she almost cast fire through the bars of her Helmet; she was
desirous to fight that day by the Prince of Scythia, and was accompanied in
that design by Oxidates, Tyridates, Ilyoneus, and Pharnabasus. Prince Oxyartes
commanded the second body, in which were first the Bactrians, and Zoydians
under Cophes the son of Artabasus, he himself having been constrained by all
the Princes to forbear the Battal by reason of his age, and only to assist
those with his counsel, whose youth made them more fit for action; next those
of Armenia under Phrataphernes, those of Hircania under Philippus, and those of
Mesopotamia under Archesilaus. Those that accompanied Oxyartes were Mythranes,
Leostenes the Son of Ariobarzanes, Lysander and Pisistratus the Sons of
Phrataphernes and Archesilaus. The third body was led by brave Eumenes, who
under him had the Cappadocians, and Paphlagonians, those of Thracia, Pontus,
and of the Bosphorus, Lysimachus his new subjects, and those Arabians and
Affricans that were under the obedience of Ptolomeus. At the head of these
Forces with Eumenes were Menelaus, Ptolomeus his brother Leocaris, and
Dioxippus the Sons of Mentor, and Trasillus the brother of Menander. The last
Battalion marched under the great Polyperchon, consisting of fifteen thousand
Macedonians, brought by him and Craterus, of Phrigians the subjects of
Antigonus, and of Illirians led by Callicrates the son of Philosas, Polyperchon
had with him his son Alexander, Demochares and Cleobulus, and (the most Valiant
as well as the most beautiful of all) the disconsolate Demetrius; for all his
looks were pale and wan, one might see in them an eagerness to fight, and
though he marched with a sorrowful countenance, it was not at all the less
resolute; for his usual courage, being improved by the desire he then had to
die, thrust him on to the performance of miraculous achievements; his Arms,
his Horse, withal his furniture were black, and that weeping God of Love did
so well accompany the sadness of him that bore it, that it gained him the
compassion of all those that beheld him. To every Battalion there were fifty
Chariots Armed with Sithes, and filled with Archers which were to march in the
front; those of Oroondates commanded by Oxydates, those of Oxyantes by
Mythranes, those of Eumenes by Menelaus, and those of Polyperchon by Cleobulus;
This was the disposing of the Army, in which Lysimachus, Ptolomeus, Craterus,
and Antigonus, would needs be exempted from any particular command, that they
might be at liberty to go any whither; according as occasion should require.
Before the Army began to move, some spies came in from the Enemies Camp, who
informed the Princes touching the order of it, and from them they received an
account as follows.

Perdiccus, whither it were upon intelligence of the manner of the Princes
drawing up, or for some other reason, had like them divided his Army into four
bodies, of between four and five and thirty thousand men at the least, to each
of which he had appointed two Commanders of equal Authority. Perdiccas and his
Brother Alcetas led the first, composed of the inhabitants of both the Media's
subject to Alcetas, and Acropates; of the Susians under Sinus, and of the
Babylonians under Peucestas. The second was commanded by the Valiant Seleucus,
and the great Arsaces, in which were the fifteen thousand Macedonians that
followed Seleucus his Colors, these Bactrians and Zogdians that obeyed
Scytheus, and Amyntas, and the Parthians under Andiagoras and Nicanor. The
third marched after Cassander, and the Valorous Orantes consisting of six
thousand Argiraspides, under their leaders Antigenes, and Teutamus; of Carians
the subjects of Cassander, and of Lycians and Pamphilians under their Prince
Nearchus. The last was under the conduct of Leonatus and Neoptolemus, and in it
were the inhabitants of Persida, and those of the lesser Phrygia their
subjects, they of mount Caucasus under Axiarchus, the Pelasgians under Arthous,
and under Stratanor the Drache's and Argeans. They had three hundred Chariots
of War commanded by Python, and Aminta, and ranked in an order little different
from that, in which the Princes had placed theirs. These two potent Armies
being thus disposed, came at the same time from the places where they were
encamped, and advanced equally into that spacious plain, which lay between both
Camps. They were no sooner within sight, but they saluted one another with
horrible cries, and actions which visibly testified the ardour that carried
them on unto the Battle; as they drew nearer together, the fierceness of their
hearts redoubled, their anger grew more inflamed by seeing their Enemies, and
their Officers were hardly able to keep them from rushing on disorderly to the
fight, when they were come within a certain distance, they were commanded to
make a stand, to receive the last orders, and then the Generals riding by the
head of every Battalion, showed themselves to the Soldiers, and with fiery
exhortations infused courage, even into the faintest of them all. Oroondates
appearing with that Majesty, and grace which was inseparable from his meanest
actions, set forth all the eloquence the gods had endowed him with, to inspire
Valor into his men, and passing from one division to another with admirable
swiftness, not much unlike a flash of lightning, kindled all hearts by his
words and presence. He had never been so great, nor so handsome in the eyes of
his faithful Araxes as at that time, and the Amazon Queen, who eased him as
much as possibly she was able in the days of his command, could not behold him
in that condition without admiration. Lysimachus and his Valiant companions
were no less full of business, and when they had set all things in the
readiness they ought to be, and that they neither could, nor would longer
retain the eagerness of the Soldiers, they chose the places where they meant
to fight themselves, and remembering in what order the Enemies were drawn up,
they went and put themselves severally at the head of the four Battalions.
Lysimachus took his place near Oroondates, who received him with demonstrations
of joy worthy of their friendship, Antigonus near Oxyates, Ptolomeus near
Eumenes, and Craterus near Polyperchon. As soon as they had thus disposed of
themselves, they commanded the Trumpets to give the last signal. That
dreadful, yet pleasing noise of so many warlike instruments, resounded along
the banks of Euphrates for many furlongs, and presently after the space, which
separated the two Armies, began to decrease, and such an infinite number of
Arrows were let fly from either side, that they could hardly find free passage
to the marks they were aimed at; hundreds of men lay grovelling in the dust, and
hundreds of horses fell under their masters at that first manner of fight, but
within a while it altered form, taking another much more hideous and bloody;
the squadrons and divisions closed to handy-blows, but their Valiant leaders
desiring to have the honor to begin the charge, advanced mutually before their
Troops, and ran at one another with an animosity, which proceeded from a higher
interest than that of their Commands. Oroondates and Lysimachus knowing
Perdiccas and Alcetas, by the intelligence they had received concerning the
order of their Battle, and by many other marks, thundered upon them with an
impetuousness which admits of no comparison, and the Valiant Amazon made a
furious charge against Peucestas; Pay me (cried Oroondates to Perdiccas) Pay me
that life which I have saved thee twice. Let us fight (said Lysimachus to
Alcetas) Let us fight for Parisatis; these words received no answer, nor were
they heard perhaps amidst the cries, and noise of that encounter, but they were
close followed by deeds, and these six Valiant persons struck one another with
their Javelines, and shocked each other with their shields, with equal courage
but forces something different. Oroondates reeled in his saddle at the blow
Perdiccas gave him, but Perdiccas and his horse came tumbling both together to
the ground. Lysimachus lost his stirrups at the stroke of Alcetas, but he took
him out of his saddle, and threw him headlong in the dust, and the Valiant
Thalestris made Peucestas fly over the crupper of his horse, among the feet of
those that were about him. All the advantage of this first encounter being on
our Princes side, their party solemnized it with a joyful cry, and from that
glorious beginning, drew happy presages of the victory. These dismounted
Princes were presently environed by many of their men, who opposing the fury
of their Enemies, set them again on hors-back, and their gallant Conquerours,
not being able to Force that resistance, turned their blows another way, and by
their example made their squadrons fall in pell-mell among the Enemies. Then it
was that the earth became covered with dying bodies, and that the face of all
things grew dismal and terrible. The Armed Chariots made great slaughters on
both sides, the Egyptians and Medes, the Syrians and Babylonians falling
together with an equal confusion. The first squadrons having begun the Battle,
the second made their charge with the same fury; Arfaces ran at Antigonus, and
Seleucus at Prince Oxyates, but Oxyates had the worst against Seleucus, and
Antigonus was overthrown upon the earth, by the redoubted hand of Arsaces; by
the same hand presently after fell Listander, and Pisistratus, the sons of
Archesilaus and Phrataphernes, Pisistratus was run through the body, and
Listander cloven from the shoulder to the breast; their desolate Fathers were
present at that sight, and rushing both at the same time upon him that had
slain their Children, assaulted him with cries full of rage and resentment, but
fortune was adverse to them and their Genius was inferior to that of Arsaces,
for Archesilaus had his hand cut off with a back-blow, and Phrataphernes was so
forcibly encountered, that he came over with his horse, and lay without sense or
motion. While Arsaces strives by such actions as these to repair the
disadvantage the first body had received by the Valor of Oroondates, and
Lysimachus, the third and last Battalions march on unto the fight, and charged
with a fiercenss no way inferior to their Companions; The encounter of
Ptolomeus, and Eumenes with Cassander, and the Valiant Orontes passed without
any great advantage on either party, for though Ptolomeus lost one of his
stirrups by the shock of Orontes, Cassander lost both his by that of the brave
Eumenes. Craterus and Polyperchon fought with more equality against Neoptolemus
and Leonatus, but all those that opposed the young Demetrius, who had taken his
place in this last body, felt both the weight of his Arm, and the effects of
his grief. In this general mixture of Squadrons, and Battalions; disorder and
confusion quickly were accompanied which wounds and horror, giving dismal
shapes to all those objects, with a few hours before appeared most pleasing,
and delightful; the slaughter was so universal, that in all the Battles which
had ever been fought under Darius, or Alexander, Death never had reigned with
so absolute an Empire as that bloody day: if the Parthian fall by a Syrian
Javeline, the Syrian is slain by the sword of a Lycian, and the dying Hircanian
drags the Pamphilian along with him, blood has not only made the earth loose
its color in the thickest of the fight, but flows in purple streams, for many
furlongs round about; the Chariots had in the beginning done great execution,
but at last the Commanders on both sides, thought best to give place to their
impetuousness, and killing the horses as they passed, made them equally useless
to one another. After that all the several divisions were engaged, the Generals
being no longer tied to keep with their particular Battalions, where they
hardly were any longer obeyed, went freely into all places, according to the
ardor that transported them. Oroondates, and Thalestris sought every where for
Arsaces, and Orontes, and the furious Prince of Scythia running from one
squadron to another, made the name of Arsaces resound wheresoever he went; his
Enemy was no less impatient, nor less industrious to find out him, but the
obstacles that were in their way retarded the execution of their desires, and
to break through them, they did actions that struck terror into all those that
looked upon them, and that are as far beyond belief as above expression.
Oroondates, which way soever he turned himself, left bloody marks of his
passage, when Cassanders two brothers Jolas, and Philippus presented themselves
before him, and would have opposed his fury, as a damme at the fall of an
impetuous torrent; they charged him both at the same time with two blows, which
scarce made any print upon his Arms; but the fierce Prince of Scythia, requited
them with two others, which being given by a more vigorous hand than theirs,
produced very different effects. Jolas was laid along, having his shoulder run
through with a thrust, and with a back-blow Philippus his cask and his head
within it, were made to roll together upon the grass; they that saw the fall
of these two young Princes, and knew their quality, ran with loud cries to take
revenge; but Oroondates broak through them with the same fury, and before their
eyes, slew Theagenes the Son of Python, Aristocles the brother of Peucestas,
and made Antigenes, and Teutamus Commanders of the Argiraspides, to tumble
breathless among the horses feet. By these prodigious feats he at last opened
himself a passage to Arsaces, and with a loud voice defied him to the
encounter, when he on the other side had newly dispatched Trasillus and the
unfortunate Tiridates. These two great Warriers knew one another by their
cries, and by the actions they saw each other do, yet before they could get
together, Oroondates cleft Erginis his Sons head into two pieces, and meeting
the Valiant Neoptolemus in his way, justled him with so great violence, that he
sent him astonished among the legs of Arsaces his horse. Arsaces could not know
his Enemy better than by such marks as those, nor did he any longer doubt but
it was he, and testifying that assurance by a fierce cry, he ran to him,
holding up his sword with such an action as might have terrified any body but
Oroondates; both of them would have spoken, but the extremity of their anger
made them both unable to express themselves, and the confused noise of so many
voices would not suffer them to understand one another. Ptolomeus, Craterus,
and Demetrius on the one side, and on the other Seleucus, Nearchus, and
Leonatus, with many other Commanders of each party were present at their
meeting, and all as with a mutual consent suspended their enmity for a few
moments, to become spectatours of that furious encounter, nor did it any way
fail their expectation, though the business was of no long continuance. The
two enraged Warriers, whose thoughts were not upon the defensive, cast their
shields behind their backs, and putting both hands to their swords, lifted them
on high into the air, and brought them down with the utmost of their strength
upon each others Helmet. At those mighty blows, the two swords flew in a
thousand pieces, their Crests were beaten off, their caskes deeply dinted, and
how great so ever was the fortitude of those to gallant men, it was not proof
against so infinite a violence. Arsaces bleeding both at nose and mouth, fell
in a swown at Seleucus his feet, and Ptolomeus running to Oroondates, saw him
open his arms, and sink without understanding from his saddle into the dust.
The fall of these two matchless persons, caused those of each party to send
forth mighty cries, and kindled a furious combustion round about them.
Ptolomeus, Craterus, and Demetrius sheltred Oroondates with their bucklers, and
his faithful Aranes, who stirred not from him, carried him off with the
assistance of I^yoneus, Menelaus, and many others; Arsaces his friends did the
same for him, and then between those six valiant men there began a Combat
worthy of more heedfull Spectatours; and of larger room to set forth the proofs
of their valor with better liberty. Ptolomeus having known Seleucus by
several marks, spurred up to him with a joyful voice, and preventing
Demetrius who was going to charge him; Seleucus (cried he) thy old Enemy defies
thee, and now thou have a brave occasion to execute thy threatenings. Seleucus
answered these words only with a mighty stroke, which Ptolomeus quickly
repaid, Craterus at the same time closing with Leonatus, and Nearchus with
young Demetrius. The fight was reasonable equal between the four first, but
desperate Demetrius whose grief seemed to have redoubled his strength, after
some few blows given, on both sides with wondrous violence, beat down Nearchus
at his feet, and turning about toward his Friends, was going to make their
Victory sure, when valiant Orontes came up unto that place. He had made himself
remarkable that day by a thousand Actions of an admirable Valor, his Arms were
all besmeared with blood, and he was hardly to be known but by that famous
device of the Heart torn with Vultures, which had yet retained some part of its
wonted figure; he besides diverse others had slain young Pharnabasus, and the
two unfortunate sons of Mentor, and had left great Polyperchon, and his
courageous son Alexander, half dead upon the ground. As he came near to these
brave Combatants he saw Nearchus fall, and desiring to make amends for his
disaster, he clave the throng of those that opposed his passage, and rushed
forward unto Demetrius. That young Prince who knew him by his shield, and who
formerly upon the bank of Euphrates, had been crossed in his design of
measuring his strength with his, received him gladly, and advanced before all
his Companions to meet him single; they by some blows given with little
inequality, had begun to show each other proof of their reciprocal Valor, when
Lysimachus opened himself a large way thither with his sword; he was still wet
with the blood of Nicanor Commander of some of the Parthians, of Apiarchus, of
Criton the son of Acropates, of Tydeus Nephew to Perdiccas, and many others
whom he had left biting the earth, and seeking to enhaunce his glory by new
Defeats, he no sooner knew Orontes his shield, but he came up close to
Demetrius, saying, Leave this Combat to me Demetrius, we began it once already,
and I was challenged by Orontes when we parted. Scarce had he spoke these
words, when another cried out, The death of this faithless man belongs to me,
and none of you have right to disput it with me. Orontes was not at all
dismayed at the number of his Enemies, but desiring them all together, Come
valiant men (said he) come all of you together assault this Life, which I shall
be well enough able to defend against you, and if you be not ashamed of this
inequality, let us get out of this crowd to make an end of our Combat. As he
brought forth these words, he flew upon them like a Lion, when presently
amongst his Enemies he knew the revengefull Thalestris, who more eager than the
rest, had at last obtained the place she sought before them. That sight
benumbed Orontes his courage, and in a moment froze his gallant Resolution. O!
Woman (cried he) art thou not weary with tormenting me? and casting his shield
behind his back, he took Sanctuary amongst his Friends against her fury, and
against her sight, which he could not endure. Thou fliest Traitor (cried the
enraged Queen) thou fliest from a Woman's sword; but know, this Victory would
not be so shameful to thee, as the perfidiousness thou art guilty of. She said
these words pursuing him, and overthrowing all that opposed her passage.
Acropates to his misfortune happened to be in her way, and the desperate Queen
whose force was doubled by her rage, slashed off his body at the waste, leaving
one half in the Saddle, while the other tumbled among the Horses feet. Cleon
the son of Stratanor lost his life by her conquering hand, and Listander the
brother of Andiagoras had the self same destiny. Perdiccas and his brother
Alcetas were hardly able to stop her fury. Perdiccas had that day done many
Actions of a knowing General, and of a valiant man, for though there were very
few that could surpass him in fighting skilfully with his own hand, there were
yet fewer that could equal him in experience to command an Army; he by Orders
often seasonably given, and by his prudent diligence had many times upheld his
party, and had that day kept the Victory in equal balance. The Medes,
Pamphilians, and Carians began to yield a little to the force of the Egyptians,
Thracians, and Cappadocians, but the stout Argiraspides did with miraculous
effects sustain and frustrate the Attempts of the most warlike Phalanxes, they
utterly defeated the Lydians, Arabians, and Phrygians, and with justice carried
away the glory of having preserved their party in that Battle. Oroondates and
Arsaces were already recovered out of their swowns, and though they that had
taken care of them, used their endeavors to get them into their Tents; it was
impossible to persuade them to it, each of them inquired what was become of his
Enemy, and not being able to learn any thing, they had taken up other swords
amongst the heaps of dead bodies, and were gotten again into the thickest of
the fight, more fierce, and terrible than before, 'twas to the misfortune of
many gallant men that they returned into the Battle, and the rage that stirred
them up was fatal to many Warriers, whose prowess deserved a better destiny.
Thy courage* O brave Amyntas, could not preserve thee from falling under the
blows of Oroondates; nor could the goodness of thy Arms, O valiant Philotas,
defend thee from the sword of fierce Arsaces; These two redoubted Warriers slew
many other famous Captains, and seeking one another through the midst of
blood and slaughter, would sure have met again if the day would have allowed
them time. All things then were in a most horrid form, the number of the dead
exceeded that of the living, and the field was covered with great heaps of
bodies, from whence ran streams of blood that emptied themselves into the
River; the soldiers were no longer obedient to Command, nor knew the persons
that commanded, and both sides were so eager to destroy those who had been
formerly their Companions, that night was hardly able to put an obstacle to
their fury. But for its arrival, both Armies had been totally defeated, and
'twas not till it began to grow dark, that after many signals to retreat, the
broken Squadrons began to rally. Neither the Prince of Scythia, nor the brave
Arsaces, did at all contribute to that care, which their particular animosity
made them wholly remit to their Companions. At last the execution ceased, the
soldiers began to gather to their Colors, and the Field remained almost
equally to both parties. This Victory so obstinately disputed, declared not it
self absolutely for either, nor could they that day know their losses, or
reckon the number of their dead; but each Army having ^allied as well as was
possible in the dark, retired into the place where it was encamped before.
These objects would have been dismal to behold, if darkness had not at that
time made them invisible; among those that retreated with their Commanders,
diverse were hurt, and many others sorely wounded came softly behind, or rather
crawled without any order after their fellows, and a very great number were
left among the slain, who not yet quite dead, lay with groans begging the
assistance of their dearest friends, by whom they saw themselves forsaken in
the night, and in their utmost extremities.

Our Princes were no sooner come into the Camp, but they saw the Ladies in
great perplexity coming forth to meet them. Apamia, Arsinoe, and the rest
having past the day full of deadly apprehensions, received their Husbands with
open arms, and scarce would suffer them to get into their Tents before they
begun to pull off their Armor, and look upon their wounds. By good fortune
none of the Princes had any that were mortal; Oroondates, Lysimachus,
Ptolomeus, and Demetrius had some few, but such light ones, that they could
hardly be persuaded to keep their beds for them the next day. Antigonus was run
through the shoulder, and brave Craterus through the thigh, Polyperchon was
wounded in the head, and in the right arm; the Amazon Queen, Oxyartes, and
Eumenes had no hurt at all, but of all the other Commanders very few were free;
part of the night was spent in dressing them, and the remainder was given to
rest, and in many quarters of the Army, to the cries and complaints of those
who had lost their near Friends, or Kinsmen in the Battle. The next day there
came Messengers from Perdiccas, who demanded a Truce of the Princes for six
days, to bury the dead, and dress those that were wounded of both parties. It
presently was granted, and they on either side sent without delay to view the
field. There it was they met with objects worthy of compassion, and then their
losses began to be known by the computation of the dead, and by the remainder
of the living; the Princes found they had lost above fifty thousand men, and on
Perdiccas his side there were slain above threescore and ten thousand, among
which diverse were very considerable on each party, on that of the Princes were
Philotas, Archeselaus and his son; Pisistratus, Pharnabasus, Trasillus,
Tyridates, the two sons of Mentor, and many others, who for their quality and
virtue were lamented by the whole Army. On the other Amyntas, Nicanor,
Axiarchus, Philippus the brother of Cassander, Acropates, with his son, the
sons of Erigius, Python and Stratanor, the brothers of Peucestas, and
Andiagoras, Perdiccas his nephew and a great number more, whose loss was no
small affliction to their party. All that day was employed in carrying them
off, which their friends did with grievous lamentations, and of the bodies of
common soldiers they made great heaps with their Arms to burn them, since by
reason of their excessive number they could not give the honor of Burial to
every one in particular. That order was executed the day following, and many of
the Commanders were present at that Ceremony, the rest knowing their Forces to
be much diminished, were busy in setting men on work to fortify their Camp,
to make their Lines deeper, and draw new ones in places which they had before
neglected.

These were the general employments, but those of Oroondates, Lysimachus, and
Thalestris were very different, and they had particular afflictions, besides
those they suffered with the rest for the death of their men, and for seeing
themselves deceived in their expectation of an absolute Victory. Lysimachus saw
his hopes further off than before, and his Princess a Captive till the
conclusion of a War, which he thought to have made an end of in one day.
Oroondates with the same cause of grief, had others also which violently
tormented him, and was not more afflicted for the Queens captivity, or for the
uncertaintainty of her condition, than to see that Arsaces had escaped his
Revenge, and was triumphant over his ill fortune; he had learned by many, who
yet bore his marks, how after their separation he returned into the fight,
where he did a thousand Actions, which ran with admiration over all the Camp;
this knowledge added an emulation to his former jealousy, which did not a
little aggravate his sorrows, and sometimes cast him into such strange
Resolutions, that had he not been hindered by Aranes, Lysimachus, and many
others, he would instantly have gone to seek Arsaces, or Death in the middle of
his Camp. Ah! hand (said he) thou which in occasions of less importance have
often served me with success; feeble hand, why did thou fail me at this time
of need, and lose thy strength against my chiefest Enemy? Heretofore thou
would have made my Sword find passage through that daring heart where
Statira is seated, or if thou had born any reverence to her image, thou
certainly would have thrust it through all those other parts where death can
possibly enter. He spoke many other such like words, and after having rolled a
thousand several imaginations in his fancy, the last Resolution was, to
challenge Arsaces to a single Combat as soon as the Truce was expired, and to
decide his Differences with him once for all in sight of both Armies. If
Oroondates was thus tormented, Thalestris was racked with a far greater
violence, and the perseverance she found in Orontes to use her ill, had brought
so great a rage, that she was utterly incapable of any rest; all that her first
resentments had made her think or say in former times, was full of gentleness,
and moderation, in comparison of these last motions of her fury, wherewith she
was impetuously transported. I Will seek thee (said she) Monster of ingratitude,
I Will seek thee in the midst of a hundred thousand swords, and spite of all the
obstacles that can oppose my lawful indignation, I with a thousand blows will
stab that black perfidious heart of thine; thou shall but vainly fortify thy
self with Guards, and with Entrenchments, against the rage of an incensed
Lover, and the passion that guides me shall make way through all the powers of
earth, to thy destruction. These wild thoughts made her of so unsociable an
humor, that she could no longer abide the company of those persons whom she
considered most, and knowing it was hard for her to avoid it by keeping within
doors, she put on her Arms, and forbidding even Hyppolita to follow her, she
mounted on horseback to go entertain her cruel melancholy out of the reach
of all humane conversation, and not to return again till darkness had
overspread the earth. She had been gone but a little while, when Oroondates,
who was made sensibly concerned in her afflictions, came into her Chamber to
visit her, and to intermix his Discontents with hers; Lysimachus and Ptolomeus
came in presently after him, and all of them together, having learned of
Hyppolita in what manner she went away, feared least the violence of her
Resentments might have carried her to some strange Resolution, and desiring to
prevent the effect of it if they could possibly, they sent for their Arms and
Horses, went with Hyppolita the same way she had been seen to go.

At that very time, sorrowful Demetrius, whose grief made him as much an Enemy
to company as Thalestris, was got on hors-back with a design like hers, and in
the gloomyest and remotest places, sought things conformable to his pensive
humor, he was so averse from all consolation, that he fled from those that
strove to give it him, and only the remembrance of his Hermione, made up the
whole employment of his thoughts; he named her every moment, but never named
her without tears, and in all his actions there was something so doleful, and
so moving, that it made even the most insensible things to be in a manner
concerned in his afflictions. Hermione (said he) whither do thou now remember
me as thy murderer, or as thy lover, and which is most powerful in thy
memory, my crime, or my affection? I killed thee, and I loved thee, but if I
have not forgotten thy last words, they contained a pardon for thy death, and
an acknowledgement of my love; thy goodness appeared in the latest minutes of
thy life; but Hermione I ought not to abuse it, and Demetrius is not at all the
less guilty, because Hermione is merciful. These tears which I give thee,
ought to be seconded by all this blood, which filial duty keeps still within my
veins; but since my hands are forbidden to follow the instigations of my love,
receive that from my love alone, which they are not allowed to give thee. He
was talking to himself on this manner, when coming near unto a way, which led
to Babylon from some neighboring villages, he had an encounter that disturbed
his solitary entertainment. He saw three men on hors-back completely Armed,
fighting with their swords drawn, against one single man on foot, who disputed
his life with a most generous resistance. Besides the three that were upon him,
there was another dead at his feet, and to keep himself from being assaulted
behind, he had set his back against an Oak; two women were present at that
combat, who by all their actions testified they had an exceeding great interest
in the life of him that fought for them; but he was extremely wounded, and so
weak, that at Demetrius his arrival his life was in a manifest danger.
Demetrius, who was generosity it self, never stood considering what he should
do in that occasion, but rushing at the three men with a loud cry, constrained
them to turn head against him, though so unfortunately on their part, that the
first of them who came to meet him, fell dead upon the grass with the first
stroke he received from the sword of Demetrius. When he had done that
execution, he slashed at the Cask of one of the other, and having cut the
straps of it, left his head quite bare, and without defense. The stranger who
fought on foot, had no sooner cast his sight upon the face of that Enemy, but
lifting up his eyes to Heaven; Great Gods! (cried he) how just are you, to
reserve the death of wicked Astiages to me! At these words; without remembering
his wounds, or considering the advantage his Enemy had by being on hors-back,
he quitted his tree, and flew at him as fiercely as a Lion; Astiages made so me
blows at him again, and strove to trample him under his horses feet, but he
received the blows upon his shield, and having avoided the shocke of the horse,
closed up to Astiages so fortunately, that meeting with a place not defended by
his cuirasse, he ran his sword quite through his body. Astiages fell dead, with
a stream of blood in which he began to welter, and his Enemy seeing him fall,
turned toward Demetrius, and with the remainder of his strength went to render
him part of the assistance he had received from him; but he stood not in any
need of it, for his Enemy not having dared to withstand the weightiness of his
blows, had already taken flight to save himself. The stranger full of
acknowledgement, was going to give him thanks, when he saw the Ladies, for whom
he had fought, coming toward him, then leaving her which appeared to be the
chief, and whom the gods had favored with an admirable beauty, and addressing
himself to the other that accompanied her, Dear Alcione (said he) I have lived
long enough, since I have been able to do you some service before I die, and
that I have sacrificed the disloyal Astiages, unto the Ghost of poor abused
Theander. As he brought forth these words, he would have gone nearer to her,
but his weakness prevented him, and made him sink down presently at the foot of
a tree. Alcione ran to him in an exceeding great trouble (while Demetrius being
come near to the Princess Berenice, endeavored to re-assure her, and demanded
new occasions to serve her;) but O Gods! how great was her astonishment, when
after she had uncovered his head, she saw the face of Cleonimus; his absence
had so little worn out the Idea of it, that it was always present to her
remembrance, nor found she any difficulty to discern those features, in the
midst of blood and paleness, which were so deeply settled in her heart. It
would be very hard to express, how infinitely she was surprised at this
adventure; the first marks whereof were cries wherewith she drew Berenice, and
Demetrius to her. She pronounced the name of Cleonimus twice or thrice, with a
voice which showed a great deal of tenderness, and not daring to follow the
first motions of her affection, in the presence of those persons that looked
upon her, she left her eyes the care to express it for her, and to execute that
which decency by a cruel constraint forbad; in this silence her face changed
color several times, and her passions were so plainly written in it, that 't
was but in vain she held her peace to conceal them. The Princess Berenice, who
knew the story of her life, and who by that natural goodness, which
accompanied the rest of her virtues, had taken an interest in her fortune,
learned the cause of all her transports, by the bare hearing of Cleonimus his
name, and forgetting the greatness of her birth, to follow her charitable
inclinations, she sat down by her, and gave her all the assistance she could
receive in such a like encounter. In the interim Cleonimus, having allowed some
time to Alciones astonishment, and conversed with her in that mute language,
which represented their thoughts without any affectation, broke silence first,
and putting forth his hand to her with much respect. Cousin (said he) you at
last see Cleominus again, whom his ill fortune banished from you, and whom his
good fortune has brought to die thus near you; how great soever the distance
that has parted us has been, you have ever been present to my remembrance, and
that remembrance which brings me back in spite of my former resolutions, is an
effect of my destiny, and of the justice of the gods. They prolonged my life in
those sorrows, that have persecuted it, for no other purpose, but to reserve
the end of it, either for your service, or for Theander's revenge, and the
conclusion of it could not be more pleasing to me, than to die at Alciones
feet, after having sacrificed in her presence, the cruel Author of our commom
miseries. Dispose now, (continued he lifting up his eyes to heaven) O gods,
dispose now of my destiny when you will, and if I cannot die innocent of the
loss of Theander, and of Alciones misfortunes, at least be pleased that this
blood, which I most freely give them, may serve in part to expiate my faults.
Cleonimus spoke on this manner, while Alcione did all she could to resettle her
inward disturbance, and called to her courage for assistance to support the
present condition of her fortune. The first motions she had felt at the
encounter of Cleonimus, began to give way to her grief for the estate he was
in, and scarce had her heart begun to receive some touch of joy, for the
recovery of a person that was so dear to her, when by a cruel capriccio of
fortune, she sees the same persons life reduced to extremity; nor could she
longer retain her modesty, within those limits which her severity had
prescribed it, but by a beseeching look begging pardon of the Princess, for the
liberty she took in her presence, she embraced Cleonimus with transports of
that affection, which as innocent as it was, had produced such fatal effects,
and sending a stream of tears from her eyes, which for some years past had been
their usual sources, she showed that neither time nor the accidents of her
life, had made any alteration in those pure, and constant inclinations she had
to him. Dear Cleonimus (said she with a voice interrupted with sighs) you are
come back at last after an age of absence which has cost us so many tears, but
if you are come back to die, Ah! Cleonimus, how cruel is your return to
miserable Alcione; if life were unpleasing to you, you should have died far
from her eyes, without aggravating, by that killing sight, those cruel griefs
which since her loss, and your departure have made a continual war against her.
'T was not Cleonimus his blood that was due to Theanders revenge, and to
Alcione's repose; the blood of Astiages was enough for both, and you ill repair
those innocent faults whereof you accuse your self by loosing a life for
Theander and for Alcione, which was ever dearer to them than their own. These
wounds (continued she looking upon them, and endeavoring to steanch the blood)
these cruel wounds are mine as well as yours, and if you still have any part of
that friendship which once you bore me, you ought not to put mine to so cruel a
proof, nor force me to confess that it is strong enough enough to make me keep
you company in your grave. The effect these words produced in Cleonimus,
appeared presently in his face, and not being able to dissemble the consolation
he received by them, Dear Alcione (said he) if it pleased the Gods that I might
live, I would not pray to them for death, and though my misfortunes have made
me desire it, I cannot hate my life, if I am still beloved of Alcione; Heaven
is my witness, it is in that felicity alone, that mine was ever bounded, and
though my thoughts for all their innocence, have drawn its anger upon my head,
I am not able to repent them; I was infinitely indebted to Theander, but I
believe I have paid his memory all that he could expect from a friend like
Cleonimus; for his sake, I used a cruel violence upon my most powerful
inclinations, I banished my self with a great deal of perseyerance, from a
place where I left the better part of my life, and if I contributed to his
death by my ill fortune, I may protest before all the Gods, that the extremity
of my grief for it was such, as never was capable of any consolation, except
this you now have given me; yet shall it make no alteration in my thoughts; and
though the Gods should have suffered my life to continue longer, this knowledge
of your friendship should never have given me any desire, whereby Theanders
memory could be offended: he so well deserved your whole affection, that I
should be more criminal than Astiages, and Bagistanes, if I would dispute it
with him, and it is happiness enough for Cleonimus, that you pardon him your
misfortunes without pretending to any greater advantage from your goodness.
While Cleonimus spoke in these terms, Demetrius, who in those sad discourses
found something conformable to his condition, and who, by that resemblance
believed himself obliged to love those miserable persons, had with much charity
assisted Acione to bind up Cleonimus his wounds, and being desirous to get him
removed from the place where he lay, rose up to look for some body to help him
in that intention; but scarce had he gone half a dozen steps, when passing by
Astiages, he by some groans he heard, perceived he was not yet quite dead;
this knowledge made him go nearer to him and Astiages, who was drawing to his
end, lifting up his eyes with much ado, Whosoever thou art (said he, with a
feeble voice) whither Friend or Enemy, for Gods sake let me once again see
those Ladies I have so much offended, that before I die I may ask them pardon
for the injuries I have done them. Demetrius, who of all men living was most
sensible of pity, was touched with Astiages his words, and returning to the
Princess Berenice, besought her to grant him the favor he desired. Berenice,
who was all goodness, and who even in another condition would not have refused
pardon to the most cruel of her Enemies, rose from the ground where she was
sitting, and Alcione quite mollified with Astiages his repentance, would have
followed her, but that she durst not forsake Cleonimus, who was in little
better case than Astiages. He soon perceived it, and not being willing to rob
his Enemy of that last satisfaction; Go Madam, I beseech you (said he) be
generous to the very utmost, and in granting Astiages the pardon he desires of
you, obtain that which Cleonimus desires of him; if it had pleased the Gods to
give his crimes a lesser punishments than death, I should have been very well
contented with it; and because he is penitent, and that he is Theanders
brother, I could have wished their justice had made use of another hand. These
words obliged Alcione to leave Cleonimus for some few moments, leaning against
the foot of an Oak, and drawing near Astiages with Berenice, she found him in
the very pangs of death, yet had he time to ask them pardon for what he had
done against them, with so great testimonies of repentance, that those generous
persons forgot all their injuries in a moment, and were very sorry for his
misfortune; but when he had learned it was by Cleonimus his Sword the Gods had
sent him the recompense of his crimes, he lift up his hands and eyes to Heaven,
and struggling against his weakness; O you revenging Divinities, (cried he) how
admirable are your judgments, and how well do you teach mortals by my example,
that it is impossible to save themselves from you. Cleonimus, whose life I have
assaulted, and whose virtue I have persecuted by my treacheries, and calumnies,
comes into the world again for no other end but to execute your just decrees,
and you have reserved the punishment of false Astiages to Cleonimus alone,
whereas you might have brought it upon him a thousand other ways. After these
words, turning his looks upon Alcione, Alcione (said he) for I dare not call
you Sister, since by my Treacheries I so unworthily have violated our Alliance,
if my repentance had been but some few moments before my punishment, I would
have offered it to you for some part of the satisfaction I ow unto Theanders
blood, but since it comes so late, I can hope for no pardon of my infidelities
from you, nor from my brothers Ghost, no nor from the Gods themselves; I die
therefore with an acknowledgement that I have deserved it, and that I was the
wickedest of all men living to persecute such virtuous, such innocent persons,
as Alcione, and Cleonimus; I give my life to both for the reparation I ow them,
and if by the loss of my blood, I can wash out of my memory any part of those
spots wherewith it is stained by the blood of Theander, I shall depart the
world without complaining of my destiny. As he made an end of these words, he
was taken with Convulsions wherein he died, happy in the end of his life, that
he was pitied by those, who of all the persons of the world, had greatest
reason to detest him. Alcione without doubt would have stayed longer by him, if
the rememberance of Cleonimus had not pulled her away, but she was hardly come
back to him again, when she saw certain Soldiers, whom Demetrius had called,
and who having from him learned the need there was of their assistance, offered
themselves willingly to carry Cleonimus unto Polemon's house, and presently
going about that office, lifted him easily from the place where he lay, and
took a path which was not unknown to Alcione. As long as they were upon the way
she kept close to Cleonimus, with such a tender pressing care, as made the
Princess Berenice know it was not without some appearance of Reason, that she
had formely been suspected to have had a particular affection to him. Demetrius
went by the Princess Berenice, but none of them would get on horseback,
because they had so little a way to go. Demetrius considered Berenice's beauty
with an astonishment, which was easy to be observed in his face, and though he
had seen the rarest in the world, scarce could he call any thing to mind that
was equal to it. He discoursed with her awhile in those terms of civility which
he used generally to those of her sex, but as soon as he heard by Alcione that
she was the Princess of Scythia, and the sister of great Oroondates, he cast
himself at her feet, and with profound submission, begged pardon for those
faults, which his ignorance had made him to commit. Berenice abused not his
humility, but with a graceful sweetness, which were inseparable from her words
and actions, expressed her acknowledgements to him, and made him quickly see
she was worthy to be sister to such a brother as Oroondates. With these
Entertainments they arrived at Polemons house, where while Alcione takes care
to get Cleonimus dressed, and said to bed, and while her whole Family was
affectionately joy'd at her return, that of the Princess of Scythia, being
heard by the Ladies that were in the house, they came all to wait upon her, and
with admiration beholding the sister of a man, whose virtue they ever adored,
and whose person they infinitely esteemed, they found in hers as great
occasions of astonishment, as in that of the Prince her brother. Apamia,
Arsinoe, Cleone, and the rest, kissed her hands with exceeding great respect,
and she repaid their civilities with such an obliging affability, as was wont
to win the hearts of the most insensible persons. After some short Complements,
she inquired for the Prince her brother, and hearing that he was well, and that
they believed he was in his Tent, she, most joyful of that news entreated the
Princesses to excuse the power of her love, which pulled them from her, from
them for awhile, to visit that dear brother; but they offered to keep her
company, and so all of them going out of Polemon's house, went together to
Oroondates his Tent.

The end of the fifth Book.
The Continuation of the third Part of CASSANDRA. The sixth Book.
IN the mean time, Queen Thalestris was gone out of the Camp, with a desire to
retire from all manner of company as much as possibly she could, and suffering
her self to be guided by her cruel passion, she sought out the wildest, and
most solitary places, to entertain it. Never was soul so violently agitated
with spite and anger, nor ever did the sense of any injury inspire such bloody
Resolutions; all her firmness of mind, and all her ordinary moderation
vanished before those cruel Enemies of her Repose, and the Bacchides
instigated by the fury of their God, never in their Orgyes appeared more fierce
than she, nor more transported. If formerly she sought for Orontes to punish
him as a faithless Lover, she now runs on to kill him as a Traitor, obstinate
in his Treason; and in the impetuous motions of her hatred, she judges the most
cruel deaths too easy, and too light for her satisfaction. Medea after the
ingratitude of her disloyal Husband, was not so furious, nor eager to take
Revenge, and all that she executed against him, seemed mild, and indulgent to
the vindicative Amazon. I will invent (said she) new kinds of Punishments,
that shall be as strange as thy perfidiousness; and the rage into which thou
have cast me, will make me study out new Torments for thee; 'twill be but a
small matter to tear that faithless heart out of its place, after having
stabbed it with a thousand blows, and to give that Body for a Prey to Vultures,
which lodges such a base, disloyal soul; I will prepare for thee, O Tygre, I
will prepare something of greater cruelty, and thou shall know at the last
groans of thy wretched life, that despair can teach even the gentlest natures
inhumanity. She was talking thus unto her self, when her Horse, to whom his
Mistresses deep thoughts had given a more than usual liberty, carried her into
a very pleasant Valley; she for a while followed the bank of a little brook,
which glided along upon certain small stones with a delightful murmr, and
was insensibly led by some spirit toward a fountain from whence it took its
source. She was come reasonable near it, when lifting up her head without
design, she saw a brave black Horse tied to a Tree, and a large shield hanging
by upon one of the branches. The Amazon had not much curiosity, yet passing
near the Tree, she could not choose but cast her eye upon the shield; at first
she believed that her imagination deceived her senses, but having fixed her
sight very heedfully upon it, she no longer could doubt but that it was really
that terrible impress of the Heart torn in pieces by Vultures, nor make any
question but that it was the same shield which she thrice already had seen born
by the hand of the faithless Orontes. At this assurance she made a sudden stop,
like some young shepherd that had trodden upon an Adder in the grass, and
looking in an extreme trouble round about her, she saw the Master of the Horse
and Shield lying asleep by the side of the Fountain. Then instantly a cold
sweat with a general shivering seized upon her whole body, and the greatness of
her surprise was such as hardly left her any sense or understanding; the bridle
drooped out of her hand, and she scarce had strength enough to keep her self in
the saddle. That he might take breath more freely in his steep, he had put up
the Beaver of his Cask, and the distance was not so great but that Thalestris
quickly knew a face, the air whereof was ever present to her fancy, what were
then the first thoughts of this furious Princess, and what strange motions were
stirred up in her heart by this encounter, so unexpected and so ardently
desired! she would have been very much puzzled to express them herself, and her
astonishment had brought her to such a pass, as deprived both her mind, and
body of their ordinary functions. At last the force of her courage dispersed
these weaknesses, and anger succeeded in the room of that perplexity, which
seemed to have absolutely possessed her Soul; she now beheld Orontes with an
eye sparkling with rage, and wrath, and no longer doubted but that the gods, to
perform their promise, had delivered him up to her resentments; nay that
neglect, they testified of his life, made her believe they had sentenced him to
death themselves, and in that thought casting a look toward heaven: I were
unjust, great gods (said she) if I should now complain of you, and if I should
not acknowledge how exactly you have kept your word. Jupiter thou god of
Hospitality, and thou great Deity of Love, whom this Traitor has so
unworthily abused, receive the victime which now I offer to your satisfaction.
The speaking of these words, the drawing of her sword, and the leaping from her
horse were all but the same action in Thalestris; she banished all her
tendernesses, and all her apprehensions, and with an eye, which spoke the deed
she was going about, stepped forward to poor Orontes, who deeply buried in sleep,
waited for his destiny without resistance; see, there thou lie, O generous
man (said she, darting a fiery look at him) thou lie exposed to the mercy of
this woman whom thou do distain; and lifting up her arms, she was ready
without doubt to have given him a mortal stroke, when some good angel staid her
hand, and in that very moment represented to her, that without an eternal
infamy she could not take away the life of one asleep. Will It thou, O
Thalestris (said that charitable Genius) will it thou dishonor thy self by a
baseness that never had example, and can thou not kill thine Enemy without
joining shame to thy revenge? waken, waken this disloyal man, thy victory over
him is certain, and thy strength is not so unequal to his, but that with the
justice, which thou have on thy side, thou may confidently hope for a
favorable issue of the Combat. With this thought she was going to have wakened
him, but presently another came into her mind which made her change her
resolution. If thou awaken'st him (said she) and if thou give him time to put
himself in a posture of defense, he will fly from thee as he has done twice
already, and so thou will it loose this occasion of revenging thy self, which
perhaps thou may never recover while thou live; besides, these
considerations of honor are no longer seasonable, nor need thou stick at
them for an Enemy of this nature. This Traitor has stifled them all in his
perfidiousnesse, and by those injuries he has done thee, he has violated all
manner of rights, and all the most holy and sacred laws whatsoever; Waken
nothing therefore, O Thalestris, but thy just indignation, and lay this
Traitor in an everlasting sleep. She then was lifting up her sword again, but
at the same time she heard Orontes sigh, and casting her eye upon his face, she
saw some tears find passage between his closed eyelids, and heard him mutter
something in his sleep. Leave me, (said he) leave me; inconstant woman. At
these words pronounced with a mournful voice, the Queens sword fell out of her
hand, and her resolution was a little startled, then she looked upon his face a
little more earnestly than she had done before, and observed in it all the
features of her lovely, and dearly loved Orithia, that remembrance wrought a
strange violence upon her resentments, and in part abated the fierceness of her
animosity. All the most winning actions that Orithia had done for her in her
whole life, those tender proofs of love she had given her both before and after
her discovery, as well by words accompanied with an unresistable grace, as by
most admirable deeds performed in favor of her, came at that time thronging
into her memory; she represented to herself her lovely imposture upon the walls
of Phriney, and in the Chamber where she had slain Neobarzanes, she fancied her
in those discourses so full of love, and in those sweet conversations she had
formerly had with her, and when that whole Idea was perfectly returned into her
mind; Now, since it is my dear Orithia (said she) so lovely, and so tenderly
beloved, can I be able to take away her life? Ah! no my hand, thrust rather
this revenging Steel into mine own breast, than into the bosom of my sweet
Orithia, there thou may find her still as faithless as she is, and it is
there only that thou ought to give her a mortal stroke; Thalestris shall
never kill Orithia with any other kind of wound, and if she be guilty of any
infidelity toward her, she ought to punish herself alone, for not having been
lovely enough to oblige her to an eternal constancy; let my Orithia live then,
since Thalestris is incapable of giving her her death, and let only Talestris
die, since she has not been able to deserve Orithia's fidelity. Thalestris
continued a while in these compassionate motions; but if the remembrance of
Orontes his first actions mollified her, that of his last, kindled her anger
with a greater violence, and made all those thoughts of love, and pity vanish.
Ah! Cowardly Thalestris, (said she again) by what unworthy motives do thou
suffer thy self to be transported, and what a meanness is this of thine, to
call any thing to mind, that can speak to thee in favor of this Monster of
perfidiousness. This Orithia whom thou excusest, and whom thou representest
unto thy self still amiable, is that same Orontes, who after having abandoned
thee to despair, disdains thee, and flies thee with contempt, and with
indignity, and who even in his very sleep can utter nothing of thee but
injurious speeches; it is therefore that same Orontes that must die, but I will
not suffer his sleep to rob me of part of my revenge, I mean he shall feel the
death that I will give him, and the last minutes of his life shall be employed
in hearing my last reproaches. She settled in this final determination, and for
fear Orontes should get away as he had done before, she stepped to the horse, and
cutting the reins of his bridle, turned him loose, and so deprived his Master
of the means to make use of him. After this precaution she came back to him,
and speaking aloud to waken him; Rise (said she) Orontes, but rise to die. The
sudden noise of these words wakened Orontes in a start, and lifting up his
head, he saw one standing by him with a sword drawn, and in a threatening
posture. The apprehension he had of so unexpected a sight, made him get up
hastily, and pulling out his sword to defend himself against that Enemy;
whosoever thou art (said he) perchance thou have wakened me to thine own
destruction: but scarce had he cast his eyes upon Thalestris when he knew her,
the beaver of her Cask being half way up. This unlucky encounter troubled him
exceedingly, and letting fall the point of his sword, he retired three or four
steps in have, crying out, will it thou torment me for ever, woman, whom I
abhor a thousand times more than death? I will never cease to torment thee
(replied the Queen) till thou ceasest to live, and the end of thy torments is
now come with the end of thy life. She accompanied these with a blow, which
Orontes warded with his sword, and flying at him with a blind impetuousness,
forced him to seek his safety among certain trees. Defend thy self, base Coward
(cried she,) and think not I will take thy flight to proceed from any remainder
of respect to me, thy treachery, and unworthy usage are a thousand times more
cruel, than any resistance thou could make, and though thy sword should cut
one from the world, 'twould only finish what thy perfidiousness has
shamefully begun. As she spoake these words, she ran headlong after him among
the trees with so much fury, and suddenness, that she reduced him to a
necessity of either standing upon his defense, or letting himself be killed.
How great soever his hatred was to Thalestris, he could never resolve to lift
his hand against her, and being weary of flying so long to save a life, which
he no longer cared for, he made a firm stop, and presenting his breast unto the
furious Queen. Strike cruel woman (said he) strike the heart which I had
blindly given, and since thou art so extremely thirsty of this blood, which I
so often have shed for thee, take, take this life which by thy shameless
infidelities thou have made more odious to me, than that death thou strivest to
give me; I meet with no new thing in this thy cruelty, nor ought I to think it
strange that thou would drive me out of the world, after having forsaken me
with so much baseness, and with so much infamy. This soul, which thou so
obstinatly endeavour'st to banish from this body, will depart from it unstaind
and clear of those infidelities thou upbraid'st me with: and thine, after
having dyed it self quite black by the most ignominious of all crimes, can add
nothing to its foulness by cruellty and murder, Do not remember I am that
Orontes, who gave himself to thee with so perfect a resignation, and to whom
thou did promise thy self entirely with so many oaths, and so many
protestations, but look upon me as Orontes absolutely changed, and as an
Orontes, who not being able to banish thee out of his memory, keeps thee there
for no other end but to hate, and detest thee: I could defend my life against
thee, if thou had left me any love of it, and this neglect I show of my own
safety, comes neither from the love I formerly bore thee, nor from any
consideration I have of thy sex, but merely out of contempt of that which thou
would take away. Or ontes had all the liberty he could desire to prosecute
his discourse, for from the the time he began it, the Queen was in a manner
stricken with his words, and had hearkend to them without interrupting him so
much as by the least motion of her body. In this' discourse as bitter and
violent as it was, she with some tenderness heard the tone of her Orithia's
voice, and even in the amidst of his most sharp and stinging words, there
resounded something so sweet, and so effectually moving, that she could not be
Mistress of that compassion which fought in her heart against her cruel
resolutions; yet found she to the great aggravation of her sorrow, how firmly
Orontes persisted in hating, and abusing her with Reproaches full of indignity;
and this assurance kindled her anger afresh, which before was a little abated,
and stirred up her desires of Revenge more violently than ever; she waver'd yet
a while in these irresolutions, and perchance at last they would have been
fatal to poor Orontes, if they had not heard a noise of Horses, at which
looking about they saw themselves environed by Prince Oroondates, Lysimachus,
Ptolomeus, and Hippolita. Oroondates instantly seized upon the Queens Sword,
and having easily taken it away by reason of the trouble he found her in, he
cast his eyes upon Orontes, whose face he presently knew, in spite of a ten
years absence; not but that time, and his discontents had made a great deal of
alteration in it, but his being in that Country which he had heard, his Arms
which had been described to him, and the sight of this adventure put him
clearly out of doubt. His affection began to work strongly in him at the
encounter of that Prince whom he had so dearly loved, and not being able to
dissemble it; Pardon me Madam (said he to the Queen) if I cannot forbear to
embrace your Enemy, and belive that the Gods have brought me hither to make him
lose that name, and quality. With these words he discovered his face, and
running to Orontes, he embraced him with great demonstrations of friendship,
Orontes returned his kindnesses with some amazement, but when he had fixed his
eyes upon his face, and that he had a little recovered the features which time
had almost worn out of his rememberance, his astonishment was beyond
comparison, and retiring a step or two, to clear his doubt, Sir (said he) is it
you? Yes Cousin, (answered the Prince) doubt no longer of it, I am Oroondates.
He had hardly got out these words, when Orontes would have cast himself at his
feet; but the Prince took him fast about the middle to hinder him, and
redoubled his indearments with much affection. Orontes received them with an
humble respect, and when he was got loose from his embraces, and that he was
preparing to express the joy he felt for having met him, Oroondates drew back,
and put on a more serious countenance, Cousin (said he) let us defer this
conversation which is not seasonable in the condition I found you in, and in
the presence of this Queen with whom you have matters of greater importance. I
have given these first testimonies of my friendship to your merit, to our near
affinity, and to the breeding we had together, but now I must speak to you as I
am obliged by my duty, by my promise, and by the care I have of your repose,
and of your honor it self. This fair Queen at my most humble request, will
moderate for a while those just resentments she has against you, and I will
protest to her yet once again in your presence, that if in your infidelity you
have not been betrayed your self, I cannot choose but be your Enemy. In short
Orontes, your perfidiousness ought to arm all the best friends, and all the
nearest kindred you have in the world against you; and unless I will declare my
self for your crime, I can no longer keep within the terms of our ancient
friendship. If I lose your friendship (replied Orontes briskly) the loss will
be more sensible to me, than all those I have sustained since that of this
ungrateful woman's affection; but though with it I should also lose my life,
which she prosecutes with so much hatred, I cannot repent my having abandoned
her, when she abandoned her self so lightly as she did; and I rather think it
strange that you should disapprove my indignation, since loving virtue as you
do, it is impossible you should approve the cause of it, and that you should
preserve so much as an esteem of her whose defense you undertake against him
that has the honor to be nearly allied to you. I loved her but too faithfully,
and too religiously, and would it had pleased the Gods that the first moment of
my love had been the last moment of my life. I for her had lost the
rememberance of all that I had formerly loved, and even of my very self; she
was endebted to me for her liberty, her life, her honor, and I should no way
injure modesty, if I should say I had deserved her affection; nay, she had
given it me in appearance, and when with some kind of justice I hoped for the
utmost proofs of it, this ungrateful woman, to the prejudice of my services,
betrays herself unworthily to betray me, and precipitates herself into
dishonor, that she might precipitate me into despair: what would she therefore
have of me now, and what is the cause of that hatred, which nothing but my
death can satisfy? did I ever trouble her in her new affections, did I oppose
the contentment she received thereby, and have I so mortally offended her by
seeking that repose in banishment, which she had robbed me of for ever? she
requires my blood; Ah! I would it pleased the gods (continued he turning toward
the Queen) I would it pleased the gods, O inhumane Thalestris, that thou had
shed it to the very last drop, and that that were the most sensible injury I
have received from thee; after my former losses, that is but little to be
considered, and thou may now give thy self a liberty, O barbarous woman, to
exercise thy utmost cruelties, for they will all be gentle in comparison of
those thou have used against me already. Orontes had not constancy enough to
utter these last words, without letting fall a shower of tears, nor had the
Queen patience enough to hear them without interrupting him. Come, tell us
Traitor (cried she) tell us what is that cruelty, and that infidelity I have
showed thee? let these Princes know who hear us, and whom the gods have sent as
judges of our differences, by which of my actions have I been able to deserve
this usage thou offerest to a Queen, who had committed no other fault but that
she had given thee her heart too easily. Discover here before the face of
heaven, those shames, and those infamies wherewith thou have reproached me both
in thy letter, and in thy discourse, and no longer spare this woman, who by the
loss of her honor has made herself unworthy of thy affections, and who will
live no longer after the knowledge of thy calumnies. If thy despair (replied
Orontes) proceed from the death of Alexander, I protest to thee by all the
gods, that I contributed nothing toward it, and that if thou had lain whole
ages in his Arms, I would never have come to pull thee thence; That gallant
voyage thou tookest to him, to renew that ignominious custom thou ought to
have abolished in favor of me, and to beg an inheritrix for thy Crown before
he had any affection to thee; that voyage I say, which was the Tomb of thy
reputation, was made too publicly to escape the knowledge of such an
interessed Lover as Orontes, and how brave a man soever that Alexander was, to
whom thou made that glorious present, and that shameful request, the
greatness of his fortune ought not to have raised him in thy heart above
Orontes: if he had served thee, if he had loved thee, nay, if he had but so
much as known thee, thy lightness would have been more excuseable; if he had
come to seek thee in thine own Country, if he had woed thee, if he had made
suit for that he had of thee, thy crime would have been less horrible; but when
he never so much as thought of thee, to cross through spacious Provinces to go
to him, to become a Petitioner, and to embrace his knees to proffer him that
which with justice thou might have refused him, though he had spent his
whole life in thy service; do thou believe, Thalestris, that these are light
causes of affliction, and inconsiderable injuries to Orontes? He would without
doubt have enlarged himself upon this invective, if from the beginning
Thalestris had not grown pale, and if within a while after she had not fallen
in a swown into Lysimachus his arms. These words of Orontes were so cruel to
her, that she was not able to hear them without fainting, and the Princes were
so sensibly troubled at it, that they could not but behold Orontes with an
accusing eye. While Hyppolita took off her Arms, they ran to the fountain to
give her help, and Orontes, who as jealous, and as angry as he was, was yet
tainted with a wound, whereof he had no hope he should be ever cured, was so
stricken at that accident, that he had neither confidence, nor strength to go
nearer to her, but turning his looks another way, he leaned his head against a
tree, the bark whereof he washed with his tears unto the very foot. At last the
Queen came to herself again, and being a little recovered by Hyppolita's care
of her, she sought Orontes with her eye, and speaking with a more settled tune
than before. You had reason (said she) Orontes, you had reason to forsake me,
if your suspicions be just, and after this infamy you reproach me with, I am
indeed unworthy both of your love, and of your esteem; but if you had loved me,
and if in the conversation we had together, you found my heart no way inclined
to such a baseness, you ought to have sought for more manifest proofs, before
you had come to such an extremity. I will not endeavor to put you out of the
cruel opinion you have of me, you do not deserve that I should go about to
justify my self to you, the basest, and most ungrateful of all men living;
neither will I invoke the gods, or call the testimony of men to clear me before
you; but for the repose of my own conscience, and the preservation of my
honor, it suffices that there are no witnesses can prove my crimes, and that
my innocence has so many, and those such eminent persons, that their Authority
may settle the belief of it through the whole world. Orontes half persuaded of
the Queens innocence both by her words and actions, upon which he began to
reflect, was giving attentive ear to her discourse, when it was interrupted by
Prolomeus. If your complaints against this virtuous Queen (said he) have no
other reason than that you have mentioned, they are very unjust, and very ill
grounded, and I (with a thousand other witnesses more worthy of credit, than I
perchance may be in your opinion) can protest to you before all the gods, that
she is innocent of those faults you lay upon her: if her coming to our Army was
ill interpreted by common Soldiers, and by those who never came near the Kings
person, all the Princes, and all the Commanders of note, knew the true cause of
it, and can assuredly testify, that she never had a moment of private
conversation with Alexander; during all the day time they never talked
together, but in the sight of a thousand persons, and for the night, it will be
easy for me to prove, that by reason of some diffidence the King about that
time had of some about him, Hephestion, Perdiccas, Craterus, Leonatus, and my
self lay in his Chamber every night. This truth is not unknown to any of those
that were with Alexander at that time, and because you may fear that the
consideration I have of Thalestris, might make me speak an untruth in her
favor, ask Perdiccas, or ask Leonatus, who are of your own party, and whose
report cannot be suspected of partiality. No Orontes, (added the Queen) ask no
body concerning a thing where you no longer have any interest, live still in
your opinion, and let me alone in mine, which is, that no man in the world is
so unworthy as your self of those favors you have received from me; I wish I
could redeem them with my blood, and though they never passed the bounds of
decency, yet are they very much to be blamed, because I granted them to so
base, and so ungrateful a man; cast away the remembrance of them, as I cast
away the design of assaulting a life, which to my shame was heretofore more
dear to me than mine own; now you neither deserve my hatred nor my love, and my
heart shall never more be capable of any thing toward you but of indifferency,
or of scorn; you may live far from me in a repose, which I shall never go to
trouble in your territories, and provided I never see you, I shall so little
preserve the remembrance of you, that I shall scarce retain any memory of
having ever known you in my life. This alteration of style and humor in
Thalestris, who from her first violences was so quickly fallen into so great a
coldness, struck the Prince of the Massagetes to the very heart, and wrought an
effect upon him, which could not so suddenly have been hoped for; he by the
Queens swowning had already found how deeply his reproaches had touched her by
the report of Ptolomeus, the certainty whereof was so easily to be known of
Perdiccas and Leonatus, he had continued to persuade himself of her innocence,
and by this sudden calmness of her mind, which passed in a moment from her
former impetuousness, to so great a moderation, he conjectured the quietness of
her conscience. All these things drew him out of his error, and left him not
the least suspicion of Thalestrises virtue, and fidelity. He began to open his
eyes as a person that had been long in blindness, and to acknowledge with how
much cruelty, and injustice he had slandered that Princess; yet that knowledge
settled not it self with any joy in his heart, but so violent a grief succeeded
his jealousy, as presently gave birth to none but satal designs. What, (cried
he, after a long silence) is it true then that Thalestris is innocent, and that
Orontes is a slanderer and a Traitor? He made a stop at these words, rolling a
thousand furious imaginations in his head; but when he perceived that
Thalestris, after having told him her final resolution, was going to take horse
to ride away, he went toward her, crossing his arms upon his breast, his eyes
fixed upon the ground, not daring to lift them up unto her face, though drowned
in tears of repentance, and having by a beseeching gesture conjured Oroondates
to obtain him audience but for one minute. Madam (said he) I received not these
impressions which have been so destructive of my repose, and of your
reputation, till they were given me by a whole Army of your Women, which I
commanded in Cappadocia, and who told me that fatal news, as an adventure which
you were willing to publish to the whole world; it was confirmed to me
afterward by whole Provinces, and if I was not sollicitous to get a more
certain knowledge from persons better informed, 't was because I avoided all
occasions of receiving further confirmation of a misfortune which I no longer
doubted of. This belief has made me commit faults, the stain whereof all my
blood is not able to wash away, and I acknowledge now that I am a thousand
times more ungrateful, and a thousand times more guilty, than you can fancy
me to be, nor will I go about to justify my self to you, for as I acknowledge
that my offenses are beyond all clemency, and beyond all goodness, I also am
not ignorant that they require other manner of reparations than words, and
repentance. Only Madam, if the remembrance of Orithia, can yet have any credit
with you, do me the favor to believe that Orontes has never ceased to love
you, and that as much blinded, and as much besides himself as he has been, he
has ever burned for you with a fire, which neither his rage, nor his jealousy
have been able to extinguish. This is a truth that I will sign to you with all
the blood in my veins, which with my whole heart and all my thoughts never was,
nor never can be any bodies but yours. I am most worthy both of that banishment
you ordain me, and of that scorn you threaten me withal, and I would resolve
to suffer both rather than ever trouble your repose; but because my past
afflictions have weakened my courage, you will give me leave by one and the
same way, to free my self from those that are like to come upon me, and to
satisfy you for the crimes I have committed, I may much more handsomely beg
your pardon by dying, than by expressing my grief barely in words; and since it
is impossible for me to recover in your esteem that innocence I have lost;
perchance my blood may obtain that of you, which can be due to no other effect
of my repentance. Receive this satisfaction then, and cease to hate me; I were
unjust if I should ask more, and I now neither pretend to tears of love, no nor
to tears of mere compassion; Neither do you receive any new thing of me in this
life I give you; for in the loss of it I only find this difference, that what
in former times I should have done out of excess of love, I do now for the
reparation of my crimes. As he ended these words he drew his sword, and was
going to run upon the point of it, if Oroondates, who stood close by him, had
not embraced him so strongly that 't was impossible for him to execute his
design. Orontes struggled to get out of hands, and Thalestris who began to be
touched with these marks of his repentance, was willing to draw him out of his
despair, but yet without engaging her self to pardon him. If I had desired your
death (said she) I would not have given over my purpose of killing you; that
punishment is too short for the expiation of your offenses; live therefore and
instruct your self better touching my life than you have done hitherto; but
absent your self from this ignominious Thalestris, who has made her self
unworthy of you, by her light, and infamous actions. She had no sooner spoke
these words but she got hastily on hors-back, and without giving ear to the
entreaties of Oroondates, and Lysimachus gallopt full speed toward the Camp,
and was got out of their sight in a moment. The sorrowful Orontes looked after
her as long as he could possibly see her, and when he could no longer do so, he
turned toward Oroondates, to bid him farewell. Oroondates who loved him
dearly, and who had not seen him of many years, would not have let him go, and
promised to make his peace, if he would but come along with him to the Camp.
But Orontes incredulous of his promises, and a religious observer of the Queens
commands, would not suffer himself to be persuaded, and persisted so
obstinately in his design, that Oroondates not being able to withhold him, was
constrained to let him take his liberty, after having made him give his word
and Oath, that he would not attempt any thing against his life; and then
Orontes without staying a minute longer, or suffering the least conversation,
took his leave with a face in which his despair was naturally represented, and
catching his horse that fed at liberty, after he had tied, and mended the reins
of his bridle as well as he could, he got up, and departing with a mervellous
suddenness, vanished from the Princes like a flash of lightning. Oroondates
seeing that end of this Adventure whereof he had hoped for a more happy
success, was exceedingly troubled at it; He often was upon the point of running
after Orontes, but the remembrance of his own misfortunes suspended the motions
of his charity, and the violence of his passions, joined to the urgent
necessity of his affairs, would not suffer him to abandon the interests of his
love, of his honor, and of his revenge; all that he could do in favor of his
kinsman, was to resolve to labor for his reestablishment with Thalestris, and
to go away instantly with an intent to solicit her with all earnestness for his
pardon. Lysimachus and Ptolomeus approved his resolution, and determined to
second him in it with their utmost power; being all three gotten on horseback,
they took the way that lead back unto the Camp, and not having far thither they
arrived there within a little while, and went to alight at Oroondates his Tent.

The fair Princess Berenice followed by a great troop of Ladies was come
thither already, and Thalestris who had heard of her being returned, was run
thither with such a joy, as seemed to have banished part of her afflictions out
of her remembrance. These two great Ladies, when the Princes came in to them,
were employed in mutual endearments, and in giving each other proofs of a most
ardent friendship. Oroondates was not a little surprised at the encounter of
his sister, and his love broke forth into all the expressions she could desire
of it; he held her a long time in his arms, and all the most sweet and tender
marks of an affection of that nature appeared in them both even to excess.
Dearest sister (said he, embracing her, and bedewing her face with tears of
joy, which he mingled with those she shed) have we recovered you then? Yes, I
see the Gods are as exact in performing their promises, as you were cruel in
leaving me when I was in such a condition as would not suffer me to follow you.
Sir, (replied the Princess) when I went away from you I meant to have stayed
but a very little while, and if I had not lost my liberty, you had seen me
again within an hour after my departure, yet the cause thereof was so just that
you will easily pardon me when I have told it you. I complained of it for no
other reason (said the Prince) but for the fear and trouble I suffered by your
absence; This fair Queen (pursued he, showing her Thalestris) bore a great
share with me in my sorrow for your loss, and ran after you with a great deal
of affection, to lend you that assistance which you could not hope for from
your brother. These words made the two Princesses begin their kindness afresh,
but they were interrupted by Lysimachus and Ptolomeus, who after they had a
while admired the excellent beauty of Berenice, made their addresses to her,
and saluted her with much respect. Oroondates having made these two Princes
known unto his sister, she repaid their civilities with a grace that had
nothing common, and presently after they retired to their Tents, to leave her
the liberty of discoursing with her brother in particular; the Ladies that had
accompanied her, returned, with the same intent, to Polemon's house, and only
Thalestris and Hippolita stayed with her in Oroondates his Tent. The Prince
having caused himself to be disarmed, received new embraces from his sister,
and inquiring what had befallen her since her departure. It is not fit (said
she) you should know my last adventures, before you have learned my first,
especially seeing they have some dependence on them, and since I must give you
account of those accidents of my life, whereof you are ignorant, and which are
of much greater consequence than the last, it is best for me to relate them
according to the order of time, wherein they happened to me; this reason makes
me forbear the telling of you those things at first, the recital whereof must
needs surprise you, and that surprise will be no way the less pleasing by
making them known to you in their due place, in the story of my life.
Oroondates, and the Amazon Queen were equally satisfied with this motion, and
being they had ardently desired the Continuation of Berenices recital, the
beginning whereof had been interrupted, they prepared themselves to hearken to
her with a mavelous attention. Sister (said the Prince) you prevent the
request I was about to make to you; I assure my self it will not be tedious to
this fair Queen, and I have so great an interest in your affairs, that it is
not just I should be ignorant of them longer. At these words they sat down all
three upon a bed, and the Princess of Scythia, after having thought a while of
what she had to say, and endeavored with her hand to cover a little blushing
that came up into her face, began her discourse in these terms.

The Continuation of the History of Berenice.
IN the first actions of my life which I recounted to you, when I began my
discourse before, perchance you found nothing criminal; but in these which I
now am going to tell you, you will find something not altogether so innocent,
and it is that confession I must make, which calls blushes into my cheeks, and
which strikes me indeed with some shame and confusion; not but that with a
little indulgence they may be excused, nor are they so black as to give you any
occasion, brother, to disown me, nor you fair Queen to repent of that affection
wherewith you have honored me.

I have already acquainted you with the beginning of the King my father's love
to the Princess Stratonice, and of the persecutions I suffered from troublesome
Arsacomes; I believe you have not forgot the condition I left them in, nor that
wherein I was my self, by the vexation I received from that insolent Prince of
the Issedons. The brother and the sister had made a very unequal progress in
their designs, and the Empire Stratonice had obtained over the King, was not
much less than my aversion to her brother. We were upon these terms, and lived
with very different hopes and intentions, when the Nomades, and the Hyleans
having taken Arms upon some slight pretenses, rose up in rebellion against the
King, slew all their Governors, and arming all their Forces, broke out into an
open War, and into the utmost Extremities. The King who desired to stifle those
Disorders in their birth, sent Theodates Prince of the Sarmates against them
with an Army of thirty thousand men, judging that strength sufficient to stop
their proceedings, and chastise their temerity; having a perfect knowledge of
Theodates his valor, prudence, and fidelity. Nor was he deceived in his
opinion, for within a short time after his departure he received news of the
beginnings of his progress, which certified him that in many encounters, the
rebels had all manner of disadvantages, and 'twas not long before he heard that
they were absolutely defeated in a pitched battle, and that the Army being
victorious had laid siege already to some of their Towns; but in the report of
these things which came to Court, they much extolled a certain stranger, who
having engaged himself in that service out of affection to Theodates, had shown
proofs of an admirable valor, and had with his single person contributed more
to our successes than whole Troops joined together. Theodates writ of him to
the King, with such praises as raised that man above humanity, and his
character of him was confirmed by some Eyewitnesses, who gained him a wondrous
high place in the Kings esteem. They told how in the battle he had twice saved
Theodates his life, and that having seen some of our Squadrons give ground,
which example struck a fear into those that followed them, and like to have put
them in a general Rout, he ran to the head of them, and snatching the foremost
Standard out of his hands that carried it, spoke to those affrighted Troops
with so much Eloquence, and efficacy, that he got them to make a stand, and
having re-incourag'd them a little, charged headlong into the midst of their
Enemies with so great valor and success, that he changed their fortune, and
brought the Victory alone to that side of the Battle. That after that important
day Theodates acknowledging how much he was indebted to him, and how great
service such a man was capable to do his Master, had given him the command of
some of his Forces, which was void by the death of one of the principal
Officers. That within some days after, being gone with those men to view a
place of the Enemies, he had found it in an ill condition to make defense, and
that laying hold of that opportunity, with as much prudence as courage, he had
stormed and taken it by force, with a very inconsiderable loss; that by these
Actions and some others of this nature he had won such a Reputation among the
Soldiers, that they called every day for new occasions to fight, provided they
might be lead on by Arsaces.

At this name of Arsaces Oroondates sig'd and changed color, but he would not
interrupt his sisters narration, which she went on with in these words.

That war was ended in a short time with an entire glory to Theodates, and
those that had accompanied him, but the valor of Arsaces had hastened the end
of it with all the success that could be desired, and we heard that that
Valiant stranger, having received eight thousand horse from Theodates, had
assaulted the Relics of the Enemies Armies, near the lake of Buges, and had
cut them in pieces with a general defeat, and with a moderate loss on his side.
This fame of that strangers actions; made the King extremely desirous to see
him, and to tie him to his service by rewards, equal to his deserts; the whole
Court longed not much less to have a sight of him, and we were all satisfied
quickly after, when Theodates, having settled those Provinces in good order,
reurned to Issedon by the Kings command, and brought along with him that
gallant man, who was so much desired, and whose fame had already produced very
different effects in the Court. I was with the King, when Theodates came to
kiss his hands, and after that he had showed him such favors as were due to
his quality, and the merit of those services he had newly done, Theodates
presented Arsaces to him. I had cast mine eyes upon him, as soon as he was come
into the room, and quickly found cause enough in his person to fix them there
without looking upon other objects; I confess I was surprised at his graceful
fashion, and that if the Idea of the Prince my brother had not been present to
my remembrance, I should have believed I had never seen any body in the world,
that could dispute that advantage with him. His stature was little different
from yours, and in the garb and liberty of your bodies there was a great
resemblance; he was a little browner than our Scythians, who by reason of the
coldness of their climate, are fairer than other men, yet had he a fresh,
smooth complexion, all the lineaments of his face were merveilously well
proportioned, his eyes sparkling, yet full of sweetness, his hair black,
naturally curled, and falling in great rings upon his shoulders, his aspect
noble and full of Majesty, and all the motions of his body had an extraordinary
comeliness. He was then hardly twenty years old, and 't was that early youth
that wrought an admiration in all those that knew his prudence, and that had
seen him lead men to fight with such an experience, as had not yet been found
among the oldest Commanders. I know not whither this little description, will
make me to be suspected of any thing, but I am sure that before the end of my
discourse, you will confess this report of Arsaces may be made by the most
indifferent persons. The King, who was already prepossessed with an exceeding
high opinion of him, beheld him with admiration, and having given his eyes
liberty to view a person so exactly handsome; while Arsaces kissed his hands
with much respect, he embraced him with a kindness far above what a stranger,
as he was, could probably have hoped for. When by most obliging words he had
testified the knowledge he had of his virtue, and the esteem he had of his
person, he asked him touching his Country, and his fortune, and then Arsaces
after having pawsed a little to consult with his modesty; Sir, (said he) I was
born in Bactria, which is now under the Dominion of the Persians, my Parents
were of reasonable good birth, but I left them as soon as I was able to ride on
hors-back, and seeking glory in the Wars, and in foreign parts, I have
hitherto made those places my Country, where I believed I might best find it;
Prince Theodates his goodness, stayed me in your Majesty's service, and the
knowledge I since have had of the honor it is to serve you, has engaged me
yet more powerfully in it. You could not have light into any Country, (replied
the King) where your virtue should have been more cherished, and valued than
amongst us, you have already found that glory you seek for, and with it a
Prince, who will always be ready to acknowledge the greatness of your deserts,
and the important services you have done him. Arsaces made an answer full of
submission, and modesty, and the King giving him occasion to speak, gave him
also an opportunity to let the Company see the quickness of his wit, and the
grace wherewith he expressed himself. He spoke not the Scythian tongue
perfectly, but so well that there was nothing harsh in his pronunciation, and
was so ready in the Greek, and many other Languages, which are in use amongst
us, that his conversation was merveilously pleasing. From that day the King
began to be very liberal to him, and gave him pensions, able to maintain him in
handsome equipage, he received them without either greediness, or disdain, and
if his growing fortune met some that envied it at first, his virtue suffered
them not to do so long. Indeed he had not been many months in Court, but he
was both the admiration and the delight of it, and his excellent qualities, in
a short time won him the love even of the roughest natures. All the world was
ravished with the gracefulness of his behavior, all the world was charmed with
the sweetness of his wit and conversation, all hearkened, as to so many
prodigies, when there was any story of his warlike actions told by those that
had seen him do them, and generally every one considered as wonders, the marks
that appeared in him every day of the greatness of his courage, of his
goodness, and of his natural generosity. He was quickly in a condition to show
them, for the King, who looked upon him, and admired him as the rest, became in
love with his virtue, and desired to tie him to his service by all manner of
obligations; he observed something in his face, and in all his actions, that
was so great, and so far above other men, that he felt himself forced by
unknown reasons to set an extraordinary value on him; and indeed he in a short
time raised him to such employments, and Offices, as other could neither obtain
by birth; nor by long services, without a great deal of difficulty. Arsaces
abased not this good fortune, and those dignities, to which he saw himself
called, without suing for them, puffed him not up, nor made him prouder than
before: on the contrary his humor seemed to be more sociable, he served all
those with freeness, and humbleness, that stood in any need of his power and
credit, and ran to meet those occasions they had to make use of him, with such
an eager desire to effect them, as made the obligation a thousand times the
more considerable; his liberality was boundless, and being far from enriching
himself with what the King gave him, he distributed it so profusely, that his
friends blamed him for it, and the King himself was fain to complain of the
contempt he showed of his presents, and of the little care he took to keep what
came from him. This reproach could not moderate Arsaces his liberality, but it
made him more circumspect in husbanding his favor, and in avoiding noise or
ostentation in his bounty. Though none of his actions were guilty of the least
blemish of pride, yet as humble, and submissive as he was to others, he could
never bend his mind to make any applications to Arsacomes, who at that time,
next to the King, was most considered of any man in the Kingdom, and who was in
a condition to build what fortunes he pleased, and to overthrow those which
were not yet well confirmed, and but beginning to be established, as that of
Arsaces. Not but that Arsaces paid him civilly whatsoever he thought due to a
man that was esteemed by the King, and that was Arsacomes his quality, but he
could not consider him, as did those slaves of favor, who having an aim very
distant, and thoughts very different from his, sought their advancement of him
by base, servile compliances, to which he would never stoop; and besides these
reasons, he had particular, and more powerful ones, which opposed his giving
him that observance he expected from all others. Arsacomes, who saw that scorn
in him, and who besides feared least that budding fortune should at last
o're-top his, and become powerful enough to ruin it, strove to hinder its
grows, and often told the King that it was something dangerous so suddenly to
raise a stranger, a man unknown, and one born in the Enemies Territories; but
the King, who knew Arsacomes his drift, and who, (bating his love) had not many
weaknesses, made no reckoning of that discourse, and finding every day more and
more how worthy* Arsaces was of his favor, and with what modesty and
generosity he used it, instead of suffering it to be diminished, did invisibly
augment it. And truly, except such as were interessed, there were few to whom
it gave not a particular satisfaction, and who confessed not that the King
could hardly make a more just, nor a more judicious choice; for mine own part,
I cannot deny, but that it contented me extremely, and with me I dare say all
the Ladies of the Court, whom he had strongly gained by his comely behavior,
by his taking wit, and by his sweet obliging humor. All these good qualities,
and a thousand others, which he advantageously possessed, joined to the Kings
esteem, who desired that every body should use him according to his example,
made him be well received amongst us, and few days passed but he came to
visit us, either with the King, or with Prince Carthasis our Uncle, or else
with Theodates. He was in my Chamber one day with Theodates, and I had no body
with me but Cyllenia, and some other of my maids, when after a very pleasing
entertainment, Theodates told me, that he sung very well, and played upon the
Lyre with a great deal of skill. I commanded presently that they should fetch
one which was in my Chamber, and causing it to be presented to him, I so
earnestly entreated him to play and sing, that though he had a mind to excuse
it, and that that request made him blush, yet could he not possibly deny me
that satisfaction; he took the Lyre with a low obeisance, and tuning it to his
voice, sung so passionate an air, and accompanied his words, which were
extremely amorous, with so moving a gesture, that 't was impossible to hear him
and not be touched with it. He sometimes fixed his eyes upon my face, with
looks visibly enflamed, but as soon as he perc^^ved that I heedfully observed
him, he let them fall to the ground, changing color in such a manner, that it
was easy to discern, he was possessed with some strong passion. After he had
made an end of singing with a grace that was nothing common, and that we had
given him the praises which were due, both to what he held from nature and to
what art had added, I was willing to draw some occasion from his singing to
make him discourse, and remembering the passionate words of his song, and the
gesture wherewith he had put life into them; Arsaces (said I) you perform all
things with a marveilous advantage, but you will give us leave to say, that all
our opinions are false, if you be exempt of that passion you express so well.
Arsaces, as if he had been surprised at this discourse, cast down his eyes
without making any reply to these first words, and seeing him so silent;
Arsaces (continued I) is it possible that you are in love? Although Arsaces
seemed to be in some confusion, yet did he lift up his head, and looking upon
me with an unconfident action. But Madam, (said he) could you think it
possible, that Arsaces should have lived so long, and seen so much, and have
loved nothing? Your years are so few (answered I) that no body will think it
strange you should have passed them without loving, and besides I believed your
affection to the war had been predominant over all others, and that a person
bred up in martial thoughts and employments, had not had any inclination to
those of Love. My affection to the War (replied Arsaces) is but very moderate,
and I should say I love it not at all, if it had not furnished me with
occasions to do the King some petie services, and given me a means to attain
this fortune to which he out of his goodness has raised me, and besides Madam,
I never believed that Mars and Cupid were incompatible, nor but that even
persons, who have grown old in Arms, might in a moment loose that liberty which
they had preserved all their life before. By this reason, Madam, it comes to
pass that the condition of my life is very different from what your Highness
imagined it to be, and that I am very far from that tranquillity which they may
live in, who are insensible of that imperious passion. Arsaces brought forth
these words with a sigh or two, which made me believe some part of what he
said, and being willing to enlarge our conversation upon that subject, and to
make him talk a little more. If you profess not that tranquillity (said I) which
you seem to envy, you ought at least to have hopes, which may sweeten the
misery of your condition, since you have such qualities, as may encourage you
to expect an advantageous success in your passion; there are but few persons
like Arsaces, and if his hope be regulated by his merit, there is no fortune to
which he may not lawfully pretend. I said this to him with a great deal of
innocence, being ignorant as I was of his intentions, and of the advantage he
might draw from thence, and he replied with a little more assurance than
before; This judgment of your Highness, would be too glorious for poor
Arsaces, if it could be drawn from the knowledge he has of himself, and could
keep him from discerning your justice from your goodness; I am far from that
merit, and from those unjust hopes; but if the gods had given me all the
excellencies a man can desire, I would bound all my pretensions within the
glory which I reap by my passion; it is so great that it suffers me not to
bewail the loss of my repose, and my thoughts are raised so high, that never
man had a more ambitious aim, nor ever sighed for a more accomplished object. I
love, since you are pleased I should confess it, but I love with so perfect a
knowledge of the party whom I love, that I limite all my desires, and all my
hopes, in the mere satisfaction of loving her; 't is the most noble end my mind
can ever propose unto it self, and so far am I from finding any misery in my
condition, that I consider all manner of panies, as the glorious marks of the
highest fortune a man can aspire to. If you love with so great a resignation
(replied I) and if you give such strict limits to your affections, you are not
of their opinion who hold that love is a desire, and who proposing to
themselves an end very different from that satisfaction you find in yours, turn
it into pure interest. They that believe that love is a desire (answered
Arsaces) did never know its nature well, or else were willing to disguise it,
thereby to cover less noble, and less reasonable passions, and if you will give
me leave, Madam, to declare my sense touching the definition of love, I shall
take the liberty to tell you, that I always thought Love to be a propension of
our souls, or an inward motion, which makes us incline rather toward one
subject than toward another, and on this manner I hold it may be produced by
the first operation of the understanding alone, without help of the judgment,
or discourse, and that considering it in the abstract nakedly, and in it self,
it differs from desire as the cause does from the effect; not but that desire
may take birth after Love, or to say better take birth from Love, but that
production is a mark of their essential difference, and that desire being born
of Love, is indeed an effect of Love, and not love it self. We love a thing
because 't is beautiful, and afterward we desire it because we love it;
before the birth of desire Love had subsisted without it, and by many accidents
desire may die without Loves being extinguished. Certainly they that confound
these two passions, deprive the first of part of its nobleness, and form a
knowledge of it to themselves, which is much more gross, and material than its
nature, Love is a passion absolutely pure, loosened from all thoughts of
interest, and I may truly protest to you that in mine, I never considered any
thing but the nobleness of that I love, without making so much as a light
reflection upon my self. Arsaces discoursed on this manner with such a grace,
that our ears were chained unto his words, and we were hearkening to him with a
mervellous attention, when the King came into my Chamber, followed by Prince
Carthasis his brother, Arsacomes, and many others. Arsacomes had not visited me
of a good while, and I began to hope, that the usage he had found from me,
would take him off from his affection, but I was deceived in that expectation,
and that very day he let me see that he was neither fuller of respect, nor more
desirous to please me than before. The continuance of the Kings passion to his
sister, and of his favor to him, had made him so proud, that he no longer
cared to keep the world from knowing the design he had upon me, and the King
had so utterly subjected himself to Stratonice, that he had not retained any
Empire at all over Arsacomes, and suffered that insolent man to make a vanity
of his passion without punishing him for it. In the sorrow it brought upon me,
I sought consolation from the Prince our Uncle, the Princess Theomiris his
daughter, Cyllenia; and some other of my most trusty maids, and even the
pleasing conversation of Arsaces, was not sometimes unprofitable to charm part
of my discontents; there was a sweetness in it, which that of other persons had
not, and he expressed himself so handsomely, and with so much eloquence that 't
was impossible to leave his company willingly; he was not ignorant how I was
persecuted by Arsacomes, that was already become the common subject of
discourse all over the Court, and Arsaces resented it in a very different
manner, from all those other persons whom Arsacomes his fortune would not
suffer to disapprove his actions; but at first I ascribed the trouble he showed
at it, only to his complacency, and to his compassion of me.

In the interim we began to perceive that since the time he had frequented our
Company, he had lost part of his lively humor, not but that he strove with
much compliance to accommodate it to ours, and did all he could to hide his
inward disquiet by an outward tranquillity; yet through all that constraint we
could observe a melancholy that was not natural, the cause whereof, considering
the estate of his fortune, and the reason he had to be satisfied with his
condition, we were not able to imagine to be other than that Love he had
complained of to us. In short we were then confirmed in a belief that he had
spoken in good earnest, and did our endeavors to learn the truth of it. We had
not taken notice that among all the Ladies of the Court, he had applied himself
particularly to any one, and although we observed him with some care we could
discover nothing, but a general civility and an equal respect to all. I still
was telling him of that change of his humor, and upon that discourse he would
presently strive to fetch a pleasingness into his face, and to disperse the
clouds of his melancholy, but within a while after we saw him fall into it
again with such settled musings that we were hardly able to put him out of
them. We were one day in the Kings Chamber, where seeing him withdraw from the
company, and retire to a window from whence he darted fiery glances at us. My
Cousin the Princess Theomiris, and I went toward him, he would have gone away
to leave the place to us, believing that we came to the window to have the
prospect of the gardens which are below it, but I detained him by the arm, and
making him stay where he was, Arsaces, Arsaces (said I) if you continue in this
pensive humor which of la^e has seized you, you will at last force us to think
you are touched in good earnest with that passion you can so well discourse of.
These words made Arsaces cast down his eyes, but presently after he raised them
up again, and fixing them upon my face, with a timorous action, and with a sigh
which he could not possibly retain. It is but too true Madam, (replied he) that
I am mortally wounded with it, and that my eyes have done me the worst office I
can ever receive from them. I burn indeed with a fire which never will be
extinguished while I live; but if my passion were a desire it would certainly
die for want of hope which is its ordinary nourishment; I love not only
without being loved, not only without hope of being loved, but even without
daring to desire it, and there is so great a disproportion between miserable
Arsaces, and the Divinity to which he does adress his thoughts, that he neither
pretends to any recompense for his passion, no nor so much as to have her know
it. You keep your self within the limits of a perfect modesty, (said the
Princess Theomiris) but they that know your worth, do not perhaps restrain your
hopes within such narrow bounds as you prescribe them. My highest hope
(answered Arsaces) is to die for the person whom I love, without giving her any
occasion to complain of my temerity, and to accuse that passion for want of
respect, whereof it laid the first foundation. Is it true then (demanded I)
that she you sigh for is ignorant of your love, and that you neither by your
discourse, nor by your actions, have ever given her any knowledge of it? I know
not (replied he) whither my actions, or my countenance have betrayed that
silence which I have imposed upon my mouth, but if I have any power over
either, she is ignorant of it, and shall be so as long as she lives: in this
ignorance she sees me, she suffers me, and shows such goodness toward me, as
ought to be envied by those that are most happy; but after the knowledge of my
presumption, an eternal exile would be the lightest punishment she would
inflict upon such a miserable man, such a unknown wanderer as Arsaces; the Gods
forbid I should exasperate her by a criminal declaration, and that I should
provoke thunders, and lightnings utterly to consume him, who is but too much
inflamed already. Arsaces perhaps would have said more, if the King had not
come to join discourse with us, but we often fell upon the same subject
afterward, and still found Arsaces in his silence, and in the terms of his
usual modesty.

In the mean time the Kings passion for Stratonice was risen to so high a
degree, that it was necessary to come to Extremities, and one day the King
having pressed her exceedingly to give him some proofs of her affection, that
ambitious woman, who knew how absolute she was over his heart, resolved to make
use of all her power, and after having a while resisted his solicitations. Sir
(said she at last) never hope for any thing from Stratonice but by lawful
ways, and if you love her, do you your self show her the utmost marks of your
affection, or else cease to injure her Reputation by a suit the designs whereof
are unknown. These words did not surprise the King who had ever expected them;
but yet they troubled him, and for some days kept him melancholy, and
unresolved; 'twas hard for him to dispose himself unto that Marriage, but
harder to leave Stratonice, and he loved her with too real an affection, to use
any manner of violence against her; two considerations opposed the design of
this Marriage, that of the inequality of their conditions, and that of the
Prince my brother, whom he did believe he should prejudice by that Match; but
the force of his love, and the persuasions of his flatterers, conquered these
two difficulties. Stratonice is my subject (said he) yet nevertheless she is a
Princess, and if I find not those advantages which are commonly sought for in
Alliances, at least I shall find no shame by it; a Wife of inferior quality
can take nothing away from mine, and it is not without example in this Empire,
nor in those of my neighbors. As for Oroondates his interest, that ought not
to dissuade me; for if he be dead as his long absence makes me fear, no body
ought to count it strange that I think of giving an heir of mine own blood unto
my Kingdom, which would fall into another Family; and if he be alive, he is an
ungrateful son in having forsaken me without leave in my foreign and domestic
Wars, and in not coming back to me when the necessity of my affairs constrained
me to beg the assistance of all my Friends. By these kind of thoughts he
overcame all the obstacles that opposed his intentions, and having nothing more
to contend withal, he told Stratonice he was ready to give her that proof she
desired of his affection. This news was presently known over all the Court, and
the King having published it himself, and proposed unto his Counsel those
Reasons that moved him to that Marriage, every body began to prepare for it,
but with very different thoughts. If Stratonice, and proud Arsacomes were in
the height of their felicities, Berenice on the contrary was overwhelmed in
grief; I had many Reasons to be so, which are too apparent not to be known to
you, and my consolation was that my resentments were approved by all those that
were not interessed for Arsacomes his Family; but how just soever they were,
they were to no purpose, and in spite of all the complaints I made, both for my
brothers interests, and for mine own, the King forbore not to go on; and after
having given me some slight consolation, and promised me with extreme kind
words, that this Marriage should not diminish any thing of that affection he
had ever born me, he effected his design, and married Stratonice publicly,
causing her to be crowned at Issedon in the presence of the whole Court. That
mischief not being to be remedied, it was best to resolve to bear it
handsomely, and to fain a satisfaction for that which the King received, since
my discontents were but unseasonable. The Wedding was celebrated with a great
deal of triumph, and to honor so solemn an action, there were Tournaments full
of pomp and magnificence. Arsacomes appeared in them with more splendor than
all the rest of the Court, and Arsaces, though he was particularly troubled at
that Marriage, was yet too grateful for the favors the King had showed him to
neglect those occasions of acknowledging them; and to please him in that
solemnity, he not only made one in all those Matches, but won all the Prizes,
and by the advantages he had in sight of the whole world, redoubled Arsacomes
his growing Envy. That proud favorite seeing himself raised by that alliance
to honors which he never pretended, absolutely gave over all thought of the
respect he owed me, to torment me openly; and the King became so subject to the
will of his new Wife, that he never resented her brothers insolency. The
vexation I received by it, made me shun all company in general that I might
avoy'd his in particular, and though Stratonice did not apparently abuse her
fortune in her carriage toward me, but paid me all the civilities I could
expect from my fathers wife, yet was her conversation unpleasing to me, and I
could not consider her as Arsacomes his sister, without having an aversion to
her; true it is that she forced me to it by the discourses she used in favor
of him, for she passed by no occasion of entertaining me either with her
brothers love, or with his deserts. One day being desirous to escape a visit
which I thought she intended me, I went out of my Chamber with Cyllenia, and
two of my other maids, and by a back stair went out of my lodging down into the
Garden; I presently gave those two wenches liberty to walk which way they
pleased, and leaning upon Cyllenia's arm, I with her sought out the least
frequented Allies. Our first discourse was concerning Arsacomes, and after that
I had a while in angry terms detested his persecutions, Cyllenia began to talk
of Arsaces; I confess I esteemed his person very much, and that seeing nothing
in him which was not lovely, great and extraordinary, I could not choose but
have such an opinion of him as his good qualities deserved* After we had spoken
something touching his love, the grace wherewith he expressed it, and the
mavelous discretion wherewith it was accompanied, Cyllenia of a sudden fixed
her Eyes upon my face, and when she had looked awhile smiling upon me, Madam
(said she) will you forgive me a folly, which I cannot keep my self from
telling you? There are but few offenses, (said I) whereof thou might not
hope for pardon from me. Upon this belief [reply'd Cyllenia smiling as before]
I will take the boldness to tell you, that if Arsaces be in love, I believe it
is only with the Princess Berenice, With me? fool, [said I, putting her back
with my hand] Yes, [added Cyllenia] even with your self, and if you have taken
the pains to observe his discourse, and his actions, your thoughts will be but
little different from mine. In what place soever you are, his Eyes are
continually upon you, he comes not near you without sighing, trembling, and
changing color, and he speaks of the person he loves, with such a submission,
and such a respect, as can be due to no body but the Princess Berenice. This
discourse of Cyllenia's made me reflect upon Arsaces his Actions, in which
truly I found something that agreed with her opinion; and I have not told you,
that I had formerly had some such fancy which I had banished as an effect of my
vanity, but then examining many words he had spoken, and particularly those in
the presence of Theomiris, I began to give some credit to Cyllenia's suspicion*
yet did I make a difficulty of confessing it to her, and after I had continued
a good while without Reply. I do not believe (said I) that Arsaces ever had a
thought of me, and indeed it would trouble me very much if I should be obliged
to banish a man for ever from my sight, whom his virtue makes me infinitely to
esteem. I saw by Cyllenia's action, that she was vexed she had said so much, and
looking upon me with a face less confident than before: What, Madam [said she]
if Arsaces were guilty of no other crime but of having adored you, without
letting you know it, would you banish him for ever? Would I banish him,
[reply'd I] why, do you doubt of it Cyllenia? I was of opinion that thoughts
had been free, [answered Cyllenia] and that all the offense had been only in
declaring them; but since they are criminal, though concealed, I Will alter my
conceit of poor Arsaces, and believe he never mingled any thing of love, with
the design he has to honor you. I will believe so with you [added I very
seriously] and I had a great deal rather be of that opinion, than suffer
another, which would make me force the inclination I have to wish him very
well, and instead of that begin to hate him. We were in this part of our
discourse, when being come to the end of an Alley, just as we were going into
another, we saw that Arsaces, whom we were talking of close by us, laid along
upon the grass; I was wonderously surprised at that Encounter, and feared he
might have overheard something of what we had said concerning him; but I was
quickly delivered out of that apprehension, and Cyllenia being gone a little
nearer him, saw that his Eyes were shut, and by many tokens knew him to be
asleep. I would have passed by without awaking him, but Cyllenia had a
curiosity which opposed that intention, and seeing that on the ground near
Arsaces his mouth there lay a little picture case, upon which it seemed that he
was fallen asleep, she went softly toward him without letting me know her
intent, and taking up the Case, she brought it to me without looking in it,
Madam [said she as she came up to me] here is something without doubt that will
be able to satisfy your curiosity, and I hope we here shall see the face of
her Arsaces loves with so much respect. The discourse we had newly had upon
that subject, made me condemn that curiosity, and fearing to meet with some
confirmation of Cyllenia's suspicions, I was going to command her to lay the
Box again in the place from whence she had taken it, when she opened it, and
made me cast my Eyes upon it; Why should I hold you longer in suspense? in
short, my adventure was such as I apprehended, and in that Box I saw the very
face which my Glass represented to me every day. I should not be able to tell
you whither my grief, my astonishment, or my anger was greatest, and though the
last be little predominate in my nature, I confess that in this Encounter I was
seized with them all three. It Is certain that I had a very particular esteem of
Arsaces, and that I found no other defect in him save that of his quality, that
could discourage him from raising his thoughts to the greatest and most
accomplished Princess upon earth; but that obscurity of his birth, made me
receive those testimonies of his affection as mortal injuries, and look upon
his presumption as a blemish able to destroy all that was good, and
considerable in him; the favorable opinion I had of him, made me really sorry
for his fault, and as I had plainly confessed to Cyllenia, 'twas not without
trouble that I saw my self constrained to punish it. Cyllenia seeing me so much
moved, would have opened her mouth to speak to me, but I clapped my hand upon
it, and preventing what she was about to say. Hold thy peace [said I] Cyllenia,
and since thou have contributed so much to this unlucky discovery which we now
have made, labor also for my satisfaction, and take you care of warning this
presumptuous man, that he never present himself before me. I know not whither I
spoke these words with too loud a voice, and whither it was that that wakened
Arsaces, but he presently rose up, and seeing himself surprised in a posture
which he thought not decent before me, he seemed to be quite out of
countenance, and had not the confidence to come toward us, without putting his
hand to his face to hide his blushing; at last he would have made his address
to us, but as he was coming toward me with a very low obeisance, and was going
to say something to me, I turned on the other side without regarding him, and
having made sign to Cyllenia to stay and perform the charge I had given her, I
went hastily away, and returned straight to my lodging. Arsaces [as I have
learned since] was so stricken with this action, that in Cyllenias eye, he
seemed little different from a Marble statue, and not remembering he had ever
seen me do the like, he believed the cause was extraordinary, and presently
guessed at something of the truth; but he continued not much longer in doubt,
when he saw his picture-case in Cyllenias hand; he had stood unmovable from
the time I went away, his hands crossed upon his breast, and his Eyes fixed
upon me till I was out of sight, but as soon as he had turned them upon
Cyllenia, and that he saw the Picture which had betrayed him, he was fully
persuaded of the truth of that adventure, and fell into a confusion which it
would be extremely difficult to represent; he stood a long time without speech,
or motion, his very look touching Cyllenia with compassion; in the end he
recovered a little courage, and going nearer to her, who was little less
astonished than himself; Cyllenia, [said he] I am undone, and I read my destiny
too plainly in your face, in the Princesses action, and in the sight of that
you hold in your hand; My crime is now discovered, but I have at least this
satisfaction, that it is only my misfortune, and not my mouth that has done me
this ill office. I have never failed by want of respect to the Princess, and
how little power soever I had over my self, I had yet enough over my tongue to
bind it to an everlasting silence. I allege not this Excuse to justify my
self toward her, for as respectfull, as innocent, and as secret as my passion
was, it is yet criminal without doubt, since it has moved her indignation, and
the Gods would not have discovered it thus, if it had not been punishable; you
see me therefore most willingly disposed to receive that sentence you are to
pronounce; I Will hearken to it without murmuring, and though perhaps you have
contributed something toward my unhappiness, I Will lend an ear to my
condemnation without any resentment against you. Cyllenia has sworn to me
since, that she was not able to hear these words of Arsaces without being
sensible of pity, and that it was with great repugnancy she executed the
commission I had given her; but being she knew not how to avoid it, she strove
to take a Resolution, and sweetning her words, and countenance, as much as
possibly she could: Sir, [said she] I bear a share in your affliction, and I
could wish with all my heart, that the Princess had made use of some other
body, to acquaint you with her intentions; it is true, she has discovered your
passion, and is so much offended at it, that she thinks her self bound to
entreat you never to see her more. Arsaces at first was touched with this
command, but being his courage was great, and that he had certain thoughts
whereupon his hopes were grounded, he suffered not himself to be dejected, but
settling his countenance as it was before, he spoke thus to Cyllenia with a
great deal of moderation. This sentence is most just, Cyllenia, and I should
not be so my self if I complained of it, and the most equitable punishment this
great Princess could ordain him, whom her sight has caused to offend her, is
to forbid it him for ever: I protest to you by her fair Eyes, and by the sacred
respect I bear her, that I will obey her Decree without murmuring, and that if
I could do so without deserving her, I would demand no longer a delay of my
banishment, than this very moment wherein it is ordained me; but Cyllenia, I am
staid here by an important necessity, and unless I will betray the King, the
State, and the Princess herself particularly, I cannot go away till she has
given me an hours audience. I must needs obtain it by your mediation, I say, I
must needs for the Princesses service, for her satisfaction, and for her
repose, and I will engage my self both to you, and to her, by all the most
religious Oaths were ever taken, that in all my discourse, I will not mingle so
much as one word of my passion. Procure me this favor I beseech you, which you
shall see I will not abuse, and if I break the promise I make you, hold me for
the most ungrateful, and the most unworthy of all men living. Cyllenia was
mute at this Proposition, and doubting she should not be able to obtain what he
desired of me, she knew not which way she should free her self from that
Request. Arsaces added so many other words to his former persuasions, and
pressed her so earnestly, that she was constrained to promise him she would
employ all her credit with me to effect what he desired, and leaving him with
that hope, she came back to me, who was already retired into my Closset.

I was so troubled at this adventure, that I was not able to resettle my self,
and so displeased with Arsaces his temerity, that I could not pardon my self
the fault I had committed, in having by my excessive civilities given him the
boldness to offend me. What, [said I] is it then Berenices destiny never to
cause love in any but those that are beneath her, and was not the presumption
of one of her fathers subjects enough for her misfortune, without making her be
loved also by a man, who perchance is hardly so much as of noble Blood? Has
this Beauty then, wherewith some have so unjustly flattered me, no power but
upon persons of mean condition? Ah mine Eyes! if you must never gain other
Victories, divest your selves of all your luster, and lose all your forces,
since they are so vilely, and so unworthily employed. Scarce had I uttered
these words, when I felt some remorse for the contempt I showed of Arsaces; me
thought though he was not born a Prince, his excellent qualities did so fully
recompense that defect, that without injustice I could not put him in the rank
of meaner persons; I then called to mind all that was great, and lovely in
him; and found so much cause of esteem, and admiration, that I could not remain
in sensible at that remembrance; I confess, the charms of his graceful
fashion, the sweetness of his conversation, and his merit in general, had
wrought in me a good will toward him, which had something in it more than
ordinary, and my reflecting upon that, abated much of the violence of my former
thoughts; Would it pleased the Gods (said I again, by some secret constraint)
would it pleased the Gods he were born a Prince, and that his too bold passion
were authorized by a less unequal birth, I should not then reckon this conquest
shameful, and if he only wanted Kingdoms, his virtue would either supply that
defect, or quickly put them in a way to get them. No sooner had I given way
unto this thought in favor of Arsaces, but my anger stifled it again, and made
me ashamed of my compliance with his crime; Let him go, (said I, recalling my
disdain) that presumptuous man, by whom my favorable usage has been so ill
received, let him carry his audacious affections somewhither else, and those
desires which are too ambitious for one of common rank, I am merciful enough
in concealing his crime from the King my father, and I punish him too gently in
ordaining nothing but banishment for such a fault as his. I was taken up with
these different thoughts, when Cyllenia came in to me, and gave me presently an
exact account of the success of her Commission, I hearkened to her relation
with some kind of tenderness, and was a little touched with Arsaces his words,
but for all the entreaties Cyllenia could use, I was not to be won to grant him
the audience he demanded. I have seen him, and heard him but too much already
(said I) he has abused my indulgence, he has abused my innocent goodness, the
Gods forbid I should fall into that error any more, and that I by my weakness
should give him further occasion to aggravate his offenses toward me. Cyllenia
pressed me a good while, but 'twas impossible to obtain any thing else of me at
that time. Arsaces came not in my sight the next day, nor of two or three days
after, but having met Cyllenia, and stopped her; Cyllenia (said he) I ask the
Princess pardon for my stay in Scythia, and though she have not expressly
commanded me out of it, I should account my self extreme faulty, in continuing
longer in her country, after having merited her indignation; if I could go
away without discharging a duty to which I am obliged by all the fidelity I ow
to her, and hers. The thing I am to tell her, will in part repair the offense I
have committed, and neither can she neglect it without prejudice to her self,
nor I conceal it without betraying her; be pleased therefore so to bring it to
pass, that she may grant me the favor I have demanded, and I will leave
Scythia within an hour after, without other trouble save that of having
offended her by my criminal passion. Arsaces to these words added many ardent
supplications, and Cyllenia, who was touched with them, and who knew the power
she had with me, engaged her self to make one trial more, and coming presently
to me, she related that Encounter in terms, which joined to the inclination I
had to wish well to Arsaces, made me not altogether insensible; yet I for a
long while resisted her importunity in favor of him, and told her many times,
that after the knowledge I had of his love, I could neither see him, nor hear
him, without doing my self an unspeakable injury; but she argued against those
considerations with many others, and alleged, that I ought not for light
scruples to lose the occasion of receiving an advertisement which perhaps was
of greater consequence to me than I imagined; to these motives she added most
effectual entreaties, and persecuted me so long, that I was constrained to
promise her I would suffer Arsaces to make me one visit more, upon the
conditions he had desired it, and upon the protestation she made on his behalf,
that it should be the last to which I should be obliged.

She let him know that same day, what she had obtained of me for him, and the
next following got me to take the same walk in the garden, and with the same
company, as I had done some few days before. After I had passed through some
of the allies with Cyllenia alone, I retired into a close arbor, where by her
persuasion I sat down upon the seats of green turf, and had not stayed there
long, before I saw Arsaces come; at sight of him I changed color, and looking
upon him with different thoughts from those I had before, he seemed to have
quite another shape than that he was wont to have; I scarce durst lift up my
eyes to behold him, and feeling already a remorse for what I had yielded to, I
was unresolved whither I should stay, or go away before I heard him; he might
easily observe my confusion in my face, for the sight of him renewing my anger,
and my shame, had already set it all on fire; In the mean time he came into the
arbor, where he instantly fell upon his knees before me; but I was ill
satisfied with that posture, and fearing it would be accompanied with some
discourse of the nature of that I apprehended; Rise, (said I) Arsaces, and
remember the conditions upon which I permit this last visit; I know but too
much of your follies already, take heed therefore that your words discover
nothing more of them. Arsaces stirred not from my feet, but looking upon me
with eyes, in which his passion was painted to the life: Fear not Madam, (said
he) that I will abuse the favor you do me; and if my follies are known to you,
remember, if you please, that I contributed not unto that knowledge any other
way than by my misfortune, and that you can neither accuse my tongue, nor my
actions of the offense I have committed. I knew too well what was due to you
from miserable Arsaces, to exceed the limits with a just sense of his want of
merit prescribed him, and I know too well with how much justice you are
exasperated against him, to kneel here at you feet with any hope to justify
his crime; Neither is it with that intention I begged these last proofs of your
goodness, and 't is enough that I have made my self unworthy of it, without
seeking occasions to abuse it; but I desired this audience before my departure,
that I might tell you some news, which it is very fit you should know, and in
which you will without doubt find some satisfaction. Arsaces would have
continued his discourse, when I commanded him to rise, and when he had obeyed
me, he began again on this manner.

Berenice made a little pause in this part of her narration, to recall into her
memory what Arsaces had said, and Oroondates, who could not suffer her to speak
so long of Arsaces without interruption, and who hearkened impatiently to all
she said of him, took his time then, and lifting up his eyes to heaven with an
angry action; Is it your pleasure than O Gods! (cried he) that I should
prosecute Arsaces not only as an implacable Enemy to Oroondates, but also as a
Traitor to Berenice? The Princess was surprised at that exclamation, and
turning toward Oroondates; Brother (said she) of what crime, and of what
infidelity do you accuse Arsaces, to whom we have so great obligations? Sister
(replied the Prince, extremely moved) Arsaces has ruined me, and Arsaces has
betrayed you, he is amongst our Enemies our particular Enemy, and 't is both
for your interests, and mine own, that I must give him that death, which in our
combats he twice already has avoided. The Princess amazed at these words, was
going to desire her Brother to explain them, but their conversation was broken
off by a noise they heard without the Tent; the Prince rose up to enquire the
cause of it, when he heard'em cry Arm, Arm, and presently after Toxaris coming
into the Tent^; Put on your Arms Sir, (said he to his Master) the Enemies are
hard by, and at the same time he clapped his Cuirass on his back, and buckled on
that Cask which he had laid aside but awhile before. Oroondates, whom such
Alarms could not terrify, made have to get on the rest of his Arms, and with
his sword in his hand ran to the door of the Tent; where he instantly saw the
cause of all that stir. One man alone was the Author of it, and one man alone
richly Armed and gallantly mounted had struck a terror into whole Troops, nor
was it indeed an ordinary man, for he, by his actions at the entering into the
Camp, had given sufficient grounds of fear to those that happened to be in his
way; he had despised the out-guards which would have opposed his passage, and
forcing his way through the midst of them like lightning, had made his horse
leap over the Trench, and was advancing toward the Tents with such a confident
rashness, as was enough to win belief, that some strong despair had Armed him
against all apprehension of death. That of Prince Oroondates was one of the
outmost, and they that had the guard of it, seeing this Cavalier advance with
his sword in his hand, and with his gesture threatening something more terrible
than ordinary, ran to meet him, and presented the points of their Javelines
against him; but he contemned those feeble obstacles, and spurring on his
horse, trampled some of them under foot, laying at the rest so furiously with
his sword, that almost every stroke brought death to one or other: He had
already opened himself a large way to the Tent, when Eumenes, and Phrataphernes
armed, and on hors-back, came unto that place; these two Warriers looked
intentively upon him, and Phrataphernes by his Arms, and the mightiness of his
blows, presently knew him to be the redoubted Arsaces, who a few days before
had killed his Son in his presence, and had reduced his own life to great
extremity; The sight of this cruel Enemy, whose idea was ever in his
remembrance, wakened his fierce resentment, and running at him like a man
transported with rage, O Pisistratus (cried he) thy Father will either revenge
thy death, or perish in the attempt. As he spoke these words, he darted his
Javeline at Arsaces, which having given him a slight hurt, remained hanging in
the sleeve of his Coat of Mail, from whence Arsaces quickly pulled it, and
seeing Phrataphernes come thundering at him with his sword on high, he met him
with an equal violence, and aiming the point of his Javeline under that arm
which he held up, made the head of it pass quite through to the other side; the
unfortunate Phrataphernes, was presently all bathed in his own blood, and
letting go the reins of his bridle, fell dead at Eumenes his horse's feet. That
Valiant man, whom his friends destiny touched with grief and compassion, rushed
forward to take revenge upon Arsaces, who was turning another way, and opposing
his passage, after he by a loud cry had given him warning to defend himself,
discharged a blow upon his Helmet with his utmost force. The hand of Eumenes
was not light, and indeed Arsaces was roughly shaken by it, but he shocked
Eumenes so violently with his shield, and with the breast of his horse, that
Eumenes, his being too weak for that encounter, was thrust upon his hinder
quarters, and came down upon the sand with his Master. This action passed
before Oroondates his Tent, just at that very time, when having put on all his
Arms, he was run to the door whither the Princess Berenice had followed him.
Arsaces cast his eye at the same time both upon the Brother, and upon the
Sister, and no sooner knew them, but he lift up his hand and head toward
Heaven, and discovering his fury by a terrible cry, and by a threatening action,
he leaped from his horse to assault Oroondates without advantage, and running
at him with his sword drawn, made him sufficiently know, that 't was only for
him he broke the Truce, and brought the War alone into the Camp of his Enemies.
Oroondates knew him presently by diverse marks, and thanking the Gods in a
moment for that so wished encounter, came to meet him as fiercely as a Lion,
and threw himself headlong into the fight with a rage that came no way short of
his; they drew blood with the first strokes they gave, and having made some few
more at one another with the same vigor, and animosity, they closed, and
seizing upon each others body, began to wrestle with an excessive fury; they
made use of nothing but mere strength, and the blind rage of these two Warriers
suffered them not to think either of slight, or skill; they that stood by to
behold this Combat, would have fallen upon Arsaces, but Thalestris, who was one
of them, and who detested such base odds, hindered them with all her power, and
in the interim these two Valiant men came down together like two Collossuse's,
and began to roll upon the ground with such a fury, as struck terror in those
that were spectatours. Berenice, Araxes and many others made prayers for
Oroondates, but none of them durst undertake any way to assist him, and his
generosity was so well known to them, that they dared not to hope for any
advantage to him, but by his valor alone; they both struggled in vain to get
the better, and after they had divested the earth of its greenness, and died it
all over with their blood in which they wallow'd, they with their arms and legs
thrust each other away at the same instant, and start upon their feet again:
they had already lift up their swords to begin a second bout, when a Soldier
coming behind Arsaces; thrust him into the reins of his back with a Javeline,
the head whereof stuck a good way in his body, and the shaft remained broken in
the Soldiers hand, Oroondates, who beheld this action with an unspeakable
grief, ran at him who had given him that shameful assistance, but Arsaces, who
for all he was so chafed, and heated, felt the blow he had received, sprung
suddenly upon that Enemy, and not giving him the leisure to get away, he with a
slash of his sword cut off the arm that had stricken him at the very shoulder.
After this revenge he turned toward Oroondates, but his strength began to fail
him, and he was so weakened by that last wound, that having reeld three or four
steps, he could no longer keep himself from falling on the ground. Oroondates
enraged at the issue of this Combat, wherein he saw so little honor, was like
to have turned his Arms against himself, to blot out the shame he had received.
Berenice, Thalestris, and Araxes ran presently to him, and began to disarm him
to look upon his wounds as they led him to his Tent, but he would not go into
it, without taking the care he thought himself bound to have of his Enemy, and
turning toward Menelaus, Alexander, and Hyander who were with him; For Gods
sake, (said he,) if this gallant man be not dead, get him some help, and let
him be brought into one of the rooms of my Tent, where I will give order he
shall have that assistance he stands in need of. Those young Warriers obeyed
him, and coming to the place where the great Arsaces lay all along, they saw
the earth stained with blood round about him, and found him in a condition
wherein their succor was very necessary. He had scarce any understanding left,
but they pulling up his beaver, the fresh air recalled his fainting spirits,
and they saw him open his eyes, and lift up his head very weakly. Menelaus
causing him to be taken up by Soldiers, and helping himself in that charitable
office, carried him into Oroondates his Tent, where in a Chamber near his, he
was quickly disarmed, unclothed, and laid in bed; but he was so weakend with
loss of blood, weariness, and the pain he felt with the head of the Javeline
which was still in his body, that he could hardly discern any thing that was
done about him; In the mean time Prince Oroondates his servants had got him to
bed, and found he had but two, and those not considerable hurts; but when the
Chirurgians would have come to dress them, he enquired how his Enemy did, and
having heard he was alive, and in his Tent; Think of him first then (said he to
Lysimachus his Physician) his wounds are more dangerous than mine, and I will
not suffer my self to be looked to, till he have had the help which I can
better stay for. Go (continued he turning toward the Chirurgians) and tell that
Valiant man, that 't is neither the incommodiousness of my wounds, nor the
mortal hatred which is between us, that hinders me from visiting him, but the
fear my presence may displease him, and the shame I should have to appear
before him, after the abominable fowl play that has been used to him; tell him
moreover that he may receive this assistance without trouble, and without fear
of being engaged to any reconciliation with me, that I expect not that fruit of
the service I do him, and that I labor for the preservation of his life, only
to assault it once again with more glory, and to repair some part of the
dishonor that reflects upon me by the event of our Combat. With this message
he sent them to Arsaces, without suffering them to touch him, but presently
after, by Araxes his care there were others brought who supplied the want of
them, and dressed his wounds in the presence of Lysimachus, Ptolomeus,
Craterus, and of all the Principal Commanders of the Army, whom the noise of
that adventure drew presently into his Tent. In the mean time Arsaces had
recovered his understanding perfectly, and seeing himself in bed encompassed
with persons whom he knew not, he looked earnestly upon them, and after having
been a while silent; Tell me I pray you (said he) in what place I am, and from
whom I receive these good Offices? You are in your Enemies Tent (answered
Menelaus) and 't is by his order you receive this succor, which the whole
world owes unto your Valor. Arsaces hearing that cried out, and lifting up his
eyes to heaven, Ah! Fortune, (said he) this is too much; and this obstinacy
thou showest in persecuting me is full of inhumanity, and injustice; thou
labourest for my confusion as much as for my Enemies glory, and 't is only to
make me die with grief that thou will it have me thus often endebted to him; but
the Gods forbid I should longer make use of thy false relief, and that I should
prolong my life, if I cannot do it but by the mercy, and assistance of my
Enemy. He was speaking on this manner, when the Chirurgians came in, and drew
near to his bedside; but as soon as ever they went about to dress his wounds,
Arsaces thrust them back, and refused their help; Go (said he) and tell him
that sent you, I had rather loose my life than owe it so often to him, that 't
was only to assail his I came into this Camp, but since he so well knows how
to defend it, let him suffer him to die without overwhelming him with shame and
confusion, whom he cannot suffer to live, so long as he is alive himself; I had
hoped he would have fallen with me, but since his destiny is stronger than
mine, let him content himself with triumphing over my happiness, and with
triumphing over my life, without triumphing also over my reputation. By such
like words as these the afflicted Arsaces rejected the succor that was offered
him; but Amyntas the Physician, judging that the message Oroondates had given
him charge to deliver, might perchance work something with him, repeated it to
him word for word, and by that means shak'd his resolution a little; when he
had told him once again, that the Prince expected no other fruit of the help he
sent him, but the means to end their differences with more glory, upon that
condition (replied Arsaces) I accept his assistance, and I will conserve my
life, to keep him from believing that I am afraid to dispute it once more
against him; he shall see me yet again with my sword in my hand, since he will
have it so, not to contend with him for the advantage of our Combats which is
wholly his, but to requite our injuries and obligations both together. After
this discourse, he no longer opposed the will of the Physician and Chirurgians,
but they were not free from trouble, and apprehension, when they found the head
of the Javeline was all within his flesh, yet did they begin with instruments
to try if they could pull it out, and at last their endeavors prevailed, but
with such extremity of pain to Arsaces, that a weaker constitution than his
would infallibly have sunk under it, and yet he never so much as cried out, or
spoke on word, or did any action that could testify he was sensible of the
pain they put him to; when the head was out, the Chirurgians no longer doubted
of his cure, and searching two or three other wounds he had, found not any of
them to be great or dangerous. When they had performed what belonged to them,
they enjoined their Patient rest and silence, but he took care of that himself,
and speaking to Alexander and Menelaus, who had not stirred from him;
Charitable Enemies (said he) I beseech you as you love the Gods, let no body
visit me; you have seen but the sleightest of my wounds, and besides the
estate of my body, my mind is in such a condition as cannot endure any
company. Alexander promised him what he desired, and then withdrawing
themselves, they left none in the room but those that were necessary to serve
him. They went into Oroondates his Chamber which they found full of Princes,
and Officers of the Army that were come to visit him, all of them together
were astonished at this adventure, and admired the boldness of that stranger,
who through the midst of so many thousand men, and of a thousand deaths which
threatened him, was come to seek him in the heart of his Camp, and even in his
very Tent; but when Menelaus told them what he had said unto the Chirurgians,
and the generous contempt he had shown of his life, they could not wonder
enough at his magnanimity, and at the greatness of his courage. This relation
made Oroondates certain that it was Arsaces, but he would not say any thing of
it, for fear of giving some allarm to the Princess Berenice, who by her story
he found bore him a great deal of good will, deferring to let her know the
truth, till time should afford him a fitter opportunity. Many of the Princes
would have visited him, and paid him what they believed due to a man of so rare
a valor, but Alexander and Menelaus diverted their intent, by telling them
what a trouble it would be to him, and the request he had made.

In this interim it grew night, and every body being retired, the two gallant
enemies passed it in disquiets that were not much unlike. Oroondates, enraged
at the issue of that adventure, could not complain sufficiently of his ill
fortune, and detested the crosness of it with words full of transport and sury.
Must I put my Enemy to the pains (said he) to come and seek me out every day,
and must this happy rival, not being satisfied with peaceably enjoying the
affection of my ungrateful Princess, envy me also this miserable life which he
has reduced to such a lamentable condition? Must ^he violate the truce, force
his passage over our trenches, and find me idle in my Tent, when I have so many
occasions to pull me out of it, and that I ought to shut my eyes against all
dangers, and against all considerations, to carry death unto that fortunate
rival, and to that irreconcilable Enemy? Ah my courage, Ah my love, Ah my
honor, what is now become of you? Do you suffer me barely to threaten, and
another to execute, that I should learn my duty of him, against whom I had
armed my self with these furious resolutions? Arsaces was no way obliged to
prevent me, and Arsaces might have sat still with honor, he whose fortune is
so happy, whose desires are fully satisfied, and who having robbed me of
Statira has nothing more to demand; but Oroondates deprived of Statira,
deprived of happiness, and deprived of honor, ought not to have breathed but
to recover what he has lost, and ought not to have prolonged his life, but to
take vengeance of that Ravisher of his happiness, of his honor, and of Statira
all together. He spent some hours in this consideration, and then falling into
more cruel thoughts; Ah! without question (added he) without question Statira
thinks it not enough to have forsaken me, but she will have me die by the hand
of her new Lover, because I could not die with grief for her inconstancy; and
it is certainly by her order that Arsaces sets himself so obstinately against my
life; her new affection without doubt makes it odious to her, and she no longer
will suffer such an irreprochable witness of her infidelity to continue in the
world; if it be so, O Cassandra, (for you no longer are Statira, and with the
name of the royal Family, have likewise laid aside all that was great and
noble in you) if it be so, I am to blame to oppose your desires any longer, and
I ought to offer up my breast without resistance to that Minister of your
commands; but I will satisfy him as soon as ever he is in a condition to take
his satisfaction, and give me mine, and the Sun shall no sooner see Arsaces
upon his feet again, but it shall see him fighting with Oroondates. In the mean
time (said he to himself) he is in thy power, he is in thy Tent, that crucll
tormentour of thy days, and instead of sacrificing him to thy just indignation,
thou art obliged by some remainders of virtue, which thy passions cannot
stifle, to assist him, to serve him, and to labor for the preservation of that
life, which thou would, and which thou ought to take away. But it is no
matter (continued he) we will do what we ought to do to the utmost, and when we
have paid our Rival whatsoever, in the condition he now is, he can hope for
from an Enemy as generous as himself, we will prosecute our quarrels without
remorse, and without advantage, and will without regret assault a life, for the
conservation whereof we have done all that we were bound to do.

These were the discourses of restless Oroondates; but if he was tormented,
Arsaces found no better usage from his inhumane thoughts; the grief he was in
to see himself at the mercy of his Enemy, and constrained to receive his
assistance, did indeed make some part of his discontents; but these were not
the most violent, and when he remembered that he that day also, had seen the
Princess Berenice with him at the door of his Tent, and that he believed him
quietly possessed of her, whose affection he by a thousand remarkable services
had so well deserved, all his constancy forsook him, and gave him over to his
rage alone; it had before been great enough to deprive him of the better part
of his judgment, and to make him, in the action he had newly done, despise
those dangers into which he would not have precipitated himself, if he had felt
the least spark of a desire to live; but by that cruel sight it was so
strangely aggravated, that it insensibly took away all the remaining power
which Reason had yet conserved over his afflicted mind; in these furious fits
whereinto it cast him, he formed such designs as were suitable to his despair;
but when he put his hands upon his wounds, or that he tried to raise himself
upon his bed, the knowledge of his weakness augmented his vexation, as much as
he felt his strength to be diminished. What will thou do, miserable man, (said
he) and in this highest pitch of thy misfortunes, to whom will thou have
recourse, and what will thou resolve upon? inconstant Berenice has unworthily
forsaken thee, fortune forsakes thee with her, and even the Gods themselves
declare openly for thine Enemy. If the Gods, if fortune, if Berenice be against
thee, what can thou fly to but Death, which will free thee from the anger of
the Gods, will shelter thee from the persecutions of Fortune, and cure thee of
the remembrance of ungrateful Berenice. We must die then, that design is no
new thing to Arsaces, if he had not been resolved on that, he would not to day
have charged into a whole Army, and an Army in which there are so many men able
to take his life without advantage; but to die without revenge is a very hard
condition to Arsaces, he has not been wont to leave his Enemies a Victory so
little disputed; and if he must lose Berenice, he can hardly quit the
possession of her to another; unless he purchase it at least with a good
quantity of his blood; his Rival must perish with him if it be possible and
Berenice who twice already has been present at our Combats, must glu^ her self
with that spectacle once again for all. But why (continued he) why should I
defer it any longer? Can I not with the small remnant of strength I have left,
get into my Rivals chamber, and make an end of the business with Daggers?
they will enter into our bodies without resistance, and we shall have no Arms
that can protract our Combat. He found some sweetness in this thought, but of a
sudden he also met with difficulties in it. Thine Enemy is too generous (said
he) and thou ought to believe, by so many effects of his virtue, that in the
condition thou now art, he will not accept this kind of Combat against thee;
and as jealous, as transported, and as desperate as thou art, thou can never
be so base as to think of stabbing him in his bed. No, do better, Arsaces,
leave him Berenice since he deserves her; his virtue, and the good offices he
has done thee, oblige thee to quit her to him, and thou may abandon her
without meaness of spirit, provided thou also abandon thy life with her; he
will not believe thou yield'st her to him for fear of a death, which thou shall
give thy self in his presence; and thou shall not then be compelled to prolong
thy pains, in prolonging thy life for a revenge which perchance thou may
never be allowed to take. This last thought fixed Arsaces his resolution more
than the rest, and he was still of the same mind when day began to break.

The Princess Berenice; and Thalestris saw it appear without having hardly
closed their Eyes all night, they lay together, as before at Polemon's house;
and if the discontents of Oroondates, and Arsaces, tormented them so cruelly,
theirs suffered them to rest but very little better. Thalestris had no sooner
given Berenice part of the satisfaction she had received by the clearing of
matters between Orontes and her, and of the trouble she began to feel for the
banishment she had condemned him to, but Berenice with a like confidence
imparted her disquiets; she remembered the words her brother had spoken touching
Arsaces his infidelity, and they were so deeply engraven in her memory, that
from the first moment she had heard them, she was not capable of any rest; she
would have had much ado to believe that report if it had come from any other
body but the Prince her brother, but she gave so perfect a credit to what he
said, that she durst not question what had been told her by so authentic a
Witness; that cruel opinion having begun to creep into her mind, tormented
her already very violently, and not being able to dissemble her thoughts from
that fair Queen, she disburthen'd part of her griefs into her bosom. The
Princess was exceeding moderate, and of a wondrous mild disposition; nor was
she transported with any fury, but satisfied her self with weeping, and
complaining of Arsaces his inconstancy, without falling into any rage, or
making any imprecations against him. If Arsaces has deceived me (said she)
there is no more fidelity to be hoped for in mankind, and I can hardly believe
he should have forsaken me without powerful Reasons to persuade him to it;
without doubt I was not lovely enough to keep his affections longer; but he had
done too much, and I dare say, he had suffered too much for me, to open his
Eyes so suddenly to the knowledge of my defects; I for his sake had committed
faults, which perhaps will never be forgiven me by severer persons, and I may
truly say, that I never by any of my actions gave him just cause to repent of
his affection. Though the Princess brought forth these words very calmly, yet
did she accompany them with sighs and tears, which made Thalestris judge she
was much more deeply touched, than she was willing to make show of: she strove
to comfort her in a Disease whereof she her self was already cured, and being
very loath to redouble her affliction, she feigned to be ignorant of the cause
of Oroondates his words, and told her nothing at all of what she with him
believed touching the Loves of Arsaces, and of Queen Statira. As she was thus
reserved in consideration of Berenice; Berenice was no less so in regard of
her, and would not reveal a secret which she had not yet discovered to the
Prince her brother. The desire she had to clear her doubts perfectly with him,
made her get out of bed when the Sun was scarcely risen, and as soon as ever
she was ready, she went out of her Chamber, to go to Oroondates his Tent. She
came thither, and gave him the good morrow, when Arsaces was yet in those
cruel agitations which had distracted him all the night. He was still full of
irresolution, when Oroondates his servants came into his Chamber, and drawing
near to his bedside, told him their Master had sent them to inquire after his
health; by this redoubling of obligations, Arsaces his griefs were redoubled,
and it fretted him to the heart to see that every moment he became indebted to
his Enemy; he asked them something briskly what company was with him? and they
without diving into his intention told him that they left the Princess Berenice
by his bedside. Arsaces at that answer could not forbear to cry out, which
they attributed only to the pain of his wounds, and being come close to him to
learn the cause more particularly; Go (said he) and tell your Master, I shall
be quickly cured. With these words he turned his head on the other side, and
reflecting upon this last confirmation of his misfortune, he no more doubted
but that he ought to dye without deferring a minute longer. Thou have lived too
long Arsaces (said he) thou have lived too long. Thy griefs are too intolerable
to languish in them any longer, and if thou no more can give two lives to thy
resentment, appease it by sacrificing the more unfortunate: but offer this
sacrifice before the Eyes of ungrateful Berenice; let thy Rival live, since
he defends his life so well, and that thou art twice indebted to him for thine;
in the condition thou now art, thou can no more attempt any thing lawfully
against him, and in the extremity of those miseries thou suffer, thou
could never have the patience to stay for the recovery of thy strength: as he
talked thus to himself, he opened one of the Curtains of his Bed, and seeing
his Armor which they had laid upon the seats close by his bedside, he pulled
one of his arms out of bed, and putting his hand upon his Cuirasse, felt for a
Dagger, which he commonly wore there, and having drawn it out of the sheath, he
hid it in his bed to make use of it in the resolution he had taken. He then
raised himself to sit up, though with much pain, and trouble, and judging that
with some help he might be able to stand, he called one of Oroondates his
servants which waited in the Chamber, and when he was come to his bedside, he
prayed him to reach his Clothes, and to help him on with them. The man who saw
in what condition he was, made some difficulty to obey him; but Arsaces
redoubled his entreaties with so absolute a look, and so imperious a voice,
that he no longer had the boldness to refuse what he demanded. He put on his
Clothes with much ado, and with much incommodiousness to Arsaces, who when he
was ready, conveyed the Dagger, so that the man perceived it not, into one of
the slieves of his Cassack; after which he desired his assistance to get into
his Masters Chamber. The servant who was ignorant of his intentions; made a
great scruple of helping him in that design, but when he saw him without Arms,
and so feeble that he could hardly sit upright, he believed he might do him
that service without putting his Prince into any danger, and moreover Arsaces
his countenance, caused so much respect, and so much fear in him together, that
he had not the courage to disobey him. By his assistance therefore he rose from
his bed, and when he was upon his legs he felt himself so weak that without his
support he would not have been able to stand, yet did he begin to walk leaning
upon the servants arm, and with much pain, and difficulty made a shift to get
into Oroondates his Chamber. The Prince of Scythia was at that time accompanied
with Lysimachus, Prince Oxyartes, Artabasus, and Berenice who by reason of
those Princes being there had not been able to clear the doubts he had caused
in her; scarce had they begun to fall upon some discourse, when they saw
Arsaces enter with his guide: he moved so softly, and his face was so exceeding
pale, that he presently stirred up more pity than apprehension. The Princess
Berenice had no sooner cast her Eyes upon him, but she knew him immediately, yet
whither it were by reason of her excessive astonishment, and sudden surprisall,
or of the effect her brothers words had already wrought in her, instead of
running to meet him, she continued unmovable upon the Chair where she was
sitting, and appeared scarce capable of sense at so unexpected an Encounter.
Lysimachus whose thoughts at that time were far enough from that Adventure,
knew him not at his coming in, and his face was sufficiently changed by his
loss of blood, to make a man lose the features of it; yet all believed at the
first, that it was that valiant Enemy whose last Actions were a part of their
Entertainment, and all of them at his Entrance rose up from their seats, and
prepared themselves with attention to observe what he meant to say and do.
Oroondates taking notice of the alteration of their countenances, thrust his
head a little out of bed, and by that sight concurring in their opinion, he
sat up, and without being moved expected the success of that Adventure.
Arsaces being reasonable near the bed, found himself so weak that he was
constrained to sink into a chair, where he was scarcely set, when casting his
eyes toward Oroondates, and the Princess Berenice; I come not [said he] O happy
Lovers, to disturb your contentments, nor to oppose a fortune which my rival
has built but upon the ruins of mine; although he possess it with injustice, he
has made himself worthy of it by his virtue, and I should be ungrateful to the
effects of his generosity, if I should still persist in the design I had
against his life. I come O Berenice, [continued he, fixing his eyes wholly upon
the Princess] both to vent my last reproaches against thine infidelity, and to
deliver up that life at thy feet, which I so blindly gave thee; I will neither
put thee in mind of thy oaths, nor of what thou ow'dst unto the services I
have done thee, 't will suffice me to tell thee, that by thy shameful
inconstancy thou make thy self unworthy of thy birth, and of Arsaces his
fidelity; the Gods, if they be just, will never suffer it to go unpunished, and
to render thee yet more guilty toward them, I lay this life to thy charge,
which to the prejudice of all my estate, of all my friends, and even of my
honor, I had absolutely resigned unto thy will, and whereof, through a lawful
despair, I here accomplish the sacrifice. As he ended these words, he drew the
dagger out of the place where he had hid it, and lifting it suddenly into the
air, had certainly stabbed himself to the heart, if Lysimachus, who was close
by, had not caught hold of him, and stopped his arm just as he was giving the
mortal blow. Arsaces was so weak, that Lysimachus easily got the dagger out of
his hand, but while he was eager in that employment, the rest of the company
was in a mavelous confusion, and such an one as all the words in the world
could not be able to express. Oroondates, Oxyartes, Artabasus, and Araxes had
first in Arsaces his face, and after in the tune of his voice found so great a
resemblance of a Prince, who formerly had been dearer to them than their own
lives, that if by an untimely death he had not been taken from them, they would
surely have believed him to be the very same. Oroondates, whom this conceit had
made to thrust part of his body out of bed, cast his eye upon the faces of the
rest, and observing in them an astonishment as great as his, O Artabasus!
(cried he,) O Oxyantes! is not this the face, and voice of poor Artaxerxes?
Arsaces who was yet struggling in Lysimachus his arms, turned his head at that
demand, and looked Oroondates in the face, which till then the darkness of the
place where he lay, and the blindness of his passion had kept him from
discerning. At that time it was in open view, and Arsaces had no sooner
heedfully considered it, but he sent forth a louder cry than could have been
expected from the littleness of his strength, and employing the Relics of it,
to rise up from his chair, and creep as far as the bed, he there sunk down upon
the Prince of Scythia. O Oroondates (cried he) O my dearest brother, is it you?
These words, and this action would absolutely have persuaded the Prince, and
the rest of the company that the Valiant Arsaces was no other than Prince
Artaxerxes, if they had not remembered that eight whole years were run out,
since their own eyes had seen him slain in the battle of Selena. In the mean
time Prince Oroondates received his embraces with an imparalell'd amazement,
and not being able to comprehend any thing of that adventure, O my eyes and
ears! (said he) with what illusions do you abuse me? Then did he cast his looks
upon the Princess his sister, who as much troubled as the rest, but for
different considerations, knew not yet which way she should carry her self; she
perceived the agitations of her brothers mind, and being desirous to help him
in that encounter. Nay, brother (said she) doubt no more on it; 't is Prince
Artaxerxes without illusion. Yes, dearest brother, (added Arsaces) I am
Artaxerxes, and if you love me still, me thinks you should not find it so hard
a mattter to know my face. Oroondates was so besides himself, that he could not
yet tell what he should imagine, and though in Arsaces he observed both the
voice, the face, and all the gestures of Artaxerxes, and that by his tender
endearments, he still perceived his former affection, yet could he not bring
his mind to so difficult a belief, nor contradict his own eyes, and the
opinion of all Asia, for the death of Prince Artaxerxes. He looked earnestly
upon him, without being able to open his mouth, and in the mean time Arsaces
turning toward the rest, and stretching forth his arms to them. What, Uncle
(said he to Prince Oxyartes) and you Cousin (to old Artabasus) will not you
know me neither? Oxyartes and Artabasus received his kindness, but with such a
confusion as kept them still as mute, and as wonder-strucken as before. At last
Prince Oroondates broke silence, and greedily devouring Arsaces with his eyes.
If I believed (said he) that the dead could recover the lives which they have
lost, and if with most part of the world, I did not know that Prince Artaxerxes
was killed in the battle of Selena, I should infallibly take you for him, you
have all his features, you have all his actions, and 't is by your Valor that
I should know him better than by all these marks; but alas! that happiness
would be so great, that I dare not so much as raise a thought to it. Artaxerxes
was not slain, (replied Arsaces) and he had a destiny in Scythia, directly like
to that you had in Persia: I have concealed my self from the whole world,
except my Princess only, and 't is by her favor I hope to recover the
acquaintance of my dear Oroondates. He accompanied these words with such close,
tender embraces, that Oroondates, as much surprised, and besides himself as he
was, could no longer be ignorant that 't was he; his heart showed him his dear
Artaxerxes, and after his extraordinary agitations were a little past over, he
became certainly confirmed of that strange truth. As soon as that belief was
settled in his mind, it produced such violent effects there, that he was like
to have died with an excess of contentment, his cheeks were presently bathed in
a stream of tears, and his joy broke forth into such passionate expressions,
that though the bystanders had not been at all concerned, they could not but
have shed tears at such a moving spectacle. He hugged him in his arms almost an
hour together, without affording a share in him to any body, and ever and anon
crying out, O Artaxerxes! O my dearest brother! without being able to bring
forth any other word distinctly; all language is too weak to represent a part
of what passed in this encounter; never had man been so passionately beloved of
another, as Artaxerxes of Prince Oroondates, unless Artaxerxes himself disputed
with him for that advantage; and never had real death been deplored with so
many tears, as the supposed death of Artaxerxes had been by his dear
Oroondates; nor did the knowledge of his being alive transport him unto less
extreamities, for all that a most violent passion can produce, appeared at the
highest pitch in that encounter. At last Oxyartes and Artabasus required their
part in Artaxerxes, and it was just they should possess him for some few
moments; scarce could they obtain it of Oroondates, but they pulled him out of
his arms, and Lysimachus, who besides the acquaintance he had with him as
Arsaces, had so many other reasons to consider him particularly, with ardent
entreaties begged the continuation of that friendship, which Arsaces had made
him hope he should enjoy. Araxes who had his share of gladness as well as the
rest, came and cast himself at his feet, and received also his part in those
charming endearments, wherewith the Prince of Persia won the hearts of the most
barbarous persons; all the company remained a long time before they could utter
any thing that hung together, but when they began to be a little settled,
Oroondates, who could not get out of his astonishment, and who, through the
excess of his joy could hardly tell what he did, nor where he was, at last
recalled pastactions into his memory, and looking upon Arsaces with eyes that
were full of love. What, (cried he) was that blood then, which my sacrilegious
hand has shed, the blood of dearest Artaxerxes? And was it against my dear
Oroondates [added Arsaces] that I made such cruel resolutions? O Gods!
[continued Oroondates, raising his voice] how many blessings do you send me all
at once! you think it not enough to give me Artaxerxes, but you also restore me
Statira whom I had lost, and since it was only of Artaxerxes that I was
jealous, and that 't was only to Artaxerxes that Statira granted those favors
which drove me into despair, Statira is innocent, Statira is not inconstant.
This last discovery put the two Princes into new raptures of joy, which had
like to have been fatal to them, and Arsaces, who but a few minutes before,
came into the Chamber with such cruel suspicions against Berenice, could not be
cured of them without falling into inconceiveable ecstasies. How! (said he,
quite besides himself with joy) has not Berenice forsaken me then, and was it
but to her brother, she gave those mistaken embraces which have cost us so much
blood, and which have produced such strange effects? Ah! Madam, (pursued he,
turning toward the Princess, and doing his endeavors to throw himself at her
feet) what shall guilty Arsaces do to obtain pardon for so many offenses, and
by what blood can he be able to wash them out, if they have already made him
spend the best part of his? He would have said more, and strove to have begged
forgiveness on his knees, but the Princess would not suffer him, and forcing
modesty to embrace him in her turn. Your faults [answered she] are very
pardonable, and instead of punishing them, I acknowledge them as the most
powerful marks you could have given me of your affection. Ah! Sister (added
Prince Oroondates) how easily do I now excuse the love you bore to that
Arsaces, whom I so much hated! and how well are you beloved of the Gods, in
that they have reserved for you, the greatest, and most accomplished Prince
that ever was! They would all have enlarged themselves further in this
discourse; if they had not found that Prince Artaxerxes was extraordinarily ill
with those great disorders, and therefore it was necessary to remit the
continuation of it, that he might be got to bed again; but the two Princes
could never resolve to part so soon, and Arsaces his bed was fain to be brought
into Oroondates his Chamber; where it was presently made ready, and where they
laid him with a purpose to let him rest, and to labor for his recovery, with a
care very different from that they took before, for the health of a generous
Enemy.

The end of the sixth Book, and of the third Part of Cassandra.
The fourth Part of CASSANDRA.
The Author to CALISTA.
IT is but reason, Calista, that I should watch for you all manner of ways, and
that some part of these nights you make me pass without sleep, should be
bestowed on this employment which you have ordained me: I obey you without
repugnance, both because in pleasing you, I meet my satisfaction, and my
perfect glory, and because I indeed find some pleasure in entertaining my self
still with persons, toward whom your inclinations have caused a friendship in
me. My Heroes now are dearer to me by your approbation, than by their own
desert, and since you have judged them worthy of your affections, they are too
proud of that high fortune, to neglect any thing from henceforth, that may
maintain them in it, or to conceal any of those gallant actions from you which
may preserve them in your esteem. They when I was taken up with businesses very
different from this, solicited me themselves to give you the continuation of
their adventures, and I had your commands too deeply graven in my remembrance
to resist their solicitations. I here bring them to you a fourth time, divine
Calista, at their next visit they shall take their leave of you, and in this
they perhaps will tell you some part of that you have desired from them. If you
think my Arsaces too long in the recital of his life, perchance you will pardon
that defect, in consideration of the accidents whereof it is composed, and of
the importance of the actions and person, since his Death drew tears from your
fair Eyes, and that you have interessed your self enough both in his return,
and in his whole fortune, to hear the relation of it without weariness. If all
the adventures of it are not equal, and if you find some places in them not so
strong, nor so diverting as others, you will be pleased to consider, that my
invention has not had an entire liberty, and that it has been racked by
Chronology, by the truth of the History, and by those things I had already
written: and in short that I have been put to it, as many others would have
been, to make Darius his son pass his time handsomely in Scythia, whilst his
Country was laid desolate, and his father deprived of his Empire, and of his
life, by Alexanders victorious forces. Yet in this encounter, and in many
others, which truly have kept me in a very troublesome constraint, I have stuck
to probability as much as possibly I could, and have made up a story which in
mine own opinion is not the most defective of this piece. You your self it may
be will make a more favorable judgment of it, than mine, since you have ever
showed as much goodness, and as much complacency to your Cassandra, as you have
had little for him who gave her to you before her birth, and who here confirms
the gift with that of his own life.

CASSANDRA, The fourth Part. The first Book.
WHile nothing but joy resounds in the Prince of Scythia's Tent, sorrow
displays all its most mournful effects in that of Antigonus, and in the soul
of young Demetrius. That amorous Prince whom the variety of so many objects,
and of so many employments, could not divert from his fatal thoughts, was gone
out as soon as day began to break, to pay his ordinary tribute to the Ashes of
his Hermione. He had washed the cold Marble of her Tomb, with his tears, whose
source seemed impossible to be dried up; he had invoked her Ghost, and a
thousand times pronounced that name so dear to his remembrance, when after
having spent some time in these doleful employments, he began to walk along
the River side, seeking in all kind of objects for new matter of increase to
his affliction. He was insensibly gotten a good way from the Camp, and already
drew near that Walk which reached from the bank of the River unto the Temple of
Apollo, when he chanced to light upon an extraordinary Adventure. He first saw
certain Horses loosened from a Chariot which stood some twenty paces from them,
and a little farther off under certain Trees he saw women sitting upon the
grass, and three or four men standing about them. Demetrius his sorrowful
humor, made him think of going directly back, or of turning into some other
way to avoid that Encounter. For that purpose, after having taken a little
circuit, he left that company on his right hand, but passing something near
them, he discovered objects that were powerful enough to stay him, and make
him change his Resolution. He cast his Eye upon those Women with more curiosity
than his grief seemed to have left him, and being naturally he was a Lover, or
rather an Idolater of that sex, he began to interess himself in certain sighs
and complaints he heard come from among them. That potent inclination, which
was predominant in him over all others, suspended the violence of his sorrow
for a few moments, and made him capable of some attention, and even of some
desire to know more. To satisfy himself he drew near to those Trees again, and
took his place behind a Hedge, through which he distinctly could observe the
persons whereof that company was composed. There was a young Lady, to whom all
the rest bore respect as to the Mistress, or as to the chief of two women that
seem'^ to be of her Retinue, an old man of reasonable good presence, and some
other servants. This Lady was laid along upon the grass, leaning her head in
the lap of one of those women; the old man was sitting five or six paces from
her, and the servants stood waiting round about them. Demetrius could see the
Ladies face but on the side, yet in that little that appeared to his Eyes, he
observed an extraordinary beauty. That sight obliged him to lend an ear to
their conversation, and then he heard the Lady speak on this manner. Flatter me
no longer Theogenes, but think as I do, that this eternal anger of the Gods has
no other cause but my ingratitude, and the meaness of my spirit: I am confident
enough of it, to believe that it has drawn part of those Desolations which
have fallen upon our house, and I account it a manifest folly to struggle any
more against my destiny. Ah! how many misfortunes should I have escaped, if I
had not survived that deplorable loss, which settled a gloomy cruel night for
ever in my soul! What an infinite of tears should I have spared my eyes, and
from how many bloody dismal spectacles should I have freed them? How great
remorse, how great repentance should I have avoided, and in short, what a world
of miseries should I have forsaken, to enjoy that rest which you have always
opposed? Ah! without doubt (continued she, with a voice interrupted by many
sighs) without doubt, O most Valiant, and most constant Prince, I ought to
have accompanied you to your grave; I should then no more be guilty of
faint-heartedness, and should only have felt my first misfortunes. I should
not have seen the loss of my friends, and the general ruin of our family, nor
should I have been reduced to wander from Province to Province, to seek a
sanctuary for this life, which I had so many occasions to hate. This fair
desolate Lady brought forth these words with so sad and yet so pleasing a tune,
that they pierced even into the very soul of Demetrius, and presently begot a
desire in him, both to know that stranger, and to offer her his assistance in
the miseries she complained of. With this intent, lending an ear to their
discourse more carefully than before, he heard that the old man, after having
kept silence a good while, made this reply. It is no longer time, Madam, to
renew your griefs by these tragical remembrances which afflict you, and to seek
out new matter of sorrow in a wound, which time, your reason, and your
resignation to the will of the Gods, ought to have perfectly cured. You have
spent time enough in mournful employments, and you have showed both sense
enough of your losses, and contempt enough of your life, to fear no reproaches
of ingratitude, or of meanness of Spirit. Think now of giving some rest unto
your mind, and begin to hope for an end of part of your miseries. The Gods do
expressly command it you, and they have discovered their intentions clearly
enough, to leave your disobedience no excuse, and to free you from all new
cause of apprehension. What would you have me hope, O Theogenes? (said the fair
afflicted Lady, with a sigh) shall I hope for the recovery of those persons I
have lost? and will those Gods, whose pleasure ought to be a sacred Law to us,
restore me the King my Father, of whose death these eyes were sad spectatours?
will they regain me that dear Prince, whom my ingratitude sent unto his grave?
Ah! Theogenes, you know that that is the true cause of all my tears, and if you
will have me hope for the end of my wanderings, and for that refuge which we
seek against our persecuters, how little able is that hope to comfort me, and
besides, how little certainty is there in it! That great man, at whose feet we
went to seek both refuge, and revenge, is now no longer in this world, and his
Valiant successors are imbroyl'd in quarrels themselves, which will leave them
but little sense of ours. The Lady without question would have said more, if
Demetrius by chance had not showed himself a little, and by that sight
interrupted their conversation. When he saw he was discovered, he resolved to
make his adresses to that stranger, and assure her that amongst Alexanders
successors, she should still find that generosity, which made him protect the
miserable, and the oppressed. At his coming toward them, the fair stranger
raised up her head, and observing something that was great and noble in
Demetrius his face, she believed him to be a man of quality, and thought
herself obliged to rise, to repay part of his salutation. Demetrius had no
sooner cast his eyes upon her, but he was in a manner blinded with the luster
of that mervelous beauty, and calling to mind the remembrance of the most
accomplished ones he knew, he was of opinion that he had seen nothing in the
faces of the Princess Berenice, or of Queen Statira, which might not be
equaled in that of this young stranger. The whitest and smoothest things in
the whole world, came nothing near the delicacy of her skin, all the lineaments
of her face were formed, as it were in emulation, with the most exact
proportion nature could possibly bestow, and her eyes had something in them
that was extremely moving, but moving with so much sweetness and Majesty
together, that 't was impossible to bear the glances of them without being
dazeled. They inclined toward black, and her hair was of the same color; her
neck, her hand, her stature left nothing to be desired for their perfection,
and the amazed Demetrius found so many causes of admiration in that lovely
object, that he lost part of his confidence, and could not approach so divine a
person, without extraordinary fear and respect. Yet did he draw near her with a
very low obeisance, and when she had returned, what the greatest strangers
thought due to his graceful fashion. Madam, (said he) the liberty I take,
would not be pardonable, if the cause of it were not very lawful; nor had I
interrupted your conversation, but to put you out of the doubts you have of
Alexanders successors. My nearest and best friends hold some rank amongst
them, and I shall not be disavow'd by the better part, when I protest to you
that they will receive the occasions of doing you service, as the most glorious
fortunes that can befall them. Demetrius spoke these words with such a grace,
that the fair stranger found little less reason of astonishment in him, than he
had met in her, and knowing both by his words, and by many marks of greatness,
which shone forth visibly in him, that he was no common person, she received
his discourse, and answered him with much civility. Whosoever you are (said
she) that with such goodness offer your assistance to afflicted persons; your
countenance gives much credit to your words, and I shall never doubt, but that
such a man as you are, must needs be one, and one of the most worthy
successors of Alexander. I am one of the least considerable amongst them
(replied Demetrius) but I have confidence enough in their friendship, and in
their virtue, to offer you all the succor you can desire of them, and to
interess them in your quarrel, with a zeal which will make them forget their
own to serve you. Their affairs (answered the stranger) are so great and so
important, that the interests of a miserable woman ought not to withdraw them
from him, neither is it my intention to make them any uncivil request, but
only to demand a retreat against my cruel Enemies, who having destroyed an
illustrious family, allied many ways to that of Alexander the Great, do
prosecute the wretched Relics of it, with an unparalelled inhumanity. You may
obtain all that you can desire of them without demanding it (said Demetrius,)
and they that could refuse any thing, to the very look of a person like your
self, would be unworthy of the memory of Alexander. The alliance of your family
to that great King, will be very considerable among them, who acknowledge all
their glory, and all their fortune from him, but your beauty will persuade
them more powerfully than any other argument whatsoever. The fair stranger,
extremely satisfied with this first encounter, which by Demetrius his civility,
made her judge favorably of that of his companions, was already passionately
desirous to know him, and her desire, which she durst not express, was
beginning to appear in her face, when some Officers of the Army passing by, and
seeing Demetrius, came toward him with much respect; whereby she learned the
greatness of his quality, but not being fully satisfied with that, she made
sign to the old man, who accompanied her, to inform himself more particularly.
Theogenes had no sooner heard from one of those men, and the fair stranger from
Theogenes, that it was Demetrius the Son of Antigonus, whose name was known
through all Europe, and Asia, but coming to him; Sir, (said she) I by so many
marks of greatness as appear in you, might certainly know you to be a Prince,
and I was already confident of it, before I heard you were the Son of Prince
Antigonus; his name is not unknown in our Countries, neither was his person to
the King my Father; Your youth has not hindered your reputation from extending
it self, as far as the place of my nativity, and I cannot but thank my fate,
for having so happily given me this first encounter. Demetrius answered with
very low submission, and reiterated the offers he had made her with so much
affection and respect, that she thought she was obliged to discover her self to
him, and to give him a perfect knowledge of her fortune. For which purpose, Sir
(replied she) if your generosity incites you already to comfort my misfortunes,
I hope when they are known to you, you will not loose those charitable desires,
and the obligation I have to your goodness, will not suffer me longer to
conceal the name, nor the life of this unfortunate woman, whom you have thought
worthy of your assistance. The recital of my sad adventures may perhaps be
tedious to you, but if you please to grant them an hours time, I hope I shall
interess you in my fortune, and I shall make confessions to you, which I cannot
do without shame, nor without showing my acknowledgement for your civilities,
and the confidence I have in your virtue. Demetrius confounded at so obliging a
discourse, could not find words to express the sense he had of it, and the
sight, and sweet conversation of that divine stranger, having in part suspended
his remembrance of Hermione, he prepared himself for attention, with a respect
suitable to the favor he received, and having testified how considerable it
was to him, he sat down with her, by her command, and making sign to the
Officers to retire, he lent a greedy ear to her relation, which she began
immediately in these words.

The History of Deidamia.
I shall not injure modesty, if I tell you, that there is no blood more
illustrious, than that whereof I am descended, since indeed it draws its
original from the Gods, and that from Father to Son without any interruption,
we fetch our pedigree from the great Achilles; He was the Father of Pyrrhus,
who after the siege of Troy, being driven out of his Country, came to inhabit
among the Molosses, where he established the Monarchy of the Epirotes. His Son
succeeded him in the Crown, and his posterity has reigned after him in a right
male line to King Arimbas, the Father of Alexander my Uncle King of Epirus, of
Aeacidas my Father who succeeded him in that Kingdom, and of Queen Olimpius the
wife of Philip, and Mother of Alexander the Great. By this short touch of our
genealogy, I have let you see the kindred that was between the late King
Alexander, and us, and moreover you without doubt have heard, how to augment
that alliance between our families, King Philip gave his daughter Cleopatra,
whom he had by a former wife, in marriage to Alexander my Uncle, who by that
double affinity became both his Son in Law, and his Brother in Law.

After this knowledge of my quality, I will tell you, that I was born of Prince
Aeacidas, and of the Princess Phtia his wife, the daughter of Menon the
Thessalian, who acquired so great a reputation in the Lamaick War. I was bred
up in the Court of King Alexander my Uncle, and he seeing himself childless,
and loving the Prince his brother very dearly, caused great care to be taken of
my education, the Princess, my Mother contributing on her side, whatsoever
could be expected from so tender an affection, as that she bore me. I will not
entertain you with the particulars of my infancy, among which there is nothing
worthy to be told you, and 't will be sufficient to let you know I passed it
without any trouble, and that that was the only time wherein I tasted any
sweetness or tranquillity. I was as much made of by the King my Uncle, and by
the Queen his wife, as if I had been their own daughter, and the marks of a
reasonable good nature which were observed in me, rather than the appearances
of a growing beauty, wherewith some began to persecute me, gained me the
affections of the whole Court. I lived on this manner, (since I must abridge
the recital of matters of small importance) until my thirteenth year, which was
the last of the calm, and quickness of my life. The King my Uncle, in whom the
fame of the other Alexander his brother in Law, and his Nephew begot an
emulation, and who was neither behind him in ambition, nor in courage, imagined
himself to be born for great enterprises as well as he; and did not despair of
obtaing as glorious Victories as his. With this design, he raised a potent
Army, and aiming at the conquest of the West, he passed into Italy, after
having put the government of his Kingdom into the hands of my Father, who took
the care of it upon him at his desire, and bearing a great affection to his
brother, used that confidence he had in him with a perfect fidelity, and
acquitted himself without reproach of the charge that had been given him. The
Kingdom for a certain time remained peaceable enough, but within a while after,
some of the Molosses, who naturally are a stirring seditious people, rose up in
Arms by the secret practices of Antipater, whom Alexander the Great had left in
Macedonia, and who contrary to his Masters intentions, strove to make himself
great in Europe, at the cost of his neighbors, and Allies: To foment the
Rebellion of the Molosses, he under hand furnished them with men and money, and
by his assistance they grew so powerful, that at last they made War openly,
set a mighty Army on foot, and marched straight toward Aeacidas with an intent
to give him Battle. My Father, who at first had been a little negligent of that
revolt, was extremely unprepared; yet having a very good courage, he with all
possible speed drew together those forces he had, and giving order for new
leavies, had not the patience to stay till they were in a readiness to serve
him, but went to meet the Rebels, with a handful of men. He trusted in the
Justice of his cause, and believed that his Enemies half conquered by their
guilt, would never have the boldness to stay his coming; but be found himself
deceived in that expectation, and having given them battle very unseasonably,
his Army weaker by the half than theirs, was utterly defeated, and scarce was
he able with a small remainder of his men, to save himself in Ambracia the
Metropolis of the Kingdom, where the whole Court did still reside. Then it was
that he saw the fault he had committed, in fighting so rashly; and that
foreseeing the continuation of that War, and the progress the Enemies might
make if they knew how to lay hold of their advantage, he sent Dispatches on all
sides to his Allies, to demand their assistance, and in the interim labored to
fortify the Town, and gathered together all the Forces he had caused to be
levied. While he was thus employed, the Rebels made themselves Masters of the
Field under the Conduct of one Tharritas a valiant Commander, and finding no
more resistance, came audaciously and laid siege before Ambracia, where we were
all retired: my father had already put it in a condition to make defense, and
to wait for the relief of his Allies, and 'twas that knowledge that made him
expect the Enemy without fear. The Approaches of that siege were very bloody,
and the first Events thereof were doubtful; there were many men slain on
either side, but our losses were more considerable than theirs, and while our
numbers decreased, theirs grew more potent every day. The little understanding
I have in War, hinders me from making you a long discourse of it, and I the
more willingly pass over the Relation, because it is of little consequence to
the knowledge of my life. Among those that held out that siege with us was
Neoptolemus, the cruel Author of our misfortunes, a Prince of the blood of
the Aeacides, as we were, and who next to the royal Family, was the chief in
all Epirus, though he wanted a Crown, he wanted not a desire to have one, and
to attain that sovereign dignity, he would neither have left any thing
unattempted, nor have thought any thing difficult to his ambition. He from my
earliest years had applied himself to serve me, and at that time was diligent
enough to let me see it, whether it were that he really was in love with me, or
that in our alliance he found advantages, and means to support himself in the
State. Aeacides suffered him to proceed without being offended at it, because
of Neoptolemus his quality, which at that time was little disproportionate to
ours; but yet he had no great desire to that match, whether it were that he
liked not Neoptolemus his person; or having but one ouely daughter, with whom
he flattered himself, and of whom he had conceived too good an opinion, he had
some higher aim for her; or that perhaps he was willing to comply with my
inclinations which were no way bent to love Neoptolemus: indeed I saw nothing
in his person that was not unpleasing to me, and I had taken such an aversion
against him, as made me receive all the proofs of his affection as so many
injuries. He was extremely busy in the siege to make himself considerable to
us, and undertook sometimes to sally forth upon the Enemies, but he was always
beaten in again, and succeeded so ill in all his Enterprises, that our
condition was thereby much impaired. In the mean time our Enemies had great
advantages over us, they had taken our outworks, stopped all passages of
Victuals and Relief that might come to us, and had shut us up in our Walls with
little hope of the Event of that War; My father was like to have died for
grief, and knowing that the King his brother was too far off, and too deeply
engaged in his new Conquests (the noise whereof had often come to our ears) to
expect any assistance from him, and that he had no news of help from his
Allies, upon which he had depended, he knew not what to resolve upon, and for a
cruel surcharge of his afflictions, he heard that the Forces he had given
order to raise in his Provinces, were cut in pieces by our Enemies, who went to
meet them, and that on every side all hope was forbidden him. This knowledge
put the whole Court in very great perplexity, and began so to deject the
soldiers hearts, that it was very hard to make them labor for their own
defense; our provisions also began to fail us, and in short, we saw our selves
reduced to wondrous great extremity. Aeacides would not capitulate with his
Enemies, whither it were that he resolved to be faithful to his brother even
to the utmost, or that he distrusted the words of those Rebels. We no longer
had any hope but in the assistance of Heaven, when Heaven gave us proof that it
had not forsaken us, and sent us Relief in a time, when without its arrival we
were in no possibility of safety. All the passages, as I have said already,
were so close blocked up, that no intelligence of it could any way come to us;
and 'twas from the tops of our Towers, that we perceived a dust, and saw the
Arms of our Allies glitter against the sun, we waver'd between hope and fear,
and could not discern whether those Forces were Friends or Enemies, when we
from far discovered them fighting with our besiegers, and within a little
after, we received a more perfect assurance by some of their Horsemen, who
having slipped aside during the skirmish, had found means to get near our Walls,
and to shoot Arrows into the City, at whose heads there were Letters fastened,
which were brought to my father, containing words to this effect.

Agis King of the Lacedaemonians to Prince Aeacides.
I Come to your relief with ten thousand Grecians, able to subdue your Rebels;
expect an infallible Victory over them, and to facilitate it, sally you forth
upon their backs, while we are fighting with them on the other side, this
double assault will without doubt put them in disorder, and I hope we shall in
one day make an end of the War.


These words caused such a joy in my father, and in all the besieged, as can
very hardly be expressed, and raised their drooping courages so suddenly that
they demanded nothing more but Arms, to make a sally upon their Enemies. By my
fathers Orders, Neoptolemus at the head of two thousand men, went forth of the
Gates to fall upon those that were left to guard the Trenches, and did it so
succesfully that they were constrained to quit them, and retire to their
Companions, who already were engaged in a sharp Encounter with the Grecians;
Neoptolemus pursued them, and when all the forces were joined, they fought a
cruel and a bloody battle; they of our party who came off, assured us
afterward that they had seen the valiant Agis do Actions that surpass all
belief, and all imagination; that all the Deeds of Achilles, and of other the
most renowned Heroes which fame has delivered to our Times, could hardly equal
those prodigious ones he did that day. To say truth he fought so well, and was
so bravely seconded by his men, that our Enemies, though more than they by a
third part in number, were utterly defeated, their General killed by the hand
of valiant Agis, and the Relics of them that escaped the slaughter, retired
in disorder to certain places that were at their devotion. Never was there seen
so gallant, nor so sudden an Execution, and when they brought us news of it,
and that we heard we were Conquerours, and freed from a siege, which but four
hours before, threatened no less than our total ruin, we at first could hardly
give credit to those miracles; yet were they soon confirmed to us when we saw
our valiant Deliverer approach our Walls. Aeacides went forth to meet him, and
to honor him the more would needs have us keep him company, attended by all
the Ladies of the Court, who prepared themselves with joy to show their
compliance to his desires. We met him a few furlongs from our Gates, and as the
effects of his valor had astonished us, we found new causes of admiration in
his person, and would it had pleased the Gods I had only admired him, and that
acknowledgment and esteem had been the only Recompenses I had given him, both
for the general, and my particular safety. Ah I Remembrance, thou Enemy to my
Repose, (continued the Princess breaking forth into tears) why do thou
represent my valiant Agis to me in the condition he first appeared before my
Eyes; and since that of his loss can never be wiped out of my mind, why do
thou bring him again into it with all those advantages, which made him a
thousand times more dear to me than this deplorable life, which I shamefully
and miserably languish out after his death.

This fair Princess was constrained to stay in this part of her Narration, to
give leisure to her tears to vent themselves, and to her speech to resettle it
self in a condition to prosecute her Discourse. Demetrius, who began to be
highly concerned in her affairs, who had a tender heart, and an excellent good
nature, and who besides had often heard tell of the prodigies, that valiant
King of the Lacedaemonians had done against Antipater, bore the Princess company
in that sad employment, and was going to speak some words of comfort to her,
when after having wiped her Eyes, she went on with her story thus.

Pardon Sir, this confession which is shameful in a Princess, it is true,
(since I must avow it to my confusion) I have been sensible of a passion, but I
was too much Mistress of it, and therein lies my ingratitude, and the blackest
of all my crimes: I Will tell you then, that I saw my valiant Agis at the head of
his Forces, his Arms were all besmeared with blood and dust, but his head was
uncovered, and I observed certain features in his face, of which I should say,
I had never seen any thing like them, if I had not seen that of Demetrius: his
graceful carriage was hardly to be matched in the whole world, and the heat of
the fight had added a color to his complexion, which gave new luster to his
natural handsomness; he was but two and twenty years of age, yet had he already
done a thousand Actions, the reputation of which began to spread it self much
beyond the narrow limits of Greece; I was already so disposed to wish him well,
for the good office he had done us, that he appeared to my Eyes with all manner
of advantage, but I thought him much more lovely, when at our meeting he
alighted from his Horse, and came with great humility to salute Queen Cleopatra
my Aunt, the Princess my Mother, and my self; he received Aeacidas his thanks
and praises with an unparalleled modesty, and entertained the Ladies with a
civility, which visibly showed him to be a Prince extremely well bred, and made
appear the advantage the Lacedaemonians had above all other Nations, whose
Education and Discipline are very different from those of Sparta: after we had
given a very honorable Reception to our valiant Defender, which he accepted
with a wonderful modesty, he went into the Town with us, and was lodged in the
fairest Quarter of the Palace, all the people considered him as their tutelary
Angel, and he could not pass through the streets without being crowded by the
throng, and made deaf with the acclamations which ecchoed to the sky. The rest
of the day wherein he had done so much, and so succesfully to our advantage,
was allowed to his Repose, but he afterward confessed to me, he tasted but very
little that night, and that the sight of me had caused such disquiets in him as
he never had felt before. I know not how he became so blinded as to think there
was something lovely in me, but in effect he saw me, and loved me, and from the
first sight of him, I cannot deny but that I had strong inclinations to love
him also, this is something a free confession; but the person of Agis was such,
and our obligation to him so considerable, that it was hard for me to defend my
self against those thoughts he imprinted in my mind: I perceived the birth of
it, by some little cares which began to trouble me more than ordinary, and
remembering that I had often seen his Eyes fixed upon my face with a particular
heedfulness, I flattered my self with an opinion that perchance I might be
indifferent to him; I was then so young, and had till that time been bred up in
such a way, that all thought of this nature were utterly strangers to me, and
yet I let my heart incline toward them, with a facility whereof I should never
have suspected it. I do not repent my self, O valiant Agis, for never did
Prince better deserve the affection of a Princess; I blush not for shame of
having given it you, and am so far from those severer thoughts, that I shall
blush, and weep so long as I live, for shame, and for grief that I loved you
not enough. The next day when he had waited upon the Queen, and the Princess my
Mother, he came also to visit me in my Chamber, his face and clothes were not
then covered with blood and dust, but though being in another dress, he seemed
more handsome than the day before, me thought he was less confident; and as bold
and eloquent as he was, he then was in such a silence, and such a confusion,
that I could not choose but partake with him in it; all his discourse was
nothing but civility, yet he accompanied it with looks, and sighs, which
strengthened those suspicions that began to settle themselves pleasingly in my
mind. He staid two days longer with us, during which time he had not the
confidence to discover his intentions, but when he could no more conceal them,
he declared them in a very gallant, and a very extraordinary manner. He had
already proposed unto my Father, that it was necessary to prosecute the
remainder of the Rebels, and that without giving them time to recruit, it was
best to make our selves Masters of all the Country, and recover the places
they had taken from us, before they had put themselves in a condition to defend
them. For the Execution of this Design, after having given only three days to
the refreshing of his Forces, he resolved to take the Field with eight thousand
of his men that still were left, and four thousand Epirotes under the command
of Theogenes, this old man you see here with me, whose quality is considerable
in Epirus, and whose experience in War has showed it self in many employments
of that nature. Agis would by no means suffer Aeacidas to stir out of the
City, whether it were to prevent intestine Rebellions, or that he might have
the glory alone of having ended that War, and save the Crown of Epirus from
manifest ruin. The Army was already drawn up in the field, and their Valiant
General was in the Palace Hall, where he was taking his leave of my Father, and
of the whole Court, which was there assembled; After he had lowdly promised my
Father that within two months he would make him peaceful Master over all
Epirus, Aeacidas more obliged to him than can be expressed, both for his passed
actions, and for what he was going to undertake in favor of that Kingdom, knew
not which way he should thank him sufficiently, but after having exalted his
praises to the clouds: By what means (said he) O the most Valiant, and the most
generous of all Princes, by what means shall we be able to acknowledge our
engagements to you, and what worthy recompense can we offer to the defender of
our lives and liberties? certainly the gifts of this Crown you have preserved,
and the blood of all that are subjects to it, would be too light a return for
what you have done for them; and if in your gallant actions, glory were not
your only aim, you would leave a Country peaceable and Triumphant (indeed) by
your Valor, but generally afflicted for its want of power, which will keep it
for ever in a forced ingratitude. Agis taking occasion by this encouragement to
declare his intentions. Do not think Sir, (said he to my Father) that I am so
perfectly generous as to quit the hope of reward you promise to my services; I
began to do you them out of a duty which binds us to our Allies, and out of
that consideration of glory which you allege; but in what I have yet to do
for you, suffer me a little to consider my own interest, and since you judge me
worthy of some recompense, give me leave to demand it, and to hope for it
particularly from your self. By all the Gods (cried Aeacidas, lifting up his
hands to heaven) King Agis shall never pretend to any thing from me, which
shall not be granted him, and I shall not think my self less happy in requiting
his great Obligations, than I have been in receiving them. If it be so (replied
Agis with a contented look) I am the most glorious, and the most fortunate of
all men living, and since it is not possible for me longer to conceal the
favor I desire from you, I demand a price Sir, which is infinitely above my
services, and that is no other thing but the permission to serve the Princess
Deidamia. All the company was surprised at this discourse as much as you can
imagine, Aeacidas was in a manner astonished, and I was stricken into a
confusion which I am not able to represent; yet he having already won the
affections of the whole Court, the whole Court interessed it self joyfully in
his demand, and testified their sense of it by cries, and clapping of hands,
which confirmed my Father in the knowledge of the advantages he saw in that
proposition; and to say truth he received it very handsomely, and breaking the
silence, in which that surprise had held him for awhile, he turned toward
Agis, and discovering his intention by a countenance more cheerful than
ordinary; Sir, (said he) my daughter has no way merited the honor you do her,
but if you have found any thing in her worthy of your esteem, I find no less
advantage to my self by this last obligation, than this whole Kingdom has to
you for your former ones; If I could give her Empires for a dowry, I should
accept of your alliance with greater joy, but since that, such as she is, you
have not disdained her, I command her to receive this honor withal that
respect and acknowledgement which is due to a Prince like your self. And I,
(replied the Prince) do here declare, that I will not abuse your goodness, nor
the command you impose upon her; for pretending to nothing from you, but the
permission of serving her, I leave her fully at liberty, to make what judgment
she shall please of my services: when the Kingdom is settled in peace, I will
come to lay them at her feet, and if by them I can obtain to a confirmation of
the favor you show me, I will beg the continuance of it, which I shall prefer
both before all the Empires of the World, and before all the sublimest
fortunes. As he ended these words, he bent one knee to the ground before me,
and taking one of my hands, which I could not refuse him in that company,
especially after my Fathers command. Madam, (said he) let the violence of my
passion gain pardon for my insolence; respect made me demand the consent of the
Prince your Father, before its declaration, but I Will draw no advantage thence
which can displease you, and will never ask that by his Authority, which I
shall not be able to procure by my services; grant me the favor to second his
approbation of them, and to accept the gift I make you, of a life which shall
never be but the Princess Deidamia's. When he had ended these words he kissed
my hand, and both by that action, and by what he had said, drew a blush into my
cheeks, and put me into a confusion, which left me not the power to answer him;
neither was it necessary I should, and the Princess my Mother,being willing to
help me out of that trouble, spoke for me, and addressing herself to the King,
who already was risen from his knee. Sir, (said she) you will be pleased to
spare Deidamia a declaration, whereof her age is incapable, and give me leave
to assure you for her, that she will ever be most ready to acknowledge the good
inclinations wherewith you honor her, both according to the merits of so great
a King, and according to the command of the Prince her Father. Agis appeared
transported at this reply, and having saluted the Princess my Mother in the
same manner as he had done me, he received the endearments of Aeacidas, and of
the whole Court, with demonstrations of a perfect contentment, and not making
any longer stay, after he had taken his last farewell, he went out of the
Palace, and so out of the Town, and having hindered my Fathers intention, which
was to wait upon him part of that days march, he placed himself at the head of
his Army, and advanced directly toward the Enemy.

It would be no easy matter for me to represent what my thoughts were really
at that time, but I may well confess to you that they inclined toward joy, and
that as young as I was, I found nothing in this encounter but occasions of
satisfaction; the surprise of Agis his unexpected proceeding, had put me a
little out of countenance, but my being already disposed to wish him very well,
quickly obtained his pardon for it, and reflecting upon the excellent qualities
of his person, I in that conquest found all manner of contentment, and
advantage to my self. I considered that the way he had gone, was full of an
exceeding great regard to me, and that in asking my Fathers approbation, before
he made me acquainted with his love, he had showed the respect he bore our
family, and had freed me from all the blame a Princess might receive, by giving
way to a secret pretender. In short, both for all these reasons, and the
remembrance of his merit, I began to love him in good earnest, and the will of
my friends affords excuse enough to my affection, to give me liberty to own it
to you. I saw nothing in his person that was not lovely to the highest point,
nay, I could not so much as wish for any thing that was not to be found most
advantagiously in him; This affection which I felt take birth, without making
any opposition to hinder it, began to cause disquiets in me, to which I had not
been accustomed, and the effect absence uses to produce in the hearts of those
that love, entering insensibly into mine, grief for his being away, and fear
for those dangers whereinto he was going to cast himself, found place in it
very quickly, and I made no prayers to Heaven, without employing part of them
for his safety, and for his speedy return. The Prince my Father, and the
Princess my Mother, who saw real advantages both to them and me in his
Alliance, confirmed me in those thoughts themselves, and the whole Court united
his interests, through the present remembrance of those important Obligations
it had to him, rung his praises eternally in my ears, and fortified me in my
affection by all manner of reasons. Only Neoptolemus was discontented at it,
but discontented even to rage, and not being able to dissemble his resentments,
he murmured lowdly at the injustice that was done him, in preferring a stranger
Prince, whom they hardly knew, before a Prince of the blood of the Aeacidas,
and in suffering him in one day to carry away the recompense of the services of
his whole life. He made his complaint to my Father, but reaped very little
satisfaction, nay, he complained of it to me my self, but in such insolent
terms, that I was forced to tell him he had no reason to envy Agis his Fortune,
for though my Father had not disposed of me in favor of that Prince, his
condition had been never a whit the better, and in short, that though there had
never been such a man as Agis in the World, Deidamia would never have been for
Neoptolemus. He was not much contented with this answer, but not being in a
condition to let his resentments break out further, while Agis was busied for
the safety of Epirus, which was wholly indebted to him for it, he strove to
dissemble them till another season, that might be more proper for him to take
satisfaction. In the mean time our Valiant defender drew the War gloriously to
a conclusion, I understand it too little to enlarge my self in the particular
Relation thereof, and 'twill suffice me to tell you, that within three months
he gained another Battle over the Rebels, perfected the Defeat of them in
some other Encounters, which were all favorable to him, and either by force,
or by the terror of his Arms, made himself Master of all the places they had
gotten unto their party. Still as we received news of these successes, I
received Letters from him also, I will not trouble you with relating what they
contained, most of them I have forgotten, and only remember the very first,
which was in these words.

King Agis to the Princess Deidamia.
WHat will not the fortunate Agis, inspired with the remembrance of the
Princess Deidamia, be able to do for the tranquillity of Epirus: and what may
not be hoped for, from a heart animated with so glorious a passion? I would it
pleased the Gods I were as certain of the Victory over my Princesses mind, as
over the Enemies of this State; but what Victory can he hope for, who begins by
his own defeat, and who declares himself conquered before he has fought? In
this condition of my fortune, the success of this War could not be to my
advantage, but that which others may find in Conquests, and in Triumphs, is
found by happy Agis in the glory of being vanquished by Deidamia.


This was the first Letter I received, and by my Fathers command I wrote him an
Answer, which my Mother dictated, and which as I remember was in these terms.

The Princess Deidamia, to the King of the Lacedaemonians.
BOth to conquer the Enemies of Epirus, and to conquer the mind of Deidamia,
King Agis has Arms which promise him an infallible success, his valor alone
is sufficient to defeat the Rebels, and as touching the Victory he desires
over my mind, he ought to hope for it, not only from the will of them that
have power to dispose of me, but from that they have left unto my self, which
shall ever make me acknowledge as well what my friends ow to his generosity, as
what I am indebted to his merit, and to his affection.


I received many others, as I have already told you, but within a while after
we received himself, crowned with Laurels, and laden with the spoils of his
Enemies, whose remainders he had settled in an obedience, which left not so
much as any appearance of trouble in the Kingdom. You may easily judge how he
was welcomed, and can imagine without my telling it, that all the magnificence
the Epirotes could possibly show, was to be seen when he made his entrance; we
went a great way forth to meet him, and that interview passed with
demonstrations of joy and affection, which it would be very difficult to
represent; but our particular meeting stirred up more tender, and more pressing
motions in our hearts than in the rest of the company, and I confess that in
that second Encounter, I in the person of my Agis found a thousand new
inducements to love him. That first day was spent in Triumphs, and in
rejoycings for his Return, and for the happy success of his Enterprises, he
came to visit me at my lodging, and gave me a thousand confirmations of his
love, with a grace, against which it was impossible, not only for the
prepossessed Deidamia, but even for the most insensible woman of the world to
defend her self. I come not (said he) as a Conqueror to demand a Recompense
for what I have done to secure this Kingdom, but as a guilty person that waits
at your feet to expect what punishment you will inflict upon his presumption;
and I acknowledge that I have less defended Epirus with my Forces, than I have
offended Deidamia by my audacious thoughts: but I was not Master of that noble
passion, which totally possessing my soul with an absolute Empire, left me not
the least power in the world over my self; and I believed that putting my self
into the hazard of dying for you, there was too much glory, in my destiny to
forbear to publish it; 'twas that that made me hasten a Declaration, which
perhaps you have not forgiven me, and though I am not able to repent it, I
accounted my temerity so worthy to be condemned, that I shall think what
sentence for ever you pronouce against it to be both just and merciful. As he
made an end of these words, he fixed his Eyes on mine with such a passionate
action, that his silence expressed his thoughts more eloquently than they had
done; and knowing that I should neither displease Aeacidas, nor injure the
modesty of my sex, by giving him civil proofs of my affection, I made no
difficulty of taking a little liberty in favor of him, and of following the
command of my friends, the wishes of the whole Court, and the incitements of
mine own inclination. Sir, (said I after I had staid a while without reply)
your services are most important, and your offenses very light, and that
Declaration, whereof you accuse your self as of a crime, was made with too much
respect and freedom, to leave me any matter of complaint against you; I think
it a most judicious course, for persons of your quality and mine, and my
Fathers approbation gives me the liberty to consider your good will, upon which
I should not have been able to have cast my Eyes, without the knowledge of his;
I will confess to you moreover, since this confession is due to the merit of
your person, and to that of the great obligations you have laid upon us, that
in the order he gave me in favor of you, I found no repugnance in my self to
obey him, nor while I live will I ever have any to acknowledge your affection.
Agis was quite transported with joy at this Reply, and lifting up his hands and
Eyes to Heaven, O fortune, (cried he) thou do but play with my destiny, and
these favors are too great to be of any long continuance; thou, in the
beginning of my services, have given me a prize, which could not be due to the
most obsequious endeavors of my whole life; and without doubt thou will
forsake me when I have merited part of it by my fidelity. He spoke these
prophetic words, and many others, with such raptures of joy, as visibly
expressed the greatness of his passion; and afterward made me a thousand
protestations of an inviolable constancy, with such sweet and moving language,
that there are but few hearts in which they would not have left a deep
impression. He continued frequently to make me the like visits, but being
desirous to stay in our Court, without being burthensom to the people of
Epirus, he sent back his Forces into Greece, under the conduct of one of his
Commanders, and kept only with him his menial servants. He protested publicly
that he would not abuse Aeacidas his goodness, and that he pretended not to his
Alliance, but when he should have merited it from me, and that I should know
him so well, as he might hope for that through my inclination, which I as yet
paid him out of obedience. This manner of proceeding was extremely civil, and
obliging to me, but it was very imprudent for him, and gave him cause enough to
repent it afterward. In the mean time he served with so great assiduity, and
with marks of so true, and so respectfull a passion, that all that the most
ardent, and most skillful Lovers ever practiced to make themselves be loved,
must yield to the proofs I received of his affection; he complied so perfectly
with my desires, and resigned himself so absolutely to my inclinations, that he
seemed to be inspired only by my thoughts, or rather to be enlivened only by
my soul, and indeed he made as fair a progress in his purpose, as he could have
wished, and I am obliged to confess to you, that never man succeeded better
than he, in the design of making himself beloved by a person of my humor and
condition. It is true that I loved him, but with so strong and so real an
affection, that it hardly was inferior to his. All the world approved it, and
all those that knew of it, thought it so well grounded, that it never was
condemned but by Neoptolemus alone. That Prince indeed, enraged that Agis was
preferred before him, murmured publicly at it, and left nothing unattempted to
cross our affairs; he made use of a thousand inventions to set dissension
between us, and so exasperated Agis, that if had not expressly forbidden him, he
would without doubt have punished him for the plots he contrived against him.
What, Sir, (said he one day to my Father) do you imagine that the Alliance of
the King of Sparta can be advantageous to you, of a King of one City, and of a
City whose Sovereigns are slaves? Are you blinded with a little valor, and a
little handsomness in his person? And will your Condition be ere the better for
having a handsome Son-in-Law in Greece? if he have done any service to this
State, does it belong to you to recompense him? and is there not a King of
Epirus who is wholly obliged to him for it? If the King your brother, to whom I
have the honor to be nearly allied were here, do you think he would prefer
this petty Prince of Greece, before a Prince of the Blood of Achilles, as he
himself is, before a Prince whose birth, whose person, and whose fidelity are
known to him? He used many discourses of this nature, which my Father pardoned
in regard of his passion, and of his birth, but which wrought no effect at all
upon him. One day he was in my Chamber, where he had talked a great while to me
upon that subject, whereby he got but little satisfaction, when Agis came in,
but Neoptolemus who could not endure his presence went out without giving him
any salute, and before he departed, casting a furious look at me; I leave the
place to the more fortunate, said he aloud; rather to the more worthy, answered
Agis briskly; Neoptolemus stung with that Reply, was going to return words
which would have incensed them more, if I had not prevented it by expressly
injoyning them silence; and that very day my Father having been advertised of
it, pressed them with so earnest entreaties to pass their words to him, that
neither of them could refuse to promise he would be quiet.

In short, Agis had obtained what he demanded, and having won my heart
according to his desire, expected nothing for the consummation of his love, but
the return of a man whom Aeacidas, obliged to that respect by all manner of
reason, had sent to the King his brother to demand his permission for our
Marriage; but while they were in this expectation, and that I lived with my
dear Agis as a person who was upon the point of giving her self wholly to him,
his fortune suffered a very strange revolution. News came, and but too true for
our repose, that King Alexander my uncle, after having made such a progress in
Italy, as promised him the total Conquest of it, was defeated in the Country
of the Brusians, and slain upon the place with the greatest part of his Forces.
All Epirus was most sensibly concerned in the loss of that King, who was a man
of admirable parts, and of a boundless courage, but Aeacidas was comforted by
the Crown, which by that death was set upon his head. Alexander had no issue,
and there was no body in Epirus that could dispute the succession with my
Father; neither was it disputed, but with a general consent he was crowned in
our capital City, and of a Princes daughter which I was before, I became a
Kings, and the probable inheritrix of the Crown. The Gods are my Witnesses,
that all the joy I felt at that augmentation of my fortune was absolutely in
regard of Agis, and that I had no other satisfaction in seeing my self exalted,
than that I was more worthy of his affection, and in a condition one day to add
another Crown to his, if the Gods sent not Aeacidas a son. Agis looked upon
this alteration of my fortune with a mavelous equality, and never showed
himself concerned in it but for my sake. Many days were spent as well in the
obsequies of the deceased King, as in the crowning of my Father, and during
that time Agis continued in his usual Estate, without laboring for the
advancement of that happiness he pretended to by my possession: but when he had
allowed the time that was necessary for the funeral pomps, for the change of
the Sovereign, and for those affairs that happen at a new coming to the Crown,
he then began to think of himself, and demanded of the King my Father, the
utmost testimonies of his good will, and the accomplishment of his promise; he
hoped that the King would receive his proposition with the same affection he
had expressed ever since his Arrival, and ever since his Declaration, but he
found him colder than ordinary, and he fell into no moderate astonishment when
he heard the King demand him a months delay, alleging some poor excuses to
cover the alteration of his humor. In effect it was changed with the change of
his condition, and not considering, that ingratitude is the blackest of all
vices, and the most unworthy of a Prince, he had given ear to Neoptolemus, and
a pack of other flatterers, to the prejudice of his word, and of what he owed
to the services of valiant Agis. These wicked people had with success persuaded
him, that the King of Sparta was a good Match indeed for the daughter of Prince
Aeacidas, but not for the daughter of the King of Epirus, and the probable
heiress of the Kingdom, that in truth his quality was equal to ours, but that
great heed was to be taken of contracting an Alliance which submitted Epirus to
the jurisdiction of Sparta, and to the tyranny of its Ephori; that it was the
greatest misfortune could befall that State, and that of freemen which they
were, or only subjects to their lawful Sovereigns, the Epirots would become
slaves to that Grecian people, whose yoke was insupportable to all Nations;
that they should lose all their privileges, and all their wealth, and should
betroth themselves to the condition of certain people subject to the Athenians,
who dreined of their money, and of their forces, were even deprived also of
their liberty, and employed in nothing else amongst them, but base and servile
uses; they alleged many other arguments, which altogether wrought their
effect upon the mind of weak, unthankful Aeacidas. By the coldness of his
answer, Agis had some apprehension of his misfortune, but he did not absolutely
believe it, and could not at first imagine, that a King should be capable of
baseness, and ingratitude, which titles he might justly give to my Fathers
change, and I offend not the respect I bear him, in repeating the very terms of
that poor unhappy Prince. He came to me with a countenance in which his grief
was naturally represented, and imprinting part of his sadness in my heart at
his very coming in, made me presage a part of our misfortunes, what do you ail
(said I) my dearest Agis, and with what disquiets will you afflict me? I am
tormented [answered he] with a mortal apprehension, and if my suspicions are
true, I am upon the very brink of ruin. These words pierced me to the quick,
and made me press him to let me know the cause of them. He with extraordinary
agitations of mind, told me the conference he had newly had with my Father,
which recital gave me thoughts but little different from his, and brought many
particulars into my head, whereby I might have observed a coldness in my Father
toward him: the reflection I made upon them began to trouble me exceedingly,
and the knowledge I had of the Kings humor, struck me into a very ominous
fear; Yet did I strive to conceal it from him, and dissembling my opinion as
well as possibly I could, I endeavored to abate his sorrows with some
consolation. Fear not dear Agis [said I] fear not a change which cannot enter
into a Prince's heart, and believe that the King my Father asked you this
delay, and received your discourse more seriously than he was wont, only to
render that formality to his new honor; there is no likelihood he should
forget what he owes to you, and that he should loose the remembrance of those
commands he has given me to love you; such a lightness would be too odious, and
of too ill an example, to suffer me to believe he can be capable of it, nor can
I have any such apprenension, without receiving most express testimonies
thereof. I said many other things, to which he lent sufficient attention, but
they were not able to withdraw him from his sadness; I easily found it, when
looking upon me with eyes that had something a fatal aspect. Madam, [said he] I
am undone, and this beginning of my misery suits so directly with some scurvy
dreams, and other ill-boading presages which of late have disquieted me, that I
cannot recover the frights they have put me in; fortune has hitherto used me
but too favorably, and such a strange unshaken course of prosperities,
threatened me with an infallible destruction. Well, (continued he awhile after
(I must loose Deidamia, but if I loose her, I Will loose my life at the same
time, and perchance will accompany it with so many others, that that loss shall
be made known through all parts of Europe. He brought forth these words with
marks of such a Violent grief, that I was touched with it to the very heart,
and being willing to let him see how much I was concerned in his affliction. If
you loose Deidamia (said I) no other man shall ever have the advantage to have
taken her from you, and I protest by all that we account most holy, and sacred,
that so long as Agis loves me, I never can be capable of a second affection. If
it be so [replied Agis] I Will out-brave all the obstacles that threaten me, and
all the powers of the world are not able to do me any harm, while Deidamia is
on my side: but Madam, remember the promise you make me, and believe that in
the extremity I shall demand extreme proofs of your affection. I was going to
answer, when our conversation was interrupted by certain Ladies who came to
visit me. We had many other discourses upon that subject, and in the mean
time, Agis every day found new confirmations of his fears in the Kings
countenance: I was little less afflicted at it than he, but I dissembled part
of my sadness, that I might not redouble his; we continued many days in an
uncertainty, full of apprehension, but at last our misfortune was but too
plainly discovered to me, and the King being one day come into my Chamber, took
me alone with him into my closset, where he spoke to me on this manner.
Deidamia, when I commanded you to love the King of the Lacedaemonians, I was
obliged to do so by many considerations, which rendered that Alliance
advantageous to us; and truly our obligations to that Prince, and the good
qualities of his person disposed me toward it with joy; but our condition is
changed, and we had not then more reasons to approve that match, than we have
now to disapprove it. In short, for many causes which are above your age and
knowledge, and wherein my whole Kingdom is concerned, Agis cannot be your
husband, and you ought betimes to withdraw your self from that affection you
bear him, to dispose of it in favor of some other, whom the Maxims of State
shall make choice of for you. You know that the daughters of sovereign Princes,
marry for other considerations than those of love, and you also know too well,
what resignation you ow your Father, to make any difficulty of being guided by
his will. I was half dead before the King had ended this discourse, and he
easily saw by my face, into what perplexity I was reduced; I had neither
strength to speak, nor confidence to look upon him, and he had so much
patience, as to wait till I was resettled, that he might receive my answer: but
when he had vainly continued a long time in that expectation, and that he saw
me still keep a silence full of trouble and confusion; speak Deidamia [pursued
he] and give me some assurance of your intention to obey me without repugnance.
I was so struck, and cast down, that I knew not which way I should be able to
reply, yet did I use my utmost endeavors to recover a little courage, and
recollecting my spirits to explain my self. Sir, [said I] what qualities soever
there are in the person of the King of the Lacedaemonians, and what service
soever he has done this State, I had not loved him if you had not enjoined me;
nor should I have licenced my self to an affection, which your command alone
can authorize. 'Twas out of obedience only, that I cast my eyes on the good
will he bore me, and I have so religiously observed it, that your Majesty could
not desire more acknowledgement from me, nor more affection to our deliverer,
than I have really given him: 't is true Sir, that I have loved him, and I love
him still by your orders, by a most powerful inclination, and by a just
knowledge, both of his worth, and of what he has done for us; but my
resignation to your will, has rooted these thoughts too deeply in my heart, to
be ever able to pluck them thence; and I was too ready to comply with your
desires, to love Agis with a light affection, or with such an one as can be
taken off, and placed upon another; that is a thing, Sir, whereof I feel my
self no way capable, and if in this Declaration, your Majesty find any matter
of complaint against your daughter, be pleased to consider 't is but for having
been too obedient, that I now am disobedient. The King heark'ned impatiently to
this reply, and was exceedingly ill satisfied with it, yet being he had not
doubted but he should meet with some difficulty in my mind, and that he found a
great deal of reason in my words, he would not fall into passion, but contented
himself with saying; What Deidamia, will you persist then whether I will or no,
in an affection which is disadvantageous to you, and which I disapprove? My
affection to Agis (answered I) shall never make me do any thing that can bring
you shame, or that can justly give you sorrow, but it shall always be strong
enough to keep me from forgetting him, and from giving that to another, which
he has so well deserved, and which he holds only from your self. You shall
have a little time (replied the King) to persuade your self to follow my
commands, in which interim, see that you resolve to do so, and let me find no
more resistance in you, upon pain of a displeasure which would not be to your
advantage. The King after these bitter words stayed not for an answer, but
going out of my closset, left me in the saddest condition I had ever been in
all my life. I loved Agis indeed equally to my self, and this unjust forbidding
me to love him, appeared so cruel to me and so tyrannical, that it left me
neither sense, nor words, but to accuse the King of injustice, and of
ingratitude. My tears lent me a great relief in that occasion, and 't was by
them I began to complain, of the violence that was used upon me; two of my
maids to whom I trusted my most secret thoughts, and which are these you now
see with me, kept me company in that sad employment, and when I was the most
deeply buried in it, unfortunate Agis came into my Chamber. The entrance of it
was always free to him, and notwithstanding the severe resolution that was
taken against him, they still remembered both his quality, and what he had done
for Epirus, and therefore in appearance he received the same usage he was wont
to have. As soon as ever I saw him, my griefs were sensibly redoubled, and I
could not hinder my self from sending forth a cry, wherein he instantly sound
the cruel confirmation of his suspicious: he made a stop at my Chamber door,
with his arms across, and seeing me all in tears upon my bed, and these two
wenches busied in comforting me, he was like to have lost both his strength,
and his understanding, and all he could do in that condition, was to lean
against the wall to keep him up, and cast looks at me in that sorrowful
posture, which made me almost die with grief, and with compassion. Well, Madam,
(cried he after a long silence) is it certain then that I am ruined? I had not
the power to answer him at first, but when he had repeated these words two or
three several times; It is true [said I] my dearest Agis, I am forbidden to
love you; but 't is also true that 't is impossible for me to obey that
command. If you hold that resolution [replied Agis] my fortune is not
desperate, but if you forsake me with your friends, there is no kind of death
so dreadful, but is to be preferred before my condition, and wherewith I would
not sacrifice a life, which I will not keep one moment after the loss of my
hopes. I am most firmly resolved, [answered I] to love no other man in the
World but Agis, and if I be taken from him, they shall never give me to any
thing but to my grave. Agis found some consolation in this discourse, and
recovering a little confidence by the hopes I gave him, he drew nearer, and
besought me trembling, to tell him the last confirmations I had received of his
misfortune. I related all that the King had said, with great expressions of
sorrow, and thereby put him into a condition, that would have touched his most
implacable Enemies with pity: that great courage, which was wont to lead him on
in fight, abandoned him for some moments in this encounter, and scarce had he
enough remaining, to keep himself from sinking under the weight of his
affliction; out of these faintings, he fell into such a rage as I never had
believed him capable of, and which nothing but his passion alone could be able
to excuse. After he had vented all that the impetuousness of his first motions
put into his mouth; What, [continued he] shall it be true then, that the word
of a Prince shall be unworthily revoked, and that my services shall be so
ungratefully requited? Will not this State which I have saved from manifest
ruin, cry loudly against the injustice that is done me, and will not the Gods
themselves, who are concerned in the justice of my quarrel, take my part
against perjured and unthankful Aeacidas? will he then so lightly forget, by
what actions I had merited the hopes he gave me, or if he can remember out of
what extreamities I have freed him, will he prefer the Viceroy of Macedon's
Son before me? These last words made me interrupt him, to ask what preferring
that was, he spoke of about the Viceroy of Macedon? Yes Madam, [answered he] 't
is to Cassander the Son of Antipater that you are destined, and I have newly
learnt, that 't is by his alliance your Father intends to secure himself
against Antipater's practices, and to unite himself with him, who under the
Authority of Alexander has made himself potent, and considerable in Greece.
That man who is not born a Prince, and who draws all his luster but from the
glory of another, robs me of Deidamia; and the King your Father, out of some
unequitable reason of state, prefer's a particular man, a man whom he knows
not, and a man who ever was his Enemy, before a King who so liberally has
exposed his life to serve him. But let him look for no success of so wrongful
a design, and let him believe, that the Gods have not inspired him with it in
favor of Cassander, but for Cassanders destruction. I Will kill him, that unjust
usurper of my happiness, I Will kill him in the very arms of Antipater, and
though Alexander himself should come in his defense, Agis despises his own life
enough to sacrifice many others to his lawful resentment. He said diverse other
words transported with an excessive fury, but when his first violence was a
little over. Dear Agis (said I) if the firmness of my affection to you, can
give you any hope or consolation, be certain that neither Cassander, nor any
other man in the World, shall ever be preferred before you by Deidamia, and
that if she cannot be yours, she never will be any bodies; perhaps our affairs
are not so desperate as we believe them, and if you put the King in mind of
what he owes unto his promise, and of what he owes to the actions you have done
for us, I do not think he will have the confidence to persist in his unworthy
resolutions. I Will go and make that trial, (replied the afflicted Prince) but, O
Gods, with how little hope it is, and with how little success (without doubt)
it will be! At these words he went out of the Chamher, being resolved to go to
the King, to know his last determination from his own mouth; the time he had
demanded to give his answer was already expired, and that poor Prince had not
the patience to defer it any longer. He ran directly to the King whom he
found in his withdrawing Room, with certain Princes, and other Persons that
were considerable in Epirus. Being blinded with his passion, he could not
dissemble his thoughts before that company, but having desired the King to
grant him a particular Audience, he stepped to him with a troubled countenance,
yet striving to keep his ill humor from breaking out, he endeavored to
compose himself to a moderation whereof he was not capable, and having by the
manner of his coming in, and by his action suspended all that were present.
Sir, (said he to the King) if your Majesty's promises had not been public, and
if the Alliance wherewith you intended to honor me were not known to this
whole Kingdom, I would not have demanded the accomplishment of them in so great
a company, nor strive in this place to cure my self of the disquiets that
torment me. I do not doubt, Sir, but that you observe some trouble in my face,
and I have not cunning enough to dissemble thoughts that are of the nature of
mine, but yet I know the King of Epirus well enough, not to let my mind yield
to the impression which they would give me of my misfortune; I know that he is
of too illustrious blood to violate his word, and that he has too royal and too
grateful a heart to forget my services; how unworthy soever I am of the
possession of Deidamia, your Majesty has loudly, and solemnly promised it me,
and I should think I did you a mortal injury, if I could believe what they
would persuade me to the prejudice of your word, which I account inviolable
between such Princes as the King of Epirus, and the King of the Lacedaemonians.
King Agis held his peace after he had said thus, and the whole company kept a
quiet silence to hearken to Aeacidas his Answer, who when he had bethought
himself a while, gave it in these terms. I do not deny Sir, but that Prince
Aeacidas, highly obliged both for all Epirus, and for his particular
consideration to the valiant King of the Lacedaemonians, approved of his
affection to his daughter, and desired his Alliance as much as gratitude, and
the merit of that Prince could oblige him to do. This truth is known through
all Epirus, but you are not ignorant also of the revolution which has happened
in the royal Family, and you know well enough, that the considerations of a
whole State, ought without question to be valued above any particular ones. The
Gods are my witnesses, that if my inclinations were followed; Deidamia should
never be matched to any body but the valiant king of Sparta, and that I would
prefer his Alliance, before that of all the greatest Monarchs upon Earth; No, I
have not lost the remembrance of the gallant Actions he did in favor of us,
nor have I lost the knowledge of the admirable qualities of his person. But my
whole State opposes my intentions, and the Epirots, whose Crown as yet belongs
in reversion to Deidamia, cannot resolve to bear the yoke of the Lacedaemonians.
They are frighted with the Example of many Nations who are become slaves unto
the Greeks, and they protest aloud, that they will not exchange their free
condition for servitude. I would it pleased the Gods, that either I had more
liberty to dispose of my Family; or that you could find such Recompense
amongst us, as might acquit part of our obligations to you; dispose of our
Estates, which you have rescued out of the Rebels hands, dispose of this
Kingdom, which you have delivered, and which by your valor you have acquired
unto your self; but leave the disposing of Deidamia to the Epirotes, since it
cannot be taken from them; they will needs sacrifice her to their security, and
she is not happy enough to pretend to the fortune which I had destined her, and
whereof I was as desirous as your self could be. Agis had hardly patience to
hear all this, and interrupting the King who would have spoken more: What, Sir,
(said he) is it true then that I shall not have Deidamia, and will you pay the
real services I have done you, with a few false Reasons invented by those that
envy me? Can you excuse the violation of your word, by the change of your
condition, and have you received any dignity by becoming King of Epirus, which
was not already in the person of the King of Sparta? Is this State, whose will
you allege, so ungrateful as to forget that I have saved it, and are not
these Epirotes, which would rob me of Deidamia, the same whose blood I spared
by shedding of mine own, and who yet upon their fields, may see so many marks
of what I have done to buy their safety? If they fear the domination of Sparta,
I freely quit all these pretensions, the marrying of Deidamia might give me to
this Crown, and provided I may have her, let them make whom they will King of
Epirus, and dispose of their Monarchy according to their own desires. It Is not
by this Kingdom you offer me, that the loss of Deidamia can be recompensed: I
too much despise the Authority over a rebellious unthankful people; and if I
have a desire to enlarge my Territories, I wear a Sword well known to the
Epirotes, a Sword which has defended their Country well enough, to make them
see it is capable to conquer others; yes, it can give me greater Empires than
that of my forefathers, but it can much more easily conserve what it has
lawfully acquired me; it is by it in part that I pretend to Deidamia, and it is
with it I will defend that right even to my latest breath, and that with rivers
of blood, I will dispute it against those would take her from me. Agis
pronounced these words with a tone that struck terror into many of the
bystanders, the King was extremely nettled with them, and his anger appeared
in the alterations of his countenance; but knowing there was a great deal of
reason in what he said, and feeling some remorse of his ingratitude, he kept
his thoughts from breaking forth, and only answered with a very serious face;
They that take Deidamia from you, are not in a condition to fear your
threatenings, nor would be of an humor to suffer them from any other but their
valiant Defender; he may freely make use of those privileges, which so many
worthy Actions, and so many fresh Engagements have given him amongst us; and
instead of returning his menaces, in a place where I might have some power to
do it, I Will confess there were a great deal of justice in his Reproaches, if the
injury I do him were a voluntary action; the contempt you show of this our
Kingdom, is an effect of generosity which would not excuse the Epirotes from
the yoke they fear, and in what manner soever you renounce this Crown, after
the death of Aeacidas, Deidamia's right to it were not to be disputed. Believe
it Sir, it is with a most sensible grief I declare this truth, and this hard
necessity of my condition; that I might be in one to content you, I could wish
this Crown were yet upon the head of another Sovereign, and if for your
satisfaction, you desire only what absolutely depends on me, I shall think
nothing difficult, to testify how great a sense I have of the general, and of
my particular obligations. O Gods, (cried out transported Agis) Gods that are
Enemies to injustice and oppression! Gods that are Revengers of perjury! Gods
that are Protectours of the persons of Kings! Can you suffer this high abuse,
without darting your Thunders upon forsworn, ungrateful heads! and you
Aeacidas, can you recall to mind, the condition out of which I freed you, and
not die with very shame and confusion? These Traitors, to whose counsels you
give ear, to the prejudice of your faith, and of your honor, those base men,
whose advice you prefer before the safety of unfortunate Agis, did they ever
rescue you from such Extremities, as those you were reduced to when I came to
your Relief; nay, rather are not they themselves indebted to me for that
shameful life, which I preserved for the destruction of mine own? Was it from
Antipater and his son you received that assistance, and is the price of my
services which you deprive me of, due to the injuries which they have done you?
The King, who did not think his design of an Alliance with Antipater had been
known to Agis, appeared much astonished at this discourse; but being he had
prepared himself against all the Events he was probably to look for from his
change, he recollected himself presently, and replied without falling into
passion, I will never prefer Antipater, Cassander, nor any other Prince in
Europe-before your self; but if my Kingdom has designs for its own quietness,
and for the establishment of that tranquillity it desires, I know not how to
oppose them, without making my self unworthy of the Crown they have set upon my
head, nor without making a people most inclinable to revolt, take Arms once
more against me. Let 'm rather take Arms (interrupted furious Agis) for their
own defense, against an Enemy which they cannot, and which they ought not to
despise; and since they undervalue me for Cassander, a private man, and a man
whose name and family are unknown, but by their perfidiousness, and by the
glory of their Master; let 'em take Arms for his Relief, as I have taken Arms
for theirs. That audacious Fellow shall not quietly enjoy, what he unjustly
would ravish from me; and since neither compassion of an unfortunate Lover,
whom your ingratitude precipitates into utter despair, nor the remembrance of
this Crown, which is the cause of all my misfortunes, and which you ow to none
but me; nor the consideration of honor, which is interessed in the violation
of your word, can dissuade you from the cruel resolution you have taken
against me; Remember, King of Epirus, remember that I shall be able to do as
much for my own Quarrel, as I have done already for yours, and that this unjust
Cassander shall either sink under my lawful indignation, or make Agis fall
with the better part of Greece. That Is the first Expedition I Will prepare for,
and if the Gods grant me the success which is due to the justice of my cause,
you shall quickly see those Arms, Aeacidas, glittering in Epirus, in a hostile
manner, which once you looked upon with so much joy, when they came to bring
you safety; they know already how to conquer the Epirotes, and shall overflow
their fields with that same blood, which heretofore they unluckily have
preserved. At these words, the King could no longer contain himself within the
limits of moderation, and seeing all those that stood about him murmur at Agis
his declaration. Hitherto (said he) in regard of your resentment, and in
remembrance of what you have done for us, I have passed by all your
provocations, but since you openly declare War against me, I accept it, and
charge you within three days to depart this Country, where you cannot be
looked upon as other than an Enemy. It Is as an Enemy, (replied Agis hastily)
it is as an Enemy you shall see me return into 't, and all the most cruel, and
most horrible effects that Fire and Sword can bring along with them, shall be
the sure Rewards of perjury and ingratitude. These words were not well
overheard by the King, who already was retiring another way, and furious Agis
going out of the Room at the same time, took his way directly toward his
lodging.

The noise of this disorder was immediately spread through the whole Court, and
there was no other talk in all Ambracia, but of this unexpected change, and of
the Events it might produce. Opinions were divided, and if those that were
concerned, found, or endeavored to make others find reason in the Kings
proceeding, they that judged of it without passion, or interest, condemned him
of a high ingratitude; but the number of the base-minded men, and flatterers,
was greater than that of generous persons, and the same Agis, who a few days
before was followed and adored by the whole Court, saw himself generally
forsaken in a moment, and attended only by those he had brought out of his
Country. When this news was told me, I was like instantly to have died for
grief, and though the Queen my Mother labored to give me some consolation, and
to cover the Kings action with some pretenses, I found nothing in her
discourses but new occasions of affliction. Let not the King hope, (said I) no,
let him never hope, that my heart can be changed, and since he needs would have
me love King Agis, let him prepare himself to see me love him in the grave, an
affection, which such express commands, such important obligations, and such
admirable qualities have kindled, is not so easily to be quenched, and the King
my father ought not to think it strange, though I ow my life to him, that my
soul nevertheless is different from his. I must love Agis, Madam, for ever, and
although I have power enough over that passion, to keep it within the limits
which my birth has prescribed, it will have power enough over me, to make my
heart incapable of a second. Ah! my dear Agis, rather let Death, accompanied
with the most rigorous Tortures, separate me from thee for ever, than that I
should afford room to a successor in this heart, which never was, nor ever
shall be any bodies but thine. I accompanied these words with such a flood of
tears, that the Queen was deeply touched with them; she esteemed Agis
infinitely, and did no way approve my fathers maxims, but he governed not his
affairs by her advice, and she was much too weak to oppose his determinations.
I passed the rest of that day, and all the night in sighs, in sobs, and in half
desperate actions, and the next morning my poor Agis being resolved to go away
that very day, came to receive his last farewell of me. The King, who could
neither forbear to consider him, nor think upon him without remorse, denied him
not that small satisfaction, and his entrance into my chamber was as freely
permitted as before. He came in with a countenance, which had almost nothing of
its wonted features, and whose looks had something so fatal in them, that Death
appeared there most naturally painted; and I beheld him with Eyes, which
sufficiently testified the part I bore in his misfortunes. Of a long time he
was not able to get out one word, and for a long time also I was in no
condition to begin that sad Entertainment. Our Eyes talked a great while for
us, and when fainting Agis thought himself strong enough, to help them to
express his mind, after having begun with many sighs. Madam (said he) behold
this disgraced, behold this banished man, behold this Enemy of Epyrus, and he
who in this Court has appeared with such a luster, and with so high a fortune,
departs now from it without any other consolation, than that of being able to
take his leave of you; it is the only favor that is not refused me, and it is in
it alone, I have established my latest hopes; you are too generous my fair
Princess, to square your thoughts by those of the King your father, and though
I be hated by your friends, I hope that you will not consider me as the Enemy
of your House. I consider you, (said I, interrupting him) and will consider you
all my life, as that which I love most dearly in this world; and as that only
which I can, and will love in it. The Gods be praised, (replied Agis, lifting
up his hands and eyes to Heaven) since my Princess is not changed, neither is
my fortune; and since she still will love me, I out-brave the tyrannical power
of a Father, and all the oppositions of unthankful Epirus. Well then, my
Princess, if you love me; if you love me -- said he again within a little
after, and made a stop at these words, as not having the confidence to proceed.
I perceived his inward disturbance, and being willing to ease him in it. Yes
Agis (added I) I love you, and I will give all the proofs you can demand of my
affection. If it be so (replied he) I no longer have any reason to complain of
my destiny, but dearest Princess, how extremely do I fear you will change your
resolution, and how I tremble at the proposition I am going to make you. In a
less extremity I should not have attempted it, but since it is the only means
of safety I now have left, I must of necessity follow it, and beg proofs of
your affection, which are above my services, and above the merit of my person,
but may peradventure be due unto my passion, and to the promise you have made
me. Since the King opposes my fortune, or rather since he opposes my life, be
pleased fair Princess that I may hold it from your self alone, and that I may
live only by you, since I cannot live but for you. If the King refuse me
Deidamia, let me receive her from Deidamia her self, and to follow the fortune
of a Prince that adores her, let her fly from a Prince that would sacrifice her
to the Capriccio's of his State. Your condition shall not be so miserable at
Sparta, that you should need to bewail your leaving this unthankful Country,
and as much forsaken as I am, I want not means to carry you from hence, if you
will have the goodness to quit it for me. Agis would have gone on with his
persuasions, but I would not suffer him to prosecute his discourse; I found
matter enough in it of offense to me, but I loved him enough, and was enough
obliged to him, to pardon it as an effect of his passion, and to content my
self with refusing his demand, without being angry with him for it. It Is enough
(said I) my dearest Agis it is enough, and I am exceedingly afflicted, that you
have desired no proofs of my affection, but such as are neither fit for me to
grant, nor you to ask. Would it had pleased the Gods, you had rather demanded
the better part of my blood, or that you had desired my life it self, and they
are my witnesses, I would have given you them without any trouble; but to
persuade me to faults so unworthy of a Princess, and so contrary to my duty,
and to my Reputation, Ah! dearest Agis, if you loved me, could you suffer such
a thought? I make you judge your self of the unfitness of your demand, and I
conjure you to tell me truly, if your self could approve the thing you counsel
me. What will you then do for me, (cried that afflicted Prince) and what fruit
can I expect from that affection, wherewith you would have me flatter my self
in my misfortune; what proofs then shall those be you offer me of it, and in
this latest extremity, what advantage can I draw from your latest promises? All
that you can hope for (replied I) from a Princess that loves you, but from a
virtuous Princess, and one who like your self would prefer Death before any
mean unworthy action. I will testify my affection to you, by preserving it to
my very grave; I for your sake will disobey the King my father, if he shall
command me to forget you, I Will disobey him if he shall oblige me to a second
affection, for in the obedience I ow him, I know no Rules that can compel the
inclination: but if he should forbid me to marry you, or if he should forbid me
to see you, I cannot persist in that Design without doing an irreparable injury
to my Reputation. What injury shall you do it (said Agis) by following a
Husband of a quality equal to your own, and a Husband whom you loved only by
the injunction of your friends? When I shall receive him from them (answered I)
I Will follow his fortune to the utmost part of the world, and will prefer the
prefer the possession of him before that of the whole earth together, but to
take him, or go along with him without their consent, is that I cannot do
without making my self unworthy both of my birth, and of your esteem, and it is
in short, a thing, which if you love me, you ought not to propound. If this
flight offend you, [replied he] suffer me at least to return armed into Epirus,
to demand the accomplishment of the King your Fathers word, and to labor with
my sword for my satisfaction, or for my revenge; and that in brief I may strive
to win you by those arms to whose success you formerly were granted; perchance
by their means, events may come to alter resolutions, and when the Epirots
shall see the desolation of their Country, and that the King your Father shall
be reduced to such extreamities, as those I saw him in before, they both may
recede from those proud ungrateful thoughts, which prosperity has given them;
I for such gallant pretensions, will arm all the men of courage that Greece
contains, and at the head of them the Epirots shall see an invincible Enemy,
and an Enemy who will requite their breach of faith, with an universal ruin
and desolation. Agis made a stop when he had said these words, and seeing he
waited for my answer; I hate Epirus enough [said I] to behold the miseries of
it without sorrow, and my want of power may have left me too little credit with
you to dissuade your resolutions; but I am too much obliged to tell you that no
sense of virtue, nor rule of decency, will suffer me to love a man in Arms
against my Country, or to offer any prayers in favor of him. Not that I will
oppose your indignation, nor that in the condition our affairs now stand, I
would still keep a Tirannical power over you, which might hinder you from
following its incitements; do whatsoever your passion shall suggest to be most
favorable for us; but remember that Aeacidas, as ungrateful as he is, is yet
my Father, and that all the Laws of duty forbid his daughter to love his Enemy.
The Prince lost patience at this discourse, and looking upon me with eyes as
full of anger as of love; What, and you too Madam, (cried he) have you also
forsaken me? Ah! this is my utmost misfortune, this is the highest point of my
affliction, without which I could not have accounted my self miserable; but
since Deidamia holds intelligence with her Father to destroy me, Deidamia shall
infallibly be satisfied; no, Madam, I will no longer preserve any resentment
against Aeacidas, and since in his usage toward me, he follows but your
inclinations, I will no more accuse him of ingratitude; let him die, this
unfortunate Agis, who has not been able to merit your affections, and that he
may die with the greater innocence, let him die without using any reproaches
against you. These, (replied I, being touched with those words to the very
heart) these are the most cruel, and the most bloody ones you can invent, and
if you really suspect me of that baseness you upbraid me with, you are more
ungrateful your self, than those whom you complain of. I love you but too well
for my repose, and too well for my duty, and I give you not so slight a mark of
it as you believe, in open resisting the pleasure of my Father, and of my King,
and in passing, for your sake, the bounds which modesty, and obedience
prescribe me. Let it suffice you, that you shall never see another man in the
place I have given you, and that if the King my Father will not suffer me to be
yours, you shall have this consolation to know I will never be another.
Content your self with this assurance, if you can, since it is impossible for me
to do more, and that I may protest to you, by all the things that are most
sacred, our misfortunes are equal, and my grief is not at all inferior to your
own, Ah! vain and light consolation! (cried the Prince quite transported) Ah!
false hopes, ah deceitful appearances, how unworthily have you betrayed me!
Well, Madam, (pursued he, casting himself at my feet, and washing them with a
stream of tears) since neither the remembrance of your promises, nor the
deplorable condition in which you see me, are able to mollify you, and that
you neglect the conservation of my life, out of light considerations, which
serve only for a pretense to cover your hard-heartedness toward me; I must
disengage you from your promises, and by my death set you at liberty, to follow
the motions of the King your Father. I Will die, it is infallibly resolved, I Will
die, but not alone, they that dragge Agis to his grave, shall perhaps go
thither with him, and 'tshall be by their blood, and by that of many thousands,
he will make his funerals renowned to all eternity. At these words he would have
risen from before me, but I let my self sink upon him with so much weakness,
that I fell down on the floor close by him, who as fainting as he was, took me
into his arms, where he saw me lose both my senses and my understanding; my
maids fetched me to my self again, by the help they gave me, and then, looking
upon Agis, with as dying an eye as his; Leave me Agis (said I) leave me, and
since you cannot content your self with what I am able, and with what I do
satisfy you, suffer me to undergo my wretched destiny with patience. Farewell
-- (pursued I, casting my arms about his neck, and drowning his face in a Sea
of tears) farewell my dearest Agis, leave this ungrateful Country, which has
nothing left in it worthy of you, and without inquiring what effect your
remembrance shall work upon me, use mine the best way you can for your own
repose. With these words, not being longer able to bear his presence, without
breaking forth into violences very contrary to modesty, I embraced him once
again for the last time of all, and turning my eyes away from his face, I
retired into my closset, where I shut my self up, with a resolution not to see
him any more.

Alas! (continued Deidamia melting into tears) that was my last sight of him
indeed, and 't was but too too truly that I bade him adieu for ever; the pangs
I felt at that cruel separation, were but too certain presages of our extremest
misfortunes; and that parting went too near my heart, not to make me judge that
it would be eternal. I was not present at the last actions of my poor afflicted
Prince, but I heard since, that after he had fallen into swownings, which
brought him almost to his grave, and that he had uttered words, which cleft the
hearts of my grieved maids with pity, he went out of my Chamber, and resolving
not to stay a minute longer in Ambracia, took horse withal his retinue to
depart. They who saw him pass through the streets in that condition, and who
could not forget they were indebted to him for their safety, were not able at
that sight to forbear lamenting and expressing by their cries, how much they
disapproved that unjust usage of their valiant Deliverer. When he was in the
marketplace, where he saw a company of men together, he turned toward them
with an action which sufficiently showed the trouble of his mind, and looking
upon them with a threatening eye, and an eye kindled with a just indignation.
People of Epirus, [said he] remember your ingratitude, and when you see your
selves again in the dangers from which I freed you, bewail at least the loss of
your Defender; his help shall fail you in your time of need, nay, and perchance
you shall see those same arms endeavor your ruin, with the same success they
had for your deliverance. These words were followed with a murmur amongst those
that approved the justice of his complaint, and the valiant Agis had no sooner
spoken them, but turning his back upon that unthankful people, he went out of
the City, and took his journey toward Sparta, by the same ways he had cleared
from Enemies, and which he still saw full of the marks of his unconquered
Valor.

Which way, my Lord, shall I be able to relate the extremity of my affliction?
certainly it is not in my power, and in what terms soever I should do it, 't
would be impossible for you to comprehend it. A body divided from its soul, may
have some resemblance with the condition I was in at that time, and sorrowful
Deidamia was the true picture of desolation. The last words, and the last
actions of that poor Prince, had pierced my heart so deeply, that I was utterly
incapable of any consideration, or of any other remembrance but his; my
affection to him was so increased by those unhappy accidents, that it was risen
to the highest degree of passion, and if before, I loved him as I was obliged,
I loved him then a thousand times more dearly than my self. Alas! with how many
tears did I lament that fatal separation, and what reproaches did I not utter
against my Fathers ingratitude, whenever he opened his mouth to condemn my
grief; I lost part of the respect I owed him, to take the liberty to tell him
of his injustice, and as often as he went about to persuade me to accommodate
my thoughts to his, and to receive impressions for Cassander, to whom he
destined me indeed, I showed so little compliance to his will, that he gave
over all hope of being able to bend my mind to it. Let your Majesty be
contented, [said I] with having swaid my heart once to your desires, and with
having introduced an affection, whose birth I should have opposed, had I not
feared to disobey and to displease you; I know not how to change so lightly,
and I testify my resignation to your will sufficiently, in taking my self away
from him to whom your command had given me, without your forcing my
inclinations a second time, for a man whom I neither know, nor ever will. I
confess I went beyond respect, in saying thus to the King my Father, but 't was
the least I owed to my poor Agis, and he well deserved that for his sake, I
should do something more than modesty in strictness would allow. Wherefore at
such times as I was alone, or only in the company of those whom I suspected
not, I suffered my resentments to break forth in such a manner, that I forgot
not any word a lawful passion could put into my mouth. In the interim
Antipater sent Commissioners to my Father, to press the proposition of our
marriage, but notwithstanding all the Kings attempts, by gentleness, and by
violence, it was impossible for him to shake my resolution, and when he went to
terrefie me with his threats. Let your Majesty cause me to be put to death
(said I) and I shall be cured of a remembrance, more cruel than all the pains
you can inflict upon me. The King was extremely moved at these words, and was
sometimes upon the very point of letting loose his anger; but he loved me very
tenderly, and his knowledge of the unjustness of what he demanded, wrought
something upon him, and did a little moderate his indignation. Antipater's
Commissioners thinking themselves mocked, returned very much discontented,
after they had publicly complained of their Masters being ill dealt withal,
and having at their departure expressed that he would not be insensible of it.
I was also persecuted by Neoptolemus, who taking his advantage upon the ruin
of Agis his pretensions, and upon my aversness to the marriage of Cassander,
left nothing unattempted, either with my Father, or with my self, to advance
his old designs; but the King answered him with my obstinacy, and I with such
strange kind of usage, that the very spite he conceived, made him leave the
Court with an intention to stir up some trouble in the Kingdom, and for that
purpose to make use of the peoples ill opinion of Aeacidas. About that time,
the news came to us, that my valiant Agis with an Army more powerful through
the courage, than the number of men it consisted of, was entered into the
Countries that obeyed Antipater, where by the beginning of his exploits, he
showed marks both of his Valor, and of the animosity that guided him. We heard
that in many encounters he had gained all manner of advantages, that he had
taken many places by storm, and that after having made himself master of the
field, he had laid siege to Megalopolis, whither Antipater was marching toward
him with an Army much more potent than his, because it was made up not only of
his own Forces, but of many of his Allies, and where Agis staid for him,
contrary to the advice of all his Commanders, being less desirous of Victory,
than of death, but most firmly resolved, to sell his life at the dearest rate,
and to make his despair remarkable by actions which posterity never should
forget.

This news made me send forth continual wishes in his favor, and all the
prayers I made unto the Gods were only for his safety; yet was I tormented
with extraordinary fears, and those mortal apprehensions were the true
presages of my misfortune. Alas! they were but too true indeed, and since I
must abridge a relation which has nothing now in it, but sorrowful and
unpleasing events; in spite of all my prayers, and in spite of all my wishes, I
heard shortly after with all Epirus, that in a bloody battle, whose issue had
been disputed by almost all the blood of either party, my beloved, my valiant
Agis had lost his life upon thousands of men whom he had sacrificed to his
lawful rage. Although this report was confusedly brought us, you may judge
nevertheless what effect it wrought upon my heart, and you imagine by the
knowledge this fatal story has given you of my love, that I was little less
dead than he himself. Indeed all signs of life forsook me, and complaints not
being capable to express the smallest part of my affliction, they left that
office to faintings and swownings, which carried me almost into the very bowels
of the grave. I had continued many days in a condition, which made by life to
be much doubted of, when that I might be utterly overwhelmed, they brought a
man to me, whom I instantly knew to have belonged to that poor Prince, and to
have been the most beloved of all the servants he had, as soon as ever I saw
him, though it was in the presence of the Queen my Mother, I sent forth a cry
of a despairing person, and presently after fell into a swown, in the arms of
those that were about me. When with several remedies they had fetched me to my
self again, as I opend my eyes I cast them upon that man, and forcing the sighs
which stopped the passage of my words; Agis is dead, (cried I) Agis is dead,
Archidamus. Yes, Madam, (answered he) the greatest, and the most generous of
all Princes is dead indeed, but he shall never die in the memory of mankind;
at his Death he has raised himself a Monument, which would render his condition
worthy to be envied, if he were not dead in your remembrance. In my
remembrance? (replied I quite transported) Ah! Archidamus, Agis shall never die
in my remembrance, and it is only by the remembrance of him that Deidamia now
lives herself. He commanded me (continued Archidamus very sadly) to bring you
the latest marks of his, and if you be so pleased, I will acquit my self of the
last Commission he ever gave me. My grief made me unable to reply, and all I
could do, seeing him put forth his arm to give me a Letter, was to lift up my
hand to receive it, and to employ the rest of my little strength to open it.
There were but very few words in it, but they were written with his blood, and
that sight struck such a chilness into mine, that I was hardly able to speak or
stir. Ah! my dear Agis (cried I, kissing that blood before I read the words)
with what dismal Characters have you engraven these last Expressions of your
love? and why have you been so prodigal of this noble blood, so dear to
Deidamia, and of this noble blood which sustained my life more than your own?
saying thus, I cast mine Eyes once more upon it, but they were so drowned in
tears, that of a long time, I was not able to see, and 'twas with much ado that
in the end I read these words.

Agis to the Princess Deidamia.
YOur ingratitude has not had power to make you lose your Empire over me; I die
yours Deidamia, and it is to assure you of it, that I employ the remainder of
my blood, and of my strength.


And I Will die thine, (cried I, kissing those words again) yes, I Will die thine, my
too, too faithful Prince, and I Will confess at the extremity of my life, I was
as unworthy of these last marks of thy affection, as thou were worthy of a more
fortunate destiny. These words were followed with a sea of tears, whose flowing
whole hours could not assuage, and if I had not been withheld by those that
were about me, I should without doubt have made these of mine to act some
violence against my life. After having been a good part of the day in this
condition, I desired to know the particulars of his death, and though I was
certain that relation would surcharge my grief, the resolution I had taken to
bury my self absolutely in it, made me seek that new occasion to afflict my
self; and therefore turning toward Archidamus. Tell me I pray you, (said I,
with a voice interrupted by my sighs) tell me Archidamus, in what manner your
valiant Prince lost his life; but do not spare my sorrow, nor conceal the most
deplorable accidents of it from her, whose despair is incapable of receiving
any addition. Archidamus with much ado refraining tears, satisfied the request
I made him on this manner.

In the condition I now see you, Madam, I will not make you a long recital of
the life my Master lead, after your separation, and since it is only an account
of his death that you demand I shall deliver it to you in a very few words. I
will not repeat what his despair made him say during our Voyage; the knowledge
you have of his passion, may make you easily judge, he uttered whatsoever a
violent affection, and a just sense of his misfortune could put into his mouth.
He would never hearken to one word of comfort, And having nothing in his mind
but the ruin of Cassander, he never talked to us of any thing, but the revenge
he intended to prepare against him. When we were come to Sparta, hardly would
he tarry there three days, either to take a little rest, or to put those forces
he found there in a readiness to march. He would not stay for any Recruits, and
his impatience was so great, that it made him run headlong upon an Enterprise,
under which being so weak in men as he was, he in all probability was like to
sink. Yet did he march with as much boldness as if he had been followed by a
million of men, and being entered into the Territories that obeyed Antipater, he
left most bloody marks there of his lawful fury; the Forces that defended the
Frontier were all cut in pieces, and whatsoever opposed his passage met the
self same destiny. I will not trouble you with the particularities of that War
at length, but only tell you, that after having defeated whatsoever came in
our way, ta'n diverse places by assault, and made such progress in a few days,
as might have demanded whole years to equal it, we saw our selves forced to
besiege Megalopolis, which was an obstacle to our passage. 'Twas not the
intention of our valiant King, to fix us upon Sieges, but his Design was to
march directly to Cassander, and make him ^^y down his pretensions to you,
together with his life; being engaged before that place, we heard that
Antipater and his Son, were coming toward us with Colors flying, and an Army
half as strong again as ours. This intelligence could not terrify the King,
but contrary to the advice of his Commanders, who counseled him either to
retire, or entrench himself, he raised his Siege, and went to meet the Enemy
with a resolution to give him battle. Why should I hold you longer? The two
Armies faced one another, and having showed an equal desire to fight, the chief
Officers drew them up according to their wonted order, and according to the
situation of the places, and the numbers of their men, which done, they
presently began the Battle. There was a great deal of blood shed on both sides
very quickly, and our Prince encouraged us by so admirable an Example of
Valor, that we should certainly have conquered with him, if he had not rather
sought for Death than Victory; but he abandoned all care of his men to think of
his particular satisfaction, and seeking Cassander in the thickest of his
Squadrons, he brake through all of them to get to him, and charging him in the
midst of a thousand Swords and Javelins, he laid him on the ground together
with his Horse; immediately after he dismounted Antipater, and if his fury had
not been stopped by a valiant stranger, whose Forces was little different from
his, without question he would have perfected his Revenge. He did not all these
prodigious Actions without receiving a great number of wounds, and in the end
he was so weakened by them, that he no longer was able to sit upon his Horse,
but had fallen off among the Dead, if we had not broke in to him, and rescued
him from among a multitude of Swords which he despised, and into the midst of
which, he with the fierceness of a Lion had precipitated himself. Having drawn
him out of the throng whither he would or no, I put him into a Litter, and
carried him a little out of the heat of the fight, but his Litter was presently
full of blood, which ran down from an infinite number of wounds, and my
magnanimous Prince, knowing he was near his end, would not suffer me to stir
from him any more, but drawing Paper from some place about him, where I believe
he carried it for that purpose, he pulled out the head of a Javelin that stuck
in his body, and with the bloody point of it, he with great difficulty writ
those words whereof I have been the fatal Bearer. As soon as he had done;
Archidamus (said he, giving them to me) carry these last Assurances of my
Affection to Deidamia, and make her the Relation of my Death. Scarce had he
imposed that Command upon me, when we saw our Forces retire, defeated more by
the absence of their General, than by the courage of our Enemies, who mingled
pell-mell amongst them, were eager in the prosecution of their Victory. Our
valiant King who would not die without resistance, nor fall alive into his
Enemies, power, with the remainder of his strength got out of the Litter, and
with his Sword in his hand, went to meet Death with a miraculous boldness. In
that conclusion of his life, Madam, he did things which Posterity never will
believe, and though even at first he was not able to stir out of his place, and
that within awhile after he fought but upon his knees, I may protest to you
with truth, that his very presence alone stopped whole Squadrons, as it had
routed them in the beginning of the Battle, and that the most daring of them,
assaulted him only with Darts and Arrows, which the valiant Prince tore out of
his body with an invincible courage, and threw them back at those by whom he
had been wounded. 'Twas in this manner of Combat that he spent the remnant of
his strength; which being no longer able to keep him up, he let himself sink
gently upon his shield, over which he leaned yielding up the ghost, rather like
a man that was weary, or falling into a sleep, than to one that was a dying.

I scarcely heard the last words of Archidamus, for I fell into so deep a swown
at the end of his Recital, that all the company believed, I had breathed out my
soul, to follow Agis. All Remedies seemed helpless for my Recovery, and
notwithstanding all the care they could take to fetch me again to my senses, I
continued all the rest of the day with so little sign of life, that many
persons feared I had really lost it; the King my father saw me in that
condition, and the affection he bore me made him in that Encounter find
occasion enough to repent of his ingratitude; he already felt a remorse for it
that tormented him, nor could he remember what he owed to the memory of Agis,
without being troubled in his conscience; the Queen my mother, as much as she
respected him, could not forbear to reproach him with it, and all the honestest
people in Epirus, had taken such an aversion against him, since the usage he
had given their brave Deliverer, that the least occasion in the world, would
have stirred them up to a Revolt. It was a good while within night, when I came
to my self again, and I no sooner opened my Eyes, but my mouth also was open to
pour forth such Lamentations, as were due from me to so dear, so precious a
memory. I asked for Agis his Letter, and as soon as it was given me, I fixed my
Lips upon those Relics of his Blood with Transports that came from nothing
but Despair, and said words that were not to be excused, but by such a loss as
that I had suffered. 'Twould be impossible, my Lord Demetrius, to represent the
excess of my affliction, yet should I be too blame to talk to you any longer of
the greatness of my sorrow, since it was not strong enough to carry me to my
Grave. It is true, I died not, whither it were by reason of the care was taken
to keep me from it, or by the anger of the Gods, who would not let me expiate
so great a fault, with the pain of so short continuance; no, I died not, but
the life I have lead since then, has differed from death in nothing else, but
the sensibility it has left me of the miseries I have undergone. When the
Queens tears, and the Kings importunities, had obtained a promise from me that
I would not make my self away, I shut my self up in a Chamber hung with black,
where all the objects were mournful, and suitable to the condition of my
mind, and where I hardly received the visits of the King, and Queen; the sight
of all other persons was troublesome to me, and I may protest to you with truth,
that during the space of a whole year, I scarce saw daylight twice; and when
the King persuaded me, or got the Queen to do so, that I ought to change my
manner of life, and dispose my self to take a Husband, I broke into such
violence at that Proposal, that the King, fearing that persecution would drive
me to my Grave, was constrained to give it over; and to lose both the hope of
winning me to it, and the design of tormenting me any further. Let the King
content himself, [said I] with having by my obedience to him, made me the most
unfortunate Princess in the world; I sacrificed my Liberty to his first
commands, and to his last I sacrificed my poor Agis, and with him all that had
power to make me love my life; for all they were so unjust, for all they were
so cruel to me, I blindly observed them, and if I had been less obedient, I
should have been less guilty, and less ungrateful. Ah! my dearest Agis,
[continued I with a torrent of tears wherewith my words were usually attended]
thou whose image never parts from my rememberance, should I be able to give
thee a successor in this heart which was so lawfully thine own, and should I
be as capable of this baseness, as I have been of this ingratitude thou
upbraid'st me with? I will not justify my self of it before thee, and though
through the considerations of my duty, it might find some Excuses, it has
produced too dismal effects to 'scape the censure of being criminal. I will
never be but thine, Dear Prince, and if my Tears are light Reparations for the
fault I have committed, I will accompany them with that ardent affection, and
that inviolable fidelity which I will keep to thee till my latest breath. These
were my ordinary discourses, but while I lived on this manner, the Queen my
mother, contrary to the hope of all Epirus, of the King, and even also of her
self, became with child. This news was no sooner published, but the Epirotes
made Bon-fires, and in the expectation of having a successor of the blood of
Achilles, which yet that Monarchy had never failed of, they made their joy
appear by all sorts of expressions; but they gave themselves over to it a great
deal more, when within a few months after, according to their wish, they saw
her safely delivered of a Son, in whose Person they found that Prince they had
so much desired. The King and the whole Court was transported with joy, and I
my self was fain to leave my solitary Retirement to bear a part in that so
general gladness. The Gods are my Witnesses, I was so far from being troubled
for losing the hope of a Crown, that I received a great deal of consolation by
it, as well by reason of the condition I was in, which rendered me incapable of
any other desire save that of Death, as of the belief I had, that I should be
freer in my design of conserving my self entirely for the thoughts of Agis, and
that being no more tormented to provide Aeacidas a successor, to whom the Gods
had given one, I should pass the rest of my miserable life at quiet. That
Child being come into the World, brought with him, by the report of all those
that understand Physiognomy, all the tokens of an extraordinary greatness. He
was called Pyrrhus after the name of his illustrious predecessor, and the
famous Oracle of Dodona, which is in our Country, having been consulted at his
birth, spoke prodigious things to his advantage, and promised to those Aeacidas
had sent, that that Prince should be the greatest man that had been seen of
many ages, that his valor should not be paralelled in the whole World, and
that if he were but as fortunate as Alexander, he should obscure the fame of
all his gallant action. These promises of the Gods, raised Aeacidas to
mervellous hopes, and they began to breed up young Pyrrhus, with so great care,
as showed the interest of the whole Kingdom in him.

Epirus lived a year in joy, and in tranquillity enough; but the ingratitude of
Aeacidas had too highly incensed the Gods, to expect any long continuance of
prosperity, nor could their justice choose, but break forth in the end upon his
miserable family. The first blow of fortune he received, was the death of the
Queen my mother, whom a violent fever took away from us in a very few days,
and whose virtue left a most honored memory among the Epirots. Aeacidas was as
sensible of that loss, as was possible for him to be; the whole Court put on
mourning with him for so good a Princess; and notwithstanding I was
prepossessed with so violent a grief, as seemed to have made me incapable of
sorrow for any other loss, this cause found room still in my heart for a new
affliction, and I was as deeply touched with it as it was fit for me to be: The
tears I shed for my mother, mingled themselves with those which yet fell daily
from mine eyes, for the remembrance of my poor Agis; but the King had scarcely
dried up his, when he received new matter of grief, and saw his utmost losses
through the anger of the Gods, whom the violation of his faith had made his
Enemies. Pardon me Aeacidas if I cannot forbear to reproach thy memory, and
believe however that the remembrance of my misfortunes never hindered me from
loving thee, and lamenting thee as I am obliged. Neoptolemus defeated of all
his pretensions to the Crown, first by my refusal to marry him, and afterward
by the birth of Pyrrhus, had changed his ways, though he had still the same
design, and making use of the contempt which the greatest part of the Epirots
had of their King, he turned his thoughts to usurp that Crown, which he no
longer lawfully could hope for. With that intent he was retired to the
Molosses, whom he found exceeding ready to revolt, and being informed of
Antipaters discontent, and of his hatred to Aeacidas, he had made him
acquainted with his purpose, and the means he had to revenge him. Antipater,
who conceived himself ill dealt withal, and mocked by Aeacidas, lent an ear to
Neoptolemus his solicitations, and joyfully offered to give him his
assistance. Yet durst he neither bring, nor send him any Macedonian forces,
knowing he should not be avowed by Alexander, who considered our family, by
reason of the near Alliance that was between us; but he furnished him with
mercenary strangers, whom he levied upon the Frontiers, and supplied him
underhand with great sums of money, to support the charges of his enterprise.
Negligent Aeacidas slighted the first notice that was given him of this
commotion, but when he went to try some remedy, the misfortune was gone so far,
that all his endeavors were unprofitable to hinder it. Neoptolemus did not
only raise the Molosses, but sowed rebellion through all parts of Epirus, and
made a party even in Ambracia it self, which quickly became stronger than the
Kings. I never could comprehend which way Neoptolemus met with so much facility
in his design, for though I know the Epirots are the most inconstant, and the
most wicked people of all Europe, I cannot imagine what advantage they could
find, in basely forsaking their natural King, to cast themselves into the hands
of an usurper. It Is certain that in any other Country, Neoptolemus could not
so easily have effected his design, but how faithless soever ours is, I could
never attribute the ruin of our family, to any thing but a manifest judgment
of Heaven upon it. Perfidious Neoptolemus declared himself as soon as he was
strong enough, and coming before our Towns with a mighty Army, he in a short
space brought them under his obedience, without striking a blow. His forces
increased daily, and when he was master of all the Country, he marched
directly to Ambracia, where he knew he was waited for by the greater part of
the inhabitants. Aeacidas then made some attempts to remedy his last
misfortunes, but he found the courage of the Epirots so cold, that after having
unsuccesfully tried to make them take Arms for his defense, he began to loose
both heart, and hope together. Then it was that he vainly called for Agis his
assistance, and that he bewailed his ingratitude with tears of blood; he in his
own destruction saw the truth of that poor Prince's predictions, and after his
unworthy usage of him, had not the confidence to demand relief from his Allies.
For mine own part, I can assure you there were but two reasons that augmented
my affliction in this misfortune; I was troubled for my Fathers disasters,
though he had drawn them on his own head, and I was afraid of falling into the
hands of Neoptolemus, whom I mortally hated. Yet did I resign my self to the
will of the Gods, and being as it were dead to all manner of contentment in the
World, it is certain I was less touched with our disasters than I should have
been in another season. My Father seeing himself reduced, by the fickleness of
his subjects, to one only Town, resolved to defend it, and there to expect
succor from some of his neighbors, or to lay his bones in the ruins of it;
but when Neoptolemus was come within two days march of us, those that took
part with him in Ambracia being the stronger, and knowing that they were so,
declared themselves publicly, and taking Arms began to march up and down the
streets, crying, long live King Neoptolemus. In this utmost extremity the King
summoned up all the remainder of his courage, and did all he possibly could to
animate those to his defense, in whom he believed there yet was any fidelity,
but their number was so small, that he was able to do nothing with them, and
saw himself compelled to yield unto his destiny, and to follow the counsel of
those few friends he still had left. They all persuaded him to get out of the
City with his family before Neoptolemus his arrival, and take refuge to some
one of his neighbors, where his person and family might be secured from the
prosecutions of his Enemy, who would do all that possible he could to destroy
him, and that after he had put himself in some friendly sanctuary, he might go
and ask relief from his Nephew Alexander the Great, who in consideration of
their nearness of blood, and of the injustice that had been done him, would
without doubt give him his assistance, and establish him in his Throne again.
The sad King hearkened to this proposition, and and taking Gold, and Jewels
with him, he caused certain Chariots to be made ready, and being guarded by a
small number of trusty friends, he in the night got out of the Palace, by a
Gate, which had free passage into the field, without going through any part of
the City. Our escape was not so secret, but that the Epirots might have
prevented it, if they had desired our ruin, but those that were less
exasperated against Aeacidas, withheld the rest, telling them they might be
satisfied with depriving him of his Kingdom, and not hinder him from saving his
life if he could possibly. Our company consisted of the King my Father, young
Pyrrhus my brother, who was then but two years old, my self, a few maids,
Theogenes, Androclides, Angelus, Hyppias, Meander, Androclion, and some others,
whose names were not so known in Epirus, and who would not abandon us in our
disasters. Sorrowful Aeacidas quitted not his Town and Kingdom without tears,
and detesting the infidelity of his people, uttered imprecations against them,
and complaints for his misfortunes, able to have touched his very Enemies with
pity. The Sun was hardly risen when our small train was increased by a few
men, who coming up to us, gave us notice that we were pursued, and that we must
hasten our flight with greater diligence, if we intended to save our selves.
Aeacidas grew pale at this intelligence, and not being able to forsake me, nor
to fly himself with greater speed, he was extreme desirous to save little
Pyrrhus, whom he believed to be the principal aim of his Enemies pursuit; and
therefore having taken him in his arms, and kissed him a great many times,
bathing his face in tears, he put him into the hands of Androclion, Hyppias,
and Meander, who were mounted upon fleet horses, commanding them to carry him
to Glaucus King of the Illyrians, his ancient friend, and to whom he would
entrust that which was most precious to him in all the World. These three
faithful servants took charge of my little brother, and promised the King that
to their latest breath, they would with fidelity acquit themselves of the
commission he gave them. When we had seen them depart, we prosecuted our
journey, but left the highways, and under the conduct of trusty guides,
traveled through the most unknown places toward Byzantium, where the King
determined to pass over into Asia, and go to Alexander. I will not entertain
you Sir, with the frivolous particulars of our voyage, it pleased the Gods we
were not overtaken by our Enemies, and that after a tedious wandering, we in the
end arrived at Byzantium. There we remained unknown, the King resolving to stay
for Meander, who, by the order he had received, was to bring him an account
thither, of the child that had been trusted to him. Meander came, and eased the
King of part of his discontents, by giving a relation of the success of his
voyage. He told him, King Glaucus had taken the child into his protection, how
he had given charge he should be bred up with as much care, and as much
affection as his own; how he had publicly sworn he would assist him with all
his forces toward the recovery of his kingdom, and how he complained, that the
king himself had taken sanctuary any where else but with him. Aeacidas was
joy'd at this recital, but he was come to the conclusion of his miseries; and
as the Gods would have it, to orewhelme the unfortunate Deidamia, he fell ill
the next day after, and felt himself so weakened with his griefs, that he had
not strength. enough to resist his sickness, upon the sixth day he dyed, and I
remained in the most sad, and lamentable condition that ever Princess was
reduced to. I make you judge of it, my Lord, without going about to make a
description of it, and you may easily imagine in what perplexities a maid
might be, who, after having lost what was dearest to her in all the world, saw
herself deprived of her parents, dispoyled of all she had, without refuge, and
without support, under the conduct of a few helpless men. Certainly it is very
hard to fancy a more miserable estate than mine, and all the tears in the world
were not sufficient to deplore a part of my disasters. I will, not tell you
what torrents I powered forth, but content my self with letting you know, that
after the king my fathers obsequies, when once the condition we were in would
suffer us, we consulted the Oracle of Mars, who by the mouth of his Priest gave
us order to proceed according to our former resolution, and promised me that
upon the banks of Euphrates I should find repose, and an end of my misfortunes.
I received little consolation by that promise the Gods had given me, knowing I
could not hope for the performance of it any other way than by the end of my
life; yet was I determined to obey their commands, and by the advice of
Theogenes, to whose conduct I had resigned my self, we continued on our journey
toward Alexander, who was then at Susa; believing that the Queens would afford
me a safe retreat, and an honorable sanctuary. The Gods can tell, 'twas not
any desire to save my life; nor to return to the quality whence I was fallen,
that made me undertake so painful a voyage, but only the fear of falling into
Neoptolemus his hands, and my willingness to comply with the desires of those
faithful persons, who had abandoned all they had to serve me, and who
expressed so great an affection to the miserable Relics of our Family; it is
under their protection that I have traveled through so many Countries; but a
long and dangerous sickness I had at Susa, whence the King was gone, e're we
arrived, hindered the effecting of our resolutions, and before I was able to
leave my bed, we heard the fatal news of the much lamented death, of the
greatest man that ever came into the World. By this last misfortune, I was
persuaded that the Gods aimed absolutely at my destruction, since they
overwhelmed me daily with new afflictions, and stopped up all the passages to
that safety, and that repose I wished for; whereupon I would have given my self
over to despair, if Theogenes, and his faithful companions had not kept me
from it, and being desirous in the extremity to which I was reduced, to have
me try all manner of ways, they were of opinion I might obtain the same
relief, and the same protection from Alexanders successors, and from his
Family, which I before had hoped for from himself; This was the reason, Sir,
that brought us to this place, where the ill chance of this war you are all
engaged in, began to make me loose the hopes which your goodness has revived,
and which I now will cherish, since I have had the happiness in my first
encounter, to light upon so generous a man as Prince Demetrius.

Thus did the fair Princess Deidamia finish her Narration, wherein Demetrius
was so concerned, that his tears for a great while kept company with those she
shed at the end of her discourse; but when her silence invited him to speak,
looking upon her with eyes which testified a sensibility in him, that went
something beyond compassion: Madam, (said he) the causes of your affliction are
so great, that they cannot justly be disapproved; but in the loss you have
sustained by the death of that Valiant King of the Lacedaemonians, the destiny
of this unfortunate man that speaks to you, has no small conformity with yours.
I weep as you do, for a person who is no longer in the world, and though my
passion were neither so long settled, nor upon so reasonable grounds as yours,
it has fortified it self by circumstances, which have some thing in them more
strange, and more unusual-Ile weep with you whenever you please to let me
bear you company in that sad employment, and in this Encounter of our Fates,
perhaps we may find some consolation: In the mean time give me leave to wait
upon you to the Retreat you have demanded, and bring you to a great many
Princesses, who know how to pay what is due unto your Birth, and Person. You
shall not fail of the protection you hoped to receive from Alexander, no nor of
Revenge for the wrongs that have been done you, for here are many Princes who
will embrace your interests with more affection than their own; and our War
shall be no sooner ended, but you shall find us ready to begin it again for
your Quarrel. Demetrius, whose sad remembrances were a little moderated by the
sight of that admirable Princess, pronounced these words with such a grace, and
his handsomness did so powerfully second his persuasions, that the Princess,
and all her followers, charmed with the mavelous advantages of his Person and
Language, could not resist his desires, but answered his offers with the like
civilities. Demetrius, after some words of an obliging discourse, entreated her
to get up into her Chariot, and having placed himself by her, Theogenes and her
Maids came in after them, and the rest following the Chariot on horseback,
they went to Polemon's house, being guided thither by Demetrius. When they were
at the Gate, he alighted first, and being desirous to prepare those Persons
that were within to receive Deidamia according to her quality, he prayed her to
expect his Return but a few moments, and in the interim ran to advertise
Apamia, Arsinoe, and the other Ladies that were with them, of her Arrival, and
having in a few words told them her name, her quality, and something of her
last Adventures, they all went down to meet, and to receive her with all manner
of respect, and civility. This interview caused a mutual admiration in them;
and as Deidamia found something that was very charming in the faces of those
Princesses, they on the other side believed they had never yet seen any thing
that excelled hers. Their conversation was in very submissive terms, and when
the Ladies had confirmed those promises to Deidamia, which Demetrius had made
her, they entered together into the house, where they obliged her to take a
Lodging with them.

The end of the first Book.
CASSANDRA, The fourth Part. The second Book.
Demetrius having left Deidamia with the Ladies, went to his Father, and then
with him to Oroondates his Tent, whither all the Princes flocked, to take their
share in his joy, and to inform themselves of those mavelous Events that were
come to pass there. Indeed, the face of all things was wonderfully changed; for
hatred, rage, and jealousy, which had so absolutely reigned there some few
hours before, had now yielded their place to gentler, and quite contrary
passions. Oroondates was even lost in the transports of his joy, both for the
life of his dear Brother, for whom he had shed so many tears, and for the
innocence of his before suspected Princess; he testified those sweet Raptures
by such moaning words, and that pleasing trouble of his mind, broke forth so
extremely in all his Actions, that so sudden a change had made him hardly to be
known by his most particular Friends. With how great Repentance did he reflect
upon all the Complaints he had made of Cassandra's infidelity, and with what
Remorse did he recall into his memory, those cruel designs he had framed
against the life of his most loved Arsaces? which way, dear Brother (cried he
before all the company) which way dear Princess, shall I be able to repair,
what I have said, and what have I attempted against you? and what blood do I
not ow to the expiation of those bloody injuries, and of those cruel
intentions? Thou guilty mouth, which have so often blasphemed my adored
Princess, and thou sacrilegious hand, which have so inhumanely shed the noble
blood of my most worthy Brother, what will you say? what will you do, to give
satisfaction for your crimes? That admirable virtue I so much wronged by my
unjust suspicions, and those deep wounds which my ungrateful Sword has made
in the body of a Brother, to whom I stood indebted for all my happiness, do
they not cry aloud for vengeance against me? Ah! no (said he again, after a
little pause) fear nothing for innocent faults; those between my Brother and me
are mutual; if I have drawn part of his blood, he has poured forth almost all
mine, and since Artaxerxes is revived, and that Statira is not inconstant, we
ought to cast away all fatal Remembrances, and banish all matters of
affliction. Artaxerxes will pardon the fury that transported me, if he consider
the violence of that passion, whose beginnings he favored with so much
goodness; and my Queen will without doubt be so indulgent, as to excuse a
jealousy grounded upon such strong probabilities, and a jealousy which has
been violent enough to precipitate me into despair, but not to lessen my
affection. If Oroondates his words were these, Arsaces his thoughts were the
very same, but he could not express them with his tongue, because Oroondates
his entreaty, and Berenices absolute command, made him observe the silence that
was enjoined him. Yet did he by a beseeching gesture, and by looks which spoke
sufficiently for him, beg pardon of Berenice for the injuries he had done her,
and that fair Princess, who at her Brothers desire was set down by his
beds-head, showed plainly enough by hers, that he had obtained the pardon he
demanded, and that her former affection was augmented by those offenses whereof
he accused himself. This assurance caused motions in joy'd Arsaces, which
raised him above himself, and which made him consider that sudden revolution of
fortune, with an inconceivable ecstasy. While he contented himself with
expressing it in that mute language, his Recovery was endeavored with an
exceeding great care, and Prince Lysimachus, who next Oroondates was more
concerned in it than all the rest, employed so many to seek that sovereign
herb, which had lately been so favorable to him, that after a great deal of
difficulty, some few Roots of it were found upon the neighboring mountain.
They were no sooner applied, but they wrought their usual effect, and gave the
Chirurgians certain hope of a speedy cure. The next day he was visibly amended,
but though the Physicians allowed him to discourse a little with his friends,
they would not suffer him to engage himself in the long narration which was
desired of him, and only ordained that he should defer it till the day
following. Oroondates, who knew not Arsaces his intentions, and who believed
that perhaps he might be unwilling to make himself known to so many persons,
who had been Enemies to his Father, who had labored for the destruction of his
Family, and who had made themselves great, but by those Territories which ought
to have been his, took such a course by the means of Lysimachus and Araxes,
that his true name was not published so soon, and he only discovered it to
Thalestris, Ptolomeus, and some of those in whom he had a more especial
confidence. Arsaces prayed Oroondates to make him the Relation of that part of
his Adventures which was unknown to him, and the Prince gave him an exact
account of them, which caused him often to fall into such admirations, and
praises of his virtue, as the Princes modesty could not suffer. Part of the day
was bestowed in this Recital, and the remainder passed in a delightful
conversation, wherein the Princess Deidamia, who with the other Ladies was come
to visit the Princes, appeared like a fair star, and made some of the company
doubt whether Berenice had any advantage over her. That lovely Princess had
already given her a large place in her affection, Thalestris had not been
sparing to her of hers, and all the Princes charmed with her beauty, and with
her admirable qualities, and touched with the sad Events of her Fortune, and
with the Ruin of her House, had with much joy, and civility promised her that
protection, and assistance she demanded of them. Demetrius interessed himself
more in that business than all the rest, and his Father began already to
observe that he beheld that Princess, with Eyes less drowned in tears than
ordinary, and that he was not altogether so much fixed upon the sorrowful
remembrance of his Hermione. This was the last day of the Truce, which obliged
the Princes to spend the remnant of it carefully in putting the Army in order,
either to assault, if they saw occasion, or to defend it self, if it should be
assaulted. Those great Soldiers were too skillful in their Trade to be
ignorant of any thing that could serve for their advantage; but after having
visited the Camp, they thought themselves not in a condition to attempt any
thing for some days, and the knowledge they had that their Enemies were
altogether as unfit for action, made them only prepare for their defense, or
to avoid those surprises, whereof too great a negligence might afford an
opportunity; and in the mean time they were extremely diligent in hastening the
cure of their hurt men, and in causing those that were well, to work at their
Trenches. The next day Arsaces was so much better, that he himself could hardly
believe the sudden return of strength he felt; and Oroondates, as soon as he
was awake, having asked him how he did; I am so well (said he) Brother, that I
find my self able to satisfy the desire you have to learn my Adventures; you
have more interest in the recital of them than any body in the world, and our
two lives are so chained to one another, that it is almost impossible to
separate them. I lost one half of mine (replied Oroondates) when I thought I
had lost you, and the other subsisted only by the love I bore my Princess. I
owed that part of Oroondates to her, and but for that, I should have sacrificed
it all to my sorrow for the death of Artaxerxes; but O Gods! is it possible you
should have lived ever since, without giving this afflicted Brother any
knowledge that you were alive? These words drew some sighs from Arsaces, and
when he was going to answer him, they saw the fair Thalestris come into the
Chamber, and with her Prince Lysimachus, Oxyartes, and Artabasus. As soon as
they had bidden the two Princes good morrow, and that they with joy had heard
from them the estate of their health. Oroondates turning toward Arsaces.
Brother (said he) these pesons are not to be suspected, in the relation I have
demanded of you, and I believe 't is partly that desire that has brought them
hither. If I am suspected, (added Lysimachus) I shall not take it ill, if you
think fit I should retire, and leave you in a more absolute liberty. No,
Lysimachus (replied the Prince) you shall never be suspected by me, and I shall
be extremely afflicted, if you conserve not that friendship to Parisatise's
brother, which you already have promised to Arsaces. He detained Queen
Thalestris with the same civility, but Oroondates desired their entertainment
should be limited to that number of persons, and Lysimachus gave order at the
Tent door, that the Princes should not be disturbed that morning. Arsaces was
going to begin his story, when Oroondates, fearing he should be obliged to
speak too loud by reason of the distance between their beds, had a mind to go
into his, but the presence of Thalestris hindered him, which Lysimachus
perceiving, led her for awhile into the next Chamber, and at their return they
found the two Princes in Arsaces his bed, linked in a very different embrace
from those they had given one another not many days before. These illustrious
persons took their places close by the bed, and Arsaces having held his peace
awhile, broke silence in these terms.

The History of Arsaces.
O Gods! with what face can I own my having been alive, while Alexander
overran my Country, destroyed my family, and triumphed over my Fathers life
and Empire? which way shall I be able to make this shameful confession, and
what excuses can I find in my love, and in my misfortunes, to justify my self
of such a seeming cowardice? It Is true, I lived during all the losses of my
friends, and the miseries of my Country, but I lived in a condition, which if
it cannot make me absolutely innocent, may perhaps obtain some pardon amongst
you, and leave you still in a belief, that if Arsaces had been free, he would
not have been so base as to see the desolation of his Country, without burying
himself in its fatal ruins. I speak this before you, Lysimachus, whom I shall
ever be able to discern from the Enemies of our house, and I call this
remembrance into my mind, without keeping any heart-burning against many of our
generous friends, who have now taken arms for the remnant of our blood, and who
heretofore, while they served their King, and labored for their own glory,
obliged Darius his family by most considerable services, and have now left in
his Son neither any animosity against them, nor any discontent for seeing them
possessours of those Countries, which were the King my Fathers, and which ought
to have been my Dominions at this present, if by the anger of the Gods this
Empire had not been overthrown from the highest pitch that ever humane
greatness attained.

I cannot think of this sad remembrance (continued Arsaces, with a sigh or two)
without showing some tokens, that I am sensible of the ruin of our house; but
for all I am an exile, for all I am divested of an Empire, whose scattered
pieces make so many sovereigns, the Gods are my witnesses, that I shall never
bewail that loss, if I may but keep Berenice, and if with those Scepters which
Heavens wrath had put into other hands, I loose not also that worthily adored
Princess, for whom I freely did forsake them all. These words drew tears from
the eyes of all the hearers, and Arsaces having wiped away his, prosecuted his
discourse on this manner.

I died not, Brother, in that bloody Battle, wherein you thought you had lost a
brother, to whom you were a thousand times more dear than his own life, and
three days ago I should have said, that I lived to my misfortune, but my
recovering of Berenice, and of your self, banishes all those ungrateful
thoughts out of my heart, and cannot suffer me to complain of my destiny
without blasphemy, and without injustice. It Is true I died not, but I remained
in a condition that was but little different from death, and if you believed I
was so, 't was upon such apparent grounds as might have deceived all the World.
Night was already shut in when the Persians quitted the field, and the
Scythians were so weak, that they contented themselves with keeping it, without
attempting to pursue their Enemies in the dark. I lay in a swown all that
night, which in the hot season it then was, was one of the shortest of the
year, and during which the Soldiers were not suffered to pillage, nor to strip
the dead. As soon as day appeared, that liberty was granted them, and then they
began to pull off all our Arms, and Clothes. My Arms, if you remember, were as
fair, and rich as ever had been worn, and the luster of the stones they were
set withal, which sparkled in some places, in spite of the blood that covered
them, drew many Scythians to pillage me; presently one amongst them took off my
Cask, and while he amused himself in considering the beauty of it, another
stooping to me, would have unbuckled my Cuirass, but his companion, who knew
the prize was wholly his, because he had seized upon me first, opposed his
intention, and though they say the Scythians despise riches, it is true
nevertheless, that then they were powerful enough to set a quarrel between
those two Soldiers, and to make them dispute their booty with their swords.
Some of their friends drawn thither by that noise, took part on either side
according to their affections, and then there began a little skuffle about me,
in which blood would have been drawn, but for the arrival of Theodates Prince
of the Sarmates, who commanded part of the Army. As soon as he made himself
known to the Soldiers, they retired with respect, and Theodates being willing
to be judge of their difference, they began to dispute the matter before him.
He had no sooner seen my Cask which a Scythian showed him, and then my Curass,
and the rest of my Arms, but he presently believed the person that wore them,
must needs be of a considerable quality among the Persians. This opinion made
him cast his eyes the more heedfully upon me; my face was pale, and my hair all
matted with blood, hung confusedly upon the ground, which was red all round
about me; I know not whither it was my youth, or some belief of the greatness
of my birth, which at first moved compassion in Theodates; but in effect, as I
have learnt since, he began to look upon me with some sense of pity, and after
having bestowed a sigh or two on my misfortune, he was going to appoint me
burial, and was opening his mouth to decide the quarrel among the Soldiers,
and to command them to carry me from amidst the dead, when he perceived me stir
and open my eyes a little, showing many signs that I was alive. Theodates at
that sight felt some kind of joy, and drawing nearer to my face, to find
whither I breathed or no; This young man is not dead (said he) and without
doubt he deserves assistance; the Gods forbid I should neglect the occasion to
give it him, carry him into my Tent with his Arms, if he die, they shall be
yours, and if he recover, I Will pay you for them as much as you can desire.
Theodates was highly respected among the Soldiers, and (the Scythians being
religious observers of the commands of their superior Officers) these obeyed
without murmuring, and going after him, carried me to his Tent which was not
very far from thence. He immediately gave order that I should be put to bed,
that my wounds should be searched, and that all those remedies should be
applied to me, which could have been used in the like extremity to his own
person. The Chirurgians that visited my wounds found them very deep, and a
great many, but they were all in such favorable places, that only my loss of
blood gave them any apprehensions, and they told Theodates that it alone was
enough to make them despair of my recovery. Yet did they endeavor it with
great care, and skill, and labored with such sovereign remedies to draw me out
of my swown, that I came perfectly to my senses again, and opening my eyes
wide, I began to discern some of the objects that were before me. I was a long
time nevertheless before I was capable of reason, and they dressed all my
wounds, I stirring but very little the while, and having but a very light
imperfect knowledge of what was done to me; not many hours after, I grew
something better, and had strength enough to turn my head a little, to roll my
eyes on every side, to call things past into my memory, and to question my self
touching my present condition. I had a confused remembrance of the Battle, and
of part of what I had done there, but I could not imagine in what place I was,
nor which way I came thither. I began to be desirous to know, when Theodates
came to my bedside, and seeing that I looked intentively upon him; whosoever
you are (said he) fear nothing, but believe you are fallen into the hands of a
man that will not consider you as an Enemy, and who will labor as much for
your safety as for his own. He went away not staying for my answer, and
shutting the curtain of my bed, left me at liberty to digest his words, and to
think of the estate I was in. I was not so weak, nor so little come to my self,
but that I understood what he had said, and after I had reflected upon it, I
conjectured something of the truth. I knew I was a prisoner, but though that
condition seemed hard to me, I had courage enough to support it, and by the
first usage I received from this Enemy, I began to hope for all manner of
courtesy from him. This knowledge sweetened my discontent, and being at that
time I was void of any passion that could make me hate my life, I joyfully
received the assistance that was given me for the conservation of it. The
second day I was a little stronger, and the next after that, the Physicians
assured Theodates, that by the favor of the Gods, there was hope of my
recovery. The third day, when they had fired the Camp to burn that great number
of dead bodies, which the Scythians left upon our fields, they repassed the
Araxis, to march back toward Issedon; and Theodates, who did already interess
himself very much in my safety, not being able to oppose that necessity, would
have me brought along in the most commodious manner he possibly could, and for
that purpose caused a close handlitter to be made, and to be carried by a great
many men appointed for that office, who easing one another of that pains by
turns, removed me very gently, and easily kept pace with the Army, which by
reason of the number of their wounded men, moved leisurely, and made but very
short marches. We came on this fashion into Scythia, and arrived at Issedon,
but Theodates, who for particular reasons, desired to keep me concealed, would
not let me be carried into that City, but to a house of his which was not
above five or six hundred furlongs from thence. I was already in a condition
which gave the Chirurgians certain hopes of my recovery, but my wounds were so
great, that long time, and much patience were necessary for my cure, nor did
they fail to labor in it with such extraordinary care, that I could not then
imagine any other thing, but that Theodates, having had some knowledge of my
quality, was so industrious to procure my health, out of hope to get a mighty
ransom for me. I wronged his virtue in that false opinon, and I have since had
very good reason to know, that nothing but mere generosity inspired him with
all those favorable inclinations to me. He had visited me often during our
march, and he saw me diverse times at that house of his, where he forgot no kind
of civility or good usage, to sweeten the discontent I might have either for my
wounds, or for my captivity. I had learned his name and quality of them that
waited on me, and that knowledge obliged me to pay him what I thought due to a
Prince, to whom I was so highly indebted. He never had asked me any thing
concerning my name or birth, and I judged it not convenient to discover that I
was Darius his Son, knowing what a mortal hatred the King of Scythia bore our
family; But one day when he was by my bedside, he with a great deal of
civility entreated me to tell him something of them, assuring me, that let me
disguise it as much as I would, I could not put him out of the opinion he had
conceived of the greatness of my quality. I all my life had a great aversion
against lying, and besides, esteeming Theodates extremely, I desired to tell
him truth without discovering my self, and remembering the former names our
family had born before my Father attained the Crown; I am called Arsaces (said
I) my Fathers name was Codoman, and you were not deceived, when you believed me
to be something above the common rank of men; for indeed, I am born a Prince,
in one of those Contreys that obey Darius, and I have the honor to appertain
to him by some Alliances which are not very remote; I make this confession to
you, upon the knowledge I have of your virtue, and though captivity be hard to
Princes, I shall bear mine with patience, and not think my condition miserable,
because I am fallen into the hands of so genererous a Prince as Theodates. When
you are once in such an estate (replied Theodates) that you can make use of the
esteem I have of you, you will find I have no intentions you can complain of,
nor shall the knowledge you give me of your quality, be any way to your
disadvantage. Yet is it necessary it should be unknown to the Scythians, for if
the King should know I had a prisoner of such importance, it would be hard for
you to recover your liberty before the end of our wars. You may lie here
concealed till you are well, and when you have recovered your health and
strength, I will certainly give you cause to continue your good opinion of me.
We had some other discourse upon this subject, and during all the time my
wounds kept me in bed, I had a thousand new occasions to acknowledge his
civility. While I led that kind of life (very tedious to a person of my humor)
I made my thoughts to travel as far as Persia, and I may truly protest to you,
brother, that nothing in my captivity troubled me so much as our separation. I
was uncertain whether you had escaped the Battle in which I fell, and into
which I had seen you rush headlong with so little regard of danger, and really
that apprehension was the greatest of my discontents. Yet did I receive some
consolation, in that among so many bodies as were stripped, yours, whereof the
whole Court of Scythia had the Idaea most present to their memory, had not been
found, which made me hope with a great deal of likelihood, that you were not
slain in that days service. Your consideration also gave me a desire to make
some stay among the Scythians, though I had had liberty to return, and my dear
Oroondates was too high in my esteem to leave his Country without seeing the
King his Father, and that Sister, whose admirable beauty was so loudly famed,
and whereof I had heard Araxes, and many other persons in Scythia, speak with
some of those praises which are her due. I heartily wished for some occasion,
wherein I might repay your house some small part of what you had done for ours,
and the Gods know I would have purchased it with the better part of my blood.
In fine, not to hold you longer in this tedious part of my life, I recovered my
health, but I was not able to stir out of my Chamber of above three months
after our arrival in Scythia; I saw my self at liberty as soon as cured, there
were no Guards to hinder me from going away, and generous Theodates, did not so
much as demand my promise for assurance. I rather would have lost my life, than
abused that goodness, nor would I have taken so much liberty, as to have walked
into the garden, if he had not earnestly entreated me himself, and if within a
few days after, he had not told me that I was a free man, and that if I had a
mind to retire into my Country, he would furnish me with means to get out of
Scythia. This great civility of Theodates, put me into a confusion which I
cannot represent, but I would by no means accept his offers, and I let him see
I knew too well how the rights of war engaged me toward him, to make so ill an
use of his noble favors; I told him that I knew the Obligations I had to him
were invaluable, but also that with what wealth the Gods had left to my
disposing, I had a life, which I held from none but him, and which I with a
perfect satisfaction would bestow on him that had so generously preserved it.
Theodates judging by my discourse that I was not of an humor, to continue
engaged in so great obligations, redoubled his affection to me, and protested,
that he never would receive any thing but my friendship for the price of my
liberty, and of what he had done to save my life. And I (replied I) will never
receive my liberty upon such conditions, and if it be an offense to Prince
Theodates to offer him riches for a reward of his generosity, he cannot at the
least refuse Arsaces himself, who gives himself absolutely to him, and who will
not leave his preserver, and his master. Our conversation ended with a great
many embraces, and Theodates told me I should oblige him infinitely, by the
desire I had to make a longer stay with him, and that he had already conceived
such an affection toward me, as would not suffer him, to let me depart from
him without discontent. He promised me afterward that he would carry me to see
the King, the Princess, and the whole Court, in such a way that I should run no
hazard of being known, and that if my face were taken notice of, he would
easily make me pass for a stranger, whom desire of glory had brought into those
places, where it was to be gotten, and the same day after he had instructed his
people how they should behave themselves toward me, and what they should
answer if they were questioned about me, he took me along with him to Issedon,
when we were alone he used me as a Prince, and as a man of quality equal to his
own; but before those that might observe our actions, he at my request, carried
himself toward me as an inferior person, and on that had dependence on him;
otherwise it would have been very hard for me to have stayed long at Court
without being suspected. The second day after our arrival, I saw the King in
the Temple, and though he was my Fathers Enemy, and without doubt mine also, I
could not look upon the Father of Oroondates, without some touches of
affection. His garb me thought was extreme warlike, and extreme amorous both
together, and there was Arsacomes, and many other Princes attending on him; but
the next day going with Theodates into a wood, where the Princess Berenice used
to walk every evening, I saw her, that admirable Lady, I saw her, and in that I
think I have said all, since to see her, and to loose that liberty for her
which I had so long conserved, was but one and the same thing; neither indeed
is Berenice's beauty one of those that stand in need of long time to make a
conquest, for to support her very first looks without yielding, is wilfully to
hold out in a guilty, and in an unseemly resistance; I saw her with Arms
against which it was not possible to defend ones self, and they amongst you,
whose passion gives them advantageous opinions of those they love, must pardon
me if I say, that all I had seen till then was but ill-favored in my conceit,
compared to Berenice. Scarce had I cast mine Eyes upon her, but I was already
in a flame, and in short, Brother, no longer time was requisite for Berenice to
make her self Mistress of Artaxerxes his heart, than according to your report,
Statira had to win the affections of Oroondates. This resemblance of our
Destinies came presently into my mind, nay, and I think, that though its
assistance was utterly unnecessary, yet did it help toward my first Engagement:
O Gods! how fatal was that moment to my Repose! how many sufferings has it cost
me, but withal how happy was it to me! since in spite of all my pains, inspite
of all my losses; and in spite of all my misfortunes, it has made me taste a
bliss, the least part whereof was not to be purchased with all my pains,
losses, and misfortunes put together. The divine Berenice was alighted from her
Chariot, to walk under the Trees with Princess Theomiris her Cousin, and some
other Ladies of her Attendance, and though I only kept along with the Train at
a good distance, I observed such beauties in her, as far supassed my
imagination. You know this mavelous Princess so well already, that I shall
not need to make any description of her, and I will only tell you, that I
fixed my self so deeply in that contemplation, that I lost all knowledge of
what I did, and in my walk I was guided merely by the throng of People that
waited on the Princess. O Gods! (said I to my self) is it possible you should
have thus advantageously displayed all your powers in one mortal beauty, or
rather, is it possible that all your powers should have been able to form so
mavelous a workmanship? Fly Artaxerxes, (said I within a little after) fly
from so fatal a sight, and suffer not thy self to fall into a precipice, from
whence thou never can be able to retire; this beauty is not destined unto
men, nor can men without a crime raise their audacious thoughts unto it. I was
so carried away in these discourses, that I had hardly so much as a small
glimpse of knowledge remaining, and I should have continued long in that
employment, if the Princess had not given over walking, and if Theodates had
not taken me back with him, after he with much ado had raised me out of the
deep meditation wherein I was buried. Of all the rest of the day he could not
draw a reasonable word from me, and when I was in my Bed, I began a war with my
own thoughts, of a quite different nature from all those I had ever been in
before that time. All Berenices beauties came presently into my rememberance,
and with them all the sweetness, and all the Advantages that might be found in
the glory of serving her, but this knowledge was quickly accompanied with that
of the difficulties there were in that Design, and in that birth of my love, I
made reflections little different from those you made in the beginnings of
yours. It Is true (said I) that Berenice is the most accomplished creature of
the world, and that all, which men have seen till now, has nothing that in any
degree comes near her admirable beauties; she is but too fair, she is but too
perfect: that is not the thing that makes thee waver, O Artaxerxes, nor do
thou at all doubt whether she be worthy of thy love, and of that liberty, which
hitherto thou have preserved entire; but she is the King of Scythia's daughter,
and thou art the son of Darius. I staid a while upon this consideration, but
presently after I passed over that first difficulty by your example. Was not
Statira (said I) Darius his daughter, and was not Oroondates the King of
Scythia's son? Have not thou a heart as well as he? And can not thou attempt
that for his sister, which he so courageously hazarded for thine? Thou without
doubt have facilities in thy Design, which he found not in his, his Example may
encourage thee, his proceeding may instruct thee, and his assistance may make
thee the most fortunate of all men living. He will not refuse to give it thee,
(dear brother) and I assure my self he will do the same Offices for thee to his
sister, which he received of thee to thine. The Gods will mollify our fathers
hearts in time, and in the interim, thou will be too happy, and too contented
in having a like destiny with thy Oroondates. But what do thou say, (replied
I presently after to my self) a like destiny? Oroondates possesses thy sisters
affections already, and perhaps his will never approve of thine. Thou ought
not to hope for the same success in thy love, which thy brothers admirable
qualities gave him in his. He is the most deserving of all the men in the whole
world, and Statira, without being the most insensible of all women, could not
have defended her self against him. Peradventure Berenices inclinations may be
different from thy sisters, and she with justice will find out the odds there
is between Artaxerxes, and Prince Oroondates. Besides, Oroondates before he
engaged himself in that Enterprise, had already gained Statira, and the whole
House of Persia, by obligations which gave him the confidence to attempt what
he undertook; but Artaxerxes has yet done nothing, (save Actions of an Enemy)
either for Berenice, or for the King of Scythia. Do something therefore
Artaxerxes, that may render thee considerable to King Mattheus, and that may
give thee some advantage in thy pretending to Berenice. If thou can not make
thy self so remarkable as Oroondates did, at least seek some occasion to
testify that thou have not the thoughts of an Enemy, and either perish for
them, or do them some service that may procure thee a place in their esteem.
All things are favorable to thee, if thou know how to use thy fortune, and
in this glorious Design which keeps thee in Scythia, Theodates his friendship
will not be unprofitable to thee. I reasoned thus a long time, sometimes
flattering my self with hopes, and sometimes afflicting my self with
difficulties; but in the end, I overcame them all to take my final resolution.
Why do thou stand wavering [pursued I] in a thing thou can not possibly
avoid? It Is a decree of the Destinies, from which all the Contestations in the
world can never free thee. Deliberate no more whether thou should love
Berenice; but deliberate of the means thou should use to make her suffer thy
affection. If it please the Gods, it may but one day be acceptable to her, all
the most happy persons that ever were, never knew felicity in any degree
comparable unto thine: and if thou die in serving her, thy death will be a
thousand times more glorious than thy thy life. Here it was I fixed, and no
longer doubting whether I should love or no, I thought only what course I
should take to make my self be loved. I resolved to use Theodates his
friendship for my stay in Scythia; but I settled a firm determination not to
present my self to the King, nor to the Princess his daughter, till I had done
some Action for their service, which might introduce me handsomely into their
knowledge. In the interim I often saw my adored Princess, but 'twas in Temples,
or in such places where she could not take notice of my face, and every time I
discovered new beauties in her, and felt inconceivable increases in my passion.
In short [Brother] I loved her with all the violence that can be found in the
strongest affections, and I loved her with so absolute a respect, and so
perfect a knowledge of her Excellencies, that I never cherished any hope of
making my self worthy to serve her. I learned with much discontent that
audacious Arsacomes had raised his thoughts to her, and that abusing the Kings
love to his sister, he was so impudent, as to own his, to the whole world, and
to give the Princess public demonstrations of it. The insolence of that
indiscreet subject, animated me with a just wrath, and with a lawful
indignation against him; and if I had been in a condition to have shown them, I
should not have suffered a presumption that displeased my Princess. That was it
wherein I found some consolation, for I no sooner knew that Arsacomes was in
love with Berenice, but I heard that Berenice detested Arsacomes. I staid some
few months at Issedon on this manner, and in the end, the Gods made me depart
from thence upon those occasions I had so ardently desired, and so impatiently
waited for.

The Nomades, and the Hyleans rose up in Arms, and making themselves Masters of
all that lies near the Lake of Buges, drew a potent Army into the field, and
began to make such havoc, that the noise of it came presently to the Kings
ear. He was desirous to apply some speedy Remedy to those Troubles, and setting
an Army on foot, worthily made choice of Theodates to command it. I blessed
that favorable occasion a thousand times, and prepared my self with an
incredible joy to march along with that generous friend, upon an Expedition,
wherein I possibly might find opportunity to make my self appear with some
Reputation to the King of Scythia, and perhaps some Encounter wherein I might
repay some part of what I owed to Theodates. I expressed to him the contentment
I received by that employment, and told him the Resolution I had taken, either
to lose that life he had saved, in fighting by his side, or else to do
something for his service, that might hinder him from repenting the affection
he had so blindly given me. I love you (answered Theodates) with so perfect a
knowledge of your merit, that I cannot be accused of blindness in my
friendship; and in performing mervellous Exploits, you will do nothing beyond
the opinion I have of you. Theodates accompanied these favorable words, with
many obliging Endearments; and we made ready for a departure, which by reason
of the pressing necessity of affairs, was very sudden and precipitate. I in
that separation should have felt all the discontents a cruel absence can throw
upon a person that most ardently loves, if I had not found my consolation in
the hope I had of some Advantages that Voyage might procure me. We went from
Issedon, and took long marches toward the Enemies. At first I would by no means
accept of any command, but contented my self with fighting near Theodates his
person; but in the first Battle that was given, I was so happy as to do him
some services, which obliged him to bestow employments on me that were above
the reach of my capacity.

Arsaces his modesty caused him to pass lightly over the occasions wherein he
had made himself remarkable; but Oroondates perceived it, and being desirous to
spare him the pains of telling them some of those things they had heard already
from Berenice. Brother (said he) we have learned part of those gallant Actions
you did in that first Battle; we know you saved Theodates his life two several
times, and that seeing your Squadrons waver, you seized upon the foremost
Standard, reanimated your frighted Troops by your words, and by your Example,
and by your only Valor, turned the Victory to your side, which was already
declaring it self for your Enemies. We know that after all these wonders,
Theodates gave you the command of part of the Army, that with it you took
places of great importance by Assault, and that with eight thousand Horse, you
perfected the defeating of the Rebels near the Lake of Buges, with such
mavelous Effects of Valor, and good Conduct, that the memory of them will
never be lost among the Scythians. You have been told a great deal more than
what I did (replied Arsaces modestly) and it is with much injustice they would
rob Theodates of part of that glory, which was totally due to him. We have
heard moreover, (continued Oroondates) how you were presented to the King, by
Theodates, the Reception you had from him, the beginnings of your favor, and
of the Reputation you acquired among the Scythians, the progress of your credit
with the King, your generous, and affable carriage, which gained you the hearts
of all the Court, the first discourses you had with Berenice, and Stratonices
Marriage to the King; and in short, the adventure which made my Sister discover
your passion for her. She was relating these passages to me when you came into
our Camp, and we were interrupted just as she began to tell the conversation
you had with her in an Arbor of the Garden, where by Cyllenia's mediation you
obtained the audience you had demanded. These Princes that hear you, learned
them not from Berenice, but I made them the Recital yesterday, and they know
enough of all to ease you of a trouble, which in your present condition, would
be no small one.

Since you are so well instructed in these particulars, [pursued Arsaces] I
will not repeat what you have heard already from my Princess; but before I come
to the place where her Narration was interrupted, I Will tell you some things in a
few words, which at that time were not come unto her knowledge. She might be
able to tell you the discourses I had with her, but she could not represent to
you what I felt inwardly for her, and though in that I am more knowing than any
other body, even I my self shall find the expressing of it to be a very
difficult matter. After the time that I had the honor to have access to her,
and that together with her outward beauties, I was permitted to contemplate
part of those which adorned her mind; when her transcendent virtue, her
charming conversation, and her excellent goodness, were as well known to me as
her face; of a passionate man that I was before, I became an idolater, and grew
quite transported, having scarce power enough left me over my self, to keep
that violent passion from breaking forth, which had made it self mistress of my
soul with a most absolute Empire. That perfect knowledge I had of her admirable
qualities, checked my aspiring hopes, and I could not consider Berenice, in
that sublime degree of perfection to which the Gods had raised her, without
remembering my self to be but a man, and therefore utterly unworthy to serve
her. This reflection caused disquiets in me, which often were observed in my
face, and though I was laden with honors, and favored by the King beyond my
desert, that inward discontent made me but little sensible of any outward
happiness, and hindered me from tasting those Advantages, which the most eminent
persons in all Scythia could not look upon without Envy. Theodates his
friendship toward me, was so augmented after those light services I had done
him, that he seemed to live only for my sake, and he took so great an interest
in those favors I received from the King, that my fortune seemed really to be
his own, and to say the truth, I made use of it as much as possibly I could to
his Advantage, and employed a great part of the confidence the King had in me,
to recommend the person of Theodates to him; but these marks of my affection
seemed light to me, in respect of what I owed to his, and I believed that after
the proofs he had given me of it; I not only might tell him who I was, but
that I could not without ingratitude conceal my self from him any longer.
Besides in the condition I then was, I stood in need of a person to whom I
might communicate my thoughts, and amongst all those that were most discreet,
and most affectionate to me, I could not have chosen one more worthy than he of
so important a trust. Theodates loves me too well, (said I) and Theodates is
too generous to betray me, and besides the shame his treachery would be to him,
he could reap no manner of advantage by my destruction. I ended these words
with repentance for having distrusted Theodates his virtue, and following the
resolution I had taken, one day when I had shut my self with him into a
Closset, I discovered my true quality to him, and the true cause of my abode in
Scythia. I made him acquainted with my love as well as with my birth, and
showed him how by that Declaration I put that life into his hands, over which
he had a great deal of power before. I should have much ado to represent the
greatness of Theodates his astonishment; after this discovery, he had so good
an opinion of me, as not to doubt the truth of my words, and both my face and
actions, as he said to flatter me, persuaded him sufficiently that my birth was
higher than ordinary; but he thought this Adventure so little common, that upon
the report of another body, he could hardly have given credit to it. Though he
appeared amazed, he appeared not changed, and he believed that by that
testimony of my friendship, he was deeply obliged to persevere in his. I
opposed those submissions which that knowledge of my quality would have obliged
him to render me, and after I had most expressly entreated him, to live in the
same freedom with me as he was wont, he made such protestations to me, and
promised me his assistance in my Design with so great affection, that I did not
think I had any reason to repent me of the confidence I had in him. From that
time forward he comforted me in my discontents as much as possibly he could,
sought means to let me see my Princess often, and procured me that little
Picture which gave her the knowledge of my love. While I lived at Issedon, in a
very languishing manner, and that I could not obtain permission of my respect
to declare my passion, the Truce was proposed, and concluded between the King
of Scythia, and the King my father; but the cause of it was sad to poor Darius,
and 'twas about that time we heard that the Lieutenants were defeated at the
passage of the Granicus, that part of his Dominions had followed the fortune of
conquering Alexander; and that afterward Darius himself had lost the Battle of
Issus, and with it a great many of his Provinces, and all his Family, who were
taken Prisoners. You may easily judge, that (for all I was so prepossessed with
a passion, which made me insensible of all things else) I could not receive
this news without a most deep discontent, and a great deal of shame. It wrought
a strange alteration in my hopes, nor had love so totally seized upon my heart,
but that it had left some place in it for the considerations of honor. What
(said I) shall I languish then at the feet of a person, to whom my sufferings
are not so much as known, and shall I live in Scythia, as a man to whom the
misfortunes of Persia were things indifferent, while Alexander lays our
Country desolate, usurps our Territories, and persecutes our House? Ah
Arsaces, Arsaces, remember that thou art still Artaxerxes; cast off this
personage which love has disguised thee with, to take up that again to which
thine honor recals thee, and consider that Berenice her self would not esteem
thee, if thou could linger out thy life so shamefully at her feet. I never
stood wavering about what resolution I ought to take, and how great violence
soever my love made me feel at that separation, to which I was to dispose my
self, the care of my Reputation, and the tender affection I bore to my own
blood, made me master of that passion which fought against my duty with its
utmost power. When once my honor is satisfied (said I) we will suffer love to
work, and I may better serve Berenice, when I shall have freed my self from a
shame that would render me unworthy of her; when we have repelled that Enemy,
who equally destroys my fathers Kingdoms, and my hopes, we will return into
Scythia, and with a freer confidence demand that of Berenice, which we should
not dare to aspire to, being depressed with infamy. This was my final
determination, and I imparted it to Theodates, who was most sensibly concerned
in my afflictions, and who resolved to keep me company in that Voyage, and to
follow my fortune over all the world. Though he complied exceedingly with my
passion, he could not disapprove my resolution, and he confessed that in the
extremity our House was reduced to, I could not give my self over to my love,
without blasting my memory for ever with an irreparable want of spirit. My
departure therefore was concluded in spite of all the oppositions of my love;
but yet I was not a little troubled to leave Scythia, without giving my
Princess some knowledge of it. I contrived several ways in my imagination, but
my fortune took care of it, and 'twas about that time my little Picture spoke
for me, and discovered that unto my Princess, which my respect had forced me to
conceal. I am not able to describe at length, with what a grief I was
afflicted, when I received the sentence of my condemnation by the mouth of
Cyllenia; notwithstanding the astonishment that appeared in my face, I did not
think it very strange, and I had ever believed that the Princess would not
without displeasure receive a declaration of love from a man unknown as
Arsaces, who passed in the Court of Scythia but for a private person; but I was
extremely grieved I had offended her by my presumption, and that at my
departure I should carry away with me the sorrow of having incurred her anger.
I had a desire she should believe I knew Berenices merit too well, to permit
her to be served by a man of obscure birth, and I judged that peradventure she
would find less ground of offense in the passion of the Prince of Persia, than
in that of an unknown Arsaces; this was the reason that made me demand that
audience by Cyllenia, which I had so much ado to obtain, and which I covered
with other pretenses, than those of my love, knowing very well, that without
entertaining the Princess with it, I by the discourse I had to make, might blot
out part of the injury I had done her. I Will not speak a word to her of my love
(said I to my self) nor is it necessary, since she is well enough instructed in
that already; that perhaps I may get her to approve it, by the example, and by
the remembrance of Oroondates; and when I shall join the intercession of that
Friend to the knowledge of my quality, I may perchance seem less faulty in my
Princesses opinion. 'Twas upon this hope I pressed the demand I had made unto
Cyllenia, and when I had obtained the favor I desired, I came into the Garden,
after I had premeditated what I would say, and how I would behave my self. Here
Arsaces making a little pause, Oroondates told him where his sisters recital
had been interrupted, and then Arsaces went on with it on this manner. Since my
Princess has told you the first words of our conversation, it will suffice me
to let you know the rest: After that by her command, I was risen from my knee,
I fixed my Eyes upon her face, and though she out of resentment, turned away
hers from me, I forbore not to speak to her in these terms.

I should not have deferred to obey you, Madam, but should have left a
Country, in which you no longer behold me but with indignation, if I could
have done it without deceiving a person, who heretofore was worthy of your
friendship, and who honored me particularly with his; I have taken the charge
upon me, to let you know what is become of him, and to draw you by the relation
of his Adventures, out of a great many discontents, wherein the ignorance of
them may have retained you. But before I tell you the name of that illustrious
person, be pleased Madam to behold a pledge he gave me of his friendship, and
perhaps the sight of it will prepare you to lend more credit to my discourse.
At these words, Brother, I showed her a Ring which you had bestowed upon me,
and which you had received from her self. It was a stone of very great price,
and luster, upon which two hearts were engraven, tied together many several
ways with certain bands, and in the Greek Tongue this word, Inseparable. The
Princess struggled with her anger, to cast her Eyes upon that Ring, and she no
sooner saw it, but she knew it immediately. Ah! Arsaces (said she) this Ring
was the Prince my Brothers. Yes, Madam, (replied I) and 'twas from him that I
received it. O Gods! (cried the Princess) in what part of the world was it you
knew him, and what news do you bring me of him? I can give you a very
particular account (pursued I) if you will allow me a favorable hearing, I
shall hearken diligently to you without doubt (said Berenice) and you cannot
engage my attention by a more pleasing Entertainment, nor by any, wherein I can
have a greater interest. O my dearest Brother! (continued she with a transport
of affection) what Province can retain you now, and how great is your
inhumanity in absenting your self so long from those, to whom your absence is a
death! After this short Exclamation, she disposed her self to hear me, and to
satisfy her Expectation began thus. Before I tell you, Madam, in what place I
had the honor to be known to Prince Oroondates; you will give me leave
(omitting what concerns my self till the end of my narration) to entertain you
with his most important Adventures, and to make you acquainted with passages,
whose recital without doubt will not be unpleasing to you. Then I began to
relate your first Encounter with the Queens, and Princesses of Persia, in that
Tent where you saved them from the violence of the Scythians; I told her the
birth of your affection, the Encounter you had with Prince Artaxerxes in the
same occasion, your generous usage of him, and the discourse that passed
between you, your parting, and your particular thoughts, till you dis-incamped,
and re-passed the Araxis. Having instructed her in the cause of your departure,
which till then she had been ignorant of, I related your Voyage into Persia,
your gallant entry into the Court, how you made your self remarkable in the
courses, by dismounting so many of the most noted Persians, and how under the
name of Orontes, you were known again by all Darius his family for their
valiant Deliverer; but I enlarged my self more particularly than in all the
rest, upon the passages between you and Prince Artaxerxes, and desiring to work
some esteem, and some affection in Berenice toward that Prince, I forgot
modesty to speak things to his advantage, the recital whereof would have been
very unseemly in my mouth, if love had not excused me. I heigthen'd the proofs
he gave you of his friendship in terms that might make him far more amiable
than he is, and which caused the Princess to interrupt me, saying, What,
Arsaces, was he whom you describe to be so obliging, and so perfect a friend to
my brother, the same Prince that was slain in the Battle of Selena? Even he
himself (replied I) but make no reckoning of these his first Actions, since in
his last, you without doubt will have more cause to think well of him, or at
least to abate part of that hatred you bear his family. Ah! (said the Princess)
how much am I afflicted for him, and how much you would have obliged me;
Arsaces, if you had spared me the grief I feel for his untimely death! After
these words I prosecuted my Narration, but I did so exaggerate the affection
wherewith Artaxerxes received the discovery of Orontes to be Oroondates, the
passion wherewith he solicited his sister in his behalf, the care he took to
favor him in his love all manner of ways, and in short, the last proofs he
gave him of his affection, as well in contesting with him about choosing sides,
as in what he did, and suffered for his consideration at the Battle, that when
I came to make the Relation of his Death, the Princess prepossessed with the
impressions I had given her, could not forbear to show how sensible she was of
it, and looking upon me with Eyes all drowned in tears, which a generous
compassion made her shed; Ah! Arsaces, (said she) how cruel you are in having
given me so great an affection fora Prince whom you meant to kill! I would it
pleased the Gods he were alive, and that Oroondates by a good part of his
Dominions, and even by a good part of my blood, were able to requite his
obligations to him. He was resolved, Madam, (replied I coldly) to give him a
more glorious recompense, and if you will give me leave, I Will tell you, Madam,
'twas by the glory of serving the Princess Berenice, he intended to repay
Artaxerxes for the good offices he had done him to Statira. 'Twas Artaxerxes,
Madam, whom Oroondates had destined for you, and if that poor Prince had been
so happy to make himself worthy of you, 'twas by the hope of that double
Alliance, he aimed to settle peace between your fathers. How often did that
Prince (flattered by the hopes he gave him, and in love with you already by the
description Araxes made) press Oroondates, to seek some way with him for the
attaining of that happiness he had propounded; and would have resolved to come
disguised into your Country, if he could have forsaken Oroondates in affairs
wherein he believed himself necessary to him. Oroondates is now with Darius,
beloved of his Princess, and in a condition which would not be miserable, if he
were not mortally afflicted for the loss of his dear friend and brother. He was
slain, poor Prince, but his fate is too happy, and too glorious, since the
recital of his Death has drawn tears from your fair Eyes, in spite of the
hatred between your families; he was slain, because the Gods knew that perhaps
he was not worthy to live for you; and that you would have condemned both the
intention of the Prince your brother, and the presumption of Artaxerxes. His
Estate is a thousand times more fortunate by being dead in such a condition as
makes you to esteem his memory, and to bestow those tears out of your
compassion for his loss, than if he had died guilty in your opinion, or if he
had died for the expiation of such a fault as that of Arsaces. Let Us not talk
of the fault of Arsaces (said the Princess interrupting me) it has nothing to
do with the fortune of Artaxerxes) for if that lovely Prince had had those
thoughts for me which my brother would have infused into him, he had been
guilty of no other fault, but of having had too great a compliance for a
friend, and of having blindly given his affections to a Princess, that had not
deserved them. If I believed, Madam, (replied I, very glad to see her brought
to the point I desired) that you really had those inclinations toward
Artaxerxes which you express, without doubt I should comfort the trouble his
death has caused in you, and should make his destiny so fortunate, that the
most happy persons in the world should have reason to envy it. What consolation
can you give [said the Princess] for losses that are irreparable, and if you
should tell me that my brothers fortune is at the highest point he ever could
have hoped, what will that alter this poor Princes condition, since in fine he
is dead, and that our wishes cannot call him back into the world again. At
these words I took courage, and raising the tone of my voice which my passion
did extremely animate; But if Artaxerxes should be alive, [said I] if he should
be in Scythia, if he should have seen you, if he should have adored you, and
did adore you still with passions a thousand times more violent than those the
Prince your brother endeavored to inspire him with; to what punishment would
you condemn his presumption? Berenice astonished at this discourse, looked upon
me without being able to reply, but I had not the power to conceal my self any
longer, and taking my time to fall at her feet while she was in that trouble:
Behold him, Madam, [continued I] behold him, that happy, and that miserable
Prince, whose death has touched you, and whose life has displeased you; either
cease to hate Arsaces, or else cease to love Artaxerxes; the one cannot be
innocent, so long as the other is guilty, and sure the Gods did not save an
innocent Artaxerxes; to make of him a guilty Arsaces. If Arsaces his passion
has offended you, that of Artaxerxes is supported with the friendship, with the
assistance, and with the inspirations of Oroondates; repay me some part of what
I did for him, and since the Gods will not let me call him now to my relief,
suffer me to make use of your friendship to him, and of his to me, to obtain
your pardon for the offense I have committed. I am criminal, since I have
displeased you, but my crime is excusable by the cause of it, nor have I any
thing considerable in me, whereby I can merit of you in the least degree except
my crime; if you look upon me as Darius his son, remember that Oroondates was
the King of Scythia's, and moreover, remember that if I be the son of Darius, I
for your sake abandon Darius, I abandon my desolate Country, my captive
Parents, nay, and I abandon even my honor it self. Be not more obdurate in
your hatred than Statira, and if to conquer your inclinations, Artaxerxes be
not so worthy to beloved as Oroondates, let that defect be supplied by the
greatness of his passion. I brought forth these words without having the
boldness to lift up my Eyes unto my Princesss face, but when I had ended them,
I took that liberty, and saw hers fixed upon the ground, with all the symptoms
of the greater astonishment a mind can possibly fall into. I waited in vain
for an Answer from her, of a long time she was not able to give me one, and
when I had remained silent a great while expecting it; I see Madam, (pursued I,
of a sudden) that my temerity will have the success I ever looked for from it,
and that Artaxerxes had done well to die as Arsaces, since the knowledge of his
true quality, is not any way able to lessen his fault. No Madam, it is not just
that the King of Persia's son, who has yet done nothing for the Princess
Berenice, that can make her lose the inveterateness of paternal hatred, should
hope for any mercy from her, and if Oroondates had better fortune in his
affection to my sister, he was worthy of it both in regard of his services, and
of the merit of his person. I will no more allege his Example to establish
mine, but will only make use of his friendship to me, to obtain your pardon
for my offense. I for the expiation of it, will if you think fit, go and expose
the son of the King of Scythia's Enemy, to his Resentment, and by his order, I
joyfully will lose a life, which the Gods have miraculously prolonged, only to
make me spend the remainder of it so gloriously for your satisfaction; if you
disapprove this kind of punishment, my hand shall execute your will without
repugnance, and if such objects are not pleasing to you, I Will go and seek your
Reparation, and that I ow to mine own honor, in falling by the Sword of
conquering Alexander. Do but let me part from you, Madam, with some tokens of
compassion, and if you think compassion too advantageous for me, let me part
from you at least with this consolation, that it is rather the War between our
fathers, than the knowledge of Artaxerxes his passion that makes you hate him.
During this second discourse, the Princess had time to settle her self again,
yet not so perfectly, but that in her face one might still see all marks of a
strong amazement. At last she raised her Eyes from off the Earth, where she
long had kept them fixed, and turning them upon me with a very bashful Action,
but such an one as showed not so much Anger as Confusion. O Artaxerxes, (said
she) to what extremity do you reduce me, and how will you have me to explain
my self in the astonishment you have put me in? Which way can a Princess of my
condition receive declarations of love, without her fathers approbation? Which
way can I receive the son of Darius, whose name is so odious to my family? but
also what do I not ow to your Birth, and to the qualities of your person, what
do I not ow to your affection, whereof you give me such dangerous proofs, and
what do I not ow to the remembrance of all you did for Oroondates? She made a
stop at these words, as extremely pensive, and unresolved, and the joy I felt
in seeing her so shaken, held me in a silence as great as hers. I with most
passionate motions observed the alterations of her countenance, which by little
and little became more gentle, in the end, letting her self sink upon
Cyllenia's shoulder, O Gods! (cried she) how hard it is to resist so many
powers, and how little is Berenice capable of ingratitude! Me thinks (continued
she, having paused a while) this confession should be enough to satisfy you,
and that assuring you, I will consider as I ought, the merit of your person,
and that of your affection, together with that of your high friendship toward
my brother, you should have nothing more to desire of me. No, (replied I, quite
transported with joy) No, though I were the greatest among all the Gods; and my
fortune, by a prodigious effect of your goodness, is far above all the hopes I
had conceived. Rise, Sir, I beseech you (added the Princess) and pardon our
ignorance those faults it has made us to commit against you. I was so firmly
linked unto her knees, that I was fain to be commanded many times before I
could resolve to yield obedience; at last I was constrained, and by the same
power I was forced to sit down by her, to relate which way my life was saved at
the battle of Selena, and to tell her those of my Adventures that were unknown
to her. I obeyed her with a satisfaction that can hardly be imagined, and
filled my discourse with so many marks, and so many circumstances of my
passion, that before I ended it, I found my Princess was not utterly
insensible. Her inclinations naturally are mild, and pitiful, and without
doubt 'twas pity, and her friendship to the Prince her brother, that introduced
an affection into her heart, which was not due to the merit of Artaxerxes. It
was to that alone (interrupted Oroondates) that Berenice gave what will never
be refused you by any body, nor could she, I will not say without ingratitude,
and insensibility, but even without stupidity defend her self against so many
admirable qualities; she loved you before as Arsaces; but her ignorance of your
condition, made her conceal from one unknown, what she avowed with honor to
the greatest Prince in all the world. This is not the discourse I expected from
my dear brother, [replied Arsaces, out of countenance at Oroondates his words]
but all things must be suffered from his friendship, and I may truly protest to
him, that I should make less account of the title of the greatest Prince in the
world, than of that of Oroondates his friend. The company opposed the Answer
Oroondates would have returned to these words, and Arsaces went on thus with
his Narration.

I will not repeat all the passages of our conversation, and it shall suffice
me to tell you, that before we parted, my fair Princess made me know that my
passion had not offended her, and permitted me to hope she would not be
insensible of it. I went away with Raptures of contentment, which cannot be
comprehended but by those that have felt the like, and my disquiets for the
miseries of our House were so swallowed up by such an extraordinary happiness,
that I had scarce so much as a remembrance of them left. As soon as I saw
Theodates, I made him acquainted with my fortune, and he was touched with it in
such manner, that he could hardly have appeared more joyful at what had most
nearly concerned his own. He strengthened me in my hopes by discourses upon
that subject, and in conclusion he pleasingly persuaded me that by my
Princesses goodness, and your assistance, my fortune might become like yours,
though our persons were very different. O Gods! with what contentment did I
cherish those sweet hopes, and what thanks did I not return to my wounds, and
to my captivity! Ah liberty gloriously lost! [said I] Ah blood of Artaxerxes
most fortunately split, how shall I grudge your loss, since it has brought me
so great Advantages! O Empires of Darius, how little considerable is the
possession of you, in respect of the possession of my Princess, and how light
is the glory of commanding Nations, in respect of the glory of obeying
Berenice! I spoke these words, and many others, being transported with a joy
which was observed in me by my friends, and they who a few days before had seen
me with a languishing dejected face, wondered to find so great, so sudden an
alteration. The next time that I saw my Princess, she appeared out of
countenance for the favor she had granted me; yet did she not express that she
intended to repent her self, but by most charming confirmations, settled me in
the hope of my felicity, and promised me in the presence of Cyllenia, that none
of those that pretended to her affection, should ever obtain any thing to my
prejudice, and that she would contribute toward my happiness, whatsoever I
could hope for from a virtuous Princess. I desired no more, and well might say,
I then had been in a condition, that deserved the envy of the most fortunate
persons, if my felicity had not been troubled by the sad thoughts of the
miseries of my Country, and by the fear of those Reproaches I might apprehend.
Thy father [said I to my self) has already lost two Battles, the better part of
his Dominions is in the power of his Enemy, thy mother and thy sisters are
Captives to a young Conqueror, who carries them shamefully along in triumph,
and perhaps thou art upon the very point of losing the greatest Empire of the
world, and can thou lie buried here in love, and can thou have other
thoughts than those of serving thy father in this wretched condition, to which
fortune has reduced him, of delivering thy so near friends from slavery, of
saving thy Country, and of saving thy Reputation? But [said I again presently
after] can I be able to leave Berenice in the beginning of my happiness, and of
my gallant hopes, and can I quit a fortune, which perhaps my absence may make
me lose for ever? It Is no matter, [added I, ashamed of that last reflection]
let us save our Reputation, though with the loss of all the rest; we would
prefer Berenice before the conservation of our Dominions, before the love we
bear our friends, but we must prefer our honor before Berenice, or rather we
will preserve our honor, that we may not be unworthy of Berenice. This indeed
was my Resolution, but I could not bring my self to it without most violent
conflicts. My Princess, who knew the Estate of Persia, and that of our Family,
did out of her goodness suffer with me in my affliction, and took an interest
in our misfortunes, with inclinations very different from those of the King her
father, and of all the rest of Scythia. She judged very well that I could not
stay in Scythia without shame, and though she then expressed that my abode there
was not unpleasing to her, and my departure not indifferent; yet was she too
full of reason to oppose a determination, which so pressing a necessity made me
take, or to desire proofs from my affection, which might redound to my
dishonor. After that I had her consent for my departure, and that by the
assistance of Theodates, I had taken such order as was necessary about it, I
represented to the King the necessity that pulled me from his service for a
little time, and begged leave of him to spend a few months in visiting my
Country, in those miseries wherewith it was oppressed. The King gave ear unto
my suit with trouble, and testified his affection to me by the difficulties he
made in granting me the liberty I demanded; he did all he possibly could to
stay me, offered me the most important Offices of the State, and promised to
exalt me to such a height, that my condition should be looked upon with envy by
the chiefest persons of the Kingdom; but these considerations were too weak to
hold me, since that of Berenice had not been strong enough. Sir (said I) the
least I ow unto my miserable Country, is to visit it in its extreme calamities,
I have friends, and kindred there, to whom I am bound in duty to lend my
assistance, and I here am useless for your Majesty's service; I would not leave
you if there were any occasion to employ me in it, and I Will come back again
before this year be at an end, if death or imprisonment detain me not. I used
many other Reasons, which at last won his consent unto my Journey, after he had
made me reiterate my promise of returning as soon as possibly I could. When I
had obtained his permission, and that I had taken my leave of a great many
friends, whom my good fortune had gained me in the Court of Scythia, I paid my
respects unto my Princess. Only Theodates and Cyllenia were admitted to our
Entertainment, and we wanted no pretenses to cover that secret conversation. O
Gods! how were my sorrows sweetened, when I saw Tears in the Eyes of my fair
Princess, and how great consolation did I receive from her charming words,
which assured me that I was not indifferent to her, and that I was not
afflicted alone for our separations! I depart from you, Madam, (said I to her)
because my cruel destiny ordains it so, and that you would have a just
occasion to repent the favor you have shown me, if I could endure to live with
infamy; but this hard necessity, which drags my body out of Scythia, cannot
pull away my heart from thence so much as for a moment, and in the remotest
places of all Persia, Arsaces never can be far from you. I go full of
resentment against the Usurper of our Dominions, the Murderer of our subjects,
and the Persecutor of our Family, but I am more incensed against the Enemy of
my Repose, and against the Enemy that separates me from my Princess; this
effect of his hatred, is more bitter to me than all the rest, and arms me
against him with a more lawful Anger; if it please the Gods I fall under his
victorious Arms, I shall at least have this glory before my death, that I was
owned by Berenice; and if they suffer me to return hither a Conqueror, or
divested of Empire, I Will bring back the remnant of my life, be it what it may,
and lay it at her feet, as a tribute due to her alone; each Moment of this
cruel absence will be an Age to me, and an Age of most rigorous Torments; but
if you bestow any of them upon the remembrance of Arsaces, his sorrows, which
might bring him to his Grave, will lose part of their force, and that knowledge
will comfort me in my disasters with a most powerful consolation. I shall
receive no small one by the sight of my dear brother, and if the Gods be
pleased that I yet may find him with Darius, the miseries of my condition will
be abated, and I shall give him an account of your friendship toward him, and
of what you have done for me, out of his consideration. Then if the Heavens
permit, we will return together into Scythia, and I by his intercession will beg
the continuance of this felicity, which mine Enemies have interrupted. In the
mean time, O most lovely Princess, give me but an assurance from your fair
mouth, whereby I may pretend to the glory of your remembrance, and hope by your
command, that this tyrannous absence, though it banish me out of Scythia,
banishes me not out of your memory. I will remember you for ever, (said the
Princess, wiping away some obliging tears) and what distance soever separates
us, you shall never be absent from Berenices mind; Idea's that are not easily
settled in it, are not easily to be blotted out of it; and in short, you are
too considerable to me all manner of ways, to fear that I can forget you, so
long as you remember me. Go Arsaces, since whether we will or no, there is a
necessity of it; Go where you are called by Reasons which I cannot oppose, but
how great soever your resentment is against Alexander, forget not that I desire
your Return, that I enjoin it you by all the power you have given me over you,
and that you cannot thrust your self into unnecessary dangers, without putting
your self in hazard of disobeying me, of displeasing me, and since (in spite of
modesty I must confess it to you) of making me extremely unfortunate. O
Arsaces! (cried I) O Artaxerxes! how happy is thy fate, and how few Enemies
will there be that can oppose thy Return, while thou art animated by these
glorious hopes! Well, Madam, (continued I, kneeling down before her, and taking
one of her fair hands, upon which by the indulgence she had toward me in that
occasion, I held my lips fast cimented a good while) since you do me favors
which are above the lawful hope of all men living, I should be much too blame
if I could desire more, and if I could fear that the persecutions of Arsacomes,
and the credit of Stratonice, could shake the courage of my Princess. Her
promises put me into security, and it is to her goodness that I abandon a life,
which shall never depend but upon her alone. I said many other things, which
time has raced out of my memory, and after I had received all the modest
testimonies of affection I could demand, I took my leave, yet not with so much
constancy, but that my grief broke forth into several Actions, which upon
another occasion, and for another subject than Berenice, would have passed for
very great weaknesses: This consolation I had, that my Princess did not appear
insensible, and that she accompanied the sorrow that transported me, with many
tears, and many signs of her compassion. I parted from her on this manner, and
being retired with Theodates, I prepared my self to go from Issedon the next
morning by break of day. Generous Theodates, whose virtue truly is one of the
highest, and most considerable of this Age, persisted in the Design of
accompanying me in my Voyage, but I would not consent to it, and knowing how
useful he might be to me by being near Berenice, during my absence, I prayed
him to continue in the Court: He was the only man to whom I was known in
Scythia, the only man that knew the love I bore the Princess, the only man
whom Berenice could trust, and the only man by whose means I could hear from
her. These Reasons which I represented to him, obliged him to stay behind,
knowing he might do me a great deal more service there than by going with me.
Yet would he not leave me till I was come to the Haven of Hypoleon, where I
intended to imbarque upon the Euxine Sea, to enter into Persia by the way of
Byzantium. We departed therefore from Issedon taking our way toward those
Provinces of Scythia which are washed by the Boristhenes, and after many days
journeys without any considerable Encounter, we arrived at the Haven where we
were to part. We could not do it without many tears on both sides, and I was so
sensible of the obligations I had to that noble Prince, that I could not leave
him without an excessive trouble. Dear Theodates (said I) your Prisoner is
going away upon his Parole; but he will return if the Gods permit, and for his
Ransom will offer you all the Dominions of the King his father, and this life
which you so generously have acquired to your self. Sir (replied Theodates) I
value not Empires in respect of the friendship wherewith you honor me, and
whereof you have given me such real proofs by mine own safety, and what command
soever you should lay upon me, I could never be able to leave you, if I were
not useful to your service in this Country. These words were mutually
accompanied with Endearments, which at last our parting forced us to break off.
I took but a very small Train along with me, composed of such servants as I had
received from Theodates, who had made trial of their fidelity, and believed
that I might safely trust them. I imbarqued aboard a Vessel which had been got
ready by Theodates his orders, and which was to make the shortest and securest
cut into Asia. Having hoised sail, we began our Voyage very quietly; the sea
had never been more calm than at that time, but my mind was far from enjoying
such tranquillity, and our ship was much less tossed with waves, than my heart
was by my restless, cruel thoughts; the absence of Berenice, and the desolation
of our Family, came both at once into my mind, yet neither could find a Room
there, without giving me equal matter of affliction. Alas, [said I] perhaps at
this very moment, Berenice, by the cruel command of the King her father, is
compelled to receive the affection of Arsacomes; Alas, [continued I] perhaps
this very day Darius fights his latest Battle, and with it loses the remainder
of his Dominions. O Gods, [cried I] must I leave Berenice, and abandon her to
the mercy of the Enemies of our House, and of my particular Enemies? O Gods,
[said I again] must Darius fall, with all that belong to him, without receiving
assistance from his own son? I spent some days in this agitation of my
thoughts; but in the end I was withdrawn from it by a cruel Encounter which
hindered the effect of all my Resolutions, and caused part of that shame, which
I am not able to blot out. 'Twas very unadvisedly done of us to go by the way
of Byzantium, and we were not informed that the Byzantians with the Governor
Zopirio, and they of Pontus with their Governor Arimbas, had of late begun to
make Excursions at sea, and to use the Scythians that fell into their hands
with all manner of Acts of Hostility. In effect, there was no War declared
between the Scythians and them, and 'twas only covetousness that inspired
Zopirio, and his brother Arimbas with a design of Pyracy, robbing Passengers,
taking Prisoners, and seeking means to enrich themselves by such shameful,
barbarous ways. I had the ill fortune to be incountred by them, and when we
least thought of any such matter, we saw our selves assaulted by eight great
ships which surrounded us on every side, and deprived us of all means to defend
our selves; yet did I do as much as possibly I could, and both by my words and
example would have encouraged those that were with me to make resistance, but
their weakness disheartened them so, that 'twas impossible for me to make them
take Arms against so great a number of Enemies. The Thracians came aboard us on
every side, and though I defended my self with courage enough, and laid some of
the boldest of them at my feet, I was so environed, and so oppressed with
multitude, that all my resistance was to no purpose. They seized upon me
behind, threw me down, and disarmed me, and I think those savage Enemies,
exasperated by the death of their companions, would have taken away my life,
but that they feared to displease him that commanded them, who believed he
should get a considerable Booty by taking me. I was bound, and carried before
Arimbas who commanded those ships; he found something in my face that obliged
him to use me a little less cruelly than he intended, or than his custom was,
and having looked upon me with some show of wonder; Either (said he) thou
love thy life but little, or else thou art the boldest of all men living, in
having dared to stand upon thy defense alone against so great a number of
Enemies. I never was thine Enemy that I know of, [answered I, without being
daunted at his words] and I am called by such pressing commands of honor, to
places whither thou stopp'st my passage, that if thou art generous, thou
without doubt wilt restore me to my liberty. It Is not from Barbarians [replied
Arimbas] that the Greeks need to learn generosity; never hope for the liberty
thou demand'st, but believe it is no small favor to let thee live, after thou
have so well deserved to die, for having killed my men, and for having so
rashly made opposition. I saw very well there was no thought of working upon
him by a sense of honor, and so I presently tried another way; I am not thy
Prisoner in a fair War, [said I] but if my liberty can be bought with treasure,
I promise thee so much, that thou hardly can desire more, and I engage my
honor with my word, that if thou will free me, I Will send thee a Ransom that
would be considerable enough for one of the greatest Princes in the world.
These words which I spoke very imprudently, wrought a very different effect
from what I hoped, and were in part the cause of my long captivity. Arimbas
believed either by my words, or by some other tokens that I was no ordinary
person, and upon that belief proposing excessive Recompenses to himself, he was
gladder of his Prize, and more careful to keep me than before. These Treasures
thou promisest me, [answered he] may regain thy liberty, but hope not to obtain
it upon thy word, for thou shall stay with us till thou procure thy Ransom thou
have proposed. At these words he commands them to unbinde me, but he made me be
carried into a Cabin with Guards that suffered me not to stir out of it. The
next day we put into a harbor of the Province whereof he was Governor for
Alexander, and near unto a Town called Synopa, I was imprisoned in a Castle
under a very strict Guard; they left me some of those servants I had received
from Theodates, the rest, and all they that were taken with us, were kept as
slaves. Do but judge, dear brother, and you dear friends, in what condition I
was by a captivity so unseasonable, and so contrary to the Resolutions I had
taken; truly I was even like to have died with grief; and when I had in vain
attempted many several ways to recover my liberty, I was upon the very point of
killing my self with my own hand. What, [said I] shall I neither succor
Darius, nor see the Princess Berenice? O Gods! if you would not suffer me to
assist my father, why did you not let me enjoy the sight of my Princess; and if
you needs would have me to leave Berenice, why do you not permit me to serve
Darius to the last drop of that blood I ow him; since I must not have both
those happinesses together, why will you not at least afford me the consolation
of one of them? Ah no, I see you mean to overwhelm me equally with grief and
shame, and not being satisfied that I die with sorrow for parting with my
Princess, you will have me die also with the reproach of having seen our Empire
lost, and our Family destroyed without ever drawing Sword in their defense.
These were my ordinary meditations, and in these cruel thoughts I could find
no manner of consolation. Either let Arimbas kill me [said I to my Keepers] or
let him set me at liberty; in the condition of my fortune, captivity is worse
to me than death it self, and I shall be less his Enemy, if he dispatch me out
of the way, than if he keep me any longer. All these words were to no purpose,
and Arimbas sent me no other Answer, but that when he saw those Treasures for
my Ransom, which I had made him hope for at my being taken, he would give me my
liberty, and not before. This cruel obstinacy of Arimbas drove me into
despair; I had none about me but Scythian, servants, who could do me no service
with Darius, where they were not at all acquainted, and to whom also I was
unwilling to declare the truth of my birth. To discover it to Arimbas was a
great deal more unfit, he was both a subject, and a creature of Alexanders, and
if he had known me to be Darius his son, my captivity would certainly have
been as long as my life. In these considerations all I could do, was to employ
all my courage to take a little patience, and hope that the Gods, who had then
declared themselves Enemies to our house, would mitigate their anger, and
lessen the hatred they expressed against Darius his miserable family. 'Twas in
that place, dear friends, I lingered out my tedious days, while you were
fighting for my interests, and 'twas in that Prison I saw a whole year run out,
which seemed longer to me than all the rest of my life. O Darius, [cried I
often] by what a strange disaster art thou abandoned by thy son in thy cruel
misfortunes? wretched man that he is, he can give thee no manner of assistance,
but is reduced to serve thee only with his wishes, while Oroondates fights
without question by thy side, and ingages himself in thy miseries with more
affection, than he could in what most nearly concerned himself. O my dearest
brother, [continued I] why am I not with you now, and why can I not at least
keep you company in those dangers you so nobly run into for my sake? From these
thoughts which my duty inspired me with, I fell into those my love suggested,
and out of the grief which was caused in me by the former, into the rage
occasioned by the later. But shall I never see you again, Berenice, [cried I,
quite transported] and will not the Gods, (who for some offenses are
exasperated against the House of Persia) be contented that I lose my
inheritance, that I lose my nearest friends, that I lose the King my father,
and that I lose mine honor with them, unless I lose Berenice also? I lived on
this manner, buried in the depth of my sorrows, when by the report of them that
kept me, they received a most intolerable surchage; They told me news of poor
Darius, but alas, the saddest that yet had come unto mine ear; I heard that
having marched from Babylon with three hundred thousand fighting men, he had
given Alexander Battle near Arbella, with the same success as he in the two
former ones, that he had lost the greatest part of his men, and with them the
hope of maintaining his Dominions, being reduced to seek his safety in a sad
Retreat, with a very small remnant of his forces; that it was believed he had
taken the way toward Media, but in so weak a condition, that no body thought he
ever would be able to raise a sufficient power to dispute the Empire of Asia
any longer against Alexander. Oh, Brother, how infinitely did this woeful news
torment me, and how great need I had of all my courage, to keep me from sinking
under so heavy an affliction! O Darius, (cried I) why can I not be with thee
in thy flight at least, since I could not accompany thee in the Battle; I would
strive to comfort thee in thy misfortunes, and not having been able to fight
for the conservation of thy Empire, I would fight at least for the safety of
thy person. Then Brother, as all fatal objects represented themselves to my
remembrance, I was afraid least you should be in the number of those, whom
Alexanders happy destiny had caused to fall under the Macedonian Armies, and
in this thought, after having given you a flood of tears, I wished with all my
heart to have been in your place, to have received your wounds, and to have
contributed to the preservation of your life by the loss of mine own. I should
never have done, if I should relate all my discontents at large, but I Will
shorten the recital of them as much as possibly I can. A whole year was already
run out from the day that I was taken, when both in the face, and Actions of
the Captain of the Castle, who was the chief Commander of those that had me in
custody, I perceived an extraordinary affection, and a very great compassion of
my misfortunes. He naturally had a love to virtue, and had resisted those
inclinations, out of a sense of his duty to Arimbas, but in the end, having
seen how unjustly he detained me, and having found something in my person,
which he thought worthy of his affection, he resolved to make use of his power
for my deliverance, believing he should not be very faulty in giving a man his
liberty, from whom it had not been taken by any right of War. With this design
coming to me one day when I was extremely dejected by the remembrance of our
last losses; Sir, (said he to me) comfort your self, your Captivity shall not
be much longer, and your virtue has found a person amongst us, who both can
discern it, and will hazard himself to serve it; Though I was exceedingly
surprised at this discourse, I could not suspect that man of any ill design,
and judging that my condition could not be worse than it was already, I
believed I ought not to neglect any way that might be for the recovering of my
liberty. O Criton (answered I) how merciful you will be, if you use your
endeavors to help me, both Gods and men will recompense your goodness, and I
am of such quality, that I dare say your condition will be better with me than
with Arimbas. Depend upon the assurance I give you (replied Criton) that you
shall not be long a Prisoner, and trust to me for the management of the
business. I will trust you always (said I) both with my life and liberty, and
I protest to you, that I would not expose you to any danger for their
conservation, if in the present estate of my affairs, my eternal shame were not
linked to my captivity. Criton would hold no longer discourse with me at that
time, for fear of giving some suspicion of his design; but within a few days
after he effected it very happily, and having made those of my Guard drunk,
whom he had least confidence in, when they were fast asleep, he came with the
rest into my chamber in the dead of night, and bringing Arms for me, and for
the two Scythians that served me, he took the Keys of the Castle, and let us
out without any difficulty, then getting upon good Horses which he had caused
to be held in a readiness about a hundred paces from the Gate, he resolved to
follow my fortune, having by that Action lost all hope of favor with Arimbas.

When I saw my self at liberty, I felt all the joy my sad condition could be
capable of, and received a sweet consolation by the hope I had that I should
give my father the last assistance, he could hope for from his son in the
downfall of his House. I promised Criton that I would not be ungrateful for
the good office he had done me, and that I would reward him so well for it,
that he never should have occasion to repent himself. We took our Journey
toward Media, whither they said Darius was retreated, and traveled all the
remainder of that first night with so much speed, that before break of day, we
were gotten far enough, not to fear falling any more into the power of Arimbas;
yet did we avoid the great Highways so long as we were in the Province he
commanded, but when once we were out of it, we rode with less apprehension, and
I for my part with some hope of seeing the Relics of our desolate House
again, and with an ardent desire, either to dispute the Empire yet with
Alexander, or to give up my life to his prevailing fortune. He shall die, (said
I to my self) that injust Conqueror, that wrongful Usurper of our Dominions
shall either fall, or kill Artaxerxes with that hand, which has been the
destruction of all our Family. Perhaps he is not immortal, though hitherto he
have been invincible, nor are we perhaps so utterly forsaken by the Gods, but
that we may pull a Victory out of his hands, which the cowardly, effeminate
Persians have so faintly disputed with him; doubtless thou were valiant enough,
poor Darius, to trample down that Enemy, if thou had commanded more generous
Forces, and nothing but their want of courage has made thee lose an Empire,
which is not much to be lamented, since it extended it self over none but such
mean spirited people. Perchance there are yet some corners of thy vast
Territories, where thou may find men that will show themselves more truly
to be men, and it is with them that Artaxerxes may possibly regain part of thy
losses, and blot out part of thy dishonor. This thought had hardly given me a
little comfort, when presently I fell into a consideration of the estate I then
was in, and to my confusion saw those ridiculous hopes all vanish in a moment.
Ah weak, abused Artaxerxes (said I again) with what fond imaginations do thou
flatter thy self? Thou think not of the revolution of thy fortune, thou
consider'st not that thou have lost all, that thou have no Country left to
defend, and that thou have no men left to oppose that Conqueror, whom thy
Father with innumerable thousands, and with his whole Forces united was not
able to resist; stifle, ah stifle these vain hopes, and limit them all within
the design of either making Alexanders person to run some hazard, or of burying
thy self in the Ruins of thy Family. These were the thoughts wherewith I was
tormented; but O Gods, O Gods, they quickly yielded place to far more cruel
ones, and scarce had I traveled three days journey, when I saw both my Voyage
bounded, and my designs orethrown by the doleful news of poor Darius his
death. I heard that lamentable end, alas, and it is with shame that I confess I
heard it without dying. They told me how that great, and much to be deplored
Prince was fallen by the horrible perfidiousness of his own subjects, and had
given up both life, and Empire to his Enemy. Although this sad Relation did
not absolutely kill me, yet certainly it put me into a condition little
different from death, and Criton with the rest that accompanied me, saw me in
such a case, as made them believe they had unprofitably hazarded themselves to
serve me. The recital of those swownings I fell into at this fatal narration,
of my sighs, of my tears, and of my mournful complaints, would but weary you,
and be very difficult for me to make, all that sorrow, for the loss of a father
who had most dearly loved me, whose person was exceeding great and amiable, for
that of a mother who went a while before him, and who ended her life in her
captivity, for that of an Empire, which might almost be called the Empire of
the world, added to my shame of having done nothing for them, of not having
shed one drop of blood for their conservation, and of not having given them any
of those assistances which they received from the meanest of their Allies, can
produce in the most tender soul, imprinted it self so violently in mine, that
it was like to have separated it from my body, and I may well protest to you
before all the Gods, that nothing but the remembrance of Berenice kept me from
my grave, and hindered me from going then to seek them after their death, whom I
had so ignominiously abandoned during their life. Thou now art free (said I)
glorious Arsaces, now thou art free, thou no longer have any Father to assist,
thou no longer have any Country to defend, or to say better, thou no longer
have any honor to preserve; all things contribute now to thy repose; but O
Gods, how much were the most cruel deaths to be preferred before this repose,
and how much better had it been for thee, to have been really slain in the
Battle of Selena, than to have shamefully outlived Darius, and to have seen
the ruin of thy House with so much indifferency; what a horrible reproach to
thee, is the blood of so many thousand men as lost their lives in thy Quarrel;
thou were fighting against the Nomades, while the Persians fell under the
Macedonian Arms, and thou were sighing at Berenice's feet, while thy Mother,
thy sisters, and all thy family, lay sighing under the chains of fortunate
Alexander! O shame, which all the blood of Arsaces can never be able to wash
out; O baseness, which all my love to Berenice can never be able to excuse! I
tormented my self on this manner in my bed, whither my sorrow had confined me,
and where my grief was so extremely violent, that it had put me into a Fever
for many days. After I had deplored my misfortunes, in the most mournful
terms my misery could suggest, and that I had spent some days in
lamentations, I began to think what I should resolve to do with my self. Shall
I not go (said I) and find out Alexander in the midst of his victorious
Forces, which triumph over our disasters; and since the anger of the Gods has
so decreed, that I no longer have men to give him Battle, shall I not go and
execute with my hand alone, what the weakness of my condition, and the loss of
our Dominions will not suffer me to do at the head of an Army? Since I cannot
revenge Darius by the blood of the Macedonians, shall I not revenge him by the
blood of Alexander, and if I die in the attempt, shall I not bear my friends
company, with the least shame that I can possibly undergo? Shall I not run
(said I again) after that Parricide Bessus, and shall I not make my way through
the midst of those faithless Monsters that take part with him, to pierce with
a thousand wounds the ungrateful and disloyal heart of that horrible Murderer
of his King? Is not that the first satisfaction I ow unto my fathers ghost, and
can I, while Bessus and Narbazanes are alive, have other thoughts than those of
the rigorous punishments that are due to their perfidious Treason? But, O Gods,
(concluded I) shall I never see Berenice more, and if (as it is very probable)
I fall in one of these Enterprises, shall I die without giving my Princess the
last assurances of my fidelity? Shall I have lost my nearest friends, my
Country, my Reputation, shall I have lost all for her uprofitably? Having
proposed no other fruit, no other consolation to my self for so many
misfortunes for that alone, shall I lose it also with the rest; and shall I
have obliged that lovely Princess, to give me marks of an affection which ought
to be more dear to me than the possession of all Asia, only to abandon her for
ever? This last thought put me into a perplexity, which for a long time made me
incapable of taking any Resolutions, and represented motives to me, which were
powerful enough to withdraw me from those I had proposed before. Alexander
(said I) is a generous Enemy, who has prosecuted the ruin of thy House only
by glorious ways, and do thou think of murdering him shamefully, who
openly, and at the swords point makes himself master of the whole Earth by his
valor alone; yes, of murdering him, for unless thou march against him by an
open War, thou can not procure any satisfaction from his single person, but
by an Assassinat; thou can not hope for an equal combat with him, for though
he should be so generous as to grant it to thy quality, and to thy just
Resentments, he never will be able to make those that are about him consent to
it, amongst whom there are many thousands that would save him from that danger
by hazarding themselves: thou can not therefore execute thy vengeance by any
means but such as are most ignominious, and perhaps that without effecting it,
thou shall die in a design, which will be most unworthy of the memory of Darius
his son, and which will blast it with a perpetual infamy. If thou run after
those Parricides, it is true that against them all ways of Revenge are
justifiable, but they are things too mean for Artaxerxes, and the destiny of
Bessus, and of Nabarzanes would be too glorious, if they should end their
reproachful days by the hand of their Kings son. Those monsters ought to end
their lives in tormens, and it concerns Alexander to prosecute them, and with
their blood to wash away the stain wherewith they have blemished his
Reputation. Rather return into Scythia, where thou have left thy utmost hopes,
and where thou have left thy very soul; forget the greatness of thy birth, to
serve thy love, and the necessity of thy affairs, and employ whatsoever the
Gods have given thee that is considerable, to make thy self considered by the
King of Scythia: when thou shall have done him services of the nature of those
Darius received from Oroondates, he will be the most ungrateful of all men
living, if he refuse thee his assistance, and if he give thee not an Army to
march against that Enemy of the whole Earth, and against that insatiable
Conqueror, who quickly will pass from our Territories into his. Perchance thy
services, and the remembrance of our miseres, will raze out of his mind, the
hatred he bears thy Family, and that he will not disdain thee for his son in
law, when thou shall have gained his affection so far as to venture the
discovery of thy true quality. He without doubt is of a royal mind, as well as
of a royal birth; and if my dear Oroondates be alive, if the Gods bring him
back into Scythia, thou may hope for all things from that dearest brother,
and writing thy self with him, whose interests will always be inseparable from
thine, thou with the whole Forces of Scythia, may oppose, and like a Kings
son oppose, that pitiless destroyer of the House of Persia. Thou at the head of
those thy dear brothers Armies, may demand* Reparation of the injuries he has
done thee, and if it please the Gods thou fall in those occasions, 'twill at
least be with more glory, than if thou should leave thy life among the
Javelins of his Guards, in attempting to stab him in his bed. This way without
question thou shall labor for the Recovery of thy Reputation, and which is
more, thou shall labor for it in seeing Berenice again, without whom thou
can not live, and without whom thou art not permitted to die; thou at her
feet may find consolation for all the losses, and she will tell thee nothing
but truth; if she say, her affection is to be preferred before all the Empires
that were Darius's. Fear not to appear yet before her, she is too generous, and
too worthy a sister of Oroondates to regard the fall of thy House, and to look
upon him as an exiled Prince, and as a Prince divested of all his inheritance,
whom at our last being together she considered as the future Monarch of all
Asia; thy miseries will rather work compassion in her, than any contempt of thy
person, and thou were unworthy of the marks thou have received of her
affection, if thou could suspect her to be of so base an humor, and of an
humor so different from her Brothers. In these last thoughts I found a great
deal of comfort, and after I had disputed yet three or four days about the
choice of this Resolution I should take, I in the end suffered my mind to be
oversway'd by these last considerations, or to speak more truly; I let my self
be guided by my love, which making all other designs odious to me; showed me
facility and advantage only in that which was subservient to it, and which it
had propounded 'Twas therefore by the power it had over me, that I was won to
those probabilities I have mentioned to you, and that I resolved to return into
Scythia. Criton, who had totally given me his affection, and to whom I already
bore a very great one, would not forsake me; besides him, I took only the two
Scythians that were with me in Prison, he having before dismissed the Guards
that had assisted in my deliverance, whom we rewarded as well as we were able
at that time. We departed from the Town where I had staid ever since the
hearing of that fatal news, and took our Journey toward Scythia, by a very
different way from that I came, for fear of falling again into the power of
Arimbas. I believed we might pass more securely through Hyrcania, and through
the Country of the Massagetes, and that was the Road we went, without
committing our selves to that inconstant Element, upon which I had fallen into
that cruel Captivity, which made the greatest part of all my discontents. We
met no obstacle in our Voyage, and though I began to trust Criton very much,
yet would I not let him know me to be other than one Arsaces a Bactrian, who by
his good fortune had merited the affecion of the King of Scythia, and who in
that Country might be able to settle him in a much better condition, than that
he had lived in under Arimbas. 'Twas not to him alone that I meant to be so
reserved, for I resolved never any more to take upon me the name of Artaxerxes,
so peculiar to the Kings, and Princes of Persia, till I had recovered hopes of
rising again to the Throne of Darius. And indeed I was then informed that the
Traitor Bessus had already usurped it, and that he made himself be honored as
a King in Bactria, under the name of Artaxerxes. When we had passed the Araxis,
crossed through the Country of the Massagetes, and gone over the Mount Imaus,
we entered into the Province of the Issedons, and with great days Journeys drew
near to the Metropolitan City of all Scythia. Being come within two days
riding of it, and meeting Passengers upon the way from thence, I inquired of
them what news there was at Court, and trembled as I asked the question, for
fear of hearing what would be unpleasing or rather mortal to me. Sir, (answered
one of them) all things are very quiet at the Court. Arsacomes has still his
former Authority, and the King, fearing to displease the Queen his wife, with
whom he still is passionately in love, suffers him to pretend to the Princess
Berenice, or rather to persecute her, that generous Princess, not having
hitherto been able to bend her self to any compliance with his desires, and
making loud complaints, because he tolerates the presumption of his subject;
they are the Princesses own words, for as for our parts, we dare not speak of
that business in those terms, he having made himself so potent, that there are
none now in Scythia but slaves to the greatness of his fortune. Yet has his
example been like to cause the destruction of others, who knowing their quality
to be equal to his, have thought they might raise their pretensions as high as
he. Amongst them, Cydaris Prince of the Tauroscythians and Agatirsians, being
fallen in love with the Princess, suffered himself to be so blinded with his
passion, that he imprudently declared it to the King, either being encouraged
by his indulgence to that of Arsacomes, or else not being able to resist the
violence of his own. The King was so displeased at such a motion, that he could
not dissemble his Resentment of it, and answered Cydaris with words so full of
sharpness and contempt, that he not being able to endure them, forgot the
respect he owed the King, and replied in very insolent, and injurious terms,
whereat he being highly offended, caused him to be seized on, and put into a
Dungeon, nor had he spared his life, but at the Request of the Queen, and of
the Princess her self, who interceded for it. It Is not above a week since he
came out of Prison, but when he was set at liberty, he was commanded to leave
the Court for ever, and from that time he has never been seen at Issedon. This
business has made such a noise at Court, that there is now no talk of any thing
else, and this is the freshest, and most considerable news that I can tell you
thence. I found a mavelous consolation in this discourse, and making no great
account of the business of Cydaris, I was so extremely satisfied to hear of my
Princesses perseverance in despising Arsacomes his affection. I went on my
Journey the remainder of that day, and the next following, before the Sun had
run out half his course, I from a Hill discovered the highest Towers of that
most precious City, where I had left the better part of my soul with Berenice.
Then I began to feel motions of a passion which seemed to have forsaken me for
ever, me thought I breathed a sweeter air than I was wont, and fortune, who by
such sad effects had declared her self so cruel an Enemy to our House, was
contented at that time to change her countenance in favor of me, and not being
able to restore me what she had taken away, was willing to sweeten my sorrows
with the most gentle usage I could receive from her. It was but just, that he
who had lost so much, should by her assistance keep the only thing he had
left, and the only thing which he preferred before all those she had injustly
robbed him of.

I was within two hundred furlongs of Issedon, when at the entrance into a Wood
which I was to pass through, I heard the sound of many instruments usual for
the chase, and seeing diverse men pass by at the same time, I leaned from them
that the King was hunting in that Wood, and that he was accompanied by the
Queen, and the Princess Berenice, who, because it was a very fair day, had been
desirous to take their part of that diversion. At this news my heart leapt
within me, not being able to hear speak of my Princess without an inward
disturbance, nor to prepare my self for that sight without most passionate
motions. Yet did I doubt, whether I should go to the King while he was abroad
there at his sport, or whether, as I before intended, I should go unknown to
Theodates his house, to pay my first visit to that generous friend, and learn
of him upon what terms I stood in Court, and whether I might show my self there
with the safety as before. At last I should have followed that Resolution, and
I was going to prosecute my Journey directly toward the Town, when I was put
beside it by a very remarkable accident. I saw a man all bloody, come galloping
full speed toward me, and when he was within twenty paces of us, he fell from
his Horse, with all the signs of a man very near his end. I ran to give him
some assistance, but scarce had I begun to speak to him, when casting his Eyes
upon us; Ah! (cried he) lose no time here about me, for I am but a dead man,
but if you be Scythians, or noble minded men, make haste to succor the King,
who is yonder like to be murdered. No sooner had I heard these words, but
leaving that man to the care of one of mine, I ran as swiftly as possibly I
could, the same way that we had seen him come. Criton followed me with the same
speed, and the two Scythians, having left that dying man, would not let me go
without them. Before I had rode five or six hundred paces, there was no more
need of a Guide, and the cries I heard, directed me sufficiently to the place.
I sought it by the noise among the Trees, and had not gone far, when coming to
a part of the Wood where the Trees stood very thin, I was witness of a bloody,
and a pitiful spectacle. I saw a small number of men, who enclosing the Prince
in the midst of them, defended themselves against twice as many with a most
invincible courage. They had slain diverse of their Enemies, but the greater
part of their companions lay already gasping on the ground, and they that
remained endeavored but in vain to prolong their destiny, and to lend their
King an assistance, which had been utterly u^profitable, if it had not given us
leisure to come up to his Relief. He had his sword in his hand, wherewith he
defended himself with a great deal of courage, but his servants put themselves
between him and danger, as likewise did those of Arsacomes, and Theodates, who
being unarmed as well as the King, fought very valiantly to save his life. I
had hardly cast mine Eyes upon that Combat, when knowing the party I ought to
take, I fell in among the Enemies, with a fury which proceeded from a quite
different cause, than the little valor the Gods had given me. And indeed it
produced effects infinitely above my forces, and at my first coming into the
fight, I scarce gave any blow that made not a mortal wound; they that were with
me seconded me with so much courage, that the half vanquished Scythians
recovered spirit by their example, and began to make their Enemies doubt of the
issue of the business. It quickly grew more equal than it was at our arrival,
and the number of those murtherous Traitors, was in a short time lessened by
the death of some of the forwardest amongst them. Their Head, who perceived
that change, would have animated them by his voice, and by his example, but he
was able to do no great matter, and I having known him by many tokens, sought
him in the midst of his men, and in spite of all the obstacles wherewith they
opposed my passage, I got to him, and to his misfortune, my sword met so
luckily with a place unguarded by his Arms, that at the first thrust, it ran
clear through his body, and made him tumble dead amongst the horses feet. His
fall did so discourage those of his party, that they no longer thought of any
thing but defending themselves, and that they did so ill, that the victory over
them was not difficult; for Arsacomes, and Theodates, though they were wounded,
closing up to me, with shields wherewith they defended themselves for want of
other Arms, and being seconded by all the Scythians, in whom that alteration
had wrought a mavelous confidence, we forced them in the end to quit the
field, and to seek for that safety by flight, which they no longer could find
by their resistance. I then turned me about toward the King, uncertain whether
I should prosecute our Victory, or run to him, but he put me quickly out of
that irresolution, by crying, Valiant man, you yet have conquered but in part,
and unless you also save the Queen and Princess, you have done nothing for my
safety. These words went so near to me, that I felt my strength almost
redoubled by them, and seeing that the King himself, ran toward the place,
where he desired we should succor those dear persons, I cast my eye upon the
ablest of those Horses, that walked about us without their Riders, and feeling
my own begin to fail, as well through weariness as some wounds he had received,
I alighted hastily, and leaping upon the other, ran with such speed after the
King, that I had quickly overtaken him. My love guided me so favorably, that I
soon discovered the Chariot, about which there had been a stout and bloody
Combat; all they of the Guard were slain at the boots of it, not having
abandoned their Princesses but with their lives, and those barbarous Enemies
were pulling them violently out of the Chariot. O Gods! how infinitely did Rage
transport me, when I saw my Princess in the power of a man, who, carrying her
away in spite of her cries, and her Resistances, would have delivered her into
the arms of another that was very well armed, and bravely mounted; certainly
all the words in the world are not sufficient to represent my fury, and I was
so animated by that sight, that all the Enemie^ Forces were not able to resist
me. I flew most impetuously at those two men, but having my sword up to strike
at him that held my Princess, the fear I had of wounding her made me withhold
my blow, and turning toward him that was ready to receive her, I brought down
my sword so forcibly upon his Arms, which he had stretched forth toward her,
that they fell both together from his body to the ground; his companion, seeing
him receive that stroke, and fearing such another, quitted the Princess, but
scarce had he disburthen'd himself of that glorious weight, when he was also
disburthen'd of his head, which with a back blow I made cask to roll, and all
between the Chariot wheels. After this execution, I fell in among the rest with
a success but little different, while the King coming to join with us, as also
Arsacomes, and all the Scythians that were left of the former fight, brought
terror to those Villains, already half defeated by the death of their Leaders,
and by the loss of their companions. They no longer made any considerable
resistance, and very few of them escaped our just Resentments. As soon as we
had no more Enemies to fight withal, I turned to that illustrious Company, all
stained with blood, and in an equipage which (as my Princess was pleased to
say) for all it was terrible, had something in it not unpleasing to her; I
consulted a while with love, and decency, whether I should run first to the
King, or to my Princess; but love, though the more powerful, was content for
its own interest to yield to decency, and found its advantage more in
concealing, than in declaring it self so publicly. Scarce had I turned my
Horse to go toward the King, when I saw him come forward to meet with all that
were about him. Whosoever thou art (cried he) O our valiant Protector, it is to
you we ow our Lives, and you have won them to your self with so matchless a
Valor, and so great a generosity, that though you should be born our subject,
you ought to be the Master of them for ever. Instead of answering these words,
I leaped from my Horse, and cast my self at the Kings feet so suddenly, that he
could not possibly hinder me, and had no sooner pulled off my Cask, but my face
was known by the King, and the whole Company. The King was wonder-strucken,
that he went back a step or two, and then presently coming to me again with
open arms, O Arsaces (cried he) O Arsaces, and without saying any thing more at
that time; he embraced me with such affection, that I easily saw my absence had
abated nothing of that he formerly had honored me withal. Berenice has since
confessed to me that she was fain to use a very violent constraint upon her
self; in that sudden surprise, and that by my good fortune, I had part enough
in her favor, to give her motions of joy in that Encounter, which it was very
hard for her to dissemble; yet did she smother it with much ado, and following
the Queens example, she contented her self with testifying her acknowledgements
in the same manner. But scarce was I got free of the King, when Theodates,
making his passage through all the rest, came to give me, and to receive
embraces, which showed the company the nearness of that friendship wherewith we
were linked together. Arsacomes, who as well as the rest, was obliged to me for
his own safety, and for the Queen his sisters, forced his inclinations that he
might not appear ungrateful, and when the King had allowed every body liberty
to welcome me he came to me again himself, and reiterating his favors; It was
impossible (said he) by the miracles you have done for our preservation, that
you should be other than Arsaces, or else some God; such prodigious effects of
valor can find no example, but in what you have done for us already; yet
since we have destined, to ow our lives to some body, I praise the Gods that
it is to my dear Arsaces, to whom we may be indebted for them, without shame, or
trouble. I had been silent, during all the Kings obliging words, and
endearments, but as soon as it was time for me to speak; Sir, (said I) your
Majesty sets too high a value upon an action, which I was too powerfully
engaged to do, both by the remembrance of your favors, and by the
consideration of my honor. I were much to blame, if I should think I had done
any thing in the preservation of your Majesty's life, it is to your own valor
you ow it, and to the Gods to whom it is too dear to let it be lost; and if
they were pleased I should be so happy as to be one among your servants at the
defeating of your Enemies, it is only I that have the whole obligation to them,
as for the most glorious favor they can ever do me. Forbear (replied the King)
to rob Arsaces of what is due to him alone, we should not now have been alive
but for your assistance, and I find as much satisfaction in avowing it, as I
should do shame if I neglected obligations of this nature; I will acknowledge
them with all my affection, and with all my power, and if ever the King of
Scythia be ungrateful toward Arsaces, I would have him pass through the whole
world, for the most unworthy man upon earth. The King accompanied these words
with many others to the same purpose, and after all the company had seconded
him, both in his kindnesses, and praises, he commanded the dead bodies to be
viewed, to the end they might see if they could discover who they were that had
been his Enemies. Among the first, whose faces they looked upon, there were
found some whom they knew to have belonged to Cidaris, and the King himself
being come close to him, whose arms I had cut off, while he unworthily
stretched them forth to take my Princess, knew him to be Bandamis the brother
of that Parricide. He was not yet quite dead, and as soon as he perceived the
King to be near him, he called together the remainder of his forces, and
preventing the questions that were going to be asked him; If Cidaris be slain
(said he) I keep him company without trouble, and die willingly for him, as he
does for Berenice, and for the Reparation of his Honor. He to punish the
affront that had been done to him, would have killed a King, that had used him
unworthily, and to content his passion, he would have carried away the
Princess; I served him in this last design, while he was attempting the former,
we have yet another Brother, who will revenge our death, if he have any
courage, and if he be so base as to sit down with it, he deserves that you
should pour forth those Resentments upon him, which you have conceived against
us. Bandamis ended his life with these words, and the King, who from the
beginning, had imagined the truth of this Adventure, could not but admire the
Resolution of those desperate Wretches. Cidaris his body was found amongst
those of his party, and the Princess expressed a great deal of trouble, for
having been the cause, though innocently, of the death of so many men, and of
the danger her Father had been in. In the mean time, we were environed by a
throng of those, whom the noise of this Accident had drawn from Issedon, and
one may truly say, the whole Town was almost empty from the very moment that
news came thither: all the People came and cast themselves at the Kings feet
with tears of joy, and by his command, they all came afterward to prostrate
themselves before me, and to do me honors as a man sent by the Gods, or as the
protecting Angel of Scythia. When many things had passed which I am not able to
tell you by reason of their length, and confusion, we took our way toward the
City, and all the while we were going, the King did nothing but embrace me, and
ask me the particularities of my Voyage. I answered those questions as I before
had resolved to do, and though the remembrance of our ruined Family could not
come into my mind, without drawing sighs from me, I dissembled my griefs as
well as possibly I could, and attributed my long absence to the Captivity in
which I was detained by Arimbas. Yet was not the King so wholly taken up with
me, but that he took care of Arsacomes, who was wounded in two places, my dear
Theodates also had some hurts, but none that were at all dangerous. All the
time I had free during the way, I spent with him, to whom in a few words I gave
account of the deplorable success of my Voyage. As I could not make him that
recital without tears, so neither could he hear it without shedding some, and
he solemnized our misfortunes with all the signs of grief I could demand from a
true and perfect friend. I durst not make my addresses to my Princess in the
Queens presence, fearing that company should observe alterations in my
countenance, which might give them some notice of my passion. As soon as we
were come to the City, we found all the People that were left in it, in the
streets, coming to meet the King, and presently they began to make Bonfires in
every place, and to offer sacrifices and thanksgiving for his safety in all the
Temples. The King would needs have a lodging appointed for me in his Palace,
but for the remainder of that day I retired to Theodates his house, to satisfy
the desire I had to embrace him at liberty, to finish the account I had begun
to give him of my Journey, and to receive particular information of all
passages concerning my Princess, and how I stood in her favor at that time. He
satisfied my curiosity to the full, and assured me that during my absence, he
had not found the least change in her affection. It Is true Sir, (said he) she
complained often of your want of care to let her hear from you, and often
testified to me, but with an extraordinary trouble, how much she feared you had
forgotten her. I put her out of those apprehensions, as well as possibly I
could, but at last I should have had much ado to find Reasons to justify you,
if she had not heard of the lamentable end of the King your father, and of the
total ruin of your House. How deeply was she concerned in that woeful story,
and how many tears did she bestow, both on the misfortunes of Darius, and on
the fears of your being perished with him! Ah! would it had pleased the Gods I
had, cried I, not being able to hear of that discourse without being ashamed,
and transported, but within a while after I repented my self, and believing
that wish offended my Princess; No, (said I again) I ought not to desire death,
since I ought to live for Berenice, nor can I without offending her, attempt,
or desire any thing against a life, whereof I have reserved no power to my
self. After these words, I ^ent my attention again to the advantageous Report
he made me of my Princesses remembrance; but I was not a little astonished,
when after that, he told me news of Prince Oroondates; Sir, (said he) the King,
since you went away, has heard part of his sons Adventures, he knows the abode
he made with the King your father, his love to the Princess your sister, and
the most remarkable Accidents that have befallen him since his departure. He
got this intelligence by some Spies he kept long in Persia, and showed most
violent Resentments at the news, but his Anger was raised to the utmost height,
when he learned that he had sent to make Levies upon the Frontiers of this
Kingdom, and that with them he had fought in the last Battle. He protested
publicly that he would not pardon him those infidelities, so it was he called
the Princes Actions, and I think that the Queen, who upon the incertainty of
his life was already forming pretensions for her children, if the Gods should
give her any, did not dissuade him from that Resoution. In this discourse of
Theodates, I found both matter of joy, and of affliction, for as I with much
contentment received some Assurances of my dear brothers life, and of the
affection, which he still preserved unto our Family, even in its latest
miseries, so did I with a great deal of sorrow learn that the King persisted
still in his hatred to us, and foresaw the difficulties it would produce in the
Reconciliation I so earnestly desired. Then Theodates entertained me with
Arsacomes his persecutions, abetted by the Queens Authority, who making that
ill use of the Kings passion to her, assisted her brother openly in that
design, but with so little success in soliciting the Princess, that it did
nothing but increase the aversion which she had already to Arsacomes, and which
she expressed to him upon all occasions. After this long conversation, I let
Theodates take his rest, by reason of his wounds, and having passed the night
on this manner, and in an impatiency on my part, which is not easy for me to
represent, I was no sooner up in the morning, but I had a mind to go to the
Palace, there to watch some opportunity of seeing, and discoursing with my
Princess. Theodates, who knew how necessary he should be to me in that
business, would needs accompany me thither for all his wounds, which as light
as they were, might have been sufficient to have kept him a few days in bed.
Fortune was as favorable to me as I could desire, for I was hardly upon the
stairs, when Cyllenia, who staid for me at that passage, faining some occasion
to talk with Theodates, told him that when I had waited upon the King, and
Queen, the Princess would expect me without any other company but her, in the
same Arbor of the Garden, where I had given her the first knowledge of my true
name and quality. Theodates having deliver'd' me this command, I strove to make
my visits as short as possibly I could. Scarce had I received the Kings first
kind salutes, when he fell into the discourse of the Prince his son. Would you
believe (said he) Arsaces, that that son to whom I have born so tender an
affection, and in whom upon very false appearances I had grounded all my hopes,
should have abandoned me in my most pressing Affairs, only to go over to my
Enemies party, that he should have fought against us with his own hand, in a
Battle where I was in person, that he should have sued to Darius his daughter,
by base ways, and such as are unworthy of his quality, and that he should have
been so insolent, as to raise Forces in my Dominions in favor of my mortal
Enemy? Sir, (answered I) these faults indeed would be very great, if your
Majesty did not allege an Excuse for them your self, and if you knew not very
well that love is able to produce much stranger effects. There is nothing but
love without question that can excuse the Prince your son in what he has done
against you; but mere generosity was enough to move him to assist Darius
against Alexander, and your Majesty may very well pardon him, if he in favor
of a poor oppressed Prince, made use of some of your Forces against the Enemy
of the whole world. Alexander is more dreadful to all Kings than Darius was,
for after having made himself Master of all those Territories that were his, he
will certainly invade yours, and labor to extend his Dominion over all the
Earth. I know very well (replied the King) that you are noble and generous; but
Oroondates is not the less faulty, because you have the goodness to excuse, and
he by his deportments has rendered himself unworthy of the care you take for his
justification. I thought it not best to persist in opposing that first brunt of
the Kings displeasure, hoping that time would have more power to qualify it,
than all the Reasons I could have alleged, and therefore I said no more, but
went to wait upon the Queen, who received me with great civilities, and
testimonies of acknowledgement for what I had done for her, and for her
brother, and when I was come out of the chamber, I got loose from all those
that accompanied us, and with no body but Theodates went down into the Garden,
where I was expected by my most adored Princess. I will not stand to represent
the Effects which the hope of so near a happiness produced in me, nor my
impatiency while I was going through the Allies which lead me to that Arbor,
where all my wealth was treasured up. You shall only know that I came thither,
and that I found my Princess there according to her promise, having no body
with her but Cyllenia; you may imagine that the first thing I did was to cast
my self at her feet, and that the transport of my passion, tied my tongue too
fast, to afford me the liberty to speak of a great while. My Princess broke
silence first, and constraining me to rise, and to sit down by her, The Gods be
praised, (said she, with tears which a generous compassion drew from her fair
Eyes) the Gods be praised, since after so many fears, and so many mortal
apprehensions, they suffer me again to behold the dearest remainders of Darius
his family. I wish I were able with the better part of my blood, to bring them
back again from the grave, whom the wrath of Heaven has taken away, and whose
perchance has not cost me fewer tears than the Princesses your sisters; but
since I can do nothing for them, but make unprofitable wishes, I receive my
dear Arsaces, with as much thankfulness as I ow to those powers that have
restored him to me, and in his person alone, I without murmuring, limit all the
pretensions I had to the greatest Prince of all the world. My Princess brought
forth these words with so sweet an air, and so full of compassion, that they
wrought an extraordinary tenderness in me, and though in those glorious
moments, my sad remembrances were not able to interrupt my felicity, I could
not forbear with my sighs to accompany those tears that pity made her shed, and
taking the liberty to fix my lips upon one of her fair hands; I have lost
nothing, Madam, (said I) I have lost nothing, since Fortune, in depriving me of
all that depended upon her, has not been able to rob me of what I without
comparison prefer before all she could possibly give me. It Is true that Darius
and the Queen my mother are in their graves, that my sisters are Alexanders
Captives, that my fathers Dominions are in the power of our Enemies, and that
he, who at his departure was able to protest to you, that you were served by a
Prince, who was heir to a considerable Empire, cannot now appear before you as
other than as a Prince dispossessed of his inheritance, and as a Prince to whom
Fortune has left nothing but his Sword, and his Ambition; but how light are
all these losses, since they have not been able to make me lose the affections
of my divinest Princess, and how little ought I to bewail those Empires the
Gods have taken from me, if I consider what your goodness has conserved for me.
Yes, Madam, it is to your goodness alone that I am indebted for my life, and
fortune, and any other body, less good, and less generous than your self, would
not have looked upon this change of my condition, without a change in her own
thoughts; nor have received this miserable Exile, as a Prince, who yet may
cherish his former glorious hopes. I consider you a great deal more by your
virtue, (replied the Princess) and by the qualities of your person, than by the
extent of those Empires, which heretofore were the King your fathers, and if
the knowledge of your birth was necessary to make me approve of your affection,
that is not lost with your Dominions, nor has Fortune deprived you of any thing
that made me love you. That change would be too base to stick one minute in
your conceit, or to be so much as dreamed of by Oroondates his sister;
therefore never make any reflection upon a thought that offends me, and if in
my perseverance, you can find any matter of consolation, believe that you
shall for ever have reason to be comforted, and that I to my grave will
preserve those inclinations, which only Artaxerxes his person, and not the
consideration of his Kingdoms, has introduced into my heart. I was so sweetly
charmed with these obliging words, that they in an instant made me lose the
remembrance of my misfortunes, and falling once again at my Princesses feet, I
embraced her knees, with Raptures which cannot be expressed but in the like
occasions. Let Alexander triumph over our patrimony, (said I) let him stretch
his Dominions over all Asia, nay, over all the earth if he will, how little do
I esteem his Conquests, how lightly do I value his fortune, in comparison of
mine, and how freely do I give up to him, all that he has injustly taken from
me, provided he leave me but Berenice; my condition is a thousand times more
glorious at her feet, than upon that Throne from whence mine Enemies have cast
me, and if I ever take up Arms against them, it shall be only to revenge my
friends, and to make my self more worthy of my Princesses affections. I should
have said more, if Berenice, forcing me once again to rise, had not interrupted
me, to put me upon the discourse of what I had done the day before for her
deliverance, and for the safety of the King her father. She extolled that
Action in terms full of a great acknowledgement, and seeing she was going to
enlarge her self in thanks; Cease, Madam, (said I) cease to thank Arsaces, for
what he did for Arsaces; It Is for Arsacomes to return me some few thanks for
his safety, it is for Stratonice, and for the King to preserve some memory of
it, but Berenice is no way engaged to me, save only by that part, which her
goodness makes her take in my interests, for what I have done to my own
advantage. 'Twas only from Arsaces, that Cidaris would have stolen away
Berenice, and since that she approves my hopes, it is only for Arsaces that I
have rescued her. That unworthy Rival ought not to have died by any other hand
but mine, and if my Princess ought to keep any Remembrance of this Adventure,
it is only that she saw Arsaces do better than Arsacomes, for the defense of
his pretensions, and for the safety of the King her father. It would have been
one of the most sensible vexations I could have suffered (said the Princess) if
the succor we received from you had come from the hand of Arsacomes. It Is
only to Artaxerxes that I will be obliged, both for the safety of my friends,
and of mine own particular life, I say my life, for though perchance those
Enemies had no design against it, I should account it an indifferent thing to
fall into the arms of Death, or into the arms of any other besides Artaxerxes.
I give you this assurance with truth, (continued the Princess, seeing me
transported with joy at this discourse) and you have reason to believe, that
it is only for your self alone that you have rescued Berenice, nay further, I
will protest to you by all that is dearest to me, that the sorrows which your
absence, the fear of those dangers into which you were going to precipitate
your self, and the news of your losses have made me suffer, could not be
equaled, except by the joy I received at your Return, but a Return which you
have made remarkable by a service the King never can forget, and which must of
necessity stifle in his breast the hatred he bears your Family, if he be not
the most obdurate, and the most ungrateful of all men living. The Princess
accompanied these words with many others, which I could not answer but with
transport and ecstasy; and after this first conversation, she needs would have
me give her an account of my Voyage, and make her the Recital of all that had
befallen me since my departure. I obeyed her punctually, and in the sad
passages of my Narration, I saw her so nearly touched, that I thereby received
no light marks of that affection, which from thence forward was to make up my
whole fortune, and be to me in the stead of Parents, of Empires, and of
whatsoever the Anger of Heaven had taken from me.

Arsaces was in this part of his story, when the Princess Berenice, accompanied
with Apamia, and Cleone came into the chamber, They that kept the door of the
Tent, knew very well that Princess was not comprehended in the Order which had
been given them, and of those three persons there was not one that could be
thought unfit to hear Arsaces his discourse. As soon as they entered, the
Princes, who were sitting by Arsaces his bedside, rose up to salute them, and
the two wounded ones received them with a great deal of joy, the motions whereof
nevertheless were a little different. Arsaces could not see his Princess
without some inward alteration, or rather without some kind of transport, and
Berenice could not behold Arsaces in a much better state of health than she had
hoped for in so short a time, without showing some signs of such a contentment,
as a bare good will is not able to produce. When she had likewise received an
assurance from the Princes mouths, of the amendment of their wounds, she sat
down, and Apamia, and Cleone with her, upon seats that were brought them.
Berenice was going to fall into some discourse, when the Prince her brother,
not being willing to be diverted from their former entertainment, opposed her
intention. Sister, (said he) content your self that the troublesome passage you
so much apprehended, has been related in your absence, and that we have heard
you have loved, without your being put to the pain to tell it us. Fear not
sister, (continued he, seeing Berenices face ore-spread at these words with a
glowing color) you would have more cause to blush if one could reproach you
with having been so blind, as not to know the admirable qualities of this
Prince, with having been ungrateful for the obligations we have to him, and in
short, with having been able to see, and know Artaxerxes without loving him. Do
not hinder us from hearing the rest of his Adventures, and hearken to the share
you have in them without interrupting us. Arsaces accompanied these words of
Oroondates with a most humble and beseeching look, which seemed to beg pardon
of his Princess, for the confession he had made to the company, of the
affection she bore him, and seeing that they were all settled again in silence,
and that they disposed themselves to attention, he went on thus with his
discourse.

The end of the second Book.
CASSANDRA, The fourth Part. The third Book.
IT is true, my fairest Princess, that being obliged to this Recital by the
command of my dear Brother* I have declared to this illustrious company the
testimonies you gave me of your affection; but they are not ignorant, that
'twas to the remembrance of Oroondates, you granted what could never be due to
the services, or person of Artaxerxes, and that your inclination to a Brother
so worthy of your love, made you look upon the passion of his dear friend, and
brother, more advantageously than you would have done upon that of the Prince
of Persia.

The signs I received of the continuance of my Princesses good will, (pursued
Arsaces, turning toward Oroondates, and the rest of the company) were so
precious to me, that I really believed I had no reason to complain against
heaven, which did so fully recompense me for the loss of those Empires it had
deprived me of; and being by my Princesses orders retired with this knowledge,
to the lodgings that were appointed for me in the Palace, I employed the rest
of that day, considering in that the greatness from whence I was fallen, had
not in its most pompous luster, had any thing comparable to my present
felicity. It belongs to none but the Gods, (said I) to do miraculous Actions,
and as great, and powerful as they are, they could not make me amends for the
greatness of my losses, but by the greatness of that fortune to which they now
have raised me; having taken from me whatsoever they could take away, they give
me whatsoever they could give me of most great, and of most beautiful, and in
short, they give me all that I could desire, and more than I could lawfully
hope for; let them bestow the Empires of Asia, and of Europe on whom they
please, provided they leave but Berenice to fortunate Arsaces, he never will
accuse them of injustice, but will without envy behold the absolute Authority
of those Masters of the whole Earth. These really were my thoughts, and
Fortune, who by such glorious tokens, made me believe she meant to declare her
self in my favor, forsook me not in those beginnings, but made all things
contribute to the happiness she had procured me. That service I had done the
King, finding him prepossessed with some good opinion of me, and with some
affection to me, wrought presently the most powerful effect one could have
hoped for by it, from the most grateful Prince in the world; and if at my
former Voyage I had been held in some consideration at Court, this last Action,
added to the inclination which the King had already toward me, raised me there
to such a credit, that to represent it to you in a few words, I may truly say,
that within one month, Arsacomes had no advantage over me; and had it not been
for the power of the Queen, I should without dispute, have held the first place
in the Kings esteem and affection. It Is true, I labored not to make my self
great by Offices, and employments, for having thoughts very far distant from
those, I was satisfied with causing that to be given to others (as much as I
could without abusing the Kings favor toward me) which men, who had been
slaves to an Ambition different from mine, would perchance have kept for their
own selves. This manner of carriage, added to the good fortune I had at that
time, gained me a reasonable good number of friends in the Court, and I did so
little trespass upon their friendship, or upon the compliance which the estate
of my condition obliged them to render me, that amongst them all, I never
observed any one to grow cold toward me, or discontented. Arsacomes envied my
fortune, but he durst not cross it openly, remembering that he was indebted to
me for his life; and the Queen his sister, who had the same obligation, and who
was an extreme cunning, and politic Princess, would not thwart the Kings
inclinations, which she knew to be very potent toward me. As Arsacomes his envy
of me was nourished in him by certain considerations; so my aversion to him was
increased by diverse others; and though I could not love him, because he was my
Rival, and a Rival very troublesome to my Princess, yet durst I not express my
enmity, for fear of discovering the cause of it, and 'twas with a strange
constraint, I suffered his daily, public demonstrations of love to the
daughter of his King. I found some consolation indeed in her behavior toward
him, and every day observed with joy, that his presumption could not be more
justly recompensed than it was by her. She never gave him an obliging word, she
never did any Action that was favorable to him, and so carefully avoided all
occasions of being alone with him, that he could never entertain her but in
company; he being of a haughty, impetuous humor, this often made him overshoot
himself, but not having utterly lost his judgment, he strove to moderate his
Resentments by his sisters advice, and remembering he was the King of Scythia's
subject, he considered, that if the causes of his fortune should come to cease,
he might fall from his Authority, and be in a condition to suffer the
punishment due to his insolence. The Example of Cidaris was fresh in his
memory, and though he could not abase himself so low as to fear a destiny like
his, yet that remembrance was enough to make some impression in his mind.
Though Arsacomes was ill satisfied with Berenice, I for my part had all manner
of reason to acknowledge her goodness, and since she gives me leave, to strain
a point of discretion, to publish my Advantages, I may tell you that I never
wished more happiness than I truly possessed at that time; and that my adored
Princess, did in my favor, slacken the Rein to all those testimonies of
affection, I could desire from so sublime a virtue. Yet were they all limited
to words alone, and to the endeavors she used, to afford me all the means she
could to see her, and discourse with her at liberty. That was not very hard for
her to do, for in the condition I then stood with the King, and in the belief
the Scythians had, that she was obliged to me for her safety, and perchance for
her honor, since the time that I had rescued her out of the hands of the
treacherous Princes of the Tauro-Scythians, no body thought strange that she
allowed me entrance into her Chamber, and suffered my company when she went
abroad. Cyllenia assisted me in those occasions with an affection, for which I
shall be indebted to her as long as I live, and my dear Theodates had
sacrificed himself wholly to my interests. True it is, that in my Encounters I
had endeavored to repay him part of the good offices I received from him, by
others which I did him to the King, and that I made that Prince better
acquainted with his virtues, than he had been formerly; but besides those
opportunities whereby I strove to testify my friendship, another offered it
self wherein I was not useless to him. He became passionately in love with the
Princess Theomiris, the daughter of Prince Carthasis the Kings brother, an
exceeding fair, and virtuous Lady, and most dearly beloved of Berenice, who
besides nearness of blood, thought her self obliged, to bear her a great deal
of good will, by the knowledge she had of her excellent qualities. Theodates
was not only considerable in Scythia by his birth, and virtue, but was also
extraordinary handsome, and well might gain the affections of that Princess,
without any other assistance save that of his own merit; but I too dearly
preserved the memory of what I owed him, to neglect any occasion to requite it,
and as soon as his passion was known to me, I employed all the credit I had
with my Princess, to make her use all the interest she had with Theomiris.
Berenice received my intercession without any repugnance, and being of her self
most ready to oblige Theodates, she labored to advance his suit with a great
deal of goodness, and with a great deal of success. In the mean time the Kings
favor toward me, increased from day to day, and although the Prince was ever
governed by his own motions, rather than by the counsel of any about him, and
that he never gave his Favorites so much power over his mind, but that he
ever kept firm to his own Resolutions, he seemed then to have receded from his
maxims in favor of me, and that even in the most important affairs, he had a
greater opinion of my advice, than he had ever had of any other bodies. I will
have the Scythians honor Arsaces, (said he) both as the bravest, most valiant
of all men living, (they were the terms which his affection made him unjustly
use, and as he to whom they ow the safety of their King, and of all the royal
Family. Not being contented with many considerable gifts, which he heaped upon
me every day, he to his former liberalities, and to the excessive Riches he had
already bestowed upon me, would needs add the Provinces which Cidaris and his
brother had lost, when they lost their lives, and which by their traitorous,
horrible Attempt, returned unto the Crown, their Attaindure having excluded all
the Survivers of their House, from any lawful pretensions to them. I durst not
oppose his Liberalities, for fear of angring him, and of giving him suspicion
of my true quality, by seeming to contemn them. He had often times been
offended with the little reckoning I made of Presents of that nature, and by
the advice of the Princess her self, I would not put my self in hazard of
displeasing him. Theodates confirmed me in that Resolution, and when he pressed
me most earnestly to it, Dear Theodates (said I) I will not accept of this
Province, but upon condition, that you will receive it from me when I am once
in a capacity to offer it you, and that (continued I smiling) shall be the
Ransom of your Prisoner, if the Gods permit him not to satisfy you better.
Theodates, who knew how to despise that kind of Riches, answered me very
generously, and by the Kings Example, began to call me Prince of the
Tauro-Scythians; but they had hardly given me that name, when it was known in
Court, I should not bear that Title without dispute; for news came thither that
Amasis the younger brother of Cydaris, and he with whom Bandamis had threatened
us when he died, had begun to execute part of those menaces, and after having
lien a while concealed in that Province, to make a party, whereby he pretended
either to revenge the death of his Brothers, or to keep possession of those
Territories which had belonged to his Family, he had at last persuaded the
Tauro-Scythians to rise, and having under false, and specious pretenses made
their Neighbors the Agatirsians take up Arms with them, had got an Army
together of above fifty thousand men, wherewith he prepared himself to enter
into the nearest Provinces, either to get them to revolt with him, or to use
all Acts of Hostility against them. As soon as the noise of this insurrection
was come to Issedon, and that the King had received the certainty of it, he
without being troubled, began diligently to provide those Remedies that were
needful, and summoning the nearest Troops, whereof he could compose an Army,
was pleased that I should have the honor to command them: not but that among
his own subjects he might have made a better choice, yet whether it were that
his affection to me, gave him too advantageous an opinion of my sufficiency, or
that having given me that Province, he believed me to be more concerned in the
preservation of it than any body else, so it is that he preferred me for that
employment, before those that sued to him for it. I know not how to represent
to you in what manner I received it. On the one side, I was not a little
satisfied to find so remarkable an occasion, to deserve those favors the King
conferred upon me, and to establish my self more and more, by the services I
hoped to do him, in that affection which was so necessary for me, both toward
the accomplishment of my happiness with Berenice, and toward the means of
recovering, with part of mine honor, some part also of Darius his Empires; but
on the other side I was not less afflicted to go from Berenice, and though I
foresaw not that that absence would be of so long continuance as it proved, I
could not resolve upon it without a most sensible grief. But there was a
necessity of it, and in that sorrow, I met with some consolations, which did in
part abate its violence. We shall fight for the King of Scythia, (said I) it
has pleased Fortune that we have not been useless to his service already, but
when we shall have let him see how we can lead an Army for his interests,
perchance he will not refuse to give us another for the defense of our own, and
that by the importance of the services we shall do him, we may blot that hatred
out of his mind, which still continues in it against the remnant of Darius his
Family. Go then Arsaces, since so many Reasons oblige thee to it, go conquer
the rest of those that would have murdered the King, and violently have
stolen away Berenice; and if thou can not part with that Princess without
sorrow, sweeten at least that sorrow by the knowledge thou have, that thou art
going to fight for her Father, that thou art going to fight for her, and that
thou art going to fight for thy self. With this kind of discourse I took
comfort in the trouble which that absence was preparing for me, and in the
interim told the King that I would endeavor by the hazard of all my blood to
make my self worthy of the employment he gave me, and either would return
victorious over his Enemies, or else not return at all. I doubt not (said the
King) but that you are certain of the Victory, and that they must be neither
Rebels nor Traitors that can resist the valor of Arsaces. In the mean time,
my departure was hastened with all possible diligence, and every day till then,
I had the happiness to see, and to entertain my Princess. If I dare take the
liberty to say so, her grief seemed little less than mine, nor did she see me
ready to go into dangers, without showing a sensibility, that was more sweet,
and more obliging to me, than all the honors, and gifts of Provinces which I
received from the King her father; but she found her consolations in mine, when
I represented those Advantages to her, wherewith the cruelty of that absence
was to be allayed. Theodates would not have let me go without him, but knowing
his quality, and that after the employments he had formerly had, he could not
march in an Army without commanding it, or doing himself a great deal of wrong,
I opposed his friendly intention, and entreated him to continue at Court to
serve Theomiris, and to serve me also with Berenice, since he was the only
man, from whom I could receive any assistance in that business. They were these
last considerations that made him yield to it, his friendship to me making him
despise the first. The night before my departure being come, I received Orders
from the King, and took my leave of him, which he gave me not without some
tears, nor without such Endearments, as those that were nearest to him could
hardly hope for from him. Go, Arsaces (said he) go quell our Enemies, restore
quietness to the Province which your virtue has given you, and testify to the
remotest Scythians, that it is only to the gallantest of all mortals, their King
is indebted for his safety. Yet have a care of a life which is very dear to us,
and think not so much of conquering, but that you may also think of bringing
Arsaces home to us again. I shall conquer, Sir, (replied I) since your Majesty
commands me to do so, and the remotest Scythians shall know, it is the
victorious sword of their King, rather than the hand of Arsaces, that punishes
them for their perfidiousness. After I had left the King, I gave the remainder
of the day to the visits of my friends, and when night was come, my Princess
had the goodness to permit me to pass part of it in her Camber, with Theodates,
and Cyllenia. It would be very hard for me to repeat all the discourses to you,
which we had at that separation, and being they took up many hours, less time
would not be necessary to tell you them. My Princess, out of an excess of
goodness, was afflicted at my departure, and by the same goodness, she
comforted her self and me with hope of the fruit I should reap by my Voyage. I
go, Madam, (said I) to labor for the Repose of Scythia, and for my own; that
hope alone, sweetens the violence of my grief; and at this separation, I should
not be to be comforted, if I did not believe, that Heaven separates us, only
to reunite us the more firmly. It cannot favor me with its assistance, in the
employment the King gives me, without advancing my happiness, and when the King
shall know I am the son of Darius, he will perhaps remember I have done
something for his service. Upon that remembrance, next to yours my lovely
Princess, my whole fortune will depend, and since I leave it totally at your
feet, it is at your feet I hope to find it at my Return, but it is only to your
goodness that I ought to recommend it; yes, fairest Princess, only to your
goodness, and since you have been generous enough to receive the banished, the
undone, the miserable Arsaces, as Prince Artaxerxes, you will also without
doubt be generous enough to maintain him in the glorious condition, to which
you have raised him; this hope not only sweetens all my sorrows, but makes me
look without envy upon Alexanders Victories, and would make me find advantage
in my losses, if I had not some compassion of my friends, and if my Reputation
were not interessed in their fall. Preserve that for me therefore, my divine
Princess, which Arsacomes, which Stratonice would cruelly take from me, and
remember, that I cannot yield my pretensions to them, nor to any body in the
world, without quitting my life together with them. Have a care of your self
(replied the Princess) that you may as well preserve your self for Berenice, as
you desire she should preserve her self totally for you; and do you resist the
unjust motions of your courage, as well as she will resist the importunities of
Arsacomes, and Stratonice. If your remembrance of me make you more wary in
fight, and if my interest, make you go into dangers with more moderation than
you are wont; I Will combat here for you with all the assurance, and all the
success you can desire. In this, Arsaces, I shall follow my own inclinations as
much as your recommendation, but remember, that I will be obeyed in what I
demand of you, and that I shall be sufficiently afflicted by your absence,
without being tormented with fears of the peril you are in. My Princess
accompanied these words with many others no less obliging, and by those sweet
marks of my felicity, she made me know, that nothing but my departure hindered
me from being the most fortunate of all men living. I took leave of her, with
effects of grief which all my constancy could not hinder, and before I went out
of her Chamber, I received a Skarf from her, part of which she had wrought with
her own hand, and with which I believed I should be invincible against the most
valiant Enemies. At last I was fain to depart, and being retired with my dear
Theodates, I spent almost all the rest of the night in recommending my life,
and fortune to him, which next to Berenice, I left in no other hands but his.

By break of day, my Lodging was full of persons that came to bid me farewell,
and of the chief Officers of the Army that were to go along with me; I took my
leave of those, and put my self at the head of these, who generally expressed
their joy for the employment that was given me, and made me see that for all I
was a stranger, I had gained their affections enough to hope for a great deal
of good will, and obedience amongst them. I answered the offers they made me of
their service, with all the civility I could possibly, and endeavored to carry
my self toward them as Arsaces, whom only the Kings favor had raised above
them, rather than as Artaxerxes, who once was heir to the Empire of Asia. This
manner of behavior perfected the winning of their affections, and they marched
with a satisfaction, whereat I my self had cause to be very well satisfied. I
will not here make a particular Relation of the number of the Forces I
commanded; They were the very same, Brother, wherewith you afterward went to
fight against Zopirio, and by the muster of them which I made two days march
from Issedon, I found they consisted of forty thousand Horse, drawn out of many
several parts of Scythia. The Scythians you know seldom use Foot, and never
draw forth any but upon those Expeditions, wherein they mean to employ their
utmost strength. We made very great marches directly to Mount Taurus, and
though I knew not those Countries, I had men with me who were acquainted even
with the most unusual passages, and by the former Voyage I made with the
Scythians under Theodates, I had so well learned their customs, and their
manner of fight, that I was no more troubled amongst them, than I should have
been amongst the Persians. The King had given me diverse persons of quality, and
command, but amongst them all, he that I made most account of, was the good old
Cleorestes, Araxes his father, whom I had particularly demanded of him, and
whom I loved exceedingly, both for the consideration of his son whom I had
known, and esteemed in Persia, and for that of his own virtue. Besides that his
quality was considerable in Scythia, he was much to be valued for his person,
and there were but few soldiers in the Kingdom that had more experience than
he, or a more perfect knowledge in matters of war. And indeed I preferred his
counsel before all the rest, and gave him the employments of greatest
consequence. I Will shorten the Recital of this War, as much as conveniently I
can, and only tell you the most remarkable Events of it. We arrived at the
Frontiers of the Tauro-Scythians without difficulty; but when we would have
entered, we found it defended by some Troops which Amasis had left to guard it.
The number of men was not great, but the places were very advantageous for
them, and that was it which put us to some trouble in conquering them, and made
us lose some men about it. Yet did we overcome those first obstacles, and after
a sharp Encounter remained Masters of the Field, by the death of all those that
defended it, who never turned their backs, nor ever demanded quarter. The entry
into this Province being free by this first success, we advanced in reasonable
good order toward the Town, near which Amasis lay encamped; but I found that
War would not easily be brought to a conclusion, and by the first judgment I
had been able to make of men of that Nation, I conjectured that they would
defend all their places to the utmost, and that that Expedition would prove
much longer than had been imagined. Scarce had we made a days march toward
Amasis, when we heard he was coming to meet us, and having fancied, that the
knowledge of the Country, and their being fresh, would give his men the
advantage over Troops tired out with marching, he desired nothing but to give
us Battle. I praised the Gods for that happy forwarding of our intentions, and
told my companions that we could not wish for any thing more advantageous, than
the occasion of putting a speedy end to the War, which by other means our
Enemies might draw out in length. I found them all as resolute, and as
confident as I could desire; but seeing that the Forces I had to lead were a
Kings, whose affection I endeavored to keep, and that upon the success of that
day, depended the beginning of that Reputation I hoped to gain with him, and
with it the establishment and Repose of my whole life, I was not willing rashly
to hazard matters of that importance, but resolved to seek our Advantages, in
all the counsels prudence could afford us. When we were certain that Amasis was
advancing toward us with all the haste he could and with a firm Resolution to
give us Battle; Let us put them to the whole trouble (said I to my chief
Commanders) and let him weary his men to come up to us, while we choose a place
to fight in, that may be for our advantage, and there we will rest our men and
horses all the time that our Enemies are marching thither. This counsel being
approved of, we encamped in a fair Plain, and having a long Hill upon our right
hand, and a little River behind us, we left the Front, and the left Flank open
to the Enemies approach. Scarce had we rested there two days, which were spent
in necessary preparations, when our Scouts brought us intelligence that Amasis
was coming to quarter that night within a hundred furlongs of us, and that the
next day he would offer us Battle. This news wrought nothing in the courage of
our Troops, but a generous impatience, and an ardent desire to have a bout with
those daring Rebels; They showed a thousand signs of it, and in the interim, I
was careful to forget nothing that belonged to my charge, and spent the whole
time I had remaining, to put all things in the order we could desire.
Cleorestes took off much of that trouble from me, and with him Lectaris,
Mazentes, Amisoras, and many others, in whom for their experience, and valor,
I had a great deal of confidence. The Report our Scouts had brought in proved
very true, for the Enemies Army encamped so near us that day, that in the night
time our foremost Troops, heard their shouts, and discovered some of their
fires. As soon as day began to appear, the Scythians made all the Plain to
echo with the sound of their instruments, and the Officers, busying themselves
diligently about the Orders I had given them, drew up their Squadrons according
to the Scythian discipline. Their form was exceeding terrible, and of all the
Soldiers I ever saw, never did I meet with any that prepared themselves to
fight with a confidence like theirs. I wore a Suit of Arms that day which the
King had given me at my departure, the work of them was excellent, and the
matter very rich; but Berenices Scarf was my most pompous Ornament. Having
learned in part what order our Enemies kept with their Troops, I drew mine into
three Bodies, whereof I took the first my self, and gave the two others to
Cleorestes, and Mazentes, and when they were all in a readiness, I rode
bare-headed along the Front of every Division, and employed all the eloquence
the Gods had given me to represent all the Reasons that might animate them to
the Battle. My Speech was not without effect, for by good fortune I had so
gained the hearts of both Officers, and Soldiers, that they cried out aloud I
should lead them to the Enemy, and that they feared not to be overcome, while
they fought under Arsaces. Seeing them so gallantly resolved, I would not
retain them longer, but covering my head with a Cask oreshadowed with white
Plumes, and with a Horse-tail which fell upon my shoulders, I armed my left
hand with a weighty shield, and my right with a couple of Javelins, and putting
my self at the head of my Battalion, marched toward the Enemies, when they were
already beginning to advance. The interview of the two Armies, caused a
dreadful noise of voices, and instrumennts, but when after we had encouraged
them for the last time, we gave them the liberty to charge, they closed with an
impetuousness which admits of no comparison. The Enemy had but little Infantry
as well as we, and so the fight was equal between the Armies, for though that
of the Enemies was stronger than ours in number of men, ours was justified by
the goodness of its cause, and by the valor of many gallant Officers I had
with me. The Body I commanded did so well, as it presently broke through that
which was before us, and having routed all the Squadrons of it, we, after a
great deal of Execution, got as far as their Baggage. The Scythians would have
fallen to plunder, but I forbad them till after the clear issue of the Battle,
and it was very happy I did so, for scarce had we obtained that advantage, when
we heard that Mayentes his Battalion had given back, before that which Amasis
commanded in person, and that our Enemies General had gained an Advantage
little different from ours. This news made us face about toward them that
stood in need of our assistance, and leaving those we had defeated at liberty
either to fly or rally, we went to fly upon conquering Amasis with a fury which
he could not easily withstand. If I did not fear to offend modesty, I should
say that the powerful interest which guided me in that Combat, made me do
things that are not ordinary, and that peradventure I contributed something
toward the winning of that Battle. Mazentes, who was not utterly defeated,
recovered courage at our Arrival, and while Cleorestes with his body made good
our Advantage, against him that was to oppose him, we gave Amasis so smart, and
so fortunate a charge, that we quickly raised our party again. All the Forces
drew insensibly to that place, and 'twas with a great deal of blood, and with
the death of many thousand men, that the Victory was there disputed. I animated
our valiant Warriers the most that possibly I could, and after having told them
what they owed to their honor, to the service of their King, and to their own
safety, which by reason of the River that was at their back, they could not
hope for otherwise than by Victory, I endeavored to incite them to it by my
Example, and not sparing to hazard my life in their presence, I by the
confidence I showed, obliged them to second me generously. I did not strive to
meet with Amasis, for remembering that two of the three Brothers had been slain
by my hand already, I sought not an occasion to shed the remainder of the blood
of that House. Why should I hold you longer? After we had fought long, and
vigorously, the Victory declared it self for our party, and Amasis knowing that
fortune was contrary to him, faced about with some of his men, and by flight,
sought either for his own safety, or for the means of fighting another time. In
that last Rout the slaughter was very great, and the Scythians, who naturally
love blood, and who seldom spare their Enemies, committed cruelties which in
many places it was impossible for me to hinder. Yet did I do all I could, and
where I chanced to come it was not without success. Our Victory was so
absolute, that of fifty thousand men, whereof the Enemies Army was composed,
there were thirty thousand slain upon the place, and we lost not above two
thousand of ours. After the Event of this Battle, a little Town which was not
many furlongs from us, opened its Gates without resistance, and there we
refreshed our selves for a few days, dressed our wounded men, and put our
Forces again in order to prosecute the Victory. I had received some hurts, but
such light ones that I kept not my bed above four or five days. Our Army was
encamped near the Walls, and all the principal Officers, with the wounded
Soldiers were lodged within the Town, where care was taken for Victual, and
for necessary subsistence. I then had reason enough to be satisfied with my
fortune, and that happy beginning of my Arms advanced my Designs, and raised my
hopes enough, to smother part of my Discontents; but the image of my Princess
was ever present to my remembrance, and all the joy I could taste by my Victory
was strongly moderated by my trouble for her absence. I had no body with me to
whom I durst impart my thoughts, and though I knew the affection of Criton, who
had not forsaken me, and that I had a great deal of confidence in some servants
I had received from Theodates, yet had I not enough in either, to acquaint them
with my love, or with my quality, for those were secrets of too great
importance, to declare them to any body but Theodates, and Cyllenia. Yet had I
then a fair occasion to write to my Princess, and being obliged to give the
King an Account of the happy issue of that Battle, and of the condition of our
affairs in that Province, I would not give that Commission but to one of those
faithful servants Theodates had put to me, and having commanded him not to
deliver the Letter I wrote to that dear friend, till he were alone with him, I
sealed up that to my Princess within it, having had trial enough of that man's
affection, to trust him as far as that came to. I writ our Victory to the King
in a few words, having given the Messenger instructions to inform him more at
large, and sent nothing to Theodates but new Protestations of friendship, and
Recommendations of my fortune; but the Letter to my Princess, if I can remember
it, was in these terms.

Arsaces to the Princess Berenice.
TO burn for you, to be at so great a distance from you, and to fear
incessantly to lose you; do you think, fair Princess, that these are light
afflictions to poor Arsaces, and that his love, his absence, and his
apprehensions, are not capable to give him that death, which he has not found
amongst your Enemies swords, because your will ordained him to avoid it? For
love, the Gods forbid I should complain of it, it does, and will ever make my
most glorious condition; for absence, my duty obliges me to bear it, and it is
by serving her father, that I ought to make my self worthy of my Princess; but
my fear has something in it more cruel, and if I could be secure against the
misfortunes I apprehend, I should endure the rest of my torments with more
courage: I do not doubt, dear Princess, of the constancy of your mind, but I
dread strong persecutions, I dread a sovereign Authority, and I dread the
fortune of Arsaces; yet is it altered since it depended only upon you, and I
have had nothing at all to do with chance, since you were the maker of my
destiny. I expect a happy one from your goodness, and it is out of that hope, I
will remember, you have imposed a command of living, and of returning upon your
faithful

Arsaces.


I dispatched this Messenger when I had given him such instructions as were
necessary, and a few days after, made the Army dis-incamp, and we marched in
pursuit of Amasis, to reduce that Province under the Kings obedience, but we
were stopped at the first Towns we came to, and all those that had never so
little strength, endured the Siege with mavelous obstinacy. That Resistance
protracted the War, and kept us all that Summer in the Province of the
Tauro-Scythians, while in that of the Agatirsians Amasis made up an Army,
partly with the broken Forces he had left, partly with new Troops levied in
those revolted Countries. We were besieging Bursia, when the Messenger I had
sent to Issedon came back to us, and brought me Answers of the Letters he had
carried. The King wrote to me with praises, able to have glutted the Ambition
of the most vainglorious man in the world, and promised me Recompenses
infinitely above all I could deserve. Theodates gave me confirmations of his
affection, in the most obliging terms that could be invented, assured me of the
continuation of his care, and comforted me with a certainty of my Princesses
perseverance, and of the little fruit Arsacomes reaped by all his industry; but
'twas Berenices Letter that caused my impatiency, and opening it when I had
kissed it a thousand times, I with incredible transports of joy read these
words.

The Princess Berenice to Arsaces.
IF you love me, if you are absent, and if you be in fear for me, you suffer
nothing, Arsaces, which I do not suffer as well as you; and I may truly
protest, that I am not exempt from any of those disquiets, which my affection,
the want of your company, and the fear I am in for you, can make me feel. In
this 't here is a perfect conformity between us; I cannot condemn an affection
which I have conceived for him, who of all men living is most worthy of it,
bear your absence out of the same considerations that make you endure mine; but
I know not how to defend myself against the fear of losing you, in those
dangers into which you too lightly precipitate your self: Secure me I pray you,
against this apprehension, if you will have me secure you against yours, and
think of bringing me home Arsaces, if you would find Berenice again in the
same condition wherein you left her.


My joy was excessive at the reading of this Letter, but scarce had I begun to
express it as much as I might in the presence of that man, when he added
astonishment to joy, by the news he brought. He told me that Prince Oroondates,
contrary to the expectation of all Scythia, was come back to Issedon, and that
when the whole Court was going to testify their gladness for a Return so
ardently desired, the King his father being of another mind, had received him
as a mortal Enemy, and had caused him to be imprisoned in the Castle of Serey,
where he was kept under a very strict, and severe Guard. O Brother, what
motions did this discourse stir up within me, and in what manner did I receive
this news of my dear Brother, of whose life I had been uncertan. I abhorred the
cruelty of the King your Father, but was comforted for your imprisonment, by
the assurance that you were alive; it pleased me a great deal better to hear
you were Prisoner to the King your father, than to have been still in doubt you
were ^ead. And indeed I hoped his choler would be allayed in a little time,
and that how great soever his Resentments were against you, he would still
remember that you were his son, and a son worthy of his affections. Upon this
thought I laid foundations for my happiness, and propounded delights unto my
self in your company, which had been interrupted by our cruel separation. I
spent some time upon that remembrance, and asked the Messenger a thousand
questions about that business; but all the particulars he could tell me of your
imprisonment was, that no body was permitted to see you, and that the Princess,
having with much ado obtained the liberty of a visit, had never been able to
entertain you in private. I judged that all this proceeded but from the first
brunt of the Kings anger, and hoped that before my Return the Peace would be
made, or if 'twere not, perhaps we might find occasion to do something in it.

In the mean time we took the Town by Assault which we were beleaguering, and
after that, some others yielded themselves to obedience, but the strongest held
us so long in play, that Amasis had all the leisure he could desire, to fit
himself to take the field again, and so he did, with as great an Army as
before, and a greater Resolution to decide the War by a final Battle. This news
was very welcome to me, believing it to be the means to finish the War, the
length whereof, I by reason of my Princesses absence, began to think
insupportable. We marched directly toward him, taking the way that could bring
us together soonest and most conveniently, but we were fain to take many places
before we got to him, and make our selves Masters, either by force, or by the
terror of our Arms, of whatsoever we met with in our passage. This we effected
succesfully enough, but that I may not tire you with the Recital of all those
petty sieges, and of many trivial Encounters, I Will tell you that we were already
Masters of the whole Province of the Tauro-Scythians, and were drawing near to
that of the Agatirsians, when the Enemies Army came within sight of us. I found
our valiant Scythians had a mavelous desire to fight, and having encouraged
them to it as much as possibly I could, I divided the Army into two Bodies,
whereof I gave the left to Cleorestes, and kept the right my self. Amasis
parted his into four, and marched toward us wondrous resolutely. We fought an
exceeding bloody Battle, but I will not detain you with relating the
particulars, for we should not see the end of my Narration of a long while, if
I should stick upon every circumstance. Amasis and they of his party fought
like desperate men, and like men, who if they lost that Battle, desired not to
outlive it. They made the Victory hang long in suspense, and disputed i^
almost all the day with mavelous obstinacy; but in the end we carried it, and
the Event proved more fatal to the conquered, than that of the former. Of five
and forty thousand whereof the Enemies Army consisted, there hardly escaped two
or three thousand, and those most of them wounded, but delivered by my
Authority, from the fury of the Conquerors. Amasis fighting in the first Ranks
with a great deal of valor, lost his life with a great number of wounds, and
by his death cut up the Root of that Rebellion. We lost not above three
thousand men, but had a great many hurt, whom we caused to be dressed exceeding
carefully, and whereof the most part recovered by the help that was given them.
This Victory made us Masters of both the Provinces, and those revolted people
having neither Forces to dispute them with us, nor Heads to stir them up to
continue in Rebellion, begged the Kings mercy, and came in every day to make
Protestations of their fidelity, and to bring me the Keys of their strong
Holds. We hardly needed to draw our swords any more to perfect the reducing of
them; but yet we were fain to spend some time in visiting some of those places,
and in securing them to us, and it being then about the beginning of Winter,
which is extremely sharp in those Provinces, we were constrained to pass it in
some of the Towns, and to employ it in settling a full Peace, and in such
orders as we thought necessary to esablish a perfect tranquillity. That long
absence would have been intolerable to me, if by the means of Theodates, I had
not often received Letters from my Princess, and if my tedious days had not
been sweetened with the assurances she gave me. The King did me the honor to
write to me very often, and in his Letters gave me praises which could not
lawfully be due to any body. When once we had nothing more to do in those
Provinces, and that the season was convenient for our Army to take the Field,
we began our March to return to ^ssedon, with a perfect joy and satifaction.
For my part, I could not without being transported, think I should shortly see
my Princess again, and that I should find my dear Brother in Scythia. The
fancy of these happinesses grew so powerful in my mind, that it banished the
remembrance of all my losses, and I was marching with contentments, not
troubled with any mixture of bitterness, when I found they were too great to be
so easily obtained. We had already passed over a good part of the way, when I
received an Order from the King, which hindered me from going further, and
reading the Letter he wrote I found these words.

The King of Scythia to the valiant Arsaces.
IT were but justice, my dear Arsaces, to let you rest, after having taken so
great pains for us, and I should equally desire your sight, and the quietness
of my Dominions; but I find all Scythia must be indebted to you for its
safety, and Arsaces is the strongest buckler it can oppose against its most
terrible Enemies. The heavens offer you matter to employ your self for it, and
for us, with the success that usually attends you, and with it an occasion to
revenge your particular quarrels, and to punish that barbarous man, who
contrary to all the rights of war, detained you in a long and cruel captivity.
Arimba^ the Governor of Pontus is entered into our Territories, on the side
toward the Boristhenes with forty thousand men, but he has not yet had time to
make any great progresses, and I am not in a condition to send other Troops
than those under your command speedily enough to oppose him. Go, valiant
Arsaces, go conquer that unworthy Enemy, who hindered you from fighting for your
Country, and who unjustly deprived you of so precious a liberty. I hope for
the victory from your hand, rather than from all our Forces, and yet I will
take care to raise more to recruit your Army, and you shall be sure to receive
supplies before you stand in need of them.


This Order crossing my fair hopes, gave me a very sensible Discontent, but I
quickly found some consolation, and had preserved so great an animosity against
that cruel man, who had kept me from paying what I owed unto my friends, and
what I owed to my Reputation, that the desire of taking a glorious Revenge,
moderated my trouble, and made me turn head against him, with a firm hope that
I should punish him, both for the injury he had formerly done me, and for the
obstacle he then interposed to my present fortune. All the affection our
Scythians bore me was needful to put them upon that new Design without
murmuring; but seeing there was a necessity of it, they followed me more
cheerfully than I expected. Our Army was then but thirty thousand strong,
having been obliged to leave Garrisons in certain Towns, but it increased eight
or ten thousand men, which I drew as we marched, out of places where they might
be spared. We took our way toward Sendica, washed by the Danube, and the
Boristhenes, and bounded by the Euxine sea, whence Arimbas was come down upon
the Frontier. Our Marches were long enough for men that were to fight, and
meeting no stop to retard us, we in a short time arrived within a days Journey
of our Enemies. We rested two days upon the banks of the Boristhenes, which was
open to us, and the third we passed it, and went to incamp within a hundred
furlongs of Arimbas, being resolved to give him battle the next day. Yet did I
mean to let him know before, that he was to fight against his Prisoner, and
calling for a Trumpet, I sent him away presently with this Letter.

Arsaces to Arimbas.
IT is against your Prisoner, O Arimbas, that you are to decide the success of
this War, and to morrow at the head of his Army, he will make you see that he was
capable to defend his liberty against you, if you had assaulted him with equal
Forces; I bring you my head for the Ransom I frustrated you of, you may attach
it with more glory than you did before, and I hope you shall pay me yours for
the price of the liberty of Arsaces.


Arimbas received this Letter with a strange astonishment, and when the Trumpet
had confirmed, that the General of the Scythians was that same Arsaces, whom he
had so long kept Prisoner, he found something of extraordinary in that
Adventure, but after he had asked the Trumpet a thousand questions, he sent him
back to me with this Answer.

Arimbas to Arsaces.
SInce the Gods send me my Fugitive again, I to punish him for his flight, will
receive the occasion they present me for that end; and because heretofore I too
indulgently spared his life, I Will take it now for that Ransom whereof he thinks
he has frustrated me. We shall see his courage at the head of his Army, and
we will give him occasions enough, either to revenge his quarrel, or to fall
more gloriously than he deserves.


The next morning it was newly break of day when our Troops were already in
Battalia, but because I would give you the issue of the business succinctly,
I Will only tell you, that I divided them into four Bodies, of ten thousand Horse
in each, whereof the first was mine own, and the other three I gave to
Leotaris, Mazentes, and Cleorestes, and having put them in as good a readiness
as we could wish, I saw our Scythians march with an undauntedness that promised
me an infallible Victory. I omitted not any thing I could say, to augment their
desire of it, and they answered me with threatening and terrible shouts. They
redoubled them with a greater fierceness when they saw the Enemies Army, and
scarce was I able to keep them in, and hinder them from rushing on to the fight
with an extraordinary eagerness. Yet did they obey me as they were wont to do,
and the Armies were already within a Bowe-shoot of one another, expecting only
the last command to fall on, when having given order to mine not to stir out of
their place, I galloped on before them, and seeing Arimbas at the head of his
men, I advanced to the middle of the space that was between the two Armies, and
defying him with many loud cries, I made him understand what it was I desired
of him. Arimbas was a valiant man, and one that could not see himself
challenged before so great a number, without showing proofs of the courage he
had boasted of. He ran toward me full speed, but before he came close to me,
he darted one of his two Javelins at me with all his might, but he failed of
his aim, and the Dart having passed whizzing over my head, fell without any
effect at the feet of our Troops; immediately he took the other in his right
hand, and ending his Carrier, we closed with a very impetuous shock. He fought
with something a blinder rage than I, and so his Javelin only hit my shield,
upon which it broke all into shivers, and mine being a little more warily
directly, found passage into the Beaver of his Helmet, and piercing to the
hinder part of his head, made him fall stark dead in sight of both the Armies.
Ours at that spectacle, sent forth loud cries to Heaven, and moving at the same
time, ran with a mavelous violence opon those frighted Troops, already half
conquered by their Generals death. I strove to open them a passage, and to
clear my self a way with my Sword, which might make theirs the more easy to
them; but we found much difficulty in the business, and the Captains that
commanded under Arimbas, being brave and valiant men, used all imaginable
endeavors to supply the want of their General. They labored a long time in it
with success, but some of the Scythians having cut off Arimbas his head,
carried it upon the point of a Javelin, and by that object struck terror into
some of the boldest of them, and animated themselves in such manner, that their
Enemies were no longer able to make resistance. As soon as they began to be in
disorder, the Scythians laid hold of the advantage to so good purpose, that
there was no more possibility of disputing the Victory against them. To shorten
this discourse, they won it absolutely, I say so absolutely, that hardly one of
their Enemies escaped with life, though I did all that was in my power to keep
them from that cruelty; but they had conceived such an animosity against those
injurious invaders, who pretended to enlarge their bounds to the utmost parts
of the Earth, that 'twas impossible, to save them from their fury.

Queen Thalestris, who till then had hearkened to Arsaces patiently, could not
longer forbear to interrupt him. I fought under your command at that battle
(said she) and was witness of many of those passages you have related; but I
cannot pardon your modesty, which robs this company of the knowledge of the
most gallant ones; you did actions there beyond belief, and 'twas with a great
deal of truth, that the Scythians published the honor of that victory to be
due to no body but their General. Arsaces could not suffer the continuation of
this discourse, and to take her off on it; Madam (said he) you give me an
advantage which belongs not to me, and since our Troops were honored with your
presence, without doubt you your self did actions there, which would have
darkened all the glory of mine, if the honor of so great a command had not
given them all the luster, that made them be taken notice of. The Queen would
have replied, but the company hindered her, and so Arsaces went on thus with
his story.

After this victory so happily obtained, but yet purchased with the loss of
five thousand of our men, we no longer had any Enemies to fight withal, and
that little piece of the Country Arimbas had brought under his subjection,
being presently settled again under ours, we saw the whole frontiere quiet, and
so were permitted to return again toward Issedon, which we had so much desired.
I did it with a greater contentment than the estate of my fortune ought in
probability to have given me, and drew near to my Princess, and my dear
brother, with the sweetest hopes a mind is able to conceive. Why should I
trouble you with the recital of our voyage? After having marched a great many
days, which my impatience made me think exceeding long, I at last saw the
great City of Issedon, but before I was come within three or four hundred
furlongs of it, I had met my dear Theodates, who with a good part of the
Nobility was come forth to welcome me. I received the honor they all did me,
with the greatest civility I could, but all the most tender expressions that
ever friendship produced, appeared in the endearments between Theodates and me.
We could not put an end to our embraces, nor were the kindest, and most
obliging words in the world, sufficient to make known the least part of our
mutual satisfactions: I had a thousand questions to ask him, but I feared least
a secret conversation might be thought an incivility to many persons of quality
that were with him; and therefore beginning another discourse with that noble
company, it lasted till we came to the Gates or the Town, which we found full
with a throng of the inhabitants that came out to meet us. Never did a
thankful people welcome their defender, or their lawful Prince with louder
acclamations, or more testimonies of joy, nor ever did any Soldier receive so
many praises, for so inconsiderable actions. The cries of the people made but a
part of our glory, for the King himself out of an excess of goodness, which he
then had toward me, came forth of his Palace into the street, to give me
glorious testimonies of his affection. He stretched out his arms as soon as he
saw me appear, and I kneeled down upon one knee to receive the favors
wherewith he was pleased to honor me: what shall we do (said he) O, our
valiant defender, to show you we are not ungrateful, and what can we offer to
generous Arsaces, which he by his valor, has not already made lawfully his
own? we are indebted to him for the conservation of our Estates, but we before
were engaged to him for that of our lives, and now neither the greatness of our
obligations, nor that of his glory, can admit of any further addition. He spoke
these words holding me in his arms, and I answered him, with all the respect I
owed to so great a King, and a King that was Father to Berenice, and
Oroondates. It Is your Majesty (said I) that reduces happy Arsaces, to terms of
not being able sufficiently to acknowledge your goodness; the opportunities you
have given him to serve you, do too largely recompense all that he has done,
and that high fortune to which you raise a stranger, is infinitely above my
merit, and above my hopes. Alter that opinion if you have it, (replied the
King) such strangers as your self, do quickly make themselves known over all
the World, and as Scythia has nothing that is above you, believe its King
possesses nothing you may not hope for from his affection. He accompanied these
words with new endearments, and afterward permitted me to salute Prince
Carthasis his Brother, Arsacomes, and many others that were attending on him.
When I had received and returned the civilities of the most considerable
persons of the Court, I by the Kings appointment, retired to my former lodgins,
whether I was followed by a great number of the Courtiers, but they presently
withdrew, to leave me at liberty to put off my Arms; and rest my self, only
Theodates staying with me in my Chamber. When I saw my self free master of my
actions, I fully satisfied my friendship in the most tender expressions of
kindness, and after having begun them afresh a thousand times, I asked him what
condition my life was in and conjured him to tell me truly, whatsoever he
judged my love could desire of him. Theodates at this demand, appeared not so
joyful as I had hoped, but keeping a serious countenance, from which I drew an
ill presage; Sir, (said he) the account you are to receive of me would be very
unwelcom, if in it you did not find a sweet consolation, and if in the
persecutions the Princess undergoes, you had not a powerful occasion to
understand the greatness of her affection. She has ever been unshaken to the
solicitations of Arsacomes, and of the Queen, who in favor of her Brother,
has done him offices to her, that are unworthy of her quality. She has spared
neither prayers nor tears to move her, and when she saw they were all to no
purpose, and that by her importunities, she made her Brother but the more
odious to the Princess, she took recourse to all the power and credit she has
with the King; and by my misfortune it is now so great, that we may say with
truth, as we find with sorrow, that only Stratonice reigns now in Scythia, and
that her Brother is by that means become almost the Sovereign of it. The King
by his last actions has showed signs of his weakness, and of his dependency
upon that woman; After he had long resisted, and contented himself with giving
Arsacomes the first rank in the Kingdom, without encouraging him to hope that
he should be his Son-in-law, that insolent favorite, whom so many preferments
could not satisfy, because they glutted not his utmost ambition, either
through the violence of his passion, or some other cause, fell sick, and was
brought almost to extremity. Stratonice stirred not from his bedside, but
made the King understand, her life depended absolutely upon her Brothers
recovery. The king, who loved Arsacomes exceedingly, and who besides, by a
meaness of spirit, which had not been observed in the rest of his life, was
become a stave to his sister, appeared very sensible of her grief, and was
excestively troubled for the sickness of his favorite. The Queen knowing her
power, made use of it very cunningly, and one day when Arsacomes was
extraordinary ill, Stratonice faign'd to be so too, and getting into her bed,
put the King into mortal apprehensions of her sickness. The next day she seemed
to be a great deal worse, and by all her actions made the King judge, she
regarded not her life, since that of Arsacomes was in danger. The King sitting
by her, expressing with most effectual words, how nearly her illness touched
him, that crafty Princess, after having sighed many times, to work upon him the
more; Sir, (said she) let us miserable wretches die in peace, and trouble not
the calm of your mind, for a loss which needs must be but little considerable
to you; it is just that Arsacomes perish, since he cannot love the Daughter of
his King, without being worthy of death, and it is just that Stratonice die,
both because she is incapable to survive that dearest Brother, and because she
is incapable to survive the loss of your affection. Of my affection, Madam,
(replied the King) I protest to you by all the Gods that it never was so strong
as now, and that it is so extremely increased, as in comparison of my love to
you, I do not at all love my self. Ah, Sir, (answered the subtle Queen,
putting a handkerchief to her eyes) if you honored me now with the affection
you gave me heretofore, you would not suffer that to die, which next your self,
is dearest to me in all the World, without showing some marks of your
compassion. She made a stop at these words, and the King, who presently
understood the drift of them, and who could not easily yield to what she
desired, nor favor Arsacomes to the prejudice of his Daughter, remained
without reply, and fixing his eyes upon the ground, made the Queen see the
agitation of his mind. She soon perceived it, and kept silence with him for a
while, but within a little after, desiring to finish, what she thought she had
happily begun; No, Sir, (added she) for Gods sake, be not at all disquieted for
my consideration, nor use any violence upon your inclinations, for a person who
cannot have deserved them, though I cannot feel the loss of them without dying,
I will at least endure it without murmuring against you, and shall be able to
put a difference between what was lawfully my own, and what I held merely by
your goodness. My fortune was too high, and (if I dare say so) too unjust, to
believe it would be of long continuance; yet has it not so blinded me, but that
I can behold the fall of it, as an effect of your justice, rather than as an
effect of my ill fate. Stratonice, and Arsacomes, had too lofty an ambition;
yet Stratonice had none but what it pleased your Majesty to give her, and
Arsacomes dies for the expiation of his; if I accompany him to the grave, your
Majesty ought not to be troubled at it, since I shall only lose a life which
was but little dear to you, and toward the conservation whereof you were
unwilling to contribute any thing. The Queen, as she ended these words, looked
upon the King with the same eyes that had so ardently enflamed him, and at that
moment, summoned together all her most alluring charms, with such a sovereign
power, that being prepossessed already, he was not able to resist them. He
lifted up his eyes from the ground, and turning them upon the Queen with a most
amorous gesture; Do not kill me with these unkind words (said he) nor wrong my
love any more with these reproaches. I will do all for thee thou can desire
of me, dear Stratonice, and though I cannot consent to use a sudden violence
upon Berenice's inclinations, I will command her to use Arsaces as a Prince,
whose design I disapprove not, and I will favor thy Brother in his passion as
much as thou ought to wish. The Queen appeared transported with joy at this
promise of the Kings, and setting forth all her most attractive allurements to
seduce him, before he went from her, she persuaded him to whatsoever she would.
The Princess found the effects of it the next day, for the King commanded her
to visit Arsacomes, and to look more favorably upon him, then she had done
formerly. Berenice received these words as a clap of thunder, and was so
extremely troubled at them, that she could not settle her self again of all
that day; but the next morning the King having met her in a gallery, and
drawing her aside to a window; well, Berenice (said he) will you not visit
Arsacomes with me, and have you not disposed your self, to do that for him
which I desired of you? The Princess was so surprised, that she stood without
reply at that question, and the King having asked it again, and pressed her to
declare her intention. Sir, (said she) I did not understand your Majesty's
commands, and was so little prepared for them, that I still have much ado to
apprehend your meaning. I thought (answered the King) I had explained my mind
sufficiently, to leave you no color of being ignorant what I meant, but since
I must clear it further to you; I mean, Berenice, that you should use Arsacomes
better than you have done hitherto, and that you should consider him as a
Prince whom I love, who loves you, and whom I account worthy to serve you. Ah!
Sir, (interrupted the Princess) what a change is this of yours, and what proofs
your Majesty desires of your Daughters obedience? I ask nothing of you, (added
the King) which you may not grant me without injuring your self; Arsacomes is a
Prince as considerable by his birth, as by my love to him, and by the alliance
I have contracted with his family, and if there be any dishonor in suffering
his affection, it is not upon you Berenice, but upon me alone that it will
totally fall. In short, enquire no more what my intentions are, but believe I
have ever loved you enough, to bring nothing upon you, that is either
shameful, or disadvantageous. He left her with these words, and she no sooner
was retired into her Chamber to digest them, but she fell in a deadly
affliction, she had so much repugnance to show any sign of complacency to the
Kings desires, that she could not hear the bare proposal of them without being
transported. What (said she, as Cyllenia has told me since) shall Stratonice
then Triumph on this manner over Berenice, and shall I approve of her Brothers
temerity, to show that I am a slave unto her power? No, Stratonice, you are not
yet so absolute over me, and what Empire soever you have over the King, I shall
always be able to discern his own inclinations from yours, and in this unjust
and severe command one may easily know it is Stratonice speaks, and not the King
my Father. The obedience I owe to him alone cannot become so general, and if I
should endeavor to follow the orders you have made him give me, that effect of
a blind obedience would not now be in my power. I love as much as you can wish,
and though I be insensible to Arsacomes, I have a just sense of Arsaces his
merits. Alas! (pursued she, a little after) my dear Arsaces, must I, while
thou art fighting for my Father, fight here against thee with so much
ingratitude, and must the injury he would do thee make me shed tears, while
thou art shedding blood, and perhaps thy own blood for his service? This
remembrance drew showers from her fair eyes, which for a long time made her
unable to say more, but when she had vented part of her Resentments, she sent
for me, believing she might find some consolation in advising with me. As soon
as I came into her Chamber, she rose to meet me, and taking a handkerchief from
her Eyes. Theodates (said she) now it is, that all our affection to Arsaces
will be necessary, for while that poor Prince obtains such gallant Victories
for the King, he ingratefully labors for his Ruin, and for mine. It Is but too
true Theodates, and I believe I shall sufficiently acquaint you with my
unhappiness, by telling you that the King has commanded me to love Arsacomes.
How Madam, (said I) has the King commanded you to love Arsacomes? Yes,
Theodates, (replied the Princess) and it is only because of that misfortune,
that I desired your company, and your consolation. With that she told me all
the King had said to her, and by that discourse put me into a mavelous
confusion. After I had showed it by a reasonable long silence; I took the
liberty to blame the Kings weakness, and blind affection, and then I deplored
the crosses I foresaw you would meet with by this alteration of his humor.
When I had a little recovered my first astonishment, fixing my Eyes upon the
Princesses face. And you Madam, (said I) what will you do for Prince
Artaxerxes? I will do all that he can hope for from me, (replied Berenice) and
in spite of all the obstacles that can happen, I Will never cease to love him, who
loves me more than I deserve, and who for my sake has abandoned all. After
this assurance, which I will receive for him, (answered I) I do not think he
will lament his fortune, and provided you persist in this good Resolution, I
hope that his Return, time, and the Prince your Brothers liberty, will overcome
all the disasters you apprehend. I Will persist in it to my grave, (added the
Princess) and all the strongest considerations shall never be able to dissuade
me from loving him while I have breath. Alas (pursued she) I am too powerfully
obliged ever to dis-ingage my self, and though my Arsaces were less lovely,
though he were less great, though he were less valiant, I ow too much to what
he has done for me, and I ow too much to him, who in my affection alone, finds
a consolation for all his losses. In the mean time (continued she) it were fit
we should give him notice of my discontent, to make him hasten his Return as
much as possibly he can, and to assure him that there is no Authority in the
world so powerful as to shake my affection. At first I approved the Princesses
motion, but presently after, we both judged it was not necessary to inform you
of a thing that could only trouble you, and whereof the knowledge could serve
for nothing, being we were enough persuaded that your passion made you long for
your Return, and that you would not defer it a minute after the end of the War.
The next day the Princess was constrained to go with the King to Arsacomes, but
though she came to his bedside, and that by the Kings command, she asked him
how he did, it was impossible for her to dissemble her Repugnancy, or resolve
to give him a favorable look. Yet did Arsacomes find so much contentment in
that visit, that he was half cured by it, and strengthening himself by the
hopes the Queen gave him, he recovered his health within a few days after. When
he was well again, his visits to the Princess were very frequent, and she was
forced by the Kings command, to endure some of them, but whenever he
entertained her with his passion, she answered him with so great a coldness,
and showed him so many tokens of her aversion, that if he were not the most
presumptuous man alive, he would a thousand times have lost all the hopes,
which the Kings favor, and the Queens assistance had given him; they are now
upon these terms, and it is not above two days since I saw him come out of her
Lodgings so ill satisfied, that I believe he stood in need of all the Queens
endeavors to comfort him. The Princess has used all possible means to obtain
permission once more to see the Prince her Brother, to impart her discontents
to him, and to make him know the person of Arsaces, of whom, by reason of the
spies that were set to observe her, she could never speak any thing in her two
former visits; but she was not able to procure leave of the King, and we easily
judge that his Refusal is an effect of Stratonices cunning, who strives to
hinder that communication, least it should fortify Berenice in her aversion to
Arsacomes, and because she in the Princes captivity, finds the continuance of
a power, which his liberty might probably overthrow.

Theodates ended his discourse on this manner, and struck me so with this news,
that I could not recover it of a long while, It Is true I found much consolation
in my Princesses goodness; and esteemed my self the happiest man in the world,
that I had been able to oblige her to so perfect a constancy; but I could not
digest the Kings injustice, who would force her inclinations, for a man whom I
judged to be little worthy of her love, and remembering the services I had newly
done him, I reproached his ingratitude with terms full of Resentment, as if he
had been acquainted with my passion, and as if he had known how much I was
concerned in what he did for Arsacomes. To the sense of this injury, I added
the foresight of those pains, and difficulties which this constraint would
cause us; and if I may be permitted to say so, some fear likewise of change in
my Princesses humor, who by the Kings Authority might possibly be brought to
forget part of her inclinations to me. She Will pardon me this apprehension, for
indeed it was very hard for a young Princess, not supported by any body, long
to resist a sovereign power, and against the Kings will, to preserve an
affection toward me, which I had no ways deserved, but by the greatness of
mine, and yet she carried her self (as you shall see by the continuation of my
discourse) with a constancy, and with a generosity worthy of her self, and of
the Prince her brother. I in that conversation with Theodates asked him a
thousand questions touching my dear Brother, but he could tell me nothing of
him, save that he was strictly kept, that no body was permitted to see him; and
that notwithstanding the complaints of all the Scythians, who murmured aloud at
the Restraint of their great Prince, the King appeared more obdurate than ever.
I hearkened to this discourse with a great deal of grief, but after we had
spent some hours in it, and that I had made my self ready to wait upon the
King, we went together to his Lodgings, where Theodates left me, to go to my
Princess, and to dispose her to give me a particular Audience. She was already
prepared for it, and by giving out that she was not very well, had freed her
self from the ordinary visits she was wont to receive, and lay upon her Bed
accompanied only with the Princess Theomiris, and Cyllenia: I went to her
Chamber, as soon as I came out of the Kings, where I had met the Queen, and by
that Encounter had saved a visit, which in ceremony was to have been paid
before that to my Princess. Though she was to be seen but by very few, it was
not thought strange, that after so long an absence, and in the condition I then
stood in the Kings favor, I should obtain that privilege. When I came in to
her, Theodates had led Theomiris into the Closet, and seeing my Princess come
alone with Cyllenia to meet me, I cast my self at her feet, and while I
embraced her knees, she threw her arms about my neck, and used all the modest
kindnesses to me I could desire from her. The Gods have brought you home
according to my desires, (said she) nor could they recompense the sorrow your
absence has caused in me, but by the joy of your Return. I have wished for you
a thousand times, both for your own interests, and for mine, and if your
presence would have been pleasing to me, your assistance would not have been
less necessary in the persecutions I have endured. You have defended your self
too well against them (answered I, being ravished with those obliging words) to
have stood in any need of my assistance, and you have been a better Champion
for Arsaces, than Arsaces could in reason desire. All my blood, fair Berenice,
is of too mean a value to purchase the smaller part of these obligations, and
though to requite them I should lay down a thousand lives, (if the Gods had
given me so many) I should still remain a Debtor to my Princess. In what I do
for you (added Berenice) I follow my own inclinations, and my gratitude, which
equally oblige me to love you; nor did I labor less for Berenice than for
Arsaces, when I resisted the Kings unjust commands. O Gods! (cried I, with a
transported action) could I lawfully hope you would recompense my losses with
such extraordinary blessings, and did you reserve me for this glorious fortune,
when you took away all that you had given me? I spoke many other words to this
purpose, and my Princess having taken a fear, and commanded me to sit down by
her, after she had asked me diverse questions concerning my Voyage, told me all
that I had heard from Theodates, and told it me with an action, which secured
me from all my fears, and made me considently to banish all my apprehensions. O
Gods! how sweet were her promises to me, and with what incredible Raptures did
I hear her express the aversion she had to Arsacomes. Fear nothing my dear
Arsaces, (said she) and if you will not offend me, suspect me not of the least
inconstancy; I know well enough to what virtue, and obedience oblige me, to
have hitherto preserved that power over my self, which I with reason may keep.
The King may well constrain me to receive Arsacomes his visits, but he cannot
constrain me to love him; and if he should be so weak as to desire I should
marry him, I shall have Resolution enough to prefer Death before that unworthy
Match. The way to hinder it lies open to us, (said I) and whenever you are
too much importuned by Arsacomes, I wear a Sword, that will be able to deliver
you from his importunities; I will not suffer that unequal Competitor, to have
too just an advantage over me, and all the Authority he has in Scythia, shall
not defend him from the hands of a Rival, not altogether so unworthy as he is,
of the glory to serve you. I brought forth these words with a tone, that made
my Princess fear some effect of my jealous Resentment, but she was desirous to
prevent it, and hindering me from saying more; You are too prudent (replied she)
not to foresee the Ruin of your Design in such an Enterprise, nor can you come
to any violence against Arsacomes, without discovering to the King, and to the
whole Court, what by so many Reasons we are obliged to conceal. Do but depend
upon the Assurances I give you, and never let us try the most dangerous courses
till the extremity. You may dissemble as you have done hitherto, and husband
the Kings affections so well, as to draw your advantage from thence, when once
the time is seasonable for you to declare your self. In the interim, we will use
our utmost endeavors for my Brothers liberty, and if we can obtain it, as he
in meeting you, and in the knowledge of your being alive, will find causes of
an inconceivable joy, so you in that ardent affection which he justly bears
you, will find all the assistance, and all the furtherance of your intentions
you can hope for. O Gods! (cried I at this remembrance) my dear Brother, must
your virtue, which is adored in all other places, be so ill understood in your
own Country, and can those admirable qualities, which gain you slaves, and
idolaters over all the world, leave you Enemies in Scythia? if Darius, the
Enemy of your Family, could not know you without honoring, and loving you as
his own son, is it possible you should be used as an Enemy by him that was the
author of your birth? Then my affection made me utter a great many resenting
words against the Kings cruelty, and after having consulted a long time what we
should do, or undertake for you, and having vainly contrived expedients to see
you, it grew night, which made me take my leave of my Princess, and retire to
my Lodging with Theodates. We spent the best part of the night in consulting of
means to let you hear from us, but the notice my Princess had given me, that
all your Guards were at the disposing of Stratonice and Arsacomes, and that
therefore there was no trust in them to be hoped for, put all my designs out of
frame, and was the cause we durst not think of hazarding a Letter through their
hands; indeed the Princess at her second visit, might perchance have watched an
opportunity to deliver you one her self, without being observed, if she had
thought on it before hand, to have writ, but then her hope of procuring a
greater freedom to see you, and talk with you in private, was the cause of that
neglect, which she was not a little sorry for afterward, and which she intended
to have repaired, if she could have obtained leave to visit you once again; but
finding no possibility of that, I resolved in the end to speak to the King
concerning you, and to employ all the credit I had with him to get the liberty
to see you, and for that purpose, I went to wait upon him the next morning as
soon as he was up: he neglected all the company that was in the Room to favor
me with exceeding kind Reception, which gave me a greater confidence than I
had before, and made me the bolder to attempt something for the service of my
dear Brother. We continued a while in a general conversation, but when the King
was ready, he took me by the hand, and drawing me aside from all the company,
lead me to walk with him in a Gallery which is near his Chamber. I was watching
an occasion to speak to him of the Prince his son, when he himself began the
discourse, and in terms full of anger, and indignation, aggravated the cause he
had to hate him, and never more to have any confidence in him. I hearkened
quietly as long as it pleased him to speak, but when I had let him vent part of
his choler, and that by his silence he showed that he expected to know
something of my opinion; Sir, (said I) if your Majesty would give me leave to
speak my thoughts with a little liberty, I really protest I would abuse it no
further, than to represent to you what a true zeal inspires me with. The King
looking upon me at these words, and expressing by his gesture, that he expected
the continuation of my discourse. Is it possible Sir, (pursued I) that that son
of yours, the most great, and the most lovely of all the Princes in the world,
whose virtue found nothing but adorers amongst his greatest enemies, should not
find some remainder of love, or at least of compassion, in the heart of the
King his father? Have those faults which a violent love made him to commit, and
for which he has suffered so long, so sharp a penance, choked all the
tenderness of nature in you, and banished the knowledge you had of the
admirable qualities of that son, whom the gods gave unto mankind, as their
most accomplished workmanship? Where were there another King to be found, who
would not redeem a son like Oroondates, by the loss of all his Dominions, and
who, in consideration of his youth, and of his passion, would not forgive an
offense, which he accompanied with a thousand great and miraculous Actions?
Have not whole years of a strict, and cruel imprisonment, punished a Prince of
his quality severely enough? Are not they that inspire this Rigor into your
Majesty, and that solicit you to a Revenge, which falls only upon your self,
satisfied with so long a Captivity, and if they love the glory of Scythia,
ought they not to endeavor to restore it its greatest, and most illustrious
Ornament? Pardon me Sir, I beseech you, if in this conceit I indiscreetly
interest persons, who it may be are considerable to you, but I feel my self
obliged, by the honor you do me, to put you in mind, that their own interests
sets them on, and that they labor to prolong the Princes Restraint, only to
prolong their own Authority. Their thoughts perhaps are yet more destructive to
the happiness of this Kingdom, and of your Majesty in particular; Time will
give you informations to which you will lend more credit than to my words; but
if you hearken to the wishes of all Scythia, and discern the counsel of your
real servants, from that of others who are swayed by their own particular ends,
you will consider Prince Oroondates as your son, and those that would ruin him
in your opinion, as persons not well affected to your service. The King would
not suffer me to pass further, but stopping me in this part of my discourse;
Arsaces, (said he) I know that you are generous, and that the Report of some
virtue which appeared in Oroondates, in his earlier years, makes you speak as
you do in his favor. It is true, he was born with parts good enough, and by
the care I took in breeding him, I had made him a reasonable complete man, but
all his good inclinations are lost, and since he betrayed me, and betrayed
himself, with so much baseness, and meaness of spirit, I cannot consider those
things that were good in him, as other than so many Advantages which he has
unworthily abused; if he had valor, he should have employed it for the good of
his Country, and for the service of his father, and of his King; if he had
handsomness, and graceful fashion, he ought to have made use of it, for a more
justifiable, and a more glorious Conquest, than that of Darius his daughter,
and of Alexanders captive; and in short, if he had ambition, he should have
showed it at the head of an Army like that of Alexanders, and according to the
Rudiments I had given him, instead of wasting the prime of his life vilely and
shamefully in the service of my Enemy. These words of the Kings touched me so
deeply, that I could not possibly retain a sigh or two, and scarce was I able
to keep my tears from discovering how much I was concerned in that discourse I
strove to dissemble it as well as I could, and looking upon the King with an
unsatisfied countenance. What, Sir, (said I) do you believe then, that your son
has shamefully abased himself, in serving the daughter of Darius, and do you
think that King held so inconsiderable a Rank amongst other Monarchs, that you
look upon the purpose your son had to contract an Alliance with him, as a mean,
and as an unworthy design? I am not ignorant of Darius his quality, (replied
the King) nor was it to the defect of that I attributed Oroondates his meaness
of spirit; but how great soever he was, he was my Enemy, and my Enemy with a
kind of hatred, which no consideration was able to reconcile. Ah! Sir, (added
I, more nearly touched than before) is it possible that the misfortunes of the
House of Persia should not have mollified you, and that you should behold the
fall of it with the eye of an Enemy? Has not poor Darius, who was once the
greatest King in the World, softened your Resentments, by so lamentable a
Death, and by the loss of all his family, and can you consider that sad
Revolution of his fortune, as other than a dreadful Example of all Kings in
general? No, Sir, you can no longer conserve against his memory, and against
what is yet remaining of his House, that hatred which heretofore produced such
fatal effects between you, nor can you look upon the assistance Oroondates gave
him in his misfortunes, as an unpardonable crime. His love was the cause of his
first faults, and these last Actions, which you accuse of so much baseness,
were inspired into him by mere generosity. If Darius his son were alive, he if
he were able, would repay you all the services Darius received from Oroondates;
he would not look upon you as his Fathers Enemy, but as the Father of his
dearest friend, and if love were joined to those considerations, he would give
you his whole life, and Darius, if he were living, would easily pardon him that
offense. The King troubled with this discourse, would not suffer me to continue
it; I do not rule my self (said he) by the example of my Enemies, and of those,
who from the beginning of their Empire, have by all manner of ways endeavored
to invade that of my Ancestors. I never desired peace; in a War which they
always began, and as my hatred was more just, and more lawfully grounded, it is
not to be thought strange, if it be of longer continuance. I was infinitely
afflicted to see the King so obdurate, but I thought it not fit to press him
further, so having walked half a score steps without speaking. Sir, (added I)
since your Majesty's indignation will not suffer me to say any thing more in
behalf of the Prince your Son, be pleased to do me a favor that cannot be
hurtful to your service, and give me leave to have the honor to make him a
visit; that which I have heard spoken of him, may excuse this curiosity; and
there are few persons, in whom the reputation of that Prince, has not begot a
just desire to see him. If I were not bound by oath (replied the King) I should
easily grant your request, but I have engaged my self before (...) Gods to
refuse it to all the World. These last words utterly stopped my mouth, nor had
I the confidence to entertain him further upon that subject. I left him within
a while after, but I was so ill satisfied with that discourse, that it was
easy for my friends to observe it in my face. I gave an account of it to
Theodates, who was afflicted with me at the little propensity we found in the
King to love them that were of the blood of Darius. I misdoubted before (said
I) that Fortune, the pittyless Enemy of our house, did but feign a
reconciliation with me, to make me the more sensible of her utmost cruelties,
and I perceive by this renewing of my misfortunes, that she is preparing
something against me, worse, if it be possible, than all she has made me feel
already. The hopes, she had given me by Oroondates his return, find themselves
most cruelly deceived, and that which they (...) him suffer in his person, is a
presage of what I e'relong shall suffer in mine. Take not an allarm so soon
(said Theodates to comfort me) but hope for better usage from your fortune than
that you apprehend. It is true, the King hated the person, and is still an
Enemy to the memory of Darius, but when he shall know that 't is to his Son he
is indebted for his life, and for the peace of his Kingdom, you shall see all
his resentments give place, and more due acknowledgement. By such like
discourse, Theodates strove to allay my discontents, and the same day having
communicated them to my Princess, she by all manner of expressions gave me to
understand, how great a part she bore in them. I laid aside the resolution I
had taken, to make my self known to the King so suddenly as I intended, and to
demand the assistance that was necessary for me to revenge Darius, to procure
the liberty of those that were remaining of his poor family, to recover my
dominions, and to repair my honor; finding that yet I had not power enough
over him, and that it was necessary to dispose him by new, and more
considerable services than those I had done him, to forget the animosity he
still kept against our house. In the interim I endeavored by the means of
Theodates, and by all kind of inventions to corrupt the guards of the Castle of
Serey to obtain a sight of the Prince, but they were always inexorable to my
entreaties, and immovable to the offers I caused to be made them. The King
still looked upon me with his wonted eye, and my Princess was as favorable to
me as I could wish, but I could not so well disguise my inclinations to her,
but that Arsacomes his interest, made him find occasion by my frequent visites,
and by our long conversations, to suspect something, and to redouble his envy
toward me. Yet durst he not openly show it, knowing my credit in the Court was
not inferior to his, and fearing to exasperate the Princess more and more
against him: but at that time there happened a very strange alteration in my
fortune, and now it is that I begin to enter into the discourse of my most
important adventures.

Ten or twelve days were hardly passed since my return, when one morning as I
was going out of my Chamber, I saw some of the Kings guards at my door, who
forbad me to stir forth: I turned toward their Captain who was come into my
Chamber, and whom I had received as one that came to visit me, and as I was
going to ask him the reason of what I saw, he clapped his hand upon the hilt of
my sword, and demanded it of me in the Kings name, I was so surprised at that
encounter, that he had taken it from my side before I observed what he was
about, and that astonishment did without doubt prevent a resistance, wherein
perchance I might have perished. No sooner was I disarmed, but I looked upon
the Captain with a countenance, and with an action, that struck a terror in
him, and made him know, it was no trivial enterprise he had performed in
seizing upon me on that manner; what, Cleobis (said I) am I a prisoner then to
day, in the same place where yesterday I was Tryumphant? Sir, (answered he) the
King has commanded me to secure your person, nor have I executed his order
without being very sorry for it. Do you not know the cause of your commission
(replied I) and will you not tell me for what crime the Scythians can accuse
him, whom but the other day, they called their defender, and preserver. No,
Sir, (said the Captain,) neither is the King wont to declare his intentions to
us in employments of this nature; I can only tell you that yesternight after
he was in bed, he gave a long audience to a stranger, who of late has been a
follower of Arsacomes, and that as soon as he was come out of the Chamber, I
received this command. Well, (added I) I am bravely rewarded by the King of
Scythia, and the services I have done him deserved this recompense. Though I
was stirred with a most violent anger, I would not let it break forth to any
sharper expressions, against the Father of Oroondates, and Berenice, and in the
just sense I had of that usage, I preserved a respect, which such moving
reasons gave me toward him. Thus did I see my self a prisoner, where but the
day before I had appeared with so great renown, and though this kind of usage,
was something hard to a Prince, who knew no condition in the World above his
own, and who by actions considerable enough, had deserved nothing less; yet was
I fain to bear that affliction without murmuring, and to bless what I began to
suffer for Berenice. I studied at first to find what might be the cause of my
imprisonment, but when Cleobis had told me of the Kings discourse with that
stranger, I immediately believed Arsaces was discovered to be Artaxerxes. This
did not seem at all strange to me, and I knew very well, I should have had much
ado, to be so long in Scythia, without having my face taken notice of by some
person or other, who might have been in the Court of Persia, if the rumor of
my death had not facilitated my disguise, and crossed the opinion of those, who
else might have believed they had seen me there. I underwent this change of my
fortune patiently enough, and only begged of the Gods, that my Princess might
not be entangled in my ruin; the Kings severity giving me some cause of fear
for her, by the example I had before my eyes, of his usage of the Prince his
Son: scarce had I had the leisure to consider what resolution I should take,
when I saw him come into my Chamber, attended by those in whom he had greatest
confidence, and to whom he declared his most important secrets, having left his
guards at the door, that they might not be witnesses of the discourse he
desired to have with me. I found not that cheerfulness in his face, which he
was wont to have when he saw me, and instead of that kind reception I usually
had from him, there was nothing in his eyes, and countenance but marks of his
anger, and new animosity. I went to meet him at his coming in, with an action
but very little troubled, and with my ordinary respect, and having given him a
salute not much different from what he was wont to receive of me, he looking
upon me with a fiery eye, and with a face kindled by a passion, which he was
not well able to master. I come to visit you (said he) Sir Artaxerxes, and
this respect is a beginning of what is due to the knowledge of your quality.
The ignorance of it has made me faulty toward you, but when I shall once have
it confirmed by your own mouth, I will repair the errors I have committed, by
usage more suitable to what I owe to the Prince of Persia. After these words, I
no longer had any reason to doubt the cause of my imprisonment, and though in
them I observed an extraordinary sharpness, I was not terrified enough to
disown the blood of Darius. I judged that such a baseness, would render me
unworthy of the honor I had to be descended from him, and that all the dangers
I could apprehend after that discovery, ought not to be sufficient to make me
stoop to so shameful a dissimulation. In this belief looking upon the King
with confidence enough. They that endeavor to ruin me in your Majesty's
thoughts (said I) have but small knowledge of your generosity, and of the
little love I bear to life, but if it were a thousand times more dear to me
than it is, and that I manifestly saw the loss of it in this confession, there
is no fear so powerful, as to make me disavow the honor I have to be of the
race of Darius. His misfortunes, which ought to serve all Kings for an example,
have not taken any thing from him of his dignity, nor from his of the glory to
be born of the first Monarch of all the earth; If I did not declare it sooner,
't was because I waited till fortune should present me with occasions to do you
services, that might be considerable enough to blot that hatred out of your
mind, which you have born my family, and to make me discover that more
handsomely, which I now only confirm to your Majesty, after the knowledge you
have of it already. Yes, Sir, I am Darius his Son; Fortune brought me into your
territories, after she had made me to be taken from among the dead bodies at
the battle of Selena; Your virtue, your favorable usage, and the remembrance
of what I owed to the friendship of Oroondates staid me here, and the hope I
had in your generosity, and in the support of my dear Brother, brought me back
again after the loss of my nearest friends, and of my dominions. I believed
that by my services, I might merit from you a part of that affection
Oroondates had received from Darius, and that against our general Enemy, I
could not hope for a more fitting sanctuary, than in the Court of my friends,
Father, and of a King, who had honored me himself with his affection. Nor did
I only hope that King, and that friend, would afford me a secure retreat, but
also their assistance, to raise my self to the throne again, to revenge the
death, and captivity of my Father, Mother, and Sisters, and to recover my
reputation. If this confidence in your generosity be my crime, I cannot deny
Sir, but I am truly criminal, and if this knowledge has made me lose my
liberty, and caused the change I observe in your Majesty. I will not disavow
it, nor hide him from your indignation, who has voluntarily exposed himself to
it. I uttered these words with an assuredness, which as I believe, hindered the
King from interrupting me before I had ended them; but when I had done
speaking, he turned his flaming eyes upon those that were with him, and then
setting them upon my face with a furious action. Is it true than (said he) that
you are Darius his Son, and that you are bold enough to make a confession in my
presence, which cannot but be fatal to you amongst the Scythians? Is it true
that you are the Son of my mortal, and irreconcilable Enemy, of him who has
often dyed our Fields red with the blood of our subjects, and with mine own,
and who many times brought fire, sword, and desolation into my Kingdom, and
instead of considering that the Gods have delivered you into my hands to give
me some satisfaction for the injuries I have received from you and yours, do
you pretend to be protected and assisted by me? I was moved with this cruel
discourse, but I yet considered the Father of Berenice, and Oroondates, and
struggling against my resentments to keep my self within the respect I owed
him. It is true, Sir, (replied I) I am the Son of him who was heretofore your
Enemy; but that which I have done for you, and yours, the marks whereof are
still fresh in the heart of your Kingdom, and in the limits of your
territories, and which I also bear in many parts of my body, may sufficiently
tell you, that you have few friends have done you services like those you have
received from the Son of your Enemy. No, Sir, I do not believe you can yet hold
him for your Enemy, who abandoned his own interests for yours, and who, to the
prejudice of his Dominions, to the prejudice of his blood, nay, and even to the
prejudice of his honor, fought for you and yours, while his Country was on
fire, and while his nearest friends became a prey to the fury of his Enemies. I
know not whither the Kings anger was then risen of it self to the height, or
that these words accompanied with some reproaches, drew him to extremity of
rage; but howsoever it were, he then went beyond the bounds of that moderation
which was befitting a person of his quality, and breaking forth with a violence
which put a fear into all those that attended him, Ah! imposter (cried he) do
thou think by thy artifices to escape my just indignation, and to disguise
those pernicious designs which brought thee into Scythia; thou came to
execute what thou had plotted with Oroondates in Persia, and 't is for that
end thou have lived unknown here in my Kingdom; the example of that friend,
has strengthened thee in thy wicked intentions, and by thine own confession,
thou art capable as he is of all manner of perfidiousness, after having
betrayed thy nearest kindred, and abandoned thy Father in his utmost
calamities. O Gods! how deeply did these cruel, and injurious words pierce into
my soul, and how was the grief I felt for those dear friends renewed, by that
wrongful, bloody reproach, of having betrayed them, and of having abandoned
them; certainly it would be very hard to express, it, and 't will suffice me to
tell you, I lost part of my reason, and part of my understanding, and 't is the
loss of them, dear Brother, that shall obtain your pardon, for what my
transport made me reply to him, whom nature has tied you to with so near a
relation. Ungrateful, barbarous King, (said I) if thou had any spark of
honor, or any sense of virtue, thou would remember that thou had not now
been alive but for him whom thou usest so unworthyly, nor would thou go about
to blast the reputation of two Princes, who have nothing to be ashamed of, but
what the one received from thee, and which the other has done for thee. I
cannot draw any example from my forefathers, of the perfidiousness wherewith
thou reproachest me, and that of his, cannot corrupt the virtue of Oroondates.
Complete thy cruelties against him, to whom they shall henceforth be dearer
than thy friendship, and since thou neither deservest such a Son as Oroondates,
nor such a friend as Artaxerxes, glut thy self with the remnant of the most
illustrious blood in the World, and believe, that for all I am alone, and
unarmed, I could yet shed thine, if a stronger consideration than any respect
to thee did not withold me. At these so bold, and perhaps so unlooked for
words, the King stood as unmovable as a statue; I know not what reason
hindered him from letting loose his indignation instantly upon me, seeing he
might very easily have caused me to be killed; but I could no longer endure his
presence, and as soon as ever I had done speaking, I turned about, and went
into my closset, shutting the door after me.

Behold a very sudden change, and a strange revolution of my fortune; the day
before, I had been considered among the Scythians, as he, who by the greatness
of his credit, was the only man that could dispute for the first place with
Arsacomes, and then I saw my self not only fallen from that power, but had
driven my affairs to such extremities, that in all probability I was like to
perish. Yet the fear of that touched me but a little, and as nothing but
Berenice, and Oroondates made me care for life, so nothing but their
remembrance was able to disquiet me; I feared that the King was informed of my
love, and of my Princesses favor toward me as well as of my quality, and this
last knowledge of his rigor, made me also afraid for the destiny of
Oroondates; These apprehensions were then my sharpest discontents; and if love,
and friendship, had not united themselves with my disasters to torment me, I
had courage enough, and was sufficiently inured to misfortunes, to bear my
imprisonment with patience. The King had been upon the very point of letting
his wrath break forth immediately against me, and was so highly offended at my
words, that if he had not been as prudent a politician, as he was a violent,
and rigorous Enemy, he would have made me find a sudden death amongst the
Javelines of his guards. Yet did he overmaster himself, whither it were that he
judged other formalities necessary, for the putting to death of a man of my
quality, or that he believed the Scythians loved me too well to suffer such a
violent execution without murmuring. Before he went out of my Chamber, he by an
Oath, which is inviolable among the Scythians, bound all those that were come
in with him, to keep the knowledge of my true quality secret, and inventing
another pretense for my being cast out of favor, he kept the whole World in
ignorance of the true one. The day was not half run out, when my guards,
leading me out of my lodging, made me get into a Chariot, and having shut the
sides of it up close, removed me to a house that was the usual place, where
great persons were wont to be imprisoned; there was I put, and kept with much
watchfulness, and severity. True it is, my keepers were as civil to me as I
could desire without hurt to themselves, and remembering the credit I had lately
had amongst them, and how I had often made use of it in their favor, they
complied with me in all things that could not serve to the attaining of my
liberty? 'Twas by their means I procured that Criton, and the two Scythians
Theodates had put to me, and who had accompanied me in my voyages, should be of
the number of those that were left to wait upon me. They had the freedom to get
out and in, but from the second day they were searched, which was the cause I
durst not venture any letters by them, for fear of putting the Princess, and
those in whom I trusted, into manifest danger. The King at first had some
suspicion of Theodates, and knowing the near friendship that was between us, he
believed him not ignorant of my true quality, nor of those designs whereof he
accused me, and was going to have clapped him up, as well as me; but within a
while after having asked him certain questions about it, he found a great deal
of innocence in his answers, and remembering the fidelity wherewith he had ever
served him, he gave over suspecting him, and believed that his friendship to
me, was grounded upon some obligations I had laid upon him. Yet did he refuse
him leave to visit me, and used all those so ill who dared to ask him, that no
body had the boldness to speak to him of it any more. By this order it came to
pass, that I was many days before I heard from my Princess, or from Theodates,
and I passed them with an inconceivable tediousness, and impatiency. Till then
I had not imparted any thing of my love, or of my true quality to Criton, nor
to my two Scythians, believing those secrets so important as not to be trusted
to any man except Theodates, but they were made acquainted with my birth, by
the discourse the King had with me, and I had already received so great and so
certain proofs of their fidelity, in a service of many years, that though the
necessity of my affairs had not obliged me to discover my self to them, I
thought I could no longer conceal any thing from them without being
ungrateful. I laid my heart therefore open to them, and that last knowledge
they had of me, having made them more respectfull than before, they cast
themselves at my feet, and received that proof of my confidence in them, with
such a zeal, and such an affection as drew tears from my eyes, and made me find
some comfort in my affliction. Yet durst I not give them any message to my
Princess, but they saw Theodates often, and not daring to bring any letters
from him for fear of the hazard they ran of being searched, they told me by
word of mouth, how extremely he was grieved for my misfortune, and how he had
taken a resolution, either to perish, or to find some means to see me, and do
me service; they also brought me word from him, that my Princess took as deep
an interest in my sufferings as I could desire, and that notwithstanding all
the endeavors she used to dissemble her sadness, she could not hinder part of
it from appearing in her face. Though I doubted not before of my Princesses
goodness, I was comforted by this news, and prepared my self with more joy, to
undergo all the miseries I was destined to for her sake: yet could I not, for
all my constancy, keep my self from bewailing my captivity sometimes, but much
less for the danger that threatened me, and for the loss of that favor to which
I was raised, than for the absence of my Princess; and when I complained of the
King of Scythia's cruelty, and ingratitude, I accused him not so much for
having deprived me of my liberty, as for having deprived me of the sight of
Berenice. My furthest walk was limited within the space of a Chamber, a
Closset, and an outward room, where Criton and my two Scythians lay. My Chamber
had a window that overlooked a scurvy little garden, but the window had a
double Iron grate before it, and the garden was enclosed with a very high wall.
One night I was in my bed, where my cruel disquiets would not suffer me to
sleep, when in that still silence, I often heard a noise at my window, and
harkening attentively to it, I guessed that it was caused by certain stones
which were thrown against the Iron bars, I called Criton, who was asleep in the
Ante-chamber, and having made him rise, I bad him open the window. Scarce had
he done so, when by help of the Moon, which then cast a dim, faint light, he
perceived a man in the garden, who as soon as he heard the noise of the window,
came near enough to be known by Criton for Prince Theodates. Criton no sooner
knew him, but he told me of it, and presently I leaped out of bed, with a joy
intermixed with fear, by reason of the danger to which my dear Theodates
exposed himself. As soon as I discerned him, I put forth my head as far as the
grate would suffer me, and raising my voice as loud as I durst, for fear of
waking my guards, who were asleep in a room beyond the Ante-chamber; My dear
friend (said I) is it you? Yes, Sir, (answered he) It is even I, and if I have
not the liberty to entertain you at a nearer distance, neither accuse the fear
of danger, nor the want of my affection. It is too well known to me to do so,
(replied I) and you now give me a proof of it, for which I with all my heart
would have dispensed with you; 't is not without trouble that I enjoy this
happiness, and how dear soever you are to me, I had rather want it than see you
put your Fortune to so manifest a hazard. I Will hazard it at any time and my
life withal, (said Theodates) to repay a part of what I owe you, and if need
should require me to give it you without any condition, you shall never see me
avoid the occasions. You are too generous in your friendships (answered I) to
be the friend of Arsaces, and the Heavens ought to have given your virtue a
more happy choice. We had some other words of civility upon that subject, but
having put an end to them to fall into a more important conversation; Well,
dear Theodates (said I) how stands my fortune, and what are ^y Princesses
thoughts in this change of my condition? Does not fear, or some unjust
consideration of what she ows to her Fathers inclinations, make her abate
something of the affection she has promised me? Does she not repent her having
looked upon a miserable man, or at least does she not bear his misfortune with
an insensibleness, whereof I should never have suspected her? You have less
cause to do so than ever [said Theodates] nor can you complain of her in this
occasion, without doing an Act of injustice, whereof you could never deserve
pardon. Her thoughts are more passionate, and more obliging to you, than you
ought to desire, and I can assure you, she stood in need of all her courage, to
keep her self from sinking under her discontent. Cyllenia and I receive proofs
which will not suffer us to doubt of it, and you shall receive some your self
by this Letter whereof I undertook the Delivery. At these words I felt a joy,
which for a few moments made me forget all my afflictions, and calling Criton
to me again, whom I had set to watch near the Room where my Guards lay, we
studied together for some invention to draw up the Letter to us. We cut some of
our Linen into narrow pieces, and tying them one to another, made a string
long enough to reach to Theodates; he took it by the end, and tied the Letter
to it; and I no sooner had got it into my hands, but I made Criton light a
Candle, and not fearing Theodates would take it ill, I read these welcome words
from my adored Princess.

The Princess Berenice to Prince Arsaces.
IF you have met with ingratitude amongst my friends, stretch not your
resentments, my dear Arsaces, so far as me; but believe my condition cannot be
good, so long as yours is bad; I suffer, because you are ill used, and I suffer
more, because you suffer for my sake. Not that I bewail my destiny, if you
continue to love me; I shall never be unhappy, if you be ever faithful, nor
shall you ever be unfortunate, if Berenices affection can contribute to your
felicity; all the persecutions that rise up against us, shall not be able to
shake it, and the King of Scythia can show no cruelty to Arsaces, that will not
equally be fatal to

BERENICE.


In these few words, which I kissed a thousand times, I found so many causes of
comfort, that I in some sort rejoiced at my imprisonment, which had afforded me
the occasion of receiving those sweet confirmations of my Princesses affection.
This consideration would have taken me up whole hours, if I had not made a
conscience of abusing Theodates his patience, who was waiting alone in the
Garden, and who for all he was a Prince, did me the same offices I could have
hoped for from my meanest servant. As soon as he was come close under the
window, putting my head out as I had done before, Most obliging Prince [said I]
and the most generous friend of all those that ever bore that name, your
goodness puts me into a confusion which I am not able to express. It Is enough,
[interrupted Theodates] reserve these complements for others, and think now of
sending the Princess an Answer. Since you will have it so [replied I] I Will drive
my incivility to the utmost, and I know you will be so good as to pardon it, in
consideration of my misfortunes. With these words, I went from the window,
leaving my good friend to walk alone in the Garden. The same servants that had
accompanied him, and that had brought the Ladder, wherewith he had gotten over
the Wall, staid for him in the next street, and kept watch to hinder him from
being surprised. Criton had found means, from the beginning of my imprisonment,
to procure Ink and Paper from my Guards, and having given it me, I writ to my
Princess in these terms.

Arsaces to the Princess Berenice.
NO, my dear Princess, I shall never be unfortunate so long as you remember me,
and all that I shall suffer for you, instead of afflicting me, shall be
accounted a most glorious recompense. It was not in the Kings power to deprive
me of my liberty, I lost it when I saw you first, and by making me cease to see
you, he can neither take it away, nor restore it. Yet has he used all the
cruelty he could against me, and not being able to rob me of my Princesses
affection, he has robbed me of her sight, since that was a thing within the
limit of his authority. It is only in the want of it, that my imprisonment
consists, and being forbidden to see you, I should be as much a Prisoner in the
open Field as in the closest Dungeon. Fear nothing therefore for me, dear
Princess, since (except those that depend on you) this is the greatest
unhappiness I can receive, and being secured by your promise, of whatsoever I
could apprehend, all that our Enemies can do is not terrible enough to strike
fear into the courage of Arsaces.


When I had folded up this Letter, I tied it to the string, and going to the
window again, I let it down into Theodates his hand, with words full of
affection and acknowledgement for the good offices he did me. We had some other
discourse, touching what the Kings intentions might be against me, whereof
Theodates told me he was as ignorant as I; yet could he not believe, that the
King would come to extremities against me, after the services I had done to his
Kingdom, and to his person; and we both believed he would spin out my
imprisonment in length, to determine of it according to the Event of his
Affairs. We had many things to say to one another, but I feared least Theodates
should be surprised in so long a visit, and so I forced him to go away, though
he desired to have discoursed with me longer.

After that night, I saw him many others by the same means, but never without
bringing me marks of my Princesses remembrance, and 'twas by them I lessened
the wearisomness of my imprisonment, which after the losses I had undergone,
would not have been supportable, but for those sweet consolations. I learned by
him how Arsacomes continued his persecutions, and though I found a Remedy
against that mischief, in the knowledge of the little fruit they reaped, I saw
great cause of fear, when I heard they were approved by the King, and that that
insolent man, employed his Authority, to acquire what he could not obtain by
the merit of his person. My Princess did me the honor, to write me diverse
Letters upon that subject, and received a great many of mine about it; you will
dispense with me if I repeat them not, for if I should tie my self punctually
to a particular Recital, my Narration would be of an extraordinary length. I
had already been many months in Prison, [the true cause of it being known but
to very few, who being bound by Oath, never declared that secret to any body]
during which I at several times heard news from Theodates, which produced
different effects in me. The first was that of Zopirio's entering into Scythia,
whose first progress Theodates told me, and with it the fright of all the
Scythians, upon the Report of Alexanders coming. I continued many days without
learning what General would be sent against those dreadful Enemies, though
Theodates brought me word that all the Scythians petitioned the King for their
Princes liberty, and cried aloud, that no other body could be set to oppose
that Conqueror of all the Earth. The King, by the counsel of interessed
persons, did long forbear to satisfy their desires, but in the end, he found
so much justice in them, or rather so little security to himself and his, in
the Election of another Commander, [he himself being already grown infirm with
years, and very unfit to undertake such an Enterprise] that he promised them
what they had so earnestly longed for, and resolved to put an end to that
tedious and unjust Captivity, for which all Scythia had much lamented. I was
extremely over-jo'd, when I heard this p^^asing news by Theodates, and though
my friendship to my dear Brother was sufficient alone to make me so, yet I
confess it was increased by some little mixture of interest. I doubted not, but
I should still find the same affection from him, he had formerly showed me,
and was confident that in the Authority he was going to recover, I might hope
for all the support, and all the assistance I could desire. Yet did I not think
it fit he should so soon learn the truth of my affairs, for fear least being
but upon the point of getting again into his fathers good opinion, the
endeavors, he should use in favor of me, might cast him into his displeasure
more deeply than before, and destroy a fortune that was yet but weakly settled.
To prevent this danger, I made Theodates swear, he would do a thing I should
desire him, and after I had strongly engaged him, that there was no longer any
cause to doubt his promise, I entreated him, Brother, that he would not make
you acquainted, with what he knew concerning me, till the end of the War to
which you were going, because I was afraid, that news would be enough to make
you quit the imployent that was given you, which would certainly incense the
King against you more than ever, and so utterly ruin you. Theodates made great
difficulty of granting me this Request, but he was so fast tied by his Oaths,
whereof the Scythians have a particular veneration, that after he had resisted
a good while, he was fain in the end to confirm the promise he had made me.
This was the cause, dear Brother, that hindered him from telling you my
Adventures, during that Voyage in which he accompanied you, though as he has
told me since, it was not without great violence upon his inclinations. The
Prince of Scythia interrupting Arsaces here; It is true [said he] Brother,
Theodates did religiously observe what he had promised you, and still speaking
to me of you, as of Arsaces, he contented himself, with begetting a love in me
toward you, by the recital of your good qualities, without ever making me
suspect that you were Artaxerxes. Alas, I was far from imagining any such
thing, and neither time, nor the continued course of my Adventures, had been
able to make me lose the remembrance of my dear Brothers death; It was always
present to my thoughts, and now I call to mind, that when it drew tears from
my Eyes, and made me fall into those lamentations which I owed unto so dear a
memory, Theodates would allege Examples to make me believe, that by some
strange effect of fortune, you might still be alive, and that there had been
persons deceived, after as great probabilities as those which had persuaded us
you were dead.

While the Prince was speaking thus, Dinner was brought in, and those
illustrious persons, made a pleasing Meal together, during which, their
discourse was partly concerning the mavelous Events Arsaces had recounted,
and they had no sooner dined, but that Prince disposed himself to go on with
the remainder of his story: the company, who feared least speaking so long
might be hurtful to him in his present condition, would have dissuaded him
from continuing his Narration, but he told them he felt himself well enough to
make an end of it without prejudice to his health, and so having put them into
their former silence, he went on where he had left, on this manner.

The end of the third Book.
The continuation of the fourth Part of CASSANDRA. The fourth Book.
THe joy I had received, dear Brother, by the news which gave me hope of your
liberty, was moderated by that which Theodates brought me the day after, when
he told me the King had commanded him to accompany you in that voyage, which
Arsacomes, who was also to go along with you. This was a very sensible blow to
me, and when I saw my self reduced to lose the consolation of that dear friend,
I knew not which way I should be able to bear it. Theodates seemed no less
troubled at it then I was, and would rather have drawn the Kings anger upon
himself, then have forsaken me in a season when he was so necessary to me; but
I was very unwilling my freindship should be prejudicial to him, therefore
representing that I was not like to run any hazard of my life during his
absence, and that the King seemed to be a little mollifi^ed since my
imprisonment, I after a long contestation, persuaded him to leave me for a
time. I will not entertain you with the discourse of our farewells, the place
would not suffer us to embrace one another, but it hindered us not from saying
all that so tender an affection as ours, could make us utter at such a parting.
We took as good order in my affairs, as the hastiness of your departure would
permit, but it was so sudden that the next day I was deprived of that dear
friend, who so generously assisted me to support the burden of my misfortunes.
I heard in what manner the King had fetched you out of prison himself, and how
he had made you to take horse, without giving you the liberty to come into the
Town, or so much as to see the Princess your sister, and I judged with some
probability, that knowing how earnestly you would interess your self on my
behalf, he had used that caution in your departure, to keep you from all
knowledge of me; which I the rather believed because he appointed none of those
to wait upon you in your voyage, who had been present at our last conversation;
and for Arsacomes, if he knew who I was, as it was likely he did since it was
by one of his creatures I thought my self to have been discovered, he wanted
not many reasons powerful enough to oblige him to silence. I was left in a
very gloomy night, though it were lightened with some small beam of hope, in the
expectation of your return, and sweetened with some comfort by the going away of
Arsacomes, who by that means lost the opportunity, of making any advantage of
my imprisonment^ for the furtherance of his pretensions to Berenice; it is true
the Queen his sister supplied his place well enough, and tormented that poor
Princess in such manner, that she was often constrained to make complaints
against her, by whose ill usage she was driven beyond the limits of her usual
moderation. I received no more of her letters after Theodates his departure,
but Criton saw Cillenia every day, and learned news of her, which he still
brought me by word of mouth. This was some case to my afflictions for being
deprived of so dear a sight, yet not so great an one, but that they began to
overwhelm me, and to put me into such a condition, as might have moved pity
even in the King of Scythia himself. I lived on this manner, or rather suffered
a continual death, when my miseries received a bloody surcharge, and that
which I had ever apprehended.

Queen Stratonice finding with what repugnance the Princess defended her self
against her Brothers affection, and imagining by the opinion she had of him
that he was handsome enough to merit hers, believed that so strong a
resistance, both against his persecutions, and against the Rings command, could
not proceed from any thing else but an aversion caused by some other love.
Arsacomes had already told her his suspicions of me, and had by that
advertisement obliged her to observe my actions more needfully then before; nor
was she contented with that care, but that she might be perfectly satisfied of
the truth, she by presents, and promises, had corrupted one of the Princesses
maids who had formerly belonged to her, and had so disposed her to a
treacherous compliance with her intentions, that that disloyal wench, had no
other thought but to play the spy upon her Mistresses actions, and to seek
occasions of betraying her, as the means to make her self a fortune. The
Princess trusted her not with the secret of her affection, neither did she
mistrust her, but next to Cyllenia used her as favorably as any of the rest.
She observed the frequent discourses between Critton, and Cyllenia during my
imprisonment, and by telling the Queen of them confirmed her in her suspicions,
and drew more considerable gifts, and promises, that engaged her further in her
pernicious design, which she found means to effect when she least expected it.
The Princess contrary to the request I had often made her, kept all my letters,
and not thinking she had any body about her so false as to seek to betray her,
only locked them up in a cabinet with those other things she valued most. One
day having shut her self up into her closet Closset with Cyllenia, after she
had entertained her a while with the grief which her goodness made her
sensible of for my sufferings, she called for her Cabinet, and sought to
comfort her self in her discontents, by her reading of my letters. She sat
leaning upon a table, where she read them over one after another, but before
she had done, she was surprised in that tedious employment, by sleep which
insensibly stole into her eyes. Cyllenia not taking notice that her Mistress
was fallen asleep, and being called away by some other business, went very
imprudently out of the Closset, shutting the door but half way after her. While
she was absent and the Princess asleep, that perfidious creature who served
Stratonice in her intention, and had set her mind upon nothing but her
treachery, came either by chance, or out of design into the chamber, where she
neither found the Princess nor any of her companions, and then drawing near
the closset door, which she saw half open, after she had pulled it a little
further, she thrust in her head, and saw the Princess asleep upon the last
letter she was reading, and by her all the rest, whereof some were open. That
sight made her guess instantly part of the truth, and taking courage by hope
of the recompense she expected, she grew so bold as to go into the closset, and
to steal softly to the table, where seeing that her Mistress wakened not, she
took four of my letters, from among a score of others, and putting them up in
have, went out again not making any noise, and passed through the chamber
without meeting any body that could discover her. Within a while after Cyllenia
being returned and Berenice awake, she gave her the cabinet to set away, not
perceiving the theft, by reason of the number of letters. The wench was no
sooner in a place where she could look upon her prey, but she presently cast
her eyes upon it, and in the first words she read, found all that was desired
of her. She delayed not a minute to go to Sratonice's lodgings, and having
easily obtained a particular audience, delivered her the letters she had
stolen; As soon as Stratonice had read one of them, she saw her self but too
much confirmed in her opinion, and having in the rest found more then she
wished for her brothers satisfaction, was transported with anger, and went full
of resentment into the Kings chamber, where she made her cruel accusation to
him, and gave him those witnesses that were to convince us. The King having
formerly received many letters from me, and was so well acquainted with my
hand, that it was easy for him to know it at the first sight. The astonishment
of Actaeon at the sudden alteration of his shape, was not to be equaled to
that of the King of Scythia, at the sight of my letters, nor can I represent
what a confusion seized on him, when in the first he opened he found these
words.

Arsaces To the Princess Berenice.
I should have been dead, Fair Princess, but for the sweet consolations you
afford my miseries. and my enemies had tryumphed over my life as soon as my
liberty, if they could have tryumphed over your constancy. But can I have any
reason to complain of them since in the design of ruining me, they raise my
fortune, and since they seem to have deprived me of my Princesses sight, only
to give me the occasions of knowing her affection? this happiness is infinitely
above all my misfortunes, and for again of so great importance, my greatest
losses are but inconsiderable.


O Gods? (cried the King as he made an end of reading this letter) with what
kind of affection will you overwhelm me, and by what actions have I so highly
incensed you, that you should arm my ungrateful family against my repose, and
against my reputation? Ah! Berenice, foolish Berenice, whom I never suspected
of such lightness, and of such a perfidiousness, by what usage have I given
thee cause to betray me, and by what punishments can thou be able to blot out
the offense thou have committed against me? Having said thus he opened another
letter, in which with a like astonishment he read these words.

Arsaces To the Princess Berenice.
My sorrows are redoubled by the knowledge of yours, and I am less sensible of
my own miseries. then of the persecutions you suffer from that insolent
Brother, and his cruel Sister; but pardon me, Dear Princess, if I cannot be
totally afflicted at them, nor think with trouble of the assaults you receive,
without looking with joy upon the generous resistance you make in favor of me;
my advantages thereby are too great to loose the remembrance of them utterly,
and if I had not had an indiscreet rival, and a troublesome enemy, I should
not so soon have known the constancy of my adored Princess.


The King was so transported at the reading of these, that he had not patience
to read the other letters, but the Queen opened them in his presence, and made
him also hear these words in the next.

Arsaces To the Princess Berenice.
I have been told what passed last night in your Chamber, and what cruel words
the King spoak in favor of my rival; you heard them, most lovely Princess,
without changing your resolution, and being all made up of goodness, and
generosity, are still willing to suffer for him, whose most cruel sufferings
cannot at all merit the least of yours; There is no justice in it, fair
Princess, but though there were a great deal less, it is impossible for me to
condemn you; I confess I love my self too well, since I desire my own advantage
to the prejudice of your repose; but I do it only because I am yours, and if I
should cease to be so, I protest to you, I would also cease to love my self.


Ah! suborner, (cried the King) art thou not content with having employed thy
subtilty in broaching thy faithless practices in my Kingdom, without making
use of it to seduce my own House against me; and could thou not satisfy thy
self with spreading thy poison among the Scythians, without infecting also the
royal family? Let Us see (continued he, taking the last letter out of the
Queens hand) let us see the rest of his perfidious designs, and let us in the
continuation of his crimes, find evident matter for our revenge. Saying thus he
cast his eyes upon it, and saw that it was written in these terms.

Arsaces To the Princess Berenice.
I am not able to represent with what an access of joy I heard the Kings
intention to set our dear Brother at liberty. This contentment (Dearest
Princess) is both beyond expression, and imagination; and though by the end of
his captivity I hope for that of my afflictions, I protest that our interests
make the smallest part of my joy, and that as that Brother is infinitely dearer
to me then my self, I look upon his happiness and his advantages, with a great
deal more satisfaction then mine own. Not that I can have quite forgotten them
(fair Princess) but I give them up absolutely to my dear Brother, being I
cannot think of his liberty, without hoping thereby for the establishment of my
fortune.


Thy hopes are vain, (said the King as he made an end of reading these words)
thy hopes are vain, false Arsaces dissembling Artanemes, and though by thy
disloyal practices, thou corruptest my subjects and armest mine own children
against me, know thou shall reap but small advantage by it, and shall profit
but little either by the infidelity of Oroondates, or by the weakness of
Berenice. As he spoak these words he walked about the chamber with so furious
an action that the Queen did not dare to look upon him, and, began already to
repeat that she had put him into so violent a rage. Bernice (said he) Bernice
has betrayed me, and that daughter whom I had brought up with so much care,
and in whom I had thought I had found so many signs of dutiful obedience, and
of a perfect virtue, does not only love a man without my approbation, but
gives her self over (faithless girl as she is) to the love of my mortal and
irreconcilable enemy. This thought transported him with fury, and presently
after, I Will punish her (continued he) in such a manner as shall serve for an
example to all that are of her condition, and shall teach all Royal families
the heinousness of such an infidelity, against a father, and against a King.
With these words not being able to master his anger, he sent for the Princess,
and at the same time having learned in what place she used to set the box where
any letters were, he gave his guards order to bring it him, and to take it by
force if there were any difficulty made of delivering it. Berenice had no
sooner received the Kings command, when being ignorant of her destiny, she went
to wait upon him in his chamber, but scarce was she come in, when she read her
misfortune in his face, and being she was commonly in an apprehension of what
then had happened, she instantly found her condemnation in her Fathers looks. O
Gods! how infinitely was she surprised when instead of the kind welcome she was
wont to receive from him, she saw her self melt with so terrible an action, as
might have daunted the most fearlesse persons. He had still my last letter in
his hand, the others lay open upon the table, and presently after they brought
in the cabinet in which were all the rest. At that sight alone she seemed half
dead, and the King having beheld her a while in that trouble which did
absolutely convince her, without being able to find words capable to express
his indignation, broak forth at last in such a manner, that a clap of thunder
could not have struck such a terror into the affrighted heart of that poor
Princess. Thou wicked, ungrateful, perfidious creature, (said he) or rather
thou monster of infidelity and ingratitude, behold the gallant marks of thy
virtue; thou art not only convinced of an affection which dishonor thee, and
which sixes an eternal blemish upon thy reputation, but also of holding a
treacherous intelligence with my mortal enemies, or rather of a conspiracy
against thy father and against thy King; See here, see the brave letters of
Darius his son, and brag of having made him triumph over my whole Family, as
thou would have made him do over my Dominions, and perhaps over my very
life. Was it then in favor of this Lover that thou so stiffly did oppose my
command, and did thou persist in that pride, and that disdain of a birth
inferior to thine only to seek for an equality in the remnants of Darius his
blood, and in this divested Prince, who by his horrible practices, would at the
cost of our House, have repaired the losses of his own? The poor Princess at
this torrent of cruel words, was ready to lose her senses, and her
understanding, and all she was able to do was to let her self fall at the Kings
feet, where she endeavored to appease his anger by a stream of tears, which
would have mollified any other heart but his. His was not at all moved with
them, but thrusting back this poor Princess, with eyes sparkling with wrath,
and with an action full of cruelty. Think not (said he) by thy deceitful tears
to soften my just resentments, since thou joynest thy self in a confederacy
with my enemies to betray me, thou with them shall bear the reward of thy
treachery and since thou declarest thy self my enemy, thou shall know me to be
thine, all my thoughts of love are now turned into thoughts of hatred against
thee, and as thou have hitherto found me an indulgent father, so shall thou now
see me as severe an Enemy. I Will take an order to cross thy perfidious
designs, and since heaven has discovered them to me, to thy eternal shame
and confusion, I Will make what ever you had prepared against me fall upon thy
self, and upon thy false suborner. Let him not so soon rejoice at the
advantages he has won upon my house, I hope they shall benefit him but little,
and I have bin in a condition to satisfy my self for all the injuries he has
done me. The King accompanied these words with a whole heap of reproaches,
which it would be hard for me to repeat, and this poor Princess was so
troubled at them, that she never had the confidence to open her mouth in her
own justification. Her silence perfected her condemnation in the Kings
thoughts, and after he had further aggravated her grieses by many bitter words,
he commanded her to be gone out of his presence, and to retire to her chamber
which was to be her prison. You tremble still at this remembrance, Madame,
(pursued Arsaces turning toward Berenice) and in your face, I still see the
marks of the fright you were in at that encounter; truly the cause was
sufficient, and when I heard the relation of it, the apprehensions I fell into
for you, came but little short of yours. Yet did not I hear it till some few
days after, but that very day my servants were forbidden to stir any more
out of prison, and were presently deprived of that little liberty which till
then had been permitted them. I will not tell you, Brother, what Berenices
thoughts were, seeing her self exposed to the anger of a father, whose
pitilesse nature was not unknown to her; you are not ignorant that she is of a
very gentle humor, and such an one as was no way able to resist those violent
assaults. The confusion she was in seeing her affection discovered, and her
fear of the Kings threats, tormented her not a little, but she has had the
goodness to confess to me since, (and will pardon me if tell it you) that the
apprehension of my danger made the greatest part of all her sufferings, not
doubting but that the King in the violence of his anger, would fly to
extremities against me. This fear which was not groundless could not settle it
self in her heart, without a most sensible affliction; and though she had cause
enough to lament for her own captivity, seeing she was a prisoner her self, and
confined to the limits of her chamber, yet did she to that consideration, add
also that of Arsaces his ruin, and was excessively grieved, for fear of seeing
a Prince perish, and perish by her occasion, who had given himself wholly to
her, and who by the endeavors of his services, had merited some part in her
affection. These indeed were lawful apprehensions, but they would have been
much greater, if she had been of the Kings counsel, and had perfectly known
his final resolution. Truly it was a stranger one then I expected, and you
will not only disapprove it, Brother, but will also be astonished at it, and
if you please will pardon me all those words, which a just sense thereof may
make me utter in the prosecution of my discourse. I was in my chamber with
Criton, where were also Theocles, and Hyander my two faithful Scythian
servants, when I saw one of those that commanded my guards come in followed by
five or six of his men in a manner that was something extraordinary. He
brought a cup in his right hand, and a dagger in his left, His countenance was
altered by the business he had undertaken and all things about him contributed
to make me know his errand; I was surprised at this encounter, and guessed,
though with some repugnance the truth of his commission. Yet did I give him
time to tell me what it was, and he trembling, and stammering at last got out
these words. Sir (said he) the King is resolved that you must die; but the
consideration he has of your person, and of the services you have done this
State, will not suffer him to employ the hands of any of his subjects to do
that office; therefore he leaves it to your own, and to your choice, to take
either this poniard, or this poison, for the execution of his will.

Ah! Brother, (cried out Prince Oroondates, at this part of Arsaces his
discourse) what prodigies are these you tell me, and what shame will you have
me suffer, for being born if a more cruel and a more barbarous Monster, then
any that Affricke ever bred! Oh thou inhumane Tygre, I disavow thee, and since
thou do so little consider, both the chiefest blood in all the world, and the
person that ought to be most dear, and most considerable to thee, I account my
birth more vile and shameful, then if I had received it from the basest dregs
of the people. Oroondates transported by his resentment would have gone on with
his invective, if Arsaces had not hindered him by prosecuting his story on this
manner;

I confess, Brother, I was as much surprised as you are at this cruel
proposition for though I began to be acquainted with the Kings humor, and that
I had some reason to look for some ill usage, I could never have believed he
would have run to that extremity against a Prince of my quality, and a Prince
who had served him both in his affairs, and in his own person. And indeed I
testified my astonishment by a silence, which perchance made these guards think
it was caused by the fear of death. True it is I had ceased to desire it, as
well by reason of the proofs I received of my Princesses affection, as of the
hopes I had in your assistance, and that if my life (which the sweetness of
these hopes began to make much dearer to me then it was before) could be
preserved without doing an unworthy action, I did not disdain to lay hold of
the occasion. Yet was it not so much the fear of losing it, as the horror of
that usage together with despite, and amazement, that caused the greatness of
my confusion. But as great as it was, I quickly recovered my self, and looking
upon that fatal messenger with an action that utterly took away the little
courage he had left. Is it possible (said I) the King should have given you
this commission against a Prince whose birth is known to him, and against a
Prince to whom he ows his life and the peace of his dominions. 'Twas he himself
that gave it me, (replied the man) but I took it not without repugnance, yet am
I obliged to obey his orders, and punctually to execute his commands. What,
(said I) you who are one of the very Scythians, that have often seen me at the
head of your armies, securing your quietness by the loss of my own blood, are
you resolved to obey his Orders, and to execute his commands? Yes Sir,
(answered that barbarous fellow) and if after the choice I have offered you,
your hand refuse to perform his sentence, mine must become the instrument to
supply that defect. I Will save it that labor, (replied I with a countenance
far more resolute then his) and death is too familiar to me, to borrow that
from thy hands, which I can easily compass with mine own; give me that dagger
(continued I putting forth my hand) the other kind of death would little become
the life of Arsaces, and he has been prodigal enough of his blood for thee
and all thy countrymen, to make thee believe, he can himself pour forth the
remainder of it, to satisfy the ingratitude of the King of Scythia. As I ended
these words, I took the dagger from his hand, but 'twas with an intention very
different from his, and as soon as ever I had hold of it, I lift up my arm, and
instead of striking my own breast, stabbed it up to the hilt in his. Scarce had
I pulled it out again all hot and bloody, but instantly I plunged it into the
body of his nearest companion, who by reason of the suddenness of my action had
not time to prevent it, and then immediately taking away his sword, I began to
dispute my life against the rest. I might perchance have perished being unarmed
as I was, but I was furiously seconded by Criton, who had gotten up the sword
of the first, and by my two Scythians, who being resolved to die with me, laid
hold of the swords, and javelins of those they saw fall, and placed themselves
by my side with a mavelous courage. By their assistance I was quickly
delivered from my enemies who were no better armed then we, and the last of
them was turning his back to save himself in the hall, where he had left more
of his companions, when he saw them come to his relief, I was so heated that
the number of my enemies frighted me but little, but they were so terrified
themselves by the death of their fellows, and by the resoluteness wherewith we
came upon them, that they did not what they might have done, to revenge their
companions, and to oppose my passage. True it is, the knowledge I had that this
was the only way for my safety, and for my revenge, and my desire to sell a
life at the dearest rate, which they so unworthily would have taken away, made
me do things beyond my strength, and I gave few blows that dispatched not an
enemy out of the fight. Cryton and my two Scythians assisted me so valiantly,
that they laid five or six of them at their feet, and the rest were so
possessed with fear that they left the passage, and the door open to me. They
followed us down stairs, but very coldly, and those that came in our way to
hinder our going out, felt such effects either of our courage, or of our
despair, that the last of them were constrained to open the outermost gate, to
seek their safety in the Towa. We rushed out after them without delay, and came
into the street all bloody, and in a posture that might have caused terror in
the most undanted persons. My Guards cried out in the streets, and called for
help in the Kings name; their cries drew a great many people together* but the
sight of us put them to a stand, and when I saw them waver in the resolution
they should take: People of Issedon (said I) for you I have often given the
better part of my blood, and will you favor my enemies in a base and cruel
assassinate; or rather, will you see him murdered by traiterous ungrateful
wretches, who at your Head, has both fought and conquered for you? I am your
general, I am your fellow soldier Arsaces, the very man to whom you so
voluntarily submitted your selves, and the very man whom you have followed in
war with so much affection. As I spoke these words I opened my way with my
sword among those enemies I still had left, and they wrought such an effect
upon the people, that whether it were that my face representing yet some Idea
of that which had commanded them, stirred up some remainders of respect toward
me, or that the cruelty and injustice of the usage which was showed me, caused
some horror and aversion in them, or that they had still preserved some
remnant of that love, which they had formerly born me, they never stirred to do
me any hurt, nay and there were many among them who to facilitate my retreat,
pestered my enemies, and cleared my passage as much as possibly they could.
They would have done more for my safety if they had dared, but I made such use
of those proofs of their good will, that I got a great deal of ground toward
the City Gate, and kept my emies still out of the reach of my sword. All this
resistance, and all this favor of the Scythians did indeed defer my death,
but it was not sufficient to have hindered it, without heavens particular
assistance. The news of this adventure was already carried to the King, and
there was no doubt but he would soon send troops against me, I was a foot,
without other arms save my sword, wounded with some light hurts, but those
that accompanied me had few parts of their bodies free, and poor Hyander one of
my most faithful Scythians, after he had done actions worthy of eternal
memory, fell dead by me, leaving his fellow in a condition little different
from his. I already saw more soldiers coming to the relief of their
companions, and in short, I saw evident death before my eyes, so that what
resolution soever I had taken to sell my life as dearly as I could, I should
certainly have lost it, if the Gods had not sent me a miraculous succor; I
call it miraculous because in the conjuncture of it, there was something very
extraordinary, which made me observe their particular care of my safety. I was
striving, weary and wounded as I was, to prolong my destiny, when I saw fifteen
or twenty horsemen come up to me, at the head of whom I knew my dear Theodates;
Theodates who I thought had been in the Princes army, who was then coming into
the Town, or rather who was then sent thither by the Heavens, for my relief.
Before he came to us he had heard some rumor of that adventure at his
arrival, and his eyes then telling him the truth of it, he never stood
considering what resolution he should take, but gallopping up with his sword
drawn, he did so scatter those that were before me, that he had a free and open
passage. Courage valliant Arsaces (cried he) we must escape, and Theodates must
either bring you off from this danger, or perish with you. He gave me not
leisure to reply, but as he spoke those words, made two or three of his men
alight, and offered me their horses; for all I was so wounded, I got reasonably
lightly upon the first, Criton took another, but poor Theocles his strength
failed, and at that very moment, his life forsook him, and having stayed but
just as long as it was necessary to me. The death of these two faithful
servants, would have been a great affliction to me, if I had then been in a
condition to be as sensible of it as I should have been at another time. As
soon as I was on horseback, I believed my self out of danger, and trampling
those under my horses feet who would have opposed my passage, I ran with
Theodates and his men to the nearest gate. We came thither just as the King
sent an order to have it shut, and a soldier was thrusting out his arm for
that purpose, when giving him a good slash with my sword I made him let go his
hold, and with the shock of our horses overturning those that were in our way,
we got out of the Town, and took toward the field to our outmost speed. The
swiftness of our flight carried us off without further difficulty, and before
those whom the King sent to pursue us were got on horsback, we were already
above fifty furlongs from the Town. Then we were favored by the night, which
presently overtook us, and leaving the high ways we rode cross the field, and
in the dark toward those great forests that are about three or four hundred
furlongs from Issedon. As soon as Theodates thought us enough at liberty to
converse, he suffered me to embrace him, and give him thanks for what he had
done toward my escape. Never were more ardentnor more tender endearments used
between two friends, and though I had not loved Theodates so well as I did, yet
I should have been the most ungrateful man in the world, if such a service as
that I had newly received, had not made me absolutely his. My dear deliverer
(said I) or rather the Genius of Arsaces his life and fortune; must you needs
happen to be, or rather must you appear by miracle in all places where you are
necessary to my safety, and must I never find an occasion to requite you with
an office of the like nature. I am so extremely engaged to you already,
(replied the affectionate Theodates) that you have no cause at all to wish me
more obliged; and I much more justly am indebted to you, for a life which shall
ever be readily laid down for yours. We occompanied these words and many others
of the same style, with an infinite number of most dear embraces, and when we
had given truce to them a little, we began to ask one onother concerning our
mutual affairs. I presently questioned Theodates about the Prince my Brother,
and about the occasion of his own coming to Issedon but he would tell me
nothing, till he had heard my last adventures, and the cause of the condition
he had found me in. I told him all I knew, and he at that relation, trembled,
and detested the Kings cruelty and ingratitude, in terms which gave me new
assurances of his hatred to vice, and of the affection he bore me. When I had
given him that account, he satisfied me in what I desired to know of him, and
made me the recital of the battle you had wonn aganst Zopirio with some other
of your particular actions, which filled me with joy and admiration, and then
coming to the cause of his departure from the army. My impatiency to see you
again (continued he) and the perpetual apprehensions I was in for you, made me
return toward Issedon; but I wanted not another pretense, and some
contestations that passed between Arsacomes and me in matter of Command,
furnished me with one specious enough, to ask the Princes leave to come away.
Not but that I was very much troubled to leave him, and had desire to share in
the glory, of what he had yet to do; but as often as I remembered that I had
left you a prisoner, and exposed to the anger of a Prince whose humor was well
enough known to me. I fell into disquiets that would not suffer me to take any
rest. I even repented me that I had obeyed the Kings orders, and that I had
forsaken you in a condition wherein my services were most necessary to you. I
also found a great deal of constraint in the oath you had exacted from me, and
not being able to tell the Prince the truth till the end of the war, I on the
other side could not endure to leave him in that ignorance at my departure. I
therefore found out a middle way, and resolved to deliver him that in writing,
which it was forbidden me to tell him, yet observing what you had enjoined me,
and tying him to the same promise I had given you; For this purpose the day of
my departure I wrote these words.

Theodates To Prince Oroondates.
An inviolable Oath has kept me hitherto from declaring, what it is necessary
you should know; but since I now have the liberty, I will acquaint you Sir,
that the Great Arsaces, to whom the King your Father is indebted for his life,
and your Country for the quietness it has enjoyed, is Prince Artaxerxes the
son of Darius, your Dear Friend, your dear Brother, and he on whom you have
bestowed so many tears. The Gods saved him miraculously from that battle,
where you thought he had been slain, and since that time, his passion for the
Princess Berenice, and the occasions of doing service to your friends have kept
him in Scythia. He is now a prisoner to the King your Father, who without doubt
has discovered him to be the son of Darius: Judge of his danger by your
knowledge of the Kings humor; and by the friendship that was between you,
think what hope he ought to have in your assistance.


O Gods! (cried Prince Oroondates, when Arsaces had repeated that letter) how
many misfortunes would the fight of these words have saved me, if you had
suffered me to cast my eyes upon them! but you had otherwise decreed, and that
knowledge would certainly have overturned all the order of those adventures
that have since befallen me. My voyage to Susa had been diverted, or at least
deferred, and I should have thrown of all consideration of my own interest, and
run to the succor of my dear Artaxerxes. Ah! Brother, how I blame your unjust
cautiousness, in concealing from me the only happiness, from whence in the sad
condition I then was, I could draw any consolation, and how I should hate
Theodates for being so scrupulous, if I had not so many occasions to love him
for the good offices he has done you! It is true, Brother, (continued
Oroondates) and I will say this to spare you something of your discourse,
Theodates the day of his departure having drawn me aside, delivered me a letter
fast sealed up, and before he gave it me, Sir, (said he) in this paper which I
present you, you shall find the most pleasing news, and the most important
advertisement you can receive, doubt not at all of the truth of those things
you shall find written in it; it will be very easy for you to certify your
self; but before I put it into your hands, be pleased to give me your word,
that you will not open it, till the end of this war. I was surprised at this
discourse of Theodates, and being desirous to persuade him to satisfy my
curiosity sooner, If this news (replied I) will be so pleasing to me, why do
you so long deferr my knowledge of it, and why do you delay a joy, which it is
in your power to give me? Sir, (answered he) I am bound up by one of those
oaths which you know the Scythians can never violate, and because I am enjoined
this silence no longer then for the time I have demanded, you may then see in
this paper, what my absence will not suffer me to tell you by word of mouth:
but Sir, I beseech you keep it carefully, and if you love your self, forget not
to look upon it as soon as the war is at an end. I was constrained to make
Theodates the promise he desired, and I locked up that paper amongst those
things which I esteemed most precious. Theodates went away the same day,
leaving me much troubled for his departure, but he had alleged such specious
reasons to me, touching the disputes he had had with Arsacomes, and the
important affairs which recalled him to the Court, that I could not deny him
the leave he demanded. I kept his writing with a great deal of care, and with
as much impatience to read it as soon as I should be free of my engagement, but
the strange revolution that happened in my soul, and in my affairs by the
arrival of Tyreus; and by the news of Statira, put it quite out of my head at
my sudden departure from Orchilachia, and till I was at sea, I never remembered
the box I had left it in, which the new trouble of my mind, had made me utterly
to forget, with many other things that were very dear to me.

The Gods would have it so (replied Arsaces) to bring our affairs to the issue
they had ordained, and to make us know the power they reserve unto themselves
over all our proposalls. It is true Brother, Theodates told me almost the very
same words we have now heard from you; and then in a few more he informed me of
the condition he had left you in, and of the success of his own journey,
wherein he had no considerable encounter. When we had thus instructed one
another, we fell to think whether we should retire, and what order we should
take to get my wounds dressed; they began to trouble me, and though they were but
slight ones, the violent exercise I had used, my loss of blood, and the
vapors of the night made them a great deal worse then else they would have
been. Criton was no less hurt then I, but his affection was so strong, that he
forgot his own danger, to take care for mine. After we had consulted a while,
Theodates would need have us go for the remainder of that night, and the day
following, to the house of one of those men who then was with him, which was
not above an hundred furlongs from the place where we were. I suffered my self
to be guided by his will, and as we rode along, Theodates calling all his
company to him, drew a new promise from them of their fidelity, and tied them
by all manner of entreaties to be as secret as we could desire. They were all
very affectionate to their Master, and some of them were so well inclined
toward me, that they were both forward in promising, and exact in performing
what we demanded. The house we went to, was far from any great road, upon the
edge of a huge forest, and in such a place as was very unlikely to be
suspected for our retreat. When we were come thither, the Master of the House,
and some women we found there, took the best order they could to receive us,
and by good fortune, Theodates having brought his Physician, and his Surgeon
from the army with him, furnished with such things as were necessary for any
wound, we had the means to have ou'rs dressed as commodiously as if we had been
at Issedon. I had but three, and those were found to be such light ones, that
it was not probable they should keep me long in bed. They applied what they
thought most convenient to them, and likewise to Critons, who had four or five
greater then mine, but not at all more dangerous. The Physician enjoined me to
give the remainder of that night to rest, contrary to the intension I had to
spend it in discoursing with Theodates, but the next day I had leisure enough,
and asked him a thousand questions concerning my dear Oroondates. By what he
had done in my behalf he was become as criminal as I, and his access to Court
was as difficult, and as unsafe as mine. His affection to me was sufficient to
make him undergo it with patience, but I was afflicted at it for him, and his
love to Theomiris being known to me, I doubted not but he had a restless
longing to see her again. We fell to deliberate what we should do with our
selves, and were along time before we could resolve. I was too firmly fixed in
Scythia, to suffer so much as a thought of going out of it, and would rather
have exposed my self to a thousand evident deaths, then have persuaded my self
to leave Berenice; but if I had been so minded, it would have been exceeding
difficult to do it, and we doubted not but that the King had sent to stop all
the Ports, and to lay all the other passages by which we could get out of his
territories. We believed also, that how secret soever our present retreat was,
it could not serve us many days, and that those persons the King employed in
search of us, might at last discover where we were. After we had long consulted
we believed the surest way we could take would be to return to Issedon, where
when the first troubles were once past over, we might have free entrance by
night, and where by reason of the greatness of the City, and the multitude of
new affairs that sprung up daily in the Court, and in that throng of people we
might easily lie concealed in houses that were at Theodates his disposing,
especially being the King would never suspect we were returned thither, and
that we had taken sanctuary so near him against his anger. This advice seemed
the most reasonable, and was most conformable to my humor, and to the desire I
had not to go far from Berenice; in the mean time we sent two witty
understanding fellows back to the Town, to fetch us such things as we wanted,
and to enquire after what concerned us. They performed their commission very
cunningly, and in the evening brought us the same news we had imagined, They
told us that the King had appeared more sensible of this last discontent then
of any other he had ever felt before, and that for all the remainder of that
day, those that were most in his favor, hardly had the boldness to come near
him, that he had left no body at home that was able to ride on horsback, but
had sent them all in pursuit of us, and that (as we had foreseen) he had given
order to stop all the ports and passages of his Kingdom, that nevertheless
they said in Town that none but those that were interessed, obeyed his orders
without trouble, and that the better part of Scythians amongst whom the name of
Arsaces was still in high esteem, rejoy'd at his escape, and favored him with
their wishes as much as they could possibly. In this news, I found some
consolation; but when I asked them concerning Berenice, they could tell me
nothing, but that the rumor was, how since this accident the King had
commanded she should be surely guarded, and that very few persons were allowed
to see her, This report made me guess at part of the truth, and I believed
that the Kings late resolution against me, had proceeded only from the
knowledge he had gotten of my passion. Ah! how many torments did that belief
cause in me, and how many sighs did it cost me when I thought what that fair
Princess was like to suffer by my occasion! O King of Scythia, (cried I)
revenge thy self upon Arsaces; but do not punish Berenice, and though that be
the most sensible part wherein thou can wound thine enemy; remember that
Berenice is above thy laws, and above the Empire of mankind. The second day
being passed, Theodates was of opinion we might be much more secure in Issedon,
(as we had already thought) then in that house, and for that purpose, having
sent to make ready a lodging, where he was confident we might safely trust our
selves; we took our way thither the night following. Our wounds would not
suffer us to ride without inconveniency, but I had so great an inclination to
be nere Berenice again, that I was scarcely sensible of mine, and having rid it
in little more then two hours, we entered after midnight into the Town, the
gates whereof were not wont to be shutt. Those that accompanied us parted
several ways, some of them retiring to other places, and for fear our number
should at last make us be discovered, we kept none with us but those that were
necessary. They did our businesses, and fetched us in provisions by night: and
during the day time, the doors of our house were always shutt; it stood in the
most unfrequented quarter of all the Town, and we were so careful to make no
noise, that their could hardly be any ground for suspicion. Yet were we in a
great deal of danger; but by the order the King had taken, we should have been
so likewise in any other place, and the consideration of peril was not able to
drive me from Berenice, Theodates and I were not without a good number of
Friends at Court, to whom we should have made no difficulty to trust our selves
if it had been necessary; Prince Carthasis though the Kings Brother, would have
received us with a great deal of affection, and his friendship to us, as also
his aversion to Arsacomes, and his discontent at the greatness of his fortune,
were sufficient to have made him exspose himself to any hazard for our
consideration. Many others of the chief of Scythia, had still preserved the
remembrance of the good offices I had done them, or which I had endeavored to
do them, during the time I was in favor and I doubted not but that they would
have ventured very far to have obliged me; but I was loath to endanger them
without necessity, believing that whosoever should be known to be my friend
would be the first suspected, and that by how much the more secret our abode
was, so much the safer also would it be. We passed many days on this manner,
which being separated from my Princess I should have thought unsupportable, if
since the time of my imprisonment I had not been inured to suffer. Yet was I
mervellously impatient to see her, and as soon as my wounds permitted me to
stir out of bed, I resolved to hazard that visit in spite of Theodates his
oppositions. What, (said I) shall I be free in Issedon, and not see Berenice?
Ah! Theodates, my life is not so dear to me as that I would secure it at that
rate, nor can I preserve it without Berenice; since it is for her alone that I
preserve it. Theodates complied with my design when he saw he could not divert
it, and that consent was not without some mixture of his own interest. The
Princess Theomiris was still with Berenice, and for all her fathers rigorous
usage of her, at the request of Prince Carthasis, she was allowed the company
of that Princess, whom she made her bedfellow, and to whom she had entrusted
her most secret thoughts. Theodates had not seen her since his departure, but
now he hoped we might share that visit together. After we had long contrived
the least difficult expedients, we at last made choice of this; We remembered
that the Princesses ante-chamber, had an iron grated window not very high,
which stood toward a little narrow street that was almost uninhabited by
reason it was so exceeding dirty, that hardly any body could pass that way; it
was not nere the Palace gate, nor any of those places where there used to be
guards, and I thought when all the world was asleep, we by that window might
get to speak with Cyllenia, and by her means enjoy the happiness of
entertaining our Princesses. After we had thus laid our design, we got on
horsback, and took two trusty men along with us, whom we set as sentinells at
each end of that street, to come and give us notice in case they should see any
body that could discover our conversation. In the mean time there had happened
things to my Princess, which the course of my story hindered me from telling
you, and which I will not recount before I pass further in my narration. It
would be fitter (interrupted Oroondates) that my sister should tell us them her
self; That little breathing time will not be needless, in so long a discourse
as this of yours, and it were good you rested your self a little, that you may
be able to prosecute the remainder of it without inconveniency. Arsaces made no
answer, leaving the Princess to satisfy her Brothers motion, and Berenice
knowing his desire. Since you will have it so Brother, (said she) and that your
friendship to Arsaces, and your knowledge of his virtue makes you pardon my
faults, and my disobedience, I Will spare him the trouble of a few moments, but I
have so little to say, that so short an intermission will not be much
considerable.

I will not stand to repeat again (after the relation you have heard already
from the Prince) what my thoughts were after the cruel accident of the
surprisall of my letters, and after the knowledge I had both of my being made a
prisoner, and of the danger that threatened Prince Artaxerxes. It suffices me
that you already know I loved him, as much as I believed I ought, and is he
could desire, to make you judge that my apprehensions for him, were my most
cruel disquiets. All my comfort was in the Princess Theomiris, and in
Cyllenia, whose company the King afforded me notwithstanding all his severitie.
Theomiris had obtained it of the King by her fathers mediation, and my enemies
thought it was not necessary to take Cyllenia from me, who in their opinion,
was not able to do me any service that could be prejudicial to them. It is
true also, that I received those petty satisfactions by the Queens means, who
with a cunning dissimulation feigned to be sorry for the misfortune which she
her self had brought upon me, and by courtesies of small importance,
endeavored to take off part of that resentment she believed I had against her.
How ever it were, Theomiris and Cyllenia continued with me, and thought at that
time I could not guess by whom I had been so unworthily betrayed, I never had
so much as a thought to suspect Cyllenia. I therefore trusted these two dear
persons; with all my discontents, and with all my fears, and they helped what
they could to stop that current of tears which both those occasions drew from
my eyes in great abundance. Ah! Cosen (said I) Ah! Cyllenia, I am undone, and
poor Artaxerxes will undoubtedly be ruined, and ruined merely by my
imprudence. That Prince, who after the loss of his Empire, and after the loss
of all his friends, has escaped such numberless dangers, under the weight of
which, any other body would certainly have sunk, he who amidst his most bitter
enemies has subsisted with such dexterity, and who by so many mavelous
actions, had so well gained their affections, falls now by my fault alone, and
she to whom all Scythia owes that repose it hold's from him, owes the life of
its King, and owes such important services, sacrifices him now her self, to his
inhumanitie, and to his ingratitude. Ah? Berenice (continued I) Berenice the
sole cause of that great Prince's misfortunes, do not outlive his
afflictions, and if thou can not hinder the death of poor Artaxerxes, at
least forerun it with thine own. I accompanied these words with such a flood of
tears, and expressed my sorrow by such moving actions, that not only
Theomiris and Cyllenia; but even people of the harshest natures would have been
touched with compassion. I spent the remainder of that day in this employment,
and would needs have my Cosen lie with me to help to pass away the cruellest
night I had ever known in all my life. She alleged all the arguments she could
think of to cure me of my fears, and often persuaded me it was not likely the
King wonld fly to extremities against a Prince of Artaxexerxes his quality, and
against a Prince to whom, besides that of his life, he had other such important
obligations; that the whole Kingdom so powerfully indebted to his valor,
would oppose the Kings rigorous intentions, and that he was too prudent and too
politic to suffer himself to be transported by his passion, to such a violence
as was without example.

I found so much reason in this discourse of Theomiris, that if my affection
had been more moderate, I should without question have drawn some comfort from
it; but it was by her inspirations, and by those of Cyllenia that I took a
little courage, and resolved to suffer the Kings presence, and to receive his
words with more spirit then I had done before. Having spent the night on this
manner, and likewise part of the day following, I saw the King, when I least
expected him, come all alone into my chamber. I rose up, and went to meet him
trembling, but he disdaind my reception, and sitting down upon a chair, from
whence he darted nothing but furious looks at me. I come not to visit thee
(said he) ungrateful, and disloyal girl, I owe not so much civility to the
daughter in Law: of Darius; and from hence forward I cannot desire thy sight
otherwise then as that of my most mortal enemy. I come only to reproach thee
with thy ingratitude, and infidelity, or to examine thee as a criminal
convicted of treason against her King. Speak wicked creature (continued he,
seeing me daunted and stricken half dead with these cruel words) open thy
mouth to excuse thy self, and justify thy infidelities if it be possible.
Did thou then think the son of my implacable enemy, more lovely then a
Prince whom I had chosen for thee, and whose affections I had expressly
commanded thee to receive? and if thou had eyes to judge of the difference
there was between Arsacomes and thee, had thou none to consider that without
betraying thy father, and shamefully betraying thy self, thou could not match
thy self to the enemy of thy House, and to him who had basely abandoned his
father, and his Country to their new enemies, to compass his treacherous
practices against their old ones, and to seek that revenge by his secret
conspiracies, which neither he nor his could ever find in open war. While the
King brought forth these words with many others of the same kind, I summond all
my courage to answer him, as he commanded me, and though I had much ado to
recollect my self, at last my affection, my sense of the ill usage I received,
and the resolution I had taken gave me a boldness that was not natural to me,
and when the King had made an end of speaking, charging me expressly to reply.
Sir (said I,) I would not open my mouth for my justification, if your Majesty
had not absolutely commanded me, but in my pref^rring Ar^aces before Arsacomes,
I can find no cause at all to repent my self. Arsacomes is born my Fathers
subject, Arsacomes never did me nor mine any considerable service, nor have I
ever seen any thing either in the actions, or person of Arsacomes, which ought
not to have obliged me to hate him. Arsaces is born the greatest Prince in the
world, and born Prince of a thousand subjects more considerable then Arsacomes.
I owe to Arsaces the life of the King my Father, and my own; the Queen, and
Arsacomes himself are indebted to him for theirs, and all Scythia for the
better part of its tranquillity, and in the actions and person of Arsaces I
never saw any thing that ought not to oblige me to love him. If he be the son
of your enemy, Sir, the services he has done you, makes you sufficiently to
know how far he is from any of those thoughts you suspect him of; if he had
desired the ruin of your Kingdom, he would not have labored with the loss
of his blood for its conservation, and if your Ma^esties life had been odious
to him, he would not so visibly have hazarded his own f^^ its defense. I
allege not to your Majesty the engagements we had to him, in the person of
the Prince my brother, the good offices he did to him pass not in your opinion
for obligations, and though I were indebted to him for none but those which are
common to me and to your self, for the loss of his dominions which he
perchance might have avoided, if your service had not taken him up, and for the
particular proofs of affection he has shown me; I think that those he has
received from mine, will not pass for shameful crimes, and that I have
confined them within such limits, that the want of your allowance is all the
fault can be objected against me. I have loved him enough to prefer him
before a subject, before whom he would have been most worthy to be preferred,
though their qualities and obligations had been equal. I have loved him enough
to approve of his services, waiting till such time as those he daily rendered
you, should dissipate the hatred you bore his family, by the example of the
King his father, in whom less important services, in spite of your inveterate
enmities begot such tender affections to the Prince my Brother; and in short I
have loved him enough, to hope with contentment, that after that
reconciliation, you would make choice of him rather then of Arsacomes, and
rather then of any other body that should have an ambition like that of his;
but I have not loved him enough to grant him any favors that can make me
blush, nor to give him either promises or hopes to the prejudice of what I owe
unto your Majesty. Though Arsaces and I were both at liberty, I should be so
much Mistress of my affection to him, as to die rather then marry him, or go
along with him without your consent, but if your will would agree with my
inclination, I confess Sir, that as much forsaken by Fortune, and as much
dispossessed of his dominions as he is, I would prefer him before all the
Princes upon the face of the earth. At these last words, the King was so
enflamed with anger, that it was easy to observe it in his face, and stamping
with his foot as he rose up from his chair with a furious action; And I swear
by all the Gods (said he) that I will quickly deprive thee of the liberty of
preferring him before any body, and thy indiscreet and disloyal affection
shall be more fatal to my enemy, then all those ill designs he has had
against me; prepare thy self for his death, which I tell thee of my self, as
thou tellest me of thy perfidious tricks, and believe that the only choice I
will leave thee from hence forward, shall be that of Arsacomes living, or of
Arsaces in his grave. If the beginning of the Kings discou^se had not prepared
me for these cruel words, they were enough to have made me loose my senses;
but as well resolved as I was, I had much ado to keep my self from falling
into a swone, and sinking into Cylleni' as arms, who stretched them forth to
receive me seeing me change color; I looked upon the King with a pitiful
eye, though it were animated with some resentment, and struggling against my
faintness. The ashes of Arsaces (said I) shall ever be dearer to me then the
person of Arsacomes, and if I must shut up my hopes, and my life it self within
his tomb, I shall esteem my condition happier, then if I were possessour of all
Europe with Arsacomes. These last words absolutely took away all the reason the
King had left; and though my chiefest desires were bounded in Artaxerxes his
safety; I innocently procured his ruin by these extraordinary marks of my
affection. The King could hardly retain himself, in the violence of his wrath,
but moderating it by the thought of that revenge he was preparing, he was
content with expressing his intention by furious looks, and went out of my
chamber with a face, which sufficiently declared the action he was going to do.

I remained in an excess of grief, or rather in a mortal agony, and all the
apprehension I had had for Arsaces before, was nothing in comparison of the
fears which then assaulted me. I knew the Kings relentless nature, and his
persistance in his cruel resolulutions, and that put me into the most
sorrowful condition you can possible imagine. Theomiris and Cyllenia knew not
which way to comfort me, and I think without their assistance, I should have
been reduced to very great extremities. I every moment fancied poor Arsaces
either dead or dying* and the Kings harsh threats had made such an impression
in my mind, that 'twas impossible for me to withdraw my thoughts one minute
from that fatal remembrance. Oh! King of Scythia, (said I) if thou accomplish
thy horrible resolutions, thou may well prepare thy self for the funerals
of thine own children; Berenice will not survive poor Artaxerxes, and
Oroondates will without question die for grief, when he shall hear, that the
life of his Brother, for the loss whereof he had shed so many tears, was
preserved only to fall under the hands of the King his father. I said many
other things, whose length makes me forbear to entertain you with them, and I
tormented my self on that fashion, from the morning when the King had visited
me, till it was almost night. I did not believe he would so soon have gone on to
the execution of his threatenings, and I thought that to put a man of Arsaces
his quality to death, there had been need of longer deliberation^; but I was
deceived in my opinion, and though my fears were violent, they were not of so
long continuance as I expected. It began already to grow late, when there was a
great noise in the next Court, and amidst a great confusion of voices, I heard
the name of Arsaces pronounced several times. At that reiterated name, my
mortal fears were redoubled, and I sell immediately into the most fatal
apprehension. Arsaces is dead (cried I, throwing my self off from my bed)
Arsaces is dead Cosen, and without doubt this confused noise is caused by the
news of his death. As I spoak these words, I ran to the window which looked
into the next Cout, where I saw a great many people got together, who in
talking of Arsaces, clapped their hands, and did actions that sufficiently
expressed their astonishment. I then heard a calling for arms, and saw a great
many of the guard go out of the Palace in have, and in confusion. All these
things confirmed me in my fears, and I was so affrighted, that I had not the
heart to open my mouth, to ask what the matter was. In the end the court
remained almost quite empty, and for a time there was a silence as great as the
noise had been before it. Theomiris and Cyllenia laid me upon my bed again, in
a condition little different from that of persons without life. I had not the
leisure to express my sorrow by any long complaints, for before I had been a
quarter of an hour upon my bed, I heard a second noise in the Palace much
greater then the former; It wrought the same effect upon me the other had done;
I ran quite transported to the window, where I heard the Officers of the Guard,
and many others calling for horses with a precipitateness which testified their
disorder. After I had remained a while in a perplexity that cannot be
expressed, I saw Prince Carthasis my Uncle come into the Court; by good fortune
he presently cast up his eyes to our window, and I no sooner saw that he looked
upon me, but I by signs, and by a beseeching gesture begged a visit from him.
As soon as he understood my meaning, he came up the stairs, and finding no
hindrance at my chamber door by reason of his quality, he entered immediately
after. He was acquainted with all matters that passed, both by what he had
heard from the King, and what I had confessed to him my self, nor had I any
cause to repent that he was privy to them, seeing there were no proofs of
affection I could desire of him, which he did not give me in all manner of
encounters to his utmost power. He had a particular esteem, and a strong
affection for Arsaces, and I received no small assurance of it by his action in
coming toward me. I cast my self all in tears into his arms, but I had not
opened my mouth to ask him the cruel news I apprehended, when to put me out of
pain, he broak silence first. Madame, (said he) the King would have put Arsaces
to death, but his Genius is more powerful then that of the Scythians, and it is
not under such arms as theirs that such a man as he can fall. These words
began to produce their effect upon me, when my Uncle not willling to let me
suffer any longer; Arsaces is escaped (said he) but he has made his escape
like Arsaces, and he has appeared to the ungrateful Scythians, the same
gallant man that he appeared to the affectionate Scythians, when he fought so
valliantly at the head of them. They have found him as invincible against them
against Armibas, and the Tauro-Scithians, and if they formerly have seen him
win battles by his sole courage in the front of their armies, they to day
have seen him alone, and unarmed, make rivers of blood run through the streets
of their principal City, and with his sword, hewn out the way unto his safety,
through the midst of their stoutest troops. This news having suddenly revived
me, I appeared very different from what I was a few minutes before, and though
I was little informed of the truth of the business, I found my self well enough
recovered to inquire it of the Prince, and to hear the relation of it very
patiently. He told me what had passed in Arsaces his escape, as it was reported
by those of his guard which had seen the beginning, and by those that had seen
the end of that action; he made me often grow pale and trembling during this
discourse, but when at last I heard, that after having done things above the
power of man, he had been succored by Theodates, whom the Gods had
miraculously sent him, and that with him he was gotten out of the Town, with
little probability that he could be overtaken by those that were sent in
pursuit of him, my greatest fears began to vanish, and I remained as quiet, and
as well contented, as I could hope to be in that adventure. Modesty forbad me
to express my satisfaction to the full before my Uncle, but he saw it plainly
enough in my face, and might easily have perceived in his daughters, if he had
observed it, that she was not insensible at the news of Theodates his arrival,
and of the share he had in the destiny of Arsaces. Though I concealed part of
my thoughts from my Uncle, I made him acquainted with the rest, not being
willing to give him cause by my distrust, to repent the affection he showed me
in a season when it might be prejuditiall to him. When I had testified my
acknowledgement of that favor as much as possibly I could, I entreated him to
be gone, for fear a long visit at that time might be hurtful to him, and gain
him the Kings jealousy and hatred. After his departure, Theomiris and I
discoursed of that last accident, and when I had compared the danger Arsaces
had escaped, with those he might yet fall into, and the rigor of his
imprisonment with that of his absence, I thought my condition a great deal
better then it was before, and believed I ought to be much better pleased with
my fortune, then I had been at any time since my restraint. I passed that night
in less violent disquiets, and though I found cause enough of affliction in
being separated from Arsaces, I found matter of comfort in his liberty, and
chose much rather to have him absent, then a prisoner to the King my father.
Arsaces (said I) will not forsake me, I am too certain that he loves me, to
fear he will go away from me for ever; he by being out of the way for the
present, will avoid the evident danger that threatens him, and without doubt
will return to me, as soon as he can be able to make use of my Brothers
assistance. Oroondates has loved him too perfectly, ever to abandon his
interests, and perhaps my fathers cruel humor may one day be appeased, by the
consideration of his whole Family. Thus did I flatter my self in my
discontents, while the King was transported with excess of rage, not being able
to bear the affront he had received, without such an impatiency as nothing can
represent. He banished those guards for ever that had escaped Arsaces his
valor, and looked upon the rest with such a fury as put them all into a
mortal terror. What (said he) has a single man, in the heart of my
Dominions, in the chief of all my Cities, near my own person and in the midst
of all my Subjects, made his escape from my just indignation, and are the
Scythians so cowardly as to quit the passage to one man alone, or so faithless
as to open it of their own accord to their Kings chief enemy? He spoak these
words with many furious actions, and grew so terrible to those that were most
familiar with him, that the Queen her self durst hardly venture to come nere
him. His belief that I would be glad of the discontent he had received by
Arsaces his deliverance, redoubled the aversion he had received against me, and
he was ready to have discharged part of that wrath upon me, which before was
kindled against him. He neither saw me nor would suffer me to be seen but by
very few, yet about three days after this accident I was visited by the Queen,
from whom I neither had expected nor desired that honor. I was I was not so
good a dissembler, as to make my face show a different welcome from what my
heart afforded her; but though I could not doubt that her malice alone had
brought me into that condition I then was in, I strove all I could to pay her,
in my own chamber, some part of what was due to my fathers wife. After the
first discourses of a very forced civility; Madame, (said she) by rendering you
this visit which I ow you, I shall without question move the King to some
displeasure against me, but I was willing to hazard that to assure you that I
am very sensible of what you suffer, and very ready to labor for your redress
as much as possibly I can. I am much obliged to your goodness (answered I) but
my fear of the Kings being displeased with you for it, could have made me wish
you had not honored me with this visit. Stratonice who has a great deal of
wit, took my words in the same sense they were intended, and showing by a smile
that she very well understood my meaning. I do not doubt (replied she) but that
you are angry with me, and that you suspect I have done what I could to
maintain Arsacomes his interests against Arsaces. In this I am very sorry I
have been constrained to thwart your inclinations, but it is a proceeding that
is both very natural, and very ordinary, and you are too full of reason to
believe, that I ought to hold the Son of Darius, and my own Brother in equal
consideration. I should not have fallen upon this discourse, if the Queen had
not begun it. But when I saw she entered so far into it her self, I thought I
might very well reply. It was not just (said I) Madame, that you should favor
Arsaces with your assistance, to the prejudice of Arsacomes, neither did he
demand it of you; but by the service you had received from him, he had reason
to believe you would not endeavor his destruction, nor had I ever offended you
so much, as to imagine you ought to seek for mine. I have done nothing (added
the Queen) that should make you think I had an intention to hurt you; nor did I
perchance seek your disadvantage, when I labored to make you prefer Prince
Arsacomes, before a Prince whose birth and merit indeed were considerable, but
he was an enemy to the King your Father, an enemy to this State, and one to
whom the Gods have left nothing of which his Ancestors possessed. If the Gods
(replied I with more boldness then ordinary) have deprived Prince Artaxerxes
of his forefathers Empire, they have left him characters which all their anger
cannot take away; they have left him a sword that can recover his dominions, as
it has defended ours, and briefly they have left him marks of what he was, and
what he still is, which can suffer no comparison with any of my fathers
subjects; if he be the son of our enemy, it is of an enemy that used the Prince
my brother as the dearest of his children; and if he be our enemy himself, he is
an enemy, Madame, without whom the King had not been now alive, without whom
Arsacomes had not been alive, without whom both you and I had either been dead
or captives, and without whom perhaps this Kingdom had been lost. The Queen
was nettled seeing me take Arsaces his part so sharply, and not being able to
dissemble it, after a blush which appeared in her face. Your affection to
Arsaces, (said she) gives you thoughts in favor of him, and to the contempt of
others, which would be very advantageous to him, if they were approved of by
the King your father; but it has pleased the Gods, his mind should be
different from yours; and though he was not unsensible of Arsaces his services
while he believed him to be his friend, nor blind to the knowledge of his good
qualities, yet was not his opinion the same with yours for the choice of him
whom he thought worthy to be your servant. That Arsacomes whom you despise so
much, was not so contemptible to him but that he destined him to the honor
which you made Darius his son to hope for, and has settled the pardon of the
offense he beleives he has reciev'd from you, in the obedience you shall
render him in favor of my Brother. The King (answered I being vexed to the very
heart at these words) cannot destine me to Arsacomes, without destining me to
my grave, and what obedience soever I owe him, death is able to give me a
dispensation. You shall not die, (replied the Queen rising from her chair) but
time will make you know what maids of yonr birth and quality owe unto their
Father, and unto their King, and how great difficulty soever you make of
submitting your self to it* you understand your self too well directly to
oppose the will of yours. After these words and some other of a feigned
civility, she went away, and left me so ill satisfied with her conversation,
that I was not settled again of all that day. I passed the next, and some
others in the same manner, till the time we were visited with Arsaces and
Theodates. Theomiris and I were in bed together, and not being able to sleep, I
was entertaining her with my ordinary disquiets, when Cyllenia who took as
little rest as we heard a knocking at the grate of my window. At first she
regarded it not, but finding it continued she leaped out of her bed, and
coming close to mine, told me of it, and asked me what I would have her do;
although I did not absolutely guess the truth, and that I believed not Arsaces
to be in Issedon, yet did I imagine it was to give me notice of something that
any body came to my window at such an hour, and in conceit I commanded Cyllena
to open it. She had no sooner done so, but she perceived two men on horsback,
one of which presently called her by her name, and was known to her by his
voice to be Arsaces. As Soon as she was certain of it, she gave him not the
leisure to discourse with her, but running to my bedside, brought me the news,
transported either with joy or with astonishment. I was strangely surprised at
it as you may well imagine, and notwithstanding the infinite desire I had to
see Arsaces again, I could not hear he was so near his enemies without being
extremely affrighted. I rose with Theomiris, and each of us taking a night
gown, we went unto that window, and made Cyllenia stay at the chamber door, for
fear we should be surprised at that conversation. I had not sooner dicover'd
Arsaces, and his friend through that gloomy night, but my fear and my affection
sharing my soul between them, made me immovable, and and also insensible; but
as soon as the too Princes knew us, they bowed down to their very saddles, and
having given us a salute full of respect, Arsaces breaking silence first,
Madame, (said he) Arsaces is yet permitted to see you again, and the Gods have
saved this prisoner, this condemned man, this fugitive, to restore him a sight
which is a thousand times more dear to him, then the liberty they had taken, or
the life they would have taken from him. He would have gone on with his his
discourse as he had begun, if I had not interrupted him. Yes Arsaces (said I)
you see me, and I see you again, but though your sight be as dear to me as you
can wish, it causes greater disquiets in me, then those your absence would make
me suffer, and if you had loved me as you are obliged to do by the last proofs
of your affection, you had kept my heart from those terrors to which you now
exspose it. You doubt not that I was as much concerned in your safety as in my
own; but you ought as little to doubt that I can see you in the danger into
which you precipitate your self, without mortal apprehensions. What? (pursued
I with the same tone) is Arsaces in Issedon, and under the Palace window?
Arsaces the sole aim of the Kings wrath and hatred, and Arsaces for whose
destruction he would hazard that of his Empire? I said a great deal more that
expressed my fear for him, but all served only to give him new marks of my
affection, and after he had quietly given me the hearing; I know no danger
(replied he) than can fright me from the sight of my Princess, and I should
have scorned my liberty, and given up my life to them that would have taken it
away, if I had believed there had been any consideration strong enough to keep
me from seeing you again. Do not therefore moderate my happiness by your too
obliging fears, but suffer me after an imprisonment which nothing but your
absence made me think unsupportable, to enjoy what was so cruely forbidden me,
and to return through the midst of all manner of dangers to that felicity for
which alone I have p^^^erv'd my self. He accompanied these with many other
passionate words, after which I received Theodates his civilities, and gave him
those wellcomes that were due to his quality, and to his deserts, and to the
good offices he had done his friend. I thanked him for Arsaces his safety, with
as much acknowledgement as possibly I could, and then I would no longer rob him
of the same advantage we enjoyed, but left him to entertain Theomiris with an
equal liberty; that Lady loved him as she was obliged by all manner of
considerations, but 'twas with so much discretion and reservedness, that the
^everest persons could not have found any thing to condemn in her affection.
The window at which we talked was so low, that the two Princes being on
horsback, could easily reach it with their hand, and though it were grated the
bars stood so far without, that we could hear one another though we spoak but
softly, and also see one another as well as the light of the stars would
suffer us. After I had ^estifi'd to Arsaces how sensible I had been of the
dangers he had run, and with what joy I had received the news of his escape, I
told him all that had happened to me since the time I had not been able to
write to him, and recounted all that you have heard, as well about the taking
of my letters, as the Kings cruel threats, the Queens visits, and all that I
had suffered for his sake. He was so passionate at that discourse, that he had
hardly patience to let me finish it, and in the answers I had made to the King
and Queen to his advantage, as likewise in the constancy I had shown to favor
him, he found so much reason to be satisfied with me, and with his fortune that
he knew not how to express the least part of his acknowledgements. Is it
possible (said he) that what I hear should be a truth, and that Arsaces should
be so happy as to attain this high degree of felicity? Ah! loss of my
Dominions; Ah! dangers that I have run; Ah! pains that I have suffered, how
gloriously are you all rewarded; and how unable is the King of Scythia to shake
so firm a fortune as mine is. Since my Princess judges me worthy of her
affection, and that in spite of such cruel rigours, and persecutions she
perseveres to keep it for me, I henceforth apprehend nothing from the power of
men, and my happiness is above the reach of all they can attempt against me.
From this he fell into such tender, and such affectionate expressions of
thanks, that it was hard to hear them, and to repent when one had done for him,
and I redoubled his contentment by all the confirmations he could desire of my
friendship. We then began all together to consult what was best to be done,
and when we had severally delivered our opinions. My design (added he) if it be
permitted for a person that is subject, and dependent to have a design, is for
some days to enjoy the happiness which now is granted me, if I can do it
without troubling, and disquieting my Princess, and when I shall have obtained
leave of my Love to be able to part from her for some time, and that by the
settling of the Kings anger I may think my passage will be a little freer, I Will
go away to the Prince my Brother, to show him the face of him he has so dearly
loved, and to take sanctuary with him against the indignation of his Father. I
hope for all things from his friendship, and he commands an Army, which after
him, would be at my devotion, against the rest of all mankind. I shall have no
other enemy there but Arsacomes; and if the consideration of Oroondates make me
deferr the effect of my resentments, against him, I am most certain I shall be
preferred before him in Oroondates his friendship; but if without ^ffending my
dear Brother, I may be sufferr'd to let them loose, I shall find ways enough
to free my self of a rival, who has made, and who perhaps would yet make the
greatest part of all my miseries; neither ought he to hope that he can enjoy
his life, with his ambition of serving Berenice, and though I fear not he
should be able to shake the constancy of my Princess, I ought however to punish
him for the pains and persecutions he has made her suffer. This was Arsaces
his intention, part whereof I approved, and laboring to divert the violence of
the rest, I would needs moderate his spleen against Arsacomes, by the promise I
made him, that all his endeavors should never serve for any thing but to make
him the more odious to me. I will not trouble you Brother, with all the
particulars of our conversation, that discourse would be too long, since it was
not much shorter then the night; In brief, judging that the day began to draw
near, I dismissed Arsaces, after having confirmed him by all manner of
protestations, in the hope he had of my constancy, and after having given him
leave to take the same opportunities for a like entertainment, while he could
stay at Issedon with any safety. This design was put in execution, and I saw
him many times in the same manner, without either being surprised or troubled
by any encounter, and Arsaces at my urgent entreaties was so careful to keep
himself concealed, that his being in Issedon was never so much as suspected. In
the interim the King was so extremely vexed at the shame he thought he had
received, that his discontent mode rated, or rather stifled all the joy he
ought to have received, for the happy proceedings of my Brothers Army. He had
heard of his victory over Zopirio, and afterward of the taking of many Towns,
which either by force or gentleness, he had brought under his obedience; but
he hardly appeared any way sensible of those successes, which in another season
would have found him very ready to bear a part in the public joy. But he
received no small surcharge to his affliction, when by an express that came
from Arsacomes, he heard how Prince Oroondates had lest the Army, the cause of
his departure being unknown to every body, as likewise the place whether he was
gone. He delivered him a letter which my Brother had written to Arsacomes*
whereby he resigned the army into his command, and gave up into his hand, the
charge the King had imposed upon him. This news cast the King into furious
redoublings of his anger, but it was raised to the extremity, when that
Messenger delivered him a Cabinet which my Brother had forgotten, in which
amongst many other papers there had been found the information Theodates gave
him of the life, fortune, and imprisonment of Artaxerxes. The reading of that
letter, produced many several effects in him, for if it made him judge that
Oroondates had till then been innocent of the treacherous designs whereof he
accused Artaxerxes, it made him also believe that it was that advertisement
that made him leave his army, to go to that dear friend, and to join with him
against his fathers service. Neither was he without some suspicion, that
Oroondates had cunningly left that letter, to make it be believed that the
designs and person of Arsaces had been unknown to him, and to gain the more
facility by that device, to effect the plotts they had continued together. But
howsoever it were, the King could not fix upon any of these opinions, without
finding cause to redouble his wrath and hatred against Artaxerxes, nor did he
neglect any thing that could serve toward his revenge, and seeing that the
Gods, or his ill fortune had made him 'scape out of his hands, he sought out
all the ways to mischief him that could fall into his imagination. He caused
many manifests to be drawn, and sent into all the quarters of his Kingdom,
wherein he accused him of treason, and of a conspiracy against his life,
exhorted all his subjects to endeavor his destruction, and the more strongly
to invite them to it, promised five hundred talents to whosoever should bring
him his head. The news of this cruelty and malice of the Kings, drove Arsaces
into resentments which were like to have made him go beyond those
considerations, which till then he had preserved toward his person. Ah! (said
he) why must this barbarous man be the father of Berenice, and Oroondates, and
why is it not permitted me to revenge* with the blood of so cruel an enemy,
the ungrateful designs he has against my life, and the wrong he would do my
reputation? After these words, he returned again to himself, and repenting that
he had spoken to them, asked me pardon, and protested, he never would fall any
more into those violent thoughts against my father. And indeed till then, he
endeavored to force himself to patience, but he utterly lost it, at the last
effects of the Kings indignation.

How great compliance soever the King had till then showed to Stratonice, yet
had he never resolved to marry me to Arsacomes, and though he was driven to it
by the considerations of his love, and by the Queens eternal persecutions, his
ambition, and some remainder of his affection to me, made him repugnant to that
alliance; but when once he began to loose the hope of taking revenge upon
Arsaces by any other way, he overcame the remnant of his love to me, and
believing he could not afflict his enemy more sensibly, then by giving me to
his rival, he resolved absolutely upon the marriage. He had heard was nothing
more to do in the Country, where Arsacomes was with his army, and having
determined that he should return with his forces, he sent an express to him
with orders to bring him back, and with a letter which he wrote to him, the
words whereof were to this purpose.

The King of Scythia to Prince Arsacomes.
Since you are the only man worthy of my friendship, and of my alliance, I
intend that you shall have them both; come therefore Arsacomes, to receive the
recompense that expects you as well for the services I have received from you;
as for those you have rendered Berenice; from hence forward she shall be yours,
and all the difficulties you have found in winning her, shall yield to the
authority of her Father* and of her King.


He showed this letter to diverse of the Court, and published his resolution to
every body, to the end Arsaces might come to hear of it and feel the sorrow he
prepared for him. He would needs also give me my share of it, and the next day
after the departure of that fatal messenger, he came into my chamber, and
bearing the marks of his cruel intention in his forehead, put me into as
great a fear as I could possibly be capable of. He took not so much leisure as
to sit down for the short visit he meant to make me, but looking upon me with a
severer eye then ever he had done before, Berenice, (said he) hitherto I have
been too favorable to you, but you too unworthily abused my indulgence,
therefore now know my last intentions, and dispose your self once for all to
marry Arsacomes I give you as much time to resolve upon it, as will be
necessary for his voyage hither, but I declare to you that he shall be your
husband, from the very day of his arrival. Though I was infinitely surprised
at this strange discourse, yet did I call up all the courage I had, to make
reply to that severe proposition of the Kings, and looking upon him with an eye
that was more animated then ordinary. I will obey you Sir, (said I) to the last
minute of my life; but my death I hope shall free me from the obedience I owe
you. You shall have leave to die (replied the King) if you prefer death before
Arsacomes but you shall never obtain a more favorable election. He stayed not
for my answer, but going out of the room left me in the condition you may judge
I was reduced to by that cruel threat; Truly it was a very lamentable one, and
Theomiris and Cyllenia, had never been more sorrowfully employed about me, then
they were all the rest of that day. I would have dissembled my grief to
Arsaces, whom I was to see that night, and I prayed my Cosen not to tell him
of that visit of the Kings, but 'twas impossible for me to hold my resolution,
and as soon as ever I saw him, my tears broak forth in such abundance, that
before I was able to speak, he was but two well instructed in my misfortune;
wherefore I was forced to confess it to him, after the tears that had betrayed
me, and seeing he suspected something more fatal, I was fain to tell him all I
knew, both of the Kings message to Arsacomes, and of the cruel command I had
received from his own mouth. Arsaces never appeared so terrible to me as at
that killing news, and I do not wonder, his enemies should think him so
dreadful in fight, since in the anger I saw him at that time, I could not but
be afraid of him my self. Yet did he all that possibly he could to master it
before me, and when he had a little conquered that first fury, which made him
fly into an extremity of rage against the Kings violent proceeding, and that he
had kept silence for a few moments. It Is too long deferred, (added he)
Arsacomes must die, and the blood of that unworthy favorite must pay for the
Kings tyranny, and for his own. Oppose not this just resolution, Madam, with
unjust commands; my obedience in this encounter would be cowardice, and in the
extremity we are now reduced to, I ought to be exempted from it. The King does
but vainly prepare a marriage for him, to which he has unworthily pretended,
neither am I so forsaken of the Gods, or men, no nor of my own courage which
hitherto has served me faithfully enough, but that I can make that rival fall
at the head of his army. The King of Scythia perhaps shall find that the
remembrance of Arsaces is not yet extinguished in the Court of Scythia, and I
hope it shall be with his own forces that I Will oppose his unjust and
tyrannical designs. These were Arsaces his words, and I saw him so fixed upon
that resolution, that I had not the confidence to oppose it with all the power
I had over him. Yet did I strive to pacify him as much as possibly I could,
and alleged all the reasons I thought capable to divert his purpose. I loved
not blood, and could have wished to be rid of Arsacomes otherwise then by his
death, and besides I saw such great and manifest dangers to Arsaces in that
enterprise, that it was hard to hope for a favorable issue of it. I
represented it to him as well as I was able, and endeavored to touch him by
the consideration of my fears for the evident peril of his life. He having
ever been very ready to comply with my entreaties, strove to appear more
moderate, and having protested he would make his inclinations yield to mine as
much as he could possibly, he left me in some belief that I had obtaind what I
desired of him. I passed the rest of that day in those disquiets which that
uncetainty causd in me; but in the night, at the hour when I expected him, I
only received a letter by one of Theodates his servants, the words whereof
were these,

Arsaces to the Princess Berenice.
I depart, Madame, since my honor, since my repose will not suffer me to
remain longer near you, and perchance I shall not return to you again, till I
am freed of a rival, and revenged of an enemy: Remember your faithful
Arsaces; and if it please the Gods he die in this interprise, suffer him not to
die also in your memory.


The reading of these words did infinitely augment my grief, and put me again
into my former apprehensions. I began to be afflicted for his absence, and to
tremble for the dangers into which he was going to expose himself. What
likelihood is there (said I to Theomiris and Cyllenia) that he can attempt to
kill Arsacomes at the head of his army, without perishing himself in the
design? Ah! without doubt, Cosen, we shall never see him more, and his despair
will make him so far to neglect the means of his safety, that he by his own
ruin will secure the pretensions of Arsacomes. I afflicted my self on this
manner, notwithstanding all the consolations I received from Theomiris, and
could never be cured of my fears during all the time he continued in that
journey. But Brother, I think I am at the end of the recital you demanded of
me, and if you desire to know the wonderful events of Arsaces his voyage, you
may learn them much better from himself then me, who am little capable of
relating such adventures as those you are going to hear from him. It is just,
fair Princess, (replied Arsaces) that I should ease you of that pains, and you
out of your goodness have given me rest enough, to be able to finish this
narration. Arsaces held his peace at these words, and when he had thought a
while of the discourse he was to make, he proceeded in these terms.

As Soon as I had left the Princess, and that I was retired with Theodates, I
made that dear friend acquainted with my resolution of departing the next
night, to go to Arsacomes, and either give him his death in the middle of his
troops, or put an end by mine own, to all the pains to which I saw my self
condemned. Theodates was amazed at that design, but he argued not much against
it, and only told me he would run my fortune, and that into what peril soever
I exposed my self, he never would forsake me while he lived: These tender
proofs of his friendship, did infinitely redouble mine, and not having the
power to refuse his company in such an enterprise, especially seeing there was
no more safety for him in Issedon then for me, and that in what part of Scythia
soever he could be, his abode would still be dangerous, because besides what he
had done to favor my escape, the letter which had come to the Kings eye, and
which was known to be his hand, had exceedingly aggravated his displeasure
against him, I consented to let him go along with me, and expose himself with
me to all the dangers which in probability we went to encounter. That day we
gave order to get good arms, and good horses, and other things that were most
necessary for us; but we would take no other company along with us except
Criton who had already well reover'd his wounds, Theodates his squire, and two
of his servants to take care of our horses and arms, beleiving that a greater
train would but make our passage the more difficult, and the more easily
discover us. I wrote those few words to my Princess which she repeated to you,
and though her absence was the greatest misfortune I was sensible of in that
attempt, yet would I go away without seeing her for fear she should oppose my
intention with her absolute authority. I gave my letter into the hands of a
trusty servant of Theodates, and when a good part of the night was spent, we
took horse, and going out of the Town, put our selves into a way that was not
unknown to those that attended us. By good fortune we had no river to pass that
was not fordable, nor no Town in our passage which we could not avoid, sending
only Theodates his servants through them, to buy such provisions as we needed.
This did much facilitate our voyage, and we performed it without any encounter
that was able to cross our purpose. But before we came to the army, I thought
fit to discover the bottom of my design to Theodates, and to that end. Do not
believe (said I) that my resolution proceeds totally from my despair, and that
my enterprise for all it is so hazardous is without some beam of hope, grounded
upon a great deal of reason. The Army now under Arsacomes, is the same you know
that I commanded against the Tauro-Scythians, in the country of the
Agatirsians, and afterward against Armibas; 'twas with it we obtained some
victories against the King of Scythia's enemies; There is no commander among
those Troops whom I have not obliged by some particular courtesy; there is
hardly any soldier whose face and name is not known to me, and never did any
General receive more testimonies of affection from his men then I from them
while we marched together. This remembrance makes me hope for favor amongst
them, though I should come to be so unfortunate, as to have ill success in my
design against Arsacomes his person; and for all he is their General,
perchance he will have much ado to find more friends then I among them. You
have reason to believe it, (answered Theodates) and as I can assure you, that
your memory is still dearer to them then you can imagine; I can also tell you,
that by reason of Arsacomes his pride, and of his haughty carriage, all the
soldiers and all the Officers have a great aversion to him, and I am
confident, they never submitted to his command without a great deal of
unwillingness. These words of Theodates redoubled my hopes, and in the mean
time we advanced toward the army, with as much speed as the compasses we were
fain to take would suffer us, and we found it sooner then we expected. The
Kings messenger had made very great have, and had been arrived there many
days, and Arsacomes who with such lofty hopes, had received so pleasing an
order, had raised his camp from the banks of Boristhenes, and was returning
straight to Issedon, with as long marches as he could. He by order from the
King had left five or six thousand men upon the frontier, which he had put in
garrison, in some of those Towns that had been recovered, and the rest of the
army was about eighteen, or twenty thousand. It was along the bank of the river
Hypanis that we saw the first battalions march, and riding with our beavers
down, we passed without doubt, among the first that saw us, for horsemen of
their army; we wore nothing upon our Arms that could discover our quality, they
were very good, but not enriched with any ornament, that could make them be
taken notice of, and we had made choice of such, that we might have the liberty
of passing every where with less danger of being known. I had taken no
particular order about my design, but had only resolved to lay hold of the
first occasion Fortune should offer me to fight with Arsacomes, or kill him if
I could do it upon even terms and without any baseness; but see how she
behaved her self in that adventure, and admire her capriciousness in one of
the strangest events you ever heard.

One part of the army was already passed, when I saw Arsacomes appear at the
head of a good number of Commanders, among which I knew the good old
Cleorestes, Leotaris and some other of those friends I had greatest confidence
in. He was completely armed, (as you know it is the custom among the Scythians
never to go without there arms upon a march, or in passing upon any duty of
their Command) but his beaver was up, and he was easy to be known by many
other marks. As Soon as ever I saw 'twas he, my resentments awakened in such
manner, that I no longer was master of them, and though in appearance I could
not take a more unseasonable time for my satisfaction, I was not capable of all
necessary considerations, and moreover I believed that in the extremity I was
reduced to, and in the nature of the cause that moved me, I could not stand
considering, nor seek ways to facilitate my enterprise, and be cautious of my
safety, without cowardice. In this conceit turning toward Theodates; Dear
Theodates (said I) I can no longer deferr the execution of my design, stir not
till you see I have need of your assistance, and then do what you shall think
convenient. I harken'd not to what Theodates alleged to dissuade me from my
rash intent, but advancing toward Arsacomes I drew near him without any
difficulty. I saluted him bowing to my saddle bow, and speaking to him without
putting up my beaver; Sir, (said I) may I have a word or two with you in
private, to inform you of a thing of great importance for the Kings service?
Arsacomes ac^us'd me of unmannerliness, or folly, for having spoken to him
without discov'ring my face, and looking upon me with an arrogant fashion, he
asked me who I was. You shall know, Sir, (answered I) and with my name, shall
also learn the business I have to impart to you, if you please to withdraw
about an hundred paces from this company that is about you. With these words I
tur'nd my horse and rode toward the place whither I desired to draw him, and
though they that were present would have persuaded him not to follow me, and
told him that by so doing he should injure his dignity, yet being (as indeed he
was) valiant, and desirous of glory, he believed that distrust would show a
want of spirit. In that opinion he commanded them to march on, and forbidding
them to follow him, he came galloping after me, and passing by the place where
I had stopped, went five or six hundred paces from his men. I overtook him in an
instant, and he turning toward me as soon as I drew near. Speak now (said he) at
liberty, and since no body overhears thee, tell me who thou art, and what thou
have to communicate to me for the Kings service. I thought I might satisfy
part of his demand by letting him see my face, and for that purpose thrusting
up my bever of my cask, I am Arsaces (answered I) and and that name alone thou
may learn all I have to say to thee. Arsacomes was so surprised at these
words and at the unexpected sight of my face, that for all he had a great deal
of courage he changed color, and appeared as unmovable as a statue. I would
not take advantage of his amazement, but to give him leisure to recover it.
Come to thy self again Arsacomes (said I) and know him, whom neither the King
of Scythia's ingratitude, nor thine, has been able to ruin. I live still in
spite of his orders, and in spite of thine, and I live to dispute Berenice with
thee, endeavor to defend thy pretensions with thy life, and make thy self
worthy by that action, of what neither thy birth nor thy services have been
able to merit. Thou can never hope to possess her quietly while Arsaces is
alive, and though ought to dispatch him out of the world if thou will free
thy self of a more fortunate rival, and of an irreconcilable enemy. My birth
is now well enough known to thee* to believe thou shall not wrong thy dignity
by this combat, nor is there so little honor to be gotten with Arsaces, but
that thou may reckon this encounter as one of the most glorious of thy whole
life. By these words I strove to draw him to a greater distance from his
troops, yet he would go but very little further, and having settled himself
while I was speaking, after he had looked upon me with a more resolute
countenance then before. Yes (said he) I am ready to dispute Berenice with
thee, and since thou have escaped the justice of the King her father, I shall
be glad to revenge his quarrel, and make my sword the instrument of that death
which thou ought to have suffered for the defense of thy country. This
cruel reproach to which I saw my self unhappily exspos'd* raised my anger to
the highest pitch, and seeing that Arsacomes put his hand to the hilt of his
sword without moving any further, I drew mine with all the have I could, and
making it glitter in his eyes, quickly showed him that to give me my death was
not so easy a matter as he imagined. I believed I had not much time to satisfy
my revenge, and that I should soon have part of the army upon me, wherefore
desiring to shorten that combat with an extraordinary have, I flew at Arsacomes
with more fury then judgment, and with two fortunate blows gave him two wounds,
one in the body, the other in the right arm, which disabled him to fight, and
put him in such disorder, that rushing fiercely against him at the same time, I
threw him headlong out of his saddle upon the ground. Though the sight of our
combat had already made a good many of those that beheld it come running
toward us, I had time enough to have slain Arsacomes if I had had a mind to
it, but how great interest soever I had in his death, I was not able to give it
him, being he was no longer in a condition to defend himself, and seeing some
of the officers of the army come thundering at me, I advanced a little toward
them, with a purpose to make my self known, and with a hope to moderate their
resentments by the sight of my face. I found more facility in it then I
expected, by the prudence of Theodates, for he no sooner had seen them stir,
but casting of his helmet, and showing them his bare head, he made toward them
with all possible speed, crying. O Cleorestes, O Leotaris, whither run you?
it is Arsaces, your General, and your best friend. The name of Arsaces often
reiterated, slackned their speed, and turning toward him that spoak it, they
knew him to be Theodates, to whom they bore a particular respect, and
affection. They were seized with a mavelous astonishment when I coming up to
them with my sword in my hand, and my head quite unarmed, do you come, (cried
I) dear friends, to take away the life of Arsaces? if it be so, I refuse not
death, nor can I receive it from more welcome hands, then those of my ancient
friends, and of my valliant companions. These words and the sight of my face,
stopped them short at first, and put them into a wonderful irresolution; but
within a while after they made all other considerations yield to their
affection, and putting up their swords they came to me with an intention very
different from that which before had drawn them. This accident had stayed the
march of the army, and all the Officers leaving their places, with part also of
the soldiers, ran thronging to that spectacle, but the name of Arsaces which
spread from one to another through the whole Army, presently stilled all their
resentments, and wakening in them the remembrance of the ardent love they had
born me, they ran all about me, to take my part against Arsacomes his servants,
and particular friends, Cleorestes was the first who finding the affection of
the soldiers, and incited to it by his own, got before all the rest and cried,
Long live our General Arsaces, and may his enemies perish. Leotaris seconded
him in his cries and in his action, and immediarely the name of Arsaces ecchoed
through all the plain, I was almost overturned with the crowd of Officers, and
soldiers, some asked to see their General Arsaces, and some pressed to salute
me. I stretched forth my hands and embraced them one after another, and calling
them by their names I made them see I had dearly preserved their remembrance.
By little and little I was encompassed by the whole army, and was fain to go
all about without my cask, and to show my self to those that were furthest off,
who with loud cries demanded the sight of their General. Never was there any
change of this nature so sudden, nor so wonderful as that and all that my most
affectionate friends could have wished to my advantage, would not have come
near to what Fortune did for me in that encounter. In the same place where a
few minutes before I had been alone against an enemy that commanded a powerful
army, I saw my self triumphant, I saw my self adored, and I saw my self
absolute over twenty thousand men, whose arms and lives were at my devotion.
Let Arsaces (cried they confusedly) take the command of us again, and let him
lead us over all the world to serve him, we will obey no body but him, and all his
enemies shall be ours. Only Arsacomes his friends and servants terrified with
this alteration, too weak to show how they resented it, and perchance being in
fear of their lives, affer'd not to come near me, but in all that confusion, I
was not forgetful of Master, and being very confident he was not dead, I
prayed Cleorestes if they had not done it already, that he would cause him to
be taken from the place where he was, and make as careful endeavors be used
for his recovery, as I could have desired for my own. After I had given this
order, I entreated those that stood near to afford me a little audience, and
having obtained silence with much ado I spoak to the Principal Officers who
came round about me, and to as many of the rest as were within hearing. My dear
and generous friends (said I) you by whom alone the name of Arsaces has gained
all the honor it can boast of* you by whom I am now alive, and briefly, you to
whom with my glory, and with my life, I owe all, and will acknowledge all; I
should be unworthy of this affection which is my chiefest happiness, if I could
abuse it, and if I should make use of your goodness for the defense of an
unjust quarrel and a quarrel wherein you your selves had not some interest.
That which you had done for the King of Scythia, and that which I had done for
him with your assistance, was not so inconsiderable, that instead of
recompenses he should give us shackles, he should give us punishments, and that
after having unworthily wronged your General in his person and in his
reputation, after having made him languish in a hard captivity* he should send
him executioners cruelly to tear away that life, which he so often had
prodigally hazzarded for his, and for the defense of his dominions. It Is true,
my birth had made me criminal in his opinion, and if your thoughts are not
more generous then his, it will likewise make me so in yours; but though I
should endanger this life which I hold from you, I can no longer be able to
disemble the truth, and into what necessity soever I can be reduced, I never
will require services from persons to whom I am not known. It is true, my
friends, if you can be so after my declaration I make to you, it is true, I
heretofore was Artaxerxes the dear brother, and the faithful friend of your
Prince Oroondates; but Darius his son, and Matheus his enemy; you are not
ignorant what my family and I have done against you; but if you have found,
that in what I have done for this Kingdom at the head of you, I have preserved
the hatred of an enemy, I shall not think it strange if you follow the example
of your King, and if according to the intention he had to do so, you take away
a life which you have newly given me, nor had I kept it hitherto but in hope to
recover by your assistance, part of that honor, and part of that Empire which
I lost while I was fighting here for yours; but I Am only to blame to say I kept
my life only for that, no my valiant fellow soldiers, I kept it also for
Berenice, and if my being in this country has been any way advantageons to
the Scythians, they owe it to the love I bear their Princess. I served her in
serving you, she has been pleased to approve my services, and I thought I had
rather merited her, then that ignominious death the King would give me; but
while he sends me poison, and presents me with a dagger to be my own
executioner, he also takes Berenice from me to bestow her upon Arsacomes, and
it is by that way alone he deprives me of a life which I defended in spite of
all his jaylours, and his hangmen. He in favor of that favorite, cruelly
forces the inclinations, and unnaturally imprisons the person of that
Princess, as he not long ago did the person of your Prince, and by that
violence has driven the miserable Arsaces, either to find a death in the
amidst of all your swords, or to kill Arsacomes at the head of all his
Troops, and to demand of those very Troops the happiness which his enemies
unjustly would rob him of. Behold, dear friends, what I ought to fear, and
what I ought to hope for from you; if you will have me live as Arsaces, I
demand Berenice of you; and if you will have me dye as Artaxerxes, I freely
offer you my breast, and desire not to conserve that life against your wills,
for which I must confess my self indebted to you. I had not made an end of
these words, when there arose a confused noise amongst the Soldiers, which at
first might have been enough to beget fear in a person that had been much in
love with his life, but I had not the leisure to be stricken with it, for I
presently understood the resolution of all that multitude. The recital of this
adventure is indeed shameful to the King of Scythia, since among so many
thousand men, of mean and obscure birth, there were none whose thoughts were
not more full of gratitude then his, and whose knowledge of my real quality was
able to blot out the remembrance of the obligations they believed they had to
me. Let him be Arsaces, (cried they) or let him be Artaxerxes, he is still our
General, he is the friend, he is the brother of our Great Prince, we have no
more war now against the Persians, and we are so much the more obliged to
Prince Artaxerxes, if for all he is a Persian, he has given us such
testimonies of affection, as we never received from any of our own Countrymen.
Let him lead us (said they presently after) whither his interests call him, let
him lead us to the conquest of Berenice, and to the revenge of those high
wrongs he has received, we will serve him without any distinction of enemies,
and will never put any difference between his and ours. These words, and many
others that were to the same sense were often repeated through the whole Camp,
and by a thousand resounding cries, and a thousand extraordinary actions, all
the Commanders, and all the Soldiers, testified that they longed for nothing so
ernestly as the occasion of going to fight for my quarrel. I cannot but
acknowledge that I felt an excessive joy at so favorable an event: I could not
keep my self from having great resentments against the King, who after his
unworthy usage of me, and the cruel design he had showed to take away my life
in an ignominio^s manner, had set my head at a price, and ran to all the
extreamityes against me, that are wont to be used against the basest
male-factors, and against the greatest Traitors to a Kingdom. This remembrance
thrust me upon the design of revenging my self against him with his own arms,
and of making him know that a Prince dispossessed of his Dominions, was not yet
so weak, nor so forsaken, but that he could in the heart of his territoryes,
destroy that peack which he himself had settled. My love joined it self to my
anger with a more absolute power, and my desire of revenge was nothing nere so
strong, as that of obtaining Berenice, I was desirous therefore for the
Satisfaction of both, to make use of the happiness that offered it self to
me, and thought I ought not to neglect a fortune, which I should never recover
again while I sen'd, if I should suffer it to escape, with this intent showing
a more cheerful countenance to the Commanders, and Soldiers then before;
Generous friends, (said I) I know not how to oppose the effects of your
goodness, nor refuse the advantageous offers you make me; since you desire it,
I entitle you to my interests, and with a confidence like that of yours, I put
my life and fortune into your hands, I henceforth will acknowledge nothing but
from you, and since you are pleased I should again take up the honor I had
hereto fore amongst you, I obey, with a protestation that I never will abuse it
while I live, and that demanding nothing of you but a mistress, I will
always own you for my Masters and for my protectors. After these words, I
rode about every where amongst them, and as I received the oath which the
Officers voluntaryly made to me, I embraced them, and almost all the Soldiers
after them. This ceremony being ended I fell into great expressions of
kindness to Cleorestes, Leotaris, and the rest of my particular friends, and
Theodates who was extremely beloved and much considered amongst them, received
a thousand civilityes from them, and a thousand praises for the affection he
had showed to me we encamped that day in that very place, and that situation
appeared very commodious for a stay of three or four days, which was not
unnecessary, to deliberate about the managing of my affairs. In the mean time
Arsacomes was in his tent, attended as if he had been in his better fortune;
his wounds were found to be neither great nor dangerous, and the Chirurgions
promised his cure in a few days; he wanted nothing but liberty, which in that
condition would have been useless to him, and my friends knowing how highly it
concerned me to keep him fast, had taken care to set guards upon him. They
judged with reason that I could not assure my self of Berenice; but by keeping
Arsacomes, and that as long as he was in my power, the king could not force
Berenice to marry him. Within a few days, though he was not absolutely cured,
yet was he able to endure a litter, and I heard by those that waited on him,
that his captivity was his most sensible discontent. How great interest so ever
I had to keep him, I scorned to make use of that advantage which I held from
fortune, and since he had escaped my sword, I believed my self obliged in
honor, to restore him a liberty, which he had lost only by the defection of
his army. To this consideration I added that if he was generous; he would
remember my carriage toward him, and that as I had not abused his captivity to
concern Berenice, so neither would he perhaps abuse his liberty to take her
from me. All my friends, and Theodates himself opposed my intention, and judged
it contrary to all the Laws of prudence; but they were not able to shake my
resolution, and after having prayed them to give me leave in this encounter
which concerned no body but my self, to make use of the power they had given
me, I went to Arsacomes, whom I had not seen since he was wounded. Although
the power I had over him, stifled all my anger, I could not see him without
being moved, and I observed he changed color at my coming in; but not desiring
any long conversation with him, I quickly told him the cause of my visit, and
took away all those apprehensious he might have had. Arsacomes (said I) I come
not hither to reproach you with the injuryes you have done me, I endeavored to
revenge them by away which you have escaped, and all others were too
dishonorable for me to use. I will not take any advantage against you, by what
the army has done in favor of me, and when you are well enough to endure a
journey, you shall be free; to go away at your own time. I know I give my self
death, in giving you liberty, and that you will make no other use of it then to
deprive me of that Princess, who is the cause of all our differences; but that
knowledge is not able to alter my design; go see Berenice again when you
please, but remember that a generous man ought to winn her affection rather by
his services, then by her fathers authority, and that the recompense you owe to
what I now do for you, is not to suffer Berenice to be forced. Arsacomes was
going to reply, but I hearkened not to his answer, not desiring to hold any
long discourse with him, wherefore going out of his tent, I commanded the
Soldiers that guarded him, to retire. He without any further delay, made use of
the favor I had done him, and the next morning causing himself to be put into
a litter, which Prince Oroondates had left at the army, and which he had used
during the cure of those wounds he had received in the Battle, he went on his
way toward Issedon, but went full of threats, and full of resentment, not of
the favor, but of the injury he had received from me. I stayed a few days
after his departure upon the banks of the River Hypanis, not being willing to
fly to extreamityes against the father of Berenice, and Oroondates, without
having well deliberated the matter, and without having used all the caution
that might free me from blame in the opinions of my Princess, and of my
friends. For this purpose, retarding the motion of the army, and making but
very short marches toward Issedon, before I engaged myself in a war to which I
was instigated by my love, I desired to let the King see I was Master of my
resentments, how just soever they were, and therefore I dispatched away a
messenger with a letter to him, the words whereof were these.

Arsaces To the King of Scythia.
I will not put you in mind, Sir, what I have done for you, and what you have
done against me. It suffices that you remember you are beholding to me for your
life, and for the security of your Kingdom; and that for my recompense you
sent me a dagger and a draught of poison; you have prosecuted me as the basest
of all malefacters, and set my head at a price, as that of a traitor, and of
an infamous person: This usage must needs be very sensible to a Prince, whose
quality is not inferior to your own, but it is supportable to Arsaces, from
the father of Berenice, and Oroondates, and if yet you stop the course of your
crueltyes, I will lay down the authority I have found in the place where I
only sought for Sanctuary against your persecutions. I demand no Satisfaction
for the wrongs you have done me, and though perhaps I am in a condition to
right my self, I will forget them all, as you have forgot my services, provided
you remember that the Princess Berenice is your Daughter, and that you force
not her inclinations, in favor of a man, whom if I would, I could have made to
loose his pretensions with his life. She is of a birth not fit to be used with
violence for a subject, and mine is not so despicable as to make her blush for
having preferred me before Arsacomes. Perchance you may have some consideration
of it, and if all generosity be not utterly extinguished in the heart of a
King, you will remember, I am still that same Arsaces, who has lost your
freindship onley by his misfortune, but who gaind it by his blood and by his
services*


The man I sent to the King with this letter, arrivid at Issedon two days
after Arsacomes, and found the King in troubles, and in passions which it would
be impossible to describe. He partly showed them by his usage of my messenger,
whom he caused to be hanged as soon as he had read my letter. And not doubting
but this last offense, and his cruel obstinacy, would utterly take away that
remainder of respect I yet bore toward him, he gave order to raise men, and
endeavored to gather such forces as might enable him to defend himself. He had
received Arsacomes as his son, and after having comforted him for the
disgrace he had received, by all the sweetest hopes he could possibly give him,
he had presented him to the Princess as her husband, and had given her no
longer time to resolve upon that marriage then till he were perfectly recovered
of his wounds which they hoped he would be within a very few days. Let not thy
Artaxerxes think (said he to her) to terrify me by the infidelity of my
subjects, the traitors that serve him shall perish with him, and thou shallt
see his destruction, as he shall see thy marriage. The sorrowful Princess
answered those threatinings only with her tears, and when she was forced to
reply. It is not my desire, Sir, (said she) that Arsaces should return in
arms, to take Satisfaction for the injuries you have done him; and though I
should be freed by those ways I know well enough what I owe to you, never to
give my self to him without your consent, but it shall never be with mine that
Arsacomes shall be my husband, nor can you give me to him, without giving me to
my grave. You are unworthy, (replied the King) I say you are unworthy of his
constancy toward you, and if he were not blinded with affection, for all you
are a Kings Daughter, he would despise you for your indiscreet, and obstinate
fondness of his rival. If he were generous himself (added the Princess) he
would remember the favor he received from his enemy, and would consider that
if Arsaces his virtue, had not carried it above his interests, and above his
anger, he would have sacrificed a life so fatal to his own, and a life which
he before had saved. She used almost the same discourses to Arsacomes, when he
went about to entertain her with his passion, and as confident as he was, she
sometimes made him blush with reproach. In the mean time I was ignorant of my
Messengers destiny, and had advanced but little toward the Town looking for his
return, but I expected it in vain, and heard no news of him but in the
manner I am going to tell you.

Having put my life into the hands of the Scythians, I took but little care
what guard was kept about my person, but they all of them took a great deal,
and with an extreme affection testified how much they were concerned in the
safety of it: yet one night when we were encamped by a wood side, some five or
600 furlongs from the River Hypanis, the Soldiers that were upon the watch, did
not so well perform what their Officers had given them in charge, but that a
little before day, two men cutting the backside of my tent, and easily making a
hole wide enough to affor'd them passage, came without difficulty into my
chamber: By good chance, I was wont while I lay in the field, to have candles
always burning by me, and was by their light that those fellows having
observed all the parts of my chamber drew nere to my bedside to execute their
resolution. They were beginning to pull open my curtains, when by some noise
they made in that action, I wakened in a start, and presently looking about, I
spyed those two men with their swords in their hands, in a posture which made
me sufficiently know their wicked design. A sudden cry I gave at sight of
those villains, frighted them so, that I had leisure to leap out of bed, yet
seeing me without arms they recovered courage, and went to prosecute their
intent of taking away my life; but I was already gotten on the far side of a
table, which saved me from their first blows, and had caught up a sword,
wherewith I thought I should be able to dispute my life against them; nor was I
deceived in my belief, for with the first thrust I made, I ran it up to the
hilts in the breast of him that was next me, and laid him dead at the feet of
his companion. The other was so terryfyed at that execution, that he lost heart
and seeking the hole he came in at, endeavored to have saved himself by
flight, but I opposed his passage, and presenting him the point of my sword,
stay, miscreant (said I) stay, and since thou have dared to venture upon so
great a design, see if thou be able to make an end of it. The cowardly
wretch was quite daunted at these words, and throwing down his sword, fell upon
his knees before me. Ah! Sir (said he) if you be that great, that generous
Arsaces, who can pardon as well as conquer, give me my life. Thou shall have
it, (said I) though thou have not deserved it, but tell me --. I was going to
proceed, when those that lay nere my chamber, being wakened with that noise,
came running in one after another, and finding me with my sword in my hand, a
man upon his knees before me, and another breathing out his life with his
blood, which ran all about the floor; they fell into a great admiration;
instantly they drew their swords, but I commanded them not to stir, and
having told them the truth of that adventure in a few words, I examined the
fellow in their presence. He was so frighted that he was hardly able to open
his mouth, but after I had hearten'd him a little, by the promise of his life,
which I often repeated. Sir (said he) I think the cause of this attempt is not
unknown to you; the King sent us to have killed you, and besides the five
hundred talents he had offered to whosoever should bring your head, he gaind us
by particular promises of an excessive recompense.

Oroondates could not suffer Arsaces to continue his discourse, without
trembling for horror nor without detesting the cruelty, and the abominable
unworthiness of the King his father, in very resenting words, which he would
not have put an end to of a great while, if Arsaces who desired to do so to
his long narration, had not taken him off to go on with it on this manner.

The end of the Fourth Book.
The continuation of the fourth Part of CASSANDRA. The fifth Book.
BE not afflicted Brother, at my recital of the Kings cruellty, but employ
that goodness which makes you fall thus into passion against him, to pardon
the things my resentment made me undertake; which certainly, how much soever I
was concerned, and what indignityes soever I had suffered, I should never have
been overcome to do against a King that had given you your birth, if by all
his actions he had not interessed you as the most odious of all his enemies,
and had not endeavored to blot out all the characters of that respect, which
your friends would have paid him for your sake.

The attempt of this assassinate, taught me nothing that I know not, or at
least doubted not before; but it made the hair stand an end of all that heard
it, whose number was so increased, that they all ready filled my chamber.
Theodates who lay in another hard by mine, was one of the first that came
running thither, and after him, the noise of this adventure had drawn the
principal Officers of the army. All began highly to abhor the Kings
proceeding, to term him cruel, and ungrateful, and the ways he took,
unworthy of a King, and unworthy of the old down right simplicity of the
Scythians. After that the tumult was appeased, I questioned the man, and asked
him particular news concerning the King, Berenice, Arsacomes, and the
messenger I had sent. He told me how my messenger had been hanged, the things I
have all ready related to you of Arsacomes and Berenice, and the Kings final
resolution to force her to that marriage, as soon as Arsacomes was quite
recovered. I was much more sensible of this news, then I had been of the
designs they had against my life, and I resolved to oppose that violence, with
all the powers Fortune had put into my hand, and in this determination turning
toward my friends. My dear Companions, (said I) the King makes use of all
things for my destruction and so he may but ruin me, he thinks not scorn to
give himself over to all the most shameful ways that can be imagined; truly
I cannot but blush for him, remembering how passionately I have honored him,
and remembering that he is the father of my Princess, and of my friend. In
consideration of that remembrance I would pass over all the injuryes he does
me, if his crueltyes were directed to me alone, and perchance I should be
Master enough of my anger, but I cannot be so of my Love. I forgive the King
all the attempts he has made against my life; but if I may be assured of your
good wills to the utmost, I will not suffer him to execute the resolution he
has taken to sacrifice Berenice to the hatred he bears me, and (contrary to
all divine, and humane Laws,) to force a freeborn Princess, and a Princess
considerable enough to be secure from all manner of violence. We Will serve you
(replied those generous friends) what design soever you can have, and except
Oroondates our natural Prince, we will acknowledge no body, when your
interests come in question. Carry the King this news (said I turning toward
that fellow) and tell him he shall shortly have a gallanter way to kill me,
then this he employed you in. He shall see me before his walls, at the head of
this same army, wherewith I conquered his enemies, and he may procure my death
by open war, with less dishonor then by the hands of Murderers. Tell
Arsacomes that if I had please I could have hindered his marriage, that I Will
have another encounter with him for that life, which he abuses after having
received it from me, and that so long as I am in the world, he has little
reason to hope he shall possess Berenice; and if thou art so happy as to see
that Princess, and faithful enough to discharge a message to her, say that
the respect I owe her, cannot hinder me from opposing the tyranny of her father
by the way of arms, and that a whole army of valliant men will perish with me
for her quarrel, or restore her that liberty, whereof she has been unworthyly
deprived. After these words, I sent back that man, giving him a convoy to carry
him safe a good way from the Camp, though all they that were with me, urged
very ernestly to have him led to the gallows. Within two or three hours after
I made the army disencampe, and when I had told my friends my last intention,
we marched directly toward Isledon without considering any longer. We lived
upon the Kings Country, just as we had done when we marched there for his
service, and when the Towns that were in our way, sent out toward us to
learn, what they should fear, or what they should hope, I declared that I was
not their enemy, that I demanded nothing but free passage, and some small
subsistence that my Soldiers might live whom I had not means to pay, and that
if they would grant it me, I would use them as my friends, and as my brothers.
By this way we gained part of them, and all the open country, which being too
weak to oppose us, chose much rather to contribute toward the maintenance of
the army, then draw the power of it against it self. 'Twas by this order we
subsisted, and after we had furnished our selves with those things that were
most necessary for us, we prosecuted our course, and arrived without any
considerable obstacle within a days march of Isledon; what do I say, within a
days march? rather within sight of the very walls, and certain Scouts whom
the King had sent out to discover, and who hardly stayed for ours, no sooner saw
themselves charged, but they left the field, and sought their safety behind
their ramparts. I in many occasions had known the strength of the King of
Scythia, but at that time I admired at his weakness and not considering that
his choler having blinded him, had taken away the greatest part of that care,
he ought to have had for his defense, I thought the Gods, whom his last actions
had exasperated against him, had contributed to his weakness, and had opposed
the leavying of his Troops, since he had none to form a body of an army able
to keep the field against us, and that he was constrained at our approach, to
shut them up within his wailes. True it is that he was surprised by our sudden
coming, and that in the little time we gave him, the leauyes he had sent to
make in the Provinces, could not be got ready to do him service. He thought
nevertheless, that he might well enough stay for them, and that the Town
being strengthend as it was with a great number of Soldiers, might endure a
siege long enough to afford them leisure to get on foot, and to advance to his
reliese. He also doubted whither I would adventure to besiege him, and though
after the things I had done for his service, he had no reason to despise me,
yet could he not fear a man over whom he had formerly had so great a power, a
man that commanded none but Troops composed of his own subjects, and a man
that had no other foundation in the world, then that of some revolted forces;
or to say better he knew that he had the better part of me in his custody, and
that being Master of Berenice, he had the power in his hand, to make me stoop
to what conditions soever he would impose. However it were, we without
receiving any hindrance encamped within sight of the City walls, and though,
according to the usual custom, our army was not strong enough to undertake a
siege of that importance in the heart of the Kingdom, I passed over that
consideration, and belieiv'd I might make use of the disorder the King was in
to labor for the liberty of Berenice. The next day he made eight hundred horse
Sally forth upon us, under the command of Prince Carthasi's his Brother. They
broake through the first of ours very vigorously, and advanced with a great
deal of courage toward the rest, when I came in to their relief with those
men that happened to be on hors-backe with me, and our number increasing in a
little time, we gave them so smart a charge, that after a light resistance,
they turned their backs, and their fear redoubling at the name of Arsaces
which our Soldiers repeated every moment, they forsook their commander, which
a very few that stuck to him, in the middle of one of our squadrons, were but
for my arrival he had been in a great deal of danger. Those that had stayed
with Prince Carthasis, having often named him, to move our men to some respect
of his person, I cast my eyes upon him as I came in, and having known him by
several marks, I commanded all those that had encompassed him to retire, and
putting up the beaver of my Helmet, I made my self known to the Prince, and
drawing nere to him with a countenance which had nothing in it of an enemy. Ah!
Sir, (said I) is it possible that you should labor your self for the ruin of
Arsaces who has so much honored you? Carthasis discovered his face by my
example, and looking upon me with an action as obliging as mine. I never will
labor (answered he) for the ruin of Prince Artaxerxes, but he knows well
enough that I cannot disobey the king's orders, nor refuse the employments he
gives me with honor. I found that in speaking those words, he was feign to
force himself before those that were with him; and not being willing to render
him suspected by my endearments I forbore them for the same consideration. I am
your prisoner (added he) but I hope you will give me fair quarter, and my
captivity will be supportable, being fallen into the hands of so Generous an
enemy as the valliant Arsaces. You shall not only be free (replied I) but you
shall ever be master in all places where I have any power, and I would oppose
your return, to entreat you to command here among us, if I did not know you
would reject that offer, I will not engage you in a conversation that might
make the King your brother jealous of you, but will content my self with
conducting you to your gates, to repay you a part of what I received of Prince
Oroondates at our first encounter. Carthasis would not have yielded to that
civility, and even refused the liberty I offered him, but he was not the
strongest amongst us, and so was feign at last to submit to the law we had
imposed. Allthough I was not ignorant of the particular obligations I had to
him, I thought fit only to make him judge by my actions that I was not
ungrateful for them, and not to mention them before those that were with him,
who perchance might have made reports of it, that would have been
disaduantageous to him. Before we parted, after he had hearkend attentively to
the complaints I made to him of the King, I confess (said he) you have most
just occasion to resent his actions, and that he carries himself very
ingratefully, and very cruelly toward you; but in fine, what is your intention,
do you mean to uncrowne Berenice's father, and will you kill the subjects,
and possess your self of those Dominions which ought to be the inheritance of
Prince Oroondates? No, (replied I) the interests of Berenice and Oroondates,
shall ever be inseparable from mine own, and though I were excusable enough,
it I should make my self some reparation for the injuryes I have received from
a Prince who declares himself their enemy, and not their father; I have not the
least thought of such a purpose, on the contrary I much rather believe I secure
these Dominions to Oroondates, which Arsacomes, and Stratonice would supplant
him of, and in short, my utmost resolution, is that of procuring Berenice's
liberty. I only demand that she be not forced to take a husband unworthy of
her, and to let you see this is no false pretense, wherewith I would cover my
resentments, I Will lay down my arms, if you will but pass your word for the King,
that Berenice shall be free in her own intentions. I will not give you my word
for any thing (answered the Prince) which I am not able to make good: but I
promise you I will employ all the power I have with the King to work him to it,
and that within three days, I Will let you know his final determination. You
do me a favor (said I) which I durst not have demanded of you, and since
after the destiny of my last messenger, I had no way left me to learn the
Kings resolutions, I accept the offer you are pleased to make me, and conjure
you to remember it. After some other words we parted, and having brought him
within a bow shoot of the gate, I retired to our tents.

The opinion of my most passionate friends, was that I ought no longer to spare
the King, who labourd for my destruction so many ways, and who, if I gave him
the leisure, would make some or other of his enterprises take effect; but I
gave no ear to their advice, and resolved not to come to extreamityes, till
the extremity of my affairs. For this purpose, I made our Troops lie still,
and suffered them not to do any act of hostility against their countrymen,
protecting the goods, and houses, which the inhabitants of Issedon had without
the Town, and not permitting the least hurt to be done, to any thing that
belonged to them. I also set forth Manifests whereby I declared, that I was not
their enemy, that it was no intent to hurt them had made me take up arms, and
that by all my actions, I would let them see I had lost nothing of that
affection I had borne them, that I only demanded of them the liberty of their
Princess, and that I conjured them not to suffer the Daughter of their
Sovereign, and the Sister of Prince Oroondates to be forced for a man unworthy
of her, and a man who in all the favor, and authority he had enjoyed, had
never given them any testimonies of affection. To these words, I added many
others able to justify my intentions toward them, and to make some impression
in their minds, and in the mean time I expected the performance of Prince
Carthasis his promise, and begged ernestly of the Gods in some degree to
appease the Kings anger, and to give us some means to avoy'd those
misfortunes, whereinto his cruel obstinacy was going to pricipitate us. The
three days within which the Prince had promised I should hear from him were
already past, as also part of the night that followed them, and I began to
complain of his breach of word, when a little before day, they brought a man
into my tent, who presently made himself known to me for one of his servants.
Carthasis had taken care himself to get him out of the gates by his authority,
for fear he should have been searched, and the letters taken which he had
about him. As Soon as he was come in he delivered them to me, and having opened
them with great impatiency, I read these words in the first.

Prince Carthasis, To Prince Arsaces.
Sir, I have forgotten nothing, that I owe unto your freindship, and to the
remembrance of your first, and last obligations; but my most sensible grief,
is that I have had to little credit with the King as not to be able to shake
the least of his resolutions: all that endeavor to dissuade him from them,
pass in his opinion for his enemies, and I wanted but very little of being put
into that number. In fine, he will have Berenice marry Arsacomes, and though
that Princess tells him, she shall meet her funeral in that marriage, she
has no longer delay granted her then the remainder of this night and the day
following is destined without fail for those unjust and cruel Nuptials; it is
with an extreme sorrow I send you such unwelcome news; think of the means
you have to prevent it, and never doubt of my fidelity, since you are too
generous, to desire any proofs of it that are contrary to virtue.


I was so exceedingly transported at the reading of this letter, that if I had
not hoped the other was from my Princess, I should never have had the patience
to look upon it; and scarce was I able, in the rage that blinded me, to know
her lovely Characters; yet did I cast my eyes upon them, after I had kissed
them, and with inward motions that were altogether extraordinary, I read these
words.

The Princess Berenice To Prince Arsaces.
The hour of my death is nere, my dear Arsaces, and to morrow must be the day
of my funeral. I write these words, not so much to tell you this ill nerves,
as to protest to you, that I will persevere to my very grave in my first
resolution. Take comfort in a misfortune you cannot divert, and be at least
assured, that if Berenice cannot be yours, you shall never have the discontent
to see her live with Arsacomes.


It is most certain that if my anger had not strengthened me, I should have
fallen into dangerous faintings at the sorrowful reading of this letter, and
all the sensiblenesse I had ever shored in my most cruel afflictions, was a
matter of nothing in comparison of this last; and indeed I had never been so
near to my destruction, nor had I ever had so great reason to fear my utmost
misfortunes, They that saw me then, said I was so changed that it was not
possible to know me, and that I did actions so different from my ordinary
carriage, as nothing but by rage alone, could have made excusable. How (cried I
with a furious action) shall I live, and shall Berenice be in the arms of
Arsacomes? shall I stand idle at the head of twenty thousand men, while my life
is sacrificed within these walls; and briefly shall I suffer my adored
Princess to be violently taken from me, and that unworthy rival to Triumph
over my happiness, and over my reputation? Ah! no Arsacomes, thou shallt not
so easily effect so high an enterprise, I can tear away that life, for all
these ramparts, which I could have taken from thee at the the head of thy Army;
and this nuptial torch, shall without doubt be that which must light thee to
thy burial. No, King of Scythia, thou shall not have the Satisfaction, to have
so cruelly made an end of the remnants of miserable Darius, and that which thou
have not been able to do by poison, by the weapons of thy guards, and by the
swords of thy assassinates, shall not be executed by the violence thou usest
against Berenice. No, my dear Princess I Will not abandon you in the extremity
you are brought to for happy Arsaces; I say happy, since they that think they
labor for his ruin, labor for his glory, and for his fortune, and that the
constancy you show in his favor, is a thousand times more dear to him, then
all the mischiefs which his enemies prepare him can be terrible. Fear
nothing, virtuous Princess, while Arsaces is a live, and believe there are no
walls so strong, as to keep a desperate lover from coming to you. While I was
speaking these words, my tent filled with a good number of my chiefest friends,
and of the principal Officers of the Army, whom desire of hearing the news I
had received, and that of the affliction I expressed brought thither. The sight
of them comforted me very much, and not being willing longer to defer
demanding the last effect of their good will. Now it is (said I) my brave, and
generous friends, that Arsaces challenges the accomplishment of your promises;
he has but a minute more to live, unless his life be prolonged by your
assistance. All that you have done for me hither to, is but a preparative to
what I desire of you to day; and that which I desire of you to day is of such
infinite consequence, that if you will suffer me to cast my self at your feet
and embrace your knees to obtain it, you shall see me abase my self to all
manner of submissions to work upon you. Behold, (said I, showing them the
letters I had received, which Theodates began to read a loud) behold to what
estate my affairs are reduced, and how much time I have left to make use of
your freindship. You know I have deferred it as long as possibly I could, and
that even contrary to your own counsel, I have conserved a respect toward the
King of Scythia, for the loss whereof his cruelty would have dispensed with me
sufficiently. How all considerations are quenched in the despair into which he
has thrown me, and being no longer in a condition to have any of my own
safety, I must at length cast away all those that have till now imprudently
with held me. I would have said more if that company of generous men had
suffered me, and if they had not interrupted me altogether, crying that I
should lead them whither I would, and that I should presently declare what I
intended, with a perfect assurance that it should be excecuted, or that they
would all perish to the very last man. When I saw them in that courageous
resolution; My dear friends, (said I) since you will have me use that term,
to day I will assault this Town, not that I desire the ruin of it, or that I
would shed the blood of your countrymen, and of a people to which I neither can
nor will bear a hatred, but I will this day pull Berenice by mere force out
of the hands of a cruel father, and of an unworthy husband, to whom they have
destined her. For this purpose: I my self will fall on with three thousand men,
at this next gate, and having opened our passage by the violence of our Rams,
I hope I shall make my way to the Palace for the execution of my enterprise. To
make it the more feisable you my Gallant friends, must begin the storm in
three other places, which shall be assigned to three amongst you. You shall
advance with your Rams, and present your ladders; but being I desire your
assault should only serve to make a diversion, and to draw the resistance
thither, to the end I may find the more facility on the other side, you shall
not need to prosecute your attempt more obstinately then necessity will require
to amase the enemy, not desiring (as I have told you) to expose this City,
where I have a great many very dear friends, to the utmost calamityes and
misfortunes which usually accompany the taking of places by force. Go
therefore, if you please, to prepare, and put all things in the readynesse that
will be needful for this design, but I conjure you let it be done with all
the have that can be possible and since it is upon it alone my life depends, as
you desire the Gods should favor you take some care for the safety of him,
whom you have judged worthy of your freindship. Leotaris with two thousand men
shall attacque the Gate of the Issedons; Cleorestes with a like number that of
Serey, Mazentes that of Mars, and Prince Theodates, it he please, shall stay at
the head of our maine body, which he shall draw up into Battalia, and keep in
a readiness to reinforce the assault where there shall be need of his
assistance. Although this resolution proceeded from my despair yet
nevertheless it was approved, and all these valliant men, ran to execute the
orders I had given them, with so much affection that I conceived a marveilous
hope of the success of my enterprise. I will not detain you longer in the
recital of our preparations, nor with that of the thoughts wherewith I was
then tormented; to be brief within two hours after the Sun was up, all the
engines for Battery were ready, and all the squadrons prepared to match against
the Town. They drew nere to it in a gallant order, and divided themselves
according to the quarters that were assigned them. They that saw them appear
from the top of the walls, trembled at that object, and the King himself who
was told of it, judged quickly he should have other employments that day then
that of the marriage for which he had appointed it. The three Commanders having
taken the ways to their several places fell on at the first entrenchments of
the Town, and though they found them guarded with some men, they assaulted them
so vigorously, that after a faint resistance, and a very small loss, they made
themselves Masters of them; and coming up to the moate, began at the mercy of a
shower of arrows that poured upon them, to cast in bavin's, and to endeavor
to fill it up with an admirable resolution. They had been fighting above half
an hour, and the greatest part of the Garrison was run to the defense of those
ports; when I at the head of my Battalion, making those that had the conduct of
the engines to advance, set forward with a wondrous confidence, drawn from the
looks of those that accompanied me, in which I read an unalterable resolution
to conquer, or else to dye for my interests. I confirmed them in that generous
design, by all the words my passion could put into my mouth, and finding them
as forward as my self, we advanced toward the gate, in a fashion that froze
the fearful hearts of those that were there to defend it, I had chosen that
Port as most convenient for my design, and though it was fortifyed with some
works that were reasonable good, it was yet the weakest of any about the Town,
because of the excessive hardness of a rock in that place, into which it was
impossible to cut a moate. Wherefore after being Masters of the outworkes, one
might easily march on horsback to the very gate, there being nothing to oppose
the passage of the Rams, nor of the Cavalry. I instantly summond the
outworkes by a Trumpet, and having let them know it was Arsaces that assaulted
them in person, my good fortune had made that name so terrible, that nothing
but their fear of the King, kept them in any manner of defense. But scarce had
they seen me a light, with a good part of my men, to advance with our swords
toward their entrenchments, when after having shot, a few arrows, which hardly
wounded any of our men, they retired in disorder toward the gate. There they
made some slight resistance, but when they saw us get on horsback again to
fall upon them, and that in sted of making our Rams advance, we prepared our
selves to break into the Town along with them, they quitted the gates and
having shut them, left us free access, without any other hindrance then that
of their arrows which played upon us from the top of the wall. They shot so
great a number of them, that our approach was very difficult, and dangerous,
but I gave order to our Archers to aim at those that appeared upon the
battlements, and at the same time covering our selves with our shields, we
drove our Rams very impetuously against the gate. A great many of our men
fell in this assault, I had two horses killed under me, and most of those that
made the Rams play, whereof diverse were without arms, lost their lives in
that service. Yet those that remained, persisted so firmly in their office,
and I encouraged them so well keeping still at the head of them, that in spite
of all resistance, they came up to the Gates, battred them in pieces, and
opened us as large a passage as we could desire. Then did I get again on
horsbacke the fourth time, and rushed on with my sword in my hand into the
middle of those that defended the entrance, in which action I was so bravely
seconded, that within a short time, part of my enemies being slain, and the
rest put to flight, I had free way into the streets, and began to enter them
with facility enough. Some Soldiers that were either obstinate, or interessed
in Arsacomes his party, found their death in the point of our weapons; but
as soon as ever I believed my self Master, I by a Trumpet commanded the
inhabitants to retire into their houses, promising they should receive no hurt
either in their goods or persons; and at the same time gave order from on to
another through all the Squadron that followed me, that none should dare to
kill either Citizens or Soldiers, except those who by their wilful
resistance drew their death upon themselves. By this command I saved the lives
of many thousands, who would have lost them in the first fury of our Soldiers;
but yet the Town was in a general consternation, and notwithstanding all the
endeavors that were used to beget an assurance in the inhabitants, there was
no possiblity to hinder the confused noise that was heard on all sides, nor the
cries of the women and children, which resounded every where in a very
lamentable manner. The King who from one to another had heard that I was Master
of the Town, stricken with a mortal grief, and fancying the mischief to be
greater then it was, because he was conscious he had given me reason enough to
cast away all consideration of him, had left those places whether the noise of
the first assaults had drawn him, and being followed by Arsacomes, Prince
Carthasis, and many of his men, had resolved to dye fighting, and not suruive
the shame, which a stranger, alone, and abondoned made him suffer in the middle
of his Dominions. While he was coming toward me, I was advanced as far as the
Palace, where I heard he had left the Princess guarded, and having opened my
way with my sword, through them that strove to stop it, I was got at last to
the gates thereof, and seeing them defended by a great number of Soldiers, I
flew in amongst them, and made my passage free, by the death of those that
would have hindered it. When once I had entered the Court I a lighted, and having
commanded as many of those that were with me as I had need of, to do the like,
I left the rest at the gate, with orders to stay there till my return, and
went up the stairs with my sword in my hand, my arms besmeared with blood in
many places, and in a posture that struck fear into all that were in my way.
I met no obstacle till I came to the Princesses Lodgings, where they the King
had left to guard her, hoping for no pardon from him if they abandoned her,
persisted in a resistance which was fatal to them, and which made the greatest
part of them fall at the doors which they defended. At last that of my
Princesse's chamber was open to me, and as soon as I had set my foot within it,
I saw her in a corner of the room, as much affrighted as if our design had
been against her very life. True it is that such a spectacle, the fight that
had been at her chamber door, the blood whereof ran all about, and the sight
of a great many dead, and dying Soldiers, were sufficient to beget a fear in
her, neither did I think it any thing strange, but judging that I had no time
to loose in words, I only said. Madame, you are free, nor shall this be the
day that you shall marry Arsacomes. After these words, to which I neither
received, nor expected any answer, I took her in my arms fainting, and
almost in a Swowne, and commanded Criton to do the like to Cyllenia, then
going out again with that precious burden, and no longer finding any
hindrance that could retard me, I went down into the Court, the same way that I
came up. In the mean time the Princesse's spirits were absolutely gone, which
I not perceiving put her into the arms of one of my men, while I got on
horsbacke, and received her from him again, without observing it, so much was
I transported in the condition I then saw my self, and so extremely taken up
with the thought of what I had yet to do. Scarce was I out of the Palace gate,
when I saw the King coming accompanied by Prince Carthasi's, Arsacomes, and
many others, but their number was little able to dispute the victory against
me. He had no sooner known me, and seen the Princess his daughter in my arms
but advancing before all his men, after he had often called me traitor, he
darted a javeline at me which he held in his right hand, and which came
whizzing over my shoulder. I trembled for fear of Berenice; but that was not
able to make me loose the respect I bore to the Kings person, wherefore having
given my men a command only to defend themselves, and to make the retreat
after me; King of Scythia (cried I) I will neither have thy life, nor thy
City, but leave them both for my Princess. Arsacomes may live also, since I
cannot give him his death without advantage, but he shall live without
Berenice. At these words, calling to those of my party to open and give me
passage. I put on my horse in the amidst of them, covering my Princess with
my shield, and crying to my men to follow me, since I had gotten what I
desired. I returned to the gate by which I came in, without any other
difficulty except the crow'd of my own Soldiers. They all followed me out, and
whither it were that they were glad to receive the command of sparing their
countrymen, or that really they bore that respect to me, I could not have
wished a more exact obedience then they showed in that encounter. I was out of
the gates, and retiring toward our camp with a Satisfaction which you may
better imagine then I express, when I perceived that my Princess was in a
Swown. The knowledge thereof did extremely moderate my joy, and though I very
well judged that it was but a faintness caused by her fear, out of which she
would easily come to her self again, and that thereby I gained the liberty to
steal favors that had never been granted me, yet could I not see her in that
condition, without falling into a mortal Sorrow, and I rode back to my tents
with a countenance which did but little testify the fortunate success of my
enterprise. In the mean time I had sent to Leotaris, and the other Commanders,
to draw off from their assaults, and within a little while the Town was left
free, and in the same condition it had been the day before. As Soon as I was
come into my tent, and had laid my Princess upon a bed, I cast cold water
often upon her face, sent for Physicians, and all persons that were able to
give her any help, but their assistance was not necessary, for either the
water or time brought her to her self again. No sooner did she open her eyes,
but she saw me by her upon my knees, having my lips fast cimented to one of
her fair hands. She looked a while about the chamber, and presently after,
having turned her eyes upon my face, upon Theodates, and upon Cyllenia who
stood by her, she knew the truth of that adventure, and sitting up, after she
had pulled away her hand from between mine, Arsaces, (said she) what have you
done? I have done what you have reason to expect from my affection (answered I)
and I have drawn you out of the arms of that unworthy husband they intended
you. Yes (said Berenice) but you have also pulled me out of my fathers. The
Princess had no sooner spoken these words, but a chillnesse ran through all my
Veins, and my astonishment was so great, that not being able to make any
reply, I only fixed my eyes upon her face. All they that were in the room
observed my confusion, and the Princess making use of my silence to proceed:
Arsaces (continued she) since you have satisfied your Love, satisfy my Honor
also; I am not offended at your action, but if you have loved me, I beseech you
in the name of all the Gods, to restore me my liberty. If her first words had
astonished me, these last pierced my very heart, and giving me that sense
again, which her former ones had taken from me, they likewise gave me the
strength to express it. How, Madame (said I) do you demand your liberty of me,
and are not you free, are not you Sovereign amongst us, whereas before you
were a Captive, and a prisoner in that place from whence I have delivered you?
It Is true (added the Princess) I was a captive, and I was unfortunate, but
that captivity, and those misfortunes, were better becoming, and more
advantageous to Berenice, then this liberty you have restored her, or this
Empire you have given her over you, and if you will have me make any use of it,
it shall only be to conjure you to send me back to the King my father. This
discourse absolutely killed me, or at least it left me a life much worse then
death it self, and gave me a desire to put an end to it before the eyes of that
cruel Princess. what Madame, (replied I quite transported) would you have me
send you back to the King, and put you again into the power of that
Arsacomes, to whom you had so great an aversion, and who this day should have
been your husband? has half a day been able to make so great a change in your
mind, and do you now reject Arsaces to prefer that Arsacomes, whom yester-day
you hated worse then death? Arsaces, (answered the Princess, with a more
resolute voice then before) never was more dear to me, and Arsacomes never
more odious then at this present; and if you well remember the hopes I have
given you* cannot accuse me of a change, which neither half a day, no nor my
whole life ever made me capable of. I promised you I would never love any body
but your self, I promised you that I would marry death rather then Arsacomes,
but I never made you hope, either by my discourses, or by my actions, that I
would fly from my fathers arms to follow you, and that I would license my self
in favor of you, to do shameful actions, and such as are unworthy of a
Princess. I never demanded any proofs of your affection (interrupted I) which
the strictest severity could condemn; but what other remedy could I apply to
so pressing an extremity, and what means had you to avoid that misfortune,
which you your self had given me notice of? Death (replied the Princess) which
shall ever be less cruel to me, then the shame you have prepared me, and
though I gave you notice of my misfortune, I did not demand remedies of you
which you could not give me without ruining me. I only protested to you that I
would never be but yours, and that promise shall be inviolably performed. And
which way do you keep that promise (said I quite transported) if you command
me to restore you to Arsacomes? you shall not restore me to Arsacomes, (added
the Princess) but only to the King my father, whom my honor suffers me not
to forsake without his consent, and if the King give me to Arsacomes, I by my
death can oppose his tyranny without offending my reputation. Ah! Madame (cried
I stepping back a little and lifting up my hands, and eyes to heaven) I had
rather leave you to Arsacomes, then leave you unto death, and if one of us must
dye, it is only this forsaken Arsaces, this Arsaces who no way but by dying,
can justifye the cowardice that will reflect upon him for quitting you to his
rival. Yes Madame, I am ready to give you the cruel proofs of my submission
which you demand, and if you yet desire any others, you shall see me run to
them with the same resignation. Lets begone from this place which is more
odious to us both then the prison from whence I delivered you, lets begone from
this place, so fatal to your reputation, and since you find so much shame, and
so much misfortune in the company of Arsaces, let us go again to the king of
Scythia, let us go and receive Arsacomes, I am ready to sacrifice my interests,
to sacrifice my life to the glory of that rival, that I may serve Berenice to
the utmost, as ungrateful* and as much changed as she is, and it shall never
be reproached to me that either her ingratitude, or her change, dispensed me
from the obedience I owe her. With these words; I commanded a chariot to be
made ready; but though my grief or rather my despair was visible in my face,
and that my Princess was deeply touched with it, yet was she not shaken in her
resolution; only she let me see by her tears, that it was not without sorrow
she parted from me, and having looked upon me a while without speaking; You are
ungrateful your self (said she) to accuse her of ingratitude, and of change,
who for all you are so great, for all you are so worthy to be loved, loves you
better then she ought, since she loves you better then her quiet, and better
then her life. The event perhaps will make my intentions better known to you
then they are, and you without doubt will learn, that though I prefer my duty
before your Satisfaction. I Will prefer my grave before any man in the world
except Arsaces. In another season ths discourse would have been sufficient to
content me, but in the pressing extremity, I was then reduced to, there was
little probability I could be satisfied with words; neither did I forbear to
testify enough by my actions how little effect they had wrought upon me, and
how firm a constancy so ever I affected, to show her to my latest end that I
made no difficulty to obey her, I could not be Master of those impetuous
motions that drove me head long into rage, and not being willing to say any
more to Berenice, that could make her believe I waver'd in the execution of her
commands, I turned toward Theodates, and those Gallant men that had seconded me
so bravely. Ah! my generous Companions (said I with tears in my eyes) how
unprofitably have I employed your valor, and how vainly have I engaged you, to
shed the blood of your countrymen, and your own! you out of your extraordinary
generosity, have linked your selves to the interests of a poor stranger; you
have marched cheerfully against your king for the establishment of my repose
and of my fortune; you have seen the walls of the Metropolis of Scythia, nay
you have made your selves Masters in a few moments, of a City, the taking
whereof by men less valiant would have required whole years, and briefly by
the effects of a prodigious courage, you have given me this Princess, for
whose sake alone I had accepted your assistance; but O Gods, how little do I
proffit by all you have done for me, and how cruel, how fatal will the fruit
of your victory be to me; ah! how much more happy had I been to have fallen by
the sword of Arsacomes, or to have lost my life before the gates of Issedon,
then to give it up now to the inhumanity of Berenice! While I was lamenting on
this manner, and drew tears of compassion from all that heard me, I saw the
chariot coming which I had given order for, to carry back the Princess. That
sight redoubled my affliction, but struggling with my utmost power to get the
mastery of it, in an occasion wherein I stood in need of all my fortitude, I
drew nere to Berenice, and offering her my hand with a forced constancy. Come
Madame, (said I) let us go back again to the King your father, stay no longer
here in the camp, and in the tent of his enemy; all things are ready for your
departure, and you are as free as you can desire. Berenice's tears with she
shed in great abundance, would not suffer her to reply, but only taking my
hand, which I had presented her, she went out of the tent in such a condition
as made me know it was not without a great deal of reluctance she gave her
self up to the severe precepts of her duty; when she was gotten into the
chariot, and Cyllenia with her, she strove to break the silence she so long
had kept, and looking upon me with drowned eyes. You shall quickly know (said
she) that without inhumanity you cannot accuse me, and that the action you see
me do, ought rather to draw pity from you, then those cruel reproaches you
have used. Farewell Artaxerxes (pursued she forcing her modesty to embrace me)
leave the care of my destiny to me, and remember that if Berenice live not for
you, she will not live for her self. With these words, after she had expressly
commanded me not to stir out of my tent, and to give her only a small convoy
to the City gate, she turned her eyes from me, and bidding the charioteer
drive away, departed, and carried with her all my joy, and all the hopes I had
conceived. Theodates took the care to conduct her, and following at a little
distance, lost not sight of the chariot till it entered into the gates.

O Gods, in what a sad condition did I remain after she was gone, how full of
sorrow were my words, my actions, and my thoughts, all my friends endeavored
but in vain to comfort me, and when I had endured their persecutions a good
while, I prayed them toward the evening to leave me alone, and having persuaded
them to it with much a do, I passed the small remainder of that day, and the
night following, in torments that cannot possibly be conceived. All that the
consideration of the greatest miseryes can produce in a heart, all the utmost
cruelty, all the utmost violence that can enter in a man's thoughts, was
gentleness, and mildness in respect of what mine made me suffer. In the
beginning they tended all to fury, and following the first motions of my anger,
I let my self be impetuously carried away by my passions. Why do I complain
(said I) why do I weakly shed tears like a woman, since I have the force,
since I have the courage of a man, and since I still have arms in my hand, to
make part of my miseryes fall back upon the heads of my enemies? Let Us no
longer deliberate upon a matter, which my just indignation ought to have
resolved; and since we must necessaryly perish, let us make whatsoever
contributes to our ruin perish with us. I have still the same forces, which
this very day made me Master of this City, where my ungrateful Princess, and
my Barbarous enemies are shut up. The valor of my companious is not coold
since morning, and I have courage enough my self, to execute, in this highest
pitch of despair, what I have executed once already in my more moderate
resentments; let us go therefore, and employ both theirs and mine for my final
Revenge, and since we must run to our grave, let us make a ruined Palace, and
a desolate City our monument; Let us once more force our entrance into the
gates of this hated Town; but let us use our victory otherwise then we did
before; let us wash the streets of it with rivers of that blood, for which we
have undeseruedly been lavish of our own, let us carry a thousand deaths (if it
be capable to receive so many) into the breast of unworthy, and unthankefull
Arsacomes; Let Us sacrifice that victime to ungrateful Berenice, which is but
too justly due unto my love; and to satisfye our self by a complete revenge, in
a season when all respect, and all passed considerations ought to be
extinguished in us, let us bury the King of Scythia, I say the King of Scythia
himself in the ruins of his Capital City; let us pour forth to our lawful
anger the blood of that Barbarous King, who by so many unworthy means, has
sought our destruction; and if Berenice be offended at that revenge, let us
make her Satisfaction by employing our own hands to give her this life, which
she for trivial scruples has so ungratefully abandoned; let us never stand
considering in this design, but run to excecute it without deferring any
longer. It is not necessary to stay till it be morning, the night is much more
proper for the execution I intend; its gloomy horror is far more faitable to
that of my afflicted soul, and the darkness of it will serve to blind that
pity which might perchance be caused by the ^ight of dismal objects. In this
impetuous torrent which hurryed me away, I start up in my bed, fully persuaded,
and satisfied in the resolution I had taken: I had nothing in my mouth, and in
my thoughts, but death, blood, fire, and all the most dreadful imaginations
that can be fancied, and I found some sweetness, and some comfort in the
Satisfaction I hoped for. I was already opening my mouth, to call for those
that were necessary for the orders I meant to give, when a more Gentle spirit
then that of revenge, crept insensibly into my heart, and moderated the
violences of it with more success then I expected. It first made me partly to
abhor the things I had resolved on, and then it endeavored to dissuade me
from them by all the reasons it could represent. By little and little,
tenderness stole into the place of anger, and I felt my self mollified by
reflections that were too powerful to be opposed. It is true (said I to my self
again) there is a necessity thou must dye, but thou must dye as thou have
lived, and not suffer thy death to cast a scandal upon thy love, nor upon thy
former actions. It Is nothing but thy life, and thine alone that is due to thy
misfortunes, and the Gods do justly demand it of thee, since thou have
shamefully conserved it after the loss of all thy friends; the people of
Issedon, this poor people in whom thou have found nothing but affection toward
thee, is innocent of thy miseries, nor can thou sacrifice it to thine
indignation, without blasting thy fame with cruelty and ingratitude. Arsacomes
indeed is perhaps worthy of death, but thou ought to leave him a life, which
thou have saved him more then once, to keep the glory of thy actions entire to
the end of thi^e. The King of Scythia would destroy thee, but he is the father
of Berenice, and Oroondates, and if the Gods had given thee a thousand lives,
thou ought to loose them all, rather then attempt any thing against his.
Rather ask pardon of thy Mistress, and of thy friend, for the cruel thought
thou have had against their Father, and blush at that parricidial design,
which renders thee the most criminal of all men living: Noe, (added I, within a
while after) it is not by violent ways that thou must satisfy thy self,
Berenice disapproves them, and I ought no more to interesse her, nor hers in
the effects of my despair. Let Us dye in such a fashion as may be obliging to
Berenice, and obliging to the king of Scythia; let us at the end of our life
take up that respect again, which we seemed to have lost, and let us order it
so that my Mistress, and my friend, may in the last of my actions, find
reparation for the discontents I have given their Father. This last thought
drew me into a design that was more pleasing to me then all those I before had
fancied, and after having a little examined it I fixed upon it so firmly, that
nothing was able to divert me.

The day begnining to appear, just as I had sett'led my resolution, I got out
of bed, and calling for paper wrote these words with an intent to make them be
delivered to Theodates.

Arsaces To Theodates.
My too dear and too generous friend, one of the most sensible griefs that
accompany me to my grave, is that of parting with you for ever, after having
engaged you, and so many gallant men after you, in a party destructive to your
repose, and to your fortune, neither in the reasons I have here to dye, should
I have ever resolved to forsake you, if I did not know that I leave you in a
condition, wherein you are able to make an aduantageous peace, both for your
self, and for the rest. The King of Scythia who demands nothing but the death
of Arsaces, and whom the death of Arsaces shall have satisfied, will grant you
all the conditions you could ask, and so long as you have arms in your hands
you may make them your selves with all manner of advantage. Pardon me the
troubles whereinto the miseries of my life have cast you, obtain the same
pardon for one of our faithful friends, and love the memory of Arsaces, since
if he could have lived, he would have lived that he might have been always
yours.


I left this letter upon my table, with a command to one of my servants to give
it to Theodates within two hours, and at the same time calling for my arms,
and a horse, I got upon him, not suffering any body to go along with me. I even
refused the attendance of Criton, and Leotaris with many others being come to
the door of my tent while I was taking horse, I opposed the offer they made to
accompany me, and entreated them so ernestly, to afford my sorrow an hours
solitariness, that not being able to deny it they left me at liberty. I first
took a little circuit to hinder them from knowing what way I went, and when I
was out of their sight, I turned toward the nearest gate of the City, I
quickly heard the outmost Corpse de guard, and found Soldiers in those places
from whence I had driven them the day before. I disir'd those that bad me
stand, (putting up the beaver of my headpiece but very little) that they would
carry me to the King, to whom I had a matter of consequence to impart; and they
having led me to the gates, those that were there upon the guard, seeing but a
single man, made no difficulty to let him in. Having asked the first I met
where the king was: He is at the Temple of Tellus, said they, where the
greatest part of the Court is assembled, and where the King intends this
morning to celebrate the marriage of the Princess with Arsacomes. Scarce was I
able to forbear discovering my self at this answer; but my helmet covered the
alteration of my countenance, as it also disguised my voice, nor was it thought
strange, that passing for a man who was come over from the party of Arsaces, to
give the King some intelligence, I should keep my beaver down, and desire to
be unknown to every body but the King himself, to whom they were leading me. I
came to the gates of that fatal Temple, where my funeral was preparing; and
though one would have thought, that in the condition the Town then was, the
people should rather have been manning the walls, then in that Temple, yet was
the crow'd so great there, that if they that carried me had not employed the
Kings authority, I should hardly have gotten passage. The King had not been
long come to the Temple, and he was gone thither so early, for fear his
intention should be hindered by some new accident. Neither the respect I had
shown toward his person, and toward his Town which I had quitted to him, after
I had made my self Master of it, nor the last proof I had given him in sending
back the Princess, had been sufficient to appease him, or to arm him against
the incitements of the Queen, and Arsacomes, but knowing very well that I was
in a condition to overthrow all his designs, if he deferred them any longer,
he had a mind to hasten the only revenge he was able to take of me, for fear
I should prevent him, and should a second time deprive him of the means he had
to effect it. For this purpose neglecting the defense of his City, and
trusting it to the hands of others, he gave himself over wholly to his anger,
and was much more eagerly fixed upon his desire of punishing Arsaces, then upon
that of protecting his people, and conserving his Dominions. All the Princesses
tears, and all her resistance was but unprofitable; she had vainly begged of
the King for some delay, and that Prince abandoned to his wrath without giving
ear to her ernest prayers, had caused her to be put into his chariot, and had
carried her himself to the Temple, whither Arsacomes was gone before, with the
Queen, and all those of his party. As Soon as ever the Priest had appeared, the
Princess casting her self at the Kings feet, had protested that she would
rather dye there, then yield the consent that was demanded of her, she had
conjured him by a flood of tears, to recede from his cruel determination, to
have regard unto the last effects of her respect, and duty, which had made her
forsake Arsaces, to put her self again into his hands; but her tears, and
prayers were all to no purpose, and when once she had found that nothing in the
world was able to mollify him, she had turned toward Arsacomes who full of
hopes, permitted the King to press her in his favor, and looking upon him
with eyes enflamed with anger. Think not wicked man (had she said) that this
authority which thou unworthyly abusest, can ever be able to change my
inclinations; with what violence soever they are opposed, I will never look
upon thee as other then as my mortal enemy, and thou well may make me
suffer death, but never make me to become thy wife. Arsacomes left the care of
answering these words unto the King, and he was going to do it with a
sharpness that made all the company tremble for that poor Princess when I
presented my self before him, and preventing the reply he was about to make.
Stay (cried I to him) Stay King of Scythia, and be not so hasty dispatch a
sacrifice, whereof I am the principal victime. With these words, I made an end
of opening my passage to him, and casting my Helmet at his feet, discovered the
face of Arsaces to him, and to the whole assembly. I know not whither fear or
Amazement seized first upon the King; the remembrance of the day before coming
presently into his mind, made him believe I had entered the Town again in
Arms, and that having forced the gates a second time, I came now for the last
to cross his design, and take revenge for all the injuries I had received. I
read his apprehension in his countenance, but I suffered him not long to
continue in it, for looking upon him with an action much more resolute then
his. Settle thy self (said I) and do not fear the sight of a single man, and
of a man whom all thy cruelties have not been able to make thine enemy; I
neither come with a power, nor with an intention to take revenge for so many
unspeakeable wrongs, I only bring thee a head which is necessary for thy
perfect Satisfaction, and a head, which with Berenice thou should present to
Arsacomes. Behold my arms, which I throw down at thy feet, (pursued I letting
fall my sword) and behold at last this Arsaces, to whom thou bear so
implacable a hatred, who comes both alone, and unarmed, to expose himself to
all thy indignation, but as it is with no design to hurt thee, so neither is
it with any to appease thee that he here presents himself; he demands no
reparation for the injuries thou have done him, nor does he preten'd to any
favor by those thou have received from him, and he would be a shamed to
receive life from them, to whom he has been accustomed to give it. Power forth
all the effects of thine anger, upon this Artaxerxes, the son of Darius, who
with thine own forces has assaulted thy walls, has forced thy Town, has
pulled thy daughter out of thine Arms, and has reduced thee thy self, once
more to be beholding to him for a kingdom, and for a life, which he has so
often preserved; but spare Berenice who is not guilty of Arsaces his crimes.
Revenge not foreign wrongs upon thine own blood, and since it has no
affinity with that of Darius, wreake upon that of Darius alone, whatsoever of
greatest cruelty thy rage can think. Arsaces has deserved death, but Berenice
has not deserved the punishment thou inflict'st upon her, or if she have
deserved it, it is only for having forsaken me, and for having exposed her self
a new to the mercy of her enemies. Let alone the innocent Berenice then, and
overwhelm the Criminal Arsaces; thou could not desire more facility for this
revenge, to which thou have run head long by so many base, and shameful ways,
and besides the conservation of thy life, and Kingdom, thou have yet this last
obligation to me, that I my self have delivered thee a person whose ruin thou
so often have in vain attempted and that I have saved thee the labor, of
seeking out new murderers, to give death to the greatest of thine enemies.
While I spoake on this manner, the whole assembly listend to my words, and with
a merveilous attention, expected what would be the issue of that adventure. I
will not tell you, what Berenices thoughts were at this last expression of my
love, nor what were those of Arsacomes, since they were the Kings that first
manifested themselves. If he had been astonished at my sight, and at the
beginning of my discourse he was no less at the knowledge of my strange
resolution, and he saw so little likely hood to hope that commanding a potent
army, wherewith I was in a manner able to dispose of his destiny, I should
abandon all the means I had to frustrate what he had determined, to come and
expose my self alone to his mercy, that he could not suffer his belief to
credit what he saw. Wherefore he remained a great while in doubt of the truth,
but when he beheld me alone, without caske, without sword, in the amidst of a
throng of his own followers, and that he heard no noise at all in the streets,
that could make him fear the coming of his enemies, he began at last to
believe, that my love had brought me to that resolution, and that my despair
making me despise my life, had made me also neglect the means I had to
preserve it. This assurance settled it self in his mind with joy, and his fear
was no sooner lulled asleep, but his anger was awaked again. The sight of his
enemy, and the fierceness of his words, kindled his wrath afresh withal its
violence, and he had scarce had time to recover his first apprehensions, when
he opened his mouth to give it vent. Yet wicked wretch, (cried he) thou shall
dye, and this false generosity which thy despair has inspired into thee,
shall not save thee from my lawful fury. Yes, I will dye, (replied I) and if I
would not have dyed, I would have come with a power that might have defended me
from thine. Boast not of an advantage, which thou hold from no body but my
self, nor threaten me with a death, wherein thou only seru'st for the Minister
of my despair. I rather serve the justice of the Gods, (answered Macheus) and
all Kings who are interessed in my quarrel; but whether it be from the anger of
heaven, or from thine own despair that I have this occasion to revenge me of
thee, thou shall not see me neglect it, nor for many considerations, spare him
that has seduced my subjects, and that led an army of rebels, and traitors,
against their Prince, into his City, into his Palaces and even against his
own person. He had hardly ended these words, making sign to his guard to
encompasse me, and to hinder my getting out of the Temple, when the Princess
who till then had heard us without interruption, moved from the place, where
she stood, and coming toward me with a countenance animated with an
extraordinary confidence. You shall not dye alone Arsaces, (said she) and
since you have been so little fearful to afflict me, in lavishing a life that
was dearer to me then my own, you also shall have the grief to see me run to a
death, which I owe to nothing but your despair. You ought to have expected the
event of what I had resolved to do for you; If I had been so base as to have
given my self to Arsacomes, that baseness would have been enough to have
cured you, and if I had preferred death before him, you might have followed me
to the grave, without the blame of having thrown me into it. By these words,
and by my Princesses action so different from her humor, and from her usual
moderation, I knew the greatness of her affection, better then ever I had done
before, and forgetting all that I had taken ill from her, I gave my self up
again totally to my love. Ah! my dearest Princess (said I) what a thought is
this of yours, and with what a reproach do you aggravate my sorrows! I
defended my life as long as I believed you cared for it, and you know that
after the losses I have suffered nothing could have made me think of its
preservation, but the opinion I had that it was not indifferent to you. That
was it that made me oppose the King your fathers arms, which after the ruin
of my family I should have welcomed into my breast, that was it that set me at
the head of an army, and in short that was it that has made me do many
actions, which could not have been expected but from a person that had been
much in love with his life. Yes Madame, I did love it, while I flattred my self
with a conceit that it was dear to you; but when I saw you help toward its
destruction, by forsaking me to put your self again into those hands from
which I had delivered you; I believed I ought to follow your inclinations, and
not leave a thing in the world, that might be an obstacle to your repose. After
my death, you may live in a greater tranquillity then you have done hitherto,
and the Gods to whom your virtue, to whom your person is dear having afflicted
you till now, only to punish me by the part I bore in all your sufferings will
cease to torment you any longer, when you no more can be infected by the
contagious afflictions of miserable Arsaces. The Princess had not patience to
let me go on with this discourse, but hastily interrupting me. Cease to offend
me (said she) with your reproaches, and do not accuse me of a change, whereof
all the considerations in the world shall never make me capable; It Is true I
would needs come away from you, to put my self again into my fathers hands,
it is an action which I yet would do, and which I cannot repent of, but it is
not an action that should make you believe you are less dear to me, then you
have been formerly. If I could have staid with you with honor, I would not
have left you, neither for Arsacomes, nor for a thousand Empires, and in
returning to my father, to whom the Gods and nature has submitted me, I did
not use a less violence upon my self then that you suffered, nor expose my self
to lighter discontents then yours; if I had ceased to love you yesterday, I
would not have begun again to day, and if I could have disposed my self to
live without you, I would not now dispose my self to dye with you. You shall
not dye, dear Princess, (replied I violently) you shall not dye, nor can you
continue in that thought, without making my death terrible to me; You shall
live for a better fortune then that you yet have met with, and if my death
cause any sorrow in you, as your goodness makes me hope it will, time, the
friendship of Prince Oroondates whom the Gods will bring home to you again,
and my ardent request at this last minute of my life, will cure you of it. I
will not pray you to live for Arsacomes, you deserve a happier fortune, and you
have too gallant a spirit to stoop to a person unworthy of you; moreover I
believe my death will change the Kings intentions in favor of you, for
purposing to give you to Arsacomes, not so much with a design to make him
happy, as to make Arsaces miserable, he by Arsaces his death, will loose those
cruel resolutions, which he had taken against you, only out of his enmity to
me; he loves you, though he has hated me, and the end of his hatred toward me,
will waken his affection to you again, I would conjure thee to it, King of
Scythia (continued I turning toward him) if I believed the latest words of a
Prince who abandoned all his interests to serve thee, who saved thy life with
the peril of his own, who fought for thy Dominions, insted of defending those
he was born to, and who to complete his services, gluts thee even at the price
of his very life, in the greediness of thy last desires, were able to work any
thing upon thee. I upbraid thee not with what I have done for thee, and thine,
though it be considerable enough to deserve some place in thy remembrance; All
I could possibly do, was due to the father of Berenice, and Oroondates, and
the Gods are my witnesses, that all thy ingratitudes have never been able to
make me repent it, but by that memory I may well demand the repose of Berenice
of thee. I was yet in a posture to defend her against Arsacomes, if I would
longer have defended her against her father, and she her self was in a
condition to dispose of her own affections, if she had not preferred her
respect, and her obedience to thee, before her quiet, nay before her life it
self. If thou art born of Royal, or if thou art born but of noble blood, all
the incitements of generosity sue to thee in her favor, and tell thee that so
pure a virtue, and so perfect a resignation, ought to drive all the cruelty out
of thy mind, that harbors in it against this lovely Princess. While I spoake
these words, I fixed my eyes upon Matheus his face, where by an unlooked for
effect I observed a very strange alteration. You have wondered without doubt,
how in the condition I then was, we had the liberty of so long a conversation,
without being interrupted by the Kings anger, who in probability should not
have suffered it with patience; but you will wonder a great deal more, when I
shall tell you, that after having given a peaceable audience to the Princesse's
words, and likewise unto mine, he found things in them that were powerful
enough to stop the impetuousnesse of his displeasure. As Soon as reason began to
find some admittance into his thoughts, it made him look upon all his actions,
with a different eye from what he had done before. He admired the contempt I
showed of death, in seeing me expose my self to it so voluntarily, when I had so
great a strength to have secured me from it. He considered my last actions,
wherein he found a respect, from which he thought I might lawfully enough have
been exempted. He remembered that having made my self Master of his City by the
right of arms I had left it free to him, and that having desired no other
advantage by that happy success, but the liberty of my Princess, I had sent
her back to him again the same day, and if in what I said he found something
that was sufficient to offend him, he attributed it to a greatness of courage
which he could not disapprove. From this consideration, he returned to that of
my former actions, and recalling to mind all I had done for him, he met with
nothing that did not move his heart to love, and tenderness. He for a while
resisted these new motions, but in the end, he was neither of brass nor marble
as obdurate as he was, and though the interest of Stratonice, and Arsacomes,
who observed his irresolution with mortal trances, with held him for a few
moments, yet was he feign at last to yield to compassion, and to remembrances
which he was not able to resist. The first token he showed of it was a sigh
followed by some tears which all the assembly saw run down his cheeks; but
presently after he turned on the other side, either to hide his weakness, or
to call back his former resolutions, but there was no more room for them in his
heart, and all his thoughts were so changed already, that he no longer had
power, no nor so much as an intention to defend himself. O Gods! cried he,
lifting up his hands and eyes to heaven, and stopping at those words, he fixed
his eyes upon the ground, and kept silence yet for some few moments; At last he
rose up from the chair where he sat, and looking upon me with a countenance
absolutely mollified, or rather full of confusion; Arsaces (said he) Generous
Arsaces, you are my Conqueror, but O Gods, how ought I to hope you will use
your victory? I was so surprised at this strange alteration, that I was not
able to reply, and within a little after, coming toward me with open arms:
Might I hope (continued he) that after such high provocations, and such crimes
as deserve no pardon, Arsaces can have the goodness to forget them, and that
by the same Generosity which has overcome me, he for the sake of Berenice, and
for the sake of Oroondates, would restore me that friendship, which once I
prized at so high a rate, and which my cruelty has forfeited? These words
giving me a full assurance of his change, did also disperse all the resentments
I had against him, and not knowing in that sudden revolution, how to find
terms capable to express my thoughts, I contented my self with declaring them
by my actions, and to let the King see* by casting my self at his feet, that I
should ever receive the return of his friendship as an invaluable favor. Ah!
(pursued he, seeing me in that posture and judging by my action that I was
readyly disposed to all he desired if it be true that Arsaces pardons me the
indignities I have offered him, I shall esteem that effect of his generosity,
above all the rest wherewith he has obliged me. No, (said he taking me in his
arms, and embracing me with a very passionate gesture) Arsaces could not be
conquered but by himself, and in this victory which he winnes over his just
resentments, he appears more great and more glorious then in all those others
he has obtained to our advantage. In fine, Most great, and most generous of
all Princes, you triumph over us all manner of ways; but though you have
reaped small fruit by all your former victories, the prize of this last, shall
be a firmer affection then that I loved you with before, a purpose to share my
Dominions with you, or else to loose them for the recovery of yours, and
finally Berenice the cause of our greatest contestations; I will joyfully
accept him for my son, who was the son of Darius, and if the father were
yet alive, I would demand that alliance of him, with an inviolable peace, as
the most happy fortune that could befall me. The King had not the leisure to
prosecute his discourse; for the noise which Stratonice, Arsacomes, and those
of their party made at a declaration that was so cruel to them, would not
suffer him to continue it. The Queen with a transported action stepping forward
toward the King, and forgetting her modesty at so sensible a blow; What Sir
(said she) will you take away Berenice from Arsacomes, to give her to the son
of Darius? The King to hinder her from saving more, replied, Madame, it is not
without trouble that I am constrained to displease you, I want not recompenses
for Arsacomes; but I cannot without being the basest, and most contemptible of
all men living, dispose of Berenice to any body but Artaxerxes. Artaxerxes
cannot have her (added Arsacomes) so long as I am alive, and I know too well
what Kings owe unto their promise, to fear that, that which your Majesty has
given me should be violated in favor of him. That which I promised you
(replied the King) as an honor that was above you, is not capable to engage
me, and having no right to pretend to it, neither have you any to demand the
accomplishment of it. How great interest soever I had in this discourse, I kept
silence out of modesty, seeing that the King defended my party very well; but
Arsacomes whose grief transported him, lost part of his respect, and without
considering that which he owed to the presence of his King; I shall know how to
maintain my just pretensions (said he) both against Arsaces, and against all
men living. Berenice is mine by a promise that cannot be revoked, nor shall she
be taken from me without effusion of blood. All this while I had continued
silent, but then I thought I both might, and ought to reply. Neither thou, nor
I (said I) are worthy of Berenice, but if either of us may preten'd to her,
Artaxerxes both by birth and Services, has more right then Arsacomes. Yet will
not I, abuse the Kings favor as thou have done, but though it declare on my
behalf, I am ready still to dispute Berenice against thee with my sword.
Hitherto thou have very ill defended her, and have not been able to defend so
much as thine own life against me single, at the head of thy army; but if that
trial thou have had of my forces, makes thee believe they are too hard for
thine, put on thine arms, and here I offer to maintain my rights against thee
with my sword alone. Arsacomes was going to reply if the King had not prevented
him. I will be Master (said he) in my own Kingdom, and in my own house, since
Arsaces who was so by the right of war, is content to leave me my authority.
You are my subject Arsacomes, and I have power to do otherwise with you, then
with the son of Darius; I command you therefore to obey me without murmuring,
and I entreat Prince Artaxerxes to leave me the disposing of my daughter,
without offering to dispute her against you; since he alone is able to cross
the power I have over the Scythians, I shall know well enough how to maintain
the promise I make him against all others. While the King was speaking on this
manner, all the people in whose memory the affection of Arsaces was not yet
extinguished, who in this reconciliation saw an end of the war, and of those
miseries they had feared, and who in my last actions had found how I had spared
them; after a clapping of hands, which made the Temple ring, cried out a loud,
that is was to Arsaces their deliverer, and their protector, that their
Princess ought to be given; and this action added to the Kings words, stirred
up so great a rage, and so much confusion in Stratonice, and Arsacomes, that
after a threatening murmurre, they went out of the Temple in a very different
manner from their coming in. I will not tell you, since that recital would be
too long, with what expressions the King confirmed the hope which he had given
me, what thanks I returned him, nor what were the words, and actions of
Berenice; all these things passed in transports of joy, but in the height of
all the Kings endearements, I cast my self once more at his feet, and after he
had done his endeavor to raise me up again, I protested to him that I never
would cease to embrace his knees, till he had granted me his pardon, for
Theodates, and for all the Officers and Soldiers of our Army. The King was
incensed against them with a great deal of show of reason, but being he with
repentance acknowledged his unworthy usage of me, he thought that to make
reparation he ought to refuse me nothing, and after having granted me the
pardon I requested for them, he would needs have Prince Carthasis his brother,
to go presently and carry them the news. I was very forward to accompany him
in that action, and getting on horsback with him, we were followed by a great
number of the inhabitants, who went thronging with us to the Camp. As the
grief of Theodates, and of my other friends had been great at the reading of my
letter, their astonishment was not less when they saw me come in such an
unexpected manner; they were already getting on horsback to seek me every
where, but when they saw their fears so happily ended, they fell from one
extremity to another, and by the excess of their contentment testified that
of their friendship toward me. Prince Carthasis having declared the Kings
pardon to them and told them in a few words the truth of that adventure, after
they had admired my resolution, and the strange event of it, they left the
Camp, and upon the Princes word went along with us into the Town, where they
cast themselves at the Kings feet. The King received them very handsomely, and
in stead of condemning Theodates, having praised his affection to me, he
promised him he would conserve no remembrance of it, but to esteem him the
more, and to the rest confirmed the pardon he had granted them. I was settled
again in the Palace in my former lodgings; and in the court I will not say in
my former condition, but in another much more glorious, and much more
considerable. To the remembrance of Arsaces services, was added that of
Artaxerxes birth, and to both, the consideration of the credit I had among the
Soldiery, and of what I could do as a friend, and as an enemy. The Queen being
pressed with discontent, came not to the King, and Arsacomes keeping retired in
his lodging vented his in threatenings, which were told the King, but he who was
unwilling to ruin one whom he had loved so well, and to whom he had given such
lofty hopes, sent for him two days after, and spoake to him in these terms.
Although I am not obliged, Arsacomes, to justify my actions toward you, yet am
I willing to let you see that it is not out of inconstancy I take Berenice from
you; she is but too justly due unto Arsaces, and I have but too obstinately
resisted to do what I ought to have done sooner; I in your favor have done
things that will for ever dishonor my Memory; you should blush at them for me,
if you loved my reputation, and believe as I do that the greatest reparations
I can make to Prince Artaxerxes, are not able to blot out the remembrance of my
cruelties. Moreover in yiedling Berenice to him, you yield her but to the son
of Darius, the greatest of all the Monarchs in the world, and but to him, whom
besides the general obligations you are particularty obliged to for your life.
If the Gods had given me another daughter, I protest I would not disdain you
for my sonne-in Law, although you are my subject, and if you can be satisfied
with my good will, I Will keep you always nere me in the same condition you have
been, I Will recompense the loss of your hopes, with new preferments, and with
new dignities, and except Berenice, there shall be nothing in my Kingdom you
may not preten'd to. And except Berenice (interrupted audacious Arsacomes)
there is nothing in your Kingdom which I do not disdain; if a King fails of
his promise to me, I shall neither fail of courage, nor of friends, to dispute
it to the last moment of my life. Thou ought then, (replied the King
exasperated by that answer) to have disputed it when thou were at the head of
an army, where Arsaces all alone took from thee all the rights thou had to
it, and had also taken away thy life with them, if he had not been to generous
to make his glory give place to his interests. Thou ought to have defended
her here within our walls, whence Arsaces carried her even before thy face,
thou not attempting any thing to hinder him; and though my promise had engaged
me toward thee, thou know I lost the disposing of Berenice, from the time
she ceased to be within my power; thou should have fetched her again out of
the hands of thy rival, at the hazard of thy life, if thou would have been
worthy of her, and not have stayed till he restored her into thine arms
himself: if thou had had the least sense of honor left in thee, thou
would not so shamfully have been beholding to thine enemy for her; and
though I were not at all obliged to Arsaces, I should not be just, if I gave
Berenice to thee after thou had so poorly disputed her. Arsacomes confounded
and stung with these reproaches, stood a great while before he could find an
answer; but in the end, he began to reply, and loosing all the respect he had
yet remaining, flew out into such irreverent speeches, that the King being
extremely incensed, after he had protested that nothing but the Queens
consideration hindered him from chastising his insolency, commanded him to get
out of his presence, and never to appear before him any more. Arsacomes
withdrew in a desperate rage, and with such threats as would have been punished
with death, in any other body but the Queens Brother.

Prince Oroondates who had harkned to Arsaces his last adventures, with a
countenance that sufficiently expressed how much he was concerned in them,
broak silence then, and with an action like that of a person who coming out of
a long and dangerous perplexity, begins to recover a little breath; Ah!
Brother, (said he) how you have made me suffer, and how you have ^as'd me now,
by letting me know my fathers repentance, since nothing could have comforted
me, if he had not in some degree repaired his ingratitude. But how is it
possible, that the fame of these wonders you have told us, should never have
come to our ears before, and that I have been ignorant of such memorable events
and wherein I had so great an interest? The distance of places (replied
Arsaces) and the little time since they came to pass, have without doubt kept
them from their knowledge. By what I can judge they happened during your
sickness at Susa, and since that time, few persons can have travailed into
Scythia, and few Scythians are come into these Countries. In the interim
(continued Arsaces) I was in the height of my felicities; The King By all
manner of kindnesses endeavored to make me lose the remembrance of his harsher
usage, I saw my Princess with all the freedom I could desire, I could not
doubt of her affection, after the important proofs I had received of it, and if
we had not waited for the news of Prince Oroondates, whose presence was
necessary to complete my fortune, I according to the wishes of the whole Court,
had obtained the Kings consent for the entire possession of my Princess. Yes,
Brother, 'twas nothing but your absence alone that retarded our marriage, and
how passionate, and how impatient soever I was, my love to you persuaded me
easily to expect your return, and to approve with a great deal of satisfaction,
that respect of Berenice's, and that testimony of the Kings consideration of
you. When I was happy in what concer'nd my love, the memory of my honor
wakened in me again, and I judged that all I had done, could not serve my
reputation, while I suffered Alexander to reign peaceably over those countries
which he had usurped from us by the death of the King my father, and by the
loss of some of my friends. This remembrance brought back part of that sadness
into my heart, which my present happiness seemed to have banished thence, and
though I found some consolation in the hope of doing something toward the
recovery of my glory, and of my fathers Dominions, the necessity of parting
with Berenice began to afflict me very sensibly, yet did I pass over all that
my love represented contrary to my glory, and having cast my self at the Kings
feet, Sir, (said I) after the honor your Majesty has done me to accept me
for your son, you should not suffer me to live unworthy of that quality, and
since the recovery of those dominions I have lost is linked to that of my
reputation, you are too much concerned in both, to refuse me the assistance I
desire of you. Alexander has triumphed over my fathers Empire, and his life,
and reigns quietly over those territories which heretofore were his. Without
your help Sir, I can neither revenge the death of my friends, nor rise to the
throne of my predecessors, and if your Majesty refuse it me, the Princess
your daughter must be the wife of a private man, and of a man dispossessed of
his inheritance, Be pleased to grant me Sir, for the highest effect of
generosity, some part of those valiant Scythians who have thought me worthy of
their friendship. By their courage I hope to repair my shame, and to reconquer
my dominions. That destroyer of our House, is an enemy to all Kings in
general, he already has invaded your frontiers, and will without doubt come
into the bowels of your Kingdom, if we carry not the war to him, into those
countries whereof he is yet but ill assured, I said some other things to the
King, which he heard with patience, and answered with a great deal of kindness.
Doubt not son, (said he) but that your interests shall henceforth be mine own,
nor but that I will con^ribute with my utmost powers, and even with mine own
person, to the recovery of your Empire; not to make Berenices condition more
advantageous by the luster of a crown, I esteem your person above all
greatnesses, and I know well enough you wear a sword, that can both maintain,
and conquer Empires: but because I judge as you do, that your glory is
interessed in your design, I Will arm the whole power of Scythia for you, and
will set you at the head of a hundred thousand men, who having such a leader,
will think nothing difficult, but hew you out a way to the regaining of the
throne you have lost: yet I desire we may stay till we either see, or hear some
news of Oroondates, I mean that he shall march along with you, that friend whom
you so highly have obliged and whose company is not to be despised; and while
we expect him, order shall be given, to make leavyes for the setting of this
army on foot. Those I was raising against you, and the troops you now
commanded, shall make a part of them, and the rest shall be ready against my
sons return, or within the time we will limit for that expectation. I was so
extremely satisfied at the Kings answer that I could not dissemble my
contentment, and to render it absolutely complete, the King protested he would
not suffer me to go from Issedon, before I had married Berenice. That fair
Princess was afflicted at my resolution; but being mistress of a great deal of
reason, she yielded to the necessity of my affairs, and to a thing for which
she had ever prepared. But alas! how little time we had to entertain one
another, and how short my joies were, though my griefs had been of long
continuance.

I was in bed, when some hours before day, I heard a confused noise about the
Palace, and an infinite number of cries, which were enough to waken the
soundest sleepers. I leapt into the floor, and running to a window, saw a great
many torches, and heard the voice of many persons who cried that the Princess
was carried away. At this news, I was very near falling into a swoune, but I
strove to keep all my forces in the need I had of them for such an occasion,
and presently after Criton came into my chamber. Sir, (said he) the Princess is
carried away. The grief he felt for my misfortune would not suffer him to say
m^^e, and I was so stricken, that I had not the power to get out one word. I
threw on a few clothes, and ran hastily to Berenice's lodgings, where I found
Theomiris with Cyllenia, and other maids, who by their cries redoubled the rage
wherewith I was transported, and told me with interrupted words, how the
Princess had been pulled by force out of her chamber, by seven or eight armed
men, and that those ravishers had carried her away by the back stairs into the
garden, and so out at a hole they had broken through the wall. I ran instantly
to those stairs, where I found two men dead, who were known to be grooms of her
chamber, and going down I saw the hole in the garden wall, through which my
cruel enemies came in and had got out again. Not knowing what way, nor what
advice to take, I went up again to the Kings quarter, where I found him buried
in an extraordinary sorrow, I had but few words with him, and those so
confusedly put together, that it was easy by them to know the disorder of my
heart. While he was sending out Messengers every way, I put on my arms in his
presence, and taking a hasty leave of him, got on horsback with a great many
Courtiers, who ran thronging to accompany me. We rode out at the City at the
nearest gate, and not being able to judge by any conjecture what way those
ravishers had taken, we wandered about all the rest of the night without knowing
whither we went, and at break of day found our selves at a little Town, some
two or three hundred furlongs from Issedon. There we could hear no news in the
world, and having taken another way, and after that a great many several ones,
we could meet with no body that could tell us any thing of what we sought, I
passed that night in a village four hundred furlongs from Issedon, and the next
morning we began our search again with the same diligence, and with the same
success. We spent three days more in it, not leaving any Town, Borough,
village, house or wood within a thousand furlongs of the City where we had
not been to seek her, at the end of which I returned to the King to see if
those he had sent out otherways had had any better fortune; but I found their
pains and care had been to as little purpose as ours. We doubted not but that
it was Arsacomes who had stolen away the Princess, he had left the Court a week
before, and since that time there had been no news of him. The King possessed
with that belief as well as I, made sharp complaints unto the Queen, and after
having protested to her, that he would use his utmost power to the ruin and
destruction of her Brother, he promised her likewise, that if by her
persuasions he would return to his obedience, and restore the Princess, he
would grant him pardon for her sake; but the Queen whither it were that she was
wilfully bent to favor her brothers action, or that indeed she was ignorant of
it, cast her self at the Kings feet, and protested her innocence with so many
tears, that he ceased to press her any further; yet he thought good I should
take two thousand horse, and go at the head of them to search Arsacomes his
houses, and gave order for a greater strength to follow me, in case we should
find him in a posture of resistance. I set forward in this equipage and to
shorten my discourse, went to all those places, whither it was thought
Arsacomes could retire, but there was no news to be heard either of Berenice
or of him, and we were informed with an unquestionable certainty, that he had
not been seen in those parts of many years. How great so ever the rage that
transported me was, I could not resolve to pour it forth upon those that were
under his obedience, or ruin a people that was innocent of their Princes
crime. Then it was that I saw my self abandoned to my despair, and that I was
often upon the point of seeking an end of my misfortunes in the end of my life.
I was going to fix on that resolution, when happening to be near the gate of a
Temple dedicated to Juno, famous for Oracles, which they came to consult from
all parts of Europe, I determined first to try if I could find any pity from
the Gods. They expressed themselves to me clearly enough, and though I do not
remember the words of the Oracle, I have not forgot, that the Goddess by the
mouth of her Priest, commanded me to seek out of Scythia for that which I had
lost, and to visit the walls of Semiramis, where I should find an end of all
my pains. I was the more willing to obey the pleasure of the Gods, because my
hopes were lost all other ways; and whither it were that they promised me the
recoverie of Berenice, or that it was by the end of my days, they made me hope
for that of my miseries, I resolvd to give my self up wholly to their will. My
design of marching into my Fathers territories with the forces the King of
Scythia had promised me, to fight with Alexander for the Empire, and the glory
he had taken from me* vanished quite out of my mind, and I was then called by a
more powerful^ motive to attempt the recoverie of Berenice, then that of my
lost Dominions, 'Twas also at that time I heard that Alexander had married the
Princess Statira my Sister, that he had given Parisatis to his favorite
Hephestion, and that he carried himself toward the remnants of Darius his blood
with the same affection as to his own. This news afflicted me very much for
many considerations; It troubled me to know it was my sisters husband against
whom I was to prepare my self for war, as soon as I should be in a condition to
entertain such thoughts; but I judged with a far more sensible grief, that my
dear Brothers hopes were utterly extinguished, and that if he had still
preserved his affections to Statira* he in her marriage could find no less
matter of affliction then what I felt for the loss of Berenice. I should longer
have reasoned with my self upon that sad occasion, if I had not been too much
taken up with my own misfortunes; but being resolved upon the voyage the Gods
had ordained me, I meant to make it without any train that could make me be
observed in those places where I passed, and to that end I took leave of all
those that were come along with me from Issedon, keeping no body with me but
Criton, and two other necessary servants, I even refused the company of my Dear
Theodates. But it was not without an extreme violence, that I persuaded him to
leave me, and I should never have wonn him to it, if I had not made him see
that his stay in Scythia was absolutely necessary for me, both to make the
greater care be taken in the search of Berenice, and to keep me right in the
Kings opinion, which might perchance be altered during my absence by
Stratonices solicitations, whereby he might in time be drawn to approve of her
Brothers action. Theodates lent an ear at last to this consideration, which in
effect was strong enough to stay him; but though he could not yield to that
separation without tears, and lamentations which I cannot express, in the end
we parted, after he had promised to make my excuses to the King, that I came
not to take my leave of him, and to tell him that since he had done me the
honor to give me Berenice, I would either bring her home to him again, or die
in quest of her. From the place where I left Theodates. I travailed directly
toward Mount Imaus which divides the two Scythia's, and having crossed through
the Asiattique, and the country of the Massagetes, I came into Bactria, and
entered upon the territories that had been the King my Fathers. I passed
unknown through all those places, where I found many marks of the disasters of
our family, and though my love was sufficient to possess me totally, yet could
I not without a great deal of trouble, see those people that had been our
subjects, yield obedience peaceably to new Masters. These objects presenting
themselves daily to my eyes, often drew sighs from me, which seconded those my
passions forced more violently from the bottom of my heart; In short I
continued all that journey in so deep a sadness, that if the consolations I
received from Criton, whose fidelity is beyond all recompense, had not in some
degree allayed I my sorrow, I think I should have sunk under the burden of
it, before I could have reached the Country the Oracle had appointed me. In the
end I arrived there without any encounter worthy to be related, and at my
arrival I heard of the death of Alexander, who had paid the debt of nature a
few days before. I know not how to tell you the several effects this news
wrought in me, I was glad for my dear brothers sake, who thereby recovered the
hopes he had lost in Statira's marriage; but I was sorry in mine own
particular, being thereby deprived of those I had conceived, of regaining my
honor from him that had taken it from me. And though it seemed to facilitate
the recovery of my Empire, it gave Alexander the advantage of having kept it
all his life, and of having been the Conqueror and the Master till his death. I
then thought upon the condition of my sisters, and was joy'd with a hope of
coming to the place where they were, of seeing them, and perhaps of doing them
some service in that estate, to which so great a revolution of their fortune
might have reduced them. Although the alteration of my face in so long an
absence, and the general opinion of my being dead, might have put me out of all
fear of being easily discovered, I would not hazard my life how ever, knowing
that in Babylon I should find persons from whom time had not taken away all
remembrance of my features, and therefore as soon as I was come into this
country, I retired to the house of a good honest man, some three or four
hundred furlongs from this place, whom I by gifts in present, and by the hopes
of more, engaged at first to as much affection, and secrecy as I could desire.
The next morning knowing I was nere the Temple of Apollo which I had formerly
visited, I had a desire to consult the pleasure of that God, and implore his
assistance. There it was I met with Prince Lysimachus, and that by his
graceful fashion, and his charming conversation, I began to give him that
esteem and that affection, which the recital of his gallant actions has since
completed. You doubtless have heard from him the discourse we had together,
and the words of the Oracle that was delivered to us; I thought them so obscure
that I could not comprehend any thing of their meaning and only found by the
last of them, that the Gods would have me wait their pleasure upon the banks of
Euphrates. That conformity with my former Oracle did a little augment those
faint hopes I had conceived, and made me in effect resolve to expect my destiny
a while upon the banks of that river. The house I had taken for my retreat was
seated nere it, well enough built, and furnished to make some stay there
without inconveniency, and far enough from the high ways, not to be
frequented with any company. The Master of it proffred with a great deal of
freedom to do me all the service that lay in his power, and finding him to be
a discreet* understanding man, I resolved to make use of him to try if I could
learn any news of Berenice. For this purpose having given him directions and
adresses to inform himself of what I desired, I sent him to the City, but O
Gods, how sorrowful was the news he brought me home; since by him I heard the
rumor that was spread in Babylon of the death of the Princesses my sisters.
This was so heavy an addition to my griefs, that it was like to have pressed me
down into my grave, and though I strove to dissemble it as well as I was able,
I could not possibly hinder my Landlord from perceiving that I was infinitely
troubled at that news. I made the dolefullest lamentations in the world, when I
was at liberty to utter them, and accused my self of meanness of spirit, for
having given my whole life up to my love, insted of bestowing part of it on the
relief I owed to those poor Princesses. I vented a thousand threats, and made
a thousand designs against their murderers, and was yet in the violence of
these thoughts, having hardly dried up my first tears when I met the valliant
Lysimachus a second time by the River side. He without doubt has told you the
discourse that passed between us, and how (just as I was going to ask his
name, after I had told him that mine was Arsaces) it was interupted by a
Cavalier who passing nere us inquired, the way to Babylon. It is very true
(said Lysimachus then to Arsaces) the coming of that stranger deprived me of
your company, after it had caused in me an esteem, or rather an admiration of
you, which all I could say, was not able to represent to Prince Oroondates,
when I made him the relation of that encounter. That Cavalier (continued
Arsaces) who passed so suddenly by us, was Arsacomes. You may easily judge by
what I have told you, that his image was always present enough to my
remembrance, not to need any long time to know him, and that his sight produced
in me at the very first, all those effects it was probable it should. The
knowledge thereof obliged Lysimachus to pardon me the rudeness of my hasty
departure, which would not suffer me to pay all the civilities that were due to
him. I ran so swiftly after Arsacomes, that though he was already a great way
of I began to see him again when we were out of the wood; that second sight
did so animate me, that my impatience doubled my horses speed, and at last I
got nere enough to my enemy to make him hear my voice. Stay, (cried I) stay
Arsacomes; These words which he heard after I had often repeated them, caused
him in the end to take up a little, and looking back to see who it was that
called him by his name, he beh^ld me with my sword drawn coming at him as hard
as ever I could drive. My action, and my threatening cries made him know I was
his enemy, wherefore not wanting courage he turned about, and expected me in
the posture of a man resolved to defend himself. He had a javeline in his right
hand, which he lifted up into the air, and when I was within twenty paces of
him, he raised himself upon his stirrups, and darted it at me with his utmost
force. The blow missed me, but struck my horse so violently in the head, that
he fell stark dead between my legg's. I disengaged my self presently from my
stirrups, and leaving my horse upon the ground, covered my self with my shield,
to end the combat on foot; but Arsacomes gave me not the leisure, and whither
it were that he disdaind to fight with me upon advantage, or that he was called
other where by pressing occasions, as soon as he saw me fall, he turned about
again, and galloped on his way at the same rate as he had done before. I
remained in a vexation hard to be imagined, and no longer having any means to
pursue my enemy, who rode away from me at liberty, I was ready to have vented
all my despair upon my self. Yet did I moderate my rage, by a reflection I
made upon this encounter, for I believed with likelihood that I had cause to
hope in the promise of the Gods, and that Berenice was not far from those
parts, since I had found Arsacomes there. This belief comforted me very much,
and a while after I was confirmed in it by Criton who came up to me at last,
his horse not having been so swift as mine, and his impatience not so violent.
He was very much troubled to hear the accident that had befallen me, and
having alighted to give me his horse, I would have gotten upon him to pursue my
enemy again, but I found him so spent, that I lost all hope of overtaking
Arsacomes, and was constrained to think upon some new resolution. I remembered
that Arsacomes had asked the way to Babylon, and I was of opinion I might light
upon him in that City, but Criton whose prudence I had observed in all his
actions, thought it not safe for me to go thither at that time, considering the
exact guard that was kept at the gates, where passengers were searched, and
examined whence they came, and what was their business, and where they did
many things that would put me in very great hazard of being known. He
represented to me that it would be much more easy for him to inform himself in
Babylon concerning what I desired, then for me who for fear of being
discovered would be feign to keep still within doors. Therefore by his advice,
in which I found a great deal of reason, I with his horse took my way back to
the house of our retreat and he went on a foot to the Town which was but a
little way of* from whence he was to come home to me the next day, with all the
news he could learn and with another horse which I gave him charge to buy.
Thus did I return to the place where I made my abode, and where I passed the
rest of that day in discontents mingled with some glimpse of hope; but before
it was night, Criton came back with a brave horse he had bought, and asking him
the cause why he returned sooner then I expected. Sir (answered he) before I
came to the gates of Babylon I met Arsacomes and which is more Sir, I met him
with the Princess Berenice. Ah! (cried I) what do thou tell me, have thou
found Berenice? Yes Sir (replied he) I found her in the arms of Arsacomes, who
in spite of her resistance, and in spite of all her cries, carried her away
before him galloping back the same way we saw him go. O Gods (added I quite
transported) what a happy progress is this toward the accomplishment of your
promises! If I had had a horse (said Criton) I should certainly have followed
them, though I had been sure to loose my life, but being a foot as I was, I
could not possibly execute my desires, for having presently lost sight of them,
though I ran as fast as I could, after I had complained of my ill fortune. I
thought the best service I could do you, would be to go on to the Town and buy
a horse for you as you had commanded me. This discourse touched me as you may
imagine, but it was with joy, which encouraged me to believe, I ought to hope
for all things from the promise of the Gods. I hardly would allow the night
leisure to pass away, and as soon as ever it was break of day, mounting the
horse which Criton had brought me, and which I found to be a very good one, I
began a fresh to seek after my Princess. Yet would I not stir out of this
Country, for fear of disobeying the Gods, whom I began to find exact in the
hopes they had given me, and when I had spent the days in my search, I for the
most part came back at night to my usual retreat. There is no Town here abouts
which I have not visited, no village, nor house whose entrance was permitted
me, where I have not been to look for my Princess; but all my endeavors were
unprofitable, and after having vainly sought through all the Province, I
thought at last to return to that Temple where the Gods had promised me the
return of my happiness, and where if I might be suffered, I meant to reproach
them for having deceived me. With this intention, being departed from a village
where I had lien, I left Babylon upon the right hand, and was hardly gotten
twenty furlongs from it, when I saw a chariot coming toward me, which six
horses drew at a very great rate. The design I had of seeking my Princess
every where, made me go nere the side of it, where I saw a woman in a man's
arms, who by her cries, and by all her actions, showed she was carried away by
force. My hopes were wakened in me by that sight, but as soon as I beheld her
face again, and heard her voice, I knew it was not my Princess; though me
thought neither that face, nor voice was unknown to me. Yet was I resolved to
succor her whosoever she was, and to that end riding up to the Charioteer, I
commanded him to stand. He made a difficulty to obey me, but I brought the
point of my javeline to his face, and made him know there was no safety for him
but in obedience. In the mean time he that was in the Chariot, having observed
my action, leapt nimbly out, and calling a man that carried his caske, gave him
charge to hold that Lady, if she should offer to get away, and making him a
light from a gallant horse he was upon, he threw himself into the Saddle with a
great deal of agility; he was no sooner in his stirrups, but coming toward me
with a threatening action; Whosoever thou art (cried he) though thou were
Lysimachus again, if thou opposest my intention, thou shall be sure to meet
with death in thine. I am not Lysimachus (answered I) but if thine intention be
to carry away that Lady by force, mine shall ever be to defend her against thy
violence. Thou must dye then, replied he, and with those words, flew upon me
with a great deal of courage. Being he indeed was valliant, the combat lasted
for some time without disadvantage to either, but in the end, I was more
fortunate then he, and after having warded many blows he made at me, I gave him
two or three wounds, which made him fall from his horse unable to fight any
longer. Then I turned toward the Lady I had rescued, and he that held her by
his Masters command, no sooner saw me coming, but he let her go, and fled
toward Babylon. The woman presently leaped out of the Chariot, and the
Charioteere lasshing on his horses toward the City, got a great way from us in
a little time. Scarce had I alighted, and set my eyes upon that Ladies face,
but I observed all the lineaments of Queen Statira my sister. You may well
enough conceive how great my amazement was at so unexpected an encounter;
especially there being a general rumor that she was dead. That belief, and her
habit which was very different from what she was wont to wear, hindered me from
giving credit to my eyes, but when by my action she saw me express my
astonishment. Never doubt of it, (said she) I am Statira, I am the widow of
Alexander the Great. And I sister (cried I quite transported) am Prince
Artaxerxes your Brother, and casting my head piece at her feet, I ran to her
with open arms, and in her amazement which made her incapable of resistance, I
gave her a thousand kisses, accompanied with tears which my eyes bestowed on
my affection. If the wonder that had seized on me was great, you may well
imagine that hers was without comparison, and that she could not see that
brother again, whom she had loved so well, and whom she had thought dead eight
years before, with a moderate astonishment. When she was got loose from my
embraces she retired a step or two to consider my face; could not believe but
that it was my Ghost, asked me often if it were possible I should be alive, and
in short did all those actions, which you did your self at our knowing one
another. As Soon as she was persuaded that I was Artaxerxes indeed, she cast
away her doubts, to give her self over to her affection, and throwing her self
into mine arms with transported cries, she made me see that neither time, nor
the accidents of her life had at all diminished her former love. We continued a
great while in a strict embrace, without having power to bring forth a distinct
word, and when once we were able, we questioned each other mutually concerning
what we were ignorant of. How come you to be a live dear Brother? How come you
to be a live dear Sister? said we both together; and answering both at the
same time, we began a very confused discourse, and so interrupted with
endearments, that we could tell one another nothing. Besides my sister believed
that in the place where we were, we could not without danger engage our selves
in a long conversation so having prayed me to carry her from thence, and to run
if it were possible to the relief of Parisatis, who was a live, and a prisoner,
she persuaded me to get on horsback and having set her behind me, we rode as
she desired a long the Riverside. She would have questioned me about my
adventures, but I having told her that the relation of my life would require no
less, then a whole day, and that it was more necessary I should learn some
thing of her present condition, and of Parisatis, she in a few words told me
all that had happend to her since Alexanders death, the name of Perdiccas, with
whom I had fought, and the estate in which she had left Parisatis; but she said
nothing of Prince Oroondates, whither it were that she judged that remembrance
faulty after the death of Alexander, or that she meant to speak of him more at
large when she had better leisure. She had not quite ended her discourse when
we saw the chariot coming in which Parisatis was; you have heard the beginning
of that which passed, and how having made Statira a light that I might be
fitter for the encounter, I was assaulted by half a score horsemen who guarded
the chariot, and that while I was engaged among them, Statira was taken again.
I heard her cry a loud when they put her into the chariot, and would have run
to help her if I could have had free passage; but the enemies I had upon me
stopped my way, and reduced me to a necessity rather of defending my self, then
of relieving my sisters. Three of them lay already gnawing the earth, and the
rest began to find that though I was alone, they should obtain no easy
victory. In effect my strength was so redoubled by my anger, and by my grief
for this last accident, that I quickly dispatched another and by good fortune
Criton who was returning from a place whither I had sent him, came in just then
to my assistance, and he no sooner knew me but making use of Policy to strik a
terror in my enemies; Courage Sir, (cried he) you are relieved. I kn^w not
whither these words and the confidence wherewith they saw him fall upon them,
made them believe he was followed by others, or whither their fear of two men
alone produced that effect, but however it were, the fierceness of my enemies
began to cool, and presently after they turned their backs leaving me the
victory, and the field; but at the same time my horse fell dead of the wounds
he had received, and Criton seeing five or six without Masters, caught the
best of them and brought him to me. I no sooner was upon his back but I ran
after the track of the Chariot, which had carried away the Princesses, and had
followed the bank of the river a while in that pursuit, when I was stopped by a
considerable encounter, and such a one as I ought well to remember, since I
still bear the marks of it, and that it cost me more blood then I had lost in
all the rest of my life. It was the encounter of you and Berenice, Brother, I
found you when I least expected it, and I also found Berenice, but in such a
condition as I believed I never could have taken her. O Gods! what were my
thoughts when I knew my Princess! but O Gods, what were my resentments when I
saw her hanging about the neck, and kissing the face of a man in Arsacomes his
armor! I presently believed that it was he, but knew not how to imagine my
Princess should be guilty of so horrible a lightness. I stood a while
considering their actions, but when I saw her continue such extraordinary
kindnesses, as could not have been pardoned if any body but a brother had
received them, I gave my self over to a rage, which in appearance was but too
lawfully grounded. You found the effects of it dear Brother, as I felt those of
your matchless valor, which by a number of very deep wounds made me fall upon
the ground without sense, or understanding. The condition I was reduced to
(interupted Prince Oroondates) was no better then yours, and if I had the glory
to share equally with you in the event of our combat, I owe it to those you had
fought before, which without doubt could not have left so great a vigor as I
encountered in that last in any other man but the invincible Arsaces. If my
former combats (replied Arsaces) had caused any weariness in me, the jealousy,
or rather the fury wherewith I was transported, banished it in such manner, and
did so powerfully redouble my forces, that I never was fresher, nor in better
condition to dispute my pretensions against any body else but Oroondates. In
short I was fallen upon the ground, where Criton had me in his arms, who that
day did me his wonted services, and who after he had long tormented himself
about me, went to seek help either for my recovery or burial. When he had gone
a little way, he by good chance met a company of horsemen who were riding
toward Babylon, and having told them my misfortune in a few words, found some
among them so generous as to be sensible of it, and to offer him their
assistance. They were the brave Seleucus, and certain horsemen that attended
him, who no sooner were come to the place where I lay, where I had died the
earth about me red with my blood, but they were touched with compassion, and
making me be taken up in some of their cloaks, they caused me to be carried to
a poor man's house about^ ten or twelve furlongs from the place where we had
fought. Seleucus was so careful as to have my clothes pulled off, and to see
my wounds himself, but he thought them so great, that he conceived very little
hope of my recovery; yet would he not leave me, knowing by many signs that I
was still alive, and therefore sent away a man instantly to the City, to fetch
Chirurgions with all possible speed. Before they came, having found something
in my face that made him desirous to know who I was he inquired o^ Criton, who
thinking he should thereby oblige him to succor me with the more affection,
contented himself with concealing that I was Artaxerxes the son of Darius, and
told him I was that Arsaces who had conquered Armibas, and gained some
victories in Scythia. Seleucus had heard of Arsaces, and of the first things I
had done in the King of Scythia's service; wherefore being indeed virtuous
himself, he was persuaded by some report of virtue that had run to my
advantage* and no sooner knew that I was Arsaces, but instead of the compassion
which had moved him to lend me that first assistance; he thought himself
obliged by all manner of considerations to neglect nothing for my safety, and
expressing a very great trouble for the estate he saw me in, he at the
Chirurgions coming promised them excessive recompenses if they could contribute
any thing toward my cure. When they had searched my wounds, they saw small hope
of life, though according to what they said, my loss of blood was cause of
their greatest apprehensions. Yet did they do their office very carefully, and
implored all their skill in dressing my hurts, and in fetching me to my senses.
Part of the night was pas'd when I came to my self again, but with very little
memory and very little understanding, and the day appeared before I was able to
discern any object, or reca^l to mind any thing that had passed. As soon as I
began to have a little knowledge I turned my eyes on every side, and seeing
Criton by me, I asked him where I was, he told me the truth in a few words, and
presently after Seleucus coming to me; Courage, (said he) valliant Arsaces, you
have persons about you who are very affectionate to your virtue, and who labor
for your health as passionately as for their own. He said no more, nor staid
any longer with me, for fear of obliging me to answer him, and Criton having
only told me that it was Seleucus, and entreated me not to speak, went also out
of the chamber with him, who was recalled to Babylon by very pressing
occasions, and who nevertheless would not go away, till he saw me in that
degree of amendment. When they had left me alone, I was more accompanied then I
had been before; You easily guess that the remembrance of my last encounter
came not into my mind, without driving me into an extremity of grief, and that
I could not call to memory the condition I had found Berenice in, without
falling into another a thousand times worse then that, out of which the
Chirurgions endeavored to recover me by their assistance. O Gods! how shall I
be able to express my violent thoughts, or rather how will you supply the
defect of my discourse, by fancying part of them in your imagination? I cannot
represent them better to you brother then by your own; but yet my sorrow wanted
one consolation which you received in yours, for you could not believe Statira
to be inconstant, without having your affliction counterbalanc'd by a joy at
the assurance that Statira was a live. Yes, I remembered that I had found
Berenice, but I had found her so unworthy and so shamefully changed, that I had
seen her give my rival favors, the smallest part whereof had never been
granted unto me. I remembered likewise that I had fallen under the forces of my
rival, and that remembrance made me doubt whither it was Arsacomes; He wore
his arms he was with Berenice, whom Arsacomes had carried away, and with whom
Criton had seen her a few days before; but I had found the valor of that
enemy so different from that of Arsacomes, that I had much a do to persuade my
self it could be he, unless the Gods to complete their anger against me, had
so augmented his strength, to hinder the Satisfaction my revenge might have
given me. I remained uncertain what to believe, but whither it were Arsacomes,
or some new servant, I found so great cause of grief and of despair in that
abominable change, that all I have told you hitherto of my former afflictions,
had touched me but lightly in comparison of this last. I could not fancy
Berenice in the posture I had seen her, holding a man in her arms, and kissing
him with that mouth, which had been so niggardly to me, even then when her
fathers consent might have authorized the permission of such favors, without
loosing that little reason I had recovered; and then yiedling to the rage that
transported me; Ah! light inconstant woman (cried I) by what horrid change have
thou lost the remembrance of what thou were heretofore, and the remnants of
that virtue which made thee leave a lover to put thy self into the hands of
thine enemies? Ah! if thou were to give thy self to Arsacomes, thou should
have done it when thou might with less unworthiness, and when thy
infidelity might have been justified by thy fathers command. Thy crime had been
less shameful by that pretense, and by the reproach of thy inconstancy, thou
might have avoided that of thy disobedience. After these words followed
whole troops of cruel thoughts, and my jealousy giving such shaps to all
things as were most suitable to it, put conceits into my head, which I should
never have fallen into if I had been in my right mind. Ah! without doubt (said
I again) thy infidelity is not so new a thing as I believed; that action of
thine before Issedon, was an effect of thy change, and not of thy virtue, nor
would thou ever have forsaken me, to cast thy self into the arms of that
rival, from whence I had pulled thee with the peril of my life, if the lover
to whom thou ran'st had not been dearer to thee then he whom thou forsookest.
Thou have dissembled since by Stratonice's counsel, to begin to accommodate
thy self to thy fathers humor, and thy stealing away whereby I lost all my
fortune with thee, had not been so easily effected, if thou thy self had not
consented to it, Pardon me dear Princess, (pursued Arsaces turning toward
Berenice) pardon me the injury I then did your virtue, and consider that the
condition I was reduced to, made me incapable of any sound, or reasonable
judgment, yet did I strive to repent my opinion, but could not do it without
be^ying my own eyes, and accusing them for having deluded me in that encounter.
Perchance I may be deceived (said I) and my imagination prepossessed with the
remembrance of Berenice, did it may be present some other object to me insted
of her. Ah! no (cried I again immediately after) I was not deceived, and
Berenice's features are too truly graven in my memory, to suffer me to be
conferred in the knowledge of her. I saw her but too plainly, and looked but too
long upon her, to be in doubt whither it were she or no. It Is she, and she is
now in the arms of my rival, and of my conqueror, and if fortune has dealt
any better with him then with me, they now rejoice together at the victory he
has obtained. In this thought seeing Criton who was come to my bedside again,
I commanded him to relate the true issue of our combat, to tell me in what
condition I had left my enemy, and what became of Berenice. Sir (said he) I
must confess that the distance, the trouble I was in during your combat, and a
veil she had put down over her face, hindered me from knowing it was the
Princess, but the woman that was present while you fought, no sooner saw your
enemy fall, (who sunk from his horse at the same time with you, either dead, or
in the same case you were) but she ran instantly to him, with cries that came
unto my ears as far as I was off; and she still was making lamentations over
him, when I went from you to seek for help, but at my return we neither found
her, nor the body of your enemy. This account of Critons wrought too different
effects upon me, for though it confirmed my Princesses infidelity, it comforted
me in the belief that I had slain my enemy, or at least that he had not gotten
an entire victory. Then I turned over a thousand several resolutions in my
mind, and though they tended all toward death, yet the last upon which I fixed
was that if it pleased the Gods I should escape my wounds, I would never dye
without being assured of my revenge, or without finishing it by another combat,
and moreover that I would never dye but before the eyes of the ungrateful
Berenice. The Princess who had often blushed during Arsaces his discourse,
could no longer forbear to interrupt him. Ah! Arsaces (said she) how
ungrateful were you your self, in those cruel thoughts you had of me,
certainly my humor should have been well enough known to you, to make you
believe that no body but my brother ought ever to hope for those kindnesses
from me, which caused your jealousy. If I had had any other witnesses but my
own eyes (replied Arsaces) I should never have given credit to them; but in
short I my self had seen that that was as bad to me as death, and I was then so
unfortunate that the truth of this adventure never came into my thoughts. I
rather believed that my dear Brother was no longer in the world, since in so
great a revolution of my sisters affairs, we had not heard the least news of
him, since upon that of her death, wherein he was much more concerned then any
body else, he had neither appeared to relieve, nor to revenge her, and since my
sister who it was likely would best have known it if he had been in this
country, had not said one word to me concerning him. This opinion of your death
dear Brother, which by little and little settled it self in my thoughts, was
cause of many of those things that have happened to me since, and confirmed me
in the design I have to dye, as soon as I was certain of my revenge, and as soon
as I had powered those reproaches into the ears of Berenice, which I thought due
to her infidelity. The desire of prolonging my life till I could find occasion
to loose it in her presence made me suffer the help that was given me, and
assist toward my recovery as much as they about me desired. Seleucus who
interessed himself in it very cordially, came back to me the same day, and when
once I was in a condition to thank him for his care, I endeavored to let him
see he took it not of a person that would ever become unworthy thereof by his
ingratitude. The Chirurgions could not yet settle any certain judgment about
my cure, but they found I was so inconveniently in that little house and in a
scuruy chamber where I was almost suffocated with the excessive heat of the
season, that though there were danger in removing me, they believed there was
more in letting me continue in that place. Seleucus whose urgent occasions
called him perpetually to Babylon, and who nevertheless could have been glad
not to be from me, consented willing to the proposition, of carrying me
thither, and I had given my self up so wholly to be ordered by them, that I did
not so much as enquire what they meant to do with me. I knew not whither it
was to Babylon, or to some other place that they intended to remove me, but
though I had known I had preserved so little care of my affairs, and of all
other thoughts but those my jealousy in spir'd me with, that I should never
have opposed them. I therefore suffered them the fourth day to put on my
clothes, and lay me in a litter to carry me to the Town, whither Seleucus
going along with me himself made me be brought to his own house, where I was
very bravely lodged, and more commodiously attended. It surprised me a little
to see I was in Babylon, but as I have already told you, my despair swallowed
up all my former fears of being known, and I judged that happen to me what
would, my condition could not be worse then it was since Berenice's infidelity.
Yet did I endeavor to free my self from receiving many visites, and to that
end, having made that request to Seleucus, he promised I should be seen but by
very few. The condition I was in, hindered me from seeing all the preparations
that were made for defense against those forces of yours that began to appear,
and Seleucus who by reason of Perdiccas his wounds, bore the greatest weight of
those affairs, knowing my weakness made me unfit for that entertainment,
talk nothing of it to me, but when by occasion of discourse he could not avoid
it. Yet thus much I understood by what I heard him say, and by what Criton told
me, that the Princes Lysimachus, Ptolomeus, and their companions, had formed a
party against Perdiccas and his, for the interests of the Princesses my
sisters, either dead, or captives, and the justice I found in your quarrel,
made me sorry I was obliged to Seleucus, since he was engaged among your
enemies. Yet did I stick but lightly upon those considerations, for a more
powerful grief had made me incapable of taking an interest in any thing, which
concerned not the cause of my despair, I continued certain days without other
thoughts save those of my revenge, and of death, the danger whereof according
to the Chirurgions opinion, was not yet quite over, and perchance I should not
have admitted any that could have obliged me to join with either side if I had
been fit for service, but for a thing that happend to me about that time. I had
sent Criton to the place where I had fought to enquire after Berenice, and my
enemy, and to endeavor to learn some thing that might inform me what was
become of them; but at his return with the remedy for my wounds, he brought me
news which wakend my interests powerfully enough, to make me neglect those of
our family, to mingle mine with these of Seleucus. Criton came back to me
Brother, with the her be you had given him for my cure, told me what had
befallen him in your Camp, delivered your generous message, showed me the
present you had sent me, and assured me that you were not Arsacomes. This
encounter made me fall into a confusion of thoughts, and into an astonishment
hard to be described, and though I was glad to hear my enemy was in a place
where I could meet him, and where we might have opportunity to end our quarrel,
it was a great discontent to me to know that by the greatness of my wounds, I
should not of a long time and perhaps never, be in a condition to fight with
him again; or that I must be feign to be beholding to my enemy for the healing
of them. Seleucus was present at Critons coming in, and at the acco^nt he gave
me, and after having admired your generosity, he knew the Herb you sent me,
and confirmed the truth of the story of Ptolomeus. He with a great deal of joy
persuaded me to apply it to my wounds, but the repugnance I had to receive my
health from the hands of my cruel enemy, made me for along time oppose his
desires, and perhaps I should never have consented, if I had not thought my
rival might attribute that refusal of his assistance, to a fear of coming to
fight with him again. I judged moreover that that obligation, did not engage
me to any peace with him, since he had no other intention in obliging me, then
that of finishing with his hand, what my wounds perhaps were too slow in
effecting, and that our hatred being founded upon the possession of Berenice,
and not upon any slight formality, it could end no other way but by the death
of one of us. These considerations made me resolve to use the present he sent
me, and turning toward Seleucus who pressed me to it very ernestly: Yes
Seleucus (said I) from whence soever I receive my cure, I accept of it to serve
you, and to acquit my self of my obligations to you, I Will fight on your side if
I can recover my strength, and though in my opinion you have not the justest
cause, the remembrance of what I owe to you, and the desire of taking revenge
upon my enemy, makes me pass over that consideration. Seleucus expressed an
excessive joy when he heard me say so, and taking me by the hand, which I put
forth to him with much affection. We have conquered, valliant Arsaces, (said
he) since you say you will fight for us, and you are too accustomed to victory, to
let us fear an ill success of this war while you are of our party. If there
be any injustice in our quarrel, I protest to you it is more then I know of, and
that I am engaged in it only by my friendship to Perdiccas, whom I have ever
known too virtuous, to be suspected of those crimes whereof his enemies accuse
him. When he had said these words* he caused that Sovereign Herb to be made
ready, but presently after he began to doubt, whither I might ^afely use it,
and whither I ought not to suspect some foul play in an enemies present. The
knowledge he gave me of his fear wrought no effect upon me but hastening the
Chirurgions to apply that remedy. My enemy is too gallant (said I) to be
suspected of such a baseness, and if you had seen how he maintains his
interests with his sword, you would not believe he had any need of poison, or
that the use of it were known to him. On this manner did I accept the present
you sent me, and made no difficulty to receive my life from you* that I might
be able to employ it once more to the destruction of yours. I confess my
resolution was some thing strange in the choice of that party, and though I
knew that I owed my life perhaps to Seleucus, and that he continued to engage
me further by all kind of testimonies o^ his affection that respect was not
strong enough to make me take up arms for men who probably were the enemies of
our house, and the memory of what I owed to my own blood, and to the friendship
of persons so nere me, was powerful enough to counterbalance my obligations to
Seleucus; but my enraged passion, stifled all remembrances^ to thrust me
headlong to my revenge, and living for no other end but to dye in the presence
of Berenice, after I had first made an end of him, who had so unjustly robbed me
of her, I shut my eyes against whatsoever reason and nature could represent.
Let all perish (said I) if the Gods ordain it so, since Bernice is false; and
since I must no longer hope for that fortune, whereby I have survived the ruin
of our house what is it to me if it be utterly destroyed* and why should I any
more be concerned at any thing in the world, where I am detained by nothing
else but my desire of revenge! They on both sides are equally my enemies, since
they have equally endeavored the destruction of our family, and that they
equally possess the Dominions that were ours; and if ^ ought to put any
difference between them, the obligation I have to Seleucus, ought to make it
wholly in favor of his party. Yet do I neither fight for Seleucus, nor for
Perdiccas, against Pto^om^ns and against Lysimachus, but among the enemies of
Seleucus, and Perdiccas, I seek mine own most cruel, and irreconcilable
enemy. If the Gods permit that I may kill him, I Will cease to offen'd my family,
by ceasing to out live him, and if I perish by his hand, the end of my faults,
and the end of my misfortunes, will both be joined together in that of my
life. Besides these thoughts which were inspired into me by my despair* I
reflected as much as it would suffer me, upon many things that confirmed me in
the design of serving the party, contrary to that of my enemy; and though I
had very just causes of resentment against Roxana, I smothered part of those I
had against Perdiccas, and could not remember that his love had thrust him upon
actions that were displeasing to the Queen my sister, without remembering also
that both she and Parisatis, were indebted to him for their lives, and that but
for the assistance he had given them, I should have been the only person
remaining of the blood of Darius. Moreover I believed that the love which he
and his brother bore my sisters, would engage them still in their defense, and
that if they were at that time in their hands, they were safer there against
Roxana's hatred, then in any other retreat whatsoever. I communicated none of
these thoughts to Seleucus, though his virtue might have given me a great deal
of confidence in him, not thinking it convenient, for the little time I had
resolved to ^^ve, and in the condition I then was, to make any further
discovery of my self. I said not a word to him of my combat against Perdiccas
nor of with I knew of the Princesses being a live, whom for all your
declaration every body believed dead, or at least faign'd to believe so.
Perdiccas had never see ne my face, and though we have often met and talked
together since, he still continued ignorant that I had ever h^d any encounter
with him. Yet you easily imagine that so were Roxana and him* and in the
midst of so many men, whom their interest was sure to make my enemies, I
could not be without a great deal of danger, but you also know, that as I
cared but little for my life, I took but little care of its conservation. Yet
did I desire (aiming at nothing less then my safety) to avoy'd the sight of
Roxana, and of all others that could know me; and Seleucus of whom I daily
requested that favor being willing to satisfy me, ordered the matter so that
I was visited by none but his particular friends. The report nevertheless of
my lying wounded at Seleucus his house, began to spread about the Town, and
that small reputation I had gaind, was cause that many had a mind to see me.
Roxana her self, who out of cunning, flatters those with great civility, whom
she has a desire to engage in her party, had oftentimes a thought to visit
me; but Seleucus at my earnest entreaty diswaded her from it, saying I was not
yet so well, as to receive her visites without in convenience. In the mean
time, Brother, your Medecin had wrought its usual effect upon me* and within
ten or twelve days after the applying of that Herb, I was well enough to
leave my bed. Perdiccas who was cured almost about that time, was the first
that visited me, and came into my chamber with Seleucus, Alcetas, Cassander,
and some other of the most considerable among them. He entertained me with the
civillest and most obliging discourses in the world, and told me that my
reputation had come to the ears of Alexander, and had not only gaind me the
esteem of that Great King, but of all virtuous persons whatsoever, that he
received the assistance I made him hope for, as the chiefest step to victory,
that he would resign me all the authority he held over those of his party, and
that there was none among them, who would not voluntarily submit to me. I
answered that excess of civility, with all that I had left in the sorrowful
condition of my heart, and assured him in a few words, that I would serve him
without any command, and without other ambition then that of fighting by
Seleucus his side. After that visit I received many others from him, but
as soon as the forces were come up, finding my self able to leave my chamber, I
prayed Seleucus I might go out of the Town to encampe with them, and to lie in
his tent, which with those of the other Princes, were pitched along the bank of
the Euphrates, there I passed many tedious days, or rather many weary some
nights, since my soul was nothing but in darkness, or at the best enlightened
only by some hope of revenge. Criton who had already told me, that my enemy
was not Arsacomes, confirmed it to me after he had seen him again with
Clitophon, when he carried him thanks for the favor he had done me, and I was
already persuaded of it, by the trial I had made of his forces, and by the
admirable generosity of that rival, who in all his actions me thought was very
different from Arsacomes: yet though I doubted not of what Criton said, I knew
not what to believe, when the report came into our Camp, that a Scythian
Prince named Arsacomes, was with our enemies and very much considered amongst
them. This news, which came to us many several ways, put me at first into
great disquiets, to learn the truth of it; but in the end I banished them all,
sticking close to my former resolutions. Let him be Arsacomes (said I) or let
him be a stranger, it is still he that takes Berenice from me, and he whom I
ought to prosecute to death. In the person of Arsacomes I shall kill my ancient
enemy, and in that of a stranger I shall punish the cruel man, who unjustly
robs me, of what he has not purchased by his blood, and services as I have
door, and who makes Berenice a thousand times more faulty by such a horrible
lightness, then if she had given her self to Arsacomes, who has loved and
served her many years. These were my thoughts till the time of my conference
with Lysimachus, the day before the battle. Seleucus had told me the History of
that Prince, and besides the esteem which was caused in me by the recital of
his gallant actions, the affection he had testified to my sister, and to all
our family, made me value him exceedingly; but when I found by his letter that
it was he with whom I had contracted a friendship at the Temple of Apollo, and
afterward by the Riverside, I recieved the occasion of seeing him withal the
joy I could then be capable of; You from him have heard what passed between us,
and how our conversation was interrupted; and from me you shall hear, that
after we parted, the remembrance of h^s words, put me again into my former
confusion, and I could not call to mind what he had said of the long services
my rival had done my Princess, without believing it was Arsacomes. The last
actions (said I to my self) which I did in Scythia, till which my passion was
never openly declared, were done too lately to be come to the knowledge of
Lysimachus, and Arsacomes his passion which has been discovered these seven
or eight years, can be unknown to no body, but those that know not him, it is
Arsacomes without doubt. Criton has forgotten his features, or else his face
is altered by his wounds, or by some other accident, and with his face^ the
Gods to ruin me, have changed his forces, and his courage. It Is certainly this
advantageous change, that has also changed Berenice, and this new gallantry,
may have obtained that of her, which he never could have done by his ordinary
qualities. With discourses and thoughts of this nature, I impatiently waited
for the next day, wherein I hoped to make my revenge famous to eternity; but
being I sought for nothing but to meet my enemy, I would needs have fought as a
private man, and 'twas almost by force, that Sel^ucus prevailed with me, to
share with him in the command of those troops he was to lead. I will not say
any thing to you of that bloody day, wherein after I had long sought the
supposed Arsacomes, I met him but to my loss and to my confusion; yet you may
guess by what I have told you, and by what I attempted, with how great an
extremity of anger and affliction I have been tormented since. When I knew
that the Gods had saved my enemy from my revenge that second time, I was ready
to have turned all the effects of my despair, against self, and 'twas with all
the difficulty in the world, that Seleucus got me to suffer the dressing of
some light hurts I had received. From my first transports, I fell into new
designs, and began to condemn the ways I had taken for my revenge. The
injustice of the side I was of, was more known to me then it had been before,
and when I heard that Prince Oxyartes my uncle, and all those that loved the
memory of Darius, were of your party, and that your intention appeared to me to
be such as you had declared in your Manifests, I with remorse perceived that my
passion had made me criminal, and ungrateful, and that my fault was too odious
to the Gods, to hope they would ever grant me the revenge I aimed at, and in
which I had bounded my utmost desires. Fight no more against thy friends,
ungrateful Artaxerxes (said I) and give not that advantage to thine enemy, to
serve thy house, while thou art favoring its enemies. The choice he has made
of that party, ought to make thee blush for shame, and if he be worthy of thy
hatred, by wrongs that are more considerable then the services he does thy
friends, set thy self against his person alone, without fighting still against
thy nearest kindred, and against those that have taken arms for the remainders
of thy family. Go and dispatch him in his tent, since without crime thou can
not stay here till a second Battle, and that thy impatiency will not yield to
so long a delay, perhaps the Gods may suffer thee to effect what thou have
resolved and if they have decreed that thou must fall, thy death will be more
to thy advantage that way, then if thou should receive it at the head of the
enemies of thy house, from the hands of Oxyartes, or of some other Prince of
thine own blood. This design was put in execution, and the next day without
thinking so much as upon Criton, so far had my fury blinded me, while he was
gone to some other part of the Camp, I put on my arms, got on horsback, and
being fully resolved to be killed, or kill my rival, I left our Camp, and
advanced directly toward yours. There was little probability I could effect
that enterprise, but the regard I had of life, was a great deal less, and
equally desiring my death and my revenge, I ran to both with a like
precipitation.

I shall not need to tell you any more (continued Arsaces) since you are not
ignorant of the rest, and that you know as well as I, the admirable change that
has happened in my fortune. Where I sought my cruel enemy, I met my dearest
brother, where I sought a faithless Berenice, I found Berenice still constant
and still full of goodness, to pardon me the injuries I have done her, and in
short where I sought my death, I found my life, but a life happy beyond all my
hopes, and a life that makes me bless all my past afflictions, since I see
them brought to so sweet, so glorious a conclusion.

The end of the fifth Book.
The continuation of the fourth Part of CASSANDRA. The sixth Book.
THus did the Prince finish his long narration, and his illustrious hearers, at
the recital of his mavelous actions, remained in an astonishment, which for
a long time they could not express otherwise then by their silence. They
looked a while upon one another, as if it had been mutually to ask what
judgment Arsaces was to expect of those his wonders, and in the end they broak
forth altogether into an admiration of that Prince's whole life, and of all his
particular actions extolling them with praises which his modesty could not
suffer. Yet was he constrained to let pass the first motions of those generous
persons, who could not hold their peace having so great, and so gallant a
subject to discourse of. After that confusion was a little over, and that a
single body could be heard; The greatness of these actions (said Oroondates)
which the Prince my Brother has related, has not at all surprised me* for
though perchance they are above all that the virtue of any man, without the
help of fortune* has ever executed, yet are they not above the opinion I had
conceived of Prince Artaxerxes. The Gods have restord him to me (pursued he
giving that Prince most affectionate embraces) and in restoring him contrary to
my hopes, they have made known to men* what exact observers they are of their
promises. The words of that Oracle, which we thought to be so obscure* are now
sufficiently explained, and in our latter actions we cannot be ignorant; that
THE DEAD, have BUILT THE FORTUNE OF THE LIVING, and that THE LIVING have
labourr'd for the REPOSE OF THE DEAD. While Oroondates LIVING defended Berenice
against the violence of Arsacomes and delivered her out of his hands, to
restore her into those of Prince Artaxerxes; A^taxerxes DEAD in the opinion of
the world fought also for Oroondates, and by the effects of his usual valor,
freed the Queen his sister out of the power of Perdiccas* As the providence of
the Gods in this encounter is wonderful; so is the conjuncture of it likewise
very strange, and by this happy beginning, I from the same Gods, and from this
DEAD Prince they have raised again, expect the end of that felicity they have
promised us with an undoubting confidence. They that heard Oroondates his
words, after they had kept him company in admiring so extraordinary an event,
confirmed him in his opinion, and we^e going to fall into a conversation, for
which they wanted not matter, when Arsaces to whom Berenices adventures were
unknown, and who was therein too much concerned to be ignorant of them any
longer, desired her to favor him with that relation, and in that desire he did
but prevent Oroondates, who knew no more of them then he, and obliged the
company who lo^g'd extremely to hear the last accidents of that Princesses
life* she staid not to be any longer entreated, but after having thought a
while upon what she had to say, began to satisfy their expectations thus.

The Continuation of the HISTORY of BERENICE.
THe whole day has been spent in Prince Artaxerxes, his story, but mine shall
be so short, that it is not the length of it will make it tedious to you.

I shall not need to tell you it was Arsacomes that carried me away, since you
are certain enough of that truth already, I will only let you know, that I
had passed part of that fatal night, in which he excecuted his perfidious
resolution, with Arsaces, Prince Carthasis my uncle, and many other persons,
and that after all were retired to their several lodgings, I instead of going
to bed, engaged my self in a long discourse, wherein, though Cyllenia often
desired me to go to bed we spent two or three hours; it seemed my evil
destiny had so ordained, to give my enemies the more facility to execute their
design; or my good fortune to hinder me from falling into their hands in an
undecent manner. Our conversation at last was at an end, and we were beginning
to undresse us to go to bed, when I saw my chamber door thrust open, and seven
or eight armed men come in. You may well enough imagine in what a fear I was*
without my going about to represent it, therefore I will only tell you that it
was so great as it deprived me of all my strength, and that I saw my self in a
man's arms, without being able to resist him, and almost without having the
confidence to call Theomiris, and Cyllenia to my relief. Yet did I send forth
loud cries, when they took me out of my chamber, which drew some of my
servants who instead of rescuing me, found their death in the swords of those
Barbarous men. They carried me down the back stairs, crossed through the
garden, and being got out at the hole they had made in the wall, they put me by
force into a chariot, in which I was stayed for by two men, and a woman, and a
no sooner was I in it, but three of those ravishers placing themselves by me,
the rest got on horsback, and the Charioteer lashing his horses, drove away as
fast as possibly he could. I then fell presently into a swoun, as one of
greater courage then I might have done, and continued so long in it, that we
were above three hundred furlongs from Issedon before I came to my self
again. I opened not mine eyes to recover light, the night was too full of
darkness to afford any to a person blinded with grief, but I recovered my
understanding to know the miserable condition I then was in, and I opened my
mouth to give my self over to such cries and such complaints, as it was likely
I should make in such a misfortune* I did all I could to throw my self out of
the chariot, but I was held by very strong men, who heard all my cries, and all
my imprecations without giving me any answer, nor did I hear any other voice,
save that of the woman who was in the chariot with me, and who endeavored to
comfort me by discourses to which I lent no manner of attention. In the mean
time the chariot went on with an incredible swiftness, and at break of day we
came to a place where they took fresh horses. Arsacomes during the time he had
to prepare for his design, had been careful to make them be laid at every
three hundred furlongs through all the way he meant to go, judging it requisite
to use all possible speed, to escape those that would be sent inpursuit of him.
He had also furnished himself with very skillful guides, and such as were well
acquainted with all the by-ways, through which they led him, hardly ever
coming into any inhabited place; You know that is a very easy thing in Scythia
where the way lies open over all the field, and where there is neither ditch
nor wall to hinder one. The fresh horses expected our passage in woods, or in
by houses known to our guides, and by this order which was observed through all
our journey, Arsacomes found as much facility as he could wish to get to
Byzantium, whither he intended to retreat, and whither he had sent a man to
desire protection, knowing he could make no abode, nor find any safety in any
of my fathers territories. This knowledge had made him resolve to retire among
the enemies of Scythia, and he had persuaded the Lieutenant of Thrace,
Zopirio's successor, to receive and protect him, having promised to Raise a
party in Scythia, that might be powerful enough to take revenge for the
defeat of his predecessor. I have thought fit to inform you of these things in
a few words, before I tell the beginning of my voyage, and now I will let you
know that after the rest of that first night was past, I by the light of the
approaching day perceived my self in Arsacomes his arms, and knew the face of
my enemy who till then had not discovered himself, nor had ever opend his mouth
to interrupt the lamentations I had made. I learned nothing by that sight,
which was not known to me already by all manner of probability; yet could I
not forbear to break into a greater sorrow then before, and my aversion to
that insolent man, being increased as you may imagine by this last offense,
made his presence insupportable to me. Another woman transported as I was,
would have flown immediately at his face, and would have employed her hands,
and all the arms that nature has given us, to take revenge upon so cruel an
enemy, or else to exasperate his anger; but I am not of so violent a nature,
and therefore left that only to my cries, and tears, which I could not hope
for from my forces. Traitor (said I bursting forth into tears) Traitor to
thy King, to thy Country, and to thine honor, is it thus thou usest the
daughter of thy Sovereign? and a Princess to whom thou did profess thy
self tied by other duties then those of her birth? are these the brave effects
of that passion, which had made thee not to know thy self, and of that love,
which raised thy presumptuous thoughts so high? is it possible it should make
thee stoop to so black, so shameful a treachery? do thou think this
infidelity to thy King, and to a King who has so particularly obliged thee can
remain unpunished? and can thou believe thou shall't escape the justice of
the Gods, though thou save thy self from that of men? I said a great deal more
to him, and powered forth reproaches which he hearkened to without interrupting
me; But when I was a little settled, or at least when being tired with long
speaking, and tormenting my self, I was constraind to hold my peace and take
breath; Madame (said he) I should find a great deal of justice in your
reproaches, and should condemn this last action of mine if I had done it in a
less extremity then that you had reduced me to, and if a service of eight
years and a service paid with as much respect, and submission as you could
desire, were not enough to justify this effect of my despair. So long as I had
any hope, you never saw me abuse the Kings favor toward me, nor license my
self to any liberty that could displease you; but when I lost my hopes, both by
your cruel obstinacy, and by the Kings dishonorable change, I to extreme
misfortunes applied remedies of the same nature, and would not leave unto my
rival, what was due to me, both by my services, and by the King your fathers
promise. In short Madame, I have done nothing that I can justly repent of, nor
for which I ought to fear any reproach, and rather then leave you to my
rival, I would not only have pulled you out of the Kings own arms, but would
even have sacrificed himself to my lawful resentments have made the whole
Kingdom perish, and have set all Scythia on fire if it had been in my power.
Ah! thou unworthy man (replied I) if thou could not endure to leave me in
the hands of thy rival, thou should have pulled me out of them, as once he
pulled me out of thine; thou should have undertaken that against him alone,
which he undertook against thee at the head of thine army; and thou should
have disputed me like a Prince, and like a vasliant man as he is, since thou
knew'st he never would have refused those occasions. I would willingly have
made use of them (said Arsacomes) if they could have been any advantage to my
passion, and as valliant, and as fortunate as Arsaces is, he never saw me run
away from him, nor did the Scythians ever see Arsacomes turn his back in the
greatest dangers; but if I had fought with Arsaces, Berenice would not have
been the prize of my victory, since the Kings injustice had otherwise disposed
of her, and that by his express command he had utterly extinguished all my
hopes: By taking that course, though I might have revenged my self upon mine
enemy, I had not obtained my Princess; but by this I have followed. Berenice
is mine, and Arsaces is more cruelly punished, then if I had given him a
thousand deaths. Berenice thine? (cried I interrupting him) Berenice thine?
Ah! never hope it, and since thou have seen her resist her fathers will, while
he was so far blinded as to favor thee, and while thou were less criminal
then now thou art, be certain that she knows well enough how to defend her
self by her death, against thy violence, and against thy persecutions, and that
so long as she lives, she will never look upon thee as other then a monster,
and as an enemy black with the basest of all crimes. Time (replied Arsacomes)
and the continuation of my respects, will without doubt abate your unjust
anger, and you will cease to hate me, when you come to consider, that it is the
excess of my love which forces me to displease you, in taking you away from a
rival more fortunate then I am; but which shall never make me go beyond the
limits of that respect I owe you, and which shall ever leave you the same
empire over me, you had in the Court of the King your father. By these words
Arsacomes strove to appease and comfort me, but all his endeavors were to no
purpose, and as often as he opend his mouth to speak to me, he received no
other answer but reproaches, and imprecations. I continued almost two whole
days, before I would eat any thing in the world, and certainly I should have
killed my self with hunger, rather then have framed my self to live with my
cruel enemies, if I had not hoped I should be retien'd, and if I had not
expected marveilous effects from Arsaces for my deliverance. Arsacomes to use
me with the more decency, and not to keep a Princess of my quality alone
among a great many men, had taken care, as I have told you, to provide a woman
to serve me. I knew her well enough having seen her often with the Princess of
the Issedons Arsacomes his mother, but though she did me all the service she
was able, with a great deal of cunning, and in show with a great deal of
affection, I could not receive it but as from my mortal enemy, and wheresoever
I looked upon her, the remembrance of Theomirus and Cyllenia whose consolations
would have been so sweet to me in that condition, drew new tears from my eyes,
and new sighs from my afflicted heart. Alas! how often did I name Arsaces? and
how often did I call him unprofitably to my assistance? I made no difficulty at
all of it before Arsacomes himself and I so little feared to displease him,
that I never used any constraint upon my self to smother my just resentments.
His whole train consisted of ten men whom he had chosen amongst those that
were most faithful to him, three of which were in the chariot with us, and the
rest followed it on horsback; he of whom he made most account, was Astiages the
wickedest of all men living, and one who having left his country where he was
born, for many crimes he had committed, and particularly for the death of his
brother, which he had caused by his mischievous practices, had taken refuge in
Scythia, where he had found a retreat with Arsacomes, during the time he was in
favor. 'Twas he who had discovered Arsaces, and who remembering the face of
Artaxerxes whom he had often seen in the Court of the King his father, had more
considered the recompenses he hoped for from Arsacomes, that the fidelity he
owed to his lawful Prince, and after he had told him of it, went by his orders
to the King, declared the truth of Arsaces birth to him, took upon him to know
the intentions that had brought him into Scythia, and by his discourse made
those cruel impressions in the Kings mind, which afterward caused so many
disorders. He after Arsaces his return, and his reconciliation with the King
had retird to one of Arsacomes his houses, not being able to look on the face
of his Prince whom he had betrayed; but from the time Arsacomes left the Court,
he had been with him again, and by his persuasions had strengthened him in his
wicked intention, and had counseled him to go to Byzantium, where by means
of his acquaintance he assured him of a safe retreat. 'Twas that wicked fellow
that persecuted me more then all the rest, and thinking thereby to gain
himself more favor with Arsacomes, he wrought such an aversion in me, that I
was not able to endure him. I will not trouble you with the discourses we had
by the way, and you shall only know that we arrived at Byzantium without any
hindrance. Eurimedon was Lieutenant there for Alexander, under Prince
Lysimachus who was Vice roy of Thrace, but he being absent with the King,
Eurimedon was absolute in Thrace, and in the Bosporus; As Soon as he heard of
Arsacomes his arrival, he received him in a very obliging manner, and by word
of mouth confirmed whatsoever he had promised to his messenger, I was ever well
log'd, and Eurimedon having taken care to furnish me with other women, I was
served as well as I could have desired, if it had not been by enemies.
Arsacomes daily employed all his eloquence, and all his cunning to work upon
me, he be thought himself of all the submissions whereby an exasperated mind
could be appeased, and made no difficulty of suffering any thing, except the
proposition of my return, and of my liberty. The impudent Astiages Solicited
me every day to favor him, and persuaded me that in the condition I then was,
nothing could be of greater advantage to me than to marry Arsacomes; he told me
it was not my best course to drive a Prince into despair, who had power to do
what he pleased himself, and that a lover reduced to the last extremities was
capable of doing any thing; but I repulsed that perfidious man with such words,
as if he had had any shame in him would have served his turn for ever.
Eurimedon himself at first spoke for Arsacomes with a great deal of
earnestness, and strove to win me to an opinion that I should not be
unfortunate with a Prince that adored me, and in whose favor he offered me his
protection against all Enemies whatsoever, and part of Alexanders Forces
against Arsaces, and against the King my father, if he disapproved my change.
He indeavovr'd also to comfort me in my sorrow by all manner of civility, but
when he found me inflexible, and not to be comforted, he ceased to trouble me
any more. I for a while believed that the compassion he had of my misfortune,
or the respect he had of my person, had made him cooler toward Arsacomes, and
with that conceit, I endured his company more willingly than before, but within
a little after I perceived that alteration proceeded from another cause, and by
his looks, and by all his actions, I found that his own interests had made him
forget those of Arsacomes. In brief, by an effect of my destiny either good or
bad, Eurimedon fell in love with me, and I saw my self exposed by my cruel
fortune, to suffer the affection of a man of meaner birth, and of meaner
quality than Arsacomes. He for some days spoke nothing to me of his passion but
in ambiguous terms, yet within a while after, the power, he saw he had, made
him grow insolent, and not only took away all the respect he had born to my
quality, but also the consideration he had of Arsacomes, and the promise he had
given him. The first time he explained himself to me, was after a discourse we
had of my misfortunes, and having quietly hearkened to the complaints I made.
Madam, (said he) you are not so unfortunate as you believe, and if you were but
of an humor to discern those persons that have an ambition to serve you, from
those that have offended you, your miseries would not be of any long
continuance. These words, into the meaning whereof I did not dive at first,
gave me some glimpse of hope, and being desirous to keep the good will of a man
who had power to oblige me; Do not doubt Eurimedon (said I) but that I am as
sensible of courtesies, as I can be of injuries, nor but that I would fully
acknowledge those I should receive from virtuous persons. If it be so, (replied
he) Eurimedon will be the happiest man in the world, and you shall not be the
most unfortunate Princess. I know what I ow to Arsacomes, and to the laws of
hospitality; but I also know what I ow to Berenice, and to my self; and though
I should commit a fault, that passion wherewith Arsacomes covers his, may more
reasonably excuse those of Eurimedon. These words, wherein there no longer was
any ambiguity, caused a disdain in me which I cannot express, and if Eurimedon
looked then upon my face, I am confident he saw it overspread with a color
that was not ordinary. Go Eurimedon [said I] go declare your passion, to others
than the daughter of the King of Scythia, and redouble not by your insolence
the afflictions of a Princess, whom you ought not to behold but with respect.
Though Eurimedon was dashed at this Reply, yet would he have spoken again, but
I gave him not the leisure, for going away without so much as casting an Eye
toward him, I shut my self up into my Closset. Imagine the complaints I made
after this last effect of my misfortune, and spare me the pains of repeating
them; 'twas not without a very sensible discontent that I considered that new
Conquest, nor was it without a great many tears that I looked upon the misery
of my condition, which forced me to receive declarations of love from a man of
Eurimedon's birth. Ah! Artaxerxes, [said I] what an unworthy Rival has my hard
fate procured thee? and how much thou would be ashamed, if thou knew'st my
misery, to have a petty Lieutenant of a Province, thy Competitour in affection,
thou to whom a hundred Provinces, and ten thousand Subjects more considerable
than this Rival ought to yield obedience. This remembrance made Eurimedon more
odious to me than Arsacomes, and though according to the Rules of Prudence, I
ought perchance to have dissembled with him, to get by his means out of the
power of Arsacomes, my fear of falling into worse hands than his, opposed that
subtilty; or rather I had not command enough over my self to make my
Resentments give way to that consideration. I therefore avoided all discourse
with Eurimedon, as carefully as with Arsacomes, yet for all I shunned him, I
could not keep him off, but growing more inflamed by that resistance, he
omitted nothing that could advantage his Design, and having found me one day
alone at my Closset-window, whither he came to me so suddenly that I had not
time to get away. Madam, [said he] it is in your own power to be at liberty,
and Sovereign in Byzantium; and if you did not disdain my services, and my
person, I would quickly revenge and free you from the tyranny of Arsacomes.
Although I hated Arsacomes, as you well may judge, I confess I abhorred the
falseness of Eurimedon, who voluntarily offered to betray a man that had trusted
him with his life, and with that which was dearest to him. This knowledge made
me hate him, and depise him the more; but thinking I should be unwise to
neglect the means of recovering my liberty. If you will serve Berenice, [said
I] as virtue obliges you to do, the Gods will recompense so good an Action, and
the King my Father will neither want power, nor will to acknowledge it. I
desire nothing but Berenice, [replied he] for the price of her liberty, and for
a less Recompense than that, I would not undertake a thing which in appearance
is worthy to be condemned. Perchance I am not so despicable as you believe, for
though the Gods have not made me owner of a Crown, I am allied to those that
are, and I serve a Master from whom I may possibly hope for one. Serve that
Master then in that hope, [said I, being extremely vext] but never serve such a
Mistress as Berenice, with hope of a Recompense that is too far above you. With
these words I left him, and though he followed me to prosecute that discourse,
I no longer would afford him any attention. He was not at all the colder for my
disdain, but his passion rather increasing to my misfortune, he every day gave
me so many signs of its violence, that I had a great deal of reason to fear it
might make him at last abuse his power. He began not long after to threaten me
with it, or at least to make me know by his discourse, that I should not do
well to drive a man into despair, who was able to do whatsoever he would, and
that perhaps he could not always continue so much master of himself, as he had
been since the beginning of his love, and in the end it blinded him so far,
that losing all manner of discretion, it came at last to the knowledge of
Arsacomes. He was most violently transported when he perceived it, and as soon
as that belief was settled in his mind, rage and indignation entered so
powerfully with it, that he was ready to go and kill Eurimedon, though he saw
his infallible ruin in that Action; Astiages dissuaded him from that furious
Resolution, and if his words were not able to moderate that fury, they at least
wrought so far as to make him hearken to less desperate Propositions. Neither
of them doubted but that there was a necessity of leaving Byzantium, and of
seeking a safer Retreat otherwhere, but they were a long time ere they could
think of one, and that uncertainty kept them for some days in a very great
trouble. In the end Astiages thought he had light upon what they studied for,
and made a motion to Arsacomes which he gave ear to, it not being without some
ground of Reason. Sir, [said he] since you can find no safety in Scythia, nor
with any of the neighboring Princes, whom the consideration of Matheus would
hinder from protecting you, make your Retreat to Alexander, he is no friend to
the King of Scythia, having lost two Armies, and two Generals against him, and
without doubt nothing but his great employments have made him defer the Design
he has to invade his Territories; if you retire to him, and let him know that
by the credit, and by the intelligence you hold in Scythia, you can facilitate
his Conquest of it, he not only will hearken to your Proposition, and receive
you very favorably, but will consider you as a Prince useful to the
augmentation of his greatness, and protect you against the King of Scythia, and
against all Enemies whatsoever. Moreover when he shall hear that your Rival is
the son of Darius, whose Empire he now is Master of, and who while he is alive
may trouble him in that possession, you need not question but he will help you
against him with all his power, and use all the strength he has to ruin him.
Having Alexanders assistance and protection, there is nothing any more to be
feared, for your chiefest Enemies will be too weak to hurt you, when once you
are so powerfully supported; he readily will give you Berenice, and if to the
interest of your love, you desire to join that of your Revenge, you may ask him
justice against Eurimedon's infidelity. Arsacomes approved so well of this
counsel of Astiages, that he immediately resolved to follow it, and after
having a thousand times embraced the giver of it, they began to deliberate what
course they should take to escape from Byzantium, not doubting, but if
Eurimedon should suspect their intent, his love would make him oppose my
departure, and perhaps thrust him upon worse Resolutions. When they had long
consulted, they at last agreed that Astiages, by a considerable sum of money,
should gain the Master of one of those Barques, that use to carry persons over
the pass at Byzantium, that after having won him to his devotion, he in the
night should carry over the Chariot, and the Horses that had brought us, which
should be left on the other side the water, under the custody of some of his
servants, and that the next night following, they should get me out of my
Lodging, to go over all together in the same Barque. They found no great
difficulty in this Design, because Eurimedon mistrusted nothing, and because I
ever had the liberty to go abroad whithersoever Arsacomes would; besides, by
reason of the tranquillity they were in at that time, there was no Guard kept
either at the Gates or Haven, so that if Eurimedon were advertised of their
Enterprise, it was not easy for him to prevent it. Astiages went away
immediately about it, and had as fortunate success as he could wish, that very
day he gained the Master of a Barque by a considerable Present, and having
disposed him to all that he desired, he at night sent the Chariot over and the
Horses, which he trusted to the care of three of Arsacomes his servants, who by
his direction set them up in one of those houses, that are about fifty furlongs
from the little Town on this side of the water. Arsacomes passed the next day
in a great deal of fear and impatiency, and when night was come, Eurimedon and
he staid in my Chamber till the hour I was wont to retire; then they both
withdrew together, but Eurimedon went to his Lodging, and Arsacomes, having
walked two or three turns in my Gallery, came again into my Chamber with
Astiages; his Return caused some apprehension in me, not being used to see him
come back at such an hour; but he quickly put me out of doubt, and coming to me
with something a troubled countenance; Madam, (said he) all your servants are
not so full of respect as Arsacomes, for though the power my fortune has given
me, has not made me forgetful of that I ow you, Eurimedon cannot say the same;
he is resolved, Madam, to take that by violence, which he has not been able to
obtain by persuasion, and if you stay here but a day longer, you will feel the
effects of that Authority you now are under. I know I shall die in your
defense, but my death will not be able to secure you; therefore I had rather
give up all my hopes, and carry you back to the King your father, than leave
you to the mercy of this faithless man. Dissembling Arsacomes had coined this
invention for fear I should cry out, or make any noise when he should take me
out of my Chamber, and the probability I found in what he said, by the
knowledge I had of Eurimedon's passion, made me immediately believe him. I
praised the Gods for putting him into so good a mind, and looking upon him
with a countenance very different from what I ordinarily afforded him; If it be
true (said I) that you will restore me to the King my father, not only he and
I will pardon you the faults you have committed against us, but you will
recover the same place in his affection you heretofore enjoyed, and shall
obtain as great an one in my acknowledgement and in my esteem, as you in reason
can desire. I am fully resolved upon it, (replied Arsacomes) and though I knew
you were left to me for ever, I had rather lose you by doing you service, than
abandon you to treacherous Eurimedon. But Madam, (continued he) we must fly
without any longer delay, for if we let pass this night, without employing it
to save you, there will be no possibility to do it to morrow. I am ready
Arsacomes, (replied I) nor shall I be less joy'd to escape the tyranny of
Eurimedon, than to return to the King my father. We must away then instantly,
(said he) all things are prepared for our departure, and wait for us at the
Gate of the City. There was no body in my Chamber at that time, but the Woman
that came along with me out of Scythia, for I had sent away those Eurimedon had
put to me. Wherefore seeing I had free passage out, I joyfully laid hold of
that occasion to save my self, and not being frighted with the night, which
might have caused some apprehension in me, I gave Arsacomes my hand more
willingly than ever I had done in all my life, and let my self be guided by him
without any Torch, since in the Design we had, darkness was more favorable to
us than light. We got out of the house without any hindrance, and went a foot
till we came to the Haven, I was so little acquainted with the streets, that I
never perceived my error, but when I saw my self at the water side, and that
Arsacomes took me in his arms to carry me into the Bark that staid expecting
us, I found I had been deceived, and recalling my first resentments against
Arsacomes. Ah! Traitor (cried I) how much was I to blame, to believe thou
could be capable of any virtuous motion, and how foolish I was, to give
credit to the words of such a faithless man? Thou had found a friend of
Eurimedon very like thy self, but since I was to perish by the infidelity of
one of you, thou should have let me dye at Byzantium, without drawing out my
misfortunes longer by thy perfidiousness, Arsacomes received these words, as he
was wont to do those he had ordinarily from me, and received that loss of my
hopes with an affliction that was like to have brought me to my grave. In the
mean time our Bark put off from the shore, and within a while after came to the
other side. I was taken out of it in spite of all my complaints, and put into
the Chariot that waited for us; we had no fresh horses to change, and therefore
were fain to travel more slowly than we had done in Scythia, and indeed there
was not so much danger for Arsacomes and his crew, because the second day we
got out of Eurimedons jurisdiction. I was in eternal lamentations all the way,
my tears ran down incessantly, and in whatsoever Arsacomes said to comfort me,
I still found new matter of affliction. Within a few days I learned that
Arsacomes his purpose was to retire to Alexander; and as he had found some
probabilities of settling his Fortune by that design, I also found some hope of
consolation in it. I knew that Alexander was a generous Prince, an Enemy to
those that were Traitors to their Princes, as he had showed in punishing
Bessus; that he had a great deal of consideration of persons of my sense, and
quality, and moreover that he had married Statira, to whom my Brother had been
extremely dear, and who was the Sister of Artaxerxes, to whom I was so, and
from whom they had taken me away; I hoped that by discovering my self to that
great Queen, by giving her the relation of her Brothers life, and by letting
her know how much he was concerned in my loss, I should make her take so much
interest in my Fortune, as to grant me her protection, and to procure the King
her husbands. This thought did something allay my discontents, and gave me
strength to go through that journey. We overcame it without any other troubles
save those of my afflicted mind, and we crossed through Provinces, and saw
Towns, whose names I know not. At last we arrived in this Country, but at our
arrival, we heard that Alexander was dead the day before, which news deprived
Arsacomes of all his hopes, and put him to think upon other resolutions. He
would not go to Babylon, which he heard was in great troubles, by the
contestations that arose upon the death of Alexander, but Astiages, who was in
his own Country, provided a place for him to retire to, and brought us to the
house of a Cousin of his, not above a hundred furlongs from this place, and
about fifteen or twenty from the Euphrates* we were very well received there by
the Master of the house, who showed an excess of joy to Astiages for his
return, and for his friends sake offered Arsacomes all the services he could
desire of him. His house was very well built, and strong enough to make some
resistance in it, besides, it was far from any high way, encompassed with woods
and very little in sight; we spent some days there with convenience enough to
my persecutors, but with so great a sadness to me, as was like to have put an
end to all my miseries with my life. Ah! Arsaces, how often did I complain of
you, when I saw my self deprived of the relief I had expected from you? and
then again, how often did I excuse you, when I remembered the order Arsacomes
had taken in Scythia, to keep you from knowing whither we were gone? Then from
the complaints I had made against you, I fell into lamentations for you, and
not doubting but that you loved me well enough to seek after me, I could not
think of the grief my loss had caused in you, without becoming as sensible of
your sorrow as of mine own. I had passed some days in these afflictions, when
opportunity made me undertake a thing above my ordinary courage. The knowledge
Arsacomes had, that I was of no very adventurous humor, made him less careful
in keeping me, than he had been when first he took me, and seeing me now in a
strange Country, where I knew no creature in World, he left me at greater
liberty than before. The season then was very hot, and being got up one morning
before day, to take the cool air at a window that looked into the garden, I
stood there for a while musing upon my strange misfortunes; but scarce had the
first beams of the approaching light discovered the prospect of the Field, when
that sight made me think upon my liberty. That window was low enough to slip
down into the garden, by tying my sheets to the bar of it, and I knew there was
a gate which gave passage out of the garden into the next wood, and which was
fastened only with a bolt on the inside. Then I believed, that if by that
means I could get forth, I should find some way to get to Babylon, where I
might address my self to Queen Statyra, at whose feet I hoped to meet a
sanctuary. This thought was hardly come into my mind, when I resolved to put it
in execution; knowing, that if I should be taken again, my condition could not
be worse than it was already. The woman that came out of Scythia with me, lay
in my Chamber, but she was then asleep, and used always to sleep so soundly,
that one could not waken her without a very great noise; that assurance made me
much the bolder, and so going to my bedside as softly as possibly I could, I
got me ready in have, and taking my sheets, tied them to one another, and
having fastened them to the window, the desire of liberty shut up my eyes to
all manner of danger. I skip'd down into the garden as happily as I had
contrived, and being gotten out, I put my self, though not without extreme
fear, into the first path I met, hoping I should quickly find some body or
other, that might direct me the way to Babylon. I had thrown my vail over my
face, and though I trembled exceedingly for the danger I was in of making some
ill encounter, yet did I go so fast, that I presently got a good way from the
house, and my legs little accustomed to such journeys, were extremely tired,
and stood in need of rest to carry me further. I was constrained therefore to
sit down under certain trees, where while I endeavored to unweary my body, my
mind was perplexed with terrible disquiets; my fear then began to make me see
the greatness, and difficulty of the business I had undertaken, I considered
the dangers into which a maid all alone, and a maid apparrell'd in a habit rich
enough to be observed, might fall, as well in the remainder of the way I had to
go, as at my entering into the Town, before I could get unto the Queen. But all
the evils my fear could represent, seemed less to me than that I fled from, nor
did I know any peril so great, into which I would not have cast my self, to
escape the hands of my cruel Enemy. That desire renewed my strength, and I rose
up again with a design to think no more of resting till I came to Babylon. I
had met with no body to learn the way, but I saw the Euphrates within a hundred
paces, and knowing it stood upon that River, I resolved to follow the bank of
it at a little distance, nor had I walked very long, when I discovered the
Towers of that stately City. My hopes were redoubled by that sight, but alas!
they were cruelly deceived, for when I had not above eight or ten furlongs more
to go, I heard a noise behind me, and turning my head in a mervellous fright, I
saw Arsacomes riding after me as fast as ever he could, it was the day he
killed Arsaces his horse, and 't was after me he was running, when he met
Arsaces, and Lysimachus by the River side, and by that encounter interrupted
their conversation. Judge if you please of the excess of my grief, at that
cruel loss of the hope I had conceived, and exempt me from repeating the
complaints I made, and the reproaches of Arsacomes. He took me in his arms
without alighting, and lifting me with a great deal of strength, set me before
him upon his horse, and galloped back toward the house from whence I was
flying, but he followed not the bank of the River, for fear of some encounter
that might stop him, and presently after having met Astiages, who was riding
after him, he did not want a guide to find the way. My ungrateful fugitive
(said he to me) you see the Gods have not approved your flight, since they have
so little favored it, and you may judge by the little care they have taken to
deliver you out of my hands, how much they blame, and condemn your cruelties.
I was so dejected with my grief, and so tired with my journey, that I had
hardly strength to give him any answer, and if I replied sometimes to what he
said, 'twas only with a few interrupted words, whereby my resentments
expressed themselves better than by any other kind of discourse. In short, I
was brought again to that house, or rather to that cruel prison, where I since
have passed so many wretched days. Arsacomes being exasperated by this
accident, and by the unlucky mischance of Alexanders death, which deprived him
of the hope of that retreat, and protection he had expected from him, but more
by the pernicious counsels of Astiages, who incited him continually to make use
of his power, and who could not forbear, even in my presence, to blame the
remainder of that respect he still had toward me, began to use me otherwise
than he had done formerly, and made me see by all his actions, that I had cause
to fear the highest outrages from him, if the Gods suffered me to be much
longer in his hands. This fear compelled me to dissemble with him, and I often
disarmed his fury by a feigned compliance. But Astiages, who being less
prepossessed than he, discovered my intention better, pressed him every day to
seek ways to satisfy himself, and by his solicitations corrupted him so far,
that in the end Arsacomes forgot who I was, and no longer knowing me to be
Berenice, whom he was wont to behold with so much submission, ran on to that
cruel resolution, which was diverted by the assistance of the Gods, and by the
valor of the Prince my Brother, whom they miraculously sent to my relief.

The Princess made a pause at these words, and left the Princes matter enough
to entertain themselves with the events she had related; Lysimachus told her
the discourse he had heard in the wood between Arsacomes and Astiages; but
scarce had she taken a little breath, when she was solicited by the Princes,
and by the Amazon Queen, to let them also hear her last adventures, and being
willing to give them that satisfaction, she went on thus.

You have been informed by Hippolita, that it was the encounter of a litter
that made me leave her, but she could not tell you, that he, whom I saw lying
in it, was Arsaces, who, according to what I guess by his Narration, was then
removing to Babylon; his paleness could not hinder me from knowing him, and
after what you now have heard of his life, you cannot be ignorant of the
motions which were stirred up in me by that sight, yet could it not have
persuaded me, Brother, to leave you in the condition you then were; but I
believed I could do no less than use my endeavors to see Arsaces again, and to
show him Berenice, whom he sought, and the finding of whom would put an end to
all his wanderings; this was my only intention, and when I followed the litter,
't was with a hope to overtake it quickly, seeing it went but very slowly, and
to come back to my Brother again within a little while, as I had done but for
the hinderance I met withal, and then I had spared you both the blood which
you have mutually shed. I walked as fast as I was able, leaning upon Alcione's
arm, when I unfortunately met with five or six hors-men, who presently
surrounded us, and having cried that I was Berenice, they leapt from their
horses, and putting up the Beavers of their Helmets, no longer concealed their
faces from me. The first I cast my eyes upon was that villain Astiages, and by
him, with an incomprehensible amazement, I saw Eurimedon. Eurimedon the
Lieutenant of Thrace, from whose persecutions I had fled with Arsacomes, and
whose presence was yet less supportable to me than his. To instruct you by what
encounter he was then with Astiages, you shall know that after my departure,
his love to me had made him leave Byzantium, and not caring to lose his Fortune
to obtain me, he had substituted his Brother in his command, and with a greater
number of men than Arsacomes had, was come in pursuit of us with a resolution
to kill Arsacomes, and pull me out of his hands. But whither it were that he
made not so great speed, or took not the same way, the Gods would not suffer
him to overtake us. He was at last arrived at Babylon, where he had lain a
while concealed, not being willing to be known in the design that brought him,
and not having been able to learn any news of me there, he had spent a great
many days in seeking me about the Country, but all his search had been to no
purpose, till the day my Brother killed Arsacomes, and laid Astiages for dead,
with a blow of his Gauntlet. As soon as that wicked fellow had recovered
himself again, he went directly to the place where Arsacomes his body lay, and
finding there was no life in it, when he had lamented his loss according to the
affection he bore him, he caused him to be taken up by some of his servants
that were come thither, and was carrying him to the house of our retreat, when
he was surprised in that employment by Eurimidon, and his party. Eurimedon, as
soon as he knew Astiages, ran at him with his Sword drawn, but Astiages finding
he was too weak, had cast himself at his feet, and appeased him by the promise
he made to serve him in the recovery of Berenice. Hereupon Eurimedon had
changed his threats into^ protestations of friendship, and having learned all
that Astiages knew of Arsacomes his destiny, he had kept him from that time, to
make use of him for the execution of his promise. They had together caused
Arsacomes to be buried, and meeting in each other a great conformity of
disposition, they by little and little had banished their distrusts, and
heart-burnings, and had resolved to seek me together in a Country, from whence
Astiages believed I could not be gotten very far. Eurimedon had been careful
to win Astiages by all manner of kindnesses, and Astiages, who in the condition
of his affairs, stood in need of a support against those whom his crimes had
made his Enemies, had really engaged himself to do him service* and unfeignedly
sought occasions to satisfy his desires. He also had brought him to the same
retreat where we had been, and which Arsacomes his servants had quitted after
their Masters death, and from thence it was that they were come, when my cruel
destiny made me fall into their hands. Eurimedon appeared transported with joy
at that encounter, and taking one of my hands, which he kissed whether I would
or no; How great is the goodness of the Gods (said he) since they restore me
the adored Princess I had lost, after having punished him that stole her from
me. I was so extremely surprised at this unhappy accident, that I neither had
strength, nor courage to reply* but only pulling away my hand from between
his, and looking upon him with a disdainful eye, I made him know, that if my
sight was a contentment to him, his produced a quite contrary effect in me; but
this encounter surprised not me alone, for Alcione, who was with me, was like
to have fallen down dead, when she saw Astiages, and Astiages, who knew her
after he had eyed her a good while, was so astonished at that sight, that as
impudent as he was, he had much ado to recover himself. In the mean time
Eurimedon being got again on hors-back, and having set me before him by the
help of one of his servants, carried me toward that cursed house, which my ill
Fortune had chosen for the retreat of my ravishers. Astiages having overcome
his amazement, did the same to Alcione, and in spite of our cries which made
all the plain to ring, and of all the resistance we could make, after having
many times escaped, and many times been taken again, we were at last partly on
foot, and partly on hors-back, carried or dragged to that house, with all the
violence in the World; Astiages his friend, who was as wicked as himself, lent
it him very readily, as well out of his inclination to mischief, as his
expectation of those recompenses Eur^medon made him hope for. As soon as we
both were prisoners, as I had been before, Eurimedon came to me, and putting on
all the mildness he could, alleged his love to excuse his violence, prayed me
to take heart, and to believe that his passion should never make him exceed the
bounds of that respect he owed me, and that if I would but take some pity of
it, I might expect any thing in the World at his hands, and even my return into
Scythia, and the regaining of that liberty Arsacomes had robbed me of; he also
protested, that if I had showed him but any favor at Byzantium, he would from
thence have carried me home to my Father, and that if by my future carriage, I
did not oppose the intention he had to serve me, I should quickly see an end of
those miseries, that had cost me so many sighs and tears. He said a great deal
more to me, but I gave no ear to him at all, and having learned by Arsacomes
his last deceit, never to believe the promises of wicked persons, I was nothing
moved by his, but looking upon him with an angry eye. Hope not (said I) to work
upon me by the hopes thou give me, I will not receive any favor, or
assistance from thee, but scorn thy services, as much as I hate, and despise
thy person. Arsacomes himself was not so odious to me as thou art, for though
he were unworthy of my affection, he had many advantages above thee, both by
his birth and qualities, and by the services he had done me, which should
strangle those guilty hopes thou have conceived, and make thee know, that if
the Gods have punished his crime with death, thou ought to expect a much
severer recompense for thine. Moderate thy ambition (continued I* presently
after) and consider, that if the daughter of a King be to be served by
Eurimidon, 't is only as a subject, or a household servant. Eurimedon found
matter of offense in these words, but his love made him digest them, and my
quality, or some other considerations did indeed give him some respect, which
left him not the courage to execute his wicked intentions. Poor Alcione, the
companion of my Fortune, who was then my only consolation, was in no less
affliction than I, not being able to behold the face of Astiages, the only
cause of all her sufferings, and of the death of her dear husband Theander,
without falling into swownings which brought her almost to her grave. Yet that
shameless fellow came into her presence with a brazen impudence, and when he
could make her hear him; Alcione (said he) for I dare not call you Sister, you
have such a strange aversion against me, let us henceforth forget all that is
past, and suffer me to make a confession to you which I never made before. I
ever loved you, and if the consideration of Theander made me silent, know it
was my own that made me jealous of Cleonimus, and not that of Bagistanes. The
interest of that kinsman should not have persuaded me to trouble the Repose of
my Brother, who was much dearer to me than he, and you well may judge that that
compliance alone would not have been able to carry me on to so great
extremities. Forget therefore those injuries which my love may excuse, and with
them forget Cleonimus, who either is no longer in the world, or else no longer
remembers you; and if you will receive me for your Husband, I will supply the
place of Theander, we will reunite our Fortunes and our Houses, and you shall be
no more less happy with me than you were heretofore with my Brother. Poor
Alcione was not able to hear these impudent words from a man whom she had so
much cause to hate, without being transported with a Rage which she could not
possibly dissemble.

Ah! Monster, stained with thy Brothers blood, (cried she) thou Monster, black
with a thousand treacheries, Can thou think me capable to hear thy horrible
Propositions? And had thou yet this last crime to commit, to be the most
detestable of all men living? Having spread thy villainies both in Europe, and
Asia, do thou come back into this Country to give them a conclusion
suitable to them, and to thy self? If Cleonimus be dead, thy crimes have killed
him, and if he no longer remember Alcione, it is only his virtue has made him
forget her, and it is only thy vice that brings her again into thy memory. But
be confident, be confident wicked wretch [pursued she] thy love is yet more
cruel to me than thy hatred, and I sooner will consent to see thee a second
time be the death of what is dearest to me in all the world, and also of my
self, than to let thee hope that I will make Theanders murderer his
successor. Astiages, in whom all shame was quite extinguished, hearkened
without blushing to these Reproaches, but still by all his Actions endeavored
to make Alcione believe that he was really in love with her. In these torments
we lived till the time of our deliverance, having hardly an hour free from the
persecutions of our cruel Enemies. The master of the house where we were, had
obtained a protection from the Officers of this Army, to the end your Forces
might not indammage any thing that belonged to him, neither did any of the
Soldiers ever come near his house, and he leaving it to Astiages his
disposing, went every day into your Camp, and feigning to be very well affected
to your party, sought only to secure his house, and his estate; the care he
took in favor of his friend, did much advantage the Design they had to lie
concealed for many considerations. Eurimedon knew that Prince Lysimachus, whose
Lieutenant he was, was one of the Commanders of your Army, and after the fault
he had committed in leaving Byzantium, at a time when there was most necessity
of his being there, durst not appear before him. And Astiages blasted with
crimes, and defamed in his Country, had not the confidence to show himself.
And indeed I think they were seen but by very few, and if one of them went out
sometimes, he left us under the custody of the other, with so exact a Watch,
that all means of liberty were utterly cut off. Yet did I hope in the
assistance of my Brother, who I knew was so near us, though I much feared his
wounds, and could never get any true information concerning them from our
Landlord; I was confident he would take care to make me be sought after, and
that if the place of my imprisonment could be but known to him, I doubted not
but he would easily rescue me out of the hands of my Enemies. I also knew that
Arsaces was in this Country, and dared to hope that his coming hither was for
no other end but to seek me; and I may truly protest, that if I had not
expected Relief from one of you, I had put an end to my miseries by some effect
of my despair. I received the sweetest consolations from Alcione that she could
possibly invent to give me, and the affection she expressed to me, had obliged
me to love her so dearly, that there was nothing in my heart I did not utter to
her; she knew all the particulars of my life, and took so great an interest in
them, that she forgot her own misfortunes, to bewail mine, and bore all the
afflictions which infamous Astiages made her suffer, with an admirable
patience, that she might be able to comfort me in all my griefs. Our cruel
Guardians were neither at the Battle you gave, nor in any of the Encounters
that passed, but while so many thousand men were fighting in this plain, they
kept within doors, where their only combats were against Berenice, and
Alcione. In the end, whether it were they believed they could not longer stay
securely in that house, and that they had a mind to seek some other Retreat
that might be further from your Army, or that Eurimedon had a design to carry
me back to Byzantium, or to some other place where he thought himself more
powerful, and more absolute, they resolved to leave that house, and to
persuade us to be set on horseback to go along with them, they often swore
they would carry us to the place where they had taken us, since by all their
submissions they had not been able to soften our hearts, nor make us lose the
aversion we had against them. I gave no credit at all to their words, and yet I
was easily persuaded to get on horseback, that I might leave that detested
house, hoping that in the open field I should find many more occasions to save
my self, than in that Prison from whence I went, with a hope which had not so
strongly flattered me till then. Eurimedon had sent away some of his servants
the day before, and had kept with him, besides Astiages and his kinsman, who
went also with us, only three of his men well armed, and well mounted. With
this company we were riding in a way, which seemed to lead us toward Babylon,
when we saw a Cavalier completely armed, coming upon the same Road. We being
desirous to interess all those we should meet in our deliverance, had our faces
unvailed, and that man had no sooner cast his Eye upon Alcione, as he was
passing by, but he stopped short, and presently after turning about, and coming
back again, began to ride at a little distance by our Ravishers, but keeping
his Eyes fixed upon us, with an Action that displeased Eurimedon, in whom all
objects were sufficient to beget a jealousy. Friend, [said he] travel on your
Road whoever you are, and leave not your way to follow us, unless you seek your
own destruction. The stranger was not at all terrified with that threat, but
looking boldly upon Eurimedon. I know the Ladies that are with you, [answered
he] and before I go away from them, I Will know whether they go along with you
willingly or by force. Ah! it is by force, [cried we both together] and if you
were not too weak against so many Enemies, we would implore your generous
assistance. You shall have it as weak as I am, [replied the stranger] and I
will die in the design of delivering you, since I am not strong enough to
effect it. He had not ended these words before his Sword was drawn, and with a
most warlike Garb had prepared himself to receive Eurimedon, who transported
with anger, fell instantly upon him with all his men. The Gods guided the first
blow he made, and though Eurimedon's sword gave him a light hurt in the arm,
his luckily finding way under Eurimedon's Cask, ran him through the throat, and
opening a passage for his blood and life together, made him tumble dead among
the Horses feet. The stranger after this gallant blow, rushed into the midst of
his Enemies with an admirable courage, but they environed him so furiously,
that he quickly was wounded in many places, and his Horse killed between his
legs. Yet had he the satisfaction to see Astiages Cousin fall to the ground
before him, who being run quite through the body, lost his life for the quarrel
of his friend. This kindled him with so great a Rage, that redoubling his blows
upon the valiant stranger, who prepared himself to dispute his life a foot with
the help of a Tree, against which he set his back, he in spite of that
mavelous resistance, being seconded by his companions, would have seconded
the death of Eurimedon, and of his friends, if the brave Demetrius had not come
in to his Relief, and had not for the preservation of his life, and the
Recovery of our Liberty, finished what he so generously had begun. You have
heard what he did for our deliverance, and how he gave that gallant stranger
[who presently after was known to be Cleonimus] the means to save himself, and
to kill Astiages his faithless kinsman, and his ancient Enemy, but not without
being so extremely wounded, that notwithstanding all the care that has since
been taken of him at Polemon's house, this is the first day the Physicians have
given any hope of his Recovery, in which I am concerned as much as I am obliged
to be, by the service he did me, and by the consideration of Alcione whom I
dearly love.

Thus did the Princess conclude her Recital, and Arsaces, who for all his
impatiency at some passages of it had heard it to the end without interruption,
fell then into a very passionate discourse, whereby he let her see how
infinitely he was concerned in the afflictions she had suffered. The Heavens be
praised, [said he] fair Princess, who after having exposed you to misfortunes,
for which in probability you were not born; Restore you now at once this
Brother so great, and so dearly loved, and [if in the number of you^ other
happinesses I durst count this last] your faithful Arsaces, whom by the
remembrance of your loss, and by the transports of this cruel Jealousy, you
have been like to lose, and for whom you have had the goodness to preserve your
self. He said a great deal more to that effect, and after that Oroondates, with
the other Princes, and Queen Thalestris had seconded him with the like
discourses, the whole company retired, to leave the night to Arsaces, who
probably stood in need of it, having spent the greatest part of the day in this
Narration. Lysimachus and Ptolomeus waited upon the Princesses to Polemon's
house, and being afterward come back into their Tents, passed the night all of
them, if not with a perfect rest, at least with less disquiets than those they
were wont to feel.

The next morning Lysimachus, Ptolomeus, Oxyartes, and Eumenes came to
Oroondates his Tent, where they found Arsaces in so fair a way of amendment, as
made them hope he would be absolutely cured within a few days. All the Princes
testified the excess of their joy, and after they were set down by the
bedside, Lysimachus adressing himself to Arsaces. Sir, [said he] I protest to
you by all the Gods, and by the respect I ow to Parisatis, that the most
sensible discontent I now am touched with, is that of having been one of those
that have helped toward the ruin of your illustrious House, and that I am tied
to you and yours, by such powerful considerations, that this cruel
remembrance will ever give a check to my most glorious fortunes. ^t is true,
Sir, I followed Alexander in the Conquest of those Dominions that were the King
your fathers, and that in the division that has been made of them since the
death of Alexander, Thrace, Pontus, and Bosphorus are fallen to my share; These
Provinces are big enough to form a Kingdom of a large extent, but though by the
same right I were Possessour of all that are in Asia, I would deliver them up
freely to their lawful Prince. I therefore divest my self, of all the
pretensions our division may have given me, and since it is not in my power to
restore you the whole Empire of the King your father, I Will serve you to the last
drop of my blood in the Design you may have to recover it. Lysimachus had
hardly spoken, when Ptolomeus who would not appear less generous than he;
Egypt, (said he to the Prince) and Arabia, with part of Afric, shall also
return to the subjection of Prince Artaxerxes, for I never will accept a Crown,
which I cannot hold, but from the spoils of his. Eumenes made him the same
offers of Cappadocia, and Paphlagonia, and those generous Princes, strove who
should be forwardest to show, that they knew how to despise Kingdoms, to render
what they owed to virtue. But Arsaces abused not their civilities, and looking
upon them with a very grateful countenance. I prefer your friendship [said he]
before the Provinces you offer me, and before all those, which by the Rights of
War we have lost, but the generosity you express, shall never find me of so
unworthy an humor as to make a wrong use of it. It Is not by that way that I
ought to rise to the Throne again, nor will I receive that from all the
liberality of my friends, which the valor of my Enemies has taken from me.
Therefore I protest to you by Orosmades, by Berenice, and by my honor, that
all your offers, and all your entreaties, shall never be able to shake me from
this Resolution. Possess the Territories which now are lawfully yours, and
which I see you command without envy, and without discontent; there are enough
besides in the power of our Enemies to establish a Monarchy great enough, and
if you would not have Darius his son live as a private man, I refuse not your
assistance to reconquer part of them. This was Arsaces his Resolution, and
though the Princes especially Lysimachus, stuck obstinately to their
Proposition, it was impossible for them to overcome his Resistance, or make him
recede from what he had determined. Since Artaxerxes is alive [said Lysimachus]
I never will command the Thracians, and if I will have a Kingdom to be worthy
of Parisatis, I must make it up of other Provinces than those that belong to
the Prince her Brother. It Is from my Enemies I ought to win Dominions, and not
from persons whom I honor more than all the world. He said a great deal more
to the same effect, but all was to no purpose, for Prince Artaxerxes continued
firm in his intention. I cannot want a Crown [replied he] while I have such
friends as you are, and if we must divest any of those that are possessed of
our inheritance, let us divest Perdiccas, and Leonatus, rather than Lysimachus
and Ptolomeus; our Enemies have Provinces enough for you, and for me too, and
the Empire of Darius [concluded he with a sigh] may very well satisfy the
ambition of us all. Oroondates, who was witness of this conversation, and who
never opened his mouth to interrupt it, admired the magnanimity of both, and
found Reasons in Artaxerxes his Refusal, which persuaded him to approve it.
When from that Entertainment they fell upon another, Oroondates, and Lysimachus
began to show the disquiets they were in for their Princesses, of whom they
could hear no manner of news, and of whom Arsaces had made no mention at all in
the end of his discourse, though he had been in Babylon, and that he had
continued a good while near those that had taken them. The discontent of those
two Princes was presently observed by the company, and after the cause of it
was known, there was so much Reason found in it, that it could not justly be
condemned. Arsaces, said he, had heard nothing of them, but that the Rage,
wherewith he was then transported, had left him very little care of inquiring,
and after he had mused a while upon that consideration. I think, Brother,
[added he of a sudden] we may learn the truth of what is become of them by a
mean's that is not come into my hand. You do not doubt but that my interests now
are inseparably linked with yours, and that though I were not tied to yours by
those of our house, Roxana, Perdiccas, and all they of that party must needs be
my Enemies now, because I know them to be yours. I shall cheerfully fight
against them with you, but before you give a second Battle, that which I ow to
the assistance I have received from Seleucus, obliges me to demand a Parley
with him, and to use all my endeavors to withdraw him from a party, against
which I am ready to declare my self; if Perdiccas will make one at our
interview, he shall be admitted, and if you please to be present, Brother, you
and I together will see them two, and make our selves known to them, and if we
cannot by generosity persuade them to restore the Princesses my sisters, we
shall at least know what we ought to fear, or hope concerning them, and the
truth of the condition they now are in. Oroondates and all his friends liked
very well of Artaxerxes his motion, and Lysimachus, both for his own interest,
and the desire of keeping them company, would gladly have been one, if his
mortal hatred to Perdiccas had not opposed all manner of interviews between
them. From this [discourse which was broken off by the coming in of Craterus,
Oxyartes, Antigonus, Demetrius, Polyperchon, and many other chief Commanders]
they fell to that of the War, and of the preparations they were to make for a
second Battle; and those Princes to whom Artaxerxes his military experience was
known only by report before, heard him speak in terms, which made them see,
that for all he was but young, he had attained to as much knowledge as the
oldest and greatest Captains in the world had ever had. Wherefore all those
great Commanders subscribed to his opinions, with a readiness which even
wounded his modesty, and the knowledge of his quality, and of his virtue begot
such a respect in them to his person, as they had never given to any body but
Alexander. There was not one amongst them who came not to pay him their
civilities with a great deal of submission, and very few; who according to
Lysimachus his Example, did not offer to restore the Territoritories whereof
they had already taken possession; but he gave them the same Answers he had
done the former, and perhaps it was their assurance of his Refusal, that made
them so forward in those generous offers. Within a little after, the room that
was left in the Chamber, was filled by the arrival of the Princess Berenice,
Queen Thalestris, the fair Deidamia, Apamia, Arsinoe, Cleone, and other Ladies,
and when they after one another had inquired how the two Princes did, that
noble company began an Entertainment, in which they spent most part of the day.
The next morning Prince Oroondates left his Bed, and Artaxerxes found himself
much mended, that he doubted not but within a week he should be as well as
Oroondates. The Princess Berenice by her own inclination, and by her Brothers
desire, kept him company for the most part, and that passionate Prince enjoyed
a happiness in her sweet and charming conversation, which made him utterly
forget his wounds. That fair Princess, whose love was not inferior to his,
drew contentments also from his sight, and from the testimonies of his
affection, which were able to make reparation for part of the sorrows she had
undergone; and that long deprivation of those joys which were then afforded
them, made them far more precious to one another, than if they had not been
interrupted; a thousand times did lovely Berenice use little Reproaches to her
dear Arsaces, for the injuries he had done her in the transports of his cruel
jealousy, and a thousand times did happy Arsaces, (reading in her Eyes that
her Anger was neither disobliging nor dangerous) excuse himself by a silence
accompanied with flaming glances, and fixing his lips upon one of her fair
hands, seemed as if he would breath out his soul there for the expiation of his
faults. Oroondates was joy'd to see the satisfaction of these two persons whom
he loved so well, and the happiness of Artaxerxes was so dear to him, that he
could not look upon his contentments with less delight, than if they had been
his own; but he could have wished a fortune like that of his, and that sight,
awakening the remembrance of his old felicities, drew sighs from his breast a
thousand times a day. In the interim he busied himself with the other
Commanders in the duties of his charge, and all of them labored to put the
Army in a condition to fight another Battle; they caused their wounded men to
be carefully looked to, their Arms to be mended, and also the Chariots that had
been broken; they recruited their Troops with fresh men that came up daily to
the Army, and in short all things tended to the cruel preparation for a bloody
day. Philonides brought a re-inforcement of ten thousand men out of Egypt to
Ptolomeus, Antistenes six thousand to Antigonus out of Phrygia, Lamachus four
thousand Syrians to Laomedon, and within a few days after with six thousand
Cappadocians, and Paphlagonians, which Aristides brought for Eumenes, they saw
the valiant Menalippa arrive with ten thousand Amazons; Thalestris was not a
little joy'd, when she saw her supplies were come, and most part of the
Princes, would needs wait upon that fair Queen to meet them, and with
admiration beheld the march, and discipline of those warlike women. Their Queen
received them with a great deal of sweetness and affection; and Menalippa, with
the chief of her companions, long embracing her knees, expressed what an
infinite trouble her loss, or her tedious absence had imprinted in the hearts
of all her subjects. The whole Army welcomed these succors very respectfully,
and the Troops that were already quartered, willingly yielded them the most
commodious place to incamp in. They were in this condition when Arsaces left
his bed, and that same day his satisfaction was increased by the sight of his
faithful Criton, whom certain Soldiers brought in, having taken him about the
Camp, where he was seeking after his Master. Arsaces, when he had embraced him
many times with a most particular affection, heard by him, that the Commanders
of the Enemies Army, especially Seleucus, had showed a great deal of trouble
for his departure, and that not having been able to guess the cause, they had
employed several persons to seek for him. This confirmed Arsaces in the design
of seeing Seleucus and Perdiccas before the battle, and with that intent he
impatiently waited for a more perfect cure. In the mean time all the Princes
being met together in his Chamber by Oroondates his counsel, would have
delivered up the sole Authority of the Army into his hands, and pressed him to
accept of it, with the most earnest entreaties they could invent to win him to
it. But all their persuasions would not serve, and after he had long refused
all manner of command, all they could obtain of him at last, was that he would
come in for the seventh man to take his turn among the six other Princes, to
whom the Army had already submitted. They all received that companion joyfully,
and while he was recovering strength, they often sent out parties; for knowing
that the Enemies Army increased as well as theirs, they strove to diminish
their number by frequent skirmishes, in which there was much blood shed every
day on either side. Among those that got greatest renown in those Encounters,
was the young Demetrius, who gained an extraordinary Reputation, and being of
an age to seek occasions to show his worth, he suffered none to escape without
giving proofs of a Valor that was far from common. Yet was it no longer
despair that thrust him headlong into danger, for his heart had allayed part of
its sorrow, by the birth of another passion; the sad remembrance of Hermione,
had by little and little given place to the charms of Deidamia, and that love
of Ashes, and of Tombs, had yielded to a more lawful affection; the current of
his tears were stopped, and his words were no longer interrupted with so many
sobs, but his sighs continued still, though they had changed their object, and
though this last were less deplorable than the former, it was so powerful, and
so imperious, that those timorous messengers of his love, durst hardly venture
to make their passage out of his breast. Yet did he resist the birth of this
latter passion, and opposed the force of it with all the remembrances of
Hermione, but though those sorrowful Idea's served his intention for a few
moments, the sight of Deidamia conquered all those obstacles, and dissipated
all his resolutions. That fair Princess wept daily for a loss which was still
fresh in her memory, and at first Demetrius had contented himself with weeping
with her, confirming her in the design of loving the remembrance of her dear
Agis eternally, and if in the beginning he had found some consolation in the
humor, and in the destiny of that Princess, he now desired an alteration in
them both. He had insensibly dried up his tears to become her comforter, whose
companion in affliction he had been before, and in short, as he had before
lamented only his own misfortunes, so now he seemed to have forgot them, to
become sensible of Deidamia's. She, who had observed the winning qualities of
Demetrius, who knew his birth, and who besides found herself obliged to his
civilities, and to the care he took for her consolation, and for her Fortune,
showed him a great deal of acknowledgement, and beheld him with more good will
than all the rest; but being her grief was very lively, and very real, and that
her heart in that condition, was little capable of a second affection, all her
inclinations to Demetrius went not beyond the limits of esteem, and gratitude,
and he whose passion settled it self with a most profound respect, and who was
more afraid of Agis, for all he was dead, than of all his living Enemies;
knowing Deidamia's mind, durst neither complain of his condition, nor desire
one more advantageous. He thought it not enough to forbid his tongue the use of
speech, but would also keep even his eyes, and sighs from discovering his
passion, and equally fearing to offend, both what he began, and what he ceased
to love, he tied himself up strictly in a very narrow constraint.

In these terms he stood, when the whole Army was ready to try the success of a
second day, and Arsaces being then well enough cured to ride on hors-back, and
to fight, approved of the resolution which he knew all his Companions had, to
send and present their Enemies Battle within three days. They had intelligence
by spies that were returned out of their Camp, that their Army was no less
recruited than theirs, and that from Media, Lydia, Pamphilia, Caria, and
Parthia, there was a re-inforcement of five and thirty, or forty thousand men
come to them; and not being willing to afford them time to make themselves
stronger, they with a general opinion determined to send them a challenge, and
to agree with them both upon the day and Field for deciding of their quarrel.
Cleomenes, and Aristides were chosen for that commission, but before they went,
Arsaces taking them aside, informed them of what he desired, and gave them
charge, to demand an entervenience of Perdiccas and Seleucus the next day,
between the two Camps, for him, and one of his friends withal necessary
securities. The Deputies departed, having received their instructions, and the
Princes remained with the Ladies, who began already to tremble, and grow pale
at the approach of the Battle. Berenice was like to die with fear for her dear
Artaxerxes, and for the Prince her Brother, who she saw escaped out of so many
dangers, only to precipitate themselves into a new one, and to try the hazard
of a day, the events whereof were very doubtful. Apamia and Arsionoe grew wan
for their dear, and Noble husbands; Deidamia, for all she was exempt from
loving any body that was alive, was not without fear for her worthy friends,
and among all the Princes from whom she hoped for support, she bestowed her
particular wishes for young Demetrius. Only Thalestris appeared fearless among
so many timorous Princesses, and making some attempts to banish out of her
mind, the remembrance of Orontes which afflicted her, she showed her self at
the head of her fair Amazons, both fairer and cheerfuller than ordinary, her
satisfaction was caused by their arrival, and she could not dissemble the
contentment she received, by being able to assist those Princes with her
Forces, whom till then she had only served in her single person. The two Camps
being not far asunder, Cleomenes and Aristides were not long ere they returned,
whereupon the Soldiers ran thronging to the Tent of Antigonus, who commanded
that day, and where the Princes were then assembled. The answer they heard was
such as they desired, for Cleomenes told them that the Enemies had gladly
received their proposition, and that Perdiccas had promised to expect them the
third day, with a hundred thousand men in the next Field. All the Company
welcomed this news with joyful cries, and the rumor of it going out of the
Tent, ran presently from one to another, into all parts of the Camp. Afterward
Cleomenes turning toward Arsaces to give him an account of his whole
negotiation, Sir, (said he) I have followed your orders, and having declared
your intention to Seleucus, he appeared so astonished to hear you were in our
party, that of a great while he was not able to answer me; In the end, after he
had made some complaints of your change, he conferred with Perdiccas, and they
both together promised me, that to morrow as soon as the Sun is risen, they
will be upon that little hill which you see on the right hand, and which is
just half way between their Army and ours; Arsaces was very well pleased with
this answer, and hoping for a good success of that parley, he imparted his
thoughts to Prince Oroondates, with whom he walked a while upon the bank of the
River. The rest of that day was spent in their ordinary employments, and the
next morning as soon as day appeared, the Princes of Scythia, and Persia called
for their clothes and Arms, and no sooner had they got them on, but they took
horse, and rode directly toward the place Cleomenes had told them of. They
arrived there first, but presently after they saw them coming whom they
expected, and Arsaces no sooner knew Seleucus, but he galloped up toward him,
and the same did Oroondates by his example. When they were near, they saluted
one another in a fashion that had nothing of enmity in it, and though
Oroondates were unknown to Perdiccas, (whose weakness had not suffered him to
observe his face when he had been succourd by him) his graceful presence
working the effect that was usual to it, moved Perdiccas to nothing but
respect. After the first salutation, Arsaces preventing Seleucus, who opened
his mouth probably to use some reproaches against him. You wonder, brave
Seleucus (said he) to see me in your Enemies party, but when once you know me,
you will wonder more that ever you saw me in yours. I know I am indebted to you
for my life, but you shall also know that I have fought for you against nature,
against justice, against my nearest friends, and even against my self, and that
perhaps few men in the World would have preferred the obligation I have to you,
before the interest which now has pulled me from you; yet as great as it is, it
is not able to make me forget a friend so worthy of esteem as is Seleucus, and
I was very desirous to see him, to justify my self in his opinion, and to beg
the continuation of a friendship, which I no longer can hope for from those of
his party. I never thought (replied Seleucus) it could be out of inconstancy
that Arsaces had forsaken us, and I have found courage, and gratitude enough in
you, for a service of small importance, to believe they must needs be very
weighty considerations that had made you to become our Enemy. Yet could I not
hear it without trouble, nor (if I may say so to you) without resentment, since
by the promises of friendship you had made me, I believed such a man as you are
sufficiently engaged. Say, (added Perdiccas, who had not spoken till than) that
no party can loose a man like Arsaces, without being very much weakened, that
the great actions we have seen him do in favor of us, will not suffer us to
bear his loss without complaining of it, and that in short, (if we may use such
a reproach) we had given him no cause, by the usage he received from us, to
carry his assistance to our Enemies. That I gave to you (replied Arsaces) as it
is my greatest crime, so would it also be my greatest remorse, if it were not
excused by what I owed to Seleucus, and by the transports of a passion, to
which I had then given my self over. In brief Perdiccas, since you know what I
have done for you, learn what I ought to have done against you, by learning
that I am the Son of Darius. Those Princesses, whom you brought to the very
brink of death, and whom you now keep prisoners, are my Sisters, and to give
you a fuller knowledge of me, he who pulled Statira out of your arms, and who
upon the banks of Euphrates, made you with part of your blood, to satisfy for
the offense you committed against her that had been your Queen, was no other
than this Artaxerxes, who since has fought for you, against the Protectors of
his blood, and the revengers of his quarrel, and this Artaxerxes, who now
speaks to you. The confusion of Perdiccas and Seleucus was exceeding great at
this discourse of Artaxerxes, and being they had heard by common fame that
Darius his only Son, had been dead many years, they could not learn that he
was alive, and that he was Arsaces, without falling into an unparalleled
amazement. They should have doubted of the truth of these words, if they had
heard them from the mouth of a person, whose Soul had been less great than his,
but not knowing how to suspect such a man as Arsaces of a lie, they considered
him from head to foot, with more respect than before, and were not able to open
their mouths to give him any answer. Neither did the Prince afford them
leisure, but going on with his discourse, while their astonishment had struck
them mute; Although I am the Son of Darius (pursued he) I come not to reproach
you as Enemies of our house, and though Perdiccas has used those Princesses
unworthily, whom he ought not to have beheld but with respect, I know
nevertheless that he employed his industry to save their lives, and that but
for his care they might perchance have been sacrifices to Roxana's cruelty;
this remembrance stifles part of my resentments, and obliges me to make a
further trial both of Seleucus his friendship, and Perdiccas his generosity, to
obtain the liberty of my Sisters; Complete the glory of that action (O
Perdiccas) which you did in favor of them, and restore us a Queen, and a
Princess which are of too illustrious a birth to continue your Captives any
longer. Artaxerxes demands his Sisters of you, and Oroondates his Mistress, the
desire of gaining such a friend should make you forget your interests, and if
you cannot become his by the recital of his admirable actions, consider him as
a Prince, who twice has been the author of your safety, he secured you once
from the revenge of Lysimachus, and after our Combat upon the River side he
assisted you again, though considering you as Statira's Murderer, one would
have thought he should rather have given you a thousand deaths, than the
succor you received from him. It Is this miraculous man, whose virtue wins him
Idolaters in all places, 't is he whom at the head of his Troops, you have seen
defeat your Battalions alone, and carry Victory which way soever he turned, he
under whose valor I have sunk two or three several times, and he -- say no
more (interrupted Oroondates, whose modesty could not suffer Arsaces his
discourse any longer) these praises offend our friendship, and 't is enough you
told Perdiccas Artaxerxes loves me, to obtain the favor you demand of him in
my behalf, Statira is without doubt indebted to him for her life, and I shall
be indebted to him for Statira, and also for my life, if he generously can
conquer his Interests, and if he will grant that to our requests, which he has
refused to the threats, and to the force of so potent an Army as that of ours.
Perdiccas, who during the discourse of the two Princes, had had time to settle
his astonishment, and to recall to mind the wounds Artaxerxes had given him, and
the shame Oroondates, for all he was unknown to him, had made him suffer, when
at the head of his Army he had overthrown him on the ground at the first
encounter, considered those two Princes, but 't was Oroondates as his Rival,
and Artaxerxes as his Enemy: and recollecting all his confidence to reply; I am
very glad (said he) to know persons with whom I have had encounters of no small
importance, and with whom I shall not fear the like again, though Fortune
seconded them in the former; I have been wounded by your hand, Artaxerxes, and
by that occasion that made us fight, you know Statira is alive, and moreover
that she is alive by my assistance; I therefore will not tell you she is dead,
as all other men have hitherto been made believe, and I have too much interest
in her life to cease to defend it, while the Gods afford me mine. Statira is
alive, but she is not alive for Oroondates; Although the good office he did me,
were sufficient weight to counter-ballance what he has done against us, and
although what Arsaces has done for us, were able to make me forget the wounds
he gave me, neither of them ought to hope for that from me, which I would not
part with for all the Empires in the World, nor does any rule of generosity
oblige me to give that to my Enemy, and to my Rival, which I would refuse to my
dearest friends, and even to Alexander himself, if he were yet in a condition
to make use of the power he once had over me. But thou shall, (Replied
impatient Oroondates) thou shall either give Statira to that Enemy, and to that
Rival, or else that life, which thou have already been like to loose by the
sword of each; I expected nothing from thee, and if I did abase my self so far
as to entreat thee, know thou owe that forcing of my inclinations only to
the power Artaxerxes has with me. If I were not withheld by the promise I have
given him, perhaps thou never should return into thy Camp, to boast of the
advantages thou have over me, and thou should quickly know, that if Statira
be not alive for Oroondates, she never shall be so for Perdiccas. Think not
(replied Perdiccas, putting his hand upon the hilt of his sword) that thy
threats can terrify me, or that I will take advantage by the promise thou have
given thy friend; I Will defend Statira both against thy person, and against thy
forces, she is in my power, she is in Babylon with her Sister, and that which I
have hitherto kept secret for other considerations than thine, shall now be
published to the whole World, to engage thee so much the more to execute what
thou have threatened. Oroondates suffered himself to be transported with his
anger, and would without doubt have decided his quarrel with Perdiccas, if he
had not been withheld by Artaxerxes, who still considering Seleucus as a man to
whom he was obliged, desired to shun the occasion of drawing his sword against
him. It is an easier matter, (added the Prince of Persia) for such persons as
Oroondates to execute than to threaten, but I should have hoped that Seleucus
(continued he turning toward him) would have used some endeavor to draw
Perdiccas to more virtuous thoughts. If I had not hitherto, (replied Seleucus)
known a great deal of virtue in Perdiccas, and a great deal of Justice, and
integrity in all his actions, I would never have been his friend, but I am so
now in such a high degree, that I serve him without arguing against his
intentions, and without considering any other interests but his. Then I am
disengaged (said Axtaxerxes briskly) of part of what I owe you, I acquit you of
all (answered Seleucus) and since you are Perdiccas his Enemy, I cannot look
upon you as other than the Enemy of Seleucus. I will not be so far his Enemy
(replied the Prince) but that I shall remember I am obliged to him, and shall
discern him always from the rest of his party. They had said more, if
Oroondates, who could no longer endure the sight of Perdiccas without breaking
forth into rage, had not hastened their separation, Let Us away Brother (said he
to the Prince) and stay no longer with Enemies, with whom we must henceforth
converse no other way but with our swords. Farewell Perdiccas (continued he
looking upon him with an eye that sparkled with fury, and with an eye, which as
resolute as he was, did a little daunt him) defend Statira, since thou have
undertaken it, but know the day draws near when thou shall restore her to me,
and all the blood in thy body with her. He said no more, but pulling Arsaces by
the arm, made him without other salute turn from his Enemies, whom he left with
very threatening words and actions. Yet in the midst of all his anger, he
carried away no small satisfaction, in having learnt from the mouth of
Perdiccas, (who till then had disavow'd it) that Cassandra was in Babylon; and
since he was assured of the place of her abode by him, who knew it better than
any body else in the World, he hoped he should recover her by force, though his
Enemies were yet stronger than they were, and though Babylon were defended with
a hundred walls, like that wherewith it was enclosed.

As soon as the two Princes were returned to the Camp, all the Commanders came
about them, to hear what had been the success of that enterview; and they gave
them an exact account of all that had passed between them. Dear Companion of my
Fortune (said Oroondates to Lysimachus) our Princesses are in Babylon, and from
hence forward we no more can doubt of their life, nor of the place of their
Captivity; but we must win them with the edge of the sword, for Perdiccas
prepares to defend them with his utmost power. Perdiccas his defense (replied
Lysimachus) will be but weak against the valor of Oroondates, and perhaps
Alcetas has not conquered all the difficulties he has yet to encounter for the
obtaing of Parisatis. After these words, the rest of the day was spent in
necessary preparations for the Battle, and the next morning all the Troops were
carefully overlooked, their number exactly taken, and the several Battalions
were disposed, according to the order they intended to observe. The day of
Battle happened to be that of Oroondates his Command, and all the Officers, in
whom that Prince's virtue had made a wonderful impression, showed an extreme
contentment that it so fell out. Yet Oroondates would have shared that glory
with his Companions, but they opposed his intention so stiffly, that it was
impossible for him to make them consent; and even Arsaces himself, whom he
pressed to it by all the considerations of their friendship, persisted formerly
in the resolution of the rest, and contenting himself with the glory he had
gained at the head of the Scythian Army, would needs see his dear Brother, at
that of so many Gallant men, and leave him the whole honor of that memorable
day. Oroondates being in the end constrained to yield to the desires of his
friends, protested that nothing but obedience made him accept of an advantage,
to which his ambition never had aspired, and afterward by their advice he
disposed of the Forces on this manner. He divided them into four bodies, as at
the other Battle, the first of which was given to the Valliant Arsaces; 'Twas
with an exceeding joy, and with a mavelous hope of Victory that they saw so
great a man obeyed by the Conquerours of the greatest part of the World, and
with them, they that had been his Fathers subjects acknowledged their Prince,
and submitted to him with an extraordinary affection. That body was composed of
Bactrians, and Zoydians under Prince Oxyartes, who desired to unite himself to
the Fortune of his Nephew, and under Cophes the Son of Artabasus; of Syrians
under the brave Laomedon, of Lydians under Menander, and of Cappadocians under
the generous Eumenes. The second body was given to Lysimachus, consisting of
Thracians, and of the inhabitants of Pontus, and Bosphorus; of Egyptians and
Arabians under Ptolomeus, who would needs fight that day by the side of his
dear friend, and of Cilicians under the conduct of Orestes, the Brother of
their deceased Commander Philotas. The third was assigned to the great
Craterus, and under him marched the valliant Macedonians that were lately of
Alexanders guard, with Polyperchon, who desired to fight at the head of them;
The Affricans, subjects of Ptolomeus, under his Brother Menelaus, as also the
Armenians, and Mesopotamians, who wanted leaders since the death of their
Princes Phrataphernes, and Archesilaus, who with their Sons had fallen by the
sword of Arsaces. The gallant Queen of the Amazons commanded the last, and
though she would have refused that charge, she was constrained to accept of it,
by the most urgent entreaties of all the Princes; She was followed by her
courageous Amazons under Menalyppa and Amalthea, by the Paphlagonians, who were
led by Euristeus, Eumenes his Lieutenant, by the Hyrcanians under Philip, and
by the Phrygians under Antigonus, who for all his greatness, and the height of
his quality and reputation would needs place himself that day under the banners
of that valliant Princess: Demetrius had an employment worthy of himself, which
was a body apart composed of six thousand horse, that was to keep upon the
wings, and according to the events and necessities, to succor them that had
need of his assistance; and the conduct of two hundred Chariots of War, Armed
with Sithes, and plates of Iron, and full of Archers taken out of the several
Nations, was committed to young Alexander the Son of Polyperchon. The whole
Army being thus disposed of, the four chief Commanders took a survey of those
Troops that were to obey them, and during the remainder of that day, they
showed themselves to the Soldiers, and instructed the Officers in those things
they desired to make them know. Craterus, who had the command that day, was
careful to over-see the Arms, Horses, Chariots, and the Field of Battle, and
when night was come, besides the general cares, every man in particular was
diversely employed in preparations for that important day.

The morning light began newly to appear when the signal of Battle was set up
on the top of Oroondates his Tent, and the sound of a thousand warlike
instruments, which were heard from one Camp to the other, roused up those that
were fastest asleep, and excited in the faintest hearts a courage which was not
natural to them. The Prince of Scythia had not stayed for it, but his cares,
and his generous impatience had made him leave his bed, before break of day. As
soon as he perceived the shining of the earliest beams; I salute thee (cried
he) O glorious day, and thou bright Sun, the tutelary God of my Princesses
Country, who to day art to give light to an action worthy of thy presence; If
these years, which my love has covered with a gloomy obscurity, have passed
with some kind of dishonor to me, perchance I to day may find occasion to make
my Fortune alone be accused of part of those faults which have hitherto
reflected upon me. My Arms, (continued he) my Arms, and presently after
Loncates having brought them, he put them on with the help of Araxes, who
busied himself in that employment with a joy, which he drew from the
contentment of his Master. They were the same he wore in the former Battle, as
well because he had tried their goodness, and for love of the Prince that had
given him them, as to make himself the more easily known to Perdiccas against
whom he had now turned all the anger which before was chiefly against Arsaces.
There had been but very few with him at his rising, because he was one of the
first up in the whole Camp, but his Arms were not quite on, when his Chamber
was full of Officers of the Army. He with them went out of his Chamber to go
into that of Arsaces, whom he found out of bed, and with him Oxyartes,
Ilyoneus, and many other Noble persons, whose affections that Prince's
admirable virtues had acquired. Brother [cry'd Oroondates as he came in] to day
we shall have you to fight with us, and I hope we shall conquer, since in
turning of our side, you without doubt will make the Victory turn with you.
Yes, Brother, (replied Prince Artaxerxes) we shall Conquer, and if the Gods are
not too much our Enemies, an Army commanded by Oroondates, and by so many
valiant Princes cannot choose but hope for Victory. After these words, and many
others full of modesty, and civility, they received Lysimachus, Ptolomeus, and
Craterus, and by little and little all the considerable men of the Army.
Berenice, Apamia, and the other Ladies, whom the apprehensions of that day had
wakened sooner than ordinary, came thither also, Apamia and Arsinoe openly
showed the fear they were in for their dear husbands, and Berenice though she
endeavored to dissemble part of hers, or to make the opinion of it fall upon
her affection to her Brother, could not keep the company from discovering that
though Oroondates was very dear to her, yet her greatest disquiets were for
Artaxerxes. Oroondates observed it with much joy, and as jealous as he had been
of him for another, he envyed not his friend the precedence in his Sisters
affection. 'Twas in her presence Artaxerxes called for his Arms, which had
newly been presented to him by his Uncle Prince Oxyartes; They had been Darius
his, and were the same he wore when under the name of Codoman, he by a
memorable Combat had added Armenia to the Crown of Persia, and the Prince his
Son having kissed them, out of the respect he owed unto that memory, could not
put them on without solemnizing that remembrance with some tears, nor without
drawing some by his action from the eyes of Oroondates, and Oxyartes, with the
rest of their companions. As Darius had been the greatest, and most magnificent
King in all the World, his Arms showed tokens of his magnificence, and of his
greatness, and the gold and stones of value wherewith they were enriched,
afforded no sight of the matter whereof they were made; so that when the Prince
had put them on, he looked like fierce Achilles in those gallant Arms, whereon
Vulcan at the request of Thetis, had set forth the utmost of his skill. All the
Princes went out of the Tent together to be present at the sacrifices that were
going to be offered through the whole Camp, and by the zeal they testified in
that action, made the Soldiers know that 'twas rather from the Gods than from
their valor they ought to expect the success of that dangerous day; the Priest
found nothing ominous, either in the smoke, or in the entrails of the beasts,
and some among them having espied an Eagle, flying toward their left hand, drew
a presage from thence, that gave them a very great hope of victory. The Troops
began presently after to march out of their entrenchments, and were drawn up in
the plain by the care of Eumenes and Polyperchon, while Arsaces took a leave of
Berenice, which she could not give him without breaking forth into sorrow, and
while Prince Oroondates attended by his faithful Araxes galloped through all
the several Divisions, and by his words and presence stirred up a desire to
fight in the hearts of the veriest cowards; The Princesses were already
retired, all the Commanders were at the heads of their Battalions, and the
Forces being quite drawn up, marched toward their Enemies in gallant order;
they had moved but a little way when they perceived them, and from a rising
ground saw all the Field of Babylon covered with men and horses. Their order
was no less beautiful than that of our Princes, nor their march less
considerable. Perdiccas had divided his Army into six Battalions; The first
composed of Macedonians, Parthians, and the inhabitants of mount Caucasus was
commanded by the valiant Seleucus. Cassander led the second consisting of
Carians, Lycians, and of the invincible Argiraspides. The third obeyed
Leonatus, and under him marched the Pamphilians, the Oraches, and the Argeans.
The fourth was under the conduct of Alcetas, in which were the inhabitants of
the two Mediaes, the Pelasgians, and those Zogdians that were not under the
Jurisdiction of Artabasus. The fifth, whose Leader was Neoptolemus, was made up
of natural Persians, and the inhabitants of Susiana, and those of that part of
Bactria which was under the obedience of Scytheus. Peucestas brought up the
last, and was followed by the Babylonians, Bellites, and the Soldiers of
Margiana. Python had the charge of two hundred and fifty armed Chariots, and
Statanor that of five or six thousand horse, which were a reserve for the same
purpose as those of Demetrius. The two Armies were no sooner within sight but
they saluted one another after the usual manner, and all the valiant Commanders
of each side animated by the present objects, and by the resoluteness they
observed in their soldiers faces, showed a generous impatience in their own,
and forgot not any thing belonging to their charge that could conduce unto the
Victory. Lysimachus, Ptolomeus, Craterus, Thalestris, Eumenes, Polyperchon, and
Demetrius, appeared at the head of their Troops like so many invincible
Alcides; Arsaces was before the first with a more than humane presence, and
with a Majesty worthy of his high birth, which begot love, respect, and fear in
all that beheld him, and Prince Oroondates fuller of business than all the
rest, seemed also to be greater and handsomer than ordinary, and the Action
wherewith he was animated, made a fire appear about his face, which dazel'd the
Eyes of all that considered him. He had already wearied two Horses with riding
about to every Rank, nor did he forget any of his natural eloquence, to inflame
the coldest hearts with a desire of Victory. My valiant Companions, (said he to
those that couldhear him) I am unworthy to command these invincible Forces,
which under a Leader worthy of them, have vanquished all the Earth; but since I
have the glory to fight with you to day, I shall also have the glory to conquer
with you. I to less generous persons should represent the interest you all have
in this Victory, I should make some of you desire it by the hope of inestimable
spoils, others by that of rest, which after such tedious labors you well may
wish, and all by that of the high Reputation your Arms have given you, and
which from the issue of this day expects its last establishment: but to the
Conquerours of the World, to the Masters of the whole Earth, what can a
stranger promise, what can he make be hoped, that is not far below them? and
what belief can they have in an unknown person, whose most glorious advantage
is that he holds to day from the goodness of your Princes, and of your selves?
It shall therefore be neither spoil nor glory that I Will propose to you, but the
Revenge of your great King, and the safety and liberty of your illustrious
Queen; It Is against the horrible Murderers of Alexander you are to fight, and
from those very Murderers you demand nothing but the Widow and Sister of that
victorious King. Besides the quality that Alliance gave them, their birth is
considerable to many of you, and I assure my self, that among Troops of so many
several Nations, which heretofore were under the obedience of the worthily
deplored Darius, there are a great number who yet hold his memory in
veneration. Allow something, (valiant men) allow something to that remembrance;
the son of that great King, more considerable by his virtues than by his birth,
fights on your side to day, and forgets whatever some of you have done against
his House, to turn all his Resentments against your Enemies. You will
infallibly conquer being supported as you are, both by the justice of your
Quarrel, and by the courage of so many brave Commanders who fight at the head
of you: if your foes are valiant, as without doubt they are, since they
heretofore were your Companions, and that they shared with you in the honor of
so many Conquests; if they be harder to vanquish than those Nations you have
overcome without resistance, the Victory over them will be much the more
glorious, and you may boast, that after having subdued Asia, and the greatest
part of Europe, and Africa, you at last have conquered the only Enemies that
could dispute the prize of valor with you. Oroondates had hardly ended these
words, when the Soldiers by loud Acclamations testified what an impression
they had wrought upon them, and at the same time, they were come so near their
Enemies, that it no longer was in the power of the Generals to bridle their
impetuousness.

The last signals were given on either side, and the Troops marched up, which
such a fury as could be compared to nothing but it self. On one side the great
Arsaces, and on the other the brave Seleucus began that bloody day, and the
foremost Ranks of each party, after having exchanged a cloud of Arrows, closed
to a nearer distance, and drawing their swords fell without delay to
handy-blows. Their valiant Leaders who equally sought for glory where the
danger was greatest, and who knew not one another by reason they had changed
their Arms, ran fiercely to the charge, and having broke their Javelins upon
their shields, which they mutually opposed against their strokes, they shocked
each other with an incredible violence. Arsaces was disordered in his seat, and
Seleucus was like to have lost his, yet did he settle himself again with a
great deal of agility, and by his readiness in drawing his sword, covered part
of the disadvantage of that Encounter. These two great men being in the middle
of their Troops, had not the liberty of a lasting Combat, but were both
constrained by the throng that parted them, to carry death to other persons.
Eucrates the son of Axiarchus, Prince of the inhabitants of Mount Caucasus,
with his Brother Evagoras were the first that found it under the sword of
Arsaces, and though they had courage, and that they charged him both together,
their Attempts were to no purpose against him, and received a different death,
one by the point, the other by the edge of his keen sword. From these he passed
on to other Enemies, disdaining common ones to choose out those that were more
terrible; Oxyartes, Eumenes, Cophes, and Ilyoneus, endeavored to follow him
amongst the thickest, but though they did Actions worthy of their great
Reputation, Arsaces opened their way whithersoever he turned, and in all places
left bloody marks of his having passed. Seleucus and his men contested for the
advantage with wondrous courage, and the hand of Seleucus had already laid
Cophes in the dust, and given two dangerous wounds to Ilyoneus; but then
Perdiccas made Cassander advance with his Battalion on the right hand, and
Leonatus with another on the left. The falling on of the fierce Argiraspides,
who gave death to all that came before them, soon made the Victory incline
toward Perdiccas his side, and if Prince Oroondates in person had not brought
up Lysimachus with his Troops, those of Arsaces would have been in manifest
danger. Demetrius by the same Order, assaulted Leonatus also at the same time,
but with such vigor, that he presently trampled under foot whatsoever opposed
his passage. This double re-inforcement changed the form of the Battle, and all
Perdiccas his advantage was lost in a fight of more equality; but Python then
appeared with his armed Chariots, and rushing on with them into the Enemies
Infantry, did very considerable Execution. Oroondates commanded one young
Alexander with his, which making a no less bloody slaughter returned a cruel
exchange to the contrary party. Then it was that the face of the Battle became
more horrible, and that death ran through all the Ranks in many hideous and
dismal forms. Oroondates having dis-ingag'd himself of the first cares of his
Command, began to fight now in his own person, and after he had slain the first
that withstood his fury, sought Perdiccas amongst all his Enemies, and made his
name resound which way soever he went. Perdiccas avoided not the Combat, but he
was environed by a number of his friends, to whom Oroondates his Valor was
well known, and who by the trial they had made of it in the former Battle,
were afraid with reason for their General, and opposed the design he had to
stand the fury of that dreadful Enemy. Oroondates hewed open his passage to
them, but not without difficulties, and dangers wherein any other man but he
would have been lost. Python who at the head of his Chariots made a lamentable
Massacre of the Foot, having a while beheld his admirable Actions,
notwithstanding the hazard he saw in that Resolution, had yet the boldness to
encounter him, and remembering in how many perils he had out-brav'd pale death
under the command of Alexander, he thought that without dishonor he could not
shun that last. With this belief he opposed Oroondates his passage, and charged
him with so weighty a stroke, as made the Prince of Scythia know the vigor of
his Enemy, but he soon gave him better proofs of his, for with his shield
receiving those blows wherewith he seconded his first, he with one single
thrust, in the default of his Cuirass, found entrance to the seat of life. That
famous Captain opening his arms fell dead at the feet of Agenor his youngest
son, who not willing to survive his father, instead of giving him the last
assistance, ran desperately as a Lion to his Revenge; Cruel man, (cried he to
the Prince) since thou have killed my father, either die, or kill me also. As
he spoke these words, he rushed precipitately upon him with so little
circumspection, that in the point of the sword yet reaking with his fathers
blood, he found the end of that life, which he no longer would preserve.
Nearchus a most intimate friend to Python, flew upon his Murderer with a great
many others, but the furious Scythian made way amongst them like a
thunderbolt, and sending some of the forwardest to bite the ground, laid
Nearchus himself there also, having given him two very dangerous wounds. This
Action was in the sight of Perdiccas and of his friends, who altogether ran
upon Oroondates with terrible cries, and with Perdiccas whom he sought, had
like to have made him also find his death. Yet did he lay about him with a
more than manly fierceness, and there came but few blows from his hand, that
drew not some of the Enemies blood. He had descried Perdiccas in the midst of
them, and 'twas at Perdiccas he rushed headlong, through the clashings of a
hundred swords. Are these (cried he to him) the effects of thy gallant
Resolution, and of thy love? Come out of that Crowd* which saves me from thy
Valor, and if thou art a worthy successor of Alexander, shun not the sword of
thy Rival, and of thine Enemy. These words received no Answer but the blows of
a great many swords at the same time, and without doubt that obstinate Prince
had met his death among so great a number of foes if the Gods had not sent
Arsaces, and Lysimachus, with a Troop of valiant men to his Relief. Arsaces was
all dyed in blood, and Lysimachus had shed so much that his Arms were red all
over with it. Those two brave Princes having found Oroondates in so great a
danger; Courage, (cried they both together) we must conquer, we must take
Revenge, and breaking into that Rampart of men which sheltred Perdiccas from
the Prince of Scythia's fury, quickly lessened their number, and with Actions
worthy of themselves, dis-ingag'd their gallant friend. Oroondates was sorry he
had neglected the care of a General, to follow his particular Revenge, and
knowing that all the Enemies Army began to incompass them, sent word by
Alexander to Craterus, and to the Amazon Queen, that they should bring up the
last Battalions to charge. This Order was presently performed, and Craterus on
the one side, and that matchless Queen on the other, came into the fight,
presently after Alcetas, Peucestas, and Neoptolemus. Then it was that the
massacre grew horrible, and that the famous Troops of Alexander, with the
renowned Amazons, slew many thousand men, whose courage might have prolonged
their destiny against other Enemies. But on the other party the Macedonians,
and the invincible Argiraspides made no less slaughter of those with whom they
fought. Those fearless women led by their warlike Queen, got ground of
Neoptolemus his Squadrons, and Thalestris being engaged in fight with their
Commander, after some blows that passed without inequality, wounded him at last
with many others, and made him fall under the Horses feet. No sooner was
Alcetas come up into the battle, but Lysimachus had sought him through all the
field, loudly defying him to the Combat, and by provoking words inviting him to
use the same diligence on his side; but Alcetas was not at liberty to do so,
for he was then exchanging blows with Demetrius, and that with so little
advantage, that if his friends had not delivered him out of the hands of that
young Prince, there was no doubt but he had lost his life. Among all the chief
Commanders on either side, there was not one but made himself remarkable that
day, by many proofs of courage. Lysimachus did Actions beyond all the fabulous
Heroes; Ptolomeus thrust on by an old animosity, closed often with Seleucus,
but they still were parted by their men, and carried the effects of their anger
other where, which became fatal to diverse valiant Soldiers. Eumenes sought all
about for his ancient Enemy Neoptolemus, but the Amazon Queen had already
dispatched him to his hand. Craterus, Oxyartes, Polyperchon, Antigonus and
Laomedon, appeared both in the duties of Commanders, and in the Actions of
Soldiers, worthy of their high Reputation. Part of the day was passed without
giving any probable conjecture of the success of that bloody battle, when
Statanor (whom Perdiccas had reserved with six thousand Horse) advanced at the
Orders he received, and came pouring down upon the Amazons. Seleucus on the
other side having rallied the Argiraspides; Invincible Argiraspides, (cried he)
who have never fought but to overcome, will you suffer your selves to be robbed
of a Victory which is your due? And will you lose in one single day that high
Renown you have acquired in so many years? Ah! Let us rather die together, and
if we cannot be Conquerours, let us at least fall with a glory worthy of the
memory of Alexander. With these words he ran foremost into the Lydan Squadrons,
and having with a shock orethrown their Prince the brave Menander, he with two
speeding blows slew Cleobulus, and Leostenes, the sons of Ariobarsanes, who
fought near his person. The Argiraspides encouraged by that glorious Example,
gave such a furious charge against the Lydians, and Cylicians that having
forced their opposition they made them turn their backs, and began to pursue
them with a terrible Execution. On the other side the Amazons not having been
able to resist the brunt of Statanors Cavalry, had given back in spite of them,
and those fresh men falling in when they were tired with fighting; put them in
so great disorder, that they wanted but very little of being defeated. The
valiant Thalestris doing wonders in her own person, saw Clitemnestra and
Amalthea fall dead at her feet, and running headlong to their Revenge, her
Horse was killed under her with a multitude of wounds. The danger in which she
saw her self could nothing daunt her, but fighting afoot with an invincible
courage, she made a heap of bodies which for a while defended her from her
foes. Yet was she ready to have lost her life, not being able to hope for any
Relief from her routed Amazons, when the Gods brought Arsaces to her
assistance. The name of Arsaces struck a fear into the Enemies Troops, but
before he could make his passage to the Queen, her Cask was fallen at her feet,
and her head being unarmed would certainly have been wounded by the hand of
cruel Statanor, if the unexpected sword of a Warrior who appeared upon a
sudden, had not slashed off that sacrilegious arm, and with a second blow taken
the life of that barbaro us man, whom the sight of so much beauty had not been
able to make relent. After this Action, that valiant man slew Sinus also the
Prince of Susiana, who was one of the eagerest to kill or take the Queen, and
gave the son of Scytheus a mortal wound. By these Exploits he scattred the
throng wherewith Thalestris was almost orewhelm'd, and had already procured her
means to get upon Statanor's Horse, when they saw the foe give way at the
arrival of the redoubted Arsaces. Arsaces was followed by a squadron of
Bactrians and Cappadocians, who under such a Leader quickly changed the face of
the Combat; for charging into the thickest of Scytheus his Susians, and
Zogdians, he not only stopped their impetuosity, but made them lose the design
they had against the life of their Enemies, to think upon the preservation of
their own. How many courageous men fell then under the sword of great Arsaces,
and how much blood did he pour forth to the fair Amazons Revenge, and to Darius
his memory! Scytheus was one of the first that felt his fury, who being run
quite through the body, fell without breath in the middle of his Troops.
Arthous Prince of the Pelasgians would have revenged his friend, but he met a
destiny which differed only in this, that Scytheus received his death by the
point of Arsaces sword, and he his by the edge, for both his arms, which he had
lifted up to discharge a blow with all his force on his Enemies head being cut
off close to his elbows, he was carried away a while by his unguided Horse, and
tumbled at last among the feet of the rest, where he miserably lost his life.
That Warrier who had first relieved the Amazon Queen, seconded Arsaces with
blows little different from his, and Thalestris being got on horseback, and
having put on her Cask again by his assistance, labored in her own Revenge
with mavelous animosity. The Amazons rallied in a little time, and being
encouraged by the Example of their Queen, and by the help of the Bactrians, and
of the Cappadocians their neighbors, they came on a fresh with such a fury,
that the Troops of Statanor, the Susians and the Zogdians having lost their
chief Commanders, were no longer able to withstand them, but having fought a
while retiring, at last turned their backs, and quitted the Victory and the
Field together. The Conquerours seeing them routed, followed their advantage
with loud cries, but in the interim on the other wing of the Battle the success
was very contrary. The Argiraspides and Macedonians led by the furious
Seleucus, Cassander and Perdiccas who then fought there in person, after having
broken the Lydian and Pamphilian squadrons, were already enlarging their
Victory upon the Phrigians, and by little and little were putting the better
part of the Army in a Rout. They still advanced like an impetuous Torrent which
nothing was able to resist, when the Gods for the safety of their foes brought
Prince Oroondates to oppose them, who with Ptolomeus, and Lysimachus, came from
another part of the Battle where his presence had been necessary. O Gods, how
great was the indignation of the Prince of Scythia, when he saw his defeated
Troops fly shamefully before the face of their Enemies. Certainly, it would be
very hard to represent his fury, but they that came in his way felt the
prodigious effects of it; he cast up his terrible brow on every side, and
having a while considered that sad form of Combat, he gallopp'd before the
chief of them that fled, and raising his voice that he might be heard; Whither
fly you (cried he) valiant men? Whither fly you? What Retreat have you if you
lose this Battle? What Walls to escape the fury of your Conquerours? and how
will you save your selves either from Death, or from eternal infamy? Are you
the same men that fought under Alexander the Great? and the same men who but a
few minutes since, had so gloriously begun the Victory? By what accident, and
by what losses are you changed and weakened? In speaking these words he opposed
their flight with his sword up, and stopping one of the chief Lydian Captains
by the arm. Stay, (said he) and face about, see here are thine Enemies. By
these words animated with an extraordinary gesture, and seconded by others from
Lysimachus, and Ptolomeus, he made some of those frighted men take heart again,
but he encouraged them a great deal better by his Actions. Follow me, [said he
to them] do but follow me the way that I will open to you; and at the same time
having observed Seleucus at the head of the Argiraspides, he judged that a good
part of the Victory consisted in defeating him. He advanced toward him with a
threatening cry, and Seleucus who saw him coming, expected him with a great deal
of Resolution; the first strokes they gave were reasonable equal, but though at
another time Seleucus might have been able to make a long resistance;
Oroondates his force was then redoubled by his violent anger, and he showed no
small proof of it, when being closed with Seleucus, he locked him so strongly
in his arms, that clapping spurs to his Horse, he lifted that gallant man out
of his saddle, and having carried him above twenty paces, let him fall quite
astonished among the horses feet. Cassander to revenge Seleucus struck Oroondates
a blow behind, but the furious Prince turning about to him, made his sword
come down with such a force upon his head, that his Cask was deeply dinted by
it, and Cassander himself, having his face bathed in blood, reeled from his
Horse among some of his men who were come up to his Relief. Perdiccas could not
see these Actions without being terrified, yet having courage enough to prefer
death before infamy, he did not turn his back, but dared to stand the furious
Prince, who knowing him by many marks, flew at him as an Eagle at his prey.
Thou must die Perdiccas, (cried he) thou must die for Statira, since thou art
unworthy to live for her. With these words he rushed upon him with a fierceness
which made him grow pale under his arms, and forced him to approve of the help
he received from those about him. With two blows Oroondates gave him, he dyed
his Arms in blood, which came streaming from two several places, but as eager
as he was upon his Victory he could not hinder Perdiccas his friends from
thrusting themselves between, nor from rescuing him out of his hands half
vanquished, and half dead. Oroondates took Revenge for the displeasure he
received, upon some of those that caused it, and at the same time turning his
eye toward his own men, he saw Peucestas and Leonatus fall by the hands of
Lysimachus and Ptolomeus. By these brave Examples the Phrigians, Lydians, and
Pamphilians staid their flight, and faced about to their Enemies with so great
Resolution, that they seeing themselves deprived of those valiant Commanders,
who had animated them, had not enough to make resistance; especially when they
saw the brave Demetrius followed by a good Body of Horse, come thundering upon
them, and Craterus also at the head of the Macedonians. This second charge
finding them wavering, utterly took away their courage, so that of terrible
Conquerours which they were a few minutes before, they became timorous
Run-aways, and instead of Victory, which by so much blood they had almost
gotten, they only sought to save themselves by flight. That Rout amongst them
was so general, that the stoutest of them shamefully turned their backs, and
even the two chief Leaders of the Argiraspides, Antigenes, and Teutamus both
wounded by the swords of Lysimachus and Demetrius, being escaped out of their
hands like feeble birds out of a Falcons tallons, fled to avoid the danger that
threatened them, and by their example perfected the routing of their men. They
are beaten, my valiant friends, (cried Prince Oroondates) they are beaten, and
if you neglect not the Advantages your valor has given you, this is the last
day of the War and of your Enemies. As he had said these words, he threw
himself among them who yet made opposition, the greatest part of which were
Macedonians, and having with the Troops that vigorously seconded him, watered
the field with the blood of those that were most resolute, the rest unable to
sustain his violence, followed the example and the destiny of their companions.
From this part of the battle, and from that where Arsaces, Thalestris, and
Eumenes had fought with the same success, the Rout spread over all the field,
and Perdiccas his whole party gave it self up either to flight, or to the mercy
of the Enemy; nor was there longer any fighting seen, but only execution
without resistance, and a lamentable slaughter which for a long time the
Commanders were not able to hinder. The Amazons incensed by the loss of their
Companions, gave store of blood to their Revenge, and the people of the most
cruel natures, as the Thracians, Arabes, and Hircanians, not regarding pity,
covered the ground all over with dead bodies. Those that could make use of the
swiftness of their Horses, sought safety toward the Town, but the miserable
Foot, either lost their lives upon the place, or found their deaths in the
River, where they leaped in headlong to shun the Sword of their Enemies. The
waters of Euphrates, which before were clear and pure, turned red with the
blood of many thousands, and seemed to swell higher with those streams, which
made a second River upon their banks. The renowned Arsaces carried on by the
ardour of the fight, had crossed through so many Squadrons, that he at last was
come near the place, where Oroondates by his glorious Actions had given the
Victory to his party, and seeking for resistance wheresoere he thought he might
find it, was brought by Seleucus his good fortune, where that valiant man,
reduced to the last extremity of his life, was disputing the remainders of it
afoot against a company of Soldiers, who but for his arrival had certainly
made an end of him. Arsaces having heard some body name him, and knowing him by
diverse marks, he, who though he had not known him, and for all he was an Enemy,
would not have suffered so brave a man to be slain, rode up before all his
Soldiers, and by redoubled cries stopping the fury of the hottest among them,
drew near to Seleucus, who making use of the respite that was given him, set
the point of his Sword upon the ground, and leaning on the Hilt to take a
little rest and breath, saw his blood run down from a great many parts of his
body. Arsaces putting up the Beaver of his Helmet; Valiant Seleucus, (said he)
you shall not die, nor shall you be overcome, Arsaces will repay you part of
what he ows you, and though he was not obliged to you for his life, he with all
generous men, ows his Relief unto your virtue. Seleucus knowing him, would no
longer dispute his life, nor his liberty against him, but presenting him his
Sword; I yield my self, (said he) and I yield my self without shame to the
great Arsaces, with this belief, that if he had not ceased to be my friend, I
should not now have been conquered. Arsaces was going to reply, when he
perceived him to grow pale, and by little and little to sink into a swown,
which his weariness and loss of blood had caused. He embraced him presently, to
hold him up, and feeling him faint in his arms, he turned toward some he knew,
and making them take him up, commanded them to carry him into his Tent, and lay
him in his Bed, with the same care he would have desired to his own person.
Then seeking Oroondates, on every side he found him busied with Lysimachus,
Demetrius, and Ptolomeus, to stop the slaughter of so many men, who had given
over all resistance. Spare Friends, (cried he, running from place to place)
spare those who were your Countrymen, and your fellow soldiers, there has been
blood enough shed already, and our Victory for being the more bloody, cannot
now be any thing the more entire. Arsaces helped the Prince of Scythia in that
employment, and by the care they took, they saved the lives of many thousand
men. The Soldiers having long been deaf to those commands, began to obey in
many places, and giving Quarter, took some of their Enemies Prisoners, leaving
the rest free liberty to escape; All those that could get off retired to
Babylon, the Gates whereof were set open to them, and of all that mighty number
of Soldiers, which a few hours, before had covered all the Plain, there
remained not any without the Walls but what were either dead or Prisoners. In
short, our Princes had as total a Victory as they could have wished, and if the
ardour of Oroondates and Arsaces had been followed, they that very day would
have appeared at the heels of the Run-aways, before the Gates of Babylon; but
Antigonus, Craterus, and Polyperchon opposed that Resolution, and knowing that
it was near night, and that the City was not in a condition to be easily taken,
they staid their impetuousness with very specious Reasons, and telling them how
well they ought to be satisfied with the Actions of that Day, persuaded them to
bestow the rest of it in the care of their wounded men, and in the help they
owed unto their Friends, many of whom lying among the dead might yet have need,
and being in a condition to make use of their assistance. The two great
Princes, to whose Valor and Conduct the Army confessed it self indebted for
the Victory, subscribed to the opinion of their Friends, and after having
employed their care, and their Authority in quieting all the Field, they caused
a Retreat to be sounded on every side, moderating their impatience by hope of
laying Siege within a few days to Babylon.

The end of the fourth Book, and of the fourth Part of CASSANDRA.
TO CALISTA.
AT last, Calista, at last I am got to the end of that long carreer, in which I
have run by your command. The course perhaps has been contemptible, nor have I
been so little aided by the inspirations you have given me, as to look back
upon it with shame, or with discontent. But Calista, where are the Crowns?
where is the Prize that should have waited for me at the end of the Race? and
where is that repose I thought I had labored for, in obeying you? and which I
thought I should have found, as well as my now fortunate Heroes? They all are
in the Haven, Calista, and I remain alone in those fierce storms, from which, I
for your sake, delivered them. The compassion you had of their disasters, made
me seek for their contentment, by forgetting my own; and you find so great a
satisfaction in the end of all their miseries, that you never so much as spend
a thought on mine. Can I have this cruel, this tormenting knowledge without
accusing you of injustice? and may I not, without offending that respect, which
I have never violated, take a liberty to utter some complaints against you?
Certainly less reasonable ones have been pardoned, and I have taken pains
enough for your diversion, and perchance too for your glory, to hope for some
kind of acknowledgement from you. The fair name of Calista (if I may say so
with modesty) has not appeared with any disgrace at the beginning of this
Work; and Cassandra has been so happy in her Afflictions, as to be able to
tell you without vanity, she has added something to your reputation. Though it
may be I have unjustly fancied that conceit, it draws me not from belief, much
better grounded. I know that all I can possibly do, comes short of what I owe
you; and for all I demanded a recompense, I am not ignorant that I receive a
perfect one, in the glory of obtaining your Commands.

Well then Calista, I have nothing to desire of you, and shall be fully
satisfied, if I have but succeeded passably in the design of pleasing you. Read
this Conclusion you have so much desired of Oroondates his adventures, yet as
you read it, make some reflection upon him, that gives it you, and remember with
some touch of compassion, That while your faithful (...) put an end to the
misfortunes of others, he still continued in his own.

THE FIFTH AND LAST PART OF CASSANDRA. The First BOOK.
THe death of many thousand men, which our Princes lost in that Bloody battle,
could not damp the general rejoicing for so important a Victory; and the
Conquerors retiring from among the slain, to return into their Camp, made all
the Field of Babylon resound with shrill cries that echoed to the Heavens. The
Princes, though more moderate in their good fortune, could not oppose the
motions of so reasonable a joy, nor themselves dissemble the satisfaction they
received from that happy success: Yet had they hoped for it before with a
mavelous confidence, and by the little order they had taken about their
Baggage, in case of a contrary event, and about the conservation of those
things, and even of those persons that were dear to them; They sufficiently had
testified, that they marched either to Death or Victory. The Princesses, and
the other Women of the Camp, who had spent that day at the foot of their
Altars, had no sooner learned the issue, but they came forth to meet them,
transported with an excess of gladness; and covering their particular fears in
the general satisfaction, welcomed them, all bloody, with cheerful
acclamations, and would have run on to greater Liberties, if the sight of their
Blood had not withheld them, by an apprehension of their Wounds. Though
Berenice had not doubted perhaps, where she should bestow her chiefest Wishes,
she doubted where she should bestow her first public Expressions; and though
she presently fell upon Oroondates his Neck, it was not without fixing her eyes
upon Arsaces; yet after she had paid what she thought due to modesty, she also
contented her affection: And being no longer in terms, no nor so much as in a
resolution to hide it, when it was approved by all those persons, to whom she
was to be accountable, she gave all the marks of it to her dear Artaxerxes,
which he could have desired from her in that encounter. Alas! How often had she
grown pale that day, at the remembrance of those dangers, into which that
Prince was gone to precipitate himself? And how often had she frighted her self
with mortal apprehensions, That the Arms of the Macedonians might be more
cruel, then those of the Scythians? and that he might perchance meet that death
amongst their Swords, which he had so many times escaped in the Wars of her
Country? But seeing him come off safe from so great a danger, and with him that
dear Brother, for whom her fears had been redoubled, she stood in need of all
her moderation to contain her self. Arsaces received those last marks of her
Affection with that powerful interest, whereby he had engaged himself so many
years, and Oroondates found his satisfaction for that Victory considerably
augmented by the tender kindnesses of that dear Sister, and by the ravishing
contentments of that worthy Brother. Apamia and Arsinoe, were neither less
concerned, nor less officious about their noble Husbands, and their Brothers;
and Deidamia seemed to have stopped her tears a while, and to have suspended the
remembrance of the dead, to partake in the joy of those Princesses, to whom she
was already linked with a very real friendship.

The first care our Princes took, before they went into their Tents, was that
of rendering thanks unto the gods by Sacrifices, which were instantly offered;
the next, that of sending to seek out those among the dead, who were yet in a
condition to receive their assistance; and the last, that of causing their own
wounds to be searched and dressed: The Princesses were present at this action
in a terrible fear; and the Chirurgions, after the Princes were laid in Bed,
performed their office very carefully. Oroondates and Artaxerxes, who with
prodigious exploits had sought Death and Wounds among so many thousand Swords,
by a kind of miracle had hardly any hurt at all; and the Princesses had scarce
power enough over them, to make them keep their B^ds the next day; Lysmachus
was almost in the same condition; Ptolomeus his left Arm was run through with a
Javelin, and Eumenes his Thigh with a Sword: Th^lestris had three or four
wounds, but all slight ones; and the Chirurgions, who knew her impatiency, gave
her hope of being cured within a few days. De^etrius had received two deep cuts
in the right Shoulder; Antigonus and Polyperchon were wounded in the Head;
Craterus and Prince Oxyartes not at all; Laomedon and Menander were brought
from among the slain with very little hope of life; the condition of Artabasus
his two sons was little better: and there were very few of all the m^st
considerable Officers, that stood not in need of the Chirurgions help. But
among those that were most carefully looked to, Seleucus, for all he was an
enemy, had the advantage of all the rest; and Prince Artaxerxes, who had caused
him to be laid in his own Chamber, and who to leave it to him, meant to retire
himself into that of Oroondates, would not suffer his Arms to be taken off,
till he had been present at the dressing of his Wounds. Seleucus was hurt in
the head, in the body, and in the left arm, but they judged him not to be in
danger of death; At which news, Arsaces showed by all his action, how great an
interest he took in the safety of that gallant man. After he had given him all
manner of assurance of it, and that Oroondates by his example, had with
excessive civilities testified his esteem of him, they left the Chamber free,
that he might take his rest, and obeyed the desires of the Princesses, who
constrained them to think of their own healths. While they were giving this
succor to Seleucus, Lysimachus and Ptolomeus did the same to Leonatus and
Nearchus, who were found all wounded among the prisoners; and without doubt had
lost their lives, as well as their blood, if they had not been very carefully
assisted. Lysimachus forgot nothing that was due unto their quality, and to his
ancient acquaintance with them; and laying aside all manner of enmity, he used
them rather like his old Friends, then like his prisoners. Craterus, Oxyartes,
and the rest that were not hurt, spent part of the night in that employment;
and those that were wounded, in that rest which was necessary for them. The
next morning, without expecting to be sued to by their enemies, as in
probability they might have done, they freely sent them leave to fetch off, or
burn the dead of their party; and at the same time Craterus with some of those,
who were able to accompany him, went into the Field of Battle to pay the last
duty to their Friends. There it was, that Brothers with tears sought the bodies
of their Brothers, and that Fathers found their mangled Sons: Those Objects
were so lamentable, that they were able to touch the hardest hearts with
compassion; and all that day was spent on both sides in mournful employments.
The number of the dead, which had already began to be computed by the remainder
of the living, was then confirmed with sorrow, and was so great, That the Plain
lay covered with heaps of bodies, for the space of threescore Furlongs: Of our
Prince's side, there were found above twenty thousand, among which, Philip the
Leader of the Hyrcanians, Orestes the Brother of Philotas, Prince of the
Cilicians; Cleomenes, Ptolomeus his Lieutenant; Euristeus, Lieutenant to
Eumenes; Lamachus, Antisthenes, Leosthenes and Cleobulus; the two valiant
Amazones, Clitemnestra and Amalthea, and many more, whom their quality and
virtue made considerable in the Army. But on Perdiccas his side, Fourscore
thousand men were slain upon the place, and amongst them, the valiant Python
and his son Agenor; Sinus the Commander of the Susians, Scythens; Statanor and
Arthius Princes of the Zogdians, Drahe's, Argeans and Pelasgians; Eucrates and
Evagoras the sons of Axiarchus, and a great number of others, who were with
much grief brought off by their Friends from the Field of Battle. Only the
most considerable Officers, or those that had particular Friends, were carried
to the Camp, and to Babylon to receive Funeral Honors; and all the rest were
with a mutual consent, piled up in several heaps, and burnt with the usual
Orders and Ceremonies: While Craterus, Prince Oxyartes, and old Artabasus, were
busied in this office, the wounded Princes took their rest in Bed, as they had
been enjoined: And because the Prince of Persia could not that day pay his
Civilities to Seleucus in person, he sent often into his Chamber to know how he
did. Oroondates did the same, and afterward he sent to visit Leonatus and
Nearchus, though Lysimachus and Ptolomeus, for all they themselves were
wounded, omitted not to take an extraordinary care of them. Berenice that day
kept her Brother, and her servant company, who lay both in the same Chamber;
and she had thereby the convenience to follow her inclinations without wounding
her modesty, and render what she owed to her loved Oroondates, without being
separated from her dear Arsaces: Yet before she went to them, she had staid a
great while with Queen Thalestris, to whom she was tied with a very particular
affection; and who that day had a throng in her Chamber of all those persons,
that were so well as to visit her. The gallant actions she had done in the
Battle were loudly extolled by all the World, but she could not think of the
death of Amalthea and Clitemnestra without a great deal of trouble; she had
seen those valiant Women slain at her feet for her defense, and remembered she
had been killed her self, but for the succor of a Warrier; who by effects of
Valor that were quite extraordinary, had saved her from Statanor's Sword, and
from a thousand others, which then were turned against her; notwithstanding all
the care she had taken to inform her self, she still was ignorant to whom she
was engaged for that good service; and though such famous actions might have
given their Author occasion enough to publish them, there was no body in the
Army that boasted to have done them. When she mused a good while upon that
adventure, she in that relief found something very suitable, to what she in
former times had received from her lovely Orontes, when she was prisoner to
Neobarsanes; she fancied that Warrier to have something in his action, and in
his manner of fighting, like her dear Orontes; and if she had not believed him
then to be a great way off, she had thought it might have been Orontes himself,
to whom she was indebted for her life. That thought, which yet she stuck upon
but very little, brought all those others straight into her mind, wherewith
she was continually perplexed; and having first represented her Orontes constant
and lovely, and then her Orontes ungrateful and injurious, it at last set
before her eyes her Orontes turned penitent, and her Orontes more passionate
then ever; she for some time did all she possibly could to approve the
banishment she had condemned him to, but she was not able to keep so firmly to
her first resolutions, and repented her self, that she had not yielded to his
repentance. Orontes ever loved me (said she) and it was nothing but his love,
that made his jealousy commit all the crimes I can accuse him of: If he had
ceased to love me, that voyage I made to Alexander, which gave occasion to his
cruel suspicions, would have been an indifferent thing to him; and to say
truth, He believed nothing, but what our shameful customs made very credible;
and what whole Armies and whole Provinces believed, as well as he. This
consideration did sometimes appease her, but presently the remembrance of those
wrongs and killing injuries, she had received from a man, whom, contrary to her
Kingdoms Laws, she had so dearly loved, wakned her resentments afresh, and made
her repent that she had given way to a thought of repentance. Berenice, from
whom she kept nothing concealed, was made acquainted with her thoughts; nor
would she hide them from the fair Deidamia, who charmed, as well as others,
with the lovely qualities of that gallant Queen, spent a good part of that day
by her Bedside. At last she went away being persuaded by Thalestris her self,
who counseled her to visit those great wounded Princes, whose assistance was
not unnecessary for the re-establishment of her affairs. Deidamia willingly
followed her advice, and after having paid that visit to the Princes of Persia
and Scythia, she went thence to the Tents of Antigonus and Demetrius: The
Father received her with much civility and respect, but the Son, who had not
expected so great a happiness, could not see her come into his Chamber, without
having his heart disturbed with extraordinary motions; All the remembrance of
Hermione was dissipated in his soul by the charms of Deidamia: And as he had
very lightly, and very suddenly loved that former Mistress, the Beauty and
Merit of Deidamia, to which all that was most lovely in Hermione bore no
proportion, had engaged him again with the same suddenness; and though out of
the goodness of his Nature, he still was very much troubled for that Woman's
misfortune, he had preserved but little remembrance of her Beauty, or of any
thing else that could make his love the companion of his sorrow: Though all
that have spoken of his life, accuse him of too great facility in receiving the
impressions of love; yet in that he received for Deidamia, he could neither be
censured of weakness, nor of inconstancy; and that Princess had so many
advantages over Hermione, though she had been alive, that it could not be
thought strange, Hermione should yield to her being dead. Demetrius disputed no
longer, then whether he should love Deidamia, but he disputed whether he should
die without declaring his Passion to her, or undertake a combat against the
memory of Agis in her heart. That depth of grief, in which she commonly was
buried, did much abate his confidence; and those mournful employments, in which
she spent whole days, forbad him any other discourse, then that of Tombs, and
such like Subjects. Thus did that young Prince suffer without daring to discover
his real sufferings, and as often as he was in company with Deidamia, he left
the care to his eyes and sighs, of declaring what he felt, in a season when he
believed his mouth could not express it without a violation of respect. He was
in this condition, when he saw her come into his Chamber, and if, as she was
coming to his Bedside, she had heedfully taken notice of the changes of his
countenance, that sight might have spared Demetrius part of the care he owed to
the Declaration of his love. His confusion might also have been perceived in
his discourse; and he thanked the Princess for the honor she did him, in terms
so little coherent, and so little proportionable to the usual fluentness of his
expression, That if she had been in a condition to make a judgment thereupon,
she might certainly have in part observed, how much he was prepossessed. What
can I have done, Madam, (said he) or what shall I ever be able to do while I
live, that may merit so great a favor, as this you do me? I should not be
worthy of it, though I had spent my whole life in your service; and the share I
may have in this our victory, is much less glorious to me then these wounds, to
which I owe the honor of this visit. All the world (replied Deidamia) owes to
your virtue, and to your quality, what I now pay; and I, above all others, am
particularly obliged to your civilities, and to the protection, which you and
those of your party, by your example and for your sake, have given to an
afflicted Princess, driven out of her Country. After these first passages, she
asked him concerning his health, and he, who in all her words found more
occasion to discover his love, then confidence to venture upon it, wavered in
an irresoluteness, which was visible in his face; and after having staid a
while without answering, Ah Madam! (said he at last with a sigh, and with looks
that were sufficient to have revealed his thoughts unto the Princess, if hers
had not been wholly taken up with the memory of Agis) How little certainty
there is of my health! and how much I ought to fear the wound of my soul, if I
recover these of my body! He brought forth these words with so passionate an
action, That Deidamia was touched with them, and attributing his discourse to
the remembrance of Hermione: Though our souls (replied she) are equally
wounded, our forces are unequal to resist our sorrows; and when you give that
to the memory of Hermione, which I owe to that of Agis, you ought to remember
that you are a man, and that your affection is not grounded as mine, either
upon great Services, or great Obligations. Demetrius, who was afraid to
discover himself, was not sorry that Deidamia had ill interpreted his words,
and yet he could not forbear to answer. The dead no longer make me sigh for any
thing but grief, and I think that is as much as we both are obliged to pay
them; but if my heart be touched with another passion, the object of it is not
among those things that have now no being. I would it pleased the gods, Madam,
(continued he with a little more boldness) That my grief were my most violent
passion, and that I were not constrained by another power to cross those
thoughts which I have reverenced, and perhaps to displease that living person,
who banishes the remembrance of the dead out of my soul, and who has
imperiously seized upon this remnant of life, my grief has left me. Demetrius
made a stop at these words, being confounded that he had said so much, and
trembling for fear of the effect his discourse might have produced: And without
doubt he had said enough, to make that Princess comprehend the truth, if all
her thoughts had not been very far from Matters of that nature; and if her
sorrow, giving her other employments, had not partly darkened the light of her
understanding. She dived not into the meaning of his words, as she would have
done in another season; and to let him see she bore a part in his discontents;
As long as I believed (said she) that all your misfortunes were known to me, I
endeavored to comfort you by the encounter of a person, touched with an
affliction like that of yours; but if you have other sufferings, that are not
come unto my knowledge, mine cannot choose but be augmented, by the share which
your virtue and your goodness makes me take in your unhappiness. And if you are
so generous, and so charitable (replied Demetrius, a little more confident then
before) show me some signs of that compassion, which makes you have a sense of
my misfortunes. He cast down his eyes at these words with some confusion, and
the Princess, in whom they began to cause a suspicion of the truth, was
something abashed, as well as he: She could not imagine (so ignorant she was of
her own power) that Demetrius from an extremity of grief, should so soon have
fallen into another passion; and the little probability she found in it, kept her
uncertain what she should believe: And perchance she had been still in doubt,
if Demetrius had not recovered courage during her silence, and had not made the
utmost attempts upon his fears, to overcome the utmost difficulties. He fixed
his eyes again upon her face, and preparing her by his looks, for part of what
he had to say: Agis is dead, (said he with a sigh) but Demetrius is dying also;
and that which Agis found in her despair, and in the arms of the Macedonians, I
find to the full in the charms of Deidamia; therein it is, my destiny is more
glorious then that of my Rival, and my Fortune likewise shall be above his, and
above all other men's, if by the gift of my life I can obtain but a part of that
place in your remembrance, which he till now has worthily possessed; I would
not strive to conquer those inclinations, which some resemblance of Fortune
made me to approve, if I were able to resist this power, which has drawn me
away from mine, to give me others more legitimate; nor would I use my endeavors
to banish a Prince out of your memory, who merited your affection by the
greatness of his Services, if he were in a condition to reap the fruits of it.
But Agis is now no longer in the world, Madam, and one may truly say, That you
love nothing, since you only love that, which no longer has a Being; you are
as free in your affections, as you were in the earliest years of your life; and
if their object cease to be, they neither ought by any reason, nor can by any
means continue after it. I have found that truth my self in a fortune like that
of yours, and am more to believed then another in this discourse, by the
testimony I can give of it in mine own example. Demetrius stopped at these
words, seeing the tears run down of a sudden from Deidamia's fair eyes, and
knowing by her looks that this discourse had sensibly afflicted her, Ah! My
dear Agis, (said she sighing with a most tender and passionate action) Ah! My
dear Agis, If you were necessitated to receive this offense, should it not
rather have been from any other body, then Prince Demetrius? Her tears
interrupted her Speech for some few moments, and in the mean time the
reflection she made upon this adventure, wakened her grief again, without
giving her any resentment against Demetrius. That young Prince was so worthy of
affection, and had by all his actions disposed her already to so much
acknowledgement, and to so much good will toward him, That if she could then
have been capable of a second impression of love, she would have received it
sooner in favor of him, then of any other person: So that though she was firm
on the resolution of keeping her self wholly to the ashes of her Agis, yet did
she suffer Demetrius his Declaration, without breaking forth into anger against
him, or without going beyond the bounds of that sweet moderation she had
formerly expressed; and turning her eyes upon him with an air that seemed more
sorrowful then angry, Let us still weep together (said she) let us weep,
Demetrius, as we have done hitherto; or if you think you have shed tears enough
for your Hermione, suffer my grief and my affection to have other limits then
yours: I owe so much to my dearest Agis, that your example would not be
sufficient to justify the change you propose to me; and though I disapprove
not yours, I am not in a condition to imitate it: Your person is as
considerable to me and as dear, as you can in reason desire; I neither am
ungrateful to your good offices, nor blind to your good qualities; and the
displeasure you now have done me, has not blotted out of my heart the value I
have, and ever will have of you. But for Gods sake suffer Agis to continue
still master of it, and counsel me not to do an unfitting thing, if you judge
me worthy of your esteem: This is a request I most earnestly make to you, and
you can give me no better proof of your affection, then by ceasing to combat
that, which ought to last as long as my life. As she ended these words, she
rose up from her chair, and took leave of Demetrius, without staying for his
reply; but it was with a countenance, in which sorrow reigned alone, and in
which anger left no mark that could give him cause to fear, his love had made
her his enemy.

Demetrius remained he knew not himself in what condition, and doubted a long
time what judgment he should make of his Fortune: At first he had a very ill
opinion of it, and believed he found himself utterly rejected by Deidamia's
Declaration; but afterward he thought he had no reason to expect a more
favorable event by the first discovery of his Pa^^ion; and that though the
Princess should indeed have inclinations to him, that went beyond esteem and
good will, she owed some resistance both to the memory of Agis, and even to
modesty it self. In things we desire, we naturally flatter our selves, and
Demetrius finding occasion to do so in Deidamia's modest carriage, hoped that
by long services, he might shake her resolution; and with what fears soever he
was assaulted, he could not repent his having broken through those first
difficulties.

While he was musing thus upon his Fortune, Oroondates was complaining of his,
that had suffered Perdiccas to escape from his revenge, and had left him still
in a condition, as much conquered as he was, to cross him more, then ever, in
his affection; he could not call to mind that Statira was in his power,
without yiedling much unto his grief, nor without fearing that his rival would
revenge the shame of his defeat, by those ways which lay open to him for that
purpose. Lysimachus his thoughts were like to his, and those Princes passed the
rest of that day in disquiets, which opposed their victory. The next morning
Oroondates, and the Prince of Persia, believing their wounds too inconsiderable
to make them keep their Beds, called for their clothes, and as soon as they were
ready, went together into Seleucus his Chamber, having first sent to know,
whether their visit would not be a trouble to him. Seleucus received the honor
they did him with a great deal of civility, and considering Arsaces then both
by the greatness of his actions, and by that of his high birth; and looking
upon Oroondates, as he of all men living, whose virtue had showed it self by
the gallantest marks, and as he, whose forces he had made trial of himself with
very little success, he forgot his wounds to render them what he believed their
due. They no sooner were set down by his Bedside, but Arsaces preventing the
thanks he was going to return; I could not have taken any rest (said he) if
some slight wounds had been able to hinder me from coming my self to see how
you do; nor is my health dear enough to me, to keep me longer from a Prince, to
whom I ow all manner of respect for his virtue, and to whom I am particularly
indebted for my life. If I was so happy, as to give you any assistance (replied
Seleucus) I was too fully recompensed by the glory of having served you; and
you have since so generously requited it, That the remembrance of that service,
which gave me the honor of your friendship, ought to yield to that of the
Obligation I have to you. We are all obliged to the Prince my Brother (added
the Prince of Scythia) and if he had let the valiant Seleucus perish, he had
let us loose the better part of those advantages, the gods have given us. I
deserved death (answered Seleucus) since I dared to meet it from your hand; and
if I had received it, when I was so bold as to oppose your valor, it would have
been so glorious a one, that I should have had no reason to lament my destiny.
You defend your life too well (replied the Prince) to let any single man have
the glory to take it; and I ow all the advantage I had over you, to the help of
my men, and to the routing of yours.

Seleucus answered this modesty of Oroondates with a perfect submission; and
when from those first civilities, they fell into another discourse, Arsaces
thrust on by Oroondates his Interests, and by his love to the remainders of his
blood; after having embraced Seleucus to win a grant of what he desired:

Generous Seleucus (said he) if your friendship to Perdiccas can permit you,
will you not tell us the truth of the present condition of my Sisters, and will
you not freely tell us what estate they are in, and what usage they receive?
After the confession Perdiccas himself has made to you (replied Seleucus) I
may give you that satisfaction without betraying him; and withal, may let you
see by the little confidence he had in me, the little share I have in your
causes of complaint against him.

I know not whether Perdiccas thought I would disapprove his proceeding, and
that the knowledge thereof would hinder me from serving him; or whether indeed
he was ashamed to own it to me; but however it were, I may truly protest to
you, That before the day of our enterview, he had not told me a syllable of it,
and that I was ignorant of the true destiny of Cassandra, as well as all other
men. In effect I believed, according to the rumor Roxana had spread abroad, That
Queen Statira, and the Princess her Sister, had been killed in the night upon
their way to Babylon, by some of Meleagers faction: And though in all these
passages I found causes of doubt enough for one that had been curious, I ever
was one of those that were least inquisitive, and blindly tied my self to serve
Perdiccas, as I thought my self obliged by a very near, and a very ancient
friendship: But that day of our Parley, after we parted very ill satisfied with
one another; the remembrance of your discourse with Perdiccas touching the
liberty of the Princesses, and of the confession he had made, caused me after
some complaint of the little confidence he had in me, to ask him the truth of
all; and then after having often embraced me, to drive away the resentment I
might have of his distrust, asked me pardon for having kept that hid from me,
which he believed he could not so soon reveal to any body in the world,
especially to me, of whose virtue, as he was pleased to say, He stood more in
aw then of any body else: He told me at large all that had passed touching the
Princess since the death of Alexander; afterward he confessed to me, That he
had been in love with the Queen, even in the Kings life time; and that he had
all that while concealed an affection, which he was then no longer able to
dissemble.

Oroondates having told Seleucus all they had heard by Cleone, concerning the
Queens adventures, obliged him to let them know what they yet were ignorant of,
and to that intent he continued thus. After that Perdiccas was fallen upon the
ground, by the wounds he had received from Arsaces, and that Arsaces had lost
the Queen his Sister, by the encounter of Alcetas; who while Arsaces was
fighting with his men, caused her to be put by force into his Chariot: Alcetas
leaving his party, for fear he should loose what he had in possession, and
should disappoint his Brothers intentions, made the Charioter drive away very
swiftly; and keeping the way he had resolved to go, came to a house hard by the
Town, where his Brother and he purposed to stay till night, that they might
enter into Babylon with less danger of having those persons known, whom they
brought along with them. But Alcetas being come to that house, found not
Perdiccas there, as he expected (though by his meeting the Queen he was already
fallen into suspicions, which he could not clear himself in, by any discourse
with her, who avoided all manner of conversation with him) and within a little
after, he saw one of his men come in, who had been present at the combat, and
who brought him word in what condition he had left him: Alc^tas was almost
besides himself at the news, but it will suffice me to tell you, That not
knowing how to leave the Princesses, he sent some of his servants to the place,
where his Brother had fought, either to succor him, or to fetch him away; and
not long after he saw him brought in upon a Hand-barrow, in a condition which
made him doubt of his life. Perdiccas had recovered his senses by the way, and
Chirurgions, which Alcetas had sent for in all have, having searched his
wounds, assured him, That if no ill accident happened, they were not dangerous.
If Alcetas was comforted with that news, Perdiccas was so, no less then he,
when he saw the Queen again, whom he had lost but a while before, and his joy
was so great, That it made him forget all the pain of his wounds; yet could he
not persuade her to afford him a word: But as soon as night was come, he needs
would leave that house, and making himself be carried away upon his
Hand-barrow, he left the care of the Princesses to his Brother; Perdiccas was
brought to his own lodging, and the Princesses to that of Alcetas, which was
made ready for them; and which, by reason it was partly environed with water,
and in a remote, less inhabitated part of the Town, had been judged more proper
for their abode. Perdiccas was visited by every body, and even by Roxana her
self, as soon as it was heard, he was wounded: But how great confidence soever
he had in us, that were his friends, he told not the truth to any body: And
those Horsemen of his, that had escaped Arsa^es his sword, were so faithful to
him, That they never spoke word to discover the business; He said he had met a
company of men, whom he knew not, and whom he suspected to be of deceased
Meleagers party; and that it was by them, his men and he had been assaulted;
and there being likelihood enough in that encounter, no body enquired any
further about it. In the mean time, the Princesses were under the custody of
Alcetas, in a private lodging, where they were seen by none, but those that
were appointed to wait upon them, and where they were so carefully looked to by
them, and by Alcetas, That it was impossible they should escape: When he went
abroad himself, he left that charge to such as were of known fidelity; and all
this was so secretly carried, (besides that the greatness of the City, and the
confusion of Affairs assisted) that we never suspected any thing in the World.
As Soon as Perdiccas was cured of his wounds, he began again to give the Queen
proofs of his love, and strove to conquer the difficulties he met with, by all
the most passionate marks of it she could receive; Alcetas used the same
industry to Parisatis, but both to no purpose; and as Perdiccas has since
confessed to me, All their perseverance served for nothing else, but to
increase the Princesses aversion. Neither Perdiccas nor his Brother, have ever
exceeded the limits of respect toward them, but they have still made them be
served by women, they put to them, who stir not out of their Lodgings, and by
Eunuchs of theirs; whose fidelity they have tried in other occasions, with so
much care and diligence, That excepting liberty, they have wanted nothing they
could desire. Notwithstanding what you published in your Declarations, Roxana
never showed any suspicion of the truth; and her belief, that she had seen them
killed before her own eyes (as I since have guessed) kept her mind at quiet,
against all the doubts which some would have put into her of their being alive.
They have lived on this manner, both before and ever since the first Battle we
fought; but as I have already told you, I never knew it, till the day that
after our enterview, I heard it from Perdiccas his own mouth. My amazement was
very great at such strange news, and as I was glad to hear those great
Princesses were living, so was I not less surprised at Perdiccas his love, at
his secret managing of the business, and at Roxana's cruelty, which caused in
me a deadly aversion against her. The gods are my witnesses, I did all I
possibly could to bring Perdiccas to more reasonable inclinations, and to make
him avoid so many misfortunes, by a just and a virtuous action; but he was so
troubled at the request I made him to that effect, and represented to me in
such passionate terms, That without certain death to himself, he could neither
think of delivering the Queen, nor of loosing his pretensions; That I thought
in civility I could not press him further: Yet did he resolve the business
should continue secret till after the Battle; and he desired me so long, to
defer the purpose I had to wait upon the Princesses. This is the condition in
which we left them, nor do I believe that Perdiccas being so passionately in
love, will restore them till the last extremity; but neither ought you to
fear, he will abandon them to Roxana's fury; for I dare say, he will rather
give his life, then suffer theirs to be in any hazard; and his Authority is so
great with all his party, That he will ever be powerful enough to defend them
openly against Roxana. The design he has had to keep his Forces united with
hers, to oppose yours the more powerfully, has obliged him hitherto to conceal
the truth; but when he shall be constrained to publish it, he will still be
able to protect them against her malice.

The two Princes received a great deal of consolation by this discourse of
Seleucus, and gave him thanks for his freedom, with words full of
acknowledgement and affection; they afterward told him, That he was at liberty,
and that it was only to do him service, they detained him amongst them, and
that they were well enough assured of the friendship of their companions, to
promise, that as soon as his health would suffer him, and that he would stay no
longer with them, they would cause him to be convoyed safe to Babylon. Seleucus
was not without reply at that noble offer: I will not abuse your generosity
(said he) nor will I accept the liberty you offer me, but upon such conditions,
as shall not be disadvantageous to you. I will try Perdiccas his friendship by
a proof of very great importance; and since Leonatus and Nearchus, who are two
of the most considerable men of his party, are your prisoners, as well as I,
for our ransom, and for that of many thousands of our men that are in your
power; I mean to demand of him the liberty of the Princesses: If he have any
virtue, and any friendship toward us, he will overcome his passion to obey his
duty; but if his interest have more power over him, then his consideration of
us, we shall be dispensed withal for that we ow to him, and shall no longer be
engaged by a friendship, which he unworthily shall have neglected. Oroondates
could not forbear to embrace Seleucus at these words: Ah! Generous Seleucus
(said he) how worthy of you are these thoughts, and how infinitely are we
obliged to you for intentions, that are so advantageous to us; it shall not be
for the price of your liberty, that we will demand the Princesses, since you
are free already, and master here amongst us; but if Perdiccas at your request
will give them in exchange for your Companions, How many misfortunes will he
avoid, and how highly shall we be indebted to you!

These discourses were followed by many others; after which the Princes fearing
to incommodate Seleucus by too long a conversation, took leave of him, and
retired into their Chamber. The rest of that day was employed by them that had
the care of it, in making an end of those last duties, they had begun to pay
their dead, and in clensing the Camp of such a number of Bodies, which in a few
days might have brought an infection into the Army; and the next morning the
Forces were all drawn up to disencamp, and to take up those posts, which the
Enemies Army had quitted before the Walls of Babylon. All the wounded men were
left in the old Camp, and Artaxerxes and Oroondates, though they had left their
Beds, not being in a condition to get on Horseback for two or three days, staid
also with their Companions, and with the Ladies, keeping Ten thousand men with
them for their Guard; and Craterus, Oxyartes, and old Artabasus, advanced with
all the rest to block up the Town: The Squadrons marched in gallant order under
those three brave Commanders, and the way not being long, they quickly saw the
lofty Walls of proud Semiramis; and having saluted them with a threatening cry,
they divided themselves into three Bodies, to go and take three several Posts,
according as it had been before determined: Some of the Enemies Cavalry came
out to meet Craterus, and to oppose his coming nearer, yet scarce did they
sustain the first shock he gave them, but falling into a Rout, forsook the
place, and left him at liberty to quarter himself at his ease, where he had
resolved to Encamp. It was upon the Bank of the River above the Town toward the
East, and just over against certain works that were defended by Twelve hundred
Median Archers. Artabasus placed himself below upon the Bank of the River also,
toward the West; and Prince Oxyartes between them, toward the North, and near
to some Defenses guarded by the Drahe's and Argeans. These Quarters were about
Fourscore Furlongs from one another; and for all the distance was so great,
they had not been able to block up above half the Town, by reason of the River
that runs through it; but they presently began to make Bridges of Boats, to
have the Passage of it free, and an easy communication both above and below
the City, with an intention to send over some of their Forces to besiege it on
all sides, and to hinder the Passage of Victual and relief, that might come in
either by Land or by Water.

The great City of Babylon, the stately Work of valiant Semiramis, and then
considered as one of the wonders of the World, is seated on both sides of the
Euphrates, which passing between its Buildings, divides the Town into two equal
parts; they are joined together by many Bridges, and principally by one very
great one of Stone, different in matter from its other Buildings, and
considerable for its breadth, height, and mavelous structure; the Banks of
the River are kept up with two Brick Walls, and have high large Causies on each
side, which yet would not be able to stop the impetuousness of the Stream, when
it is swelled with Rain, if there were not deep open places at certain
distances, by which the water, before it comes to the Causies, is swallowed up,
and lost in huge gulfs under ground, some of it making a great lake at one end
of the Town; the Houses were very stately-built of Brick in a well-ordered
form, and divided into a great number of large and spacious Streets, in the
chief of which stood the gallantest Palace of the Assyrian Monarchs; the
circuit of it was thirty Furlongs, and as well for the loftiness of its Towers,
as the beauty of its several Lodgings, was a House worthy of its Founders, and
of the greatness of those Masters, to whom it belongs: There was to be seen
that miracle of the Hanging Garden, so cried up by Ancient Writers, where in
Earth carried thither with an admirable industry, and sustained by Pillars of
Two hundred foot high, there grew Trees whose Branches seemed to touch the
Clouds, presenting tufted Forests to the eye of passengers above the tops of
the highest Buildings. The whole compass of the City was not filled with
Houses, but there were open places of a large extent, whole Fields that were
Ploughed and Sown with Corn, reserved against Famine in the extremities of a
long siege; which with the Houses were enclosed by the Great Semiramis, with a
Wall of Three hundred sixty five Furlongs: Although that was a prodigious
compass for a Town, the excessive greatness of it diminished nothing of its
perfection, for mankind never saw so exact, nor so beautiful a work; the
height of the Walls was of a hundred Cubits, and their breadth was Two and
thirty foot, so that many Chariots might easily go a breast upon the top of
them: At certain equal distances stood Towers of the same Fabric, Ten foot
higher then the Walls, giving them the command of all the neighboring Fields;
and though their strength was exceeding great of themselves, they were
fortified with a Mote of Threescore foot deep, and Two hundred broad; there
were some Outworks also on the far side of it, but they were of no great
defense; and by reason of the little fear they had been in of a siege, they had
not taken any pains to better them.

It was before this stately Town that the Victorious Army encamped, and the
frighted Inhabitants from the top of their Walls saw in one day a Thousand
Tents pitched, a Thousand Banners displayed, and the whole Field covered with
Men and Horses: The order of their encamping was very regular, and in the three
several Quarters, all the Soldiers having their places assigned to Hut
themselves, fell to work about it with so much diligence and readiness, that
within three days one might walk up and down the Camp, in long, strait streets,
where symmetry and proportion were most exactly observed; they were separated
according to their several Nations, but those Forces that were destined to pass
the River, as soon as the Bridges should be finished, were lodged outermost,
and took not the pains to fit themselves as the rest, for a stay of so few
days. The number of them, taking in those that were left in the old Camp to
guard the wounded men, was not less then the other, being they were to lie in
the most dangerous places, and to possess that side, where the coming of relief
was most apprehended. The third day after, Artaxerxes, Oroondates, Lysimachus,
and Ptolomeus, came up to their Companions, fearing some occasion of getting
honor should pass, while they were absent, and not being willing t^^part, they
made their Tents be set up in Prince Oxyartes his Quarter: Bereni^e and Apamia
not being able to forsake them, left Polemons house with Deidamia (who would
needs keep them company) and went to lodge there with them; and those fair
Princesses, whom the accidents of their life had taught not to fear death, were
not afraid to draw near their Enemies, nor to expose themselves to the perils
of a siege, to go along with persons that were so dear to them. The next day
Thalestris, who could not bear their absence, made her self be removed to them,
for all she was so wounded. Demetrius, to whom it was an insupportable thing to
be parted from Deidamia, despised the counsel of his Physicians to be nearer to
her, and within two days after, Eumenes, Antigonus, Laomedon, Menander, the
sons of Artabasus, and all the other wounded men dislodged by their example,
and neglected their hurts to see the Walls of Babylon. Seleucus also, and his
three Companions would stay no longer at Polemons house, where they had been
lodged and looked to with a great deal of care; and though they were more
wounded then the rest, and in such a condition as would not suffer them to be
removed without some danger, Arsaces was constrained to make them be brought
upon Hand-Litters, and lodged in a Tent hard by his. Polemons house remained
quite empty; and even Alcione, seeing Cleonimus cured of his wounds, and able
to serve the Princes in person, placed her self with the Princess Berenice, who
received her with much affection; and Cleonimus, to whom the Princes of Persia
and Scythia were so highly obliged, one for his Mistress, the other for his
Sister, tasted the kindest expressions of their favor, and was taken into the
same degree of neerness with Araxes and Criton; who by their admirable fidelity
had made themselves very considerable to their Masters: They needs would have
him make relation of what they knew not of his Adventures, and at their request
he gave them an account of all those voyages, to which his sorrow had engaged
him: He told them how after the news of Theanders death, which was come to his
hearing, he in vain had sought for rest and comfort; and that purposing to fly
a Country, where he had been so unfortunate, he had traveled about As^a, and
all Europe, and had never ended his wanderings but with his life; if after many
years of a most rigorous absence, which had worn out the sharpness of his grief
for the loss of Theander, the remembrance of Alcione had not violently recalled
him, and made him by force resolve to see the innocent cause of his afflictions
once again before he died; but yet without any design, to overthrow the memory
of Theander in her heart, or to oblige her by any of his actions, to recede in
favor of him, from what she owed to her dear Husband. The Princes, who had
heard the first passages of Cleonimus his story from Berenice, admired his
virtue; and knowing his passion, and the ardent affection of Alcione, resolved
to do that for them, which neither of them durst desire; and to take away by
their Authority, all the bashfulness, and all the scruples that hindered them
from following their own inclinations. In the mean time the Princes thought fit
to make those Works be assaulted, that were defended by the Medians, the
Drahe's, and the Argeans; and for that purpose, were commanded out two thousand
Macedonians, two thousand Thracians, two thousand Phrygians, one thousand
Amazones, and a thousand Cappadocians, under the conduct of Lysimachus to
attacque the Medes; and a like number of Cilicians, Egyptians, Syrians,
Lydians, and Bactrians, under Ptolomeus to fall on against the Drahe's and
Argeans. Prince Oroondates, and the valiant Arsaces would have accompanied
their friends in that occasion, but they told them it was not business worthy
of their hazard, and prayed them so ^arnestly to leave them the whole honor of
it; that they were fain to let their desire of Action, yield to the importunity
of their request. Young Alexander, Menelaus, and diverse others of his age, were
of that party without Office or Command, and marched on foot at the head of
those Squadrons against Enemies, whom their Entrenchments could not preserve
from the fear of their approach; and indeed, they came on with an undantedness
so little common, that the boldest of them trembled with good reason; and
advancing through a thick shower of Arrows, obliged their men by their example
to c^^^temn the danger that opposed their passage. That employment could not
have been given to any two, that would more generously have discharged it; and
the great exploits of Oroondates and Arsaces, having begot a noble emulation in
them, carried them on to more then ordinary achievements. The circumstances of
all that past in that piece of service would be but troublesome; Lysimachus on
his side, and Ptolomeus on his, after a vigorous resistance, and the death of
two or three thousand of their men, entered the Enemies Entrenchments, and had
made themselves absolute Masters of those Outworks; when Antigenes with a
party of Argyraspides sallied upon Lysimachus; and Iolas, the Brother of
Cassander against Ptolomeus: That sally retarded the Victory of our two
Princes, but was not able to prevent it; and though they were not ignorant,
that there were Squadrons drawn forth to second them, they neglected their
assistance, and only with their own men encountered those new Enemies with such
an extraordinary courage, That after a fight maintained with the death of many
of them, they made the rest turn their backs; and having driven them within a
Bow-shoot of their Gates, remained peaceable Masters of all the Outworks. In
this business they of Babylon lost above Four thousand of their men, nor did
the Princes escape at an easier rate, but the advantage was wholly theirs: And
after having lodged part of their men in those places, whence they had beaten
the Enemy, they returned Victorious to their brave Companions; from whom they
received praises due to the gallant actions of that day, and an increase of
that reputation they had gained in many such like occasions. The day following
was given on both sides to the burial of the dead; and the next morning, as
Oroondates and Artaxerxes were rising, there was a Spy of the Enemies brought
in to them, who had been taken in the Camp close by their Tent, about which he
had been hankering all that morning; with all the appearances of a man that had
some ill design, being a very cunning fellow; he had endeavored to deceive them
by his subtilties, and had given them tokens enough to make them believe he was
one of their party: But having neither been owned, nor so much as known by the
Officers of that Troup which he said he was of; they that had taken him,
thought fit to bring him before the Princes, though he showed himself wondrous
unwilling to be carried thither, and had desired them rather to kill him. As
soon as Oroondates cast his eyes upon his face, he observed Lineaments there,
that were not unknown to him; but Araxes and Toxaris no sooner saw him, when
instantly they cried out: Ah! It is that false wretch Arbates. At the name of
Arbates, Oroondates perfectly remembered him; and at the ^ight of that man, who
by his perfidiousness had destroyed his Fortune, and who alone had plunged him
into the bottomless Sea of his miseries, a chilness ran through all his Veins,
and his Countenance was so changed, that all the company observed the great
disturbance of his mind: After this shivering, and this paleness, followed an
extraordinary color, which his anger brought into his face; and not being able
in those first motions to master his lawful indignation, or to keep himself
within the bounds of his usual moderation: You have brought him me, just gods,
(cried he) you have delivered into my hands, this cruel Torturer of my days,
this Traitorous servant, who sacrificed his Master to so many painful deaths;
and in short, This Monster, by whom I suffer, and by whom I have suffered the
whole weight of my afflictions. He made a stop at these first words, and not
being able to express himself well enough in the impetuousness of his choler,
he fixed his eyes, sparkling with rage, upon the face of that perfidious wretch,
who in a mortal terror and confusion kept his fast upon the ground, with an
action fully prepared for that death, which in his own conscience he had but
too well deserved. Thou shall die (pursued the furious Prince) thou shall die
in most exquisit torments; and though thy death cannot restore me, what thou
have robbed me of, nor make amends in the finallest degree for those infinite
miseries, thou have made me endure, I will at least give this satisfaction to
my grief, and to my love, to sacrifice the cursed instrument of all my
misfortunes, and the true cause of the death of so many thousand persons. From
these words the transported Prince fell into the remembrance of that happiness,
which Arbates his treachery had taken from him, and that reflection touched him
so deeply, That all the company saw his face immediately bathed in Tears; and
were such partakers in his grief, That they seemed but little different from
him, either in the sadness that appeared in their Countenances, or in their
Resentments against the disloyal Arbates. His treachery was known to them, and
they all instantly judged him worthy of the most rigorous torments that could
be invented, and of a destiny, at least, like that of Bessus. Till then
Oroondates had continued in the thoughts of an ordinary man, and not being able
in those first motions, utterly to divest himself, of what he held from humane
Nature, he had let himself be carried away to inclinations that were not
unreasonable; but presently after he from mere man, came back again to
Oroondates; all whose thoughts had nothing common with those of other men, when
they had power to work at liberty: And looking upon trembling Arbates with a
scorn, that a few minutes before had anger in it, he judged, That the revenge
he could take upon him was too unworthy of himself, and that it was against
more noble Enemies, then a vile servant, he ought to pour forth his
indignation; wherefore putting on a milder Countenance, he turned toward those
that had taken him: Why did you not kill this Traitor (said he) as soon as you
discovered him to be an Enemy, instead of bringing him before us? Do you not
know that the sight of Princes is favorable to Criminals, and that Artaxerxes,
Lysimachus, and Ptolomeus, are too generous to approve a base and a shameful
revenge? The Soldiers had reasons enough to allege for themselves, and they
were not unknown to him, but he gave them not the leisure; and looking upon
Arbates, who at these last words began to resettle his fears: Live disloyal
Wretch (said he) live, since thou art unworthy of the death, which I could give
thee; and that without doubt thou art destined to a more ignominious end, then
that thou should receive from Oroondates. Live, but go live among our
Enemies, and tell Roxana and Cassander, I envy them not the service of a man
fit for none, but such a Mistress, and such a Master. With these words he
turned away his eyes, not being able to behold him longer without repugnance,
and Arbates not knowing where to find words to excuse his crime, nor to thank
the Prince for the mercy he showed him, only fell upon his Knees, testifying
by his gestures, and by his Tears, some kind of Acknowledgement, and some
kind of Repentance. If the Princes that were present at this action, had not
been generous enough themselves to do the same in a like encounter, they
without doubt would have admired it: But being they had Souls made up all of
nobleness, and that they were accustomed to the gallant deeds of Oroondates,
they did not wonder at this last; only Prince Lysimachus turning to Arbates,
who was going to make use of the liberty that was given him; Think not to
escape so (said he) for though the Prince have pardoned thee his particular
offense, thou ought at least to give us account of the design, that brought
thee into our Camp. Tell us truly in what condition our Princesses are; the
intentions of Roxana, whose Governor and whose confident thou art; and the
continuation of Cassanders loves, which thou began'st to Toxaris and Loncates:
But disguise not the truth in this recital, and endeavor by some light effect
of freedom, to deserve the mercy thou have received. Arbates, who by that time
had taken heart: I would it pleased the gods, Sir, (said he) that for the
expiation of my crimes, you desired something of greater importance, that were
but in my power, and you should find, I would little consider the loss of my
life, if thereby I could but hope for pardon: But since I am not able to do you
greater service, then that you now demand of me, I will be more faithful in
obeying you, then I was in serving my Master; and will give you an exact
account of such things, as are come unto my knowledge. Arbates making a stop at
these words, the Princes prepared to give him attention; but Oroondates, who
was not able to endure him, found it so much against his stomach* That he
desired his Friends to dismiss him, and not suffer him to stay any longer
amongst them; yet Artaxerxes and Lysimachus did so represent the interest he
had, in the relation they had demanded of him, and he understood it so well
himself, that in the end he yielded to give him audience with them. After they
were set down, Arbates who had had time to recover confidence of Speech, since
his fears were dissipated, when he had recalled those things into his memory,
which he had to relate, began on this manner.

The Continuation of the History of ROXANA.
MY LORDS,
TO tell the things you desire to know, in order, it is necessary I begin with
Cassanders Love; the first effects whereof, I related to Toxaris and Loncates,
from whom without doubt you have heard them; and then I will freely give you an
account of those things I have been able to learn, and which fall within the
employment I have under Queen Roxana.

THe Gods are my Witnesses, that I used all the power I had with the Queen, to
diswade the cruel resolution she had taken against Toxaris and Loncates, when
she saw them obstinate in concealing their Prince's abode; but she was so
incensed against them, that my importunity in their Favor was like to have put
me in disgrace: She commanded they should be carried out of the Town, to the
end, that Action might be the more secret; but when she heard by him that had
escaped the hand of their deliverers, that they were rescued out of their
hands, before they had been able to draw that confession from their mouths
which she desired; she was extremely troubled and displeased at it, but was the
more confirmed in her opinion, That Prince Oroondates was in this Country: In
this belief, casting her eyes upon me, who happened to be then in her Chamber,
Arbates (said she) all things run contrary to my desires, and the gods, whom
the folly of my love has exasperated against me, will not suffer them to be
satisfied; but either I am the most deceived of any Woman in the World, or
cruel Oroondates is in these parts. Let him hide himself, the ungrateful man,
(pursued she a while after) let him be insensible of my love, or rather let him
persist to hate me as he has done hitherto; I at least have this advantage,
that in flying me, he flies his Fortune; and that he shall never enjoy the
happiness, for which he disdains, that I have offered him: He shall not make
himself sport with my rival, by scoffing at the mean spirited affections of
Roxana. And though I be miserable, I shall not have the discontent to see her
triumph over my miseries, who has been the cause of them. Yet Arbates
(continued she, having paused a little) I cannot disavow, but that I still have
those first inclinations that have brought me so much trouble, and I mean to
employ all the affection thou have to my service, in seeking some redress for
my disquiets: Set all thy wits a work to inform thy self if he be not in
Babylon, where we took his servants; the greatness of the Town, and the
confusion of our affairs, that make us receive so many unknown persons into it,
might permit him to lie long concealed here; but he cannot be so to thy
vigilance, if thou will take the pains to employ it, and after such a service,
there is no recompense that will not be below thee. By these words the Queen
discovered to me the continuation of her love, and strove to confirm me in the
design I really had to serve her. And I believed, Sir, ( added Arbates,
addressing himself to Oroondates) that I might safely comply with her, without
doing you any hurt, considering the quality of her Fortune, and the general
opinion of Queen Statira's death; therefore I protested to her, with so many
Oaths, that I would use my utmost care to obey her commands, that she drew some
consolation from my promises, and then being desirous to avoid Cassanders
anger, which I feared, after I had disposed her to hearken to me patiently.
Madam, (said I) Cassander persecutes me to serve him in his affection to your
Majesty, and not many days ago he forced me by his threats to take a Letter,
which he had written to you; but I neither had the boldness, nor so much as an
intention to deliver it; but having torn it in pieces, I have put him off ever
since, as often as he asked me any thing about it, by saying that I had not yet
found a fit opportunity to present it to you. You did very well (answered the
Queen) and to keep fair with him, you may say I tore it my self. That insolent
man raises my anger to the extremity, and if in the present condition of my
affairs, I had not need of him, I would give him such proofs of it, as should
cool him perhaps for all the rest of his life. Take heed in the mean time, that
you never receive either Letter or Message from him any more; and let him know,
that I have expressly forbidden you. I promised to do as she commanded me with a
design to follow her Orders; and that very day having met Cassander, Sir, (said
I) my desire to serve you, has perhaps ruined my Fortune, and your Letter has
been like to make me be banished for ever out of the Queens service; she tore
it without reading it, and has protested, That at the first employment I shall
take again of that nature, she will cause me to be exemplarily punished.
Cassander, who by many other encounters had known the Queens intentions, easily
gave credit to what I said; but he flew into a violent passion, and uttered
many words both against the modesty, and against the respect he owed her. The
Queen's too blame (said he afterward) to drive a man into despair, who as her
affairs now stand; is not unuseful to her; and who with the peril of his life,
against a great number of Enemies, struck the main stroke perchance in settling
her in the place she now possesses. Tell her Arbates, that among all Alexanders
Successors, she shall find none more powerful in Europe, nor in Asia, then the
Son of Antipater; nor among all men living, a more faithful or a more
passionate Servant then Cassander. I prayed him to excuse me, that I could not
undertake that Message, alleging the Queens absolute charge to the contrary;
and the fear I was in, of being utterly undone, if I disobeyed her Commands.
This kind of usage from the Queen, was not able to repulse him; and seeing
himself then in a condition not to fear her power; as he had done in Alexanders
life time, he no longer was so careful to hide his passion as he had been
before* and governed himself with so little discretion, that it was unknown to
no body. Roxana's aversion to him was but the more redoubled thereby; but being
she was cunning and politic, she partly dissembled it, or at least through
the necessity of her Affairs, suffered without taking revenge, what in another
season she would have resented in another manner. Cassanders credit amongst his
Companions, and Antipaters in Europe, were well enough known to her to make her
judge, That she should not do well to make a powerful Enemy, of a passionate
Lover; and of a lover, who in her present troubles might do her good service,
and had done so already: That consideration kept her from following the
incitements of her anger, but not from letting Cassander see by all her words,
and by all her actions, that his passion was very unpleasing to her. The
liberty of coming into her Chamber, was permitted him as well as others, for
the Reasons I have given you; and being there one day with Leonatus, and two or
three more of his Friends, I think it was with a purpose to oblige him, that
the rest withdrew, and left him alone with the Queen, Hesione, some other of
her Maids, and my self, who chanced to be there at that time, and to be witness
of that Conversation. When Cassander found that opportunity, which he seldom
met with, he resolved to lay hold of it; and putting himself into a very
beseeching posture, gave the Queen notice, that he was preparing to entertain
her with his love, but she afforded him not the time; and as soon as he opened
his mouth to begin his discourse, I forbid you (said she) to talk to me of your
follies, and enjoin you to consider the offenses I have received from you, as
they ought to be considered by a Subject of the King, my Husband. Cassander,
who was prepared for such like usage, never seemed danted at it, but answered
with a confident look. I did not think my passion could have given you any
cause of offense; For if I was a Subject of the King, your Husband, I do not
believe I cast off that subjection, by letting you know that I am yet more
powerfully yours: None of those homages you receive, from those that once were
under his Dominion, are paid you with more respect, nor with more submission,
then mine; and if I may be permitted to speak the truth of my self, They are
not more advantageous to you, then those of a Prince, who holds not a
contemptible rank among the greatest, that are now alive. I know what I am,
(replied the Queen, with a very disdainful action) nor am I ignorant what you
are, I see nothing that should hinder us from living together, as we have done
hitherto; and when you shall look upon me, as the Wife of Alexander, I will
look upon you, as the Son of Antipater. These scornful slighting words, wrought
such a spite in Cassander, who by nature is the most impatient man in the
World, that he lost all respect and discretion, and not being able to dissemble
how ill he took them: I confess (said he) that Alexander was above Cassander;
but since Alexander is dead, the Daughter of Cohortanus is not above the Son of
Antipater. He brought forth these words very briskly, and judging that he ought
to expect nothing from the Queen but some biting reproach, he intended not to
stay for it, but went out of the Chamber with a very troubled action. The Queen
was highly offended at his discourse, but being she is very cunning, she
dissembled it in part, and drew some satisfaction from his anger, in that she
hoped it might free her from his importunities for the time to come, but she
was much deceived in those hopes; For though Cassander was easily moved, by
reason of his sudden impetuous humor, he came back again presently after, more
mild and more submissive then before, and asked her pardon, with all manner of
signs of his Repentance. But about that time there came Copies into the Town of
your Manifest, wherein you accused him of having poisoned the King: The Queen,
and diverse others, had already suspicions of it grounded, upon some
conjectures, and receiving this Confirmation, though it was not sufficient to
convince him, especially coming from his Enemies, the Queen abhorred to behold
him, and believed it not fit for her so much as to suffer him to speak, till he
had justified himself. She neither could, nor would dissemble that thought from
him; and the first time he would have come near her, with an intent to speak,
Purge your self (said she) of the accusation that is laid upon you of having
poisoned your King, if you would have his Wife to hear you; and put her out of
the opinion she may have of that horrible parricide, if you would have her look
upon you without detestation. Cassander seemed enraged at this discourse, and
beholding the Queen with eyes that sparkled with anger; They are your enemies
Madam, (replied he) they are your enemies, and not mine, that slander me with
these Calumnies; which I will clear my self of to their confusion: But if I
were less faithful to you, they would be my friends, and you would have no
occasion to use a reproach to me so full of ingratitude. It was not from you I
should have received it, since your Interests procure me this disgrace; but I
will wash it off with so much blood, that my Enemies shall repent it, and you
shall be satisfied. I know not whether Cassander dissembled in this impression,
which he desired to give of his resentments, or whether he indeed was innocent:
But however it were, he bore that accusation with such an impatience, as caused
many persons to make different judgments of it. If the accusation, you
published against Cassander in your Manifest, wrought some effect upon Roxana;
that which you said concerning Queen Statira, and the Princess her Sister, whom
you demanded, as being alive, wrought almost none at all; and though you
alleged particularities, that were enough to have given her sound suspicion,
when she remembered what she had seen with her own eyes, she could not lend any
belief to it, nor contradict her sight in a matter that was so fresh in memory;
yet did she say something to Perdiccas concerning it, and desired some kind of
clearing in the business (as I have heard by Hesione;) but Perdiccas shrunk up
his shoulders at that demand, and answering her with a great deal of coldness,
Madam (said he) I need tell you nothing of that adventure, the truth is well
enough known to you; and your own eyes were witnesses of an action that makes
me odious to Heaven, and detestable to all the Earth. Roxana was satisfied with
that reply, and in the interim solicited me every day to search out Prince
Oroondates; and, I confess, I employed all my care to see, if I could learn any
news of him: About that time Prince Arsaces was in Babylon, but though he was
unknown to all the World, I was the only man that was not ignorant of the
truth; and I had the means to advance my self very much with Roxana, by
discovering him, if, as wicked as I am, I had not had some good motions, that
withheld me from doing it. In the voyage I made into Scythia, by her Command, I
had learnt the truth of all that had passed, and knew that Prince Artaxerxes,
the Son of Darius, was alive, under the name of Arsaces: But for all I am so
false, I reverenced the remainders of the Blood of my King, and the virtue of
that Prince, which in his earliest years had so powerfully gained the hearts of
all the Persians: I believed with Reason, That they, who could not suffer
Darius his Daughters to live, for fear they should dispute the Empire with
them, would strive by all manner of means to make away that Prince, who had more
lawful pretensions to it, and who could better defend them; and this belief
hindered me from saying any thing of it to the Queen at my return, and
afterward, when the Prince was come to Babylon: The secrecy I had kept till
then, hindered me also from making any mention of it to Toxaris and Loncates,
when I told them of the journey I had made into Scythia. It is certain, That
nothing stopped my mouth, but the fear of destroying that great Prince: And if
you will do me the favor to believe, My Lords, That though I was so faithless,
as to do my Master ill offices in his love, I was not so errant a Villain, as
to sell the Blood of my lawful Prince, and to deliver him up to Enemies, who
had so great an interest in his ruin, that they never would have spared him. I
will not relate any of those things, that have passed in Babylon touching the
War, you have been informed of them, both by Prince Artaxerxes, and by others,
who knew more then I; but will only tell you what you are ignorant of, and
which cannot be come unto your knowledge, being passed since the last Battle.

After that bloody defeat of our Army, the remnants of it, as you know, retired
into the Town; and of above A hundred thousand men, there scarce came back
Eighteen or twenty thousand, and even of them a great many sore wounded: Among
the Commanders, there was hardly one that had escaped without hurt; and scarce
were there any of them in a condition to gather up the scattered relics of
our Forces, and to present themselves at the Gates to oppose the pursuit of
yours, in case they should have prosecuted their Victory into the City. Alcetas
much less wounded then his Brother Antigenes, Nearchus his Father, and some
others, did all they possibly could to that purpose; and while they were so
employed, Perdiccas, Cassander, Neoptolemus, and the rest who had not come off
so well, went to their Beds to seek repose, and remedy for their wounds. All
things were then in a very lamentable form in Babylon; the streets rung with
the cries of many thousands, who then finding their losses, enquired for their
Sons, their Fathers, or their Husbands, with tears and mournful groans; the
mangled Soldiers begged with cries to have their wounds dressed: To this grief,
and to this disorder, was also added the fear of timorous women, and feeble old
men, who being utterly dismayed by so great a defeat, imagined every moment,
that they saw the Enemies within their Gates, and who with mortal terrors
expected the taking and sacking of their City. Alcetas and his Companions took
the best course they were able in that confusion, they showed a great deal of
care in quartering the Soldiers, who by reason of the vastness of the Town,
found all room enough; they looked to set such Guards, as were necessary
within, and to Man the Outworks, which they meant to keep; nor did they forget
any thing belonging to their charge in so pressing an exigency. You may guess
at Roxana's sorrow by her interest, it was so violent, That of all the rest of
that day, she was not capable of any thing that was said to comfort her; and
the Physicians, who had care of her health, told her, but in vain, That being
so far gone with child, she did her self a great deal of harm by such an
excess of grief. Her disquiets were augmented by the news she heard that day;
for she was told by those, that had escaped from the Battle, that Prince
Oroondates, who was so dear to her remembrance, was amongst her Enemies; that
he had commanded the Army that day, and that it was to his valor, and to his
good conduct, his Party owed the winning of that Victory: She also heard that
^rtaxerxes, the son of Darius, who had been thought dead so many years, was
alive in the same party; and that it was he himself that had served on her side
in the former Battle; and who, under the name of Arsaces, had gained so high a
reputation. Roxana was as sensible of these news, as one can possibly imagine;
there was no doubt but she was infinitely troubled to know that Artaxerxes was
alive, who thereby frustrated the cruelty she had used against his Sisters; and
who much more potently, then those Princesses, could disturb her in the
possession of her Dominions; but yet she was more sensible of Oroondates his
return: The knowledge of his hatred was a terrible discontent to her, finding
it so great, that it had made him side with her Enemies, and fight every day
against her: And though she was not ignorant how just cause he had, nor could
in reason condemn his resentments; she could not choose but be much afflicted
at them, since they crossed the design she had of drawing him to her affection,
and that by those expressions of his hatred, he showed the small inclination he
had to love her; yet was it some comfort to her to know he was so near her, for
all he was an Enemy; and in this satisfaction, and some remaining spark of
hope, not yet extinguished in her heart, she found at last cause to be as much
contented, as if she had not heard of him at all. She passed the night in
distractions, which according to Hesione's report, would not suffer her to
sleep a moment; and the next morning, as soon as she was ready, she went to
visit Perdiccas, whose wounds kept him in his Bed. Their first discourse was of
the unsuccessful issue of the Battle, and they both bewailed the loss of so
many thousand men slain for their Interests, especially of many brave
Commanders, who were either dead or prisoners; among which, Seleucus held the
first place, and then Leonatus, Nearchus, and their Companions, of whom they
had then heard no news at all. After some talk upon that subject, Perdiccas,
who either could not, or would not any longer dissemble the truth, which in the
estate of his Affairs, was not possible to be still kept secret, seeing no body
with Roxana, but such persons as he suspected not, spoke to her on this manner.
We might have reason, Madam, to complain of the ill success the gods have sent
to our Affairs, if we were not conscious by what crimes we have provoked them
against us; And if the blood of those great and innocent Princesses, which you
needs would shed for your own Interests, did not call upon them for a revenge,
which they in justice cannot refuse. In brief Madam, That crime which makes us
odious to all the World, has been as unprofitable to us, as it is detestable
in it self; and you have vainly desired to secure the Throne to your self, and
to the child you go withal, by the death of Darius his Daughters, since the
gods have preserved the life of his Son, Prince Artaxerxes: It is he, that may
trouble your reign a great deal more powerfully, then his Sisters; and all the
advantage we can reap by that horrid cruelty, will be nothing but the stings of
a guilty Conscience, that will torture us for ever. Perdiccas made a stop at
these words, and the Queen replied. I was persuaded to that cruelty against
mine own inclination, by the example of many persons that have done the same,
in a like condition: And though the advantages I desired to procure to
Alexanders Son, made me conquer my natural pity; I have not nevertheless been
without a great deal of Sorrow and Repentance for it. It is true, the return of
Artaxerxes, whom the gods have miraculously raised again, has overthrown all
our Policy; but it is as true, that I would revoke what is passed, if it were in
the power of mankind; and that I now could wish, with all my heart, those
Princesses were alive. They are alive, Madam, ( answered Perdiccas instantly)
and the gods have not permitted, That the most Illustrious Blood in the World
should be so cruelly shed. Are they alive? ( cried Roxana, in admiration:) Yes
Madam ( added Perdiccas) they are so: And he, whom deceased Alexander honored
with the last marks of his affection, was not so base, is to destroy what was
dearest to him in all the World; it was by the death of certain condemned
Slaves, that your eyes were deceived, and your passion satisfied: But neither
my compliance with you, nor the consideration of my Interests, were able to
make me forget, what I owed to my King, and to the quality of Prince, in which
I was born. You required too inhumane, and too shameful effects of Perdiccas
his Obedience; and if you were to have employed his hand to do you service, it
should have been in an action more worthy of him, and against other Enemies,
then those great and innocent Princesses. While Perdiccas spoke on this manner,
Roxana hearkened to him with so much astonishment, That of a long time she was
not able to reply; and that strange news surprised her in such sort, that she
knew not which way she should receive it. The return of Artaxerxes, which
thwarted the security she thought she had established in her Dominions, by the
death of his Sisters, might have made her content they were alive; but that of
Oroondates bringing to mind the interest of her love, incenced her so against
her rival, whom she saw coming into the World again, to deprive her of a
happiness, upon which she had settled some flattering hopes, That she straight
repented the wish she had made in her Favor, but a minute before. What?
Perdiccas, (said she, looking upon him with an angry eye) Have you then
deceived a Princess, that trusted no body but your self, and that put all her
Interests into your hand so freely? I have deceived you ( replied Perdiccas) as
I should have deceived all the most Sovereign Powers upon Earth; And though my
action stand not in need of any justification, know, To the end you may be
better satisfied, That to the Interest of my honor, and to that of Alexanders
memory, I also joined that of my love, which alone was able to overturn all my
Resolutions. I love, Madam, since it is no longer time to disavow it; I love
Queen Statira, and for that love, instead of attempting against her life, I
would have given my own: She has no Enemies, against whom I would not have
defended her at the price of my Blood; and I have done a great deal more to
content you, then I ought to have done, since I put her in fear of death, since
I kept her concealed, to avoid your anger, though she were all manner of ways
the greatest Princess of the World; and since I made her lay aside the name of
Statira, peculiar to the Royalty, to take again that of Cassandra, the Daughter
of Codoman: She is now in Babylon, and if hitherto my respect to you has
obliged me to conceal from you, both her being alive, and the place of her
abode, I think that now I may declare them to you, by reason of Artaxerxes his
return, of the belief I have, that her misfortunes may have appeased you; and
of the hope, that you will have some regard to the love of Perdiccas, who has
blindly tied himself to run your fortune, and who has endeavored to comply
with you, even to the prejudice of his honor. Roxana was so troubled, during
this discourse, that she knew not in what terms to express her sense of it; and
after she had long beheld Perdiccas with an eye that seemed to tax him for
deceiving her; I should never have believed ( said she) that you would so
craftily have deluded me, me, who would have depended upon you, for whatsoever
was most precious to me. I am not troubled, that Statira and Parisatis are
alive, they were other motives, then the ambition of reigning, that made me to
desire their death; and in the extremity, I will make known, that which may
justify my crimes, as well as you allege the cause of your subtle artifice. I
will not tell you that I will employ all the power I have, to destroy those you
have saved, to the falsifying of your word; and that perhaps, I am potent
enough over the hearts of the Macedonians to do it, though you should undertake
to protect them: It is not out of inclination, that I am led to cruelty, and I
consider you more, then you have considered me: The love you bear Statira, may
justify in part, what you have done; but I can tell you, you shall profit
little by her being alive, and that it is not for your self, you have preserved
her; It is for Oroondates, the Prince of Scythia, (the most dreadful of all
your Enemies; and he himself, whom you saw yesterday dyed in the blood of your
Sold^ers, and also of your own) that you have plotted; and Statira is so
totally his, even before she was Alexanders, That nothing, but death alone, can
possibly take her from him: You have that puissant rival at our Gates, you
shall have him to fight with all without, and her constancy to assault within
our Walls; it is by them, without doubt, that I shall be revenged of you, and
that I shall see you repent the Service you have done, for your most cruel
Enemy. This threat of the Queens, made Perdiccas grow pale, but he recovered
himself presently again, and desiring to let her see his resoluteness; I do not
doubt ( said he) but that Queen Statira is prepossessed with some powerful
inclination, that makes her to disdain my affection; nor am I ignorant, but the
Prince you speak of, is a valiant and a terrible Enemy; I have already tried
his Forces in two set Battles, and I have had a discourse with him, which has
sufficiently made me understand his intentions; but neither the knowledge of
Cassandra's engagement can repulse me, nor is that of my rivals power able to
affright me; I should have satisfied him before now, if I could have feared his
threatenings; but if in the open Field he saw me not avoid to encounter him, he
shall not make me tremble behind Walls, which are strong enough to resist the
greatest Army in the World: And though Fortune should favor him against me, he
shall see me perish in the resolution I have taken, and defend that against him
to my latest gasp, which I have too lawfully acquired, to deliver it up but
with my life. Well, we shall see ( replied the Queen, extremely vexed) which way
you will behave your self, and I will also think how I shall behave my self in
this new face of my Affairs. I hope ( said Perdiccas) you will have some regard
to my being tied to your Interests, from which, the consideration of mine own
shall never be able to separate me; and that you will not do any thing against
a life* which no body can attempt, without aiming directly at mine. The Queen
returned Perdiccas no answer, being uncertain both what she should say, and
what resolution she should take; but parting from him very coldly, she went out
of his Chamber, and returned to the Palace in a great deal of trouble. Then did
her cruel disquiets set her on the rack, and her love and her ambition,
tortured her by turns, but with unequal force; the life of Artaxerxes made her
but little sensible of that discontent, which out of reason of State, she might
else have received for that of his Sisters, whose sorrowful destiny had indeed
moved her to compassion; but she could not know Statira was alive, and in
Babylon, and Oroondates at the Gates of it, demanding her with an Armed power,
and in a condition, to obtain her shortly in spite of her, without falling
into an extremity of grief, and without giving her self over to the rage of her
jealousy. She caused me to to be sent for, as him of all her Servants, who was
best instructed in that affection; and having called me to her Bedside, where
she was laid down, Thou feast Arbates (said she) how the gods overthrow the
Proposals of men, and by what ways they advance their own, inspight of our
resolutions. I have labored, but in vain, to separate Oroondates and Statira,
by so many different means, since neither the disunion I had wrought between
them, nor that death, whereby wine own eyes were deluded, have been able to
oppose the course of the destinies, which will join them together again, in
spite of all my endeavors, and which will bring me to the sorrow of seeing
them triumph over me, by those ways that are the most glorious to them; That
ungrateful man fights at our Gates against us, and is upon the point of taking
her away by strength of Arms, whom I by force and policy have vainly disputed
with him; but rather let death put an end to my afflictions, different from
that I had promised to my self, then that I should suffer my rival to have the
advantage, and my ungrateful Scythian to obtain his utmost satisfaction before
my face: I will yet put in practice, whatsoever love and anger can inspire into
a Queen, animated with those mighty passions; nor will I leave any thing
unattempted, either to destroy the felicity, they propose unto themselves, or
to make them perish, when I am at the end of all my hopes. It is but in vain,
that Perdiccas undertakes the protection of my rival; for though cunning, he
should not be able to effect it, I am powerful enough to ruin her by open
force: Notwithstanding all the credit he has among the Macedonians, they are
more at my devotion, then at his; and they with veneration, expect the birth of
a Son of Alexander: All the Carians, Lycians, Parthians, Susians, and
Bactrians, we have left; obey my Orders without repugnance; and if we must take
Arms amongst our selves, my party will not be weaker, then that of Perdiccas.
Only help me, Arbates, with thy Counsels, and with thy Assistance, in a
passion which I have trusted to none but thee; seek some invention to satisfy
me, before I be compelled to fly to extremities against Perdiccas, and hope
for nothing from me, but recompenses worthy of such an acceptable service. The
Queen ended with these words, and seeing that she expected my answer, I replied
immediately in these terms. Madam, The gods can testify, that I have devoted
my life entirely to your Majesty, and that I shall never value peril, nor
difficulty in the occasions of serving you: I will strive, with all the wit the
gods have given me, to procure your satisfaction; but if your Majesty will give
me leave to tell you my opinion, and to dissent from yours, I will take the
liberty to say, That in the condition of your Affairs, violent ways are not the
best, or rather, That you cannot make use of any such, without ruining them. If
you attempt against Queen Statira's life, and if you raise a party within the
City against Perdiccas, you divide the Forces, which are necessary to defend
you against your Foes without, and make a Prince your Enemy, who is really
affectionate to your Interests, and without whom, you cannot subsist against
those that are at our Gates: Rather take a contrary resolution, Madam, and
instead of thinking how to kill Statira, endeavor to give her to Perdiccas,
thereby you will avoid the shame, and the remorse you would have by her death;
you will preserve your self, and you will highly oblige a Friend and a Servant,
without whom, to speak the truth, it is impossible you should stand; and by
depriving Oroondates, of the hopes he may have in the possession of Statira,
you will invite him to turn all his thoughts upon you: If you succeed in this
design, you will be satisfied all manner of ways; and if this course prove
ineffectital, I see none other you can probably make use of. The Queen gave ear
to me attentively, and found so much reason, and likelihood in what I said,
That after having struggled a while with her resentment, against Perdiccas, for
having deluded her, she resolved to follow my advice: And when by very obliging
words, she had testified how much she approved it, she determined to do all she
could to join Statira with Perdiccas, and to take away all Prince Oroondates
his pretensions to her. If in this counsel, Sir, ( pursued Arbates, and
addressing himself to Oroondates) I did you an ill office, by persuading the
Queen to assist Perdiccas against you, I did you no small service on the other
side, in diverting her from the design she had to seek the death of her rival,
as she might have done many several ways, though that of force had not taken
effect. The next day, the Queen being fully resolved to follow the counsel I
had given her, and having banished, or at least feigning to banish all the
sharpness she had conceived against Perdiccas, she sent me to his lodging to
see how he did, and to assure him from her, That how great Interest soever she
had, in the death of the Princesses of Persia, she would not thwart his
inclination; nor prefer the security she found in their destruction, before the
contentment; and the advantages of a Prince, to whom she owed the better part
of her own, and from whom, in regard of the Obligations she had to him, she
would never disunite her self. Perdiccas received this complement of the
Queens, with a great deal of civility; and after I had also protested to him
from her, That instead of doing him harm, she would favor his passion, as much
as possibly she could. Dear Arbates (said he) you may tell the Queen, That
since she has so generously conquered her resentments, in favor of me, there
is no consideration in the World, that can separate me from her service; and
that I will spend my Blood, to the last drop, for her quarrel, with more
passion then for my own. He sent me back with this answer, and presently after,
being visited by Alcetas, he gave him the order he desired, to have observed
for the service of the two Princesses: From that very day Alcetas left them the
whole House, caused the Lodgings to be furnished according to their quality,
gave them a great many Women to wait upon them, with Officers, little different
from what they had had in former times; and settled their Household in such a
manner, That Queen Statira was attended in all points, as Alexander's Widow; and
the Princess Parisatis, as the Daughter of Darius. Nothing but liberty was
refused them; the passage out of the House, being forbidden by a great number
of Soldiers, who kept Guards there, as at the Palace of a Queen, and who
detained them as prisoners. They have their Chambers free, but the Guard lie at
the door; they continually have Sentinels under their Windows; and when they
walk in the Garden, which they have the liberty to do, they follow them always,
but in such a manner, That they seem rather to be there to do them honor, then
to restrain them. Perdiccas did not resolve to use them on that fashion,
without being well assured; That all the Forces of Babylon were at his
devotion, and Roxana's; and that those, in whom the love of their natural
Princesses, might stir up a desire to give them liberty, or a sorrow for their
captivity; were too weak in the City, to dare to show themselves, or to
undertake any thing against his Authority. In the mean time, though he was
forced to keep his Bed, he provided, with a great deal of care and diligence,
for all businesses, and for the defense of the Town. Alcetas, who never staid
within doors for his wounds, assisted by Andiagoras, Antigenes, Iolas, and many
other Commanders, who by practice, have attained an exact knowledge in matters
of War, forgot none of the duties of a perfect Captain, for the defense of the
City: He lodged the Soldiers, according to the Quarters that were assigned
them, and according to the order of the Assaults, you might make, disposed the
Guards, as well for the Outworks, as for the Walls; over-looked the Arms,
visited the Stores of Victual that were in the Town, and caused Provisions to
be put into the Magazins, set men at work to make Arrows, employed others about
Boats, to make sallies upon the River, if it were necessary; and to oppose the
Works, you should make there, and sent Messengers into all the Provinces of
their Allies to hasten relief. Perdiccas and Cassander left their Beds the same
day, and I think this is the third day since; but Peucestas and Neoptolemus lie
by it still, and are not yet so near their cures: Neither did the two first
stay for theirs, but out of impatience, to see the Princesses whom they loved,
would needs go abroad, contrary to the will of their Physicians. What respect
soever Perdiccas meant to pay Roxana, in his first visit he followed his own
inclinations, and with one Arm in a Skarf, went to the House and Lodging of
Queen Sta^ira; I learned the discourse he had with her, from one of his
Servants, with whom I have a particuliar friendship, and by that means am able
to tell you something of it. He found that beauteous Queen a little less sad
then ordinary; whether it were by reason of the happy success of your Forces,
or of the order that had been given to settle her Household; and taking an
occasion from thence, to entertain her, after the first civilities; Madam (said
he) I should think you rejoiced at our late loss, if I were not acquainted with
the excellence of your Nature, that cannot with pleasure look upon the death of
so many thousand persons; and if I did not also believe you begin to know, that
among those, whom you account your friends, there are none more affectionate to
you, then those, to whom you give the title of your Enemies: If the passion I
have for you, has carried me on to any action, from which you have received
discontent; and if my fear of loosing you, forced me to keep you in a
condition, very different from that, in which you ought to be, I will make
amends for what is past, by a manner of life, wherein, without doubt, you will
find less cause of complaint: Hitherto the apprehension I have been in, for
your life, has obliged me to conceal you from Queen Roxana, whom her Interests
have made your enemy; but since her inclinations are changed, since she repents
of what she once attempted against you; and since you are here with all the
safety I can desire, you shall be better attended, then you have been till now;
and in your House, you shall find all the marks of your former Dignity; Only,
Madam, be not offended, I beseech you, If I cannot dispose my self to loose
you, and if I do all I possibly can, to shun a death, which I cannot avoid, by
restoring you to my Enemies; If I could live in giving you that satisfaction,
the gods are my witnesses, I would content you to my own prejudice; but since
in letting you go, I should utterly extinguish all my hopes; and since I have a
rival at our Gates, whose advantages would establish themselves upon my ruin,
Think it not strange, if I defend you against him, and if by all manner of
Reasons, I endeavor to make you understand the difference there is between a
barbarous Prince, and the chief of Alexanders Successors. Perdiccas held his
peace at these words, and the Queen, who had hearkened to him with impatience,
replied very tartly. Think not Perdiccas, that I find any change in my
condition, either by this new order you have taken in settling my House, or by
that safety you promise me from Roxana; since my last losses I have so little
cared for this state, you cause me to be served with, or for this life you
assure me of, That I can find but a very mean consolation in either; nor do I
rejoice for the death of so many men, whom you have made to loose their lives
in too injust a quarrel: And though I see the justice of the gods in your all
success, I could wish nevertheless, they would be contented with a smaller
reparation for your faults, and that they would restore me the liberty, which
you unworthily have robbed me of, and which you unjustly refuse me, by less
cruel, and less bloody means. That affection you bear me, discovers it self by
very disobliging signs, and that barbarian Prince, whom you reproach me with,
and who now fights my quarrel, has expressed his to me, by effects very
contrary to yours; and by actions, which without doubt, may equal him with any
of Alexanders Successors; Yet did I shun the sight of him, both before, and
since the death of the King, my Husband: And if by that sacred memory, I have
conquered the inclination, which I shall have for him, while I live, and the
remembrance of the Obligations I have to him, Judge, what you ought to hope for
from me, you, for whom I have no inclination, and to whom I am not at all
obliged. I hope (replied Perdiccas) that by my perseverance in loving you, I
shall overcome yours in hating me; and that by rendering you, in all the
testimonies of your hatred, the same services, which that more happy rival, did
in the proofs of your affection, you will find the difference there is between
his passion and mine. It is a small matter for a man beloved, and for a man
favored by Queen Statira, to continue constant in his love, and to be for ever
faithful to her; but in the disdain, and in the ill usage I receive from you,
Fidelity is a great deal more considerable, then in a condition, that were able
to keep the most insensible persons firm unto your service: Perhaps, if you had
made such a trial of this Oroondates, so worthy of your inclination, you would
have lost some part of it, and would soon have thought your self disengaged of
those Obligations, that tie you to him, to the prejudice of the passion I have
to serve you. I know not (answered the Queen, with a very serious countenance)
who can have instructed you so well in my Affairs; but whatsoever has been
told you of the affection I bore to Oroondates, it is too great a glory to me
ever to disown it, while I live. I repent my self of nothing (continued the
Queen, with a sigh) but that I loved him not enough; that is all my crime: And
if I had not been deceived by the cunning practices of her, who has given you
this information, I was enough indebted to that great Prince, to have preferred
my grave, before the honor I received, to be the Wife of Alexander the Great:
Yet Oroondates as great, and as worthy to be loved, as he is, has not begot
any design in me, to give my self again to a man, after having been married to
the greatest of all men. In short, The Widow of Alexander shall neither be for
Oroondates, nor for Perdiccas; but if she were to be for any body, it should be
for Oroondates, not only rather then Perdiccas, but rather then all the rest
of mankind; though the gods should raise up another, a thousand times more
great then Alexander. I hope (added Perdiccas briskly) that if you are not for
me, you shall not be for Oroondates; I will defend you against him, with forces
that shall not be inferior to his; and if the gods have so decreed that his
genius must be above mine, he shall never open his passage to you, till he have
laid me dead at the bottom of our Walls. After this discourse, Perdiccas had
some talk with the Queen, while Alcetas entertained the Princess Parisatis,
upon the same subject, and drew just as much satisfaction as his Brother had
done: That brave spirited Princess used him always with so much sharpness and
disdain, That if he were not of a very mild and patient nature, he would have
fallen into some expressions of anger, and particularly that day; for when
Alcetas reproached her, that for all the severity she feigned since
Hephestion's death, she had not been insensible of the love of Lysimachus. I,
for my justification (replied the Princess) may call all the Earth to witness,
what I have done in favor of Lysimachus, both before, and since the death of
Hephestion; but if I had really given my affection to the knowledge of his
virtue, and to the remembrance of his services, I were as much excusable, as I
should be little, if I should cast my eyes upon Alcetas. I know not what
Alcetas answered, because Perdiccas went then out of the Chamber; and he that
gave me this account of their conversation, went out with him. From thence
Perdiccas went directly to visit Queen Roxana, whom he found retired from all
Company, entertaining her self in an Arbor of the Garden, with no body but
Hesione; Perdiccas out of respect, came in alone, and the Queen seeing him
enter, rose to meet him, and gave him the best reception he could wish. After
the first terms of civility, Perdiccas began to thank her, for the force she
had used in favor of him, upon her first intentions, and for her complying with
his passion; and then he protested to her, That he desired nothing so
earnestly, as some occasion, to let her see how sensible he was of those last
effects of her goodness. While he was making these protestations, the Queen
having prayed him to sit down by her, gave ear without interruption; and when
he had done speaking, she, who during his discourse, had had time to confirm
her self in the resolution she had taken, looking upon him with an action
accompanied with some shame, and some uncertainty: May I have a perfect
confidence, Perdiccas (said she) in the Protestations you make me? And may I,
upon that hope, make you a confession, whereby, I put both my quiet and my
reputation into your hands? You may Madam, with all manner of securirity,
answered Perdiccas; and then he confirmed his promises by Oaths, which begot a
full assurance in the Queen. I will make no difficulty then (replied she) to
trust you absolutely, and to own a thing to you, which I shall not be able to
do without blushing: But, Perdiccas, since you have weaknesses your self, which
you have confessed to me, Why should not I confess mine to you? and why should
I not hope for some indulgence from you toward them, and even for your
assistance, if it be necessary? In brief, Perdiccas (said she, putting her hand
before her face) if this Declaration may be permitted from the Widow of
Alexander, I love as well as you, I love with an affection, borne many years
ago, but with an affection which never injured that which I owed unto the King,
my Husband, and which revived again since his death; but not without a
violence, which I have not been able to resist; neither the multiplicity of my
Affairs, nor the care of my Fortune, have been able to banish a dear
remembrance out of my heart, no more then you out of yours; and Queen Statira
is not more deeply settled in your thoughts, then Prince Oroondates is in mine.
Perdiccas was surprised at this discovery, and looking upon the Queen, with
much astonishment: How, Madam (said he) do you love the Prince of Scythia? I
love him (answered Roxana) with so strong an affection, that it takes away my
repose, and perhaps will also take away my life. Ah! Madam (added Perdiccas,
raising his voice) cease to love Oroondates, he must die to secure me the
possession of Statira. Statira must die then (replied Roxana) to secure me the
possession of Oroondates. They both were mute at these first words, and looked
upon one another a good while without speaking; but the Queen breaking silence
first, You have no more reason (pursued she) to demand the death of Oroondates,
then I have to procure that of Statira; nay, I have more; For whereas
Oroondates is only your rival, Statira is both my rival, and my competitor in
Empire; and I have no less cause then you, to desire the ruin of the one, and
the preservation of the other. If you can give me Oroondates, the obtaining of
Statira will be much more easy for you, then if he remain still constant to
her; and if I can assist you toward the conquest of Statira, that of Oroondates
will not be so difficult, as it now is, in the continuation of his hopes.
Instead of destroying one another, let us labor mutually to content one
another, and let us join the Interests of our love, as we have already done
those of our Fortune. Perdiccas, who had flown out at the beginning of the
Queens discourse, found so much Reason in the rest of it, that he could not
possibly disapprove it; and also considering how much easier it was for him to
follow the way the Queen proposed, then to execute the resolution of killing
Oroondates, he had nothing more to argue against her; and desiring to let her
see how he was overcome, You are all powerful, Madam (said he) and they that
could resist your will, were unworthy of the honor I receive from you: I will
not say a word, to argue against that passion you have imparted to me, but will
only serve you in it with all the fidelity, you can desire from a man
infinitely obliged; both by offers full of goodness, and by a trust which I
have not deserved. Yes Madam, I shall be but too proud to join my Interests
with yours, and how much soever I hate Oroondates, as the lover of Statira, he
shall be considerable to me, as being beloved of Queen Roxana. They had talked
longer, if they had not been interrupted by a man, whose sight struck them into
a great deal of confusion. It was the amorous Cassander, who as he was seeking
the Queen in the Garden, had come to the Arbor, while they were deepest in
discourse; and through the Boughs that grew about it, that jealous lover had
overheard the greatest part of their conversation; Although some of the Queens
Servants who were waiting at a distance, saw him stand harkening on that manner,
The Authority he had, and their knowledge of his humor, hindered them from
troubling him; so that from Roxana's own mouth he heard, but to plainly for his
repose, how she was in love with Prince Oroondates. Never did the anger of a
man rise to a greater extremity, then that of Cassanders, after this cruel
knowledge; it was so violent, that it made him loose all the discretion he had
left, and the remembrance of the Authority of those two persons, was not able
to make him dissemble it for a minute. He came into the Arbor with a very
troubled action, and with so wild a look, that Roxana easily read the truth of
that adventure in it: He was so far transported, That he scarce bethought
himself to pay the Queen any salute; but beholding her with eyes sparkling with
anger, It was not the memory of Alexander then (said he) but the love of
Oroondates, that made you an enemy to Cassander; and you feel that passion for
a Scythian, and for a Scythian that disdains you, which you could not suffer
for a Prince of Macedon. Was this that greatness of courage, Madam, and that
brave remembrance of an Illustrious Husband, which made you receive the
testimonies of my Affection as mortal injuries: And while the unfortunate
Cassander sighs in vain for you, do you sigh for a Scythian, who is an enemy to
your party, and your particular enemy? The vehemence of his anger hindered him
from saying more, and Roxana was so abashed, that she had so discovered her
self, and given those advantages to him, for whom of all the men in the World,
she had the least inclination, That she neither knew how to reply, nor with
what countenance to look upon him: At last, she recollected her courage, and
considering, that in the condition of her Affairs, dissimulation was no longer
seasonable; she looked confidently upon him, and resolving to show that her
resentments were not less then his; Your indiscretion (answered she) has been
punished, as it deserved to be; and if you had not been so bold, as to hearken
to my secret discourses, you had not learned this truth, at which you appear to
be so angry; whether I love, or love not, you are he, who of all men living,
has least Interest in it: The Scythian you speak of with so much contempt, is
worthy the affection of the greatest Princesses upon Earth, and you deserve the
aversion of all the World: You cannot make any comparison with him, without
doing him wrong, nor believe that though I should cease to love him, I should
also cease to hate and to despise you. You will cease to love him (replied
furious Cassander) when he shall cease to live; and the designs you have now
made in his Favor, shall not hinder me from carrying death to him, into the
midst of all his Army. If you can but use poison for that purpose (answered the
Queen in the extremity of her choler) I do not doubt but you may effect it; but
I am sure you never can revenge your self of him by open War; and you are not
so ignorant of his force, as to dare to attempt it in the Field; there would
need a whole Squadron of such men as you, to kill Prince Oroondates; nor do I
think that you have so much courage, but that you tremble even at his very
name, though you are within the shelter of our Walls. Cassander was so
transported at these offensive words, that without doubt he was going to reply
in terms, that would have driven her to extremities, if Perdiccas had not
hindered him: Although he disapproved Cassanders carriage, yet was he his
friend, he knew he was very much obliged to him; and moreover, he considered
the credit his Brother and he had, in Macedonia and in Babylon: These Reasons
kept him from declaring against him, and not being willing to suffer matters to
pass further between him and Roxana, You are too violent (said he) Cassander,
and it is by ways quite contrary to these you practice, that you ought to gain
the Queens affections. Come, let us withdraw from her presence (continued he
embracing him, and carrying him out of the Arbor, almost by force) and consider
in another manner what you ow to the Wife of Alexander. With these words he
pulled him away quite blinded with rage; but he could not make him forbear, as
he went, to pour forth a thousand reproaches against the Queen, and a thousand
threats against the life of Oroondates. Perdiccas got him out of the Garden,
with much ado, and presently after came back to the Queen, whom he found highly
exasperated, and infinitely confounded, for having imprudently discovered the
secret of her love to Cassander, which she would not have confessed but to
Perdiccas: Yet Perdiccas pacified her a little, by putting her in mind, That
she could not hope for any satisfaction in that business, without giving
further knowledge of it to the World; and that though Cassander had not learned
it by that means, he could not have been much longer ignorant of it. He prayed
her also to pardon his hastiness, and the violence of his passion; for though
both Cassanders love, and his person, were odious to her, it was best to
dissemble her indignation, and not to come to extremities against him, so long
as she had need of his assistance. The Queen promised him part of what he
desired; but she would not give him any hope, That she would show any kind of
favor to a man, whom she with a great deal of appearance suspected for the
death of the King, her Husband. From this discourse they fell into that of the
resolutions they should take in matters of the War; and after they had talked a
while upon that subject, they determined to send one into your Army, to stay
some days unknown amongst your men, and bring them intelligence of what passed,
both in the Camp, and among the Princes: When they had spent some time in
bethinking themselves, whom they should employ, they cast their eyes upon me;
as well, because of my readiness in speaking several Languages, and of my being
versed among most of those Nations, your Army is composed of; as out of a
belief the Queen had, That I would bring her some particular news of Prince
Oroondates; yet was she not ignorant of the hazard I ran, of being taken by
some of his men, to whom my face was known; but she believed I had cunning
enough to avoid their knowledge, or rather (as it is the custom of all great
persons) she little considered the danger of a man, provided, she might draw
any service from it. I was presently sent for, and the Queen and Perdiccas,
having proposed the business they desired I should serve them in, I offered
readily enough to undertake it; they instructed me punctually in my Commission,
and the Queen commanded me very earnestly to learn something of Oroondates, if
it were possible. Why should I trouble you longer, with a discourse of small
importance? I came that very day out of the Town, the passages from thence
being free, by reason that the Outworks then were ours; and after I had made a
little circuit, I went into Craterus his quarter, and lay that night among the
Cilicians, my Countrymen, with whom I quickly made acquaintance; and the next
morning, which was yesterday, I walked about all the Camp, while part of your
men were busy in assaulting our Outworks; I observed the order of your
Encamping, the number of your Forces, and the manner of your Guards; but by the
loss of our Outworks, I no more had free entrance into the City, as before;
yet did I not despair of getting in one way or other: But before I returned, I
was desirous to do something in discharge of the Queens Command, and while I
sought means to see Prince Oroondates, without being seen by him, or any of his
that could discover me, or at least, to learn something concerning him, that I
might carry back to the Queen: My walking hereabout, begot suspicion in those
that took notice of it, and made me fall into this danger, wherein I should
certainly have perished, for a punishment of many crimes together, if my
destiny had not depended upon the greatest and most generous Prince that ever
was.

Arbates made an end of his Relation thus, and casting down his eyes, expected
the confirmation of that Pardon that had been granted him; but Ptolomeus not
having learnt so much by his discourse, as he desired; Tell us ( said he) the
order of the City Guards, and what number of Soldiers there is in the Town.
Besides the Inhabitants ( replied Arbates) who most of them bear Arms, there
are yet Fifteen or sixteen thousand Soldiers: Alcetas commands that quarter
that is opposite to Craterus his post, where he makes Two thousand men go upon
the Guard every night, which are relieved every Four and twenty hours:
Andiagoras has the same charge, over against that side where Prince Oxyartes
lies, with the same order, and the same number of men; and Antigenes defends
those parts toward Artabasus, being there is no more of the Town besieged, but
what stands on this side of the River, the greatest force of the Garrison is
quartered there; and on the other side, the Guards are very weak, but they
intend to strengthen them, as soon as you go about to pass the River. The Town
is provided with Victual for four Months, and is in a condition to defend it
self till relief come, which they have sent to demand on every side.

The Princes had some other Questions to ask Arbates, but Oroondates who could
not see him, without feeling too sensible renewings of his grief, having till
then, endured his presence and his discourse, reasonable patiently. For Gods
sake ( said he to his Companions) dismiss this Fellow, and never expect a true
Answer to your Demands, from a man that has so little Fidelity in him. Go, (
continued he, turning toward Arbates) Go back again to Roxana, Perdiccas, and
Cassander, thy Illustrious Masters, and my generous Enemies: And since I, by
thy mouth, am informed of their designs and threats; let them also hear from
the same Mouth, what effect that knowledge has wrought upon me; Tell Roxana,
she has now too little virtue to make a man in love with her, who did not so
much as value her, when she was more innocent; and that the remembrance of her
old perfidiousness, and that of her last cruelties, is too deeply engraven in
my mind, to leave me other thoughts of her, then those of horror and
detestation. Tell Perdiccas, That I neither can endure him as a Friend, nor
fear him as an Enemy; that I equally regard his designs against the life of his
rival, and his considerations of a Prince, beloved of Roxana; and that if he
will deserve Cassandra, he must become more virtuous then he is, and dispute
her against me, with more valor, then he has done hitherto. And tell
Cassander, That I willingly yield to him in his pretensions to Roxana; and that
I would do him service, if I could possibly, in his design, upon a person
worthy of him; That I will not fight with him upon that quarrel, but in the
intention I have to serve these Princes, who prosecute him as the poysner of
his King. I will make him know, if I meet him in the field, That to take away
the life of Oroondates, is no easy enterprise for such a man as Cassander, I
give thee no Message to my Princess, for I know thou would perform it with
thy usual Fidelity; but if thou have the honor, and have yet the face to appear
in her presence, I give thee leave to tell her, and the Princess her Sister
also, That by the valor of the Prince, their Brother, and that of so many other
gallant Princes, as have united themselves for their Interests, Lysimachus and
I, hope to see them free ere long, from the persecutions of their Enemies; and
in a condition, to punish those cruel persons that have used them so
unworthily. After these words, Oroondates could no longer suffer Arbates to
stay in his Chamber, but commanded Araxes to make him be safely conducted back
to the Gates of the City.

The End of the First Book.
THE FIFTH AND LAST PART OF CASSANDRA. The Second BOOK.
As Soon as Arbates was gone, and that the Prince of Scythia was resettled from
those troubles which the sight of that man had caused in him, all the Princes
went together to see Seleucus, and his Companions; Ptolomeus himself, who till
then had been his particular enemy, and who had had differences with him, which
probably might have dispensed with him for that visit; had so much complacency
for his Friends, as to accompany them in it, and so much generosity, as to
forget his old quarrel, while Seleucus was not in case to decide it. Seleucus,
whose heart was no less great, then his, received that civility with a like
magnanimity; and after having rendered what was due from him, to the other
Princes, choosing out Ptolomeus amongst them; and putting forth his hand to
him, with a countenance that had nothing of an Enemy: You surprise me not (said
he) by this effect of your virtue, for I never doubted, but that you were as
generous in showing kindness to your Enemies, when they are conquered, wounded,
and prisoners, as I have known you valiant in fighting with them, while they
were in a condition to resist you. The enmity that was between us (replied
Ptolomeus) could not exempt me from what all the World ows to your virtue, and
what effects soever it has produced between us for the time past, the
consideration of it, ought to yield to the knowledge I have of you. It shall
yield it self (answered Seleucus) to this last effect of your generosity, and I
hope you will cease to be my Enemy, since I neither can nor will be any longer
yours. All the Princes, and particularly Artaxerxes reaped a great satisfaction
by Seleucus his words, and Ptolomeus, who desired to receive them handsomely; I
find too many advantages (said he) in our reconciliation to accept of it
otherwise then as one of my happiest fortunes, and will not only cease to be
your Enemy, but in giving you my Friendship entirely, beseech you to restore me
all that you honored me with heretofore. At these words he came close to him,
and Seleucus welcoming him with a great deal of joy, those two brave men
embraced one another often with much contentment, to all that were present at
their reconcilement. After this action, and some other discourses, the Princes
went into the Chamber of Nearchus and Leonatus, who would needs be together,
they had a conversation with them full of civility; and having proposed the
design of Seleucus, touching their exchange, and that of all the prisoners; for
the Princesses, they found them very ready to employ all the credit they had
with Perdiccas, to that effect.

When they were returned into Seleucus his Chamber, they began the discourse of
that accommodation, although they still excepted him from the number of
prisoners; and that they not only offered him his liberty, but with it all
manner of Authority, he could desire amongst them. Seleucus, who wished their
satisfaction, much more then his own liberty, received their Proposition with a
great deal of joy, and prayed them to give him leave to send a man that very
day to Perdiccas, with a Letter from him and his Companions. The Princes took
him at his word, and calling Araxes to his Bedside, to serve him for a
Secretary, because he was not yet able to write with his own hand, Seleucus
dictated these words, which he knew his Companions would approve of.

SELEUCUS, LEONATUS, and NEARCHUS, To PERDICCAS.
IT is no light effect of Friendship and Virtue, to conquer ones own most
violent Passions for their sake; neither durst Friendship alone demand it of
you, if Virtue did not join with her, or if we could consider you as our
Friend, without looking upon you as virtuous: We are Prisoners to your Enemies,
but they disguise our imprisonment so well by their Noble usage of us, that we
cannot know it, but by your absence; nor desire liberty, but to recover with
it, the occasions of doing you service. Your Enemies have been so generous, as
to offer it us, but it is from you alone, that we will, or that we can
handsomely receive it: If you love Seleucus, Nearchus, and Leonatus, and if you
make any account of the deliverance of Eight thousand of your men, which are in
your Enemies power, you will make no difficulty of recovering them by the
exchange of two persons: In short Perdiccas, it is Queen Statira, and the
Princess her Sister, whom they demand of you, for the ransom of your best
Friends, We have ever held that rank, and give you to day the utmost proofs,
you can desire of it; We to any other, but Perdiccas, should represent the
hazards, to which we have exposed our lives for his Interests, the loss of our
men, and the wounds, wherewith we still are kept in Bed; But he is too
grateful, and too generous, to stand in need of being put in remembrance, or of
being solicited for an action, to which he is yet more powerfully obliged by
his Virtue, then by our consideration. Those Illustrious Princesses, whom you
detain, are of too high a condition not to have liberty at least, after those
greatnesses they so justly have possessed, as you are too much indebted to the
memory of Alexander the Great, to go about to obtain that of the Queen his Wife
by violence, which he himself in so absolute an Authority, as that he had,
never sought for from her, but by ways of submission. We hope Perdiccas, that
out of your love to them, and to your self, you will open your eyes to the
Counsel of your Friends, and pardon the freedom they take to give it you; much
less for their consideration, then for your own.


This Letter was approved of by the Princes, who thought it worthy of a frank
and generous spirit, like that of Seleucus; and after he had signed it, and had
sent it to his Companions to do the same, the Princes sent for Cleonimus, upon
whom they had cast their eyes for that deputation; he had an understanding
capable of all manner of Commissions, a great deal of Eloquence to persuade what
he desired, and much courage to overcome all the difficulties, and all the
dangers, he might meet with in that employment: They in a few words, for he was
apprehensive enough, not to need any long discourse, gave him all the
instruction that was necessary. Oroondates and Lysimachus could have been glad
to have sent Letters by him to their Princesses; but they easily judged, that
Perdiccas would not give him permission to see them, and they intended not to
ask him. Cleonimus very well pleased, that he had found an occasion to serve
those gallant Princes, to whom he had so much devoted himself, after he had
protested, That he would faithfully perform the Commi^sion they had given him,
took his leave of them, and getting on Horseback, advanced toward the Gates of
his Native City; which, the remembrance of former times, and of the deplorable
death of his dear Theander, would not suffer him to behold without tears. In
the interim, the Princes were gone out of Seleucus his Tent, and were thinking
to go wait upon the Princess Berenice; when they heard, that she with Deidamia
and Cleone, was gone to visit Apamia and Arsinoe, who were with Prince
Artabasus, their Father. Although his Quarter was a good way off, the Princes
took that walk without unwillingness; and Arsaces thought all ways ease, that
led him to his Princess: They found very good company with that venerable old
man, but it was increased presently after, by one of the most welcome
additions, it could have received. Scarce had they begun to fall into
discourse, when there was seen coming toward the Tent, a Chariot drawn by ten
white Horses, guarded by certain Horsemen, and followed by a good number of
servants. The equipage showing the quality of the person, to whom it
appertained, caused those that were most curious, and least employed, as
Oroondates, Lysimachus, and Ptolomeus, to break off their Conversation, and go
toward the door of the Tent; whither they were no sooner come, but they saw the
Chariot stop there full of Ladies; and Prince Oroondates advancing first to
help them to alight, and offering his hand to her, that appeared the chief,
knew her to be his good and generous friend, the fair Princess Barsina: But,
once in his whole life, had that Prince been touched with a more pleasing
surprise; and hardly had he given greater testimonies of it, when from the
mouth of Perdiccas he had heard, that his Princess was alive. Of all the
persons in the World, only Statira, and Artaxerxes, had any advantage over
Barsina in his affection; and the Princess Berenice, did but hardly possess an
equal place, to that of hers, in his friendship; neither could he see her,
without an extraordinary tenderness, nor without melting into tears, which his
Affection, his Joy, and very moving Remembrances drew from his eyes, at that
fortunate meeting. Barsina, to whom, by a good will, whereof the virtue of them
both had made the strongest engagements, that Prince was dearer, then all the
rest of mankind, seemed no less touched, nor less transported, then he, at
that encounter; and when she saw her self in his Arms, she made no difficulty
to press him between hers, and feared not to offend her modesty, by giving him
testimonies of an Affection, not inferior to his. Honored Barsina (said the
Prince) my Protectress, and my Tutelary deity, Are you come to take away the
remainder of my Afflictions, by your presence, and to bring me a Fortune again,
whereof your goodness has ever made one of the chiefest parts? Ah! without
doubt (continued he, beginning his endearments afresh, which she could not
oppose) without doubt, this felicity was to fore-run the last I now can hope
for; and the gods, after having preserved my Princess, and regiven me my dear
Artaxerxes, have thought it necessary to restore me Barsina also; without whom,
I could not relish any perfect happiness. He brought forth these words with
interruption, and Barsina, after having a while given place to their
impetuousness; Sir, (said she at last) The gods bring me to you again, that I
may share in those blessings, they have restored you, and in those felicities,
they are preparing for you; They know that I am too much interessed in your
Fortune, to be separated from it; and they should do me an injustice, if in
those good successes, that wait for you, and in those, that have already befaln
you, they should not give me as great a part, as I have had in your
afflictions. They had gone further into that discourse, if the throng of those,
who at the name of Barsina, were run out of the Tent, had not taken them off,
and if, as ardent as Oroondates was, he had not been constrained to yield her
for a while to those other friends; Her two dear Sisters, Apamia and Arsinoe;
her two Illustrious Brothers-in-law, Ptolomeus and Eumenes; and even her Father
himself, whose affection had given him a nimbleness to go out to meet her,
demanded to possess her in their turns, but all were fain to leave her to
Prince Artaxerxes; and Barsina no sooner saw him appear, but geting loose from
the Arms of all, she ran to him with an action, that made the company know what
love, and what veneration she bore to the remnants of the Blood of Darius. O my
Lord! (said she, casting her self into his Arms, which he stretched forth to
her) O my Lord! Is it possible, that Barsina should yet be so happy, as to
receive the favor of her revived Prince; and of a Prince, to whose death she
had given so many tears? Artaxerxes, who dearly loved, and particularly
esteemed her, appeared sensible of her Affection, by all the signs he could
express of his. I was alive, dear Cousin, (answered he) while you believed,
that I was dead, as peradventure I ought to have been; but if my life have
something of shameful in it, after the death of my Friends, behold my excuse,
Cousin, and pardon my being alive, by considering for whom I have lived. He
said these words, showing her the Princess Berenice, whom Oroondates was
bringing toward her; and who being informed of the virtues of that Princess,
and of the good offices she had done her Brother, ran to her with a spirit of
acknowledgement and esteem. Barsina, who already had learned some part of the
truth, knew her by many marks, but more then all the rest, by that admirable
beauty, which the whole World could hardly parallel; And advancing to her, with
an action full of astonishment and submi^^on, would have kissed her Hands with
great respect; but the Princess pulled them back, to present her Mouth, and to
let her see, That in the esteem and affection she already had conceived toward
her, she desired a greater equality in their salutations.

After a familiarity, very different from that of a first enterview, Barsina
looking still upon Berenice with admiration, O most worthy Sister ( said she)
of such a Brother, as Oroondates, and most worthy cause of the life and
passions of Prince Artaxerxes! How easy are you to be known, among whatsoever
of great and beautiful our eyes can see, and how infinitely is Barsina
satisfied, that she now can pay her homage to the worthy Mistress, and worthy
Sister of the greatest Princes in the World! The Princess out of countenance at
so obliging a discourse, replied with a great deal of modesty; Madam, I shall
be extremely glad, if to add to these happinesses, which I have not merited, I
may also be worthy of your Friendship; since besides the desire your sight has
produced in me, the report of your goodness had already absolutely gained me,
and that among those persons, who are tied to Oroondates by blood or
friendship; my affection to you took birth, before I had the honor to know you.
After the sefirst civilities, Berenice permitted Barsina to salute the Princess
Deidamia, in whose quality she presently was instructed, and after her, the
faithful Cleone, whose sight wakned in her the remembrance of her Mistress,
with a great sense of her misfortunes. Prince Oxyartes, who chanced also to be
with Artabasus, and Prince Lysimachus saluted her after the rest; but in
Oxyartes his countenance, Oroondates observed alterations, that were not
ordinary, and believed him either to be indisposed, or else particularly
interessed in the arival of that Princess. As Soon as that fair company was
entered again into the Tent, some of the persons it was composed of, made their
complaints to Barsina of her long abode at Susa, and of the little care she had
taken, to give them the contentment, that was then occasioned by her presence.
She was desirous to justify her self in that particular, and for that purpose,
after she had a while given ear to their reproaches, I am not so faulty, as you
believe ( answered she) and I hope you will pardon me a stay, which has been a
greater punishment to me, then to any body else. The sickness, Prince
Oroondates had at my house, hindered me from waiting upon the Queens, as you
certainly have heard; and I was obliged to render that great Prince in my own
house, a part of that, which all the World owed to his virtue, and his person:
After his recovery and departure, I was preparing to leave Susa within a few
days; but scarce had I given order in some affairs, which it was necessary I
should provide for, before my journey, when I received news of the Kings death,
and of the troubles, that were sprung up among his Successors. Within a little
after, I heard of the death of our great Princesses, and of the good Queen
Sysigambis; and without particularising my lamentations, I will only tell you,
that my sorrow was like to have brought me to my grave. When I was able to
overcome that grief a little, which had kept me many days in Bed, I bethought
my self of taking a retreat, either with my Father, or my Sisters, whom the
authority of their Husbands, made cons^derable among the Successors of
Alexander; but I found great difficulties on every side: Artabasus was in
Bactria, and to go into that Province, I had others to cross through, the
passages whereof were very dangerous for a Woman; and my Sisters were at
Babylon, where all matters were then in a strange combustion, and where every
thing tended to War, Disorder, and Confusion; so that believing I could not
then find a more quiet abode then Susa, I resolved not to stir from thence,
till I had learned more particular news of my Sisters, and their Husbands: This
was it that staid me there, notwithstanding the impatience I had to see them
again; and afterward, when I heard that all my Friends were met together in
this party, and that with a puissant Army they were fighting near Babylon, for
the revenge of the Princesses, my desire to come hither to them was retarded by
a sickness, which kept me long in Bed, and which would not suffer me to take
the journey, till very few days ago. Before I departed from Susa, I had heard
the success of your former battle; the news of this last, met me upon the way,
and yester-night at Laris, where I lay, some persons belonging to the Army,
told me, How those great Princesses, whom all the World had thought dead, were
still alive, and in Babylon; how Prince Oroondates was amongst you, with the
Princess Berenice, his Sister, his Combats with Arsaces; and, which surprised
me most of all, how that valiant Warrier was known to be Prince Artaxerxes,
whose loss we had so much bewailed, and whom we had with so much appearance,
believed dead for many years. I tell you not the effect this news produced in
me, I was almost out of my wits for joy, and never was transported with so
violent a desire, as that of seeing those dear persons again, who had made me
shed so many tears. Ah! my dear Barsina (said Prince Oroondates) How welcome
would your sight, and your consolations have been to me, in the miseries I have
endured since our separation; and in how much a more deplorable condition,
should you have seen me, then that which heretofore made me the object of your
compassion. I should have suffered with you in it, ( replied Barsina) as I have
formerly done, and as I will do, while I live, in whatsoever shall concern you;
but I praise the gods, for seeing you now in a different estate, from that
which has made me sigh so often, for your discontents: You have now neither
Duty, nor Husband, nor rival to fight against, which both in the Queens
opinion, and in truth, is not infinitely below you; and though your Fortune be
not yet complete, I see so happy a progress toward it, That your impatiency
alone, will henceforth be the greatest of your sufferings. From this discourse
the whole company fell into a conversation, which lasted the better part of the
day; and Prince Oroondates, who by a just acknowledgement, took the greatest
interest in Barsina 's coming, knowing her curiosity promised her the
particular recital of all, that had befaln him, since their parting, and that
of the life of Prince Artaxerxes.

The arrival of Barsina, had so taken up the company, that it had not allowed
them time to talk of Cleonimus his deputation; and yet they, that were most
concerned in it, ceased not to wait for the event thereof with much impatiency;
but the knowledge they had of the humor and passion of Perdiccas, made them
fear the success of it: This disquiet was observed in the faces of Oroondates
and Lysimachus, and they began already to impart it to their Friends, when they
saw Cleonimus arrive: His return surprised them, being more sudden then they
expected, and Oroondates, who was most eager to learn the effect of his
negotiation, no sooner saw him come in, but rising from his seat, he ran to
meet him. Well, Cleonimus (cried he) will they restore us our Princesses? Sir,
(answered Cleonimus) they will not be so easily obtained, nor can I hope they
will return into your hands, without more effusion of blood. Then we will shed
more, (added the impatient Lysimachus) and indeed, we have not yet poured forth
enough for reparation of the offense, that have been committed against them. I
ever doubted (said the sad Prince of Scythia) that so great a happiness could
not be purchased at so cheap a rate; and that those wicked men were too guilty,
and too much hated of the gods, to put any other period to their crimes, but
that of their lives. It is their life then (went he on) it is their life,
rather then our Princesses, that we must have; and Lysimachus and I cannot
appease the incensed gods, but by such Victimes, as Perdiccas and Alcetas.
After these word, he turned toward Cleonimus, of whom Prince Artaxerxes
demanded the circumstances of his Commission, and he gave him an account of it
in these terms. Sir (said he) when I came near the Gates of the City, I sent a
Trumpet before, whom I had taken with me, to give them, that were upon the
Guard, notice, how I was sent to Perdiccas, by Seleucus and his Companions; and
after having stayed a while for their Answer, they came and took me, and
without further ceremony, carried me to Perdiccas, who then was in his Closet,
with his Brother, and some other of his Friends. The name of Seleucus obliged
him to look kindly on me, and coming forward with a civil action; What do my
dearest Friends desire of me? (said he) And what service can I do them, that
may in part requite the imprisonment, and the wounds they suffer for my
Interests? Sir (answered I) you shall see their desires in this Letter, and I
have charge from the Princes, to give you all manner of assurances, for the
execution of what your friends demand. Perdiccas, without replying, took the
Letter, and having opened it, his Brother and he read it both together; which
while they were doing, they both changed color, and made me conjecture by
their action, That they were little disposed to give ear to the Propositions of
their Friends; they kept silence a while, looking upon one another, and in the
end, Perdiccas breaking it first; Ah! Seleucus (cried he) I should never have
expected this usage from you; and if it be true, That you are the best of my
Friends, my life should have been dearer to you, then it is: You are certain,
that without loosing it, I cannot abandon Statira; and I had trusted you
sufficiently with my passion, to let you know the injustice of what you demand
of me. Alcetas spoke something almost to the same effect, and then they both
walked up and down a little, without saying a word; at last, Perdiccas began
again. Why should our Friends (said he) reduce us to the necessity of a
refusal, which they could not but foresee; and if they desired some very
difficult proof of our Friendship, why did they not ask our Blood, and not our
Princesses? Do they believe, their Friendship ought to carry it above our
Passion? And that we can forsake Statira and Parisatis, because we are Friends
to Seleucus and Leonatus? Ah! without doubt, if they had loved us, they would
have sought for any other accommodation with our Enemies, then this cruel
exchange, to which we cannot consent. After these words, the two Brothers
having talked softly a while together, commanded me to go out into the next
room, and to stay for the answer, they meant to return to Seleucus and his
Companions. I obeyed them, and after I walked an hour, with those that had
guarded me thither, I saw them come with the answer, I waited for; and
Perdiccas having given me the Letter himself, Go (said he) and tell Seleucus,
that I will restore him his liberty by other ways, then those he proposes to
me; and that it is rather by killing his Enemies, then by doing them service,
that I must deliver him out of their hands. That is not the easiest means to
procure their liberty (replied I) and if they have no other way to obtain it,
they are in danger to continue prisoners a great while. I had said more, by the
right of Nations, which permitted me to speak, if Perdiccas had not commanded I
should be carried back, without letting me stay any longer in the City. I came
out in the same order, as had been observed at my going in; and presently being
returned to your Tents, and not having found you there, I went to that of
Seleucus, where I had left you, I delivered him Perdiccas his Letter, and the
account of my fruitless negotiation: He flew out into anger at that recital,
and at the reading of the Letter; and after having inveighed against the
ingratitude of Perdiccas, in terms very full of resentment, He gave me back the
Letter, and commanded me to bring it to you. Cleonimus then presented it to the
Princes, and Arsaces taking it, read these words aloud to his Companions.

PERDICCAS To Seleucus, Leonatus, and Nearchus.
IT is not to prevent the Complaints you will make against me, that I complain
first of your want of Friendship; and you will know by your own Consciences,
rather then by my words, That you ought to have sought for your Liberty, by
ways that had been less fatal to me: If you were more ignorant of my Passion,
and knew not that it is for it alone, I have suffered so many thousand men to
perish; and that in fine, it is upon it, that all this War is grounded, you
would be more excusable for the Proposition, you make to me; But after my
having avowed it to Seleucus, and after the bloody proofs of it, your selves
have received, you cannot desire the effect of your demand, but that with
inhumanity you must desire the death of Perdiccas. I would it pleased the gods,
my cruel Friends, That you had asked the better part of my Blood, and that you
had asked me all my Fortune, leaving me nothing but that Princess, for whom I
quit you all the rest. Alcetas makes the same complaint of you; and in short,
if you are prisoners, you can no longer be ignorant, but that we are so, as
well as you, and prisoners to Enemies less compassionate, then yours. If the
counsel you give me, does less consider your own Interests, then what I ow to
Honor and Virtue, in my want of power to follow it, you will find my
justification toward you, and will not think it strange, that I commit some
fault against you, by that violence, which makes me fail against Honor and
Virtue. It is not, (my credulous Friends) but that with my death, I also meet
my shame in the Propositions, you make to me; and consider, that I cannot now
without baseness do that, which I should have done (if I had been able) before
the death of Two hundred thousand men, who have been slain for my quarrel, and
who would yet have been living; if to spare their Blood, and to preserve their
lives, I had done, what you would have me do, to free you out of an
imprisonment, which by your own confession, you find very easy and
supportable. The good usage you receive, ought not to have banished a more
ancient Friendship out of your remembrance; and you might have acknowledged the
civilities of our Enemies, without seeking their repose, and their advantage by
the ruin, and by the destruction of your Friends. After having done so much
for us, you should not have changed your inclinations in favor of them, and you
should have demanded your Liberty of me, by the same ways, that took it from
you; also will I regain it you with the price of my Blood, and with a powerful
relief, which we expect; you shall quickly see me in the Field, carrying death
for your ransom to your Enemies. This is all, that in the want of power, my
passion has reduced me to, both you and they can now hope for from Perdiccas.


I would it pleased the gods! ( cried Prince Oroondates at the end of this
Letter) I would it pleased the gods, Perdiccas! That the fear of thy
threatenings were my most sensible affliction, and that these Enemies, to whom
thou boasts of bringing death into their Camp, had nothing else to apprehend,
but the effects of thy courage. Ah! how little should I fear that valor, which
I have tried already, if thou had not more potent forces to combat against
me; and if thou knew not, cruel Enemy, and ungrateful Friend, That without
drawing Sword, thou have the better part of my life within thy power. To these
words, Lysimachus added others full of threats, but being neither of them had
conceived any other, then very faint hopes of that proposal, they were the
sooner comforted, and found ease in their discontents, by the hope they had to
bring their Enemies quickly to more reasonable terms. The night already drawing
on, they went all together from Artabasus his quarter; but Oroondates, who
could not leave Barsina, and who found a marvelous consolation in her company,
made the Princess Berenice entreat her so earnestly to lodge with her, that she
knew not how to refuse it; and leaving her two Sisters, with her wounded
Brothers, whom she had been to see, and whose hurts were then reasonably well
recovered; she took Prince Oroondates his hand, and went along with that good
company. Before they parted, they all together went to the Tent of Seleucus and
his Companions, and the Princes were desirous to honor them with the visit of
those great Princesses, who at their requests consented to it very willingly.
Seleucus, who at that time was mortally afflicted, dissembled part of his
sadness, and of his resentment, to render to those Princesses, what was due
unto their persons, and to their civility; but after he had thanked them for
it, with terms full of acknowledgement and respect, he turned toward the
Princes, and being no longer able to contain his thoughts; If I had to do (
said he) with men less great, and less generous then your selves, I should
wonder at the continuation of your favors, after the ill success of the
Proposition, I made to Perdiccas: My Companions and I, should have a great deal
more reason, to fear the effect of your just resentments against our unkind
Friend, then to expect this civility from you, and these great Princesses. He
would have gone on, when Prince Oroondates interrupting him first, as most
concerned; It is enough ( said he) and you should have wronged us all, if you
had believed, that Perdiccas his ingratitude could have made us loose the
esteem we have of you: If we hoped for any fruit of the design you had to our
advantage, it was, because we believed that Perdiccas ought not to have refused
any thing to such a Friend, as Seleucus; but though by a base consideration of
his own Interests, he makes himself unworthy of your friendship, we will not
fall from our first inclinations, by the knowledge of his. I tell you not that
you are free, since we never reckoned him, as a prisoner, to whom we ow the
life of Prince Artaxerxes: But I assure my self, I shall be avowed by my
Companions, if I say, that maugre Perdiccas his refusal, you with your own
Liberty, may dispose as you, please, of those of Nearchus and Leonatus: We will
recover our Princesses by other means, if the gods will favor the justice of
our Swords; and perhaps this last satisfaction will be more entire to us, then
that we hoped for by your inter-mission. This magnanimity you practice toward
us ( replied Seleucus) shall not perchance be less disadvantageous to
Perdiccas, then the ingratitude he has showed; and my Companions, and I, will
not abuse it so far, as to make the liberty, you offer us, more prejudicial to
you, then our imprisonment: I will take those resolutions I ought to take, when
once I shall be in a condition to execute them: And though the ungratefulness
of my Friend, cannot so suddenly make me pass from an extreme Friendship, to an
extremity of hatred, and to designs against him, I protest to you, at least,
That I never more will fight for him against you.

The Princes testified their esteem of Seleucus, by the joy, they made appear,
at this Declaration, and Artaxerxes taking him by the hand, and pre^sing it
with much affection; The ingratitude of Perdiccas (said he) will not be
disadvantageous to us, if it give us such a friend, as Seleucus, nor can our
Enemies party be more weakened, then by the loss of a man, whose valor alone
disputed the Victory against us. After this discourse, all the company went
into the Chamber of Nearchus and Leonatus, to whom they had sent Perdiccas his
Letter, and to whom the Princes by very obliging words, expressed, That the
carriage of their unkind Friend, should be no prejudice at all to them, nor
should be able to dissuade them from the intent they had to offer them their
liberty. They returned their thanks in very different terms; Nearchus, who was
grave and discreet, dissembled part of his resentment; but Leonatus, who was of
a hasty impatient nature, could not keep himself from breaking out, and
declaring all that lay in his heart. For my part (said he) I not only will
never be a Friend to Perdiccas, but will be his Enemy, as long as I live; and
if you will receive me amongst you, I will not only serve you in my own
person, but also will make, whatsoever is left of my forces, come out of
Babylon, and solicit all my Friends, to quit that ungrateful party. We receive
you gladly (replied Ptolomeus, for himself, and the other Princes) and this is
too obliging an offer, to be accepted without expressions of a great deal of
joy.

After these, and some other discourses, which kept them a while longer in that
Chamber, they went out, and retired all together to Oroondates his Tent, there
they supt, and spent part of the night in a most pleasing conversation; and
there Barsina learned of Oroondates, all that had befaln him, and all he had
suffered since their separation, with some part of Artaxerxes his adventures.
When the time of night obliged them to withdraw, Berenice took Barsina with her
to her Chamber: And considering her, as a near Kinswoman of Prince Artaxerxes,
and as the best Friend of the Prince her Brother, she contracted a very strong,
and a very particular Friendship with her. This union was not hard to be made
between two such virtuous Ladies; and if Berenice had charms, against which,
they of her own sex could not defend themselves; Barsina's were little
different; for scarce was there in the World a more lovely person.

The next day was bestowed in visiting those that were wounded, the greatest
part whereof drew near their cure: Thalestris had already left her Bed, and
Demetrius and his Father were almost well enough to leave their Chambers. They
thought to have sent the Prisoners, whose number was about Seven or eight
thousand, to some neighboring Towns, where they should have been distributed to
be kept, till the end of the War; but when they heard the little care Perdiccas
had to free them, and the resolution of Leonatus to take part with the Enemy,
they offered to do the same; and after they had given the Princes to understand
the purpose they had to serve on their side, and that they had been promised
all manner of good usage, and protection, they put themselves under Leonatus,
and increased the Army with a very considerable recruit. It for some days lay
idle, staying till the Boats were ready, that were in hand, and also for the
finishing of those Engines, which were making, and which were necessary to
storm the Walls; they were so thick, that the force of Rams was utterly vain
against them, and so high, that without making great elevations on the
outside, they seemed impossible to be scaled. All the most industrious Masters
of Asia were employed in framing Engines, and most part of the Soldiers were
set to work about them. That business required time, nor could it be hoped,
they would be fit for service of many days; but the Boats were ready a great
deal sooner, and almost at the same time, when Thalestris, Demetrius,
Antigonus, Polyperchon, and all the most considerable of those, that had been
hurt, were in a condition to bear arms again. Thalestris was cured of her
outward wounds, but her inward one was still as bad as ever; and then the
absence of Orontes, whom she could not hate, or rather whom she could not cease
to love, drew the same sighs from her breast, which a few days before, had been
caused by animosity and resentment: The remembrance of that repentance he had
showed at their last parting, had dissipated the greater part of her anger; and
since then, the persuasions of Oroondates, who had employed himself very
carefully in that business, and her own inclination, which had persuaded her
yet more powerfully, had so mollified her, That if Orontes had come back to her
again, she would easily have been brought to pardon him. The young Demetrius,
cured also of the wounds of his body, was in no better estate, then she, for
that of his mind; and all that he had suffered for Hermione, was light, in
comparison of what he felt for Deidamia. That fair Princess, since the
Declaration he had made to her, had been more reserved toward him then before;
and though she had visited him afterward, while he kept his Bed, she had ever
avoided the occasions of being alone with him; and by all her actions, and
discourses, had taken away part of his confidence; yet did she give him signs,
but of a moderate resentment, without any show of anger or aversion, and
without being carried by the knowledge of his love to any uncivil or disobeying
usage: She saw nothing in his person, that was not great and lovely, and she
would have had no repugnance to receive a second affection for him, if the
memory of Agis had left her the liberty to do so; that also was the thing she
endeavored to make him understand, and it was by the mildest ways she could
use, that she strove to divert him from an affection, which she could not, and
believed she ought not to approve. Demetrius, in whom all passions imprinted
themselves with violence, took all her actions to his disadvantage; and though
he knew her love was to be bought with greater and longer services, then those
he yet had done her, he could not without trouble, consider the little progress
he had made toward the gaining of her heart. This remembrance caused disquiets
in him, which would not afford him any rest, altered his looks, and deprived
Antigonus and his Friends, of all the consolation, which his forgetting of
Hermione had given them. After that he had been able to leave his Chamber, he
had shunned all other company, but Deidamia's; and not being content to avoid
the society of his Friends, during the day time, he bestowed part of the night
upon his solitary walks. Many times* while all the Camp was fast asleep, flying
a repose that fled from him; and not being willing, vainly to seek those
slumbers in his Bed, which nothing but weariness drew sometimes into his
watchful eyes, he with a slow pace followed the bank of the River, and let his
roving thoughts abroad, in a silence which gave them a fuller liberty: The
passage to go out, and return into the Camp, was free to him at all hours,
among those that were upon the Guard, and he made no difficulty to walk without
the Line, and stray a great many furlongs off. The nights were fair and clear,
and the Moon, which was then in its perfectest form, imprinted its shining
figure upon the stream of Euphrates, and discovered objects distinctly enough
through all the Plain. The young Prince, fixing his eyes sometimes upon that
fair constellation, which gave light unto his steps, sometimes upon the calm
Waters of the River, which rested then in their usual Bed, without the
disturbance of the least murmur, and sometimes upon a Wood, whose gloomy
obscurity could not at such an hour present it self to the sight, without a
kind of horror, found in all manner of objects, fresh matter for his passionate
thoughts.

All Creatures ( said he) both upon the Earth, and in the Waters, do now enjoy
a peaceable repose, while Demetrius alone watches with the Stars, his eyes are
open to sources of tears, which never must be dried up, they are not to be
closed by sleep; and he wages a more cruel War with his own disquiets, then
with the Enemies of his Party. It is in brief, The woeful destiny of the
unfortunate Demetrius, that all things should contribute to his ruin, and
that, as if the living were not sufficient for his destruction, even the dead
themselves should take up arms against him. It is enough ( pursued he) that
love should have tormented me, for what no longer has a being, and that
remorse should torture me, for having been the death of what I loved; but my
hard fortune must stir up Hell it self against me; and to revenge the dead,
raises the dead against my happiness: If I had living Enemies to combat with, I
should make use of the little valor, the gods have given me; but against Agis,
who no longer is, but in the memory of Deidamia, What Arms, and what Forces can
I possibly employ? Ah! Fortunate Agis (went he on) How blessed is thy
condition, and how glorious should I reckon mine, if in the other world, like
thee, I were daily wept for by the fair eyes of Deidamia? Ah! How infinitely is
such a death, as thine; to be preferred before such a life, as this of
Demetrius? and how much more advantageous is it to be dead in all the rest, and
for all the rest of the World, and to live in Deidamia's remembrance, then to
be living among men, and not to be able to live within her thoughts? Demetrius
entertained himself on this manner, and in these like employments passed away
part of the nights, declaring to insensible witnesses, what his respect would
not suffer him to declare with confidence to Deidamia.

Whilst he led this kind of life, he saw an occasion arrive of making himself
remarkable; the Army was preparing for an action, which every body judged could
not be performed without blood; and for that purpose, the Princes disposed
their Forces with all the orders, that were necessary: It was the making of
those Bridges, they intended to cast over the Euphrates, on both sides the
Town; and though peradventure, they might have avoided fighting, by making them
further from the City; The Princes, who shunned not the occasions of coming to
blows with the Enemy, and who in this distance found more convenience, then in
a greater, chose rather to hazard a few men with them, then to let their
Enemies believe, that fear had diverted them from any of their resolutions. The
Boats were ready upon the Banks of the River, and besides them, that were
necessary for the building of the two Bridges, there were a great number of
others that were to be filled with Soldiers, to sustain the Workmen, and to
oppose the sally, which the Enemies might make upon the River. That day the
Army was commanded by Artaxerxes, and he for his post, took the Bridge, that
was to be made on the West Side, leaving that on the East, to Prince
Oroondates. The Forces destined to sustain the Workmen, were drawn out
equally, and with the very same orders on both sides of the Town; and because
the Princes would not do that day, as they had done, in storming the Outworks,
the glory whereof they had left wholly to Ptolomeus and Lysimachus; Oxyartes,
Antigonus, Demetrius, Alexander, and many others, went a long with Prince
Artaxerxes; and Lysimachus, Ptolomeus, Eumenes, and the valiant Amazone Queen
followed Prince Oroondates; Craterus and Artabasus stayed to defend the Camp,
with the Body of the Army; and Polyperchon advanced as near to the Mote, as he
could lie, from the Enemies Arrows. The Battalions stood firm upon the Bank of
the River, while the first Boats were placed, and the Work was begun on both
sides, continuing a good part of the day without any hindrance; but when they
began to extend themselves a great way upon the River, the other Bank became
over-spred with many of the Enemies Squadrons; and from within the Town, they
saw come forth on either side a hundred Boats well manned, who through the
stream advanced in good order, toward those that were at work. That being no
more then the Princes had foreseen, they were not at all affrighted at it, but
presently according to the order that had been taken, they went into the Boats,
that stood ready by the shore, little different in number from those of the
Enemy. Oroondates took one for himself with thirty Soldiers, Lysimachus,
Thalestris, Ptolomeus, and Eumenes did the same; and so every Boat had its
Commander, and its Soldiers, according as had been assigned them by the
Princes. The same order was observed on the other side, where Prince Artaxerxes
was, and both prepared with a great deal of cheerfulness for that extraordinary
kind of combat: Alcetas commanded the sally against Prince Artaxerxes, and
Cassander that against Oroondates.

These two little Fleets were seen to draw near to one another, by force of
Oars; and those of Alcetas and Cassander were already within Bow-shoot of the
Workmen, and by a thick shoure of Arrows, began to put an obstacle in their
design; when they were compelled to turn head toward those of their Enemies,
which cutting the waves with an incredible swiftness, got the passage of them,
and coming between, sheltred their men that were at work. That sight, though
like to be bloody, was for all that very gallant to look upon; and they, who
from the Bank beheld what was done upon the River, if they could have
considered it without interest, might have found a very pleasing divertisement.
The Princes that day were but lightly armed, that they might be able to swim,
in case they should be put to that extremity; and most of them had nothing on
their Heads, but little Murrions. Those of the Enemies, who then could look
upon Prince Oroondates at the Prow of his little Vessel, one foot set forward
upon the edge of it, his left Arm covered with his Shield, and his right armed
with that glittering Sword, which had already shed so much of their Blood, felt
a chilness, which running over all their Bodies, took away part of their former
boldness: The Boats of Lysimachus and Thalestris, through a generous emulation,
were advanced by the side of his; and those of Ptolomeus and Eumenes, came at
the head of all the rest. Before they were able to join, many Soldiers of
either Party fell, by each others shafts within their Boats, or into the River;
but Prince Oroondates opposing his broad Shield against those Arrows, that were
aimed at him, and commanding them, that steered his Boat, to close and grapple
with those of the Enemies, to engage them to another kind of fight, advanced
through the thickest of their Darts, with as much confidence, as if his body
had been of some impenetrable matter. At last his desires were accomplished,
and his Enemies not avoiding the combat, he quickly saw himself in their Front,
and had means to let loose part of his valor, and part of his fury against
them: His generous Companions seconded him with a resoluteness, little inferior
to his; and their Enemies received them, like men of courage, and like men,
that were determined to fight stoutly. Those, who with Cassander commanded the
foremost Boats, were ^olas his Brother, Ariston head of the Peonians, who the
day before was come into Town with a supply of Six thousand men, a Captain, who
was very considerable under Alexander, for having slain Stratopaces, and done
many gallant actions; Evander his Brother, a valiant man, and of a greater
strength of body, then any one, that fought at that time in Perdiccas his
Party: And Andiagoras, Prince of the Parthians, who for all he was a Persian,
considered not the memory of Darius, in the person of the Prince his Son, nor
in the Interest of the Princesses his Daughters.

These Warlike-men withstood the fury of our Princes, and stopped their
impetuousness for a long time by their courageous resistance: The Soldiers by
the example of their Commanders, stuck undantedly to the fight, and the Water
of Euphrates began quickly to change color, by the Blood of each party, that
was mingled with it. The service was as hot on the other side with Prince
Artaxerxes, and his Companions, and he with Alcetas, had encountered
Neoptolemus, Antigenes and Teutamus, and many other famous Warriers, who
received them, and assailed them with a great deal of fierceness. Arsaces
appeared Arsaces, in the first blows he gave, Antigonus and Oxyartes, did
things worthy of their high reputatation; and young Demetrius made himself
renowned by a thousand mavelous actions. Arsaces closed presently with
Alcetas, but their forces were unequal; and if he had not been speedily
succored by his men, that Prince's hand had put an end to his passion for his
Sister. Arsaces seeing him saved from his resentment, turned his anger upon
diverse others, and many lives were then cut off by the edge of his Sword.
Demetrius was fighting with Neoptolemus, and Antigonus and Oxyartes, with the
two Commanders of the Argyraspides; all the other Boats were mingled by the
example of their Leaders, and the combat was obstinately disputed in every
place. In the interim, on Oroondates his side, there passed actions, that were
very memorable, and that Prince having given death to all, that presented
themselves upon the edge of their Boats, was hooked to that of Cassander, and
having known him by the means of many of his men, who showed him to him, and by
the Enemies cries, which often named him, was kindled with an extraordinary
fury at the sight of that man, who had sworn his death, and whom, besides the
suspicion of his crime, made him to hate in a particular manner; he praised the
gods for that encounter, and seeing Cassander upon the edge of his Boat, in the
posture of a resolute man, Cassander (cried he) behold the Scythian, whom thou
would kill; and behold this innocent rival, who deprives thee of Roxana 's
affections, whether he will or no: Effect thy threats against my life, and try,
if thou have chosen a trivial enterprise in attempting the death of Oroondates.
Cassander, whom that Prince's actions had terrified already, grew pale at these
words; and if he could have found any handsome way to avoid the combat, would
willingly have been excused; but having so many witnesses of his actions, he
dissembled his fear, and holding forth his shield against the first blows of
his Enemy, he armed himself with his despair, and with the assistance of those
about him; they were both of them very necessary for his safety, and the
furious Prince of Scythia laid at him so forcibly with his Sword, that he
staggered, retiring amongst his men, being ready to fall; and he no sooner had
quitted the edge of his Boat, but Oroondates leaped into it, and many of his
men by that open way got in after him; his aim being chiefly at Cassander, he
closed with him in the midst of all the rest, and seizing upon him with a
puissant arm, lifted him up with that force, which was not to be parallelled.
Go thy ways (said he) cool those flames, that make thee so audacious; and with
these words he plunged him into the River; neither the resistance of all his
men, nor that he made by struggling in his arms, being able to hinder him.
Cassander sunk under the Water, but he presently came up again, and sought his
safety by swimming among those of his party: Oroondates could have opposed it,
if he had pleased, but he despised him; and turning his arms toward them, that
made head against him in the Boat, gave him the leisure to save himself in one
of those, that advanced to his relief. Lysimachus and Ptolomeus, who were
engaged with Ariston and Iolas, had forced their first resistance with an
admirable valor; but when with a great deal of probability they were in hope of
the victory, they had been assaulted by two other Boats, which had not only
retarded their design, but had also put them into a manifest danger. Eumenes
was fighting with Andiagoras, and by a happy beginning, made him already fear
the issue of the combat; and strong Evander had assailed the valiant Amazon:
That man, the fiercest of all his Party, disputed the advantage long against
the furious Thalestris, and leaning upon the side of his Boat, hindered her
entrance with blows, given by a very puissant hand; but the high spirited
Queen, whose choler was raised, to the extremity, by that resistance, grew so
terribly animated, That after, having made Evanders arms red, with the blood
she drew from him, by two several wounds, she set her left foot upon the edge
of his Boat; and her Enemy having striven in vain to stop her with his Sword,
opposed her passage by the strength of his arm. Thalestris coming to close with
him, they fell to a very dangerous wrestling; Evanders forces were not inferior
to the Queens, but his wounds had weakened him; and when he believed he could no
longer dispute the Victory, he drew as near to the edge, as possibly he could,
and holding her fast embraced, let himself fall with her into the River; though
they were so firmly locked in falling, the Water made them soon let go their
hold; and though they sunk together, they came up again asunder, and at some
distance from one another: Evander raised up his head, as he swom, and had no
sooner espied his Enemy, but he advanced toward her, to finish the combat; but
in that, the advantage was not equal, and Evander had it as much in the Water,
as Thalestris could have had by Land: He was a very expert swimmer, and the
Queen being ignorant of that skill, struggled with the waves, in which, she was
like quickly to be overwhelmed, though she had had no other Enemy to fight
with; she already had swallowed a great deal of Water, when cruel Evander being
got to her by strength of arms, plunged her overhead and ears, and hasting to
her again, as soon as he saw her come up, thrust her head under Water a second
time, and without doubt, had an intention to have drowned her: That poor
Princess, instead of being able to resist him, having lost all knowledge, and
despairing of any succor from those of her Boat, who in the mean time had been
assaulted by two others; from which, notwithstanding Hippolita's lamentable
cries, it could not possibly disengage it self. She was at the extremity of her
life, and pitiless Evander, who saw the Water stained with his blood, was going
to make an end of sacrificing her to his revenge; when from one of the Boats, a
man threw himself into the Water, holding a Dagger in his right hand; Stay
cruel man (cried he to Evander) stay: And in pronouncing these words, he swom
toward him so swiftly, that he over took him, before he was able to accomplish
his design; and scarce had he had the leisure to turn about, when that stranger
being got up to him, seized upon the cr^st of his Cask with his left hand, and
pulling him toward him, with an exceeding great strength, struck the Dagger
with his right, up to the very hilt in his throat. Evander with that blow lost
his Forces, and sinking into the Water, which overwhelmed him, vomited out his
blood and his life together; his Conqueror thinking no more of him, turned his
eyes upon poor Thalestris, who would not have been in a condition to receive
his help, if it had been deferred but a few minutes longer; she was striving,
yet faintly, with that little strength she had left; when the stranger, raising
her up with a vigorous arm, laid her upon his shoulders, and with that burden
swom, though with much ado, toward his Boat; he had perished himself,
undoubtedly if it had been much further off; But the Boat rowing that way, at
his cries, they that were in it, received the Princess from his arms; and
as soon as they had drawn her into the Boat, he got up after her: Presently he
commanded them to make off from the fight, and to gain the Bank by tugging hard
at the Oar, to set the Queen on Land; and the consideration every one had of
that Princess, having made him find a great deal of obedience among them, they
put away to the shore, with all the have that was possible. In the mean while,
the Stranger having taken the Queen into his arms again, and lifting her up
with her head downward, made her void most part of the water, she had drunk,
and gave her so much ease, That having opened her eyes, within a little after,
she recovered her senses and understanding perfectly, when she was upon the
Bank.

The danger she had ran, coming immediately into her mind, she turned toward
those, that were about her, and asked them, by whom, and in what manner she had
been saved; they told her the truth, in a few words, and let her know the
Obligation she had unto that Stranger: And where is he ( said she, turning her
eyes on every side) where is he, that has defended my life, with so much valor
and goodness? Madam, ( answered they) As soon as ever he saw you open your
eyes, and begin to come to your self, he went away; and praying us to have a
care of you, since you no longer needed his succor, he vanished from our eyes,
like lightning. Ah! ( cried the Queen, at that reply) Without doubt, he is the
very same, that saved my life at the last Battle; it is either my good angel,
or some man sent from the gods, for my preservation: But the gods forbid, he
should so often escape the acknowledgement, I ow him, and that I should be
longer ignorant, to whom I am so often indebted for my life: I will follow
thee, My miraculous and flying Defender; and whether thou be, god or man, I
will do all that possibly I can, to render thee, either the Sacrifices, or the
Thanks, that are due to thy relief. With these words, rising from the plac^
where she sat, after having learned that he could not be very far off, and
having enquired which way he went, she got upon the first Horse she met with,
and galloped away, to seek him by that direction.

In this interim, the Victory declared it self on both sides, in favor of our
Princes; Artaxerxes on his, entered Alcetas his Boat, had thrown most part of
the Soldiers overboard, and their Commander himself had not escaped death, or
imprisonment; if, while his men held that furious Conqueror in play, he had not
got into Neoptolemus his Boat, which passed near his with a very few Soldiers
in it, and which, with much ado, had saved it self by flight, from the valor of
Demetrius. Antigenes and Teuramus, at the same time, fled before Oxyartes; and
Antigonus, and the other Boats, by their example, ^ought not any longer; for
they that were left in them, seeking nothing but their safety, rowed, as hard
as ever they were able, toward the City. Oroondates and his Companions, had
reduced their Enemies to the like condition; Cassander having felt his fury,
durst not stand him any more; and after, having from the Boat, in which he had
saved himself, continued for a while some kind of opposition, without coming
near that dreadful Enemy, he had at last turned his Prow toward the Town,
leaving his Party to the mercy of the Conquerors. Oroondates, who saw him fly
at too great a distance, to hope to overtake him, made him hear his voice, to
redouble his terror: Stay (cried he) stay Cassander, return not to Roxana,
without having executed, at least, some part of thy threats: Do thou leave
Oroondates alive, thou that should have slain him in the midst of a thousand
Swords? do thou now shamefully fly before him? Cassander, whom this voice
froze with a thousand deadly fears, heard some of these words plainly enough,
but he had not the confidence to reply, and contenting himself with saying, to
those that were with him, That Fortune was contrary to him at that present, and
that another time she perhaps would be more favorable; he made them row so
hard, That he saw himself quickly in a place of safety: Lysimachus and
Ptolomeus, were then giving chase to Andiagoras and Ariston, and Iolas had
followed his Brother, from the beginning of his flight. There was a great deal
of blood shed in that defeat; and if the conquering Princes had not been
merciful in their victory, it would have been far more bloody, then it was: Yet
was it not so light, but that in both places there were slain above Fifteen
hundred of the Enemies; whose bodies were seen floating upon the River, and
whose blood had altered the color of the water, for many Furlongs.

The Conquerors attempted not to enter the Town, after the Fugitives, knowing
well, That they could not possibly land, that the Cau^ies, which bordered the
River, and which were bordered with Soldiers, were of a height, little
different from that of the Walls; and that besides, their number was too small
to go and engage themselves, among so many thousand men, wherewith the City was
defended. They returned out of Bow-shot, toward their Workmen, who had already
done a great deal of work; and according to the notice, the Princes gave each
other of their success, it was found, That they had conquered both, almost at
the same time, and with an event but little different; yet did the victory cost
them Five or six hundred of their men; But of all the considerable Commanders,
there was none wounded, except Antigonus in the left arm, and Eumenes in the
shoulder.

The Bridges were in a very good forwardness, but the rest of the day was not
enough to finish them, and they were confident, That the Enemies Forces, who
had not stirred from the other Bank, would not suffer them to be made an end
of, without fighting; yet did not the Princes judge it necessary, to stay
longer upon the River; and so leaving certain Boats for a Guard, between the
Town and the Workmen, to keep them from being assaulted in the night, which
they were to spend wholly in continuing their work, They went a shore to rest
themselves, after the labor they had undergone that painful day. Berenice
received her Brother, and her lover, with the transports of her ordinary
affection: Deidamia, Barsina, and her Sisters, appeared no less joyful, then
she, for that good success; and all the Camp welcomed the Victorious Princes,
with acclamations and rejoycings: They gave order to have the bodies sought of
the principal men, that had been slain in that service, to give them another
burial, then that of Fishes bellies; they caused those that were wounded to be
dressed, and by some sacrifices, returned thanks unto the gods for so favorable
an event. Then they commanded out Forces to make the descent, when the Bridges
should be finished, under the conduct of Demetrius, Alexander, and Menelaus,
young Princes, who desired that occasion, to make themselves famous, and it was
granted them; not having thought it necessary, That all the Princes should
return thither, as they had done then, unless the issue should oblige them to
it: Only Thalestris was wanting in that brave assembly; Hippolita, Menalippa,
and the rest of her women enquired for her, with great earnestness, and great
apprehensions; and Oroondates and Berenice, were no less troubled then they, to
know what was become of her; at last there were Soldiers found, who told them
of her adventure, and having related all that passed, and with what have she
was run after the track of that Stranger, to whom she was indebted for her
life, delivered them from their fears, and caused many to take Horse to follow
her.

In the mean while, that fair Princess rode with great disquiets in quest of
her valiant defender, and asking news of him, from all she met, by the tok^ns
that had been given her, she learnt, as she went out of the Camp, That he had
been seen to get upon a Horse, which a man held ready for him without the Line,
and that he went cross the Fields toward a Wood, that appeared about Thirty or
forty Furlongs off on the left hand: The Queen observed some track of Horses on
that side, that was shown her, and resolved to follow it, with some hope of
success, in the search she went about. Must my ill fortune (said she) make me
ow my life to a man so often, without being able to testify some
acknowledgement for my safety? But (said she again) perchance it is not a man,
whom I am obliged to for it: This succor, I have twice received in so great a
necessity, has something in it that is miraculous, and I ought rather to
believe, that it is a god, that it is the protecting angel of the Amazones,
come down from Heaven to save my life in those extremities: The suddenness, of
what he did in my favor, and the suddenness, wherewith he twice has vanished
from our eyes, marks out something of divinity; And if it had been a man, he
neither would have shunned my thanks, nor the praises due to him for such
gallant actions. Although she spoke these words, she was not without some
suspicion it might be Orontes, and that was it, rather then any other motive,
that made her so eager to find him out. But (continued she with a sigh) what
if it should be, my cruel, my ungrateful, my injurious Orontes? And, what if
that repenting Prince, for the expiation of his crime^, should have sought
occasion to satisfy me by services, which he has so usually rendered me? What
kind of fortune would mine be? and, what resolution should I take? Should I
pardon him, that cruel man, who has used me so unworthily, and so
outragiously? Who, after having had the possession of my heart, forsook me, is
a person not worthy of his affection? and who by his Letters, and his Words,
has endeavored to fix an everlasting infamy upon my reputation? But (went she
on presently after) should I not pardon my lovely Orithia, who gave me so
brave, and so dear assurances of her first affection? who was faulty only by
error? who offended me only by an excess of love? and who gave so great and so
important reparations for her offense? She had some other discourses with her
self, full of irresolution, when she entered into the Wood, that had been showed
her, and there upon the green swarth she lost that track, she had followed, and
wandered about a great while among the Trees: That Wood had something more wild
and savage in it then others, and was more suitable then ordinary, to a
melancholy, solitary humor: The Trees were of an excessive height, and with
age were almost covered with Moss and Ivy; their tufted Branches cast a shade,
which even at high noon, defended a great part of the ground, from the Suns
most piercing Beams: Among the Trees, one might see many pieces of Rock
overgrown also with Moss, and for the most part dropping with a clear Water,
which moystened the Grass round about them, and which, with the help of certain
little Springs, turned insensibly into a little Rivulet: The place was rugged
and unfit for walking, as well by reason of the Rocks, as of thick Briars and
Bushes, that stopped the passage, and showed, it was but very little frequented.
The Princess roved about a while, where it was passable, with least
inconveniency; and though she was almost out of hope, she found some pleasure
nevertheless in visiting a place so unfrequented, and so conformable to that
pensive humor, she had long been in. The Wood was of a large extent, and she
spent some time in searching through a good part of it; at last, she came to a
little Brook, where her weariness and some incommodity she felt, by the wetness
of her Clothes, and the Water she had swallowed that day, constrained her to
alight, and to take a little rest upon the Grass: Her deep musings kept her
there so taken up, that she spent almost an hour, ere she was aware; at last,
remembering the design, that had brought her into that Wood, and looking on
which side she should continue her search, she perceived a thing, she had not
taken notice of before; she from the edge of the Brook, a good way into the
Wood, on that side where she had not been, observed that the Grass was trampled
down by the treading of Men and Horses, which seemed to have worn a kind of
path, and thereby she suspected, that place to be inhabited by some body, who
for the use of that Rivulet, had beaten that little way, by having often gone
it. She began to settle in that belief, when she heard a noise, and looking
round about, saw a Horse come trotting down that path; he had a Saddle on his
back, but was without either Bridle or Halter, and tossing up his head, and
neighing at sight of the Amazones Horse; he came unto the Brook, where he drunk
quietly of the Water, that rouled along certain little Flints, and when his
thirst was quenched, he took the same path again, as a way that was usual to
him. At this sight, the fair Amazone no longer doubted, but that she in that
place might find, what she was seeking for; but she felt beatings at her
heart, and inward disturbances, that presaged some extraordinary encounter. She
was already upon her legs, and when she saw the Horse go away, Ah! Glorious
beast (cried she) if it be true, That thou servest my valiant deliverer, stay
for me, and be my guide to bring me to thy Master. Saying these words, she took
her own, and getting hastily upon him, passed over the Rivulet, and rode along
the path, after the Horse she saw before her: She had the better convenience to
do so, because that Horse hearing hers to follow him, according to the nature
of those Creatures, staid his coming up, and came so near the Queen, as gave
her means to observe his color, stature, and the Saddle that was upon him; it
was black, as he himself was; his size was large and tall, but he was lean, and
very ill dressed, and by the condition he was in, showed plainly enough, That
he served a Master taken up with other cares, then that he ought to have had of
him. The Queen having looked on him a while, after two or three sighs forced
from her Breast, by certain thoughts, wherewith she was then assaulted; Could it
be possible (said she) that thou should belong to my ungrateful, and my
lovely Orontes? She durst say no more at that time, being uncertain what to
wish; but putting him on before her, she went after him in the way he led her,
full of doubt, hope, fear, and confusion. He never strayed out of his little
path, and the Queen having followed it two or three hundred paces, saw it end
at the foot of a Rock, hidden in the most gloomy and desert part of the Wood,
and encompassed with many Brambles, and craggy Stones, which made the access to
it very rough and difficult. The Princess having gone a little about it,
perceived through certain Branches, a hole at the foot of the Rock; and seeing
that it was just there, the path was lost, she doubted not but it was the
retreat of him she sought, or at least, that of the master of the Horse, which
had guided her, and which having no further to go, fed there at liberty without
wandering. As Soon as the Queen judged, that so hideous a place, and a Cave,
which ought only to have been the Den of Beasts, was at that time the dwelling
of a man, she believed, that either he must necessarily be in some strange
misfortune, or dejected with some excessive grief; but when from that thought,
she passed to a belief, that that solitary man was her Orontes, she fell into a
sense of pity that mollified her, and made her receive those first marks of his
repentance, for a full reparation. Ah! (said she) if it were true, that the
remorse of his fault, had reduced Orontes to this lamentable manner of life, I
should be harder then this Rock, under which, he has chosen his abode, if by
these effects of his repentance, I should not be perfectly satisfied. She
wavered then a few moments in the resolution she should take; her resentment,
against Orontes, made her fear to meet him in the person of him she sought for,
and the remainders of her love, made her to desire it; In the end, whether it
were a motion of gratitude toward the person, to whom she was indebted for her
life, or a motion of love and pity toward Orontes, she resolved to clear her
doubts of that adventure, and to seek even into his Grot for him; who, either
for some great misfortune, or peradventure for the love of her, had chosen such
a dismal retirement. She was afraid, that he, who twice already had fled so
suddenly from her presence, should get away the third time, unless she could
surprise him: And in this conceit, desiring to make as little noise, as could
be possible, she went to alight a good way off, and having tied her Horse to
certain Boughs, she walked on foot toward the entrance of that Cave: There she
beheld the Grass so trodden, that she no longer doubted, but it was inhabited;
and after having yet disputed with herself a while, she entered, full of fear,
into that sad abode; she was fain to stoop at the going in, but after she had
gone not many steps, she found that the Vault enlarged it self, and growing
wider, by little and little, made at last a reasonable spacious hollowness.
Through the top of the Rock, there was a Cliff, that gave light enough into the
Cave, to discern all objects, and by it the Amazone taking heart, and casting
her eyes on every side, saw that there was no body in it; but she perceived
things, that made her know it was inhabited: the first that presented it self
unto her sight, was, a suit of Arms hung upon a snag of the Rock, and having
her hands upon them, as soon as her eyes, she took them down from the place
where they were, to look upon them by a greater light; they were all black,
except in certain places, where they were spotted with blood, and the Plume of
the Cask seemed to have been lately wet. When the Queen saw that, she doubted
no more, whether they were the Arms of her Defender; but after she had eyed
them, for some time, with very confused thoughts, she put them in their place
again, to visit the other parts of that silent Grot, which might give her a
more certain knowledge of what she sought. In one of the corners she saw two
little Beds, which could not be accused of delicacy, and which by their form,
and matter, made appear how little love they bore unto themselves, who took
their rest in such a lodging; they were of Leaves and Turf, and the sides were
partly made of Osier, and partly of several Boughs interwoven in a careless
fashion; upon a flat of the Rock, there lay certain wild fruits, which
probably served for the nourishment of the inhabitants of that Cave, some of
them one might see were lately gathered, and thereby the Queen conjectured,
That they that brought them thither, could not be far off; but when she cast
her eyes once more upon those fruits, and upon those uneasy Beds, and that she
imagined they were the Lodging and the Food of poor Orontes, it was impossible
for her to withhold her tears, which presently forcing the resistance she made
against them, bedewed her Cheeks with a plentiful shour. Ah! (said she) If for
me, Orontes has chosen this abode; if he lie but upon such a Bed; if he live
but on such homely fare; and in short, if for me, he suffers all, that these
signs make me conjecture he does, I never should be pardonable, for having
reduced him to so deplorable an extremity. But (said she again) I have
undergone as considerable sufferings for him; I have run through Europe and
Asia; I for him have exposed my self to a thousand dangers; and for him I have
passed many as restless nights as his: But (added she) that which my hatred
made me suffer for him, his love makes him suffer now for me; and if I sought
him, to take away his life, he seeks me only, that he might save mine, and
flies me only, for fear of offending me. Dear marks of the repentance and
fidelity of poor Orontes (continued she, turning toward those objects, that
had softened her) If you be witnesses of his constancy, and of his remorse, you
are so likewise of my grief, and of the resolution I take before you, to
restore him, With the pardon of his offense, the possession of whatsoever he
had lost in my affection. Scarce had she said these words, when she was sorry
she had engaged her self so far, but when she was going to recall them, she was
crossed by another thought that made her alter her discourse. And, who has
told me (cried she again) that he I seek, and that he I think I have found, is
Orontes? What assurance, and what testimony have I received of it? Is it
because, he came twice to my relief? Is it because, he fled from me, by reason
of my having forbidden him to see me any more? Is it because, by this sad and
austere manner of life, he expresses the affliction of his heart? Ah!
Thalestris, How light are these conjectures? are there not other men besides
Orontes, and even in thine own party, generous enough to have succored thee?
Modest enough to fly the glory of those noble Actions? And perhaps afflicted
enough to have chosen this retreat? If by thy first conjectures, thou were
afraid to meet him, fear now, that thou were afraid to no purpose, and believe,
that thy ill fortune, will be but too careful to keep that from thee, which
thou though^st had been too near. She spoke on this manner, and began to be
disquieted by this last conceit: when she heard two men talking near the
entrance of the Cave, she started at that noise; but though, she doubted not,
but they were the inhabiters of that sorrowful place, she was not willing to
show herself, till she had observed them a little, if possibly she could; and
with that intent, casting her eye toward the hollowest part of the Rock, she
saw a cleft wide enough to receive her, in which, by reason of the darkness of
the place, she might stay some time without being discovered; She no sooner had
found it, but she stepped in, and had hardly taken her station, when she saw
enter two men, and two men, whom by the little light that obscure Grot
afforded, she instantly knew to be really Orontes, and his faithful Lascaris.
She shivered at that fight, though she was almost prepared for it, and was not
able to judge of a long time, whether she should be glad or sorry for her
fortune; if she had followed the motions of her love, she had run with open
arms to her dear Orontes, to assure him of pardon, before she gave him time to
ask it; and if she had hearkened to her resentments, she had gone to him with
reproaches; but she then was mistress of them both; and whether, it were, that
her silence and unmoveableness, was caused by her astonishment, or by the
design of clearing her knowledge further, that she might regulate her actions
by the things she should see, she kept her self exactly without noise or motion.

In the interim, Orontes was no sooner in his Cave, but he threw himself upon
his Bed, and Lascaris being set down upon the side of his, after he had a while
beheld the action of his Master, who tumbled himself in his leaves, with sighs,
which sufficiently testified his cruel disquiets: Sir ( said he) after having
received those favors of the gods, which they have done you, you cannot without
incensing them against you, persevere in a life so different from that of men;
and the complacency I have showed to your commands, ought to cease now, by the
reasons I have to allege against them: So long as your offenses were without
reparation, and that you had reason to believe the Queen was not satisfied, I
adhered in all things to your will, though it brought you to such strange
extremities; and knowing the nature of your love, I never wondered at the
things you do, after those I have seen you do in former times; but now, that by
most particular, and as it were miraculous favors, the Heavens have permitted
you twice to give that Princess her life, whom you had offended, only by your
error, and that by so great and so important a reparation, you have undoubtedly
appeased her; Why do we not forsake this life, which is unworthy of you, to go
and receive a pardon, which you have so well deserved, and which will easily be
granted you? Do you think the Queen is less sensible of such Obligations, then
she was of injuries? And that being prepossessed, as she is with so powerful an
inclination to you, she can behold you, as him that offended her, by an excess
of jealousy and love, without beholding you, as that Orithia, that was so dear
to her, as that Orontes, that has done her so many services, and as that
Orontes, to whom, since his last misfortune, she is doubly indebted for her
life? Lascaris spoke on this manner, and perchance would have continued his
discourse, if his Master, after many sighs, had not interrupted him. Ah!
Lascaris (said he) How blind does thy affection make thee in my affairs, and
how little do thou know the condition of my present fortune; thou art no
less deceived, then I have been, if thou believe that my crimes can be
expiated by light reparations, and that I may hope for pardon from my Queen,
because I have done something for her safety; My offenses are above all
satisfactions, and that which Thalestris ows to her honor unworthily defamed,
ought never to suffer her to remember Orontes, but to hate and to detest him;
some smaller fault might perhaps have been repaired by the things I have done
to serve her; but after the extremities I have flown into against her, though
Thalestris would pardon me, I could never pardon my self: My crimes were worthy
of a thousand deaths, and I should certainly have sought by death, to ease the
torments of my conscience, if I had not thought that in the occasions of war,
in which my Princess hazards her self every day, I might find some means to do
her service: I have been so happy as to effect what I desired, by the favor the
gods, have granted me, and by the care I had to tie my self to her
conservation, the only thing, for which I lived: Now, that by these fortunate
encounters, I am a little more at quiet, I shall die with less affliction, then
if my crimes had been the latest actions of my life; It has pleased Heaven,
that these last days of it, have not been useless to my Princess; and since she
has drawn all the service she could hope for, from it, I shall give it up now
without other trouble, then that of having rendered it unworthy of the fortune,
to which she once had destined it. What Sir, ( replied the sorrowful Lascaris)
after what you have done for Thalestris, will you not have the confidence to
cast your self at her feet, to ask her a pardon, which you have so well
deserved, and to let her know, That since you were criminal toward her, you
have saved her life, both by Land and by Water? He made a stop at these words,
as to expect an answer, but seeing that his Master, in stead of replying,
contented himself, to testify by shaking his head, that he was not in a
condition to make use of his advice; At least, Sir, ( went he on) if you want
courage in this occasion, you that never wanted it in any other, of the
greatest danger; if you have not boldness enough to present your self, before
exasperated Thalestris, and to labor in your own behalf, for a reconciliation
with her, give me Commission to do it, I may perhaps perform the business with
more dexterity, then you believe; I will address my self to Hippolita, who was
ever very affectionate to you; I will address my self to Prince Oroondates, who
has promised you his assistance, and who is obliged by nearness of alliance,
and many other considerations, to give it you; and in fine, I will manage your
Interest in such sort, that your fortune shall perchance be better then ever it
was, and that you shall joyfully dispose your self to quit this dismal
habitation, where we seem to have laid aside humanity, and live like savage
Beasts: This strange life, and this strange diet you feed upon, has changed
you so already, that you are hardly to be known: You have lost all the
freshness of your color, your healthful looks, and the better part of your
strength; and if in this last combat, you had enough to execute the things you
did there, it was from your love you drew it, rather then from that lean and
weakened Body, which falls away, and decays every moment, and which tends most
visibly to the grave. Lascaris brought forth these words with tears, wherewith
Orontes was touched; but it was not on the fashion he desired, as he quickly
made appear by his discourse. Thou can not, O Lascaris, (said he) tell me any
news, more pleasing, then that I have now received from thee, nor give me
notice, that I am near my grave, without giving me a great deal of contentment;
How great soever my crime has been, it makes my destiny glorious, since in
dying for its expiation, I have the glory to die also for Thalestris; that is
the aim, I ever proposed unto my self, through the whole course of my life, and
in my utmost misery, I shall attain to that advantage, which I aspired to in my
greatest fortune: My soul is but too fast united to this wretched body, which
it would fain abandon, and no longer suffers but with shame, the company of
this accomplice of its crimes; it is true, That in this desert, we lead a life
exceeding different from other men, but also I ought no longer to be counted
amongst men, I who have made my self unworthy of that name, and who no longer
can without horror endure the light of the Sun, which they rejoice in: All that
I find most strange, and most troublesome to me, in my condition, is, That I
have thee for a Companion in my afflictions, and that I make thee bear thy part
of my punishment; thee, who had no part at all in my offense, and who have
been faulty in nothing, but in having too obstinately tied thy self to the
fortune of a miserable man, and of a man that is hated of the gods; but
Lascaris, thou know that nothing but thine own wilfulness, has reduced thee
to this misery, and that I have solicited thee a thousand times, to quit this
hideous dwelling, and to retire thy self, where thou might spend thy days
more pleasingly. That which comforts me for thee, in the sad condition of our
life, is, That thy sufferings will not now last much longer, I have but few
more days to linger out; and after thou have closed mine eyes, and covered my
body with a little Earth, thou may go home with a perfect satisfaction, and
with a perfect glory, for having served thy master to the end, with an
inviolable fidelity; yet does there remain one service for thee to do me, after
my death; and then it is that I consent, nay, and desire, thou should present
thy self unto Thalestris, and that thou should endeavor to obtain that pardon
from her, which then I may handsomely demand; she then will hearken to thee by
the intercession of Hippolita, and by that of Prince Oroondates, and perhaps
will not be so obdurate, but that the recital of my death, may make her cast
away some part of her just resentments. Orontes brought forth these words in so
doleful a manner, that a heart of Adamant would have been touched with
compassion; and that of Thalestris was so mollified, that after having
permitted her tears to overflow with violence, her constancy was utterly at an
end, and coming hastily out of her dark station, You shall not die ( cried she)
you shall not die, my dear Orithia; Thalestris pardons you, without dying, and
Thalestris will not have your death, for the reparation of your faults. Orontes
quite besides himself, at these words, at the tone of the voice, and at the
sight of his Princess, started suddenly from his Bed, and at so unexpected an
adventure, fell into so strange an astonishment, That his soul lost the
greatest part of its functions, and of a long time he was not in a condition to
know, what he should believe, or what resolution he should take; yet did he
look unmovedly upon Thalestris, and finding in her face those lineaments, which
were deeply graven within his heart, his surprise and his amazement, made him
absolutely incapable of doing any thing: At last, he threw himself down before
her, while she strove to stop a torrent of tears, that had deprived her of the
use of speech, and lying prostrate at her very feet, without daring to lift his
eyes up to her face; If you be some god ( said he) whom my sorrowful fortune
has drawn from Heaven, into this dismal habitation, your pity is unworthily
bestowed upon the most criminal of all men living; and if you are the divine
Thalestris, to whom I offered my adorations, while I was less guilty, I now am
altogether unworthy to behold you. The Queen, who had recovered her self a
little by the violence she had used, and who no longer wavered in the
resolution she was to take, put forth her hands to have helped him up, and
looking upon him with a countenance quite appeased; I am Thalestris (said she)
but Thalestris, who was less sensible of the wrongs you did me, then I am of
your last services, and of the marks of your repentance: If I sought you
heretofore, to give you a death, which in my opinion you had merited, I seek
you now to give you a life, which you have gained unto your self, by having
preserved it: I live by your assistance, and you shall live by my desire, since
your death would now be mine, and that you have but too much satisfied me
without dying. These words penetrated so far into Orontes, and produced such
sudden, and such powerful effects in him, That in a happiness so little
expected, his joy was like to have done that in a moment, which his grief had
not been able to do in many days. He with all his force, resisted the vehemence
of those motions, that transported him beyond himself, and embracing the knees
of that fair Queen, with raptures which she easily understood; Ah! ( said he)
you are my divine Thalestris, I know you now by these miraculous marks, and no
body, but Thalestris, could have made me pass, in an instant from the grave, to
this supreme felicity: Ungrateful Orontes does now sufficiently understand the
excess of his ingratitude, and that of your celestial goodness; but since, that
without horror, you can endure this Monster, such as he is, and that compassion
is stronger in your heart then justice, What punishment will you ordain this
guilty man, to settle him again in that estate, from which, his crimes have
thrown him? Where will you find torments, that can expiate a part of them? In
short, as full of goodness as you are, Where will you find enough to blot out
their remembrance? Orontes brought forth these words, keeping still upon his
knees, whatsoever power the Queen could use to make him to rise; but in fine,
being resolved to draw him out of that woeful condition, and to take all matters
of affliction away from him; I command you ( said she) to forget your faults,
since I have lost the memory of them, and that you have made amends for them,
but too fully, by your last actions: I command you to leave this abode,
unworthy of you, to seek a more delightful company among the Princes, who
esteem you: And finally, I command you to take that place again, which you
heretofore possessed in my affection, and with it, all those hopes which you
had lost. As she ended these words, she constrained him to rise, and fortunate
Orontes taking then the liberty to kiss one of her fair hands: How unjust are
you ( said he) to show such favor to so guilty a person! And how my sufferings
ought to be envied, since they end in so glorious a conclusion! Such was the
reconciliation of these two lovers, whom too violent resentments had separated
for so many years; and this reunion was so sweet to them, that it seemed, as if
Heaven had consented to that breach, for no other end, but that after such
sensible afflictions, their happiness might be the more perfect, and entire.
Orontes, who saw his fortune so different, from what it had been a few moments
before, had much ado to comprehend that admirable change: Thalestris, who saw
her self delivered, from those torturing disquiets, which had so long made war
against her, and who found in her dear Orontes, as great a fidelity as she
could wish, was in an ecstasy of joy, little inferior to his; and even
Lascaris, who with his Masters condition, saw his own so advantageously
changed, could not contain the excess of his gladness; and having cast himself
at the Queens feet, as soon as his Master allowed him to do so, received from
her, the acknowledgements that were due to so faithful a servant.

The Queen would not suffer Orontes to tarry longer in that melancholy Cave,
but commanding Lascaris to go and make ready Horses, she needs would have
Orontes put on his Arms immediately in her presence. Never had Lascaris
received any command more joyfully then that, nor ever did Captive, that had
languished ten years in Irons, receive the news of his liberty, with a more
perfect contentment. Orontes was armed, and the Horses ready in a little time,
and the fair Queen leading that solitary lover, by the hand, out of his gloomy
Cave, appeared in that action, not much different from Hercules, when he drew
his dearest Theseus out of the black and horrid Dungeons of Hell. Although
Orontes left his Grot, without unwillingness, yet could he not go away, without
looking back upon it with some affection: If it were in my power (said he)
favorable Cave, I would consecrate thee to the godess of Love, as the place
where the most passionate of all Lovers, has received the greatest and the
most glorious of all fortunes: May it please the gods, thou never serve for a
Den of Lions and Tigers; and may thou never be polluted nor profaned, after
having been the temple of those Adorations, which I have paid to my divine
Thalestris. The Queen accused Orontes of impiety for these last words, but she
pardoned all, in regard of his passion; and at the same time, geting on
Horseback, they crossed through the Wood, by a way well known to Orontes, and
rode toward the Camp, when the Sun was upon the point of seting; but before
they were out of the Wood, Thalestris, who knew not in what manner, and in what
Country Orontes had passed his life, since his departure out of Cappadocia,
being desirous to learn something of it; It is not just (said she) that I
should be ignorant, on what fashion you have lived, since you forsook us; let
me entreat you therefore, to give me some account of it, during the way we have
to go. Madam (answered Orontes) since you are pleased to desire it, and that
you have already pardoned my faults, I will refresh the memory of them, by a
brief recital of my life, which I shall give you in a few words, as well
because there has befaln me nothing of great importance, as because in so
short a way, we have but little time to spend in it; but being I shall have
happiness to be near you, I will recount the particularities of it more at
large, whenever you shall be pleased to command me.

The History of ORONTES.
I Was in Cappadocia, where I had the honor to command your Army, under the
name and habit of Orithia, and where by some fortunate successes, I had already
secured the tranquillity of your Frontier, when Arethusa, one of the principal
among those women, that had command in the Army, and one of those whom you most
esteemed, being one day come into my Chamber, with more have then ordinary:
Madam (said she) I mean to be the first that shall tell you a pleasing news,
unless perhaps some other body have prevented me. I opened my ears at these
first words, and natural curiosity having moved me to press her, that I might
hear the business; We have hitherto been ignorant (pursued she) for what design
our Queen was gone from Themiscira, in so gallant an equipage; but I come now
from learning the truth of it, and you shall know, that being obliged by our
Laws to give us a Queen, that may succeed after her death, and not being
willing to bring into the world a Daughter, that should be unworthy of her, she
disdained all her Neighbors, to cast her thoughts upon the greatest man in the
World; And hearing that Alexander, the Conqueror of all the Earth, was come
near unto Hyrcania, she is gone to meet him, there to demand an Inheritrix, who
according to the greatness of both Father and Mother, cannot choose but be a
mavelous person. Although I ought not to have given credit so lightly to that
report, yet was I so touched with it, that my face became exceeding pale; and
Arethusa perceiving it, asked me presently the reason; I find my self a little
ill (said I, endeavoring to dissemble my thoughts, as well as possibly I could)
but that need not hinder you, from telling me, from whom you had this news, and
what certainty you have of it. Two friends of mine (replied Arethusa) that are
come unto the Camp, not above two hours ago, assured me of it, and it is a
thing so fully confirmed in Themiscira, that no body any longer, doubts of such
a truth. It is enough (answered I) I bear as great a share in your contentment,
as it is possible for me; but, I pray you, give me leave to take a little rest.
Arethusa astonished, that I received a news so coldly, which did so rejoice all
her Companions, went out of my Chamber, and only Lascaris continued with me.
You may judge, Madam, if you please, into what estate I was reduced by that
cruel opinion, and since that, Memory is an Enemy to me; you will be pleased to
dispense with me, for repeating the discourses my jealousy made me utter;
neither should I be able to do it, without awaking your just indignation, nor
without giving you new causes to condemn my ingratitude.

I passed the rest of that day in a mortal disquiet, the night, that succeeded
it, was not spent in the repose of a mind, that no longer was capable of any;
yet me-thought your humor, according to the knowledge I had of it, and the
promises you had given me, agreed but little with that horrible change, and
that was it, that kept me in the beginning, from lending Faith to that report;
but within a while after I considered, that you were a Woman, that you were
young, and that you might possibly be persuaded by the Counsel of those about
you, and flattered by the reputation of Alexander: These reflections made me, in
the end, incline to that belief, which I resisted, as much as possibly I could;
but not being willing to settle it upon the bare report of Arethusa, I
commanded Lascaris to enquire more particularly among the other Amazones, he
did it but too much for my repose, every one he spoke with, confirmed that
cruel news; And to complete my ruin, there arrived certain women from
Themiscira, within a few days after, who redoubled that belief by their
testimony, and who told us, That at their departure they had left all their
Country, in the expectation of their Queen, who was to come back within a few
days, and had sent word by some of her women, who were come before, That she
returned very well satisfied with the happy success of her voyage, and that she
had obtained of Alexander whatsoever she had desired. The Queen blushiing at
this discourse, interrupted Orontes: The women, who spread that rumor abroad
(said she) and who were neither those of quality, nor any that had access near
my person, had some occasion to take the Message I sent, in the sense that they
received it. Before I departed from Themiscira, they assembled themselves, and
knowing that I was going to Alexander, they begged of me altogether, To give
them a Queen of the Race of that great King, and not to return from that
voyage, without bringing back a fruit, which I could not so nobly hope for,
from any other part of the Earth: Being I saw my self reduced by our
ignominious custom, to endure that request without expressing any anger, I
heard it without showing my dislike of what they demanded, and that was it that
made them believe, before my arrival, that I had followed their Counsel; but
after my return, they were quickly undeceived. I would to Heaven (continued the
Prince of the Massagetes) that I had been so too, and that by my too great
facility in persuading my self of my disaster, I had not fallen into that cruel
error, which has since, in a short space of my life, made me undergo a
thousand tedious deaths. In brief, Madam, I believed (and I make you this
confession, how shameful so ever it be) I believed to my misfortune, what I
never ought to have believed; and by that inhumane credulity, I drank the
poison, that infected the soundest parts of my heart: As Soon as I had received
that impression, all things contributed to settle it in me; and in the end, I
was so fully persuaded of it, That I thought, without being blind, I could no
longer doubt of a thing, which no body called in question, but my self. The
first effect this error produced in me, was a desire to make an end of my life,
with my own hand; and I know not what good genius, took part with Lascaris, to
divert me from that design, or at least to defer it for a few days; after
which, I fell into a quite different intention. I will not tell you, Madam (to
spare my self the shame I sold suffer in relating them) the discourses I used,
or rather the reproaches I poured forth against you; as I believed I had
received an offense, which took away all the respect I bore unto your person,
and even unto your sex, I found nothing in the most bitter invectives, which
seemed not too mild to my resentments: I flew out so far, as even to wish your
death, and to make designs my self against your life. Those irresolutions, full
of mortal agonies, held me for some days, during which, I suffered no body to
see me; but when I had long deliberated, I believed I could not without
meanness of spirit, persist in the thought of dying for you: The gods can
witness, that it was not love of life, that gave me those reflections, and that
though it had been dear to me before, it was then grown odious enough, to
sacrifice it a thousand times unto my grief, if my blind spite had not
represented, That she, who had so shamefully abandoned me, to abandon her self
to a man she knew not, was unworthy of all the marks of love, that I could give
her. I am compelled, Madam, against my resolution, to let escape some criminal
words, else it would be hard for me, to let you know the sense I had of that
imagined injury: My last determination, was that, of absenting my self for ever
from you, and from your Territories, and of banishing you for ever out of my
memory: I executed one part of this resolution suddenly enough, and have
labored in vain to do the other; during some years, which have seemed to me of
an extraordinary length. I left your Army then, without taking leave of your
Women, after having dispatched that fatal Messenger, that gave you the first
knowledge of my crime, and began my wanderings with Lascaris alone, not so much
as thinking, whether I would go; all Countries were indifferent to me,
provided, I might be but far enough from you, and from all places, where I
might hear speak of you; and me-thought, that in flying from you, I fled from
my ill fortune; yet did I turn my steps toward Hyrcania, that fatal Country,
where I thought I had lost you, and from which, Alexander was then departed: I
arrived there, but too soon for my quiet, at least, if I had any left, and
intending to inform my self of my misfortune, by people of those parts, and
enquire of them, concerning the voyage, which the Amazon Queen had made into
that Province, my evil destiny had so ordained, That I addressed my self to
none, but such as were ill instructed; and vulgar people, who being ignorant of
what passes near the persons of Kings, make judgments upon gross appearances,
according to the reach of their understanding; I therefore received from them,
the most cruel confirmations I could expect, and with them a heavy addition to
my despair. From Hyrcania, I went into Parthia, and like an Orestes, driven
about by furies, not being able to find any rest in all the places I visited,
flying mine own Country, and all others, where I might meet persons of my
acquaintance, I resolved to go into the Indies, and to seek to the utmost parts
of the World, for remedy against the rage that tormented me, and for some
sanctuary against that evil spirit, that persecuted me in every place: As Soon
as I had resolved it, I put it in execution; after a long and painful voyage, I
entered into the Kingdom of good King Taxiles, with whom Alexander contracted a
near friendship afterward; and I confess, that if my soul had been capable of
any tranquillity, I might have found it in the Court of that Prince, whose
virtues are admirable, and whose Politick-government, might serve for a rule,
to that of all other Monarchs; but my tormentor never forsook me, and
whithersoever I turned, my furious pa^^on racked me with a pitiless War. I did
all that possibly I could, to banish you out of my mind, and a thousand times
a day represented to my self, the injury, I believed, I had received from you,
with all the blackest colors, wherein it could be painted, to find by that
remembrance, the means either to forget you, or to hate you: But in what
fashion soever you then appeared to me, you were still Thalestris; and my most
violent resentings, could not race out that deep-graven characer of love, you
had made within my heart; How defiled soever you appeared to me, with
Alexanders embraces, you still came into my mind with an Empire, which I could
not overthrow: And though among the thoughts of Love, those of Hatred crept in
sometimes, Indifferency could never find a room there; and whether sleeping or
waking, you still were present with me: It was to little purpose I changed
Climats, for I never changed my condition; and as a wounded Hind carries the
deadly Arrow along with her, I in the midst of my heart, carried that poisoned
shaft, which made me find what I fled away from, in all those places where I
sought for refuge. Alas! How often, not being able to resist that implacable
Enemy, did I offer it a more absolute victory, by demanding death? And how
often, when I thought to have given it to my self, was my hand withheld by the
Prayers and Tears of Lascaris, whose fidelity having made him considerable to
me, had gained him a great Authority over my inclination? When I left the
Kingdom of Taxiles, I passed through a great many barbarous Provinces, and at
last came into that of the Phasiaces, which obeyed the great King Porus; he,
who afterward disputed the glory against Alexander, with so much valor, and
who in his defeat, acquired so brave a reputation: Certainly, all that has
been said to the advantage of that Prince, is published of him, but with a
great deal of Justice; and, if he had but as much politeness in his manner of
living, as he has greatness of courage, he might well be reckoned one of the
worthiest persons of our age. I served him two or three months, in a war he
then had against his Neighbors, and having made my self remarkable fortunately
enough in some encounters, I received favors from him, that were infinitely
above my services; and if I could have been staid there, by his urgent
entreaties, he would have showed me the Noblest usage, I could have hoped for
from a magnanimous King. There are few Languages, in which I have not an
imperfect knowledge, and that gave me the greater facility, in so long a
voyage. From the service of Porus, which I quitted, as soon as he forsook the
war; and a little before the arrival of Alexander, I went on toward the
Bactriaces, and the Seres, and prosecuted my course, as far as the Caspian
Ports. I crossed through deserts full of Serpents, and dreadful Monsters,
amongst which, I should have met with death a thousand times, if I had not
desired it; but amongst all the fellest Monsters, I found nothing so cruel to
me as the memory of Thalestris. I overrun all the Indies, that lie on this side
the Ganges; that River bounded my wanderings that way, and not finding the
passage easy, because of its excessive breadth, which is of two and thirty
Furlongs, and because of the little communication, the Indians on this side
have with those on that, I was fain to take my way along the Banks of it, to
return into these Provinces: I saw the Country of the Sacans, where I heard of
the fortune of Roxana, and of the progress Alexander made already in those
Countries, out of which I was come; the advantage I thought he had obtained to
my destruction, having made me hate him, I was sorry I had left the Indies, and
the service of Porus, against whom he then was making war. Coming from the
Sacans, I saw the Naura, the Xanippa, and the Country of Maracanda: You will be
content, Madam, that I speak of my voyages but cursorily for the present,
referring to entertain you more at large, when your curiosity shall move you to
demand the particularities of them; I will therefore tell you nothing else, but
that after my return from the Indies, I wandered above a year in Asia, without
any other design, then that of lingering out my miserable life, till I should be
so happy, as to meet the end of it. Never had I any desire of returning into my
Country, though Lascaris solicited me perpetually; but as I avoided nothing so
much, as persons of my acquaintance, and those that might oblige me to change,
that solitariness into a more sociable life, I never would give ear to his
entreaties: True it is, That what he suffered by my occasion, touched me
sometimes very sensibly, and that I did all that was possible, to persuade him,
to forsake me, and to go and take a retreat, which I offered him amongst my
friends, and which I could have procured him by Letters, I would have given
him; but as I rejected his Counsels, he rejected my offers, and I could never
win him to do what I desired. If you ask me, how you then stood in my thoughts,
I will tell you, That you were as a Monster, to which a tyrannical power kept
me in slavery; and as the thing, which in all the World, I endeavored most to
hate, nay, which I did hate, and yet for all my hatred, could not hinder my
self from loving it a thousand times more dearly, then my self: Hatred, Grief,
Anger, and Jealousy, those imperious passions, tore my heart, like Promethean
Vultures, and that was it, that then caused me to take that device of the
heart, torn by Vultures, under which I found you, and under which I lifted my
sacrilegious arms against you. I was come to Susa, when I heard the news of
Alexanders death, and I had been gone from thence, but a little while, when I
heard speak of contestations amongst his Successors, and preparations that were
making for a War: My grief had not extinguished the inclinations I had ever had
to Arms, and being I sought for death, I thought I could not meet with it more
honorably, then in the occasions Fortune offered me: I therefore took my
journey toward Babylon, and arrived there, as you may have heard, the day your
Army made its general muster; but before I came within a days riding of this
place, I in a Town of your party, learnt the names of those persons, that were
most interessed in this War: I was told that Craterus, Lysimachus, Ptolomeus,
and Antigonus, were of the one party; and on the other, Perdiccas, Cassander,
Seleucus, and many more, that were named to me. I then called to mind, the
friendship I had formerly had with Cassander, and his Brother Iolas, when I had
served Antipater in the War against the valiant Agis, King of the
Lacedaemonians, it had not been so light, but that the remembrance of it, was
still very dear to me; and since I was necessarily obliged to take one party,
the justice of both being unknown to me, I had reason to prefer that of my
ancient Friends, before the other, of such as were mere strangers. I was
traveling toward Babylon with this design, when I was stopped by some Horsemen of
your Army, and when upon the Bank of the Euphrates, I ran some carriers with
reasonable good success, against a great many gallant men: You know what the
issue of them was, and how by the frank civility of those worthy persons, I was
conducted to the Gates of the City; and you shall learn, that as soon as I had
made my self known to Cassander, and that I had told him, how desirous I was to
serve him, he received me with acclamations of joy and transport, and gave me
the most affectionate welcome, I could expect from my most passionate Friend:
He presented me to Roxana, Perdiccas, Seleucus, and other the most considerable
men of their party; and at his recommendation, I was received by them all, with
civilities which I had not merited. Cassander made an absolute confidence with
me, and would needs have me share the command with him in all places; that was
a thing that rendered me most perfectly criminal, by giving me occasion to draw
my Sword against my Princess, in the first encounter that passed: You know that
our combat, after having been obstinately disputed, was interrupted by
Cassander, who judging, that against so terrible an Enemy, I stood in need of
his assistance, came rushing upon you, behind, with his Horse. I have a great
deal of cause (said the Queen, interrupting Orontes) to remember that
encounter, since by an action full of generosity, you testified the greatness
of your courage, in opposing the fury of Cassander; who, but for your
hindrance, would have made me end my life, under his Horses feet. I rendered you
what was due unto your valor (replied Orontes) but by that action of
Cassanders, I lost part of the esteem and friendship I had born him; It was
much diminished, a few days after, by the accusation that was published against
him, of having poisoned his King; whereof he did not clear himself so well, but
that I entered into great suspicions of it; and if afterward I shared in command
with him at the Battle, it was rather by the engagement of my Honor, then by
that of the affection I still had left to him. About that time, I had a desire
to see the great Arsaces, and though he showed himself to very few, and that he
avoided society out of a sad melancholy humor, like that of mine, he was
pleased not to disdain my visit; and when he had learned who I was, he made
extraordinary much of me, and gave me marks of a particular affection; yet
could he not hear my name, without testifying by some alteration that appeared
in his face, that he was concerned in it, some way or other: The cause was
still unknown to me, but by the kindnesses I received from that great man, and
by the inclination which his high virtue, and the admirable qualities of his
person bred in me, I was so firmly tied to him, that from thence forward, it
was his consideration, more then that of Cassander, that kept me in the party I
had chosen: I happened to be with him, when a Trumpet came to speak with him
from Lysimachus; and then remembering that I had begun a combat against that
Prince, upon the Banks of Euphrates, I was glad to take that occasion to see
him again, being he had a Companion with him, and that I might thereupon take
the pretense to wait upon Arsaces, likewise. He opposed not the intention I had
to do so, and it was in that enterview, my fair Queen, that I came to know you,
that you also knew me; that I saw marks of your just displeasure, and that you
saw the effects of that ingratitude, my error had caused. O gods! What were my
thoughts, when I had escaped your lawful indignation? And, in what manner, did I
receive that blow of Fortune, which by so unlooked for, an encounter, made me
find that person, whose very memory I had fled from, to the utmost parts of
all the World? I fell into a confusion, which all the words of the World are
not able to express, and I continued the rest of that day, almost quite
deprived of reason and understanding: As Soon as I began to open my eyes, upon
that effect of my destiny, I fell into discourses, as strange, as that
adventure seemed to be. After I had long complained of my ill fortune, which
yet presented me that cruel Enemy, whose sight I thought I had escaped, for all
the remainder of my days; I r^flected upon the anger you had showed, which had
made you attempt that against me, which in probability I should have attempted
against you, if the respect of your Sex, and the remnants of my passion had not
opposed it. How is it possible (said I) that being so guilty, she should make,
as if she were so much offended? Can one single Letter (for it is only from
that Letter, her choler can proceed) have kindled so excessive a fury in her,
who by so black an infidelity, had given me so great cause to write it? Could I
take a more gentle revenge upon such a perfidiousness, as hers? And in
banishing my self for ever from her sight, did I not do a good office to a
person, who in her last affections, had reserved nothing but Hatred or
Indifferency for me? By what actions then have I provoked her to these
extreamities of rage against me? Ah! without doubt (said I again) she would
give me my death, to dispatch out of the World, this witness of her infidelity;
she will not suffer him to continue amongst men, who before the eyes of all
men, can blast her with so many black reproaches; and since, the bloody injury
she has done him, has not been sufficient to drive him to his Grave, she
resolves to send him thither with her own hands: Let us give her then this
satisfaction, and let us glut her with this blood, whereof she appears to be so
thirsty: Let us offer to the point of her sharp Sword, this mean-spirited
heart, which as unworthy as she is, has still preserved her Image: Let us make
her kill this Thalestris, which we conserve there, whether we will or no; and
let us by her own arms, destroy this unworthy remembrance, which so legitimate
resentments have not been able to extinguish. But why? (added I a little after)
why should I give such a contentment to my mortal Enemy? By what right can I ow
it, either to her, or to some new-come lover, that has taken up my place in
her affection? Ah! Let us be satisfied, with having suffered, without revenge,
the horrid usage we have received; and if we cannot resolve to oppose our Arms
against her violence, let us dispose our self, to fly from her afresh, and to
fly from her, as far as there is day. This was my resolution, and I should
instantly have put it in execution, if I had not seen a Battle so near, which I
could not go away from, without infamy; I was at it therefore, as you know, I
saw you there, I fled before you, and saved my life from your fury, as I had
done at the first encounter; but this last confirmed me in the purpose of
getting me gone, fearing in the occasions, in which, I might happen to be every
day against you, not to die by your hand, but perchance to wound you with mine,
without knowing you, which would have been the utmost effect of my ill fortune.
With this intention, I left the Camp of your Enemies, not taking leave of any
body; and it was, the day you found me, by the side of that Fountain, where I
was fallen asleep, and where I staid for Lascaris, whom I had left behind, to
dispatch some little business, that concerned our journey; There it was, Madam,
that your goodness, and my crime, were made manifest; there it was, that you
spared me a life, which I ought to have lost a thousand times; there it was,
that I ceased to be innocent, by coming to know, that you were so; and there it
was, in fine, that my resentments vanished, to give way to my repentance. The
testimony of that Prince, whereby you were but too fully justified, added to
the means he gave me, of clearing my doubts, with your very Enemies; that
fainting wherewith, you were seized out of an excess of grief, for the bloody
and injurious reproach I used against you; and that coldness, into which, by a
great tranquillity of Conscience, you pressed within a minute after, opened my
eyes sufficiently, to make me know, That I alone was criminal, and that I was
unworthy of this life, which you had left me merely out of contempt; and I had
taken it away, with my own hands, if by an oath, inviolable among the
Scythians, Prince Oroondates had not engaged me to live. Scarce was I gone from
him Five or six hundred paces, when I met Lascaris, he found a disturbance in
my face, and being I loved him dearly, I made him acquainted with the cause,
and gave him a true relation of all that adventure. After he had considered
that event, in stead of being afflicted for my crimes, he found matter of
consolation for me in it, and would needs persuade me, That my fortune was a
great deal better in my Princesses innocence, then in mine own: He argued, That
since nothing but the opinion I had had to your disadvantage, had been the
cause of all my miseries, I by loosing that, lost also all the occasion I had
had to account my self miseraable; and that if by an error, grounded upon
appearances, that were great enough, I had offended you, I might hope for your
pardon, by the assistance Prince Oroondates had promised me, and by the
services I might render you. I found some reason in his discourse, and could
not without a mavelous comfort, imagine, that my Queen was innocent of that
infidelity, whereof I had accused her: But that satisfaction was quickly
counter-balanced by my remorse, and I was no more gently handled by it, then I
had been before, by my Anger and my Jealousy. My love, being returned with all
^^s powers, represented my crime so horrible, that I could not look upon my
self, but as a Monster, unworthy of the light, nor could I longer endure it,
but with grief; and from that moment, I began to fly it, and to seek out
darkness, as more agreeable to the condition of my soul. That Wood, from whence
you now have drawn me, presenting it self unto my sight, I turned my steps that
way, and seeking the most remote and gloomy parts of it; I found that place so
suitable to my humor, that I spent the rest of the day there, and the whole
night, Lascaris not being able to draw me out of it; the next morning, I
accidentaly light upon that Cave, where I since have made my abode; and having,
with my Sword, cut away some Branches, that stopped the entrance of it, I no
sooner had set foot within it, but I found it very proper for my habitation;
all things were conformable, to the horror, that settled it self in my soul;
and that place was so desert, and so out of the way of humane society, That I
believed the gods had miraculously guided me thither; yet was it not, that
reason alone, that stayed me there; for what commodiousness soever I found in
that retreat, I should, without doubt, have fled further from you, if I had not
been retained by another consideration. I thought that in the occasions you
hazarded your self in, every day, you might fall into danger of your life; and
I believed, that being near you, I might watch an opportunity to preserve it,
for an expiation of some part of my offenses, and that peradventure, the gods
would afford me means of doing something profitably for your service. Lascaris
did not disapprove that thought, and from that time, having saluted that
favorable Cave, as the place of my future dwelling, I began to take posse^sion
of it; Lascaris, behind it, made a kind of a Hovel for our Horses; and we
fell to work together to make Beds, upon which we since have lain. The second
day, I sent Lascaris to a little Town, not far off, to get the device of my
Shield wiped out, and the color of my Arms changed, by which I might have been
known; He also brought back some provisions; but I made little use of them, and
have lived for the most part of wild fruits, which we gathered in the Wood.
There passed few days, that I sent not Lascaris to your Camp, to learn if there
were any occasion, in which, you might be employed; and it was by the
intelligence he gave me, that I came to the Battle; and that keeping my self,
concealed under Arms, in which, I was not known, I had the means to be near
you, to fight for your defense, and to retire with the same facility: I did the
same to day, by the news he brought me yesterday, of what was to be done in
your Army; and in these two encounters, the ardent prayers I made unto the
gods, won them to be so favorable to me, That they guided me miraculously for
your deliverance. To tell you now, in what fashion I lived in my solitude, were
but superfluous, since you to day have seen enough to inform you of it, and
that you may partly guess it, by the alteration of my face. I have passed days
and nights, there that were sufficiently cruel to me, but yet too gentle for a
reparation of so heinous crimes, and for so glorious a recompense. I fed almost
altogether upon those wild fruits, though Lascaris, sometimes brought other
provisions from the Camp: I often talked of you, to insensible witnesses; I
sighed, and poured forth tears, that were enough, perhaps, to have washed away
the guilt of any other fault, but mine.

The End of the Second Book.
CASSANDRA. The last Part. The third Book.
ORontes had something more to say for the conclusion of his Discourse, but
they were then come to the entrance of the Camp, and he seemed to have justly
measured the length of his recital with that of the way: The Queen would also
have replied many things upon his last words, if she could have expressed her
thoughts to him without a great number of witnesses* she therefore contented
her self with discovering part of them by glaunces that were full of
sweetness, and with giving him her hand once more in token of an eternal
reconciliation; they alighted at Prince Oroondates his Tent when darkness
began to overspread the Earth, and there with the Princes of Persia and
Scithia, they found Lysimachus, Ptolomeus, Oxyatres, Eumen^s, Demetrius, and
Polyperchon, and with them the Princesses Berenice, Deidamia, Barsina, and
Cleone. As Soon as Thalestris appeared, the Princes rose to meet her, as well to
pay her their Civilities, as to testify the disquiet her sudden departure had
caused in them; but when they saw Orontes whom she had led in by the hand* they
lost some part of the intentivenesse, where with they looked upon the Queen, to
fix it particularly upon that Prince. He was presently known by Artaxerxes and
Oroondates, but they were so surprised to see him with that fair Queen who a
few days before had showed so violent a hatred against him, that they knew not
what they should conjecture of that Adventure, nor in what manner they should
abord him. Thalestris who perceived their astonishment, having a mind to put
them quickly out of it, and striving to overcome the bashfulnesse that broke
forth in her blushes. This is not, said she, that injurious Enemy, against whom
you have seen me animated with so vehement an indignation; but it is the
Defender of my life, who in the last Battle, and in the Combat to day appeared
miraculously to succor me; I believed that these Obligations added to a
repentance capable to wash out greater faults then his, might countervaile the
offenses he had done me, and thereupon I forgot my own interests for yours, and
have conquered my resentments to bring a man into your party, whose Valor is
not to be despised. There was no need of saying more to the Princes, to make
them know the truth of that Adventure* and the Queen had hardly ended these
words, when Prince Oroondates running to Orontes with open arms: Cousin, said
he, I praise the Gods for your return, and rejoice at your happy success, as
much as if it were my own. Orontes receiving those endearments with a great
deal of respect, was going to reply, when Prince Artaxerxes prevented him, and
pulling him out of Oroondates his arms: That friendship, said he, which was
granted me among our Enemies, must not be refused me from the Kinsman of my
Princess, and from him who so worthyly bears that first Name, under which I
came acquainted with my dearest Brother. Orontes who knew Arsaces to be
Artaxerxes, and who during the abode he had made in his Grot had learnt the
truth of his Story by the Report of Lascaris, answered his kindnesses with much
submission, but they were interrupted by Lysimachus, who demanded his part as
well as the rest in the friendship of that valiant man, whose Forces he had
already tried, and whose Virtue he infinitely esteemed, as well by the recital
he had heard of his life, as by what he knew of it himself, Ptolomeus,
Demetrius, Eumenes, Oxyatres, and Polyperchon, to whom that Famous Stranger
(who under the terrible Ensign of the Vultures had done such gallant Actions
against them) was already very well known, came pressing about him, to begin a
more particular acquaintance, and embraced him one after another with marks of
a mavelous esteem. The Princess Berenice, to whom the first years of their
lives, and their nearness of Kindred gave particular inclinations of good
will, and who besides was very aff^ctionatly concerned in the Affairs of Queen
Thalestris, opening her self a passage among the Princes: What Cousin, said
she, and shall not I have my share in the common satisfaction? I who amongst my
nearest Kinsmen have ever very especially esteemed you, and who love you still
more for the inclinations you have had, then for the services you have done to
this fair Queen, to whom I have given a part of my self: By the example of
Berenice, Deidamia, Barsina, and Cleone saluted Orontes very civilly, and when
he was got Free of those first Receptions, coming back to the Princes of
Scithia and Persia: Great Princes, said he to them, I am unworthy of the Honor
you do me, and should be confounded at it, if I did not know that this day to
me is full of glorious events, and that this same fortune which draws me out of
the Grave to restore me to life again, and to regive me my Princess, gives me
also in the esteem of such Eminent Persons, a Glory that may establish my
highest felicity. You ever desrv'd it, replied Oroondates, but you have made
your self more worthy of it by your last actions then by those which made you
be condemned of your best Friends; and that which makes you merit Thalestris,
may justly make you merit the affections of virtuous persons* For my part, dear
Cousin, (went he on embracing him) I confess I had very great resentments
against you, but that repentance which has obtained the pardon of this fair
Queen, and the obligation we have to you in what you have done for her safety,
restore you my affection entirely. The remorse I have felt, answered Orontes,
for the offenses I had committed against my Queen, have been accompanied with a
sorrow for having born Arms against the party of my Prince; but as I may excuse
my error of the faults I did against my Love, my ignorance also was the cause
of those I did against my duty, and from the very minute I was cured of both, I
passed from my crime into a sudden and severe repentance. Let Us talk no
longer of your faults, added Prince Artaxerxes, since she who therein has the
principal interest is willing to forget them, and since the Noble Actions you
have done in her favor, ought more justly, and more worthily to possess your
remembrance. Orontes never wants the power (interrupted the fair Queen) to save
the life of Thalestris, he has done but that twice or thrice in your presence
which he had done before upon the walls of Phriney, and in the Prison of
Neobarzanes. Alas! (said Orontes, not suffering her to proceed) how happy am I
in having done these petty services for so good and so grateful a Princess,
and how different would my destiny be from what it is, if you should judge me
with severity? They had enlarged themselves further in this conversation, if
every body had not passionately desired to hear the truth of that Encounter
from the Queen, and if the Princess Berenice, seconded by her Brother, and by
her Servant had not pressed her to it very earnestly. Thalestris disposed her
self to obey them, and though she could not do it without blushing* nor
without making appear some inward disturbance in many places of her discourse,
she made them a full recital of that Adventure, and by relating the words of
Orontes, the place of his abode, and the condition she had found him in, drew
tears from the eyes of the most hard hearted. She was making an end of her
Discourse, when Araxes, Hyppolita, Menalippa, and some other Amazones, who had
been abroad to seek her, came into the Tent; if Hyppolita was ashonished to
meet Orontes there, Menalippa and her Companions were so a great deal more,
when in his face they saw all the feature of Orithia's, and when they found a
man in the person of that valiant Lady, who had lived so long amongst them; not
but that they had heard some rumor of it, both in their Country after their
Queens departure, and in the Camp since their arrival there; but they had
found some little probability in that adventure, that they stood in need of
such a confirmation as that, to lend a perfect belief to that Report. They knew
not at first how they should receive such a Metamorphosis; but in the end,
being they bore a great deal of affection, and respect unto their Queen, they
submitted to her inclinations, and not judging that her love to Orontes reached
to the destroying of their Laws and Customs, they approved it without
discontent, not being able to condemn any thing in it, if it were Platonic,
and if it went beyond those limits, they had as little cause to dislike that
she should give them a Queen to succeed her of the blood of a Prince, whose
virtue was very well known, and whose person had ever been very dear to them;
although they concealed part of their thoughts before that illustrious Company,
they declared the rest by endearments full of affection, which they gave to
their ancient Companion.

And Orontes knowing Menalippa, and with her some other women, whom formerly
she had cherished and esteemed, embraced them with motions full of tenderness,
and showed them great expressions of his first affection. Valiant Menalippa,
said he, to what will you condemn this deceitful Orithia, who under false
appearances abused your friendship? we will condemn her, answered Menalippa, to
love us as she has done heretofore, and that is all the punishment we can
impose upon this generous imposter, to whom we owe the safety of our Queen.
Hippolita had her full share in the kindnesses of Orontes, and Lassaris renewed
his friendships and his acquaintance among the Amazones. The arrival of
Orontes, and the satisfaction of Thalestris, being very considerable to that
illustrious company, made that whole evenings entertainment, and after having
spent it in a conversation which afforded them matter enough; they all retired
into their Chambers to take their usual rest. Orontes was lodged in Prince
Oroondates his Tents, Artaxerxes would have no other quarter, but being the
Tents were very spacious, they had their Chambers apart with good convenience;
the Princesses lay near them within the same enclosure, though their lodgings
were separated, only Apamia, and Arsionoe were retired to their Husbands, and
even Thalestris leaving Menalippa to command in the Amazones quarter, would not
forsake Berenice, Deidamia, and Barsina, with whom she laid aside her Warlike
Humor, to live in a society more conformable to their Sex.

During that night and the beginning of the next day, the workmen who were in
hand with the Bridges, hastened their business with such diligence, that two
hours before Noon they drew near the other bank, and only stayed for the forces
that were to sustain them, and that were to land, to place the last Boats, and
to finish the work. Demetrius who remembered the employment he was to have that
day, had begun it in the duties of a Captain experienced above his Age, and
using the clear lights of his understanding, had begun to put that in practice,
which afterward he executed with so much reputation, he took a careful review
of those forces that had been assigned him, and having drawn them up in
Battalia upon the bank of the river, he divided those that were to pass over to
the other side in Boats, from those that were to go upon the Bridge, at the
head of which he meant to fight himself against those that should oppose his
descent. Alexander and Menelaus to whom the other Bridge was assigned, labored
on their side with the same Care; but when Demetrius had taken such order as
was necessary upon the bank, he resolved to bestow the time he had left, before
there was matter to employ him, in visiting Deidamia; the remembrance of that
fair Princess never forsook him for a moment, and considering that the chance
of war might make him fall in the peril to which he was going to expose
himself, he demanded of his Love a little more courage then ordinary, that he
might be able to make protestations to his Princess, which peradventure were to
be the last of his life: in this resolution completely armed, he turned his
steps toward the Tent where she was, but not without being much more afraid of
that occasion, then of the other to which he was destined. Being no reason had
obliged him to conceal his passion, it was then unknown to very few, every body
approved of it, all the Princes and Princesses favored him in it, and
Antigonus who with much joy had seen the memory of Hermione die in his
thoughts, had not opposed the birth of a more lawful affection, and condemned
nothing but the violences that troubled his repose, and were prejudicial to
his health. When Demetrius came into Deidamia's Chamber, Barsina and Ptolomeus
were with her, and were witnesses of their salutation, and of their first
words; but as they were two very discreet persons, and who knew Demetrius his
passion, they quickly took a pretense to withdraw, and left him alone with the
Princess and her M^ds, who out of respect kept at the further end of the Room.
Demetrius had then all manner of liberty to entertain her, if his profound
respect, and the fear of displeasing her, had not taken away some part of his
confidence; yet being he had broken through the first difficulties, and knew
the goodness of that Princess, which made him judge she had no aversion against
him, and that nothing but the remembrance of Agis forbad him access unto her
heart, he recollected a little boldness, and looking upon her with eyes in
which his thoughts were painted; Madam, (said he) I were unworthy of the
employment that has been given me for this day, if to discharge it I should
not seek all that may contribute to the advantage of my party: to make me
conquer, it is not enough for me to command valiant men, to be inspired with
glorious examples, and to have my self some little courage, and valor; all
this may be amongst our enemies, and by the same advantages they may dispute
the victory against me: But how valiant soever they are, they will but vainly
oppose our forces, if in this occasion I be avowed by Deidamia, and if I may
march on to the encounter with some belief, that in favor of me, you will take
some interest in the success of it. Give me (my adored Princess) a victory that
depends on you, and suffer me to make my Companions hope* that if Demetrius be
yours by your owning him, he will hew them out a passage to day, both to the other
side of Euphrates, and even into the gates of Babylon; I am constrained, Madam,
to touch you by the consideration of our whole party, because by my own alone,
I cannot lawfully hope for these effects of your goodness. The Princess
hearkened with trouble to this discourse of Demetrius, and if she had not been
prepossessed with a great deal of esteem, nay, and even with a great deal of
good will toward him, she had not lent him so quiet an attention; she sighed
as soon as he had made an end of speaking, and beholding him with an eye in
which through some resentment he observed a great deal of gentleness. How
cruel you are (said she) to persist in the design of afflicting me! and what
an unjust violence you use upon me, in constraining me to complain of a Prince
whose person I infinitely esteem, and whose compassion was most obliging to me,
while it appeared to be without interest; that gift you make me of your self,
would be a very considerable one to me, if I were in a condition to receive it,
and you ought not to demand that of me by the consideration of your party,
which your own alone might make you worthily to hope for from a heart less
prepossessed then mine. Content your self, my Lord Demetrius, with this
Declaration, and that I only style that in you an unjust perseverance, which
from any other man but your self, I should receive as a cruel persecution; you
have no need of my favor to overcome your enemies, it would be fatal to you
in the Combat, and Fortune my cruel enemy would undoubtedly make you perish,
if you were owned by Deidamia. That glory (replied Demetrius) would be more
advantageous to me then victory, and I account Agis more glorious, and more
fortunate in his death, then he was in the whole course of his life; Alas!
(continued he with a sigh) how much reason he has to be pleased in the lower
shades with that perseverance which perchance with more justice then you, I
might call more unjust then mine, if I were not withheld by my respect, and by
my submission to to all your thoughts, it is by that strange prepossession that
my fortune is the more deplorable, and my destiny would be much more
supportable; if that affection you oppose me with had a reasonable foundation,
if it had a true and real Object, an Object that could take it up, and an
Object that could make use of the advantages which are refused me. You complain
unjustly, answered Deidamia, of a thing wherein you ought to find your
consolation, and your fortune (if you confine it to the thoughts I have of you)
would be a great deal worse then it is, if that precedence which I only give to
what is now no more, were granted to living persons; you have at least this
satisfaction, that there is no man in the World more favored, nor more
esteemed by me then Prince Demetrius; and you will yet have a more perfect one,
when I shall tell you that there is none before whom I would not prefer you, if
the Gods had left me in a condition to have still the liberty of making a
choice, and of giving a precedence; the little power I have to deal more
favorably with you, obliges me to make you this confession freely, which
perchance does injure Decency and Modesty; but you may be pleased to content
your self with it, and never to desire any thing more from her, of whom
without mortality afflicting her, you can ask nothing further. I will desire
death then, replied the amorous Prince, and in this combat I am going to, I Will
seek for death by the example of happy Agis, instead of that Victory I had
demanded of you: you alone had interrupted the purpose had to die for Hermione,
and I never resolved to live, till I resolved to live for you; but since you
abandon that life to despair, which I had rescued from the arms of death to
offer you, I Will go and give it to that perseverance you oppose against me, and
make a sacrifice of (...) ^^ppy Agis, that I may complete the glory of his
destiny. It Is with that intention alone I now go from you, and in giving you
the last farewell, I protest to you that this day shall be the last wherein you
shall see your self exposed to my cruel persecutions.

Demetrius uttered these words with so sorrowful a countenance, and
accompanied them with an action so little common, that Deidamia was troubled at
them, and remembering the woeful adieu she had received from the unfortunate
Agis, which according to his promise had really proved the last, she found so
much conformity in the action, and in the words of those two Princes, that she
was afraid for Demetrius of the same success and of the same effects of
despair which had deprived her of the other, and which had made her weep away
so many tedious days. In this apprehension, being mollified even to the
shedding some tears at that fatal remembrance, she stayed Demetrius who was
already going from her, and eying him with a look something more concerned then
ordinary. Whether you faign, said she, or speak really, I will not have you
die: and I have causes of grief already, without your giving of me new ones by
your death. I without doubt say something more then I should, but to complete
my fault, if it be true that I have any power over you, I employ it all in
commanding you to live, that you may give me the assistances you have promised
me. The sorrow which before was painted in Demetrius his face, was partly
dissipated by these words, and 'twas not with a light alteration he found by
the discourse, and by the countenance of his Princess* that his life was not
indifferent to her. He showed many signs of that sudden effect of his hopes,
and bowing to the Princess in a very submissive manner: My life replied he, is
not worth one of your tears, and by so rich a price it would be too highly paid
for; but though I were not obliged to obedience by the Empire you have over me,
certainly I ow to these marks of your good nature, the conservation of a life,
from which by an excess of goodness, you are pleased to draw some service. I
will live then, Madam, if the Gods will have it so, since you command me, but
it shall be no longer then I can do it without troubling, and without
displeasing you. After these words he took his leave of her, and having again
observed that she was not without fear for his safety, he went out of the
Chamber with some kind of hopes wherewith he suffered himself to be pleasingly
flattred. He was going to the place where he was expected by his men, when he
met the Prince of the Massagetes, who remembering with trouble that he had don
nothing but harm to a party for which he believed all he could be able to do
was less then he was obliged to, had from the Princess, and from Queen
Thalestris obtained permission to fight that day in company with Demetrius.
That Prince received him with an exceeding great joy, and though he considered
perhaps with some emulation, that the presence of so valiant a man would
eclipse part of his glory, yet did he give him no knowledge of it that was not
very obliging. These two brave warriors placed themselves at the head of those
soldiers that were to follow them; Alexander and Menelaus did the same on their
side, and all the Princes being come upon the bank of the River, set the forces
in a readiness to second them, and without stirring from the shore, saw them
partly upon the Bridge, and part in Boats, draw near to the other, which was
guarded by their Enemies.

The too great number of our combats will not permit an account of the
circumstances of this, the particulars whereof after so many such like
narrations would perchance be of a tedious length; it will suffice to say that
Orontes and Demetrius being come near to the other bank without any hindrance,
found it overspread with enemies, who disputed the descent with a stout
opposition; but being that they were valiant among the valiantest, that Love
made them act with extraordinary forces, and that they were generously
seconded, they opened their passage at last by the death of a great many men,
and made it clear for the soldiers wherewith the shore was quickly covered; as
soon as they could fight against their enemies with more equality then before,
they broke into them with a mavelous vigor, and scattered so many dead
bodies about the field, that Peucestas who commanded on that side as he had
done the day before, seeing that Fortune was contrary, and believing that if he
should stay the arrival of all those forces which were coming against him,
and under which the Bridge seemed to groan in every place, he should not have
a free return unto the Town, made his retreat as well as he could possibly, and
leaving a good part of his men either killed or taken prisoners, got to the gates
of Babylon with reasonable haste. The two conquering Princes not being
satisfied with that brave success, advanced within sight of the walls, toward
the other side where Alexander and Menelaus fought, and marching round that
part of the City which stood beyond the River, they prepared to go and fall
upon the Rear of them that disputed the victory against their companions. That
relief came to them very seasonably, for they had found so stiff a resistance
on their side, that they were in doubt with reason of the success of the day,
although they had done a thousand valiant actions; but Ariston who commanded
their Enemies, had no sooner seen Demetrius his Van appear, but fearing to be
charged on both sides, he quitted the field, and leaving them a free descent,
retired toward the City as Peucestas had done. In that rout many of his men
lost their lives, either fighting or flying, and the victorious Princes pursued
the run-awaies to the very gates of Babylon. As soon as the passage was clear
the forces destined to encamp on that side passed over quietly, and before
sunset the Army was equally divided on both banks. That part that had crossed
the River, took three several posts opposite to those on the other side, and
observed the very same order. Antigonus commanded that toward the East over
against Craterus, Eumenes that toward the North over against Oxyatres, and
Polyperchon toward the West within sight of that of Artabasus. All the other
Princes remained in their former quarters, but having free passage over the
Bridges, they visited one another every day, and went to each several post
according as their presence was necessary. The young Demetrius, and the valiant
Prince of the Massagetes, received the praises that were due to them from the
whole Army, and if Thalestris openly took interest in the reputation of
Orontes, Deidamia could not choose but be secretly concerned in that of
Demetrius. The Princesses were lodged together, and though they had their
Chambers apart, their whole quarter was encompassed with a wall of Canvas, and
that little enclosure was defended by a very strong guard which kept watch
continually for their safety. There was the usual randevouzes of the Princes,
and there it was they passed the greatest part of those days they had free
from action. Arsaces at Berenices feet enjoyed the felicity that had been
interrupted by his absence, and by his jealousy; Orontes at those of
Thalestris, endeavored to repair his former faults, and his former sufferings;
Demetrius with very great assiduity combated against the fatal thoughts of
Deidamia; and Barsina who in appearance was in a different condition from those
of her companions, faild not among so great a number of Princes to find
illustrious adorers. That beauty attended with all the graces that could set it
off, had been but a little while among persons capable of sense and
understanding, without producing its ordinary effects, and many of those
gallant men were already touched for her with a pain, the expression whereof
respect made them leave to their looks and sighs. Amongst them all Prince
Oroondates who was no less interessed in Barsina's affairs then in his own,
took particular notice of Prince Oxyatres, and observing part of what he had
done in his presence since Barsina's arrival, discovered that his inclinations
to that Princess were far from indifferency, he neither came near her, nor
spoke to her without changing color, but that effect had been so sudden, that
it was easy to judge this last sight had rather revived his ancient flames,
then kindled new ones in him. This imagination made the Prince of Scithia call
old remembrances to mind, and by little and little brought into his memory the
discourses he had heard before Barsina's marriage, concerning Oxyatres his
affection to her, but being in those days he took no particular interest in
her fortune, he had been ignorant of those passages, or had heard them but very
lightly. He therefore had then a desire to inform himself more fully of that
business, and he believed he had credit enough with Bar^^^a, to demand some
trust in what concerned her, and to oblige her to tell him freely all he had a
mind to know. Prince Oxyatres for all he was Darius his Brother, was but ten
years older then his Nephew Prince Artaxerxes: he was then hardly above six
and thirty; there were few men in the World that were of a fairer statute, of a
more pleasing countenance, or of a braver, and more magestick fashion; in his
garb and in all his actions, there appeared something extremely suitable to the
greatness of his birth, and that show of a Royal dignity that was to be
observed in his person, extended it self into his manners, and might easily be
discovered in all the actions of his life: his valor had made it self known
sufficiently, to hearken without envy to the recital of that of his
companions, and would have been more famous without doubt, if it had not been
obscured, partly by the fortune of Alexander, and partly by the destiny of the
house of Persia: if Oxyatres was valiant, he was also liberal* generous, and
without self interest, and by all these noble qualities had gained the
affection and respect of all those Princes that shared in the command with him.
Oroondates to whom for his virtue, and for many other reasons, he was more
considerable then to the rest, looked upon him also with a stricter eye, and he
no sooner believed him to be in love with Barsina, but he entertained the
desire of doing him service if it were possible, in a design which could nor
choose but be extremely honorable to his good friends. The more he settled in
that thought, the more he recalled into his mind the remembrance of those old
rumors which time and the importance of his affairs had blotted out of it; but
desiring a more particular assurance from Barsina's own mouth, he sought an
occasion to discourse with her of it particularly; it was not hard for him to
find one* and the next morning being gone betimes to the Princess Berenices
Chamber, he met Barsina at the door, who earlier then the custom of her sex,
was coming to give her the good morrow.

Berenice was in Bed, and her Chamber with respect forbad Arsaces, as well as
other men, to enter at that time of the day, was open to the Prince her
Brother, and to Barsina. As Soon as they had given and returned their mutual
salutations, and asked each other the first questions that affection put into
their mouths, Oroondates prayed his sister to lie a little longer to, thereby to
hinder the visits that might disturb their conversation, and afterward being
set down by her bedside with Barsina, he took that Princesses hands between
his, and looking upon her with a smile: If you had known, said he, the design I
have to persecute you to day, perchance you would have avoided meeting me more
carefully then you have done; but if I be indiscreet in that enterprise, you
without doubt have forced me to this indiscretion, by the little trust, and the
little friendship you have showed me. I will ever trust you (replied Barsina,
with an action like his) with whatsoever is most secret, and most important to
me, nor do I think I have reserved any thing from you, that you desired I
should make you acquainted with. You persist, answered Oroondates, in a
dissimulation, for which you shall suffer punishment before we part; and since
you have judged me unworthy to be your Confident, which I should value more
then I do my life, I will introduce my self into that Honor, and to drive my
indiscretion to the utmost, I Will make my Sister partaker in it, as well to
punish your reservations, as to oblige you to give her proofs of the friendship
which you have promised her. But what do you accuse me of? (interrupted
Barsina) and what is it you would now have of me? I would have your mouth (added
the Prince) confirm that to us, which Prince Oxyatres his actions have already
declared; I was too much versed in matters of that nature, to behold the
actions of a Prince in love, with as much ignorance as others, and that which
may deceive them, cannot escape the knowledge of a man too well instructed, and
too much interressed in what concerns Barsina; that Oxyatres loves you, and
that he has loved you, is a thing in which I find nothing to surprise me, but
that I should be more ignorant in it then other men, and that you should have
concealed it from him, who would open his heart to you with his own hands, if
there were any thought in it that would hide it self from you, that is it which
I will never pardon you without a great reparation. Ah! Brother (added the
Princess Berenice) I protest to you, you have prevented me, and that I from
Prince Oxyatres his actions had drawn a knowledge like that of yours* I was not
yet familiar enough with this fair Princess, to tell her what I thought, but
if for your sake I may be received into this confidence which you demand, I
promise her that I will never abuse it while I live. Barsina had not been able
to hear Oroondates his words without blushing, nor see her self exposed to his
reproaches, without some alteration of countenance, but she quickly settled it,
and breaking her silence with a most pleasing smile: I shall never be angry
(said she to the Prince) at any knowledge you shall have in my Affairs, in
which nothing but your goodness makes you take an interest, and if I never
entertained you with what passed between Prince Oxyatres and me before I had
the honor to know you, 'twas because you never asked me of it, and that the
occasion never offered it self; I know not (continued she with the same action)
whether these miserable remnants of beauty have been able to rekindle an
affection, which I thought had been extiguished ten whole years? but how ever
it be, I have no intention to make a secret of it to you, nor to refuse the
punishment you will in join me. It is easy for you to guess it, said the
Prince, and you well may judge we desire nothing else of you now, but the
recital of what we have been ignorant of, and of both the old and new passions
of Prince Oxyatres. I will hearken to you with a more then ordinary attension,
and shall not be less touched with the discourse of your Adventures, then with
those of Statira and Oroondates. You are going, replied Barsina, to waken
remembrances by your curiosity, of which I am extremely sensible; but what can
I refuse to two so dear, and confiderable Persons? Barsina made a stop at these
words, and fixing her eyes upon the Ground, kept silence a while, which she
broke at last in these terms.

The History of BARSINA.
I Will not entertain you with the first years of my life, nor with the first
testimonies I received of the love of my dear Memnon, Prince Oroondates has
learnt part of them formerly, and the divertisement the Princess his Sister
would find in them, could not equal the wearisomnesse she would receive by the
length of my Narration. I will content my self with telling you, Madam, that
Memnon was considerable, by the greatness of his Birth, which made him hold
one of the first Ranks in Persia, by the lovely Qualities of his Person, and by
that high Reputation which in very early years he had acquired in Arms, having
made himself famous above the other Persians in a thousand glorious
Encounters; he also was raised to the highest Military Charges in an Age, when
others do but begin to make themselves be taken notice of, and before he was
three and twenty he had commanded the Kings Armies in Person. This high Renown
making all Asia set their eyes upon him, and rendering him dear to Prince
Artabasus my Father, and to all those persons that had any power over me, was
the cause that he found great facilities in his design of serving me; but if by
Public Virtues he had merited the general esteem, he in particular had
Qualities that wrought a greater effect upon me, then the glorious success of
his Armies, or his high Reputation in War, and to say the truth, he never
fought with so much dexterity against his Enemies, as he showed in making
himself Master of my heart, and all that the most expert, and the most
passionate persons ever used to make themselves be loved, was put in practice
so gracefully by that Prince, that perhaps a more obdurate heart then mine
would have been won by his addresses. I Will make no difficulty to confess that
I yielded to them, nor is this confession shameful to me, since that affection
which a due acknowledgement made me give, was authorized by the will of all my
Friends, and by that of the King himself, who was pleased to interresse
himself particularly in the Affairs of our House as being nearest to the
Crown, and that which then held the first Rank in all Persia. Memnon having
gained the affections of the whole Court the King upheld him in it openly, and
Prince Oxyatres himself before he was blinded by this indifferent Beauty, did
him very good offices in the beginning; he was one of the forwardest in
recommending his person to me by the recital of his gallant actions, and in
that design he had the favor of him, found better success then he would
afterward have wished: I know not why the Gods would have that Prince to cast
his eyes upon me, among so great a number of persons much more lovely; but what
ever it were, he began to love me when I was no longer in a condition to
requite his affection and when by the will of my Friends, and by mine own
inclination, Memnon was already Master of the place he assaulted; had it not
been for that preengagement, Prince Oxyatres without doubt had qualities
capable to make him be considered by the greatest Princesses of the Earth and
besides the greatness of his Birth, and the price of his Valor which had made
it self known through all Asia, there could no excellent parts be wished,
either for the mind or body wherewith he was not very abundantly stored. I
should say more if you had not a perfect knowledge of him; this Prince when he
began to love me, or at least to let me see it, was about five or six and
twenty; I was ten years younger, and came into the World the same year, and
almost the same day with Prince Artaxerxes. Oxyatres continued some time
without discovering his affection to me, not being able to find a handsome way
to destroy what he had built himself nor to fall off fairly from what he had
done in the behalf of Memnon: Being he was virtuous, he could not but consider
the Virtue of his Rival, who at his Age had by force of Arms added Provinces
to the Persian Empire; and being he was prudent he feared to cross the Kings
intentions, who had declared himself in his favor. These considerations
withheld him a few Months, and would perchance have done so longer, if
Memnon's absence had not given him both opportunity and confidence to discover
himself. Memnon was sent about that time with a flying Camp into Susiana,
where certain Cities had bred some jealousies of a Revolt, and I remained at
Persepolis with a great deal of trouble for his departure. Prince Oxyatres
began then to make his thoughts appear to me by many of his actions; if I had
carefully observed them, and reflecting upon them since, I judged that if I had
not been taken up with other Cards, I might have guessed at part of his
intentions, without putting to the trouble of declaring them more plainly. He
rendered me all petty services with a great deal of watchfulness, and took
such cares in all things that concerned me, as nothing but love alone could be
the cause of; but I ascribed them to another motive and received them as
proceeding from that civility he had ever used, and from the good will which
the nearness wherewith I had the honor to be allied to him, might breed in
him toward me, or even from the esteem he had of Memnon, whom he loved and
honored in my person, while he was fighting for the service of the King his
Brother: In brief he was fain to explain himself openly to make me comprehend
the truth, and a declaration from his own mouth was necessary, to give me an
opinion which I was very far from having at that time.

I was one Evening on the Queens side with the Princesses, and a good number of
the Court Ladies, when the Prince seeing me at a Window a good distance from
the rest, and with something of sadness in my countenance, came thither to me,
and Asparia, and Rhaesaces, with whom I was talking, having left him their
place out of respect, when he saw he was neither overheard, nor observed by
any body. Cousin, said he, may I ask you if it be Memnon's absence that makes
you so sad, and so solitary? Sir, answered I, I know not what sadness you can
have observed in my face; but how ever it be, perhaps I should not be condemned
by you, though Memnon's absence should have been able to give me some
discontent. In the terms I then stood with Memnon by my Fathers express
command, I well might take the liberty to speak on that manner, without fearing
that my freedom would be blamed by Oxyatres, neither had it been so if he had
not taken an interest in it. He looked upon me with an eye in which I perceived
something extraordinary, and pressing one of my hands which he held between
his. Memnon, said he, is worthy of a very good fortune, but that you have now
raised him to, is above all he could lawfully hope for: I should account my
self most happy (answered I with my former innocence) if I could contribute to
the fortune of a man, whom the King, whom your self, and whom the whole Court
judges worthy of affection and esteem. If you could contribute to it? (replied
the Prince) Ah! Cousin, never doubt but that you may make the whole Fortune not
only of Memnon, but of all persons that see you; I say of all, and if I should
except any, it must be none but those that are either blind, or insensible. I
thought this discourse very strange, from the mouth of a Prince who had been
wont to entertain me in other terms, and when I was going to testify my
astonishment; I see well (pursued he) that my last words have surprised you, I
spoke them rather before I was aware, then with a set intention, and I should
have continued to conceal that of my real thoughts which you wonder at, if I
could have kept power enough over my self to do it; you would not understand
the language whereby by my eyes have long expressed themselves, and you have at
last reduced me to the necessity of declaring to you with my mouth, that Memnon
indeed is the most happy, and the most favored, but not the most zealous, and
the most passionate of Barsina's servants: I confess to you, Madam, that in
all my life, I had never heard words that were more unwelcome to me then these,
and that they put me into a confusion, which my silence and my blushing made
manifest to Prince Oxyatres; my being out of countenance made him partly so
too, and for all his confidence he cast down his eyes by my example, and
disposed himself to hear what I was going to reply. That was it that caused my
greatest trouble, and though perchance I should not have stood considering
whether I should follow what my resentment would have inspired against another,
I could not judge suddenly enough, which way I should proceed with the Brother
of my King, and with a Prince to whom our whole Family bore very particular
respects. I was in the disquiets which this irresolution gave me, when I was
eased, or to say better relieved by Prince Artaxerxes, and the young Princess
Parisatis who coming near us with a cheerful action broke off our conversation
for that time: When I was retired into my Chamber, and that I was at liberty to
reflect upon that Adventure, I found in it great causes of affliction, and that
which would have made some others glad of this new Conquest* was that which
moved me to detest it. If Oxyatres had been less great, and l^sse potent in
the Court, the Authority of Memnon and of my Friends might have maintained us
against the power of a Rival, and our Fortune seemed then to be crossed by the
sole person that could possibly cross it. The best consolation I found in this
displeasure, was in the belief I had that peradventure the Prince had only had
a mind to divert himself, or that if he had felt some moments of affection to
me, 'twas nothing but a passing affection, and a complacency which I should
hear no more of. I remained some few days in this opinion, but within a while
after I was constrained to lose it, and Prince Oxyatres having conquered the
first difficulties, was easily carried on to continue what he had begun He came
to visit me one day in my Chamber, where he found me taken up in the reading of
a Letter I had newly received from Memnon; his comeing in was so sudden, that
I had not time to put it up, and when I would have done it he would not suffer
me, but laying his hand upon it, prayed me to give him leave to see it, in such
terms that I could not civilly refuse a thing of so small importance;
especially being that I was not unwilling he should be confirmed in the opinion
he had that I loved Memnon, and that I believed that confirmation would serve
to dissuade him from the design I apprehended; he took the Letter then out of
my hand, and casting his eyes upon it, found these Words.

MEMNON, to the Princess BARSINA.
THE marks of your remembrance, my fair Princess, make my absence too glorious
to have any cause to complain of it, and all the pains it makes me suffer are
too fully recompensed by that goodness which lets fortunate Memnon know you
have not forgotten him: But yet these happinesses though they might satisfy a
reasonable ambition, cannot oppose the desire I have to see you again, and this
impatience would perhaps be prejudicial to the service of the King my Master,
if it were not fatal to his enemies, and if it did not make me hasten their
defeat, thereby to hasten my return. I will see you again, my adored Princess,
with the hope you give me that my absence shall not have changed my fortune,
and that after the combats I have sought far from you, I shall have nothing to
combat with when I am near you.


I knew that Oxyatres read these words with discontent, and when he had ended
them, he could not so well contain himself, but that lifting up his eyes to
Heaven he cried out; O Memnon! Must I in your good fortune find the ruin of
Oxyatres? These words troubled me very sensibly, but I was so a great deal
more, when turning toward me, after he had given me my Letter. Cousin said he,
Memnon has reason to be satisfied, and I know no reasonable man that would not
with the better part of his blood buy a felicity like his: I would it pleased
the Gods, went he on, that either Memnon had not prevented me in the design of
serving Barsina, or that death might prevent my fear of serving her
unprofitably. This discourse struck to the bottom of my heart, where it pierced
me with mortal stings, and though my confusions made me silent for a time, a
trouble which I was not mistress of, made me break it, and looking upon
Oxyatres with a resenting eye. Sir, said I, your discourse amazes me, and I had
thought for divertisements of this nature, you would have taken another object
then Barsina. My divertisements? Replied Oxyatres. Ah! Madam, give another name
to the most material employments of my life. No indeed, it is not Barsina that
ought be the object of my divertisements, but it is Barsina who but too much for
my repose is the object of all my thoughs, and of all my affections: this is a
declaration that displeases you, but it is a declaration I am forced to by a
most tyrannical power. Sir, said I, (interrupting him) I am unworthy of the
honor you do me, but though I should deserve it, the good offices you did for
Memnon are too fresh in your memory to have a thought so soon of destroying
them. I served Memnon in his suit to you, answered the Prince, as long as I
could without destroying my self; I would serve him yet with the hazard of my
life, and you may thereby judge how great the violence of that passion is,
which makes me cross the fortune of a man whom I have so dearly esteemed; I
have often told you, and told you truly, that Memnon was very worthy of love;
but I never told you, neither did I ever believe, that his good qualities
should forbid all others access to Barsina, unless they could take away their
sight, and their judgment for the knowledge of beauty: I will never contradict
what I have said to his advantage, but you will not think it strange if I be as
industrious for my self, as I have showed my self for a friend: I will speak to
you more modestly of Oxyatres, then I did of Memnon; and if I praised him to
you for his valor, and his good qualities, it shall be by nothing but my
passion that I Will endeavor to recommend my self. You are recommendable,
replied I, both by your birth and virtue, and by many excellent parts, and you
shall ever be so to Barsina, both as the Kings brother, and as one of the
persons whom in all the world I ought most to honor; if I must answer
seriously to your words, you will give me leave to say that your change
astonishes, and afflicts me both together, and that I cannot consider these
different proceedings without having reason to complain of one of them: in the
former you conformed your self to the Kings intention, to that of my friends,
and if I dare say so, ever to mine own inclination, and in the later you thwart
all that you before had favored. Hitherto, said he, I have carried my self
either as a man without passion, or as a man that was master of it, and now I
do like a man that is not only passionate, but like a man that is a slave to
his passion; I for the reasons you allege, have resisted this affection which
displeases you, as innocent and as full of respect as it is; but all my
resistance has served for nothing else but to render it more violent, and more
imperious: In short, fair Barsina, it is no longer in my power to hinder my
self from loving you, though to the consideration of Memnon, you should join
all those that ought to be strongest in me: and if by them you make me
comprehend that I have done amiss, and make me know the greatness of my pain,
yet can you neither cure me of it, nor make me to repent my fault. But Sir,
replied I infinitely perplexed, what can you hope for from a person whose
engagement is not unknown to you? And how great a glory soever it be to me to
be loved by the brother of my King, why do you reduce me to the necessity of
being ungrateful to your affection? I do not pretend, answered he, to be
considered by Basina as the brother of Darius, and should be unworthy of the
honor to serve her, if I thought to make use of other advantages, then those
my services can give me; my birth has nothing that can ex^mpt me from
servitude, and I now protest before you, that I will never combat Memnons
felicity, but by the testimonies of my passion. Give way to this design, since
it cannot be diverted, and if I cannot be loved by you, suffer me at least to
love you, without making the effect of it to be your aversion. I must be fain
to suffer all, said I, from a person to whom I ow all, but I cannot without a
very sensible grief, acknowledge the honor you do me, in a season when I
cannot receive it without being the most faithless woman in the world. To these
words I added many others to dissuade him from his resolution, but he still
continued firm, and by the rest of our conversation made me sufficiently
understand that he would very hardly be withdrawn from it. After that day he
let slip no occasion of expressing his love to me, and entertained me with it
every time he had opportunity; 'twas always with as much respect as I could
have exacted from the meanest Persian, and with so good a grace that a person
less preengaged would have found it very difficult to defend her self against
him; but being I was really possessed with an affection to Memnon, which he had
extremely well deserved, and that besides that tie, I was many ways obliged by
my honor, to keep the constancy I owed to him, I could not receive the proofs
of Prince Oxyatres love as other then causes of a very just affliction I had
lived some time in these discontents, when to bring me some consolation in them
Memnon returned to Persepolis, after having done the King mavelous good
service in his Commission, and brought the Rebels of Susiana under a perfect
obedience: The King received him with great demonstrations of friendship, all
the Court welcomed him with a great deal of honor, and I did all that modesty
and decency permitted me to testify that his absence had not altered my
inclinations. He had determined in his return, to demand from my Father and
from the King himself, the last effects of their good wills, but at his
arrival he found the Court in preparations for the voyage that was thought
upon for Scithia, whither the King, exasperated by the loss of certain troops
that had been cut in pieces upon the frontiers, resolved to go in person, and
to take all the Royal family along with him. 'Twas partly for that reason that
the King had made him hasten his return, and having discoursed with him in
private touching his designs for that intended war, obliged him to defer that of
his marriage; the little desire I had to engage my self under that yoke so
suddenly, made me approve of his considerations, nor did I think it strange
that so warlike a spirit should give it self wholly to an Expedition of such
consequence. He forgot nothing in the mean while, that could make appear the
greatness of his love, and expressed the troubles our separation had caused in
him, in terms that made me think him yet more lovely then he had seemed to
me before his departure. I would not entertain him so quickly with the love of
Prince Oxyatres, and believed he would know it but too soon, without my being
hasty to tell him of a thing which he could not hear without discontent;
neither was it needful I should take that care upon me, for the third day
after his coming home Prince Oxyatres himself saved me that labor, he was
confident it could not be long e're he would learn the truth, and therefore he
resolved to declare it to him himself in a fashion something extraordinary.

Having found him at the Kings rising in the Morning* he made much of him as he
had been accustomed to do, though in his face a suspicious body might have
discovered the alteration of his heart, and having intimated that he had a
mind to talk with him in private, he led him out of the Chamber into a
Gallery close by; there they took three or four turns discoursing only of
indifferent matters, but when Prince Oxyatres saw there was no company near,
and believed he might speak without being overheard, after having looked in
Memnon's face with an action that was not ordinary, he began thus: You would be
stricken, brave Memnon, at the discourse I have to make to you, if you had not
a courage great enough to hear stanger Novelties without being daunted; and yet
perchance, for all you are so accustomed to all manner of Events, you will not
be able to hear the confession I am going to make without being surprised; I
was willing it should be rather from my own mouth then any other bodies, that
you should be informed of the offense I have done you, since in avowing it, I
may represent my weakness to you better then another, and allege the power
that has made me faulty toward you* In a word, Valiant Memnon, I love Barsina,
and it is only by the loss of my liberty I have offended you. The Gods are my
witnesses, that for your consideration I defended my self a long time, and
that the remembrance of what I owed to you, to our friendship, and to the
services you have done the Persian Empire, made me for a great while oppose the
violence of a passion, which is become too imperious to be resisted any longer:
I love Barsina, and if without dying I could keep my self from loving her, I
would certainly do it for your sake; but since it is an attempt I cannot hope
for over my self, being so far engaged, suffer what my destiny has ordained in
spite of me and suffer him to be your Rival, who has ever been your Friend,
and whose ancient affection is not alienated by the birth of this new one.
Oxyatres perhaps would have said more, if the sadness he observed in Memnons
face at so unexpected a discourse, had not hindered him from going on; in effect
he was so surprised, and so afflicted together, that as he afterward confessed
to me, he in all the accidents of his life, had never been in so strange a
perplexity. He had always born a great respect, and even a great affection to
the person of Prince Oxyatres; but he had so great a zeal and so great a love
to the King, to whom he believed he owed all that was possible, that he held
whatsoever concerned him, in a most sacred veneration; that was it that caused
his most sensible discontent, and he made it sufficiently known to the Prince
by his silence, and by the alteration that appeared in his countenance; yet
having a mighty courage, he strove to receive it with dejection, and lifting up
his eyes from the ground, where he long had kept them fixed, to turn them upon
Oxyatres face, he answered him in these terms: With what greatness of courage
soever you are pleased to flatter me, you ought not to think it strange, Sir,
that in the confession you have made me, I find much matter of grief, and of
astonishment; I am astonished that a Prince to whom I am indebted for a part of
my happiness, and whom by a zeal not inconsiderable, I thought I had obliged
to my protection, rather then to my ruin, should have changed his inclinations
for my destruction, and should go about to take that from me with inhumanity,
which I believed I held from the King, and from himself, rather then from the
merit of my person, or that of my services; and I am afflicted that Fortune
having a will to raise me up a Rival, should have raised me up the only man
that I could fear, and the only man that could triumph over me by all manner of
advantages; if among all the Persians, or perhaps among all the Inhabitants of
Asia, any other but Prince Oxyatres, should unjustly assault my Fortune, I
would without doubt defend it, and defend it perhaps to his confusion; I would
make use of those Arms which are daily employed for the service of your House,
I would make use of a good number of generous Friends, and for my greatest
advantage I would make use of that friendship wherewith you heretofore have
honored me; but being to dispute it against Prince Oxyatres, I can draw no
manner of assistance, neither from those Arms I wear to fight for him and his,
nor from that friendship which his passion has cruelly extinguished: I cannot
Sir, I cannot dispute any thing against you, and you may take Barsina from me,
both by the greatness of your Birth and Authority, and by the merit of your
person: I know that I ought to yield to you in all things yet can I not yield
Barsina without giving my life up to you with her; the respect I ow you has not
that Empire upon my love, but if my life be contrary to your satisfaction, I
know how to give it you with the same courage, that makes hazard it every day
for the service of all that has relation to you. Oxyatres was touched with
these words, but they wrought no effect upon his passion, and being willing to
express his intentions to Memnon: I do not pretend, said he, that my Birth,
and the Rank I hold in Persia, should give me any advantages over you, and for
the Conquest of Barsina. I Will make no use of that which I account to be below
her, and below your Virtue; if you can fear me for a Rival, it is only as the
Lover of Barsina, and not as the Brother of Darius, for I mean not to dispute
her against you by the Kings Authority, nor by that I may have my self in his
Dominions, but only by my services, and by the proofs of my affection* You have
yet an absolute advantage over me, and you see me undertake that with very
little hope, which you have justly, and happily obtained: The Victory is yours
when I do but begin to fight, and Barsina's heart which I assault with feeble
forces, is quite overcome already by the merit, and by the love of Memnon; it is
in this point that my condition is as much to be implored as yours is glorious,
and that if you ought to look upon a Rival who ever was your Friend, it is
rather with compassion then with resentment. Memnon was a little flattred with
these words, but they were not able to satisfy him, and he was going to reply
with a countenance discontented enough, when the King who was gotten ready,
while they were talking, broke off their conversation by coming into the
Gallery with a great deal of company. Memnon who was seized with an
extraordinary sadness, and who felt himself incapable of any pleasing
entertainment, would not stay near the King in that humor, but finding means
to slip away in the crowd, went out of the Palace, and came into my Chamber
just as I was dressed, to make me acquainted with his trouble. I presently saw
it in his face, and guested the cause, when he declared it to me himself in
such passionate terms, that he exceedingly redoubled my affliction by the
knowledge of his; he at first made some complaints for my having concealed a
thing of such importance from him, but I contented him by saying, that my care
of his quiet had obliged me to it, and that since it was an unwelcome News. I
had desired he should hear it rather from the mouth of another, then from mine.
He could not keep himself that day from going a little beyond the limits of
that moderation which was very natural to him, and after having complained of
his Fortune, and of Prince Oxyatres who came to cross him so unjustly. Madam,
said he, if Prince Oxyatres will contest with me only by his love, and by his
services, ought I to fear he can deprive me by those ways, of what I hold from
your goodness alone? and ought I to fear that you will look upon the
advantages he has over me, to my destruction? Ah! if this fear be lawful, as
you desire the favor of the Gods give me some knowledge of it, and suffer me
not to conserve my life a minute after the loss of my hopes. In another
reason, replied I, I would not easily have pardoned this discourse, nor do I
think that by any of my actions I have given you any just cause to suspect me
of inconstancy: I shall know how to render unto Prince Oxyatres what I ow to
the Kings Brother, without forgetting that I ow all to Memnon; and though with
his love and services, he should also employ his Authority, and that of the
King his Brother, he should not be able to deprive you of what you have so
lawfully acquired. If it prove so (said Memnon, better satisfied then before)
as without doubt it will, since my fair Princess promises it me, I will no
more lament my destiny, but shall account Prince Oxyatres his love, rather an
effect of Barsina's merit, then of my ill fortune. He was comforted on this
manner by the promises I reitterated to prefer him while I lived, before all the
persons in the World. He was many times upon the point to hasten our Marriage,
thereby to break Oxyatres his pretensions, but then he beliv'd he could not do
it handsomely, after he himself had declared to the King, that he would stay
till the return of that Voyage, for which all the Court was making
preparations, and he judged that by that precipitation contrary to his former
design, he should exasperate Prince Oxyatres whom he infinitely considered, and
incite him to go beyond the terms he had proposed; these Reasons retarded it,
and in the mean time he suffered the visits Prince Oxyatres made me, by the
assurances I gave him every day, that he could not draw any lawful cause of
fear from them; they often met in my company, and I used Oxyatres still with
great respect, and Memnon as I had been wont to do before Oxyatres was
concerned. Oxyatres showed very much discontent at it, and expressed it in most
passionate complaints, when he was alone with me, but his resentments never
made him fly out against Memnon, nor against me; he kept still in the
resolution he had taken to employ nothing to his advantage, but his love and
his services: In the Interim he carried not his passion so secretly, but that
it was quickly taken notice of by the whole Court, and came also to the Kings
Knowledge.

That great Prince who cherished Memnon, both through a strong inclination, and
through a just acknowledgement of his services, who had particularly favored
him in his design upon me, and who had moreover engaged himself to support him
in it to the uttermost, heard this news with some displeasure, and as soon as
he saw Prince Oxyatres, testified to him by reasonable sharp words, that he
had disobliged him, by by crossing the affections of a person that was so dear
and so considerable to him as Memnon. Prince Oxyatres who had prepared himself
for that event, hearkened to the Kings reproof without interruption, and when he
had done speaking; Sir, said he, if my love to Barsina were an effect of my
will, I should be faulty in thwarting the intentions you have in favor of
Memnon; but since it is by constraint I yield, you can only accuse Barsina's
char^es for their violence upon me; If I could cease to love her, I would do so
to please you, but since that effect of the complacency I ow to your Majesty's
desires, can never be in my power; permit me, Sir, to suffer a pain, for which
I will use no remedy that Memnon himself can justly disapprove. You will thereby
be better served then you were formerly, Memnon to maintain himself in your
affection and in your esteem to the prejudice of Oxyatres, will second the
first actions he has done for your service, by others greater, and of more
importance; and Prince Oxyatres whom the glory and fortune of Memnon have
pricked with emulation, will seek the occasions of making himself as
considerable by his valor, as he is by the honor of being brother to Darius;
we shall strive who can be forwardest to fight for you in the war to which we
are going to march, and if Barsina can yet be disputed against Memnon, we
shall both of us endeavor to purchase her with our blood, and with that of
your Majesty's enemies. You have no need of that motive, replied the King, to
actions of valor which are ordinary to you, and the Persians consider you no
less for your virtues, then for your birth; but neither of them can dispense
with me for what I ow to Memnon, and without ingratitude, I cannot for the
passions of my brother, no nor for my own, lose the remembrance of his
services, nor that of the promise I have made to favor him in his love to
Barsina: if after this knowledge of my intentions, any other but my brother
should go about to cross them, I would oppose his with all my authority, and
would perchance make him repent his little consideration of my will; but since
it is from a brother, and from a brother who is very dear to me, that I receive
this disrespect. I will content my self with praying him as his brother, to lay
aside so unjust a passion, if he can possibly, and if he persist in it, not to
hope for any support or assistance from me, to the prejudice of what I ow to
Memnon and to my word. No Sir, answered the Prince, I demand nothing of your
Majesty but the permission to serve Barsina, and I protest to you that that
favor shall never produce any effect you can have cause to disapprove. I have
already told you, said the King, that I would not use my authority to force
your inclinations; but neither will you think it strange, that I leave Barsina
in the liberty of hers, and that I grant Memnon, so long as he shall carry
himself as he has done hitherto, all the testimonies of my affection he can in
reason demand. Such was the discourse between the King and the Prince his
brother, which Oxyatres was not overmuch satisfied, but he dissembled his
trouble the best he could, and that very day being come to visit me, he told me
part of that conversation.

While these things passed on this manner, there were great preparations for the
Scithian Expedition, in which the King resolved to take the Royal family with
him, and by his example, the chief of those that went the voyage took their
wives and daughters with them, to wait upon the Queens and Princesses, who for
all they were so young, were exposed to the hardship of that journey. True it
is, that the magnificence and commodiousness of their Tents, and of their
Chariots made it almost as easy as the abode in Towns, and the King believed
it no small mark of his Greatness, to be able to remove whithersoever he went,
a Court as full of pomp, as that he had at Persepolis. My mother, my sisters,
and my self, were of the number of those that made that voyage, and with us
Roxana, Ispatia, the daughters of Mentor, and many other of the fairest, and
most principal Ladies of Persia, whom you since have known. Oxyatres and
Memnon expressed an equal satisfaction, when they knew they should go to the
war without being parted from me, and that I should be in a manner present at
the Actions they meant to do in emulation, to make themselves worthy of my
affection. Those were the terms they were pleased to use; and when the day of
our setting forward was come, Oxyatres addressing himself to Memnon in my
presence: Memnon, said he, the time draws near when we shall dispute for
Barsina, by the ways that are permitted me: you have acquired a brave and a
just reputation, which is it that flatters Barsina in your favor, and she
believes with a great deal of reason, that a man less valiant, or at least
less famous then Memnon, is not worthy of her affection: perhaps I pass in
her opinion for a man of little valor, but I hope fortune will now give me
the occasions to make her know that I am not born without courage. I know I
have not undertaken an easy enterprise, in proposing to my self to win a fame
in this Expedition equal to that of yours; but I must either die, or be
accounted by Barsina to be as valiant as Memnon. Weel charge the Enemy
together, weel strive who shall hazard himself furthest in seeking glory, and
he that can make most Scithians perish under his sword, shall be called most
worthy of Barsina: so it is we ought to contest for her, and he that shall
gain her by his sword, may boast that he has more gloriously acquired her,
then if she were his only by the Kings favor, or by the favor of Artabasus.
Oxyatres spoke on this manner, and Memnon replied with a great deal of modesty:
Sir, I neither ought nor will dispute any thing against you, and I reckon both
my valor and my reputation much inferior to yours; it shall not be with an
intention to equal you, that I Will assault the Scithians in your company, but
since you are pleased I should wait upon you, perchance I shall go on far
enough to conserve that glory Fortune has given me, and shall do it without
other design then that of continuing to the King and your self, those services
whereby I had hoped for Barsina, by his approbation and by yours. You are more
modest then I answered Oxyatres, but you suffer your actions to speak, when
mine are silent, and the satisfaction of your mind renders you free from those
fits of passion, which carry me, without doubt beyond my self* but be it how
it may, I Will do my best either to execute my propositions, or to deliver you
quickly of a Rival. They had some other discourses in my presence, and within
a little after took horse with the whole Court, which departed that day from
Persepolis: I will not talk to you of the magnificence of our troops, and of
the Kings equipage, of the number of his guards, and of his Chariots; you know,
Sir, in what manner he was wont to march, and you since have heard that it was
with a pomp worthy of the greatest King in the World, and with two hundred
thousand fighting men, that we advanced toward the Araxis. It was in that
Expedition that Prince Artaxerxes first bore Arms, and 'twas in the same field
that Prince Oroondates made his glorious Apprenticeship both in Love and War.
We took long matches toward the Araxis, where our passage was prepared, and
during all the voyage neither Oxyatres nor Memnon were ever from me, but at
those times they were forced to spend in their several charges. Oxyatres who
had a desire to make himself remarkable in emulation of Memnon, prayed the King
his brother, to give them equal imploiments, to the end that with forces and
commands alike, they might make their valor known without advantage; and
though Memnon very modestly refused that equality with Oxyatres, yet did he
accept of it at the desire of that Prince, and peradventure what respect soever
he testified toward him, he had no great repugnance against it. The King
divided all his Cavalry into two parts, each of which consisted of seven or
eight and twenty thousand horse, and set those two valiant Commanders at the
head of them with an equal authority. Mazeus had the Command of all the
Infantry, and Prince Artabasus my Father was the Kings Lieutenant General of
the whole Army; the little knowledge I have, even in the terms of war, hinders
me from speaking of the march of our Army, and of our first successes. After a
great many of days we came to the bank of the Araxis, and upon Bridges of
Boats that were prepared, our Forces passed that River, and encamped in the
Territories that obeyed the King of Scithia. The King and the chief Commanders
would have had the Ladies stay on this side the River, but they all together
opposed that motion, and the Queens protested that since the King had brought
them so far, they would follow him whither so ever he went. You know, Sir, all
that passed of any consequence at that time, and I will only tell you and the
Princess your sister, who is much less instructed in them, those matters
wherein I have some interest. We hardly were beyond the River, when we heard
that the King your Father with all the forces of Scithia, was coming to meet
us, and the next day after our Scouts discovered your foremost Troops, who came
to encamp within half a days march of ours. You are not ignorant, Sir, of all
the skirmishes that happened in those beginnings, and as you made your self
renowned by a thousand gallant actions on your side, on ours young Artaxerxes in
those first trialls of his Arms, acquired a mavelous reputation: but Oxyatres
and Memnon pricked with emulation, and engaged by the propositions they had
made, ran on mutually to extraordinary exploits, and by the report of those
that came off those services, did actions that were altogether wonderful.
Perchance you may remember one encounter, which was the most bloody of all that
passed beyond the Araxis, and which might deserve the name of a Battle, though
the whole Armies fought not in it, since on both sides there were above twenty
thousand men left dead upon the place. I remember it very well, (said Oroontes
interrupting Barsina) it was to gain a rising ground which was of advantage to
each party, that the Cavalry was insensibly engaged; we contested for it with a
great deal of blood, and there it was I received my first wound. The Troops,
went on Barsina, were already mingled, and slaughter had brought disorder
amongst them, when Prince Oxyatres seeing Memnon, who bloody all over, hewed
open his passage with his sword amongst your men, came up to him with a loud
cry, and placing himself by his side; Memnon, said he, do you see yon'd red
Standard, about which the greatest force of the Scithians appears, and where
without doubt their most considerable Captains fight in person? Memnon having
cast his eye that way where Oxyatres pointed; I see it, answered he, and if I
be not deceived it is the King of Scithia's own Standard, since there are so
great a number of men that defend it. There it is, replied Oxyatres, that we
must seek for Barsina, or for death; we must either perish, or bring off that
glorious mark of valor. Lets on Memnon, and see to which of us Fortune will
give that advantage. Saying these words he flew with his sword in his hand
into the midst of the Scithians, and Memnon excited with some resentment for
seeing himself pricked with honor in such an occasion, in stead of answering,
ran whither glory called him with an impetuousness like his; I have heard them
say who were present at this action that never two men fought more generously;
that emulation had like to have been fatal to both of them, and they rushed
headlong into dangers* where in all probability they should have met with
death; but Fortune was more favorable to them, and those that followed them
were so animated by their example* that they bro^k the Scithian Squadron in
that place, and the thrung of those that environ^d the Standard, upon which
they had set their aim, being opened by their fury, they that defended it
nearer were either routed or cut in pieces, and he that bore it, was beaten
down with two blows given him at the same time by Memnon and Oxyatres* they
both ceaz'd upon it at the same instant, but as soon as Memnon cast his eye
upon Oxyatres, he pulled back his hand which he had thrust forth, and being
willing to yield him the glory of that action; The Standard, Sir, said he, is
yours, and mine the honor of having seconded you. No Memnon, replied Oxyatres,
I will not rob you of your part in a glory which is equal between us, and I am
not ill satisfied to divide it with you: With these words he gave the Standard
into the hand of those that followed them, and turning another way, carried new
marks of his Valor thither. Here Oroondates interrupting Barsina: That which
you tell me, said he, is very true, 'twas indeed the Kings Standard which we
lost in that encounter, and 'twas a Nephew of Arsacomes that carried it; but
the King my Father was not in the field that day, and he comforted himself for
the loss of his Standard by the gaining of that piece of ground, for which we
had fought.

In all other occasions (pursued Barsina) Prince Oxyatres did almost on the
same fashion, and he hardly ever saw any danger into which he invited not
Memnon, and into which he did not precipitate himself with him: Memnon sought
not those occasions, but being stung to the quick, neither did he avoid them,
and though in his discourse he yielded all to Oxyatres, yet he disputed all
with him by his actions; this manner of proceeding had like often to have been
their destruction, and was the cause that they sometimes committed faults in
point of their commands, by fixing themselves too eagerly upon particular
actions. The King himself blamed them for it many times, but it was hard to
convert Oxyatres, who had undertaken either to eclipse the glory of Memnon by
the luster of his own, or make him perish in the dangers to which he exposed
him daily, or force him to quit his pretensions to me by the difficulties he
raised him up. In the mean while they both saw me every day, and Prince
Oxyatres expressed his passion to me by such obliging, and such pleasing
marks, that if indeed I had not been prepossessed, and prepossessed with a
great deal of justice, I should not have been unsensible of it. He chanced to
be one day alone with me, and taking his time to entertain me with more liberty
then he did in company: Shall I never bend you? (said he to me) and will you
see me languish eternally at your feet, without testifying at least that my
pains are not unpleasing to you? Any other body but your self, if they were
not sensible of love, would yet be touched with compassion, and not let her
self be so far dazzled with a first affection, but that she would still have
eyes to judge of those that love and serve her: Is my passion, or my person the
more despicable, because another loved you before me? and may I not repair for
the time to come, what I lost in times past, by having employed some years of
my life in other occasions, then those of your service? Must Memnon's Genius
have so great advantages over that of Oxyatres? And finally, must I be born to
be his slave, and he to be my conqueror and my Master? You are born, Sir,
answered I, for greater matters then those in which you now employ your self;
and I am born with all manner of inclinations to honor you as I ought to do. Do
not believe, Sir, that I am unsensible of the proofs of your affection, I
receive them with much acknowledgement and respect, and the advantages I give
to Memnon, proceed from an ancient and a lawful Engagement, and not a
preferring of his passion before yours; if I were tied to you in the same
manner, and that among men there could one be found, who by Birth, or by the
Qualities of his Person might be accounted above you, I would undoubtedly
disdain him, to keep my self exactly within the constancy I should ow to you;
and perchance I should not have those thoughts of acknowledgement and respect
for him, which I have for you. Ah! cried the Prince, how cruel are those
thoughts of respect to Oxyatres? and how little is it by them that his love
ought to be requited, in the condition to which it has now subjected him? cast
but your eyes upon that I bear to you, and do not kill those hopes to which my
life is fastened, by an unsensiblenesse which in vain you would disguise; I
might be satisfied with the Reasons you allege, if I were upon other terms,
and if I were wounded with a light affection, but in the state I am reduced to
by the violence of mine, I can live by nothing but the hope of being loved by
the Princess Barsina. As he ended these words, he took one of my hands which
was more then he used to do, and keeping it by force, put his mouth upon it,
and held it there so long, that Memnon coming then into my Chamber, found him
in that posture. Although I believe that Memnon was confident enough of my
affection, to draw no jealousy from that action, yet was I so out of
countenance, and so vexed together for having been surprised in that condition,
that I could not dissemble my astonishment, nor my trouble; the two Princes
easily observed it by the color that came into my face, but Memnon stung to
the quick at that unpleasing sight, and taking that color to be an effect of
shame for his coming in, could not so well contain himself, but that he showed
some part of his resentment. B^ush not Madam, said he to me, Prince Oxyatres
does well deserve to have that granted in the beginning of his love, which is
not due to Memnon after a service of many years: These words, in which I found
a great deal of sharpness, coming out of Memnons mouth* touched me very
deeply, and being desirous to let him know it was not with my consent that
Oxyatres had obtained that freedom. That which I grant not to Memnon, replied
I, I grant to no body, and it is by other marks I would testify my respect to
Prince Oxyatres, then by liberties he has taken against my will. Memnon found
some satisfaction in these words, but Oxyatres was terribly nettled by them,
and could not see the care I took to justify my self to Memnon in his
presence, without a great deal of trouble; I saw his countenance alter, and
after he had stayed a while to make himself Master of his resentments: Memnon,
said he, is worthy of the Empire he has over your mind, and his fortune would
not be great enough, if you were not so careful to make him see your
innocence. Yes Memnon, 'twas by force that indiscreet Oxyatres kissed Barsina's
hand, and to repair my fault I am obliged to endeavor her justification: With
these words he went out of my Chamber not staying for any reply, and left me in
a greater confusion then I was before; although! took no pains to hide from him
my inclinations to Memnon, yet was I extremely troubled, that Oxyatres had
taken my care to justify my self, proceeding from my complacency for him; and
indeed to take it so, that carriage had something that was disobliging to
Oxyatres, but he took it so ill from me, that of many days he saw me not
again, and by an effect of anger, and of jealousy, he began then to hate
Memnon, with whom till that time had ever kept in terms of esteem, and in some
remainders of good will; by little and little he grew more cold to him, and in
the end hardly spoke to him at all. This came to the knowledge of the King, and
of the whole Court and the King used his utmost power to settle the mind of
Oxyatres, but he was not able, and that jealous Prince could not without a
violent indignation behold a Rival that had so great advantages over him. His
anger against me was quickly dissip^ted, and he paid me my visits again more
constantly then ever: 'Twas about that time, Sir, that our Army was infected
with a Disease which destroyed a great part of it beyond the Araxis, and took
away Darius his hopes of the progress he thought to have made in Scithia; we
thereupon repassed that River, leaving your fields covered with many thousand
Persians, and returned into our own Territories, whither you followed us
presently after, and encamped within a little distance of our Army: There it
was that many memorable actions passed, there it was that you assaulted our
Camp by night, and there it was that I began to be indebted to you, since I was
one of the number of those Ladies that happened to be in the Queens Tent, when
both your fortune and ours brought you thither to save us from the violence of
the Scithians, and to make you fall your self into the power of our fair
Princess. There it was that I first saw you in a condition, that could charm
and terrify both together, and that among all those to whom your sight was so
favorable, I perhaps was she who had the most grateful thoughts for so
considerable a service; I will not say any thing more to you of that encounter,
nor of the effects it produced in us, since that is not the thing you desire
from my discourse, and that I ought only to tie my self to my particular
Adventures.

Oxyatres and Memnon strove who should spend most of the time with me, which
they had free from employments of the War; but with a different success, for
all that I saw really great, and really lovely in the Person of Prince
Oxyatres, was never capable to make me forget what I owed to my former
affection* yet I confess I was not insensible of that he bore to me, and that
it was not without some discontent I saw him so ill satisfied, but I could do
no more then pity him, and entreat him as much as possibly I was able, to give
over a design in which he could not persevere, if he had a good opinion of me;
he would fly into passion at those requests instead of disposing himself to
grant them, and in the mean time he was so exasperated against Memnon, that he
could no longer suffer him but as an Enemy; yet would he never make use of
those advantages his Birth afforded him, and though he met him with me every
day, his respect to me kept him still within his former terms, and hindered him
from showing his alteration otherwise then by his coldness and his silence;
but at Court, and in other places he took a greater liberty, and gave Memnon
causes of complaint, which he never would have endured from any body but Darius
his Brother, he could not suffer his Valor to be spoken of with those praises
that were wont to be given it, and when occasion of that discourse happened in
his presence he lessened the worth of it as much as possibly he could. The King
was talking one day upon that subject with the Queens and a great many other
persons, and after that upon some encounter which had passed a few days
before, he had said all to Memnon's advantage, that truth, and the affection
wherewith he honored him very especially could put into his mouth, the Prince
jealous and impatient, not being able to hear the continuation of that
discourse, wherein he seemed to be particularly concerned* Memnon (said he to
the King) is valiant, but there are a great many of your Subjects whose valor
is not inferior to his; if there be any service done Memnon goes neither
further, nor more boldly on then we; but though a good part of the danger be
ours, the glory is entirely his, and perchance it would be sought for with more
hazard, if it were distributed with more justice. The glory of Memnon, replied
the King, does no injury to yours, and so long as you had no other interest,
you never went about to oppose it; it is nothing but your own change that makes
you unjust your self, while you accuse others of injustice, and that makes you
commit a fault, which you would have judged unworthy of you when you had your
reason undisturbed. Oxyatres blushed at this Answer of the Kings, but respect
hindered him from replying, as without doubt he would have done to any other
body. This discourse was related to Memnon, who heard it without being moved,
out of the respect and love he bore to the Kings Person, and as often as they
told him any such passages, or that he received any new proof of Oxyatres his
hatred, I am very unfortunate (would he say) to be hated by the Brother of my
King, but though Oxyatres should kill me with his own hand, I will never hate
the Brother of Darius. This character of respect and love was graven so deeply
in his heart, that he scarce so much as murmured before me against his
Persecutor, and he was yet more strongly confirmed in that humor, by a very
odd event which Fortune sent him. He was abroad with five or six hundred Horse
upon some design he had, when he met a Party of Scithians much greater then
his, and having with less prudence then he was wont to show in other
Encounters, engaged himself in fight, while by his valor he counterballanced
the inequality of number, he was charged and surrounded by another Squadron of
the Enemy, whereby the first was seconded, and though for the Victory, or for
his safety he did extraordinary exploits, his life had been in manifest danger,
if the Gods had not brought Prince Oxyatres thither, who was gone forth that
morning with a thousand Horse. The Prince having a while beheld that unequal
combat, from a higher ground, presently learned the truth from a Horseman,
that was running away to save himself, and when he knew that Fortune working
to his advantage was going to free him of a Rival, in the defeat of a small
body of those of his party, he was at the same time assaulted with very
different thoughts; that pressing disquiet put him instantly in a sweat, and he
by his action made those that were about him see in how great a conflict he
was. Let Us stay (said he to himself) till Memnon be killed, before we give our
Party the relief we are bound to do, when my Rival is dead, I Will save those
that are left, and will do that for his revenge, which my love forbids to do
for his rescue. This was his first suggestion, but his Virtue, and the urgent
necessity would not suffer him to continue long in it. O Fortune my Enemy!
cried he, why did thou not guide me to some other place? and since I was to
succor my Rival, why did thou not make him perish before he was in a
condition to be the better for it? Saying these words, he commanded to sound a
charge, and fall upon the Scithians with a fury which they were not able to
sustain; in short they were quickly routed, and after having lost a great many
of their men, they left the Field and the Victory to Prince Oxyatres, and to
Memnon his life, and the means to know his Deliverer: 'Twas not without grief
that he saw himself indebted to his Rival for his life; but being he had
neither ingratitude nor pride, he was willing to appear sensible of that
obligation, as he was bound to be, and turning toward the Prince with an action
accompanied with all signs of acknowledgement: Sir, said he, my life is yours,
and I should say you had gained it by this last effect of your generosity, if
by all manner of rights you were not in possession of it before; but in offering
it I offer you nothing that was not yours already, and nothing which you and
yours might not ever dispose of with most absolute Empire.

The Prince who had done an action which he could not rejoice at, though his
virtue forbad him to repent it, seemed little sensible of Memnons
acknowledgement, not so much as giving heed to his words; I have done nothing,
said he, out of generosity, or out of friendship to you, nor had I any other
design then that of fighting with our Enemies, and releeving our Party. Having
spoke these words he turned about from Memnon, and rode away without giving him
leisure to entertain him longer. Memnon that very day made me the recital of
that Adventure, and by that augmentation of esteem he gave me for Oxyatres, did
but redouble my discontent to see him persist in a design whereby he was like to
reap so little satisfaction. For Memnon, he was so nearly touched with that
obligation, that if Oxyatres had desired any thing else of him but what he did,
he would have given it up to him without reluctance: he praised his action
before the King, in terms that made the whole Court know how great a sense he
had of that good turn; but Oxyatres was neither moved with his acknowledgement,
nor with his praises, and expressed to all the World that he accounted himself
most unfortunate, in having been forced by his duty, to fight for the
preservation of a life, which was opposite to the repose and to the felicity of
his; he dissembled not his thoughts to any body, and when I would have praised
him for it as well as others, and have testified that I had some part in the
obligation, he received my discourse with a great deal of coldness. I did not
hope, said he, to have thanks from you, which are not advantageous to me, nor
did I think to do you a service worthy of these brave acknowledgements in
exposing the life of Oxyatres for the defense of Memnons; I had no other
intention but that I fighting against the Scithians our Enemies, and if in the
execution of that design I have been so happy as to do you a good office in the
preservation of my Rival. I wish with all my heart I had done it you to the
full, in losing for his greater security, and for his repose, that life whereof
you make so little reckoning. Ah Sir, replied I, lose that opinion if you have
it, and do not believe I can make little reckoning of your life, nor of your
person, I consider them both as I ought to do, and I have thoughts of you,
which nothing but my ill fortune hinders you from being contented with. I will
content my self, answered the Prince, when my passion shall be the thing you
consider most in me, and when in Barsina's heart which can establish all my
felicity, I shall see no body more happy nor more favored then my self. If
that could be, said I, you should have no cause of complaint against a person
who is every way disposed to honor you. That may be, added he with an
extraordinary tone, that may be perhaps by means we have not yet made trial
of, and in the despair into which you cast me, and the shame of seeing my
Rival triumph over me so easily, I shall be capable of all things I can
attempt, without exceeding the terms I proposed unto my self when I began to
serve you. As he ended these words he went out of my Chamber with an action
that had many signs of anger in it, and was hardly gone twenty or thirty paces
from the Tent when he chanced to meet with Memnon; he changed color at that
encounter, as Memnon told me afterward, but he quickly recovered himself, and
having returned Memnons salute, he put forth his hand to him, with a more open
countenance then for some time before he had been wont to show him. Will you
give me leave, said he, to have a little discourse with you, to ask your
counsel and assistance, about a business I lately had notice of? Memnon was
surprised at this demand, but he dissembled his astonishment, and receiving the
Princes words with a cheerful countenance. Could I be so happy, replied he, as
to believe my Prince would employ for his service this life which I hold from
him? and saying these words, he followed him that way he led; after having by
Oxyatres example commanded his attendants to leave him, they walked together
awhile without speaking, or if they spoke 'twas only of indifferent matters,
but when they were a good way from their servants, and that by the
interposition of a little hill, they were out of sight of the Tents, Prince
Oxyatres made a stand, and turning toward Memnon, after he had looked awhile
silently upon him: You shall know now (said he) the subject of the discourse I
desired to have with you, and shall learn to what use I reserved that life for
which I fought to the prejudice of mine own; when I undertook to serve Barsina
with you, or rather when I was forced to it by a passion, which for your sake I
had long resisted, I promised you I would never help my self against you by the
authority of the King my Brother, nor by that which my rank might give me
amongst the Persians, and that I would dispute Barsina with you only by my
services. I think I have kept my self exactly enough within these limits, I
have used no kind of credit, nor power to hurt you, and in the employments we
have had to make our selves worthy of her esteem, I have ever sought for an
equality between us; I will continue to the end in this manner of carriage
toward you* and since I have loved Barsina unprofitably, and that by the
victory you bear away from me, my hopes are quite extinguished, as you triumph
over my repose, you must also triumph over my life, or defend your own with
arms equal to mine; I fly not to this resolution against you, but at the
extremity wherein my life has no other foundation but the loss of yours, and
wherein the repose of yours depends on nothing but my death alone; this is the
last action we will do for Barsina, she shall be the Prize of the Conqueror,
and the victory shall give that to the more valiant, or to the more fortunate,
which during the life of his Rival, his services never could secure him of. In
ending these words Oxyatres drew his sword, and presented himself before Memnon
in the posture of a man ready to fight, but Memnon did not the same; but after
having hearkened to his discourse, and beheld his action without showing any
sign of astonishment, or of being moved, he answered him with a settled
countenance, and with an absolute coldness; you have reason Sir, to go to take
away a life which I hold from you, and a life hurtful to your pretensions; but
I should not have reason, if I went about to defend it against you, who have
acquired it by its preservation, and who are the brother of my King; neither
shall it be said, I drew my sword against him to whom I owe my safety, or
against the brother of Darius to whom I owe all, and I would rather turn it
against my own breast, then against a Prince whom those two considerations shall
ever make me reverence; If my life be odious to you, and if by the obstacle I
have been to your pretensions I deserve to dye by your hand, content your
desire, pierce this heart proud of Barsina's image, and this heart which draws
your hatred by its ambition; but do not strive to blast me at my death with an
ingratitude whereof I never can be capable. What? (replied Oxyatres) does
Memnon see his mortal enemy defy him to fight, and if he be that same Memnon
who passes for valiant among the Persians, has he not the heart to defend his
life against him? I never wanted heart (answered Memnon) in dangers that
perhaps were greater then this I have now before my eyes, and my reputation is
well enough established not to fear the fall of it by this action; I should not
have been prevented if fortune had given me other enemies, and I had already
received offenses from you, which any other man but Prince Oxyatres, and the
Brother of Darius should perchance have washed away with his blood. You are
dispensed with for all those considerations, (said Oxyatres interrupting him)
both by the equality I resolved to keep with you in the birth of my affection,
and by the declaration I make, that 'twas not with any design to oblige you or
to serve you, that I succored you against the Scithians; the King will not be
displeased with you for this action when he shall know the truth of it; you owe
more to your honor, and to the defense of your life, then to your respect for
him; and it is in short by no other way that can be repayd for the obligation
you believe you have to me. Then I will be eternally in your debt, replied
Memnon, and it is by my own blood I acquit my self, and not by a blood which is
sacred to Memnon, and a blood for the conservation whereof I will shed mine own
to the very last drop. If neither the love of life, added furious Oxyatres, nor
that of honor touches you any longer, and if you fear not to die by my hands,
or to live with infamy among the Persians, at least endeavor to defend
Barsina* whom I am resolved to take away from you, or dispose your self to
yield her to me, if you dare not dispute her against me. I yield you Barsina,
said Memnon* in yielding you my life; but if my life be left me, I Will never
leave my Love, nor my pretensions to Barsina.

O Gods! cried Prince Oxyatres quite transported, with what an unworthy Rival
and with what an unworthy Enemy do you oppose me? And do thou not fear
continued he turning toward Memnon, do thou not fear I should dishonor thee
among the Persians, whom thou have abused with a false gloss of valor? and
that this cowardice should make thee lose that fame thou have unjustly got, and
which thou hold from fortune rather then thy courage? I should fear it,
answered patient Memnon; and I should believe I were guilty of cowardice, if in
the injuries you do me, I did not find (better then in all the combats I have
fought for him) an occasion to testify my true respects unto my King, and the
true affection I bear him; this is the highest proof of it he could ever
desire, and with what cowardice soever you would blemish me, you know me well
enough your self, to think that the fear of a single man can ever make me
avoid the combat; you often in as dangerous occasions have seen me outbrave
death without terror, and give my blood liberally enough for you and yours;
'twas by that remembrance I had hoped for an usage from you very different from
this you make me suffer, and that I had expected any thing else from Prince
Oxyatres, rather then these cruel threatenings, in a love whose beginnings he
himself upheld, rather then bloody outrages against my reputation, and rather
then a cruel and violent design against a life which was never spared for the
interests of his House. While Memnon spoke on this manner, Oxyatres looked upon
him intentively, and in these last words found something that sof^^ed him, and
made him repent his design: the more he reflected upon it, the more he found it
violent, and in the end after having well examined it, he absolutely condemned
it. I have done too much perhaps, said he to Memnon* but I have not been Master
of my passions, and for the time to come I will endeavor to regulate them
better if it be possible. As he brought forth these words he put up his sword,
and turning his back to Memnon, went from him and ^eturned to the Tents. Memnon
agitated with cruel disquiets retired to his, not meaning to visit me in that
condition, lest I should take notice of his ill humor. Yet had he so much
discretion, and so much respect to Prince Oxyatres, that he would not discover
his proceeding to any body, for fear the King should take it amiss, and
testify some displeasure against him for it; he would not speak of it so much
as to me, doubting I might find some matter of affliction in it, and I never
heard any thing of it till a long while after. In the mean time Prince
Oxyatres, whether it were by the anger wherewith he had been transported to see
a man preferred before him whose birth was inferior to his, and who surpassed
him not in good parts, or by the love which he blindly bore to me, was no
sooner at his Tent but he was seaz'd with a violent Fever, and it increased
with so much vehemence, that within three days the Physicians began to doubt
of his recovery. Being that Prince was infinitely esteemed by the whole Court,
his sickness caused a general sorrow, and the King to whom his virtue made him
dearer then neerness of blood, fell into a sensible grief; I was particularly
afflicted at it, and Memnon took it not ill that I expressed my trouble to him.
In the fits of his Fever he sometimes fell into ravings, and while reason was
dispossessed of her government, he talked of nothing but Barsina, and by all
his actions made those that were about him judge, that nothing but his love had
caused his sickness. This knowledge redoubled the Kings affliction, and he gave
him self over to his sorrow in an excessive manner, when he believed he could
not succor his Brother without destroying Memnon whom he loved very dearly,
and to whose services he believed himself as much indebted, as to his own word,
whereby he was engaged to him. Yet was he not so dear to him, as to have that
affection ruin that he bore his Brother, and he could have desired if it had
been possible, that Memnon of his own good will should contribute to his cure;
but he would never speak to him of it, and would rather have run to any other
extremity, then that of employing his authority to oblige him; I was one of
the first that visited him with my Mother, but as soon as I came near his bed,
he was moved in such manner as confirmed all that were present in the belief
they had of the cause of his sickness* Till then he had lived with me in a
discretion that had hindered him from entertayning me in company, with a passion
which he knew I disapproved, but seeing himself then in a condition that
seemed to afford him a greater liberty, he made no difficulty to take it, and
looking upon me with languishing eyes. Fair Barsina, said he, I die for you,
and by my death I abandon a happiness to Memnon, which by the greatness of my
love, I peradventure had deserved as well as he. Saying these words he turned
away his eyes from my face, and by his action touched me so that I hardly was
able to retain my tears; Sir, answered I, you shall not die for Barsina, and it
had been better she had never come into the world, then to cause so great a
damage to her Country. My death is little considerable, replied the Prince,
and I receive it willingly, since it is favorable to you in delivering you
from my importunities. I never received any from you, said I, which I would be
delivered of by the least of your discontents, and if your life depended on my
wishes, I would make as many for your health as for mine own. You have more
goodness in appearance, replied he, then in effect, and when you saw me in
another condition, you contributed nothing to hinder me from falling into this,
in which you see me for the love of you. Yet it is not, continued he with a
sigh, to reproach you that I tell you this, you are too just in all your
actions to find any reason to condemn them, and being I punish no body but my
self of the faults I have committed, I ought also to accuse no body but my self
of the advantages you give my rival. He had said more without doubt, if the
Physicians had not entreated him to keep silence, and if the Queens accompanied
by the two Princesses and Prince Artaxerxes their Brother, had not entered then
into the Chamber, and coming to his bed side had not broken off that
conversation. If I omitted not to visit him, Memnon for all he was his rival,
and for all he was so ill satisfied with him, was not one of the last in
offering to perform that duty, but the Prince expressed a repugnance for his
visits, and when he was told that he meant to come and see him, he made known
that he should do him a pleasure to forbear. It suffices that I am vanquished
(said he) without showing me the face of my Conqueror, and if Memnon be
generous, he ought to content himself with his victory, without insulting over
me in my misfortune. These words of the Princes which were told Memnon again,
hindered him from coming into the Chamber, but not from going every day to the
door to enquire how he did; that very care displeased the jealous Prince, and
he said to those that brought him word of it, tell Memnon that I have but a few
days to live, that he has but a while to exercise his patience, and that he
should not labor so much to learn the news of my death. These words struck
Memnon very deeply, whose intent was far from Oxyatres suspicions; and in the
mean time his sickness grew so dangerous, that the Physicians could no longer
dissemble their appehensions. Their did the Kings affection to him break forth
into greater signs of sorrow then he yet had showed, and then did that good
Prince abandon himself unto his grief with more excess then was expected from
the greatness of his courage. Memnon who saw him in that estate, who as I have
told you, had the strongest love to him that ever subject bore his Prince, and
who besides took notice of the admirable goodness he had toward him, in
letting a Brother perish whom he loved more dearly then himself, rather then
seek his safety to his prejudice, fell into a grief wherein he was like to have
been overwhelmed, and considering that he ought no longer to suffer those
proofs of his Kings affection, without showing the utmost he could hope from
his, he resolved rather to die, then to abuse his goodness in an unhandsome
manner, and finding him one day deeply buried in his sadness; Sir, said he to
him, if I can contribute to the life of Prince Oxyatres, be not in fear of his
recovery; It Is true, I love Barsina, but I love my King as I ought to do, and
to preserve him a Brother worthy of his affection; I shall know how to overcome
my passion, and to yield that to Prince Oxyatres, which perhaps I have too much
disputed against him. The King life up his head at these words, and after
having a while looked upon Memnon, without speaking, he cast his arms of a
sudden about his neck, and embracing him with an extraordinary tenderness: My
dear Memnonhe, said, I should have let Oxyatres die, and should have dyed my
self, before I would have asked you what you offer me with so much generosity;
but if really you can contribute to my Brothers safety without hazarding your
own, I shall be indebted to you for all my quiet, and shall never find any
recompense worthy of you. Memnon o'recharg'd with grief made no reply, but
only taking his leave of the King with a low obeisance, went straight to
Oxyatres Chamber, and notwithstanding all that they who were at the door could
say to hinder him from seeing the Prince, he entered into the Chamber, and came
to his bedside. As Soon as the Prince knew him, he turned his head the other
way, and by some sighs which he could not retain, made appear that he was
touched with his sight, and that he hardly could endure it; but Memnon meant to
put him out of that ill humor, and drawing near to him with confidence: Sir,
said he, for the love of the Gods, and for the love of Barsina, receive me no
longer as an Enemy; I come not here to triumph over you by the advantages
Fortune has blindly given me; but I come to deliver them up to you, to abandon
all my pretensions, and in short to yield you Barsina, of whom you are more
worthy then I. Oxyatres his resentment against Memnon was not so great, but
that a good part of it was presently dissipated by these words, and he scarce
had heard them, when turning toward him with more suddenness then his weak
estate could probably have suffered: What, cried he, Memnon, is it to give me
Barsina that you come to visit me? Yes, Sir, replied Memnon* it is Barsina I
resign to you, and you may recover upon the assurance that she shall no more
be disputed with you. And what will Memnon do (added the Prince) if he lose
Barsina? He Will dye (answered Memnon) and it is more just that he should dye,
then that the life of Prince Oxyatres should be longer in danger. Ah! (cried
the Prince) if one must dye, I know how to dye as well as you, and my spirit
will be no more daunted then yours with the Image of Death; I fear it perchance
as little as you can do, and if you have no other remedy for my health, I
account that worse then the disease you would save me from. If I had e're a
gentler, said Memnon, I would make use of it to content you, without amusing
your self about considerations that are too trivial to oppose the safety of
such a Prince as Oxyatres; your death would draw the imprecations of all Persia
upon me, and Darius would have just occasion to detest the ingratitude of a
man, who by the loss of a thousand lives like his, cannot repay the smallest
part of what he owes him. At these words, without staying for a reply he went
out of the room in so strange a condition that he could hardly have been known
by his most familiar Friends. As he had done that action without making me
acquainted, and believed that I would find just cause of complaint against him,
for seeing him so lightly quit pretensions in comparison of which he a few
days before would have despised the Empire of Asia; he had not the confidence
to come into my presence, or perhaps feared he should want resolution in taking
leave of me for the departure he had before determined; all that he did to bid
me farewell, was to get free of all Company, and shut himself up in his
Chamber to write me a Letter, the words whereof I think were these.

MEMNON, To the Princess BARSINA.
I Leave you, my dear Princess, since my cruel Destiny ordains it me, and I
can no longer dispute you against the Brother of Darius, and the Brother of
Darius dying for you; it is not perhaps that I want courage to defend my
interests, but I can no longer defend them against the goodness of my King,
who could, and peradventure would at last have taken that from me by Authority,
which I give up to him by a too just acknowledgement; Yet do not believe I
leave you, without also leaving my life: I am going to dye, but I will dye far
from you, that I may not trouble, by my death, the felicities I give unto my
Rival, and those to which you are destined with a Prince Worthy of you; I
beseech you to have but a moderate sense of my loss, since my Fortune will be
glorious if I can establish yours, and never attribute that to any want of
love, which is a rigorous effect of duty.


Memnon gave this Letter to one of his Servants to bring it me, as he got on
Horseback to leave the Champ, but the Night was near, and came presently after
so extremely dark, that having no light at all to ride that Evening, he could
advance his Journey but a little way. You may easily judge of my sorrow at the
reading of that Letter, since it is very true that I loved Memnon as much as he
ought to desire, and since I never had been shaken in my first affection, by
the advantages I might have hoped for in Prince Oxyatres; my grief was so
exceeding violent, that it deprived me almost of all sense and understanding,
and I think I had sunk under it if I had not been well assisted by the
endeavors of those about me; I poured forth my tears with all manner of
liberty, before all my Friends, who approved of my affection, and I made them
all so far concerned in my grief, that their faces seemed little different
from mine. As dark as the Night was, Hydaspes, and Cophes my Brothers, would
needs take Horse that very Evening to ride in search of Memnon, but though I
was little in a condition to do it, they by all means would have me write two
or three Lines to him, believing that they would be more powerful to bring him
back then all the persuasions they could use; I satisfied them, and with much
ado wrote these few Words, which I gave them for him.

BARSINA To MEMNON.
I Never will pardon you the injury you do me, if you repair it not by your
return, nor will I ever call that other then an effect of your ingratitude and
forgetfulness, which duty never could have exacted from you: Live, and come
back again, if you will have me live, and strive not so much to be faithful
and acknowledging to Darius, as thereby to become false and ungrateful to
Barsina.


I will not repeat the complaints I made, the discourse of them would without
doubt be tedious to you* and therefore you shall only know that that night was
the most cruel one to me of all that ever I had passed in my whole life: but
if it was sharp to me, it was favorable to the health of Prince Oxyatres, and
he fell into a sweat at the end of which his Fever was almost quite gone.
Before it was day they found so visible an amendment in him, that they doubted
no more of his recovery; but as there was a change in the condition of his
body, there was also a very great one in that of his mind, and that Prince
after a great conflict all that night, had obtained a gallant victory over his
passions* The carriage of Memnon, who had so generously given up his own life
for the preservation of his, had wrought so far upon him, that from that very
moment, he had resolved to use his utmost endeavors to make himself Master of
that love, wherein he could hope for no satisfaction, but by the ruin of so
generous a man. He found it extremely difficult, as he confessed to us
afterward, but having a very great courage, he did so effectually represent to
himself, what he believed he owed to the action and to the virtue of Memnon,
that though he could not dispose his mind to forget me, he brought it to quit
me to Memnon, and rather to suffer all things then to cross his pretensions
any longer. I know very well, said he to himself, that 'twill be hard for me to
lose the love I bear to Barsina, but I will oppose virtue against its power,
and peradventure time, and a little absence, may work my perfect cure. Scarce
had he taken this resolution, when the King who that day rose extraordinary
early, came into his Chamber, and over joyed with the hopes that were given him
of his recovery, drew near to his bedside. As soon as the Prince had cast his
eyes upon him; Sir, said he, I shall live, nay more, I Will live without Barsina
if it please the Gods. Memnon had resigned her to me, out of an excess of love
and respect to you, but I am new in condition not to abuse his goodness. The
King was transported with contentment at these words, and embracing Oxyatres
with a great deal of tenderness. Ah! Brother, said he, if that which you tell
me were possible, how much glory would you reap by that action, and how
infinitely should I be indebted to you. It is possible, Sir, replied Oxyatres,
and you shall quickly see proofs of it. While they were speaking on this manner
Artabasus came in, who told them of Memnons departure, and showed them the
Letter he had written to me. The King at the reading of it appeared exceedingly
afflicted, and the Prince having heard it; Ah! cried he, let me rather die,
then cause the death of noble Memnon. Sir, continued he turning toward the
King, for Gods sake send after him instantly, and let them assure him that I
renounce Barsina, and that I Will renounce her without dying. The King delayed
not a moment to execute what the Prince desired, immediately he made a great
many men take horse, and to give them an authority which Memnon should not be
able to disobey; he would needs have Prince Artaxerxes go forth with them. That
Prince full of goodness, was soon on horseback, and having informed himself and
those that followed him what way Memnon had taken, he ran to seek him with all
possible speed. Good Artabasus came presently after into my Chamber, where he
gave me account of all that had passed, and where by the relation he made me of
Oxyatres his change, and of the order that was taken to fetch Memnon back, he
gave me hopes that drew me partly out of that depth of sorrow wherein I had been
buried.

In the mean while Memnon was gone, but the night that came on presently after
his departure, had proved so dark, that not being able to see his way, he had
been constrained to alight and stay in a Wood, where he expected the morning
with strange disquiets. I will not tell you what his thoughts were, though he
made me the recital of them, that discourse would draw out my narration to a
troublesome length, and it suffices that you know he loved me extremely, to
imagine that the action he had done, could not choose but put him into a most
sensible discontent, which tormented him so cruelly, that he saw day appear
without having slept one moment. As soon as it was light enough to see to
travel, he caught his horse again which had strayd from him in the night, and
getting out of the wood rode toward a little River, which runs within a few
furlongs of it, but when he was going to pass it at a Ford, he saw himself
overtaken by my Brothers, whom the darkness of the night had stayed at the side
of the wood in which he had passed it. Memnon who had resolved to get away from
as as far as he could possibly, and to seek death in the wars of some very
remote Country, was surprised and afflicted at that encounter, and if it had
been possible for him to shun it, my brothers should have employed their pains
to very little purpose. As soon as Hydaspes came up to him: What Memnon, said
he, do you leave us on this fashion, and if you loved Barsina could you be
capable of so strange a change? It is but because I love her too well, answered
Memnon, that I forsake her, and if without dying I could see her in the arms of
my Rival, I would not leave my native Country for ever, and friends that are
dearer to me then my self. You shall not leave us, replied Hydaspes, or at
least weel follow you whither soever you go, if my sisters earnest entreaties
added to ours, cannot have power to get you back. With these words he
delivered him the Letter I had written, and Memnon having received it from his
hands, read it, bedewing it with his tears, and kissing it a hundred times.

O Barcina! cried he, how miserable am I, in not being able to enjoy that
fortune to which you raised me by your goodness; and how much happier had my
condition been, to have died in those dangers to which Oxyatres exposed me for
the love of you, then to see my self reduced to the cruel necessity of
forsaking you without dying. Then turning toward my Brothers; I did not doubt,
pursued he, but that the Princess Barsina had a great deal of goodness, and
that she would make some attempt to recall me from the Grave, either by your
solicitation, or out of her own generosity; but in the terms I now stand, her
pity is unprofitable to me, and though I were not driven by my despair, the
engagement of my word will never suffer me to see her more.

What, (replied Hydaspes impatiently) will you then show so little friendship
to us, and so little consideration of Barsina's desires? Alas! (said sorrowful
Memnon) there is the misery of my condition, since having obeyed her all my life
in the most difficult matters, I am forced to disobey her in those that are
most pleasing to me, and most advantageous. Memnon was speaking on this manner,
and my Brothers were laboring but in vain to persuade him, when Prince
Artaxerxes, and those that attended him came to their assistance. Hydaspes glad
of that encounter, ran to meet the Prince: Ah! Sir, cried he, how necessary to
us is your presence and authority, with a man who will no longer know us? I
shall have more credit then you, answered the Prince, and without doubt I shall
persuade him to return by the News I bring him. Barsina is yours (continued
he, turning toward Memnon) she is no longer necessary for the safety of
Oxyatres, to whom you generously had given her: After these words he told him
what the Prince his Uncle had said, and having acquainted him with the Kings
pleasure, and the command he had to bring him back, he by the hopes he gave
him, and by the mavelous power he had over all hearts, prevailed with him to
break his resolution, and return with him to the Camp. Yet did he not know what
he ought to hope, having much ado to comprehend the truth of that Adventure.
Prince Artaxerxes sent a man before to advertise the King of his good success;
and Prince Oxyatres no sooner heard that Memnon was upon his way to come back,
but he entreated the King to order it so that I might be in his Tent with him:
The King having sent such word to Artabasus, he would needs carry me thither
himself, and we chanced to come to the door just as Prince Artaxerxes with
Memnon and my Brothers alighted. As Soon as the Prince saw me: Cousin, said he,
I bring you home this Fugitive; but it is upon a condition you shall pardon him
his flight for my sake, and that you shall tie him so fast he may be able to
get away from you no more. I was so confounded at that encounter, that I had
not the confidence to reply, but I held my peace, partly out of the respect I
bore to my Fathers presence, and partly out of some resentment I had against
Memnon; we went into the Chamber, where we found the King, with the Queen, and
a great deal of other Company. Oxyatres could not see me and Memnon (who
appeared at the same time) without sighing and changing color; many took
notice of it, but the King taking me by the hand himself led me to his
Bedside, and Memnon also came thither. Oxyatres used some violence upon his
thoughts to express himself, but dissembling his constraint as well as
possibly he could, he spoke on this manner.

I Have a great deal of reason to complain of you, Memnon, since in all your
actions you have sought my shame as much as your own advantage, and that you
have not been satisfied with having conquered me all manner of ways, unless
you had also the Glory to triumph over me; your Generosity has without doubt
gained an entire glory over my ingratitude, over my obstinacy in crossing your
pretensions, and over the cruel designs I had against your happiness, and
against your life, but also I have endeavored to repair my unworthy actions,
by a force I have used upon my passion, and perhaps you fought not better when
you conquered me, then I did when I overcame my self: I will not tell you that
Barsina is no longer in my heart, it would have been very difficult to race out
such deep Characters in one night, but I promise you she shall never be there
to do you any prejudice, and that if by time and reason I am not able to banish
her out of it, the place she shall possess there shall never give you any
cause of jealousy or complaint against me. Do not by an excess of generosity
oppose the resolution I have settled; you would but vainly combat a design
which nothing is capable to divert, and to take away all the scruples which
compassion for a sick man might cause in you toward me, know that it shall be
without dying, I Will quit all my pretensions to you, and that Barsina is no
longer necessary to save my life.

Oxyatres spoke to this effect, and Memnon who had harkned to him without
interruption, answered him in these terms.

I Never doubted, Sir, but that you had Virtue enough to compass the most
difficult enterprises, and the proof you give of it to day, confirms that
belief most powerfully to the World: I know, Sir, that without being unworthy,
I cannot abuse the favor you do me; but also after your command to the
contrary, I cannot without disobedience oppose the will of my Prince, and of my
Master; I will therefore shut my eyes, since you enjoin it me, against all the
Reasons that argue against my happiness, and will blindly receive the Fortune
you give me, since it comes from a hand from which I can refuse nothing.

Memnon held his peace after these words, and by his action made known to the
Prince, that the fear of displeasing him, rather then the consideration of his
own interest obliged him to obey. Prince Oxyatres put forth his hand to him,
and then turning toward me; Cousin, said he, pardon me the discontents I have
made you suffer, and if I no more demand proofs of your affection to Memnon's
prejudice, will you not grant me those which nearness of Alliance may yet give
me leave to hope for from you? I then looked upon Artabasus, and having by a
nod received permission from him to reply: Sir, said I, I while I live will
preserve the remembrance of what I ow to your Person, and to your goodness,
nor will I ever swerve from the respect to which I am obliged both by birth and
by the affection wherewith you have honored me. Oxyatres appeared satisfied at
these words, and then the King mingling himself in our conversation with a
great deal of interest, testified an extraordinary joy to see us in so fair a
way to our happiness.

I shall not need to tell you more* such were the end of the crosses we had met
in our affection, and from that day Prince Oxyatres kept the promise he had
made to Memnon most exactly; true it is, that he sought some part of his cure
in absence, and as soon as he was well enough to endure a Litter, he departed
from the Camp, where by reason of his weakness, he could not exercise his
valor, for some time, and took his journey toward Persepolis. Besides, you
know, Sir, that we returned thither within a little after; and that the
incommodiousnesse of the season, constrained the King to draw out of the field,
and retire. Oxyatres appeared not at the Court at our arrival, but stayed a
while longer at one of his own houses in the Country, to obtayn by that absence
a forgetfulness which he judged necessary for his repose. He came thither
again when he believed he had brought his mind in part to what he demanded, and
you arrived there, Sir, almost about the very same time. You know all that
passed before my Marriage, and there is nothing memorable nor diverting enough
to entertain the Princess your sister without wearying of her: it will suffice
me to tell her that we received no more trouble in our Loves, that Oxyatres
was one of the forwardest to solicit our marriage, and that having been
deferred only by reason of a sickness that kept Artabasus long in bed, it was
accomplished presently after his recovery, with a great deal of satisfaction to
the King, and to the whole Court, that took an interest in Memnons contentment.
Oxyatres never would resolve to marry, but still resisted the Kings desires,
who would have matched him to one of the Daughters of King Occhus his
predecessor, from that time he never gave me any knowledge of the return of
his passion, and Memnon never found any occasion of complaint in any of his
actions. This is all I have to tell you, and you will give me leave to pass
over the great actions poor Memnon did afterward against Alexander, whereby in
gayning an immortal reputation, he acquitted himself of what he owed to the
goodness of his King. He died full of glory for his service, after having made
all Asia judge, with how much justice he merited his affections, and I remained
in the world after him to be exposed to those long miseries which the Gods sent
me for a punishment for having outlived so amiable, and so illustrious a
Husband. Barsina made a stop at these words, to wipe away the tears that ran
from her eyes in great abundance, and when she had settled her self a little;
You know the rest of my life, pursued she, the abode I made at Damascus after
Memnons death, where I was comforted by your presence, and where I was taken
Prisoner with you; you know my long captivity with the Princesses, and all that
befell me till your departure from Susa, and till my arrival in this Camp; I
will only add that since that time, whether it were by reason of my captivity,
during which Oxyatres continued ever with the King his Brother, or of his being
taken up with the employments Alexander put upon him afterward, which engaged
him to long Voyages, or of the abode he made in those Provinces, which he gave
him at his return to Susa, I have seen him but very little, and it is only since
my arrival in this Camp, that I perceived the renewing of that affection he
had born me in former times; he first gave me knowledge of it by his looks,
and afterward by words that show neither an insensibility, nor an indifference
toward me.

Barsina thus ended her discourse, and Prince Oroondates and Berenice, after
having heard the conclusion of it, fell upon the praises of those two generous
Lovers, and after they had entertained themselves a while upon that subject;
You have told us things in order, said Oroondates to Barsina, which I had heard
confusedly long ago, nor had I lost the remembrance of them if at the time when
I heard them spoken of, I had interressed my self as much in your affairs as I
have done since; I now find a fair occasion to employ my self, and I must
confess to you that if Prince Oxyatres will make use of me in his design, I
shall joyfully embrace the opportunity of doing him good offices toward you;
the esteem I have of his person, and the love and respect I bear to the whole
family whereof he is descended, will make me undertake the most difficult
things that may be for his satisfaction, and I know that in doing him service I
shall not offend Barsina: They indeed are worthy of one another, and as among
all Princesses Oxyatres can find nothing more lovely then Barsina, she among
all Princes cannot find one who deserves better to serve her then Oxyatres, and
with whom for the merit of his person, the greatness of his birth, and the
remembrance of his ancient passion, she can more worthily match her self.
Barsina blushed at these words without replying, and the Prince judged by her
action, that perhaps she would have no very great repugnance to hearken to the
proposition he made her. They had a little discourse upon that subject, after
which Oroondates was willing to give his sister liberty to rise, and to that
end leaving Barsina with her, he went out of her Chamber to Lysimachus his
Tent, where a good part of his companions were already assembled.

The CONTINUATION Of the Fifth and Last Part OF CASSANDRA. The Fourth Book.
THe Princes were met together in Lisimachus his Tent, to deliberate what order
they should take about the assault for which the Army was preparing. The
Engines, they had stayed for, were now in a readiness, and all the skill of
the most industrious workmen of Asia had been employed about them; but amongst
all those that were most expert, Demetrius was he that had furnished the rarest
inventions. For all he was so young and amorous, he had bestowed some hours in
that study, and he there made his experiments in that science, which afterward
gave him the name of Polyorcetes, or taker of Cities. His father and all his
friends admired the effects of his inventive wit, and of the inclination he had
to those exercises, in which he gave directions, and instructed those he set a
work, rather like an old Master, than a young Prince prepossessed with an
amorous passion, and fitter in appearance for any other employment. The
Princesses themselves took pleasure to be sometimes present at his work, and
Deidamia, who in all his actions found motives to recede from her severity in
favor of him, did not hearken without some interest to the praises that were
given to such hopeful beginnings. Amongst his many several inventions, he
caused Engines to be made of a prodigious greatness, to oppose them against
the height of the walls, which without that elevation were safe from any
scalado. These were certain towers or kind of houses, on the top of which one
might place a good number of men, and the under-rooms were filled with Archers,
who out at open places made for that purpose, shot arrows securely against the
battlements, to favor the approaches of their companions; they were moved upon
wheels, which by reason of the excessive weight of the bodies they carried,
could be turned but very slowly; the Platform, where the soldiers stood that
were commanded out for the scalado, was defended with a good parapet, and in
the middle of it engines of battery were raised, which by the force of certain
cables stretched and let slip again with violence, cast stones of above an
hundred pound weight to the distance of above three hundred paces, and more
than two hundred foot in height. Besides these Engines that wereto be rolled
into the Moat after having filled up those places with earth, or with brush
faggots, where they had meant to set them, they had made others more manageable
to batter the gates; for they knew very well, that the strength of the Rams
would have been but little considerable against such walls as those of Babylon;
the Princes took great care to see them all in order, and intended to make
trial of them before they employed them in good earnest. The result of the
counsel held in Lysimachus his Tent was, that they ought no longer to defer
the assault, since they were in a condition to give it, for fear the courage of
the soldiers should slacken by prolonging the siege, and least by the arrival
of some relief, which the enemies expected, their difficulties should grow
greater than they were at that present, and order was given that at the
beginning of that very night they should fell to work about filling up those
parts of the Moat, whither they purposed to roll their Engines, and by which
they were to get unto the wall.

For this end they had provided a great number of Bavins, and the forces
appointed for that service, had no sooner received command, but they put
themselves in a readiness to execute it. Eumenes and Polyperchon undertook the
care of that service, and as soon as night was come, they had their men upon
the counterscarp of the Moat, and set them about the business; they that were
to work had furnished themselves with all materials that were necessary; they
got earth from the counterscarp which they threw down, and took faggots from a
great number of Carts which brought them after them. There being twenty several
places in which they were to work, Eumens and Polyperchon, who could not be
present every where, left a Commander in each place, with certain Officers to
oversee the workmen, and a thousand soldiers upon the counterscarp, to sustain
them against sallies, and went up and down to all the rest to provide all
things needful. The darkness of the night favored their beginnings against
the enemies arrows; but when it was half spent, they sallied upon them in two
several places, commanded on the one side by Ariston, and on the other by
Andiagoras.

They presently made a very great slaughter of the first that happened to be in
their passage, and interrupted the work by the death of a great number of
Pioneers and soldiers; but Eumenes and Polyperchon, having rallied their
forces with a mavelous diligence, without calling for relief or giving the
alarm to the rest of the Camp, stopped their fury in a little time, and pressed
them so vigorously afterward, that having left many of their men slain in the
Moat, they were constrained to return into the town. In the mean while the work
was so diligently hastened, that before day, the third part of it was done, the
workmen lodged, and in some measure sheltred from the arrows that were shot
from the top of the walls.

Next morning the besieged with sorrow discovered the progress of their
enemies, and how they had lodged themselves, and would have tried to beat them
away from thence, if they had not seen part of the army upon the counterscarp
in a posture to withstand their resolution. The day passed without attempting
any thing, and the Princes contented themselves with making those parts be kept
which they had taken, without engaging their soldiers rashly in too manifest
dangers; but as soon as darkness had driven away the light, which had hindered
their proceedings, they fell to work again, and continued it with such speed,
that by break of day they had carried it within thirty foot of the wall, and
needed but another night to bring it to perfection.

The next ensuing was not quite passed, when there was an alarm given to
Antigonus his quarter; some horsemen that had been sent abroad to scour the
ways, were beaten back by a stronger party, and being returned into the Camp,
after having loft some of their fellows, had brought intelligence, which made
all the Princes rise and go to Antigonus his Tent. They said they had met fifty
or threescore horse advancing secretly toward the Camp, and that having asked
them the word, they had been so suddenly charged, that all the^ were able to do
was to save themselves by the swiftness of their horses. The Princes doubted
not by this report, but that those horse^en, were the forerunners of a greater
body that was advancing to relieve their enemies, and being desirous to know
the certainty, while they were setting the army in a readiness to receive
them, they presently sent forth two hundred horse, under the command of Araxes
and Cleonimus, who guided by the Troopers that had given the alarm, departed
from the Camp with order to bring in news of the enemy; but scarce were they
without the line, when there appeared upon the town walls a lighted torch which
was held up, and shaken about for a certain time. Antigonus, who was one of the
first that observed it, showed it to his companions, that were gathered
together with him before his Tent. Lets doubt no longer (said he to them) but
that relief is come to our enemies, behold the signal which they of the town
have given, and I am much deceived, if while these supplies strive to get into
the City, the besieged make not a salley to favor them and facilitate their
passage. All the Princes were of the same opinion, it being grounded upon very
great probability, and with that belief they made the whole Camp stand to their
arms, sent order to those on the other side of the river to bring over more
forces, and gave notice to Eumenes and Polyperchon, that they should keep in
their Posts with theirs, and not quit the work they had begun, what noise, or
what alarm soever they should hear, unless they received some new order. The
valiant Thalestris, who was gotten up as well as the Princes, was entreated to
stay with all her women, to guard those of her own sex, and in case it should
be necessary, to draw up all her squadrons round their Tents to defend them.
The orders were hardly given, when Cleonimus returning with his men brought 3
of the enemies prisoners unto the Princes. He was presently encompassed with a
great number of gallant men, and after that in a few words he had given them an
account of the encounter, and of the ski^mish he had newly had, Prince
Artaxerxes, who was then in command, examined the prisoners, and having put
them out of their fear, asked who they were, under what leader, what number, in
what order, and with what design they marched? We are led (answered one of the
prisoners) by Nabarsanes, who with 12000 horse drawn out of those countries
which Alexander left him, and out of those of his neighbors, means to endeavor
to get into the town; his Cavalry is well chosen, well armed, well mounted, and
with the help of those within, hopes to break through your troops, but we
should have had much more confidence of it, if we could have surprised you, as
we believed we might have done, if we had come some few hours sooner. This
prisoner told other particularities to Ptolomeus and Craterus, who asked him
many questions; but he had no sooner named Nabarzanes, but Prince Artaxerxes,
Oroondates, and Oxiartes, grew pale and trembled with horror, at the detested
name of that abominable paricide. Artaxerxes as most concerned, appeared most
stricken, and after having testified his astonishment by a few minutes silence;
Is your Comander (said he to the prisoners) that execrable Nabarsanes, who with
impious Bessus imbrued his cruel hands in the blood of his King? The prisoners
having avowed it by their silence. O Gods (continued the Prince of Persia) how
perfect is your justice in bringing this monster to punishment, and in giving
Darius his ghost a satisfaction, which Alexander owed it, and which he refused
to pay at the solicitation of a vile Eunuch; I was obliged to follow this
paricide over all the earth, and he comes now to deliver himself up unto his
destiny, without putting me to the trouble to go and seek him. While Artaxerxes
spoke thus, Oroondates and Oxiartes, whose resent^ents came little short of
his, could not withhold their tears, and rekindled their wrath against the
monster by the news of his arrival. They asked their prisoners some other
questions touching the order of their march, and the way their troops were
coming, and when they had informed themselves sufficiently, Arsaces drew 12000
horse from amongst the best of theirs, and Prince Oxiartes took six thousand
others with a design to fetch a greater compass, to surround the enemy, and
put them out of hope of flight.

When these were all on horseback, and that Lysimachus, Orontes, and Demetrius
were also mounted with Arsaces, intending to go seek their enemies without the
line, they heard a crying, Arm, Arm, toward the gates of the City, and learned
from one to another, that the besieged were sallying, and falling upon those
that were next them with the better part of their forces. This news did not at
all dismay the Princes, nor did it interrupt Arsaces his resolution, he marched
with his men out of the Camp, and Prince Oroondates, Ptolomeus, Craterus, and
Antigonus with Battalions and Squadrons which were then drawn up in order,
turned against Perdiccas, who, followed by Peucestas and Neoptolemus, was come
forth in person with eight thousand of his men to favor the passage of his
Allies, while the fight was beginning and growing hot, and that Perdiccas by
that first resistance found it would be no light difficulty to open away for
the relief.

Arsaces gone out of the Camp advanced at a large trot toward his enemies, but
he was not far without the line, when he heard the noise, and even the neighing
of their horses, that were coming up with speed at the signal which was showed
them from the walls a second time. He sent forth Criton with a party of horse
to discover them, and Nabarzanes, who had heard the same noise Arsaces had
done, did the same on his side, and made a halt, not knowing what resolution he
should take. Arsaces and Lysimachus with their companions wavered likewise in
theirs, thinking it fit to stay till day which was near at hand, for fear least
the enemies and Nabarzanes, whom they sought for more than all the rest, should
escape him in the dark, especially seeing by that delay they gave Oxiartes
leave to invirone them. With this conceit they sent speedily after Criton;
forbidding him to engage, and commanding him only to keep a little before, and
to observe the countenance of the enemy, as much as night would suffer him, in
case they should advance any further. His design was executed as they had
contrived; for Nabarzanes, who saw himself discovered, durst not go on, neither
would he retire in disorder, for fear of giving his enemies greater advantages
by his retreat. While he was in this irresolution accompanied with deadly
apprehensions, the darkness began to vanish, and insensibly, the troops of
either party perceived and knew one another. Then it was that Arsaces commanded
all his Trumpets to sound a charge, and marched against his half^ conquered
enemies as to a certain victory, rather than to a combat, whose sucesse could
be disputed with him. Yet Nabarzanes, who saw himself in a manifest danger, and
who judged, that nothing but his sword could clear his passage or his return,
received them very stoutly, and his soldiers, which were chosen men, quickly
made it appear, that the advantage over them was not to be gotten without loss
of blood. Arsaces, Lysimachus, Orontes, Demetrius, Alexander, and the sons of
Artabasus, flew in amongst them like so many hungry Lions, and the
extraordinary fury that transported them at the remembrance of Darius, made
them do things beyond the power of men; at first it was not light enough to
discern objects distinctly, but when once it was clear day, these valiant
Warriors sought their enemies, and hewed out their passage amongst them with
more facility than before. Arsac^s, who in that first brunt had died himself
all over in blood, and who that day had sacrificed part of merciful
inclinations to the memory of the revenge he owed unto his fathers Ghost,
slaughtered his enemies with pleasure, and seeking for Nabarzanes in all
places, made his name resound which way soever he turned, Where art thou
Nabarzanes (cried he) where do thou hide thy self, thou horrible murderer of
thy King, behold the remnants of that blood which thou did so inhumanely and
so perfidiously shed.

Uttering these words, he went about to every part of the field, where he
believed he might meet him, and Nabarzanes, who at first had fought in the
first ranks, not being then able to resist his fear, and the remorse of his
guilty conscience, crowded into the midst of his men, and sought for
Sanctuary against the sword of that threatening Warrior. Arsaces not knowing
which way to get to him, let fall his anger upon the first that opposed his
passage; Lysimachus gave blows little different from his, and in that occasion
showed gallant marks both of his usual valor, and of the interest he took in
the revenge of Parisatis's father; Orontes made himself remarkable by actions
like those which in the Amazons Country, and in all other places where he had
drawn his sword, had gained him so brave a Reputation; and young Demetrius
pricked with Emulation by the actions of those famous men, did things that were
miraculous to equal them; the other Princes that followed did break into the
Enemies ranks with a courage like theirs, and in short they were so vigorously
second^d by their men, that Nabarzanes his Troops, not being longer able to
withstand them, gave ground first, and within a little after plainly turned
their backs.

As Soon as Artaxerxes saw them in disorder, he rushed into the thickest with a
fury which made him find room enough wheresoever he went, and opening a way to
the very last ranks, which were the first that fled, he sought Nabarzanes so
carefully there, that he no longer could escape his ^ight, and being showed him
by some of his own men, whom fear of death had forced to do him that ill
office, he ran to him with a cry, which for all his arms froze him with a
mortal terror: Thou must die, Nabarzanes, (said he) but thou must die as
Bessus did. Saying these words he flew upon him, with his sword in his hand,
and in despite of the resistance of a great many of his men that defended him,
he charged him so impetuously, that with the first blow he gave, he made his
Cask tumble amongst the horses feet; the unarmed head of that horrible
parricide appearing to the eyes of Darius his son, awakened his indignation
with so much violence, that all the power of mankind would have been too weak
to stop the effects of it.

Nabarzanes his friends seeing his head without defense, would have sheltred him
with their bodies: But the famous Prince of Persia quickly made a way with his
sword, and sending some of the most zealous of them to gnaw the earth, got up
to Nabarzanes just as he was turning his back to run away, and not judging him
worthy to die by his sword, he let it hang by a chain, wherewith it was
fastened to his arm, and with his right hand, which was then free, seizing upon
his hair that hung long upon his shoulders, he spurred on his horse at the same
instant, and with that puissant arm pulled the Traitor out of his saddle, and
having dragged him a few spaces on that manne^, with an unparalleled force he
laid him cross the bow of his own, stretched all at length, and maugre the
opposition of all his men, carried him out of the throng in that estate.
Wretched Nabarzanes strugled in Arsaces his hand, like some weak bird in the
talons of an Eagle or Vulture; but all his striving was to no purpose, for his
furious Conqueror brought him off easily from among those of his party, and
meeting Criton, who was busy with some other horsemen in pursuit of those that
fled; Stay (cried he) and keep this murderer of my father whom I deliver into
thy hands. With these words he gave him into his custody, and Criton, who took
part in his Masters resentments, received him with a great deal of joy, and
causing him to be mounted behind one of his Troupers, he made all the rest ride
round about him, using all the caution that was necessary to hinder such a
prisoner from escaping.

In this interim, Lysimachus and his companions had utterly defeated their
enemies, and for their absolute destruction, their ill Destiny made those that
had gotten the advantage of the rest by flight, to fall into the party led by
Prince Oxyartes, who no less animated than his Nephew by the memory of the
King his brother, put them almost every man to the sword. This defeat was
exceeding bloody, and the Conquerours never gave off till they knew that
Nabarzanes was taken, and that an examplary justice might be done upon the
person of that Monster. After they had given quarter to some few that had
escaped from their first fury, the Conquerours returned to the Camp with as
entire a victory as they could have wished. They found their valiant companions
victorious, as well as they over them that had sallied out of the town, and
heard, that after a considerable loss on both sides, they had beaten back
Perdiccas to his very gates, the work of those that were filling up the Moats
having never been interrupted, but by the approach of day, which had made them
defer the end of it till the night following. Oroondates welcomed his dear
brother with acclamations of victory, and the Princes, who had accompanied him,
received from the whole army such honors and praises as were due unto their
virtue; but when disloyal Nabarzanes appeared before Oroondates, Artabasus,
and those who did yet reverence the memory of Darius, his sight transported
them in such manner, that their high virtue could hardly furnish them with
moderation enough to contain themselves; all cried out aloud that he should be
exposed to the most cruel torments that men were able to invent, and scarce was
the authority of the Prince sufficient, to rescue him from the first fury of
those that were most passionate. Oroondates turned away his eyes from off his
face, not being able to look upon it without horror, nor without tears, which
that tragical remembrance made him shed; and Arsaces being unwilling to
condemn him, and being unwilling also to acquit him for a crime which his
clemency could not mediate for without making it self detestable, delivered him
up to the judgment of Craterus, Antigonus, Ptolomeus, and Poliperchon; none of
those that were concerned would have to do in it, and those valiant Captains to
be exempt from all blame in the punishments they should ordain for a man that
seemed to be a prisoner of war, would needs have Seleucus, who then began to
leave his bed, and Nearchus, whose health was in the same condition, to be of
the number of his Judges, and that they themselves should pass sentence upon a
man of their own party. This consideration was nothing favorable to
Nabarzanes, for Seleucus was the first, that without having any respect to the
design he had had to serve those of his party, judged him worthy of the most
rigorous torments that could be inflicted, Nearchus was of his opinion, and
then all the rest of them condemned him to the same kind of death, which Bessus
his horrible accomplice in that fact had suffered. This decree, which was yet
too gentle for his crime, was executed with great satisfaction to the Persians,
who found some comfort in that revenge of their Kings death, such was the end
of the murderers of much lamented Darius, and the Successors of Alexander did
in some measure repair the fault he had committed against the interest of all
Kings, and against his usual magnanimity in sparing that Monsters life at the
intercession of Bagoas. Order was given to cause the dead of each party to be
buried or burned, and the remainder of that day was employed in preparations
for the assault, which was intended for the next. These last successes had
increased their hopes, and though their enterprise was one of the greatest that
men had undertaken, as well in regard of the strength and height of the walls
they were to storm; as of the number and valor of the men that defended them;
they doubted not of a favorable issue, and made themselves ready joyfully for
any action, the thought whereof might have struck terror into the most
resolute hearts. All the Engines were carefully surveyed that they might be fit
for service, and as soon as it was night, Eumenes and Polyperchon set their men
to work again, and plied them in such a manner, that they had made an end an
hour before day, and the Moat without the Walls of Babylon, was filled up and
made level with the counter-scarp in twenty several places, for the breadth of
above threescore foot.

No sooner did the Sun discover his earliest beams, but through the whole Camp
was heard the noise of a thousand warlike instruments, which excited the
courages of the soldiers for the important action of that day, one might see
them run on all sides, and range themselves under their Standards and Banners
with a cheerfulness full of resolution, their valiant Commanders observed it
with a great deal of joy, and every one amongst his own endeavored to confirm
them in it, by all the considerations of honor and of interest; the common
soldiers in whom the hope of booty produces usually as strong effects as the
desire of honor, could not think of the pillage of a City, proud with the
spoils of so many Kings, and enriched with the treasures of so many Provinces,
without preparing themselves for mavelous exploits, and they, in whose souls
more noble considerations were wont to work, promised themselves a more perfect
glory in this last effect of their valor, than that they had acquired in their
former conquests. The Princes walked about through all the quarters, and
incited all the Battalions, which being drawn up in very good order, were
advancing already toward the Counterscarp: one part of the Cavalry stood in
Battalia in the Plain on both sides of the river, and the other, by order from
their Commanders, had changed their quality for that day, and made a body of
infantry to march on to the assault as the rest of the foot, those famous
Captains having judged that to assault a Town like Babylon, defended with
twenty thousand fighting men, all their forces were no more than necessary.

Oxiartes had the command that day, and the renewing of his flames having added
something to his natural order, he seemed to be all fire in the duties of his
place, and prepared himself to let Barsina see by the actions of that day, that
without offending the memory of Memnon, she well might cast her eyes upon so
worthy a successor. Artaxerxes, Oroondates, and Orontes, who had no forces to
which they were particularly engaged, took part in his cares to give him ease,
and all the other Commanders kept themselves at the head of their men to fall
on in the places that were assigned them. It was no trivial enterprise to
attacque that vast extent of walls on every side, and for the exectuion of such
a design, the Princes in probability stood in need of a far greater number of
men than that they had; but they likewise made a strong diversion of the
enemies forces, and all places were not a little weakened, which were guarded
only by men that had a circuit of three hundred and sixty furlongs to defend.
When they had implored the assistance of heaven, by the sacrifices that were
offered through the whole Camp, and that all the forces were in the readiness
that had been ordained, they were made to advance at the sound of diverse
instruments which struck fear into the hearts of those that defended the walls.
Perdiccas nevertheless had forgot nothing that belonged to his charge, and
having found by the enemies working, that their design was to give a general
assault, he had prepared himself to sustain it, and not contented with the
soldiery which he had to man the town, he had caused the better part of the
inhabitants to take up arms. Against Craterus his approach he had opposed
Cassander; Peucestas against that of Oxiartes; Andiagoras against Artabasus;
Antigenes against Antigonus; against that of Eumenes his enemy Neoptolemus;
Teutamus against that of Polyperchon. Besides these six principal Posts, he had
furnished all those places where his enemies had filled the Moat, with a good
number of soldiers and Officers to command them, judging well that there they
would employ their greatest force. All things were in good order upon the
walls, when those dreadful Engines began to move, which were full of armed
men, and in which most part of the Princes had taken their places; they were
drawn by cables that were put round many pieces of timber rammed into the earth
on the far side of the Moat, even at the very foot of the wall, nor was it
without astonishment that those moving houses were seen to approach those lofty
walls at the mercy of a storm of arrows, which poured upon them as they came
on; the Parapet, wherewith the platform was defended, and their large shields,
which the soldiers held forth against them, diverted part of the danger, and
the Archers that were placed in a lower story, and that shot under covert
against the battlements, favored those who were above them, and who waited
only for an opportunity to plant their scaling ladders, wherewith the platform
was provided, they began also to make those engines of Demetrius his invention
to play, which threw stones of an extraordinary weight, and they that had the
care of them managed their business with such dexterity, that they could
scarce have aimed them better with a bow or sling; that strange manner of fight
made havoc among them that defended the curtain, and did something terrify
them at the first; but their Commanders heartened them, and telling them that
the danger was not great enough to be fled from, especially seeing their flight
would give their enemies the victory, and deprive them of all hope of safety,
they made them stand firm in their places, and expect their destiny with
patience. It would be hard for me to describe the particular actions of so many
famous Warriors, as made themselves remarkable that memorable day, the number
of valiant and considerable men in that army was too great to be able to relate
the circumstances of their exploits, and besides, we have enlarged our selves
but too far already in discourses of this nature, the length of which would
without doubt be tedious; therefore we will only say, what cannot be omitted
without concealing the most important events of this our History.

Craterus, Polyperchon, Antigonus, Oxiartes, Eumenes, and Laomedon stood upon
the edge of the Moat at the head of their men, to lead them on to the assault
as soon as their companions had mastred the first difficulties, and Prince
Oroondates, Artaxerxes, Lysimachus, Ptolomeus, Demetrius, and the gallant
Amazon Queen, followed by Menander, Alexander, Menelaus, and the sons of
Artabasus, had placed themselves severally in the Towers, by which they hoped
to find a shorter way to come unto their enemies. Their valor did not long
remain unprofitable, and they spent part of the day in opposing their shields
against the arrows that showred upon them, without finding any other matter to
employ themselves; but in the end in spite of all opposition, they got to the
bottom of the walls, and then it was that a thousand ladders were lifted up
from the top of those Engines toward the battlements, and that the besieged
with a firm resolution received them, overthrowed them, and gave a great many
different deaths unto their enemies. There it was that the danger came to be
known, and that by the fall of their stoutest soldiers, the Princes judged
that the City would very hardly be entered by so perilous a way.

The besieged made use of all things for their defense, and by the advantage
they had in the height of the place they were upon, all manner of arms became
the more effectual; they cast down stones of a prodigious weight, which never
fell without destruction, and darted fireworks skilfully composed, which did
considerable execution among the soldiers, and did much mischief to the wood
the Engines were made of; above three thousand men lost their lives in less
than an hour by that kind of combat, more than four thousand were wounded, and
even among the Princes Menander was slain with an arrow, Demetrius shot through
the hand, Orontes was laid for dead at Thalestris feet, and Prince Artaxerxes
knocked down with a stone, which disabled him for service all the rest of that
day, and which had absolutely killed him but for the goodness of his Cask.

Perdiccas, Cassander, and their companions, who by many tokens found the fruit
of their resistance, encouraged their men still more and more, and proud of
that good success. It Is not a slight attempt (cried they (for Persians and
Scythians, to force the walls of Semiramis, when they are defended by the
Successors of Alexander; behold the last day of the war, and the day that you
shall bury your selves in our Moat, as in a grave prepared for the funeral of
all your army. These words or others to the same effect, which the besieged
uttered aloud in many places, were heard by their enemies, and thereupon being
animated by shame, they were incited to extraordinary attempts. Oroondates, who
had heard part of them, blushed at those reproaches, and was kindled with a
fury, against which, the walls of Babylon appeared too weak, for the defense of
its inhabitants, he cast his irefull look toward the battlements, and
threatening his enemies both with arm and voice, took a ladder in his own hand,
and covering himself with his shield, he clapped it up against the wall. Follow
me (cried he to those that were near him) here it is we must either seek for
fame or burial.

Saying these words, he began to get up, but scarce had he set his foot upon
the lowest staves, when he was met with by a tempest, under which any other man
but he would without doubt have been orewhelmed, but covering himself with his
shield in his left hand, and holding by the ladder with his right, he bore that
burden, which would have been insupportable to a lesser strength; many
courageous men set up ladders also, and began to go up by his example, but they
made not an equal progress, and most of them were thrown down again at the
very first steps, The undaunted Prince, maugre all the obstacles, and all the
resistance of his enemies, got at last to the top of his ladder, and catching
hold of a battlement; was going to throw himself upon the wall, when he found
Ariston there, who forbad his passage with so weighty a blow, that but for the
help of the battlement which he had already seized upon, he in the posture he
then was, had been without doubt overturned on the top of those that followed
him; he staggered at it a while, but soon recovered himself, and having taken
sure footing, while Ariston prepared to second his former stroke, he prevented
him with a back blow which cut off the hand he had lifted up against him, close
by the wrist. Ariston loosing his courage with his blood and strength, quitted
the place unto his enemy, and the fierce Prince of Scythia had no sooner driven
him away, but raising himself with a great deal of activity, he sprung to the
top of the wall, yet it pleased his destiny that part of the Battlement he held
fell down by the force he used in striving to get up, and tumbling upon those
that followed him, overthrew them all with their ladder, either killed or
wounded, while they that had opposed the others which were planted, cast them
down headlong with the same destruction into the Moat, and not only took away
the advantages they had gained, but also the courage of attempting to scale
them any more.

Those who defended the place where the Prince of Scythia had gotten up, were
immediately scattered to avoid the death they feared to meet in the point of
his sword, but when they saw him alone, and that by the cries of their
companions, they had learned the fate of those that were coming after him, they
recollected their spirits, and getting together again, began to incompasse him.
He soon perceived the misfortune he was fallen into, and turning his eyes from
the top of the walls, toward the Camp, which he could see, all of it from
thence, he was unresolved whether he should preciptate himself into the Moat,
rather than submit himself to the mercy of his enemies. Must I (said he to
himself with a deep sigh) must I give my enemies the joy to triumph to day over
my life, or over my liberty.

This thought afflicted him most infinitely, but he had not the leisure to
express it, and they only gave him time to resolve to sell that dearly, which
they would have taken from him. With this resolution which he took very
suddenly, he rushed like a Lion into the midst of those that assaulted him,
and with his two first blows, having laid two of the forwardest of them dead
at his feet, he made their companions know that he was not yet their prisoner,
though he were shut up within their walls, their breadth at the top which was
of two and thirty foot, afforded them room enough to fight in, but it proved
oftentimes too narrow, for those, who flying the point of his fatal sword to
the very brink, fell down into the streets. and found that death by their fall,
which they had in vain endeavored to avoid. The most terrible objects that
ever had been seen, were nothing in comparison of what Oroondates appeared to
them that opposed his fury, and some amongst them who called to mind just such
another accident, whereby Alexander had been so near his death in the City of
the Mallians, thought they saw something far more great, and far more dreadful
in this latter; He had already covered the place on which he fought with
flaughtered carcasses, and such was his fortune, that his enemies had not yet
drawn blood of him; but though he had been yet more valiant, if it could have
been possible, though he had been invulnerable, there was a necessity of
yielding ^o a world of enemies, whose very throng alone was able to have
stifled him, and for a last effect of his mishap, that so redoubted sword
having been laid with too potent an arm upon a Headpiece of too hard a temper,
flew into a great many pieces, and left its Master disarmed in that extremity.

His rage grew to the highest pitch when he saw himself in that condition, yet
his misfortune was not capable to abate his courage, but instantly thinking
upon the means to prolong his resistance, after having overturned those with a
shock that ran first to seize upon him, he catched at the sword of one of them
that were next him, when his enemies surrounding him with less fear than they
had done before, came on so thick, that he no longer had the power to stir; He
was thrown down at last under a crowd that was like to have smothered him, and
it was by order from one of the Commanders, in whom the Princes admirable
valor had begot a respect toward his person, that the soldiers endeavored
rather to take than kill him. Before they suffered him to rise again, his hands
were bound, and his enemies, who could not look upon him without terror, durst
not adventure to leave them free, for all they were unarmed.

When he beheld himself in that estate, so different from that in which he
ought to have been, and in which he had been but a few moments before, he was
upon the point of giving himself over to his despair, and casting his eyes on
every side, he chose a place from whence he might precipitate himself, and was
already striving to get thither with that design, when he was stopped by those
that were about him, and reduced to a necessity of following them, and of
submitting to their will, then did he look upon his bonds with shame, and
turning his eye upon the chief of those that led him; these hands (said he)
were destined for other uses than to bear the unworthy bonds thou give them;
take them off therefore, if thou will deserve the glory thou have acquired to
day.

I will take them off (answered the Captain) if you will promise me to follow
us without resistance, and that by some action of despair you will not force us
to draw our swords once more against you. I promise thee said Oroondates,
offering him his hands, and the man having untied them himself, made him go
down into the Town, and pass amongst twenty naked swords toward the place
where he meant to carry him. In the mean while the assault had been continued
for some time very hotly, but after the taking of Oroondates, and the wounding
of his friends, fortune seemed to have declared her self in favor of the
besieged, and they made so great a number of those that were getting up ladders
fall into the Moat, that the soldiers lost courage, and durst attempt it no
more; they also broke some of the Engines with the huge stones they rouled down
upon them when they were fastened to the wall, put the rest in so ill a
condition, that the Commanders and soldiers were constrained to quit them, and
retire toward the counterscarp, while by the same invention that had drawn them
to the wall, they were pulled back again from thence.

Oxiatres finding that day was not favorable to his party, and loosing hope of
a better issue, commanded a retreat to be sounded on all sides, but he left
above six thousand dead in the Moat, and brought off above eight thousand
wounded. It would not be easy to express the discontent of the Princes for
this ill success; they, by the greatness of their courage, dissembled part of
it, and comforted themselves by the hope of repairing their loss within a few
days; but when they heard the fate of Prince Oroondates, they gave themselves
over to their sorrow, and received the news as they would have done that of the
utter ruin of their party; they could not judge whether he were dead or
prisoner, but whatsoever his fortune were, they could not without a mortal
grief, think of the loss of either his life or liberty.

Lysimachus made complaints more worthy of the greatness of his affection to
that Prince, than of the greatness of his courage, Orontes, Oxiatres,
Ptolomeus, Queen Thalestris, and the Princess Barsina were all drowned in an
immoderate sorrow. Berenice called for death with a sea of tears, and protested
to all the world she would not survive the loss of so dear a brother, but when
Prince Artaxerxes at his coming to himself again (which was above two hours
after his blow) was told that cruel news, he appeared without comparison more
sensible of it, than he had been of all the most tragical adventures of his
life. He ran blindly to his arms, and would have returned unto the fight,
either to perish there, or to rescue, or revenge his dearest brother, it was to
no purpose for the Princes to tell him the condition of their affairs; for he
could not resolve to continue one minute alive and at liberty, while Oroondates
was either dead, or in the power of his enemies; his transports were redoubled
by the presence of Berenice, whom he saw pouring down floods of tears, and not
being able to find any consolation for her, since he was incapable of it for
himself; Madam (said he) I will either quickly restore you Oroondates, if he be
living, or follow him to the grave if he be dead. Yet was he fain (after having
allowed some time to that first brunt of his passion (to hearken a little to
his friends, and recall that fortitude, which had formerly kept him from
sinking in such important affairs, and such considerable losses.

In the mean time Prince Oroondates was led without Sword or Cask along the
streets of Babylon, and though most part of the inhabitants were then upon the
walls, yet did there happen to be many in his passage, who beholding his brave
aspect with admiration, recalled the almost lost Ideas into their minds, and
remembered that they had formerly seen that gallant Prince in their City, and
adored in the Court of poor Darius; he had gone but a little way, when false
Arbates crossing a street, had the chance to see him. He no sooner cast his
eyes upon his face, but instantly he knew him, and at that encounter his
astonishment was so great, that at first he was not able to speak a word. Yet
did he recollect himself, and not having the face to speak to the Prince, he
addressed himself to the Officer that led him. Neander (said he) whither do you
carry this prisoner? I am going (answered Neander) to put him in a place of
safety, till such time as Perdiccas be at leisure to see him. Arbates having
bethought himself a while before he replied. It would concern you (added he) to
go and present him immediately to the Queen, you will be sure of a considerable
reward, and if you do it not after the notice I have given you, you will be in
danger of incurring her displeasure.

Neander needed no other persuasions to carry Oroondates before Roxana, and
Arbates invited him to it out of the hope which he himself had of the
recompenses he promised him; yet was he desirous the Prince should have another
opinion, and drawing near with the respect he owed him. Sir (said he) I do you
no ill office in causing you to be led before the Queen, from whom you will
receive very different usage, from what you could hope for from Perdiccas.
Oroondates understood Arbates his meaning, but he vouchsafed not to reply, and
looking upon him with contempt, he made him know that all the good offices he
could receive from him were not capable to touch him. Let us go (said he, only
to Nenader) whether thou intendest to lead me; Roxana and Perdiccas are equally
my enemies, and it is indifferent to me whether I am prisoner to the one, or to
the other. Yet was it not without a great deal of trouble that he saw himself
carrying before Roxana, but he had no less aversion for the sight of
Perdiccas, and he also believed that it was less shame to him to be so abased
before a woman, than before a man whom he could not esteem, and whom he
considered as his unworthy rival. Before he came unto the Palace, Arbates
hasted away to tell the Queen the news, and to prepare her for an object, which
in probability she could not behold without some inward disturbance; his
foresight was no more than necessary, for at a thing so unexpected, the Queen
was so strangely surprised, that in the first effects of her astonishment, she
scarce had any understanding left; the excess of happiness she found in that
adventure, made her for a while incredulous of Arbates his report, but when she
thought she could no longer doubt of it, and that she had no more but a few
moments to resolve upon the sight of that man whom she had so much loved, and
whom she still loved better than her self, she distrusted her own strength for
such an action, and turning toward Arbates and Hesione who then was with her;
It is not fit (said she) that I should see Oroondates in the condition I now am
in, and in the presence of a great many persons, who without doubt will observe
my weakness in the changes of my countenance; when I have settled my self a
little, I may see him with more confidence, and with more liberty, but in the
mean time, I will have him lodged here in the Palace, and guarded by the guard
of my own person.

With these words, she sent for the Captain of the guard, and when he was come
to her; Go (said she) receive the prisoner Neander is bringing before us, lodge
him in a quarter of the Palace, and stay your self to guard him with your own
company, but keep him in such manner that no body may see him, without my
order; I say no body, for I do not mean, that so much as Pe^diccas be excepted.
The Captain went away with this command, and after him the Queen sent Arbates,
and some of her Officers, to give order about lodging the Prince, whom she
desired to have used according to the greatness of his birth, and that of the
love she bore him.

That was all she could do in the trouble she then was in, as well by reason of
so unlooked for an accident, as of her fear for the success of the assault;
the high interest she had in it caused great disquiets in her mind, and she
had men upon the walls which every moment brought her news from thence; within
a little while after that of Oroondates his being taken, she heard that the
enemies had the worst, and within an hour after she learned that having
received a very great loss, they had given over the assault, and were retiring
from the Moat; she gave thanks unto the Gods for those two favorable events,
and the truth of the latter was presently confirmed to her from Perdiccas his
own mouth. He came to her, quite transported with the advantages of that day,
not considering the blow they had received the day before, by the defeat of
their Allies, and not being able to dissemble his contentment.

Madam, (said he) we are Conquerours, and our enemies have been so ill handled
in this assault, that if I be not deceived they have dearly bought the
advantage they had over us yesterday. I hoped for no less from your valor,
(replied Roxana) but me thinks, you forget to publish part of your success,
and that you might tell me of Oroondates his being taken, as of a news of some
importance. Perdiccas had heard a kind of a rumor of that business, but had
not been able to learn the truth of it, nor to get any certain information of
that prisoners name, though the report of those wonders he had done at his
taking, had put him into great suspicions of the truth; but when he heard it
from the Queens mouth, he seemed transported with joy at it, and could not
dissemble the fear he had been in of so dreadful a rival, as courageous as he
was, the name of Oroondates of late struck terror in him, nor could he fancy
him in the posture he had seen him in twice or thrice without trembling, when
he rememembred it was against that enemy he disputed his pretensions. Ah Madam,
(said he to Roxana) is it possible that Oroondates is a prisoner? He is so
(answered the Queen, turning away from those of the company whom she suspected)
but he is my prisoner, as Statira is yours; and I pretend to have the same
right over your rivalls that you have over mine, you will remember our
agreements, and as I have not troubled you in your design upon Statira I expect
you should trouble me as little in what concerns Oroondates; even out of
generosity you must forbear to see him for a few days, for fear you fly into
passion against a rival, and against a man whom I cannot keep my self from
loving.

She spoke these words with a smile, and Perdiccas replied with much respect.
He that would serve you with the hazard of his life, will never trouble you in
your intentions, and the least I ow to her that leaves me Statira with so much
goodness, is to give up Oroondates to her absolutely. May the Gods assist you
to make a greater progress in his heart, than I have done in the gaining of
that ungrateful Princess, and may they dispose things so, that he out of a
just sense of the happiness you offer him, may quit that to me, which he can
no longer dispute against me without injustice. I will not see him till you
shall please to command me, as well to give you this mark of the respect I bear
unto your will, as not to insult over the misfortune of a man whom you judge
worthy of your affection.

After this, and some other discourse which they had upon that subject,
Perdiccas took his leave of Roxana, and went directly to Queen Statira's
lodging, to be himself the bringer of a news upon which he hoped to ground some
part of his fortune. That fair Queen and the Princess her sister, had spent
all the time of the assault in prayers, and though they had heard part of the
event from those that guarded them, yet were they ignorant still of the
particulars. Perdiccas was no sooner come into their presence, but with a face
in which his joy appeared; Madam, (said he to the Queen) the Gods who find more
justice in our prayers than yours, have driven our enemies from our walls to
their loss, and to their confusion; I am sorry to be the relater of a news
that may afflict you; but perhaps you will be comforted for it, when you hear
that Oroondates is in Babylon. Oroondates in Babylon? (cried the Queen) and how
can he be there if his party have had the disadvantage? he is a prisoner
(replied Perdiccas) and the Gods by his ill fortune, have made known the
injustice of his pretensions.

Ah Perdiccas, (said the Queen) how cunning you are, and how well am I
accustomed to your subtilties, to give no credit at all to what you say. I tell
you true Madam, (answered Perdiccas) Oroondates is prisoner in Babylon, he was
taken upon our walls, where he was the only man of his party that got up, and
it is a thing whereof you may have time enough to be informed. But afflict not
your self (continued he seeing her change color at his words) he is prisoner
to a person that loves him, and one for whom perchance ere he get out of prison
he will have no aversion; you need not be in fear for the usage he is like to
have, and it suffices me to tell you he is in Roxana's hands to make you judge
that his condition will not be unhappy.

The Queen hearkened to this discourse with a mortal sadness, though she still
doubted whether she should believe it, and she could not learn that her dear
Oroondates was in the power of his enemies, without being touched even to the
very bottom of her heart with his ill fortune, yet did she dissemble part of
her grief before Perdiccas, and looking upon him with a countenance very little
moved. If Oroondates be a prisoner (said she) you have reason to be glad, since
you were but in little safety while you had such an enemy before your walls;
but if he be not, your policy is fruitless, since neither his being taken, nor
his liberty can change my thoughts. It is not from his being taken (replied
Perdiccas) that I expect your change, but yet I hope for some advantage by it,
and if he change first by the favor of Roxana, you will no longer be obliged
to the constancy in which you persevere toward him. The change of Oroondates,
if he were capable of it (answered the Queen) shall never authorize mine, and
though he should become unfaithful, Perdiccas never shall succeed Alexander in
Statira's heart. Perdiccas seeing that the Queen grew sharp, was not willing to
press her further, but taking his leave, went whither he was called by the
importance of his affairs.

When the Queen was left at liberty with her sister, she reflected upon
Oroondates his captivity, and though she knew not whether she should absolutely
believe it, yet did she begin to reason upon that disaster, as if she had been
very certain of it. Ah sister (said she) with what a new affliction the Gods
overwhelm me, and what offense had innocent Oroondates committed, to make him
fall into the power of his enemies; is it that the interest he takes in the
miseries of this unfortunate wretch renders him guilty in their esteem, or that
having made me feel so many sorts of calamities, they will afflict me now with
the only cross which yet remained for me to suffer? In bringing forth these
words, the tears fell from her fair eyes, and the Princess Parisatis, for all
she her self was so sensible of her grief, used all her utmost endeavors to
give her comfort. Peradventure Madam (said she) we ought not to take Oroondates
his captivity for an effect of his misfortune and of ours; for it may chance to
be more advantageous for us, that he is now shut up within the walls of
Babylon, than if he were yet before the Town exposed to all those dangers,
which he outbraves too venturously, and in which he might perhaps have met his
death. He is in safety of his life, since he is in Roxana's hands, she loves
him with too much passion, not to divert all the mischief that can threaten him
from his enemies or from his rivals.

Ah Sister (replied the Queen) is it possible you should be so little
acquainted with Roxana's spirit, and that you should not judge by our own
fortune, that after having vainly tried all gentle ways with Oroondates, there
is no extremity so great to which he is not like to fly. But perhaps (continued
she presently after with a sigh, which the remembrance of Perdiccas his threats
drew from her breast) perhaps it will not be necessary for Roxana to use
violence against him, and that he will give up himself either to the charms of
that wicked woman, or to the considerations of his present fortune.

Ah Madam (answered the Princess) how unjustly do you wrong a Prince, to whom
you are so much indebted? and how little do those ungrateful suspicions suit
with all the actions of Oroondates his life? Neither do I believe, Madam, that
you are much tormented with that apprehension, and after the little care you
had to keep Oroondates yours, after the death of Alexander, I cannot think you
fear his change as the worst fortune that can befall you. I do not fear it
(replied the Queen) because I know his virtue too well, to believe he can over
be capable of it; But though it be true, Sister, that after the death of that
great and illustrious Husband the Gods had given me, I thought I could not,
without doing my self an injury, preserve any design touching Oroondates, it is
also true, that his infidelity would be less supportable than his death, and
perhaps less than mine own; after having lost the greatest of all men living, I
believed I could not make any man his Successor, and in that belief I used a
violence upon mine inclinations, which then you did not disapprove, but that
consideration was not able to hinder me from loving Oroondates still, nor from
desiring to be still loved by him; that is the only happiness fortune has not
robbed me of, and if I were deprived of that only consolation, which has
sweetened all my miseries, I should be deprived of all that could make me love,
or that could make me suffer life. After these discourses, the two Princesses
had some others upon the same subject, and all the rest of that day they
entertained themselves with considerations, which that event brought into their
minds.

In the mean time they had lodged Prince Oroondates in a quarter of the
Palace, and by chance it proved the very same, which in another condition, he
had formerly lain in, during the stay Darius had made there before the battle
of Arbella. That remembrance touched him with some motions of tenderness, and
made him bestow a few sighs upon the memory of that great King: His lodgings
were richly furnished, and his prison was so sumptuously disguised, that it was
not to be known, but by the number of Guards that forbad the going in and out
of his chamber, and by a double grate that was put before the windows; in all
other things he was used like a Kings son, and the will of Roxana, who desired
it, was punctually fulfilled.

When the Prince saw himself deprived of that liberty, which he would have
employed for the recovery of his Princesses freedom, and frustrated of the
hopes he had to fight for her deliverance, he sunk a little from his ordinary
constancy, and bore that beginning of his captivity less patiently than might
have been expected from the greatness of his spirit; he made reflection upon
the estate of his companions, and remembering that ^e had left them in danger
for a quarrel, the greatest interests whereof were his, he gave himself over to
an immoderate affliction. What (said he) shall I then be a captive, or rather
shut up in a Chamber, where I am in safety from the enemies sword or javeline,
while Artaxerxes, Lysimachus, and their companions fight for Cassandra and
Oroondates? Shall those gallant resolutions I had taken, vanish then without
any effect? If there be hazard to be run, if there be glory to be gained, shall
my companions have it all, and shall Perdiccas and his friends laugh that they
have him in their fetters, who had so loudly threatened him? O my fairest Queen,
if you were to hope for succor, was it not from your Oroondates, and since by
my captivity I lost the means to give it you, ought I not to have prevented it
by a death less shameful and more supportable?

In these unquiet thoughts, wherewith he was cruelly tormented, he found some
consolation, by remembering that he was but a very little distance from his
Princess, and that he was shut up with her in the compass of the same walls. We
are neither separated (said he) by Seas nor Provinces, and only a few houses
takes up all the space there is between my Queen and me; but dearest Princess,
we both are captives in this City, which was once the King your Fathers, and
which was also the King your Husbands, and poor Oroondates for all he is so
near you, has no more means to see you, and discourse with you, than when he
was kept in prison by the King of Scythia.

He had continued two or three hours in this kind of entertainment, when he was
told that Queen Roxana was coming to visit him. That hated name made his color
change, and he knew not which way he should prepare himself for the sight of a
person, whose very remembrance alone he could not but abhor, yet did he do all
he possibly could, to dispose himself to bear it, and scarce had he begun to
settle his countenance, when he saw her come into the chamber, attended only
by Hesione and another of her maids. Though he was fain to use a great violence
upon himself to receive her, yet did he go to meet her, and strove to pay her
what he believed due to the Widow of Alexander the Great; but if he were in
some confusion, the Queen was in no less than he, and notwithstanding all the
preparations wherewith she had armed her self before she came unto that action,
she could not see the so beloved face of that man for whom she had suffered so
much, and whom she had made so much to suffer, without being in the greatest
perplexity of mind, she had ever felt in all her life; she looked a while upon
him with eyes which sufficiently discovered the motions of her heart, and if she
had followed them, she would without doubt have been transported to give him a
reception far beyond the bounds of decency and modesty; but having as much
power over her self as any woman in the world, she made use of it in this
encounter, and keeping her self within reasonable moderate limits, after she
had saluted him according to the ordinary custom, she was the first that broke
silence in these words. I am come to render you what the quality of an enemy,
and the condition of a prisoner of war, cannot take away from your birth and
virtue, and to assure you, that your fortune is not worse by being fallen into
our hands, than it was when you fought before our walls.

Though the Queen spoke these words with a grace that was common to very few
persons, and that her beauty was capable to dissipate part of the resentments
one might have against her. The Prince was prepossessed with his by such just
and powerful motives, that the sense he was obliged to have of her civil
offers, was hardly able to suspend that for a moment, which he had of the
miseries she had made him undergo; yet did he force himself the best he could,
and being he bore a most perfect respect unto that sex, he strove for all he
was so much exasperated to observe decency, even with his most bitter enemy.

Your Majesty takes a care (said he) which I have never merited, and this
favor is undeservedly bestowed upon a prisoner, and upon an enemy like me. If
you are my enemy, (replied Roxana) I am not yours; our thoughts have still
continued in their first estate, and as all the testimonies of affection, which
I have given you, have not been able to touch your heart, so all the marks of
hatred, which you have made appear against me, both in your former and in your
latter actions, have not been able to change my inclinations. Oroondates had no
intent to engage in such a like discourse, as desiring to shun all occasions of
falling again into the persecutions of Roxana, but when she had put him upon
that subject, and by those words revived his sad remembrances and his lawful
resentments, he could not be the master of them, but being carried away by
their impetuousnesse. I had thought Madam (said he) I had been in a condition,
that would have freed me from hearing or from using reproaches, but since by
yours to me, you give me some liberty to justify my actions, I will excuse
them no other way but by avowing them; it is true that I have the thoughts of
an enemy toward you, nay thoughts of such a violent hatred, as perhaps nothing
but your sex alone has defended you against them, and hindered me of the
satisfaction to destroy the cruel cause of all my misfortunes; it is not
necessary I should quicken your memory of them, you know well enough that after
having a thousand times disturbed my quiet by your subtle plots, you in the
end have utterly deprived me of it by a deceit without example, and cruelly
torn away my happiness and all my hopes. It is you alone that have thrown me
headlong into this gulf of miseries, wherein I have unfortunately languished
out my days; it is by your means alone that I lost all, and when you thought
heaven was preparing to restore it me, you would have sent it out of the world
to put me out of all hope to recover it; you forgot that you were a woman and a
Princess, to change your self into a fury armed against my life, and so you
could but make me perish, you never feared the shame you were to receive by
such a horrid cruelty, nor the remorse of conscience that would have tortured
you; for having shed the remainders of the most illustrious blood in the world,
and the remainders of the blood of your own Kings. These Madam, are the gallant
marks of your affection, and after this can you think it strange I should have
received them with ingratitude, and that I should resent those crafty practices
that have been so fatal to me, and abhor that prodigy of cruelty in which I
had a greater interest than all Mankind? It is true, Madam, that I have hated,
that I have detested you, and that I took up arms against you; but could you
think my resentments should be more moderate, and that I could behold the cruel
Authors of my deplorable miseries, and the horrible Murderers of Statira, as
other than Monsters, and Tormentors of my life?

The Prince peradventure would have said more, if the Queen, who hearkened
impatiently, had not interrupted him: I must confess (said she) that I have
done all that you reproach me with, but these actions, which are extraordinary
to my Sex, and perhaps unto my humor, have been extraordinary marks of my
affection, and if you had rightly considered them, they would have drawn your
love, or your acknowledgement insted of your aversion: It was for your sake
alone, that from opennesse and sweetness, I fell to subtlety and cruel^ie,
and that dreadful change of mind was nothing but a pure effect of this
affection, which you have so ingratefully requited; if at the first I troubled
your repose, it was because I thought you should have sought it in none but me
alone, since it was for you alone I had rejected mine; if I had recourse to
subtilty to get you from my rival, it was because I believed you ought to have
been mine, as I was wholly yours, and that having by the knowledge of your
ingratitude lost the hope o^ acquiring you, I was not willing my rival should
triumph over my destruction; and if after the death of the King our husband, I
would have dispatched her out of the world, it was Oroondates, and not ambition
of Empire, they were the maxims of love, and not the maxims of State that
carried me on to such a cruelty; she came again into a condition of taking
Oroondates from me, and to endeavor to secure him to my self, I with her would
have sacrificed all that next after him was dearest to me in the world* imagine
something yet more strange than that, I was capable to have done it that I
might purchase you; but by these violences which I have done to a nature, that
of it self was not inclined to cruelty, and by these blemishes which my actions
may have stuck upon my reputation, you ought to judge, Oroondates, of the
greatness of my affection, rather than of that of my rival by the slender
proofs you have received from her* she hated you as soon as she believed you
ceased to love her, she banished you injuriously from her presence, when with
the price of your blood, and the danger of your life you came to buy her
liberty, and I have loved you in your ingratitude, in your scorn, and even in
your highest provocations; I loved you when you were armed for our ruin before
our gates, and I love you still being newly entered into our City with your
sword in your hand, with a design perhaps to turn it against my life.

Roxana made a stop at these words, and the Prince seeing she expected his
answer; I do not deny (said he) but that these proofs of affection which you
allege are very different from those I have received from Queen Statira, I
never looked for any such from her, and if she had been capable to give me
them, I might have been capable to lose the report and the passion I had for
her, it was in permitting me to see her and to serve her that she expressed her
goodness to me, better than by crimes which could never have come into her
thought without horror; and by the knowledge I had of her, I received those
favors, as graces that were above a reasonable ambition; I wondered not that
she should cease to love him, when she believed him ungrateful and per^idious,
who in his greatest fidelity was unworthy of her affection, and by means of
your cruel deceit, I was guilty enough in her opinion, to deserve a thousand
deaths with the banishment she condemned me to; if she hated me so long as my
innocence was unknown to her, if she married Alexander, you alone were guilty
of the crime, and if since her marriage she bounded all her affections in the
person of the King her Husband, and could neither love me, nor suffer me after
my justification: I accused nothing but her virtue only, and did not think it
strange that a Princess, who could not commit a fault, would not for my sake go
beyond the limits of her duty. In short, Madam, though it were true, that that
great Princess had ill requited my passion, she is such an one as merits an
eternal service, without the least hope of requital, and I am too proud of the
advantage I have had above all other men, to give a moment of my life to the
thought of another glory, or of another felicity. These inclinations (replied
Roxana) have hitherto been very contrary to your repose, and the miseries
wherein you have passed your life, ought perchance to have diverted you from
that imprudent perseverance. These miseries (answered Oroondates) shall ever
make my most glorious fortune, and that, which I have suffered for my Princess,
is above the highest recompenses I could propose unto my self in a design less
noble than that of devoting my whole life unto Statira. You might, perhaps,
employ it with better fruit, (added Roxana) and though Statira were yet more
worthy of it than she is, perchance she may never be in a condition to
acknowledge it; she is in the power of a man who will rather perish than
abandon her, and you your self may consider that you are my Prisoner. I am a
prisoner, (said Oroondates) but this captivity of the body reaches not unto the
soul, or if my soul be a prisoner, it is in a prison, out of which it neither
can, nor ever will be set at liberty; thus it is you share Oroondates with
Statira; but her part will eternally be hers, and you may happen quickly to
lose yours, by the succor of a great number of gallant friends that fight for
my deliverance. That succor of your friends (replied Roxana) is not so
infallible as you believe, and the success of this day may perchance have
cool^d them for a great many others; but I hope you will not need it, and that
I shall make your prison so pleasing to you, that you no more shall wish for
liberty; it is with that design I desired you should be my prisoner
particularly, nor would I leave that advantage to enemies you have among us,
whose interest in your ruin would perhaps have been more powerful in them,
than the consideration which ought to be had of your person.

After these words, Roxana, who desired first to try gentle ways, not being
willing to exasperate Oroondates by a longer conversation, took leave of him,
when she once more had promised him all the good usage he could hope for from
the person that in all the world was most affectionate to him, and going out of
his chamber, left him at liberty to reflect upon that past entertainment, and
upon his present condition. A^ she retired to her own lodgings with torches,
which were already lighted, she in a Gallery met Cassander and Alcetas; they
both knew of Oroondates his being taken, which was divulged through the whole
town, and they also were not ignorant that the Q. had been to visit him.
Alcetas presented his hand to her on that side that hers was free, to lead her
back unto her chamber; and Cassander, who by reason of former passages between
them had not so easy an access, kept at a farther distance, but he looked
upon her with eyes, which the rage of his jealousy had kindled, and not
knowing how to dissemble his resentments. Your Majesty (said he) comes from
doing an action generous even to excess, and if you had seen your prisoner to
day before our walls, in the posture we saw him animating his men by his voice,
and by his example, to the ruin of our party, and perhaps even to your own, it
may be you would not have made such extraordinary haste to visit him. The Queen
who hated both the discourse and person of Cassander, answered him something
briskly; I have rendered that without generosity, which I in reason owed to a
man of Oroondates his quality, and I have rendered him nothing whereof he is not
very worthy both by his birth, and by his virtue. He is yet the more worthy of
it (replied the jealous Cassander) by the happiness he has not to be hated of
you, but I will tell your Majesty once more, that he appeared very ungrateful
to day to your affection, and that you could not have honored an enemy with it
more fierce and eager to procure your ruin, so generous an enemy as he, (said
the Queen, exasperate by that discourse) in what condition soever he can appear
is a thousand times more lovely than a cowardly friend, and I should be less
ashamed of loving such an enemy as Oroondates, than such a friend as Cassander.

Cassander would have answered that sharp reply, and perhaps with too much
bitterness, if they had not been just then at the Queens chamber door, into
which he would not enter, so the Queen went in, not staying for his answer,
leaving him in furious transports of anger and jealousy: Instantly his
thoughts ran all to the death of Oroondates, and he more considered the
facility he might have to execute his design in the condition he then was, than
the shame he might undergo by killing a prisoner. He shall die, (said he,
walking fast up and down the Gallery) he shall die, that proud Usurper of
Roxana's affections, he that unjustly robs me of what he himself disdains,
though he be unworthy of it; and though by this woman's ingratitude I am little
obliged to embrace her interests, I in my revenge will give her hers, and
punish this insolent man for his contempt of her: I upon Oroondates will
revenge both Cassander and Roxana, and perchance I shall also revenge my self
even upon Roxana by giving death to Oroondates; if she be reasonable, she will
think her self beholding to me, in what I shall have done for her reparation,
and if she persist in her ingratitude toward me, I shall be satisfied, in
having punished her by the death of my enemy.

He was talking on this manner to himself, when Perdiccas returning from the
Town, where he had given all the Orders that were necessary for the guard that
night, came into the Gallery; Cassander saluted him with so troubled a
countenance, that Perdiccas soon took notice of it, and having asked him what
the matter was, Cassander in a few words told him how he had met the Queen, and
repeated all the discourse that had passed between them. She uses me (added he
afterward) as a man of no account, and as a man unable to retort the injuries
she does me; but she shall find her self deceived, and shall see that I yet am
powerful enough to do her a very sensible displeasure. You are the most
violent man in the world, (replied Perdiccas) and you take a very wrong course
to effect your intentions; this is not the way to gain the affections of a
Princess, and the Queen must needs have had strong inclinations towads you, if
after the violence of your proceedings, she could suffer you without aversion.
I have tried (answered Cassander) all ways of gentleness, and of respect, with
as much patience and submission as Roxana could have looked for from the
meanest man alive, but that submission, and that patience have been as
fruitless to me as these violences you reproach me with. While you kept your
self within those terms (said Perdiccas) the Queen was engaged with a Husband,
and with a Husband great enough to take up all her affections, and since his
loss you have hardly given her leisure to come to her self. Say rather,
(replied the jealous Cassander) and say so with a great deal more truth and
reason, that both during the life, and after the death of that Husband, she was
prepossessed with the passion she has for our common enemy, say it is her
prisoner, or ours with as much justice as hers, that robs me of Roxana, as he
does you of Statira, and say in fine, that the only way we have left is to
make him perish for the repose of us both. I Will agree with you, (answered
Perdiccas) that Oroondates is indeed the greatest obstacle to my designs, and
that he is my rival a great deal more than yours, since he has as strong a
passion for Statira, as an aversion against Roxana; and I will also agree with
you, that by his death I should find advantages which I can hardly hope for
while he is alive, but you must know withal, that I cannot be the author of
it, and that I am engaged to Roxana, by a promise that will not suffer me to
attempt any thing against him; I must be fain to let Oroondates live, thereby
to secure the life of Statira, without which I could not preserve my own, nor
can I take arms against my rival, without arming Roxana and all her powers with
her, against hers. I know (said Cassander) what plot you both have contrived
against my happiness, I am too much concerned in it to have been ignorant
thereof till now, and I doubt not but Roxana will leave you Statira, to have
Oroondates for her self; but hope not for your satisfaction by those ways, and
rather expect it by your rivals death, than by his matching with Roxana,
neither indeed is there any probability of seeing a Scythian joined in marriage
with the Queen of the Macedonians, and the posture her affairs will be brought
into by the birth of a son of Alexander's, will not permit her to think of the
alliance of that Barbarian; it were much securer for you, that Oroondates were
no longer in the world, than that he should continue in it to be still seen,
and still in a condition to be loved by Statira; perhaps I may do something
both for you and for my self, and if your promise keeps your hand from serving
you in that occasion, mine shall be employed in it without consideration, and
without repugnanc^e. Cassander said many other things of this nature to
Perdiccas, who for his own interest could not disapprove that intention, and
though he was hindered by the promise he had made to Roxana, from confirming
him in it, yet did he not do what he might have done to dissuade him from it.
He parted with him presently after to go and see Roxana, to whom he had
something to communicate, and Alcetas, whom Cassander had stayed for, came to
him then out of her chamber.

Alcetas would needs go immediately to see the Princess Parisatis, and
Cassander, for all he was so much transported, went along to serve him in a
design they had laid together to discover how she stood affected toward
Lysimachus. They found her not in her own lodging, for all that day she had not
stirred from the Queen her sister, with whom she had had matter of discourse
enough concerning Oroondates his being taken, they passed on to the Queen's
chamber, into which they had free entrance always by their authority; yet the
Queen, by reason of the suspicions that were had of Cassander, for the death of
the King her husband, could not suffer his presence without horror; nor would
she have permitted him to visit her in a place where she had been Mistress;
they then had newly supped, but had eaten very little in regard of the
disturbance this last accident had caused in them, and they were rising from
the table, when Alcetas and Cassander came into their chamber. After some words
of civility, which they spoke at their first coming in, Parisatis, who thought
she might more handsomely than the Queen ask news concerning Oroondates, prayed
Cassander to tell her the truth, and to let her know some particulars of the
manner of his taking. Cassander, though he could not hear the name of
Oroondates, prayed Cassander to tell her the truth, and to let her know some
particulars of the manner of his taking. Cassander though he could not hear the
name of Oroondates without trembling, yet did he master himself to satisfy
her, and to make the plot take, which Alcetas and he had agreed upon, so after
having told her what he knew of the truth; we had not that advantage alone,
(continued he) nor are we better pleased with the taking of Oroondates, than we
are with having slain and wounded the chief of his companions: Ptolomeus,
Eumenes, and Polyperchon have lost their lives in this last action, Antigonus,
Craterus, and Demetrius are wounded, and we our selves saw Lysimachus, who was
getting up after Oroondates, hurt with a great many arrows, and thrown down
under the ruins of a battlement, with the ladder and all those that followed
him into the Moat, from whence he was carried off by some of their soldiers
without any sign of life.

The subtle Cassander spoke on this manner, and his words struck like a
Thunderbolt into the soul of Parisatis. Although that virtuous Princess had
lived til then with such a prudence and discretion, as hardly suffered those
that frequented her most familiarly to judge of the truth of her thoughts, yet
was it most certain that she loved Lysimachus, and that she could not remember
what he had done for her service, and in what condition he had been with her,
even by the will of Queen Sy^igambis her self, without placing him in her
esteem above all the rest of mankind; the mavelous power she had over her
passions, had made her dissemble her thoughts in a season, when by reason of
scruples too full of severity, she believed she could not handsomely discover
them; but as soon as without offending the memory of Ephestion she had been
able to turn her mind upon the actions and person of Lysimachus, she in them
had found so many occasions to love him, that she was of opinion, that she
could not without ingratitude, and insensibility defend her self against an
affection that was so legitimate, and so much approved by them that had the
power over her; any other body but Parisatis would without doubt have showed
greater tokens of it, and if Lysimachus had had to do with one whose humor had
not been so full of circumspection, he might have conceived more advantageous
hopes than those he could draw from the actions of that Princess, but if she
loved him before the death of Alexander, and before the revolution of their
fortune, her affection was without doubt augmented by the last proofs of his,
not being ignorant that it was chiefly for her revenge, and for her liberty,
that he had made all his friends take arms, that he fought before the walls of
Babylon, and that he exposed himself every day to so many dangers; she had
often quaked and grown pale for fear of him, as well as the Queen her sister
for Oroondates, at the recital of those battles and combats, wherein he might
have met with death for her interests, and though she had disguised the cause
of her apprehensions more carefully than she, yet had they been but little
less than hers. Till then nevertheless she had maintained her self like
Parisatis, but at this cruel relation of Cassander, she showed more weakness
than she had done in all the actions of her life, and though she made good the
Empire she had over her mind, she lost that she had over her face, and in an
instant it was struck with such a palenesse, that all they that were near her,
believed with a great deal of probability she would fall into a swown; Alcetas
stepped to her to hold her up, and her aversion against him could not defend her
at that time from receiving his assistance, nor from sinking in his arms with
little sign of life, the Queen running to her received her into hers, and
kissing her with much affection, and with words full of tenderness, she
touched them in such manner, who by their subtle practices had put her into
that condition, that she made them soon repent what they had done.

Alcetas was not capable of a long dissimulation, and fearing his deceit might
produce effects worse than those beginnings, and might bring the Princess into
such an estate as would not be in his power to remedy, he drew near to her
again,in whom there yet remained some sense and knowledge; Madam (said he) give
no credit to Cassanders words, it was at my entreaty he made you this recital,
and it was by that device I desired to learn a truth, which I never had been
able to draw from your former actions; I have but too well effected my design,
and would to God I had still kept my self in my bare suspicions without clearing
my doubts any further; we saw nothing, nor heard we any news of Lysimachus his
being wounded, or of the death of his companions, all the advantage we had was
the taking of Oroondates, and the killing of a great many thousand men that
lost their lives under our walls, but my happy rival is alive, and alive but too
certainly for my repose, he is safe from all disasters, since he has the good
fortune to be loved by you, both above his merit, and to the prejudice of my
life. Believe this truth (continued he, observing by the Princesses action,
that she gave little faith to what he said) since you may be certified of it
within an hour, and since this second deceit, could not but be useless to me,
after having drawn more from the former than I could have wished. To these
words Cassander added his confirmation, and Peucestas, in whom the Princesses
had more confidence than in them, entering then into the chamber, by his report
took away the apprehensions of Parisatis. She recollected all her spirits that
were dissipated, but she came to her self again with so much shame and
resentment, that it was impossible for her to dissemble either. She turned away
her eyes from Alcetas and Cassander, being inflamed with an anger that was not
ordinary in her, and by her action made them see they had mortally offended
her. Alcetas observed it, but being by the knowledge of his rivalls good
fortune cast down into an extremity of grief, he was no better able to hide his
resentments than Parisatis, but passing over the fear he would have had in
another season to exasperate her more against him. Madam (said he) I beg your
pardon for our having deceived you, I ought to have contented my self with the
former proofs I had of Lysymachus his happiness, without using this trick to
seek out what I have but too plainly found: but to deal with a mind like yours,
a man is forced to try extraordinary ways. He would have said more, if the
Princess, infinitely displeased, had not thus interrupted him. You have very
well interpreted an effect of my not being well, rather than of Cassanders
discourse, but though it were true that the change you saw in me, proceeded
from the grief I might receive by the death or wounds of those valiant men that
fight our quarrel, I should find no cause to fear any reproaches for it; and
though according to your suspicions it were for Lysimachus alone that I showed
those marks of sensibility, I owe enough to the merit of his services, and to
that of his person, to remember them without blushing; and I owe so little to
Alcetas, that it should never be his interest should make me to repent it.
Though my sister should love Lysimachus (added the Queen) she should but follow
the Will of the Queen her Mother, that of Alexander your King, and the Counsel
of her elder Sister; but if she stood in need to justify that affection to any
body living, 'twere less to Alcetas th^^ to any other man in the World. I
demanded no justification of it (replied Alcetas) hough perhaps I am in a
condition to give my self some satisfaction; but I Will demand that assistance
from my hand, which it owes me against the fortune of my rival; and
peradventure, may make tears be shed for a real death, by them whom a feigned
one had so sensibly afflicted. That Is the shortest way (added Cassander) and
the most reasonable one we both can follow, and I neither can nor will make my
self amends for Roxana's contempt of me, by any other means but the death of
Oroondates. The Queen, who was touched to the heart with that discourse, lost
all consideration of Cassander, and looking at him with an eye kindled with a
just indignation; I doubt not (said she) but by the same arms thou made use
of for the death of the King thy master, thou may likewise compass the
death of a prisoner; but I also know very well, that if he were at liberty thou
would fly before him as thou have shamefully done many times already. At
these words, refusing any longer conversation with them, she took her sister by
the hand, and entering her closet with her, shut the door. They remained
together in the chamber mad with rage at the Queens replies, especially
Cassander, whom the reproach of having poisoned his King drove into extremities
of fury; that brake forth into transported words, which Alcetas could not
hinder him from uttering. They are the Persians (said he) and the race of
Darius not the Princes of Macedon that are guilty of the death of the
Macedonian King. They are the Barbarians unworthy of his rule and of his
alliance that have taken away the life of their Conqueror and of their master,
and perhaps it was Oroondates his rival, and his enemy that made him perish to
facilitate his possession of the daughter of Darius; but I will prevent you
both well enough from reaping the fruit you pretend to by it, and you shall be
punished with Roxana by the death of that Barbarian, whom you both unworthily
prefer before the Macedonian Princes. He would have said more to this effect,
if Alcetas and Pucestas more moderate than he, had not carried him out of the
room almost by force. After their departure, the two Princesses continued yet
some hours together; and when they had spent the beginning of them in
complaining of that visit of Cassander and Alcetas, they employed the rest in
discoursing of Oroondates, whose last accident took up all their thoughts; they
reasoned a long while upon what they ought to fear or hope for concerning him,
and were not able to judge whether they had more cause to be pleased or
displeased with their fortune in that last adventure. In the end, it being
grown late, they parted, the Princess retiring to her lodging, and the Queen
going to bed, where she passed the night in disquiets, which already were
become habitual to her.

The end of the Fourth Book.
CASSANDRA. The last Part. The fifth Book.
BUT if the fair Queen and the Princess her sister, if the Prince of Scithia,
if Roxana, if Perdiccas, Alcetas, and Cassander, passed the night in Babylon,
with a great deal of care and restlesnes; Oroondates his friends in the Camp*
were tossed with the most cruel disquiets they had ever felt: under that name
of Oroondates his friends, one might comprehend all the Commanders of the Army,
and as many of the Soldiers as did but know him; among which there were none
whom the admirable virtue of that Prince had not gained even to the utmost
proofs. Artaxerxes saw day appear without having bestowed one minute of the
night in sleep, and as soon as he was out of bed, he sent a Trumpet with Araxes
to the Gates of the City, to learn the destiny of his dear Brother. Araxes all
whose thoughts had tended to nothing but death* since the loss of his Master,
undertook that employment with a mortal apprehension, and with a most firm
resolution, if he were slain, not to survive the hearing of that fatal news.
He advanced toward the Gate, and having by a Parley which he made his Trumpet
sound, disposed the Enemies to suffer his approach, and hear his business, he
that commanded their Corpse de guard, came upon the Gate to speak to him, and
having bidden him propose his desires, poor Araxes trembling for the answer he
expected, opened his mouth twice before he had the confidence to get out a
word; but in the end being pressed to tell his Message; I come, said he, to ask
whether the Prince of Scithia, that got upon your walls yesterday, be dead or
living? The Officer who had no order to disguise the truth* told it to Araxes
without dissimulation; and when he had ^et him know that his Master was alive,
without wounds, and used according to the greatness of his quality, and of his
virtue, it caused a joy in him very little different from his former
affliction. He made it appear by a loud acclamation, and having thanked the
Officer, of whom he at that time desired nothing else, he returned to the
Princes, and restored them life with that good news. Not but that Oroondates
his being a prisoner, was to them one of the greatest misfortunes they could
have apprehended, but the fear they had been in of his death, made them
consider it as ablessing; and it seemed as if it had been necessary, to make
them find consolation in an accident that would have excessively afflicted
them. Since my brother is alive, said Artaxerxes, I do not despair of our
fortune, and the Gods to whom his virtue is too considerable to let it perish,
have delivered him from many dangers as great as this. It Is a very favorable
encounter, added Lysimachus, that he is fallen into Roxanaes hands, whose love,
and power, will without doubt, secure him from all manner of peril; besides the
friendship and the agreement she has made with Perdiccas, do put him yet in
greater safety; but though Perdiccas his jealousy should incite him to attempt
any thing against him, Roxana as potent enough to defend him by open force.
It Was by this consideration the Princes endeavored to comfort themselves; but
desiring to labor without delay, for the liberty of their friend, they went
all together to Seleucus his tent. Seleucus was already cured of his wounds.
Nearchus also, and Leonatus were in the same condition; but the last had taken
part with the Princes in good earnest, and had only stayed for the recovery of
his strength, that he might be able to serve them against Perdiccas. After the
first complements, Prince Artaxerxes addressing himself to Seleucus, by the
consent of all his companions; Noble Seleucus, said he, we now have need of
your assistance, for the liberty of Prince Oroondates; if the Enemies into
whose power he is fallen, were as generous as you are, we should not be in any
fear for him, but because their inclinations, and the interest they have in
his ruin, may suggest thoughts into them very different from yours; we cannot
bear his captivity with a minutes rest; we come not to offer you your liberty
and with your own that of Nearchus, they have been long at your own disposing*
but, weel beseech you to make use of them to regaine us what we have lost; weel
talk no longer to Perdiccas of Exchange, but since your health permits, you may
retire if you please to Babylon, and when you are among those of your Party,
you will remember the request we make you, to restore us Prince Oroondates.
Seleucus esteemed this motion of Artaxerxes, and this manner of carriage, so
obliging, that he knew not where to find words to express the sense he had of
it: wherefore he remained a while without reply, considering which way he
should receive the civility of the Princes; but having spent some moments in
that thought. By the former trial I made, said he at last, of my credit with
Perdiccas, I ought to have lost all the hope I had in his friendship, neither
will I any more ground a confidence upon it, nor is it for our enlargement that
I will promise you that of Prince Oroondates, that exchange would be too
unequal, and there is nothing amongst us all, that can pay the value of so
precious a liberty; but since you are pleased I should make use of that you
offer me, I Will go into the City with Nearchus, where weel employ our utmost
power to get the Prince of Scithias freedom; and if our indevours prove
ineffectuall, I give you my word that weel return to you, and that weel bring
back with us all the forces we have in Babylon.

You are free without condition (replied Artaxerxes) and though we should not
be able to regaine the Prince by your mediation, you are not at all engaged to
return to us; but if after that last proof you judge Perdiccas unworthy of
your assistance, and of your friendship, we shall receive them both, according
to the inclination and esteem we have for your Virtue. Seleucus and his
Companion answered these words in terms full of acknowledgement, and after
having spent some time in prosecuting that conversation, and in giving order
for their departure, they took leave of the Princes with great demonstrations
of friendship, and went toward the G^tes of Babylon with a Convoy suitable to
their Quality. But before they came near unto them, they were overtaken by
Araxes, who begged of them to carry him with them into the Town, and to
procure if they could possibly that he might continue with his Master, in case
he should not be released; they promised him to do the best they could, and
having prayed them to request the same favor for Cleone, who desired also to
go and wait upon her Mistress, he went along with them, as if he had been one
of their retinue* The Princes gave in charge to those that convoyed them, that
they should propose a Truce for two days, to fetch off the dead that lay in
the Moat, and to give them buryall, during which time they also permitted them
to bury those of Nabarsanes his Party, wherewith the Ground was covered for
many furlongs, and they in the interim engaged themselves not to make any
attempt, nor do any thing in prosecution of their Work.

The Princes being parted from one another, Artaxerxes and Oxyatres went to
visit Berenice and Barsina, who at that time, and almost always were together,
and to whom as almost equally interressed, they desired to confirm the News
they had already sent them of Oroondates his being alive: The Princesses found
a great deal of comfort in it, and received such welcome Messengers very
favorably. Artaxerxes was not ignorant of his Unckles passion, and had a
purpose to serve him in it as much as possibly he could: Berenices intentions
were the same, as well for the interest of Barsina, as that of Prince Oxyatres,
wherefore they both gave him the liberty to entertain her; and he whose passion
was really kindled again with more violence then it had been in former years,
could not see himself in those terms without discovering by the changes of
his countenance, how sensible he was of such opportunities; he began to
discourse with that Princess in a way that showed less confidence then in
probability he should have had after so long an acquaintance with her, and from
that timerousnesse Barsina drew a just computation of the greatness of his
love. They talked a while of Prince Oroondates, whose being taken did then
almost wholly possess the thoughts of his friends; but from that discourse
Oxyatres took occasion to fall into another. You are very sensible (said he to
Barsina) of Oroondates his misfortune, as indeed you ought to be both to
acknowledge the esteem he has of you, and to follow that which all the World
has of him: I commend a sensibility grounded upon so much reason; but since you
are capable of it for another, why do you want it for Oxyatres, whose life has
been yours from the earliest years of your own? I never was unsensible (replied
Barsina) either of the qualities of your person, or of the affection wherewith
you heretofore were pleased to honor me, and you without doubt should receive
from my acknowledgement and from my esteem, what I now pay to the misfortune of
Oroondates, if you were in the like condition. Ah! Cousin (answered Oxyatres)
believe it, I am no more at liberty then Oroondates, and my imprisonment,
though it be more glorious and more pleasing then that he suffers amongst our
Enemies, is not yet less strict, nor less difficult to be escaped: I stand
more in need then he of that compassion you express for his disaster, I need
it more then I did in the first years of my affection, and when upon the
Frontiers of Scythia I was like to have dyed for you, I was not so fit an
object for your pity, as I am in the present condition my Love has brought me
to. I had thought (replied Barsina something out of countenance) that a good
number of years had worn a person out of your memory, whom you un justly enough
had placed there, and I have more reason then ever to believe it, now that the
better part of my Youth is past, and that my years, and my afflictions have
taken away what you might have accounted lovely in my face: she could not end
these words without a smile, and indeed she had spoken them with a great deal
of injustice; she was then but in her seven and twentieth year, and neither her
age, nor her many crosses had made her lose any thing of her former Beauty.
Oxyatres who with very much reason, thought her handsomer then ever she had
been, could not suffer the wrong she did her self, and setting off his
discourse exceeding gracefully: If I did not know (said he) that you speak
against your own thought, I should call the eyes of a thousand witnesses
against you, who will all acknowledge the advantage you have now, above that of
your former years; neither the Beauties of your Body, nor the Beauties of your
Mind, had ever attained to that degree you now possess, nor did I ever arrive
at the perfection of my love till now; think not these years which are run out
since I ceased to importune you, to yield you up to Memnon; think not that the
miserable fall of our house, or that the multiplicity of great Affairs in
which I have been almost always imploy^d, did ever separate you from my
thoughts; you have always reigned in my heart with your former Empire, and
what occasions soever I have had for the establishment of my fortune, I never
have been able to lodge any remembrance there but years: I with an indifferent
eye have beheld all the Beauties of Asia, and disdained very advantageous
Matches, to which poor Darius, and Alexander after him did often times
solicit me; not but that through some resentment, I have labored to forget a
person in whom I had found so little inclination toward me, but all was to no
purpose against my Love, and though my strivings by the help of a long absence,
did something moderate the violences of it, your sight has wakened them again
with far greater power then ever: Now therefore fair Princess, that you are in
a condition which will not permit you to defend your self against my love, by
those reasons wherewith you were wont to oppose it* and that with an absolute
liberty, you by considering my late actions can make reflection upon my former
ones, suffer me to aspire unto that fortune after which I have sighed above ten
years, and give me leave to hope that your goodness, and your acknowledgement
will own these services, to which I am recalled by my former destiny, and in
which I mean to spend the whole remainder of my days. Oxyatres brought forth
these words in such a passionate manner, that Barsina was a little touched with
them, and having all her life time had a great inclination to esteem him, she
had not any repugnance against his discourse; yet did she not know which way
she should reply, for as she had much freedom, and too little affection in her
to seek excuses upon the thought of what she owed unto the memory of Memnon,
which in probability might have been moderated in a Widowhood of six or seven
years; she had also some difficulty to find terms wherewith she might express
her self without giving Oxyatres cause of complaint, and without favoring him
beyond the limits of decency. This uncertainty made her continue silent, and
the Prince having for some time vainly waited for her answer. I see well
(pursued he) that I shall be no happier in this second Trial of my fortune,
then I was in my first, and that which heretofore was found in the merit of
Memnon, will be found now in the defects of Oxyatres. He raysd his voice so
loud at these last words, that they were overheard by Artaxerxes, and that
Prince being much concerned in his Unkles contentment, was desirous to lend him
assistance; and having gotten the Princess Berenice to second him in that
design, they both drew near with that intention. By doing so, they much
obliged Barsina, who was in some confusion, and who was glad to see her self
eased by their approach, but Prince Oxyatres would have been next at that
interruption, if it had befallen him by other persons. Uncle, said Artaxerxes,
you would not pardon me the discourtesie I do you, if you did not know we come
to second you* And you Cousin, said he to Barsina, would perhaps oppose the
design I have to serve my Uncle, in his love to you, if you did not remember
that heertofore I served Memnon in a like occasion to his prejudice, and that
it was from me you received him after that banishment, to which he generously
had condemned himself.

I have received my whole life from the favors of your goodness, (replied
Barsina) and the memory of that good Office you did poor Memnon, shall never
perish in my thoughts. By that remembrance (added the Princess Berenice) Prince
Artaxerxes his right to pretend to some credit with you, and to employ it for
the Prince his Uncle, as he heertofore did for his rival. Prince Oxyatres
(answered Barsina growing serious) stands in no need of any recommendation to
obtain from me all the esteem, and all the acknowledgement he in reason can
desire; and yours have so much power, that they might draw my mind to greater
difficulties. Oxyatres was going to reply, and their conversation had enlarged
it self further, if it had not been broke off by a servant that came into the
Chamber, to tell them that Lysimachus, Ptolomeus, and many other of the
Commanders were at the door of the Tent, and with them a stranger of a very
graceful presence, who was newly arrived at the Camp, with the Equipage of a
man of quality, and that he asked for Prince Artaxerxes. The Prince was going
toward the door, when he saw his friends come in, and in the midst of them the
stranger that enquired after him; but the Princess Berenice and he had no
sooner cast their eyes upon his face, but they knew him to be Prince Theodates,
their faithful, and their generous friend. In the grief Artaxerxes had felt
for the taking of his dear Brother* he could not receive a greater consolation
then the sight of so dear a friend; he solemninized it at the first with a
transported cry, and running to him with open arms, he held him long in a
strict embrace, without being able through his excess of joy, to find the
liberty of expressing it by words. My dear Theodates! (said he at last) the
greatest, and the most faithful of all my friends, by what good fortune is it
possible that I hold you now between mine arms? By mine Sir, (answered
Theodates) since I have established my highest felicities in the honor of your
friendship. They were interrupted in this discourse by the Princess Berenice,
whom the remembrance of the good Offices she had received from Theodates, had
filled with acknowledgement and affection toward him nor did she dissemble it
in that noble company, for all her modesty could not hinder her from embracing
him, and giving him all the testimonies of good will she could have granted to
her nearest Kinsman. Orontes, Queen Thalestris, Demetrius, and many others
entered about that time, and amongst them all those to whom by the hearing of
Artaxerxes adventures the name of Theodates was already known, looked upon him
with a great deal of affection and esteem, and the Prince desiring to confirm
them in it: Behold (said he) this gallant Prince, and this generous friend, to
whom I am so many ways indebted, both for my happiness, and for my life, he to
whom I owe no less then to Darius, and he whom I ought to love more then my
self, if I will not be the basest and most ungrateful man in the world. He
spoke these words beginning his endearments afresh; but the Princes, who all
took interest in his fortune, would needs immitate him in his actions, and
drawing near to Theodates one after another, they welcomed him with civilities
which put him into confusion, but yet hindered him not from admiring in the
majestic garb of those great men what he believed could not be found again in
all the rest of the world. Orontes renewed the ancient friendship they had made
in the Court of Scythia many years before, and Oxyatres, and Lysimachus, who
were more concerned then all the others in the fortune of Artaxerxes, gave his
friend a most particular reception. When he was gotten loose from the arms of
all, the Princess Berenice began to ask news of the King her Father: but
Theodates answered, he could tell none fresh, it being a great while since his
coming from Issedon, and having wandered through a great many Provinces, to see
if he could find her and the two Princes whom he sought. Berenice sighed at
that discourse, calling to mind her Brothers Captivity. Neither you, nor we
(said she) receive a perfect contentment in this meeting, and the Prince my
Brother, whom without doubt you seek, though he be not far from us, is yet in
the power of our Enemies. I heard that news at my coming into the Camp,
(replied Theodates with a sadder countenance then usual) and nothing else
would comfort me in that misfortune, but the knowledge that you are in a
condition, quickly to restore him his liberty* After that Theodates had
received the welcomes of all those worthy men, to whom his virtue, and the
affection of Artaxerxes rendered him considerable, the Prince of Persia desired
to possess him more particularly then the rest, and to that end led him out of
that Chamber, and went into the next, whither he was followed by none but
Orontes, and Lysimachus: he then demanded the occasion of his journey, and
Theodates his look becoming more sorrowful then before. When I shall tell
you, Sir (said he) that I left Scythia out of an earnest longing to see you
again, perchance the passion I honor you withal is well enough known unto
you, to procure your belief; but I must confess it is not the only motive of
my journey, and that it is accompanied with another, which of it self was
sufficient to make me undertake it; I was not willing to declare it before the
Princess, and I leave that care either to you, or to the Prince her Brother,
who will have more power to prepare her for the hearing of an unpleasing news.
The King of Scythia is dead. Is the King dead? interrupted Artaxerxes; Yes,
Sir, replied Theodates, he is dead. After he had languished a great while for
the absence, or for the loss as he believed of his children, he was taken with
a Fever, which finding him weakened, both by his age and grief, deprived the
world of him in a matter of eight days. Arsaces could not hear this news
without an extraordinary trouble, nor without a most sensible discontent, and
though many of that Kings actions had in former times given him occasion enough
not to be sorry for his death, yet was he so fully reconciled to him by what he
had done in his favor afterward, and did so much consider the Father of
Berenice and Oroondates, that he could not be a hearer of that fatal news,
without being touched to the very bottom of his heart. His sorrow discovered it
self presently by his tears, and looking upon Theodates with very sad action;
Ah my dear friend! (says he) how much you moderate my joy, to see you by the
news you bring? it did not please the Gods I should receive it in a time when I
should have taken it with more patience! but they send it me now when I have a
great deal of reason to be afflicted at it; Ah how great a fear I am in for the
grief of my poor Princess! and how discreetly it was done of you to dissemble
it before her! Artaxerxes said many other things, by which he discovered his
sense of that loss to his friends, but they comforted him by all manner of
reasons, and it was likely he would receive consolation for it, when he
remembered that of Darius, of the Queens, his Mother, and Grandmother, and all
the rest he had sustained. After he had settled himself a little by the force of
his courage, and that he was able to question Theodates touching the estate of
Scythia since the death of its King. The affairs of Scythia, answered
Theodates, are in the best condition we can desire, and the Scythians now feel
no other trouble, but their impatience to see their King Oroondates: they with
acclamations and transports of joy, received the proposition I made, of sending
the Chief among them to seek for him; and when I began my journey for that
purpose, they made many of the principal Scithians set forward also to go in
quest of their King by different ways from that I took; but before my
departure I had the satisfaction to help to set the State in such order as was
necessary, and to see all the people submit themselves voluntarily to Prince
Carthasis, whom they declared Regent of the Kingdom till their Kings arrival.
And for Stratonice, said Artaxerxes, what is become of her? together with the
affliction she received for the Kings death: replied Theodates, she was
assaulted with two others, almost at the same time, which moved her to the
resolution she has taken; the first was, that being some months gone with
child, she got a hurt that made her miscarry, and by that accident she lost the
hopes she had grounded upon her great belly: and the other was the news of
Arsacomes his death, which within three days after the Kings, was brought to
Issedon by one of those that had accompanied him. Stratonice had sunk under so
many occasions of sorrow; if she had not indeed had a great deal of courage;
she bore them so impatiently for some days at first, that she would not be
comforted by any means, nor be visited but by very few persons; but when she
was again become capable of reason, she resolved to forsake the world, in which
she no longer hoped for any satisfaction, and bidding adieu to the Court, she
shut herself up in a Cloister amongst Virgins devoted to the Goddess Tellus,
which is but a days journey from Issedon, with a design to spend the rest of
her life within those walls; I was of the number of those that visited and took
leave of her before her departure, though since the crosses her ambition had
caused you, I no longer had any affection for her; but that was the least that
could be paid her in that condition of her fortune; she knew very well that
amongst all the Kings Subjects there was none that had a greater zeal and
passion for his service then I, wherefore she adress'd her self to me, rather
then any of the rest, and before she got up into her Chariot, she said thus to
me in the hearing of Prince Carthasis: Theodates, you may tell King Oroondates,
that it is not any fear of him makes me forsake the Court, and though by my
actions I may perhaps have moved him to some resentment; I am too well
acquainted with his virtue to fear him, and I know he is too generous to
overwhelm her with new afflictions, who has received enough, and those great
enough from Fortune, and who had the honor to be Wife to the King his Father;
you may carry him this assurance, if you please, and you may tell Prince
Artaxerxes, that the affection of a Sister may make him pardon what I did
against him in favor of poor Arsacomes, since he is now revenged of him, and
since that poor Prince has quitted his pretensions to him with his life. While
Theodates repeated these words of Queen Straton^ce, Artaxerxes was so touched
with them, that he hardly could refrain from tears, and after having continued
a while in the reflection he made upon that change of her Fortune. Stratonice
is to be blamed (said he) for having robbed my Brother of the Glory he would
have gained in the services, and in the duties he would have paid her; I am
confident he would always have honored her as the Wife of the King his
Father, and I for my part have no resentment against her that could have
hindered me from looking upon her all my life time with respect, and from
comforting her in her misfortunes, as much as I possibly could have done. She
departed from Issedon with that belief of you both (replied Theodates) and
went to shut her self up in that house which she had enriched with a great
many Presents, and which she had taken care to beautify during the Kings life.
After this discourse, Theodates told the Prince many particularities of the
Affairs of Scythia, and answered too many questions he asked him upon that
subjuct, and concerning his love, and the health of the Princess Theomiris;
but he likewise heard partly from him and partly from his friends, those
admirable events that had befallen him since his departure out of Scythia, the
cruel effects of his jealousy, his combats against Oroondates, and at last
their happy knowledge of one another.

In the mean while Seleucus and Nearchus followed by Araxes, were gone into the
City, where they had been received by those of their Party, with acclamations
of joy; the noyce of their arrival being run from one to another unto the
ears of Perdiccas, he was much surpised at it, being something ashamed to
look them in the face, after having neglected their friendship; yet being bold,
and having a very ready wit, he was quickly prepared for that reception, and
coming to meet them with demonstrations of gladness, he desired by his
countenance and by his action to repair the fault he had committed toward them.
As Soon as he was near enough to be heard, going forward with his arms
stretch^d out; I welcome you my cruel Friends (said he) with as much affection
as if you had not injured that which is between us, by those inhumane
propositions which my passion forced me to disobey. Saying these words he
embraced them, but they received both his Complement and his Embraces very
seriously, and Seleucus made this Answer; It is not necessary, Perdiccas, to
examine the faults against friendship which we may have committed; we desired
nothing of you, which reason and honor did not demand as much as it, and we
sufficiently express the greatness of it, since after the contempt you have
showed of us, we are not become your Enemies, as Leonatus. I confess (replied
Perdiccas) that you are very generous, since you have had so much compassion of
my misfortune, and that you have been pleased to put a difference, between
faults that are caused by a violent constraint, and those that are committed
through ingratitude: I will not examine whether my refusal, or your demand
offended our friendship most; but I have always thought you might better have
asked my life, then that which you desired of me. I confess I was too blame
(answered Seleucus) to presume so much upon your affection, and that I ought to
have expected none but more common proofs of it; but the Gods be thanked, we
now are free merely by the Nobleness of our Enemies, and we have accepted the
liberty they have given us, upon condition to repay it by that of Oroondates.

Perdiccas stood a while without replying to that discourse; but after he had
bethought himself a little: It is just, said he, that Oroondates should be
given you* and though you very well know by the confession I make you of my
love, how great an interest I ought to have in detaining him, and what damage I
shall receive by his liberty; I Will lay aside the consideration of my own
repose, to satisfy you, and conquer my strongest inclinations, to put you out
of the opinion you have conceived against a most unshaken friendship. We desire
to know the issue of it to day (added Nearchus,) and if you please to call a
Counsel, we there will make our Proposition. Perdiccas protested to them that
he would not oppose it, and that he would do as much as possibly he could to
persuade all those that had credit there, to grant them that satisfaction.
After having made them that promise, he went to Roxana, whither neither
Seleucus nor Nearchus would go till the Counsel were assembled. Perdiccas
said nothing to the Queen of the intent they had to demand Oroondates, but she
soon suspected it, and if possibly she could would have broken the meeting. The
Prince and all those of the Counsel, were come together in a Room appointed
for that purpose, having had notice given them by Perdiccas, who brought the
Queen thither himself, and Seleucus and Nearchus entered within a while after
They kissed the Queens hand, and saluted all their friends, from whom they
received endearments full of affection. When they had all taken their places,
and were in a readiness to hearken to Seleucus his Proposition; He began to
speak, and having first made a complaint against their friends, who had left
them to the mercy of their enemies, without having attempted any thing for
their liberty, and without having so much as lent an ear to proposalls, which
other considerations besides theirs, ought to have made them embrace: he told
them how Leonatus with eight thousand Prisoners, had taken their enemies party,
and that though Nearchus and he had been sufficiently provoked to follow his
example, since their usage had been all alike, yet had they had more regard to
their ancient friendship, and had received their liberty from the generosity of
their enemies, to come and employ it in the service of their friends as
ungrateful as they were; but that they had accepted it only as a ransom for
that of Oroondates, and that they had engaged themselves to them by promise,
either to send him back in exchange, or to return themselves into their hands:
he then prayed them to consider the justice of their demand, and if they still
thought them capable to serve them, to set them at liberty to do it by
disengaging them of their word. Seleucus having ended his Discourse, the
greatest part of the Assembly inclined to grant what he demanded, but they
durst not openly discover themselves, till the intentions of Roxana and
Perdiccas were made known: neither of them had spoken yet, but when Perdiccas
was obliged to give his opinion, he declared that he opposed not the
satisfaction of Seleucus and Nearchus, since those two men were considerable
enough, to deserve that things less reasonable should be granted them and
that if the Queen were so pleased, he willingly consented Oroondates should be
set at liberty. While Perdiccas spoke on this manner, Roxana, whom that
discourse had raysd to an extremity of anger, beheld him with an enflamed eye;
and if she had followed her first suggestions, she would have reproached him
with transported words, for betraying her on that fashion contrary to the
agreements made between them; but she moderated her self as well as possibly
she could, yet not so much but that she interrupted him before he had done
speaking. If there be a necessity of releasing prisoners, said she, it is
Statira that must be released, and not Oroondates: Statira is the Daughter of
Darius, the wife of Alexander your King, and your Queen with as much justice as
my self: Perdiccas has no right at all to keep her; he that is borne a
subject to the King her husband, and when he refused her for the exchange of
his friends, he violated not only all the laws of friendship, but all other
laws both divine and humane: besides she is a woman, as weak without our walls
as in our prison; and though she were at liberty, the party of our enemies
would be never a jot the stronger; but Oroondates is a Scithian, that has
taken Arms for our destruction, and one to whom you owe nothing of what is due
from you to the Widow of Alexander: moreover, he is the greatest and most
terrible of your enemies, so that you cannot set him at liberty without
contributing toward your own ruin: and the chief men of his Party are tied
to him by such pressing considerations, that by retayning him, you will always
have the means to make an advantageous treaty with them in extremity. Perdiccas
who found a great appearance of reason in what the Queen said, and who believed
he had done enough in favor of Seleucus, by declaring his first intention,
would not second it against Roxana, knowing he could not break with her without
making a very great disunion in their party; wherefore turning toward Seleucus;
I have paid (said he) what I believed I owed you, and I could have wished with
all my heart, that the Queen would have thought fit to satisfy you, but being
tied to observe her will, as I am both by respect, and by the whole interest of
our party, I cannot tell how to contradict her; you may remain with us, since
our Enemies have given you your liberty without condition, and if in the
progress of this War we can find any occasion to do so, we will acknowledge
their civility by returning them other Prisoners instead of Oroondates.
Seleucus was so transported with choler, both by Roxana's denial, and
Perdiccas his change, that he had hardly any power left over himself to
moderate his resentments. What (said he, with a louder voice then ordinary) is
it thus you use us after what we have done for this party? and have you so soon
forgotten that we have preserved the glory of it by our Actions? is it because
we were left among the dead all mangled with wounds, while those who now
dispose of us sought their safety behind our walls? is it because that I alone
did animate and rally our defeated Troops, to make head against a conquering
Army, and because that I alone opposed the sword of Arsases, and the sword of
Oroondates, which made the stoutest of our Masters fly? did any amongst you
ever see Seleucus turn his back in either of the Battles? or can any of you
deny but that he alone made the Victory to waver, and disputed the glory of the
last day single against your Enemies? do these wounds he received make him more
contemptible then if he had retired with the first into the City? and after
this unworthy usage of him, can you think he can continue your Friend against
these valiant men amongst whom he has found so much freedom, and so much
generosity? Seleucus suffered himself to be thus transported to words, that
exasperated Roxana and Perdiccas, and Perdiccas was going to reply if the Queen
had not prevented him. You have free permission (said she) to do what you have
most mind to, and if you are engaged either by promise or inclination to
return to our Enemies, your passage to them will be more easy for you to
procure, then the exchange you have proposed. Yes, (replied Seleucus, we will
return to your Enemies, but we will return with all our Forces, and with those
of Leonatus, we are not so mean spirited as to employ our own Arms, or the Arms
of our Soldiers any longer in the service of the most ungrateful persons upon
earth, and you shall lose us in a time when our loss will peradventure be of
some importance. After these words, and some others which N^archus added with
an indignation as great as his, they went both out of the Room, and retired to
Seleucus his lodging with a design not to go out of Babylon without all the
remainders of their Forces; they were presently visited there by all the
Officers that commanded them, and by a good number of the Soldiers, who that
day had not much to do, by reason of the Truce which was agreed upon for two
days, to bury the dead of either party.

Araxes during the Counsel had stayed at Seleucus his house, and having found
him there at his coming in, he made him quickly see by his countenance, that he
had labored unsuccessefully for his Masters exchange. Araxes (said he) I have
not had credit enough to deliver the Prince of Scythia, and they that keep him
prisoner, have judged with reason that we had set our liberty at too high a
rate; since we would not accept of it, but by the exchange of his, they have
refused it us with scorn, but perhaps we shall endeavor to procure it by other
ways; in the mean while stay you here with patience for the remainder of this
day, and to morrow you shall know the resolution I have taken for you and for
your Master. Although Araxes was much afflicted for that ill success, yet did
he bear it as patiently as he could, and submitted without reply to Seleucus
his pleasure; the house within a minute after was full with all the Officers
that were in Babylon, he received them in general with most obliging
civilities, but he made his own sure to him particularly, and commanded them to
have their men in a readiness to perform the Orders he should be obliged to
give them according to the necessity of Affairs. Of fifteen thousand
Macedonians that had followed him, there were yet three thousand left, and
there were above four thousand Pamphilians and Phrygians remaining of the
Forces of Nearchus and Leonatus; they were all at the devotion of those two
Chief Commanders, and all protested they would be ever ready to obey them
without dispute. They did no more at that time but make themselves sure of
their assistance, being yet uncertain what resolution they should take, though
they were most fully resolved to be no longer friends to Roxana and Perdiccas,
and to serve their Enemies by all the ways they could follow in honor without
any other consideration; they determined therefore to spend the rest of that
day, and the night following in concluding what course it was best to take.
Peucestas, Neoptolemus, and almost all the other Commanders in Chief came to
visit them; Perdiccas went not to their lodging, but he sent his Brother
Alcetas to excuse him, and to represent the Reasons that hindered him from
contesting against the will of Roxana. In effect Roxana and Perdiccas were both
afraid of Seleucus his threats, and knowing how able he was to serve, or to
disserve their party, they repented their having used him ill, yet neither of
them could yield to content him to the prejudice of their love, and all they
could do for that time was to pray Alcetas to see him, and to do his utmost
endeavors to keep him and to moderate his resentments. Alcetas did the best he
possibly could, and forgot nothing that might excuse his Brother, or that might
serve for Rosana's justification; but Seleucus was little moved, with all he
alleged and after having lent him very quiet attention. Alcetas, (said he)
Roxana and Perdiccas have despised our friendship, and they never shall recover
it while they live, they have no reason that can justify their ingratitude,
and we have a thousand to become their Enemies; we have cause to be humbled by
the little account that is made of us, but we will set our selves up again, if it
please the Gods, and shall perhaps come off with Honor from the Enterprise we
have undertaken. This was all that Alcetas could obtain from Seleucus and
Nearchus, but Perdiccas was not so repulsed, for considering of how great
importance it was to him to keep their friendship, he set all the Commanders a
work to flatter and pacify them. In the mean time though Roxana had been
offended with him at the first, he had partly appeased her by his carriage
afterward, and had not failed to allege all the Reasons to her which had
obliged him to that former compliance with Seleucus his Request; but if she
were well satisfied with Perdiccas, she was little pleased on the other side
with Oroondates, and by a visit she had made him that day, she lost part of the
hopes she had conceived since his being taken; she had neglected nothing that
might win his love, and after she had often represented the power she had to
oblige him, and to change his present condition into a most happy and a most
glorious fortune. The only happiness you can give me (said he) and the only
one I would now receive from you, should be to grant me the sight of my
Princess, and for that only favor, if I could not love you, I at least would
pardon you all the mischief you have done me. Roxana thought that demand of
Oroondates so contrary to her intentions, that she immediately refused it, but
after that, she had not been able to get him so much as to look upon her, and
had parted from him so ill satisfied, that her ill humor had not contributed
little to the ill usage she had showed Seleucus. She told Perdiccas the
passages of that visit, as likewise of the other she had made him the day
before; and she no sooner had let him know Oroondates his demand, but Perdiccas
gave her notice how that very day he had received the same from Statira, and
how that fair Queen had protested to him by the Ghost of Alexander, that if he
did not procure that Oroondates might visit her, she never would look upon him
while she lived, but as her most mortal Enemy. Ah (cried Roxana) I never will
consent that Oroondates should see her, he has seen her but too much already to
my misfortune. Nor will I ever suffer (replied Perdiccas) that she should be
seen of Oroondates, she has been so but too much for the quiet of my days. And
what shall we do then (added Roxana) to content them, and to appease their
minds in some degree? I no longer know (answered Perdiccas) how I should carry
my self toward Cassandra, and I see my self at last reduced to the necessity
of following the last ways that are left me; hitherto I have considered her as
a great Princess to whom I owed all manner of respect but she ingratefully has
abused it, and in her late usage of me, she has forgot nothing that could make
me loss it. After this discourse Perdiccas left the Queen in an Alley of the
Garden where she had begun to walk, but as she would have gone into another,
she chanced unexpectedly to meet Cassander and Alcetas, who were talking there
of their Affairs; if the Queen had followed her inclination, she had turned
back again to avoid Cassander, whose sight was insupportable to her; but she
forced it in regard of the need she had of his assistance, and seeing her self
upon the point of loseing part of her strength with Seleucus and Nearchus, she
was afraid that if she drove Cassander utterly into despair she might be left
alone, and by consequence too weak to resist her Enemies. These Reasons made
her suffer his approach, and he came up to her more confidently then he would
have done in another season, thinking he had obliged her that day in the
Counsel, by his compliance with her to the prejudice of his own interests,
which should have made him desire the sending away of Oroondates. Yet was his
heart possessed with rage, at the remembrance of the endeavors she had used to
retain him, and perhaps he had seconded her desires in part that he might be
the better able to make his Rival feel the effects of his anger, while he was
a prisoner; he saw by the Queens countenance that she took it well he had born
her that respect, and that belief having made him bolder then ordinary, he
resolved to use it to his advantage. Madam (said he) you have reason to be
satisfied that the Princes yielded to day so willingly to your desires, but
amongst them all none but Cassander neglected his own interests for yours, and
he gave his voice against his own repose, when he gave it according to your
inclination. Though the necessity of her Affairs made Roxana dissemble part of
her aversion against Cassander, it was wakened in her every moment by the
suspicions she had of him for the Death of Alexander; and as the smallest
things were sufficient to cast her again into ill humor toward him, she found
matter enough in his discourse to do it, and looking upon him with disdain. And
what interest had you (said she) that should have persuaded you to oppose my
intention? I had as much (answered Cassander) to wish for Oroondates his
liberty, as you had to hinder it, and as to keep one near you whom you love,
you have used Seleucus ill, whose assistance and whose services are very
considerable, I to oblige a Prince that was ever my friend, ought with a great
deal more reason to have desired the departure of a Rival whose presence is
destruct^ve to me. The presence and the departure of Oroondates ought both to
be indifferent to you, and you shall always draw as much advantage from the
one as from the other; I love nothing but what I ought to love, but I will not
take care to justify my self to you for it, nor will I ever use violence upon
my inclinations to content you. What (added Cassander) shall time, the fidelity
of my services, and his disdain whom you unjustly prefer before me, work no
effect at all upon you? and will you for ever persist in this hard heartedness
toward a Prince, who gives himself up wholly to your will, and who finds
neither glory nor contentment but in the occasions of doing you service? what
reason can you have (if my passion may give me the liberty to speak to you in
these terms?) what reason have you to persist in the undeserved usage I
receive from you? is my Birth inferior to yours? and if by an effect of your
Beauty you were raised unto the Fortune to be the Wife of Alexander, may not I
by an effect of my love attain the glory of being suffered by the Daughter of
Cohortanus? do you hope to have another Alexander, and in the present state of
your Affairs, can you expect a better condition for your repose, then with one
of the Chief of his Successors? for in fine you cannot be ignorant that you
have lost the right you had to the Universal Empire, it is divided amongst a
great number of Princes, who will not restore you the Countries that are fallen
to their lot, and though you should bring forth a Son of Alexanders, he will be
very happy if he can but keep Macedon alone, and his share without doubt will
be less then mine, and less then many of my Companions: Do you hope for the
reestablishment of your greatness from some Barbarian King? there is not one
amongst them all that can equal himself to us, and though out of the respect
we bear to the memory of Alexander, we have not yet taken upon us to wear
Crowns, we lack nothing else but that formality, and when we shall have quieted
our troubles, we shall undoubtedly attain those qualities, the want of which
makes you think there is something despicable in us; pardon this liberty of
speech in a man who is no longer in a condition to dissemble with you, and who
has too strong a passion for your interests to flatter you unseasonably. Yet I
demand nothing of you through these considerations, and pretend that nothing
but pity alone should obtain a favor from you, which no manner of reason can
oblige you to; I know that Cassander is unworthy of your affection, but all men
living are so as well as he, and if any one can merit it, it is he without doubt
that gives you all the moments of his life, and that limits all his thoughts in
you alone; if my presumption deserve punishment, I have suffered a most severe
one, nor could you your self inflict more cruel torments then those I undergo.

As you desire the favor of the Gods, my adored Queen, have some regard to me
out of mere compassion, and suffer me not depart from hence, without having
leave to hope for some change in my deplorable condition. As he ended these
words, he cast himself at Roxana's feet, she being set down upon one of the
seats that were in the Alley, and embraced her knees so ardently, that the
Queen much troubled at his action, knew not how to disentangle her self. His
Discourse had extremely offended her, as well by reason of the unwelcome truths
it contained, as because it had been spoken in the presence of many witnesses,
before whom she could not approve that he had entertained her with so little
respect: wherefore she testified her ill humor both by her action, and by her
answer; and thrusting away Cassander, who still had kept himself in a
beseeching posture. Go, said she, and represent their affairs to them that
ask your counsel: I hope that I shall always be in a condition to stand in no
need of you; and if I cannot hope to have a second Alexander for my husband,
either I will never have any, or I will have one whose person is more pleasing
to me then yours, and whose life is without blemish: if from the daughter of
Cohortanus, I became the wife of Alexander, I had qualities in my person that
gave him an affection, and I see none in yours that give not me an aversion: I
speak to you with a liberty like your own, and to express my self yet more
freely, you force me to tell you, that I should think my condition less
shameful with a Barbarian King, nay, or with a private man, then with a man
accused of the death of the King his Master, and my Husband: I am constrained
to use this reproach once more to you, whether I will or no; but you have
defended your self so ill against that accusation, that you ought not to think
it strange, if I cannot suffer you without horror till you have cleared your
self. Roxana as she ended these words rose up from her seat, and Cassander
transported with rage, followed her with his face all on fire. It Is not for the
Kings death, cried he, that you hate a man whom you believe to be most innocent
of it; I shall justify my self of that crime much better then all those that
suspect me for it: but you loved him too little to make his death the motive of
this hatred, and you preferred the same man before him during his life, whom you
prefer before me now: It Is Oroondates that robbed Alexander the Great of the
affections of his wife, and that robs Cassander of all his hopes; but I Will
revenge those injuries that are common both to my King and me, and if hitherto
I have threatened without effect, you now shall hear that in the rage into
which you have precipitated me, I am capable to execute the strangest
resolutions. As he uttered these words he turned away from the company, and
leaving the Queen in a manner besides her self, with anger at his injurious
reproaches, and at his cruel threatenings, he went out of the Garden, and
being come home to his lodging, in an exceeding great fury, he employed the
rest of the day and the night following, in plotting the means he should use
both for his revenge, and for his contentment.

In the mean time Queen Statira, or Cassandra, (for she had retained that name
with a purpose never any more to take up that of the Princess of Persia, under
which she had been exposed to so many misfortunes) was extremely pressed by
Perdiccas his importunities, and he being vexed at the little progress he had
made in his design of gayning her affection, and at the ill usage he had
received from her in his last visits, went beyond the terms in which he long
had kept himself toward her, and flew out to threats which made her fall into
strange apprehensions, yet did she not sink at all from the greatness of her
courage* and when he told her it was not her best way to make him desperate in
the condition he then was, nor to drive him to extremities, which could not
but bring her cause of discontent. Think not, said she, with your threats to
fright a Princess who is not weak enough to fear them, and who by the power
she has over her own life, can secure her self from yours, whenever you
shall go about to abuse it: I know how to die, Perdiccas, to deprive you of the
Empire you have over my body, and by my death I shall complete the anger of
both Gods and men against you* who will not suffer your crimes to go
unpunished. The Gods forbid, replied Perdiccas, that I should seek your death,
or that I should ever consent to it: it is not your life I threaten, for I would
rather expose mine own to all manner of disaster, then arm my hand, or those of
your Enemies against it. Yes Madam, you are still too dear to me to be able
to conceive any violent thought against you; but you may fear lest that in the
end my rage be turned against this Oroondates, whom you unjustly prefer before
me; and lest I power upon him whatsoever he can apprehend from a despayring
rival, and from an Enemy that has all manner of power over him: hitherto* have
spared him for your sake, and for Roxana's who loves him, and out of some sense
of generosity; but at last all these considerations will be blown away by my
despair; and since the advantages he has over me, make his life and mine to be
incompatible I shall undoubtedly sacrifice his either to my repose, or to my
revenge. The fair Queen could not hear these cruel threats without growing
pale, nor without testifying by the motions of her countenance how deeply they
had touched her, and indeed they made her lose part of her constancy, wherefore
looking upon him with eyes swelled with tears ready to break forth, which she
withheld with a great deal of difficulty: Cruel man (said she) execute then
with thine own hand against the unfortunate Cassandra, what thou intendest to
do against Oroondates; and since thou art at last fallen upon the only thought
that was left thee to conceive for a conclusion of thy crimes; take this
wretched life which thou made show to be willing to spare, and preserve that
brave and glorious life of the gallantest man that ever was; the loss of mine
is but of small importance, if thou comparest the miseries of it with the
wonders of his, and moreover they are tied together with so strong a knot that
thou shall never see the separation of them; all the blows thou shall aim at
him will fall directly upon me, and the same wound that shall take away his
life, will infallibly send me to my Grave. Ah! my dear Prince, (continued she,
not being longer able to retain the motions of her love, nor her tears, which
ran down with violence, but breaking forth, through that extraordinary effect
of her passion, with as much liberty before Perdiccas as if she had been all
alone.) Too lovely Oroondates, must I be now so near thee for no other end but
to see thee so cruelly exposed to the rage of thy Enemies, and after having
escaped so many dangers into which thou have thrown thy self for my sake,
after so many causes to forsake me for ever, must thou be brought to submit thy
self to these barbarous people, who by the fear of one death alone, which they
have power to give thee, will make me die a thousand times a day? The Queen had
never made the affection she bore to Oroondates so clearly known unto
Perdiccas, nor could he hear those words that gave so manifest a Declaration of
it, without falling into transports of anger and of grief, which tormented him
most vehemently: He remained a long time unable to express his resentments
with his tongue, but in the end looking upon the Queen with a more troubled
countenance then before. You could not (said he) have done a worse office to
the Prince you love, then this of showing such violent proofs of your
affection; for though I were sure to perish, and to see the whole World perish
with me, I Will never suffer him to live when once my hopes are dead; I for your
consideration will defer my revenge till I have tried all my utmost endeavors
to mollify you, but when all my submissions shall once prove useless, I Will
never let him triumph over my ruin, and whether I fall by the anger of Heaven,
or by yours, or by that of my Enemies, I will at least have the satisfaction to
bury my Rival with me. Thou may do (replied the Queen utterly transported)
thou may do whatsoever thy rage shall inspire thee; but this I declare
before the Gods, thou shall never draw other contentment from the death of
Oroondates, save that of seeing me die with him, and I protest to thee
moreover, that thou never from this minute shall have word or look from me any
more, till thou have given me the means to see him, and discourse with him.
Perdiccas was struck dumb at that reitteration of a demand which the Queen had
already made him, and fixed his eyes upon the ground, deeply musing what answer
he should return; he could not consent to give her a satisfaction which could
not but be very prejudicial to him; but at last there came a thought into his
head, which made him change his opinion, and he no sooner had conceived it,
but turning toward the Queen; You shall obtain what you desire, said he, if I
can persuade Roxana to it; but hope not that Oroondates shall profit by it,
since he shall never be permitted to see you, but to beg his life of you, which
depends only upon the usage you shall show to me; if he be wise he will counsel
you to forsake him, and upon the success of his counsels shall follow either
his death o^ his preservation. After these words he went out of the Chamber,
and left the Queen so troubled at his threats, that if she had not been
comforted by the hope he gave her of seeing Oroondates, she would have been
reduced to a most lamentable condition. The Princess her Sister came into her
chamber presently after, and having heard her new causes of affliction, she
sought out all the words her affection could put into her mouth to give her
consolation; their last hope was in the assistance they expected from Prince
Artaxerxes their Brother, and their sorrow was a little moderated by the
remembrance of that Great Princes being alive, and by that of the succor they
might probably look for from a man of that Reputation, seconded by the Valiant
Lysimacus, and by their generous and invincible Companions.

But Roxana's mind was at no better quiet then those of the two Princesses, and
her love made her endure whatsoever was least supportable to them in their
captivity, and in the rest of their misfortunes: she saw the most potent Party
of the World armed at her Gates for her destruction, and who by the first and
most important successes ought in likelihood to hope for the last advantages:
she saw Enemies within her walls, not doubting but that Seleucus was
sufficiently incensed to harbor thoughts of revenge against her, she had heard
of the defeat of her Allies, in whose relief she had grounded part of her
hopes; she was persecuted by a brutish man, whom she saw ready every moment
to vent his fury in some bloody attempt, and by the testimony of her own
conscience, she believed both Heaven and Earth to be her Enemies, yet all this
touched her not so deeply as Oroondates his scorn: that cruel remembrance
made her neglect all care of her affairs, and hardly left her so much as a
minutes rest. When she returned out of the Garden where she had had that
unpleasing discourse with Cassander, she went to the lodging of her Prisoner,
though she had incited him once that day already, and as she passed by the
Guard, she had set upon him, she commanded their Captain to have an exact care
of his person, and to defend it to the last gasp, against all those that should
attempt to hurt him: She used that caution for his safety, by reason of
Cassanders threats, believing him capable to fly upon some violent design.
Oroondates who received her visits with a great deal of wearisomness, had much
ado to settle his countenance to what civility seemd to require from him; but
Roxana was not repulsed thereby, though it was a mortal grief to her to see
those continual marks of his aversion, and drawing near him with a dissembling
look. Well, cruel Oroondates, said she, will you for ever be my enemy, and
will you not open your eyes at last, to see the faults you commit, both against
your own happiness, and against the gratitude you ow to my affection? Do you
not consider that I neglect all my interests to preserve you, and that I put
both my affairs, and even my very life, in a manifest danger, to defend you
from Enemies which your fortune has stird up against you? Had it not been for
this protection, wherewith I have powerfully sheltred you, both they from whom
you take the love of Statira, and they from whom you take Roxana, would ere now
have powered upon you whatsoever their jealousy could suggest unto them: will
you be insensible of these last obligations, as you have hitherto been of
former ones; and if you disdain the happiness and the glory which you might
find in the acknowledgement I demand of you, do you not think that even
generosity it self obliges you to use some violence upon your inclinations, in
favor of a Queen, who is as obstinate in loving you more then her self, as
you are in hating her for all her love. But you your self, Madam, replied the
Prince somewhat briskly, do not you believe your self obliged by that
generosity you allege, to leave him at least some liberty of mind, from whom
you have taken that of his body? and if it be true that you bear me that good
will whereof I acknowledge my self most unworthy, do you think to express it to
me by effects so contrary to their cause? Do you believe a heart can be
changed by persecutions? and if mine were capable to be so, do you judge it
could be by the usage I receive from you? While I was free, I defended my self
well enough from those Enemies against whom you have taken my protection, and
now I am their Prisoner, or yours, I had rather die by their hands, then by the
mischiefs which you make me suffer, and which nevertheless you would have me
receive as proofs of your affection. Ah, what do you suffer, ungrateful man,
said the Queen, what do you suffer, that might not make all Prisoners of War to
envy your condition? I suffer, answered Oroondates, an imprisonment very
different from that the Prisoners of your Party found with us: I suffer for the
captivity of my Princess; I judge of her torments by mine own, since she is in
the power of a man, whose inclinations are suitable to yours: I bear her
absence a great deal more impatiently, then when I was far from her; nor can I
from this affection to which you would have me think my self so indebted,
obtain the liberty to see her, so much as for a moment. No, added Roxana, you
shall never obtain it, and I would rather kill my Rival with my own hands,
then consent unto that cruel enterview which you demand, but to complete the
ruining of my hopes. Nor shall you, replied Oroondates, ever obtain one word
from me, or one moment of compliance more: Do, kill her, the Daughter of your
King, and by that action you will but finish what you had so generously begun:
your heart already is enough disposed unto that crime to be the actor of it
without reluctance, and you must never hope, that he who could not love you in
a more innocent estate, can cast his eyes upon you, when by your cruelty you
shall have drawn upon your self the imprecations even of those that had no
interest in it. The Queen was stung so deeply with these words, that her anger
showed it self in the rednes of her face; and beholding Oroondates with an
offended eye; You are, said she, the most ungrateful man alive, and the most
unworthy of this affection which you have so insolently abused, if I could
obtain of my heart, what my lawful indignation has reason to demand, you
should never see me but as your most cruel, and irreconcilable Enemy: but
such as I am, fear to drive me to extremity, and by the remembrance of those
cruelties wherewith you reproach me every moment, judge what I may be capable
of, when I shall be prompted by despair. I hold you capable of any thing,
replied the Prince, except of making Oroondates love you; and neither your
threatenings, nor your kindnesses, shall ever work my mind to thoughts which
are worthy only of Cassander. Roxana heard not these last words distinctly, for
when Oroondates spoke them, she was already gone out of his Chamber. Hardly was
she gotten to her own, when Perdiccas came in; they presently read their
resentments in each others faces, and being they were accustomed mutually to
impart the progress they made in their affections, they gave one another
account of the success of the visits they had newly made. Roxana was exceeding
angry when Perdiccas told her he had promised the Queen that she should see
Oroondates, and protested often that she would never give her consent; but
Perdiccas pacified her by many reasons he alleged; representing to her that
that enterview could not hurt them, since it should be in the presence of many
witnesses, which would tell them all the passages of their conversation; and
that if it could not serve to their advantage, however it could be no obstacle
to their intentions; and praying her to trust it to his managing, since his
interest was equal to hers, he brought her in the end to yield to his
persuasions: after they had conferred together about the order they should
observe for the making of that Visit, Perdiccas bad her good night; and the
Queen before she went to bed, having a mind to let Oroondates know her purpose
to oblige him in what he had desired, and the conditions upon which she granted
him that favor, called for pen and inck, and wrote to him in these words.

Queen Roxana, to Prince Oroondates.
YOU are permitted to see my Rival, since you have desired it; but it is not
meant you should make use of that favor to the ruin of those that grant it
you: it is in your power to turn it to your advantage, if you use it as prudence
would advise you, and in counselling Statira not to think of you any more; you
ought to receive the counsel she will give you to lose all thought of her.
This is the way you ought to follow if you love her life, since it shall depend
merely upon the success of this enterview.


Oroondates received this Letter that very night before he went to bed, and in
spite of all Roxana's threatenings, found causes of joy in it, that made him
forget his present miseries; he could not fancy that he should shortly see his
Princess, without being transported with an excess of contentment, and he
formed an Idea of that happiness in his imagination, which placed it above all
those that ever he had enjoied. What, said he, shall I see my Princess once
again? Death has not then deprived me of her sight for ever, nor captivity
robbed me of that blessing for the whole remainder of my days: I shall behold
her with these very eyes, which the first time they saw her, found the glorious
loss of my repose and of my liberty. I shall speak to her with this very
mouth, which has so often made her the true protestations of my fidelity, and
I shall hear that very voice which has many times pronounced the sentences of
my life and of my death. Ah, my soul, will thou be able to resist those violent
motions of thy joy, which must in probability put thee besides thy self? After
these raptures of delight, followed some effects of his fear; nor could he
without trembling, remember her parting from him at Susa, and the humor he had
left her in at that cruel separation; his joy nevertheless got the better of
his fear, and possessed him then so absolutely, that it hardly suffered him to
bestow one hour of the night in sleep, Perdiccas passed it not in such pleasant
thoughts as his, and he was so perplexed with the cares of love, and with
those of the war, that he had hardly a minute free from the persecutions of the
one or of the other. Yet did he give Orders for the defense of the Town with a
great deal of understanding, and as much in love as he was, he forgot but few
of the Duties of a very expert General, and of a man whom his passion could
not make to neglect any thing

He was tormented nevertheless with an anxiety caused by the ill success of
his Affairs, and as he had been afflicted at the loss of the last battle, and
at the defeat of Nabarsanes, he also knew with an extraordinary discontent, the
danger of the taking of Babylon, and of the utter ruin of his Party which did
most visibly threaten him; he was weakened by the loss of part of his men, he
was but ill assured of the affections of the rest, and in every thing he found
occasions of fear which he thought too important to be slighted. That was it
that made him so hot in the prosecution of his design upon Cassandra, when in
likelihood it should have been interrupted by cares of so great consequence,
but his haste was grounded upon some reason, and his fear of being quickly
reduced to some capitulation, or to some disadvantagious Treaty, made him
press the Queen so much as he had done, and as he did more eagerly afterward,
to engage her while she was in his power, so that after the change of his
Affairs, his Rivals might no more pretend to any thing with her; knowing that
if he laid not hold of his advantages while she was in his hands, he was never
to hope for any thing after. If he passed the Night in such troublesome
disquiets, Seleucus was little better at rest with his, and the day appeared
before he had fully taken his resolution. Araxes being come at that time to
receive his Commands, renewed his discontents, but not being willing to detain
him longer, and having drawn him aside, so that no body could over-hear him:
Araxes, said he, you may return to the Camp when you please; after having
succeeded so ill with my faithful Companions in what concerns mine own
interests, I will not undertake to speak of yours, and I have considered that
your Masters Enemies fear your fidelity too much to suffer you to be near him.
I would return along with you, and would not abuse the favor I have received
from my generous Friends, if I did not know that I shall be more useful to
them here then in their Camp. In brief Araxes, I am resolved to do that by the
way of Arms, which I have not been able to compass by my persuasions, and I Will
recover your Masters liberty, as I undertook to do, or else I Will perish in that
design; give Prince Artaxerxes, and his Friends this assurance from me, and
because I have reason to distrust my Forces here, which are not great enough to
oppose those of our Enemies, tell them that when I shall have need of their
assistance, I Will set up red flags upon the walls, as soon as they see them
appear, they may fall on at the Gate which is opposite to Craterus his
approach, and I Will facilitate their entrance with my utmost power; but it shall
be in the open day, by open force, and by ways which ungrateful Perdiccas
shall not be able to accuse of treachery. After he had given him this
instruction, he sent him away, and appointed Officers to accompany him to the
Gate, who caused it to be opened by their Authority. Araxes went out of Babylon
with a great deal of discontent, but he comforted himself by the hopes
Seleucus had given him, that he would attempt something for his Masters
liberty; his passage out was the freer by reason of the Truce which continued
for that day, which Perdiccas made to be employed in burying those that were
slain at the taking of Nabarsanes; he had taken no offense at the punishment of
that Parricide, though he was very sorry for the defeat of his men, and neither
he nor Roxana were ignorant, that they had put that Monster to death, not as
their Friend, but as the murderer of Darius. That morning as soon as Queen
Statira was ready. Alcetas came into her Chamber, to tell her that Oroondates
was coming to see her as she had desired, but then he prayed her from
Perdiccas, that she would use that visit according to his intention, and not
make it fatal to Prince Oroondates. The Queen was so pleasingly surprised to
hear that News, that she never so much as thought of answering Alcetas,
neither indeed could she make him any answer, which according to her thought
was not disobliging to his Brother; but as soon as he was gone out, she
discovered her contentment, which in his presence she had dissembled as well as
possibly she was able; she went into the Chamber of the Princess her Sister,
to communicate it to her, and after that she had testified the part she bore in
it, and how glad she would be her self to see that Prince again so dear to all
their Family, they returned together into her Chamber to receive that welcome
visit: In the mean while the same Discourse had been used from Roxana to
Oroondates, and that Prince having received it with raptures of joy, which made
him forget part of his resentments against her; no sooner heard that the Queen
was ready for his coming, but he went out of his Chamber, and out of the
Palace, followed by those to whom the charge of guarding him had been
committed; yet did he go with an unperfect satisfaction, nor could he without
fear remember the cruel command she had laid upon him at Susa, when she had
banished him from her presence for ever; nevertheless when he had reflected
upon it, he found some cause of better confidence, remembering that she had only
forbidden him to present himself before her, till she was in a condition to
receive him, and at that time he believed the change of her estate by the death
of her Husband, gave him a dispensation against all the Rules that could
dissuade him from it; without this consideration he was too religious an
observer of her commands, to put himself in danger to infriuge them, though he
might have found some encouragement to take a little liberty, by the discourse
Cleone had made him of the Queens thoughts, and of the pains she had taken to
visit him her self when he lay wounded at Polemons house. The people in the
streets as he passed by, looked all upon him with admiration, and maugre the
malice of his Enemies, the fame of his Virtue was sufficiently spread abroad to
make all the World respect and reverence his Person; he went to the Queens
Lodging in a Chariot that was appointed for him, and when he was come thither
he made haste up the stairs, and walked toward her Chamber with a countenance
in which one might easily read part of his thoughts; his Guard accompanied him
thither, and some of them stayed within the door by order from Roxana, to be
present at their Actions. As soon as the Queen heard the noise, and was
advertised of his being come, she would have risen from her Chair to go and
meet him, but her strength forsook her in that occasion, and she was seized in
such manner, that without the help of the Princess her Sister she would scarce
have had the power to stir; she had already gone three or four steps when she
saw him appear at the entrance into the Chamber, and at the same time
Oroondates having cast his eyes upon her was so powerfully touched with that
^ight, that he could hardly get forward to present himself at her feet.
Perdiccas having been desirous to use the Queen according to the Greatness of
her Quality, to disguise her misery by outward shows, had taken care to have
her Chamber hung with black, and all her Furniture made suitable to the
condition she was in since the Kings death: The Queens Habit also was black
trayling negligently upon the Ground, and her head had been adorned with more
curiosity, if her present estate would have let her take the care to dress it;
yet as negligent as it was, it took off nothing from her admirable Beauty, and
her eyes through that mornfull color darted a fire at the Prince, which was
bright enough to dispell the thickest darkness. O Gods what were the first
motions of his heart, and how will my pen be able to express them! here it is
indeed that I distrust its forces, and that I must content my self to let
imagination supply what I should not know how to represent. Once in his life
before had that poor Prince appeared in her sight with the like inward
disturbance, but in this last encounter he seemed to have lost part of his
courage, and all the resolution wherewith he had strengthened himself, gave
place to thoughts of tenderness which at that sight had totally possessed his
soul; yet did he advance toward the Queen for all he was so besides himself,
and was no sooner near her, but casting himself at her feet, he embraced her
knees with so passionate an action as made a deep impression in all that beheld
him. The Queen permitted it longer then she would have done, if she had not
been in a trouble that hindered her from ordering her actions with a perfect
knowledge and liberty: But all she was able to do in a surprise, from which all
her preparations had not defended her, was to bow down her head, and stretch
forth her arms with so pressing a sign of her affection, that those that
observed it, might very well judge, the fear of displeasing Perdiccas had not
power enough over her to make her dissemble it. After she had pressed him a
while between her arms, she raised up her head, and letting the Company see a
face all bathed in tears, she put forth her hand to lift him up, and while the
Prince fixed his lips upon it with a transported ardency. Rise, rise, my Prince,
said she, and pardon the trouble of my soul, for having left you so long in
this unfitting posture. Oroondates who could not disobey her, rose up, and was
no sooner upon his feet, but the Princess Parisatis, as severe, and as
circumspect as she was, came to embrace him with as much affection as if he had
been Artaxerxes. Oroondates received her kindnesses with much respect, and when
they gave him leave to return to the Queen, he would have thrown himself at
her feet again if she had not forbidden it, and commanded him to sit down by
her upon a Chair that stood near her bedside. The Princes agitation of mind
had seized him in such manner, that the Queen was fain to break silence first,
and beholding him in his ecstasy with motions full of affection. Am I then
permitted to see you again? said she, and has the cruelty of mine Enemies
yielded to the only favor I have asked them? I had not hoped for this only
satisfaction I was capable to receive, and was disposing my self to die
without expecting this sweet consolation in my misfortunes. The Queen spoke to
him in these terms, testifying by her looks how dear his sight was to her, and
the Prince who recovered courage by his discourse, and who had had a little
time to recollect himself replied: Madam, I had not thought this blessing had
befallen me by your means, and I had prepared my self for it with fear of
displeasing you, remembering how carefully you had shunned the occasions of it
while you had the liberty to grant it me, while I was in the same house with
you, and while the report of your death had brought me so near unto my Grave:
At that time, indeed (if I may be permitted to use some reproach against my
Sovereign) you might with more facility then now, Madame, have drawn me out of
the deplorable condition I then was in; I was dying for the rumor of your
death, and you were alive close by me, to see me die without showing any mark
of compassion for my death; my presence was then so odious to you, that you
preferred a cruel captivity amongst your most cruel Enemies before it, in a
season when you had so much need of the services of all that honor you, and my
life was so little dea^ to you, that you would not secure it by a bare
knowledge of yours. The Prince would have enlarged himself further in these
complaints, if the Queen had not thus interrupted him. They that made you this
Relation, if they did faithfully recount my life, and if they be of those to
whom my thoughts were known, may have told you the Reasons I had to use a cruel
violence upon my inclinations, to keep my self within the limits of my duty:
Your ^ight was very dear to me, your assistance would have been most welcome,
and what you sufferrd for me, found as great a sencibility in my heart as ever
you could have desired from it; but I owed so much to the memory of so Great a
Husband, who was dead but two days before, that any other remembrance save his
would have been criminal in me; and without destroying my reputation, and
making my self unworthy of your esteem, I could not cast my self into the
arms of a man that had loved me, and that loved me still, when the King my
Husband had not so much as received the honors of enterment. It would be
harder for me to justify my self to another then to you, my dear Oroondates,
in whom virtuous thoughts do easily make impression, and usually weigh down the
scale against your interests: No, I could not see you without doing my self an
injury, and yet I visited you, I sought you to your very bed, and to give my
self that satisfaction, I put my honor in the greatest hazard that ever I
had done in all my life. How great repentance soever that action was like in
probability to have drawn after it, I passed over all manner of considerations
to follow the incitements of my affection, and I was already disposed to let
you see me, and to discover my self to you, when the violence of my enemies
pulled me away from you, and deprived me of the means of effecting my
resolution. If 'twere by Cleone (as I believe it was) that you have been
instructed in my life, you heard from her in what manner I b^^e that separation,
what your remembrance has made me suffer since, and what tears, and
lamentations I bestowed on the memory of what I owed you.

The Queen pronounced these words in so tender and so passionate a way, that
the Prince repented he had so reproached her, and being desirous to express
his sorrow for it. I ask you pardon, Madam, said he, for the complaints which
were drawn from my mouth by an unjust resentment: you are incapable of erring,
and 'twas not by reproaches I should have begun so dear and so desired a
conversation. These marks of your goodness, are a full reparation for all that
I have suffered hitherto; and though with the years I have spent in serving
you, I should have given a thousand such lives as mine. I should be too
gloriously recompensed by your remembrance. Since happy Oroondates (continued
he, kissing one of her fair hands) has not lost the place he heertofore had
in your heart, he has no reason to bewail his fortune; your will shall ever
make the better part of it, and that which depends upon the Gods, and upon the
chance of war, is too inconsiderable to oppose that which I hold from my
Princess goodness. But Madam am not I obliged by this knowledge I have of it,
to render you some account of the persecutions I suffer from our cruel Enemy?
Would it had pleased the Gods, (pursued he with a sigh) that I had done so in
times past, then perhaps by a small fault against discretion, I might have
avoided these tedious miseries that have made me shed so many tears. Roxana
torments me, if I may say so with modesty; Roxana would have me love her,
Roxana would have me cease loving you, nor had she suffered me to see you, but
to have me tell you, that I ought only to be hers, and that I never can be
yours. And Perdiccas, replied the Queen* would not have consented to this
enterview but that he desired my mouth should let you know that I will never
be but his, and that you ought to lose all the hopes you have in my affection.
And do you believe, said the Prince, that I can obey Roxana? Or do you think,
added the Queen, that I ought to do what Perdiccas would have me? What you
ought to do is so perfectly known to you, replied the Prince, that I will never
take the liberty to counsel you; this I am sure of, that if I had a thousand
lives to lose, I would give them up all to the rage of my enemies, rather then
bestow a moment of them upon other thoughts then those of living and dying for
you: but I dare not demand a like proof of your affection, as well because I
have not deserved it, as because, if we ought to fear our enemies threats, it
would be fatal to you: peradventure I shall never obtain from the care I have
of your safety, so much forgetfulness of mine own, as to advise you to love
Perdiccas, since he is unworthy of your affection, in regard both of the
defects of his person, and of the injuries he has done you; but neither can I
persuade you to love this miserable man, since by Roxana's threats, your
destruction is tied to the affection you shall express to him. Though I had
death before my eyes, answered the Queen, it could not divert me from the
resolution I have taken, to render while I live, all that I ow both to the
person of Oroondates, and to the memory of Alexander. For all I am a woman, I
shall fear it no more then you, when I thereby can assure you better then by
the complacencies you have desired, that I am not ungrateful for the long, and
for the gallant proofs of your love; and if to preserve what I hold a thousand
times more dear then my life, I need but expose it once again to Roxana's
cruelty, I Will do it with a resolution, which perhaps shall make appear that my
friendship is not inferior to yours; but neither will I oppose the desire you
have to keep your self wholly mine, and since by the perseverance I will show
in favor of you, I draw upon you Perdiccas his indignation; I never will wish
you should divert the effects of it, by your infidelity. In short, dear
Oroondates, I acknowledge my imperfection, and confess I love you not with so
unconcernd an affection, as to look upon you with more contentment in the arms
of Roxana, then in the arms of death: I wish the same eye shall behold
Oroondates dead, and Oroondates inconstant, and I consent in fine either that
he live for none but me, or that he cease to live by my example. Ah, Madam,
said the Prince transported with joy, what can I have done in my whole life,
that is not far below so high a recompense? Yes, my Queen. I will die to keep
my self entirely yours, and that consent that you give to so glorious a death,
is dearer to me then all the favors you ever granted me. You shall see me
dead* for certain, a great deal sooner then inconstant; and I cannot choose but
infinitely commend a resolution so advantageous to me, although I have more
weakness toward you. No, my admired Queen, I should not have the courage to
see you die, to avoid the tyranny of Perdiccas for my consideration, but I
would willingly die my self that I might never see you in the arms of
Perdiccas: it is by that remedy I ought to prevent my last misfortune, rather
then by the hazard of a life, which a thousand such as mine cannot countervail:
that law is not equal between us, nor is my passion the less violent, for not
being able to desire that of you, which no manner of right can make me lawfully
demand. The Prince and the fair Queen were giving each other these
confirmations of their love, when the Princess Parisatis, who was present at
their conversation, mingled her self in that entertainment, to ask the Prince
some account of the last actions of his life, and of the passages that had
happened between him and the Prince her Brother. Oroondates obeyed her in a few
words, and by the discourse he made to the Queen of his cruel jealousy, of
the strange effects it had produced in him, and of the bloody combats he had
fought with Arsaces, he cast her many times into an astonishment, which she
knew not how to express, but by the alteration of her countenance. She often
accused the Prince in his Discourse, for the opinion he had had of her; but
when she remembered the appearances upon which his jealousy was grounded, she
was constrained to pardon him, and to receive all the violent resolutions he
had taken against her Brother, for the greatest testimonies of his love. The
Princesses had been in a great agitation of mind during that recital, but they
were quieted by the end of it, and could not hear how those two friends came to
know one another again, without receiving a mavelous consolation. Then they
desired to learn what they knew not of their Brothers adventures, and the
Prince was beginning to recount a little more at large what Arsaces had told
the Queen his sister; but in brief, when Roxana and Perdiccas not being able to
suffer that their conversation should continue longer, sent order to Oroondates
his guard to bring him back. At that cruel command, he sighed twice or
thrice, and looking upon the Queen, with an action of grief and anger mixed
together. We must obey our Masters, said he, O Gods how hard is this
condition! I part from you, Madam, but it is with a firm resolution to carry
away nothing but my body, and to leave my mind tied to you, with such bonds as
all the malice of our enemies will not be able to break. Go, Oroondates, said
the Queen, and be most certain that all the violences of Perdiccas and Roxana,
shall not divert me so much as for a moment, from the determination I have
settled, never to be any bodies if I cannot be yours. These words were heard by
all that were in the Room, and told within a while after to Roxana and
Perdiccas, but the Prince had not time to give reply, and his severe guard
making him go out of the Queens Chamber, and out of the House, put him again
into the chariot to carry him back to his Prison.

In the mean while, jealous Cassander, after having rolld a thousand furious
resolutions in his head, had fixed upon the last which he had taken, to kill him
that was the obstacle of his happiness: and though he well enough knew him to
be innocent of all his sufferings, and that he contributed nothing willingly
to Roxana's aversion against him, his blinded passion stifled all the motions
that consideration might have given him, and he fancied such helps to his
pretensions by the death of his Rival, and such sweetnesses in his revenge, as
got an absolute victory in his heart, over all that honor and virtue could
represent; yet did he see some difficulties in his design, and the Prince of
Scithia was at once both guarded and defended, by men whom Roxana had placed
about him for his custody, and for his preservation: 'twas in the Palace where
he was kept, where in probability all the Queens household, would take arms for
the interests of their Mistress, and without coming to a great combat, the
advantage whereof could not in likelihood be his, he knew not how he should be
able to execute his design. He was beating his brains to find out the means
that were least dangerous, when he heard that the Prince was gone to Queen
Statira, and that all his guard being commanded along with him, there remaind
no body in his lodging, but some few Officers who were appointed for his
service, not for his defense, and who likewise might perhaps be ignorant of the
Order the Queen had given to forbid his entrance. He thought he could not light
upon a more favorable opportunity, to get into his enemies chamber without
difficulty, and though to have argued the matter calmly, he might have found
some danger in it, he in the condition to which his passion had reduced him,
was too little in love with his life, to seek for all the cautions which might
secure it in that action. He only took seven or eight of those men, in whom he
had most confidence, and without any greater train, went to Oroondates Quarter;
going up the back stairs he found the doors of it open, and they that were
there, had not the boldness to oppose a man of so great authority as
Cassander. He retired with his men into an inner Room that was at the further
end of the Lodging, and there he resolved to expect the Princes return, well
knowing that his Guard, came not into his chamber without necessity, and that
commonly they waited in the Hall next to it. He had staid but a little while in
fears which the greatness of his enterprise brought into his mind, when the
Prince returned; his Guard according to their custom, only conducted him into
his chamber, and having shut the door left him alone.

His ill fortune seemed willing to give Cassander a greater convenience to
effect his purpose, for the Prince not staying in his Chamber, went on into the
inner Room, which was far more pleasant by having the prospect of the Garden.
No sooner was he entered, but Cassander in spite of all the fears that assaulted
him, drew his sword, and they that were with him making good the door to hinder
his going out, he came toward him with an action that sufficiently witnessed
his intent. That object did a little surprise Oroondates, but he was not
daunted at it, and the greatness of his courage making him look upon that
danger with the same contempt he had showed in so many others, suffered him not
so much as to testify by an alteration of his countenance that he was
testified at it, only darting a furious look upon Cassander. Coward, said he,
dare thou attempt the death of Oroondates? These words pronounced with an
impetuousnesse like that of thunder produced a like effect, and the Majesty of
the Prince that uttered them, appeared in so sublime a degree that the
afrighted Cassander thought he saw fire in his eyes, and marks of Divinity in
his face. And indeed he was so much dismayed, that his arm which he had lifted
up, sunck down without effect, and he stood with his heart frozen by a thousand
terrors, in the posture of a man that knows not where he is; all his followers
held their hands by his example, and if he had not been so well accompanied,
Oroondates might have made use of the confusion he was in, to seize upon his
sword, and to make the effects of his cruel intention fall upon himself; but
whether it were that he knew the impossibility of saving himself without Arms
amongst a great many men, the points of whose swords were turned against his
breast, or that he disdayn'd a life accompanied with so many misfortunes he
never went about to attempt any thing for his safety; but only looking upon
Cassander with as resolute a countenance as if he had been out of danger: Why
do thou delay, said he, to dispatch an Enemy whom his destiny delivers up to
thee without resistance? Lay hold of this brave occasion to triumph over his
life, and though he never had a thought to dispute the possession of Roxana
with thee, endeavor to acquire it by the death of a Prince whom she prefers
before thee, and by the death of a Prince to whom thou can not give it but by
these ways: Why do thou tremble? See, I am alone, and without Arms, and
remember that it is only in this condition thou dare come near an Enemy, who
while he had his liberty struck thee pale even within thy walls. In the time
while Oroondates spoke these words, Cassander had had the leisure to settle
some part of his amazement, and considering the truth of what the Prince told
him, instead of being touched by the greatness of his courage, he was
confirmed in his resolution, and in the belief that he should not do well to
let slip an opportunity, which perchance he never might recover while he lived;
he quickly made it appear, and looking upon the Prince with more boldness then
before. It is not fear, said he, that has hindered me from effecting my design,
but the repugnance I have against this Action, and if it had been possible for
me to acquire Roxana without thy death, I would have left thee a life which I
am forced to sacrifice to my resentments, and to my repose: With these words he
stepped forward again to the Prince, from whom he had retired a little, and
raising the point of his sword* he was preparing himself to thrust it into his
breast, when after a confused noyce which he heard in the Chamber, he saw Roxana
enter into that Room, crying, Hold, hold thy hand cruel man: These words, and
the sight of the Queen, for whom, as furious as he was* his passion gave him
both fear and respect, made him fall into such a confusion, that he no longer
had either strength, or understanding, and Roxana throwing her self at the
same time before Oroondates, made him see that he had no other way but through
her body to find a passage to that of his Enemy. Cassander knew himself then
to be frustrated of his hopes, and seeing that the Guard came running in at the
Queens cries, and that if more of them should follow, his life might be in the
same danger into which he had put his Enemies, he got out of the Room, and
though the Queen called out to have him stayed, he made his passage with his
men, who with their swords in their hands endeavored to facilitate his escape,
and they that could have hindered it were afraid of his Authority, and had not
interest enough in his taking, nor in his death, to purchase either with the
peril of their lives. As Soon as he was gotten forth with his men, and that
Roxana had recovered the fright she had been in, she gave order for the
doubling of Oroondates his Guards, and then going toward him: Well now
ungrateful man, said she, will you put this obligation in the rank of those
offenses wherewith you reproach me every day? and are you not once more
indebted to me for this life, which you unjustly destine to my Enemy? Have I
not saved it with the hazard or mine own? and did I not present my breast
against Cassanders sword, to divert the stroke from yours? Did you ever receive
so good Offices from my Rival? and can you compare a few fair words, wherewith
she may have flattred you* to proofs of love of so high a nature? I confess,
answered the Prince, that if my life were dear to me, I should have a
considerable obligation to you, but be it what it will, I am not so little
sensible of the care you have taken for its defense, but that I would hazard it
without repugnance for the preservation of yours. I desire other effects of
your acknowledgement, replied Roxana, then those that are ordinary to your
generosity, and I desire you should do that through Love, which you would do
through the mere incitement of your Virtue. Your desires are so little
reasonable, said the Prince, and the performance of them is so little in my
power, nay and even so little in my will, that I shall never be in a capacity
to satisfy you. No, unthankful man, added Roxana, thou will not long be in
capacity to satisfy me, for when I shall have given thee up to the rage of thy
Enemies; if thou can content me in any particular, 'twill only be in my
revenge; perhaps I may see thee reduced to the necessity of imploring this
goodness which thou unworthyly abusest; and if thou art obdurate enough to
behold thy own death without grief, or without repentance, perchance thou will
be sensible of that of this Rival, for whom thou disdainest me with so much
obstinacy and imprudence; it is by the favor I have showed thee that thou art
hardened in thy cruelty, and thou have made no other use of the permission I
gave thee to see mine Enemy, but to confirm thy self with her in thy
ungrateful resolutions; but know that she shall have little joy in thy
undiscreet perseverance, and that thou may assure thy self thou to day have
had thy last sight of her, nor shall she live to receive another visit. As she
ended these words she went away from Oroondates, and left him so terrified with
that threat, that his heart which in all the greatest dangers had seemed
incapable of fear, could find nothing in his courage wherewith he might secure
himself against his mortal apprehensions. Roxana was no sooner gone out of
his Lodging, but as she was passing to her own, she met Perdiccas, and
presently in his face she espied all the marks of an anger as great as hers;
to say the truth their humors were then alike as well as their conditions, and
Perdiccas having been to visit Queen Statira after Oroondates his departure out
of her Chamber, had found her so potently confirmed in the resolution of not
loving him, and of never enduring him while she lived, that after having flown
out before her into the most violent threatenings he could invent, he had given
himself over in the end to his last determination. Roxana was opening her
mouth to tell him her cruel intention, when he preventing her, said: Madame, I
ask your pardon for the displeasure I am compelled to do you; hitherto I
contrary to mine own interests, have kept my self within the terms of a
complacency that has been fatal to them; but now I am constrained to let you
know that for the good of our Party, and for the quiet of my soul, Oroondates
must of necessity lose his life. Roxana had hardly patience to hear these last
words, but breaking forth with a louder voice then ordinary; Oroondates shall
live, said she, as ungrateful as he is, but Statira shall die before this day
be at an end; and all the mercies I have had toward her for your consideration,
are extinguished now in your ingratitude, and in my despair. Statira shall not
die, replied Perdiccas, though Oroondates must, and though by her disdains she
has made her self unworthy of my protection, I Will defend her with my utmost
power, to the latest moment of my life. And I Will prosecute her so vigorously
with all mine, added Roxana, and will so strongly oppose the design you have
against Oroondates, that I Will make even you your self to perish in one of your
resolutions.

The wrath wherewith they both were transported, hindered them then from going on
with their discourse, and after they for some time had looked upon one another
without speaking, they were about to go put their designs in execution, when
Alcatas and Neoptolemus came in to them; and having comprehended their
intention by their last words, and by their action, they resolved to divert the
violent effects that cruel division might produce in their party: they
represented to them, that they had enemies enough at their gates, and even within
their walls, without disuniting themselves in that manner, and without giving
such an advantage to those that were armed and fighting for their destruction,
as they could not hope for from all their forces. Neither Roxana nor Perdiccas,
could be brought to moderate their indignation, for all those reasons, and all
their friends could obtain, was that they would retard the effects of it, till
they saw the issue of a final proof which they intended to make, and which
they agreed upon together before they ^parted. All these distractions which
Love stirred up in Babylon, hindered not the Commanders that were less
passionate, nor even those whom passion tormented, from thinking of the defense
of the City: all orders were exactly observed, all guards exactly kept, and yet
the besieged rested more securely then before, upon a belief they had, that
their enemies would not be in a condition of many days to make a second
attempt; and that they needed time to repair their engines, and to seek
inventions to assault them by other means, then those that had so ill
succeeded. Seleucus and Nearchus meddled not with any thing, nor stirred out of
their lodgings, but though their carriage might have begot suspicion in Roxana
and Perdiccas, they were still in hope nevertheless to pacify them; and in
regard of the need they had of their assistance, as well as of the
consideration they had of their persons, they deferred coming to extremities
against them, or forcing them to declare themselves, or go out of the Town, as
they ought to have done for their greater security, and as without question
they would, if their passion had not too strongly prepossessed them.

The rest of that day being passed, Prince Oroondates the next morning, saw
some of his Guard come into his Chamber, who drawing near him without
discovering their intention, seized suddenly upon him, and bound his hands; if
he had foreseen their purpose, he would undoubtedly have opposed it, but when
he saw that he no longer was in a condition to do so: Have you order, said
he, to use me on this manner? Yes Sir, answered they, and to carry you to Queen
Statira in this posture. In what posture soever I am, replied the Prince, I Will
follow you thither without repugnance, nor needed you to use bonds, or any
violence, to lead me to a place from which my soul is never absent. The Captain
of the Guard returned no answer, because he had not Order, only making him go
down the little stairs, he brought him to the Chariot, into which he got up
with him, as also a good many of his men, causing the sides of it to be let
down, that the people might not see him as he went. The Prince during all the
way was not able to settle the fear he was in for his Princess, being stricken
with a morta^l apprehension of something fatal to her in that last enterview,
he was conducted to her Chamber as he had been at his former visit; but he
had hardly set his foot within it, when he saw Roxana and Perdiccas come in at
other doors, attended by so great a Guard as almost filled the Room. Cassandra
looked upon her enemies with very little disturbance, and though thought of
Roxana, after what she had attempted; and executed against her, was enough to
have touched her, yet did she behold her accompanied as she was, without any
trouble that could be taken notice of; but as soon as she cast her eyes upon
Oroondates, and that she saw him bound, and led as a sacrifice to the Altar,
she could not obtain so much assistance from her constancy, as she would have
desired in such an encounter; and though they had resolved to use her that day
as they meant to do him, yet had they had so much consideration of her sex, and
of her quality, that they had not bound her tender hands, neither did they fear
that opposition from them, which they dreaded from Oroondates, if his had been
at liberty. She went to meet him infinitely transported, and not caring to
constrain her self for enemies whom she neither valued nor feared enough to
dissemble her inclinations in their presence. Ah! my dear Prince, cried she,
what barbarous hearts can have used you so unworthily, and by what injustice
can they bind those hands, that were destined to bear a Scepter, and those
hands that with so much glory have done so many gallant actions? Why do not
these Tygres turn their rage against me alone, since only I am cause of the
greatest part of their discontents? If Roxana loves you, how can she consent to
this inhumanity? and if I be loved by Perdiccas, why will he afflict me with
this killing spectacle? Neither Perdiccas, nor Roxana, answered the Prince, can
make my destiny more glorious, then in making me to suffer these bonds for my
love to you; Those noble bonds wherewith you keep my heart fast tied for ever,
make me despise all theirs; and if they could have broken them, they would not
have showed this Empire over my body, which neither force nor gentleness, have
been able to extend over my mind. The Queen was going to reply, when Roxana,
who in their first Discourse found new occasion to exasperate her anger, broke
off their conversation; and looking upon Statira with a countenance which her
passion had enflamed: Madam, said she, I will make no excuses to you for what
is past, nor will I seek out reasons to justify my present actions; I Will only
tell you, that for all the double interest I have in your death, I have let you
live to the prejudice of my repose, both to satisfy Perdiccas, and to follow
the incitements of the compassion I have of you: but now that Oroondates by his
ingratitude has driven me to the last extremities, and that by your obstinacy
to keep him, you your self have labourd for your own destruction, I am forced
to let you know, that in the end you have armed all my resentments against you,
and that you have no other way of safety, but to quit Oroondates to me, and to
oblige him by all the considerations he ought to have of your life, to obtain
it of me by his repentance, and by the affection I desire from him. And I,
added Perdiccas, addressing himself to Oroondates, declare to you, O Prince of
Scithia, that you cannot escape the fury of a Rival, whom his ill fortune has
cast into despair, but in yielding up the pretensions you have to Cassandra,
and in disposing her your self to requite my passion. The gallant Queen, and
the courageous Prince of Scithia, were equally touched with their Enemies
words; and if they feared their threats, they both feared them for the person
beloved, and not for their own danger; yet did there appear an equal scorn in
both their faces, and Oroondates his sex gave him no advantage then above that
generous Princess; they both were opening their mouths to express their
thoughts at the same time, but the Prince who saw the Queen was about to speak,
kept silence out of respect, and yielded that liberty first to her. I did not
doubt, said she to Roxana, but that after having been stained with crimes
wherewith you have dishonored your sex* and the rank you have held, and after
having joined in a confederacy against the blood of your Princes, and against
the true friends of the King your Husband, with their murderers, and
poysoners, you would give your self over to the extremest cruelties; it is a
worthy end of your glorious beginnings, and 'twere not fit you should suffer
her to continue longer in the world, whom you could never look upon without
shame, nor without remorse; but you have been much mistaken, if you believed
that by your menaces you could make me lose what I hold a thousand times more
dear then all that you can take away from me; your subtilties heertofore
succeeded but too prosperously but your cruelties shall not now have the same
effect, and by your former actions, you have made my life too little dear to
me, to think I can be terrified by your threatening to deprive me of it. The
Prince of Scithia, as soon as the Queen had ended these words, took his time to
speak, and looking upon Perdiccas with disdain. These ways, said he, whereby
thou would rob me of my Princess, are worthy of the greatness of thy
courage* and without doubt it had not been glorious for thee to dispute her
against a Rival, by thy blood, and by thy services; thou will now acquire her
far more nobly, and thou make thy self worthy of her in setting forth thy
valor against a Prisoner, against a man alone, and bound, yet a man who twice
already has made thee fly, and to whom thou art twice indebted for thy life.
These words stung Perdiccas in such manner, that he scarce had power to contain
himself; but the resolution he had taken to comply with Roxana yet a little
longer, made him delay the effects of his indignation. They that know me,
answered he, will never believe that I fled before a Barbarian, and I disown
those good Offices for which thou would have me be indebted to thee; but this
is not a place to decide that question, and thou have now no time but to think
of the proposition I have made thee: If Statira love thy life, she must now
resolve upon it, either by thy advice, or of her own accord. And if Oroondates
love Statira's, added Roxana, he has but a few moments to determine about the
loss or the preservation of it. At these cruel words, these illustrious and
unfortunate Lovers saw themselves reduced to most miserable terms, and all the
constancy wherewith they had fortified themselves, was not able to defend them
against too just a sorrow; they both were absolutely resolved to die, and the
love of their own lives was not capable to touch them, but neither could
consent to the loss of what they loved, and the resolution they were to take
not being able to settle it self in their minds without great contestations,
and great violence, kept them for a while both silent and unmovable; yet did
they make their eyes to speak with looks that eloquently enough expressed their
thoughts; but when they had remained a while in that condition, the Prince
fixing his upon the Queens face, with a most tender, and a most passionate
action: My fair Queen, said he, you for the safety of your life may follow
those ways that displease you least, but I for the preservation of mine, will
never cease to love you.

My dear Prince, answered the Queen, you shall live, if you can live without
me, but I am firmly resolved to die for you* and yet I do not desire you should
live for Roxana. No my Princess^, replied Oroondates, I will not live for her,
and now you set my death in such a degree of felicity, that the most happy life
in the World could not be comparable to it; but if you think it unjust that I
should live for Roxana, I think it far more unjust that you should die for
Oroondates, a thousand lives like his are not of equal value to one moment of
yours, and you by the loss of it would make him purchase the glory you give
him at too dear a rate. Yet do I not entreat you to live for Perdiccas, he is
unworthy of such a Fortune, nor will I die for his advantage; but it may so
fall out that the Gods may bless the remainder of your days with a more happy
condition, and that by the succor of the Prince your Brother, and that of our
valiant Friends, you may recover both your Liberty, and part of your former
Dignities. Defend her, Perdiccas, I conjure thee, pursued he, defend her
against Roxana's cruelty, thou have no other way but that for the reparation of
thy crimes; by that thou may obtain the pardon of those potent Enemies that
are at thy Gates, and I most freely forgive thee my death on that condition.
Ah, cried the Queen, unjust Oroondates! Why do you envy me the last of my
contentments? and why will you oppose the only way that is left me to acquit my
self of part of what I owe you, and to put you out of the belief you had that
I loved you not enough? You have abandoned Kindred, Empire, Fortune and life it
self for me alone; you have exposed all; you have sacrificed all for me, and
through the whole course of my life I never till this day was in a condition to
let you see how sensible I am of your love and services; my ill fortune, and
the calumnies of our Enemies thwarted the first acknowledgments I owed you;
those you may have desired from me since have been opposed by my duty, but now
nothing hinders these last proofs I mean to give you of my affection, they are
permitted me, both by honor, and by the memory of Alexander, and in short I no
longer fear to make that known to you by my death, which in times past the
state of my condition forbad me to express by favors. The Queen perhaps would
have said more, if impatient Perdiccas had not interrupted her, just when
Roxana as much transported as he, was about to do the same. What, Madame, said
he, with his countenance quite altered, is this then your final resolution? and
is this all I at last can hope for, from the indulgence which for your
consideration I have showed unto my Enemy? Yes Perdiccas, answered the Queen,
this is my final resolution, the greatest cruelty of all thy threatenings can
never have the power to shake it, and in fine, it is by my death alone that thou
can separate me from Oroondates. It Is rather by his, cried Perdiccas, and all
the considerations in the World are not able to make me defer it longer. Die,
(continued he turning toward the Prince) die Barbarian, whom I have but too
much spared, and restore me by thy blood the quiet thou have robbed me of. As he
spoke thus, he drew his sword, and stepping forward to Oroondates, was going to
thrust it up to the Hilts in his Body, when Roxana, who by his last words had
foreseen his action, caught a Javeline from one of the Guard, and presenting
it against Statira's breast. Hold, cried she, hold Perdiccas, Statira's dead if
thou touchest Oroondates. This word made Perdiccas pull back his arm to turn
his head toward Roxana, and seeing her in that furious posture, and the fair
Queen in the utmost peril of her life, he remained suspended between the
motions of his anger and of his love. Oroondates despising the death which he
had before his eyes, did not so much as take notice of Perdiccas his action,
but turning all his thoughts upon that of Roxana, and upon the danger of his
Queen. Ah, Perdiccas! cried he, the Queen is dead if thou run not to succor
her, deliver her out of Roxana's hands, and then give me my death with
confidence. Statira's Constancy was not less then that of Oroondates, for
looking upon Roxana with contempt. Strike, said she, thou Daughter of
Cohortanus, strike the Daughter of Darius, and the Wife of Alexander, and
through this heart pierce the Image of Oroondates, who disdains thee. These
words of both were able indeed to work some effect upon their Enemies; but
'twas their love that carried it then above their anger, and they less desired
the death of what they hated, then they did the life of what they loved.
Perdiccas quitting Oroondates, cast himself with a great deal of suddenness
before Roxana's Javeline, and Roxana leaving her Rival placed her self between
him and Oroondates. Thou shall not die, said she, and as ungrateful as thou
art* I Will defend thy life as carefully as mine own. I give thee but little
thanks for that care, replied Oroondates, and all the succor I can receive
from thee cannot but be very odious to me, after having seen thee present that
Javeline against the breast of my Princess: I love Perdiccas a great deal
better, for all he is so much my Enemy; and for his tenderness of my Queen, I
easily pardon all his cruelty toward me; it is to him alone I ought to be
obliged nor my real safety, since this life which he assaulted is not
considerable to me in comparison of that which he defended. Roxana found matter
enough in this answer to redouble her anger and her resentment against
Oroondates; yet that resentment could not persuade her to give him up to the
rage of Perdiccas; nor could Cassandra's scorn incite Perdiccas to expose her
to the cruelty of Roxana. They looked upon one another with eyes inflamed with
choler, and stood at the head of their Guards in the posture of persons ready
to decide their contestations with the blood of their men. They for some time
continued unresolved, and perhaps the violence of their wrath would at last
have carried them on to the utmost misfortunes, if Alcetas and Peucestas maugre
the resistance of those that would have opposed it, had not entered then into
the Chamber. Peucestas was very moderate, and Alcetas not of a violent nature;
they both were instantly amazed at the spectacle that presented it self unto
their eyes, but they cast off their astonishment to remedy that disorder, and
labored so succesfully in the business, that though they could not appease
Roxana and Perdiccas, they hindered them from coming to greater extreamities,
and got Roxana to retire to the Palace with Oroondates. She had no sooner taken
that resolution, but darting a look at Perdiccas full of the marks of her
indignation: Remember, said she, that thou have violated our Agreements first,
that thou have lost the respect thou owe me, and that thou have denounced War
against me; defend my Rival with all thy Forces, and assure thy self I Will
kill her even in thy very arms, as thou before my eyes would have taken away
the life of what I loved. I Will do it yet, replied Perdiccas, nor shall all your
Authority be able to divert me. Roxana gave no ear unto these words, but making
Oroondates go forth of the Chamber in the midst of her Guard, she carried him
back to the Palace in the same manner as he came.

The End of the fifth Book.
CASSANDRA. The last Part. The sixth Book.
AT last the day was come, wherein the fortune of many illustrious persons was
to receive a memorable revolution, and the destiny of those of either party,
after so many various events was drawing them on to very different ends; till
that time heaven had tolerated oppression, and injustice, and seemed to have
suspended the course of its usual providence, to give virtue matter to
exercise it self in so many great occasions; but then it unveyled it self to
see more clearly what was done on Earth, and to change the condition of so
many persons whom prosperity, or the adversity of their affairs, had unjustly
humbled or exalted. We draw near unto the haven Calista, after a tedious
navigation, but not without apprehending that desired Land, nor without fearing
that my forces are unequal to the design I now have, to let you know the so
much wished for end of the Adventures of my gallant Heroes.

Roxana was hardly gotten back to the Palace, where she had put Oroondates
under his former Guard, and whither for her own defense, and for the purpose
she had to assault the life of her Rival, after having taken order to secure
that of Oroondates, she was calling the better part of those forces that were
at her devotion; when Cassander went to Queen Statira's house, followed by a
good number of those in whom he had most assurance. The Queen was retired into
her Closet, and Perdiccas with his brother was yet in the Hall so transported
with anger, that he had scarce any reason or understanding left. Cassander who
as he came in had heard the success of that last Adventure, was no sooner near
him, but speaking with an angry tone: What Perdiccas, said he, have you then
made so ill use of the fair occasion you had to revenge and satisfy your
self, and have you let escape an enemy who despites you, who braves you to your
face, and during whose life you can never hope for any repose, or any
contentment in your own? Is it thus you use that authority we have given you
amongst us, and do you look upon Roxana as a slave to her greatness, and not
as a companion in her authority? Do you hope for Statira from those enemies
that are at our Gates, and can you expect that from the uncertain issue of this
war, which you do not obtain from a most certain, and a most absolute power?
Ah, rather lay down the command you have received amongst us, or else make use
of it in such a way as may not draw upon you the scorn of all your party* Go
and require Roxana to deliver up our common and your particular enemy; but
require him of her in such manner, that she no longer may be able to refuse: go
with all your forces to pull him from the place where she is resolved to defend
him against you, and prevent the purpose she has to force this house, that she
may take away the life of her Rival: I Will follow you thither with all the
strength I can command, or rather I Will lead you on with fire and sword, to
enter the Palace where our enemy is shut up* you may boldly kill him when you
have provided for the safety of the Queen your Love, and that fear which made
you now to spare your Rival, will no more be able to retain you, when Roxana
shall no longer have any power over hers. Let Us march without any further
delay, for Roxana is already preparing to assault you; she draws together all
the forces she has in Babylon, and if you give her the time to get a greater
strength, you no longer will have any your self to execute too hardy
resolutions. Cassander spoke to him on this manner, and Perdiccas whose passion
had driven him to the highest degree of blindness, had already so great an
inclination to follow his counsel, that he hardly staid for the end of his
Discourse, to let him know he was quite persuaded. Let Us go Cassander, said he,
let us go whither our common resentments call us, and if we cannot otherwise
then by the blood of our party, let us by that blood gain Statira, and Roxana
which are refused us by all other manner of ways. Alcetas disapproved that
violent resolution of his Brothers, but durst not oppose his will, and what
repugnance soever he had against it, he was determining to go along with them;
but Perdiccas desired him to stay there with the men that were under his
command, and defend the Princesses, in case Roxana should cause any attempt to
be made against them; so he went forth with Cassander, after having given
order to some that were about him to gather together those men of whom he was
most assured, sending word to Antigenes and Tentamus that they should rally the
Argiraspides, in whom he had a greater confidence then in all the rest, and
stay for him with Cassanders Carians at an alarm place that was at the end of
the great Bridge over which they were to pass to go to Roxana's Palace.
Perdiccas his authority was such, that no body could think strange that he
beat up his Drums through the whole Town; nor did any body enquire whether it
were to call the soldiers to their arms against Roxana, or against the enemy.
Yet Roxana having heard of it, within a little time doubted presently of the
truth, and judged of Perdiccas his intention by her own; then all her passions
were not strong enough to secure her from fear, and she with a great deal of
discontent saw her self constrained to change the purpose she had of
assaulting, into that of the defensive; she with all imaginable speed called
those she trusted most to her assistance, the Persians, the Parthians, and the
Bactrians, were affectionate to her service; and among the Commanders she was
confident that Neoptolemus and Andiagoras would take her part: but scarce had
she received into the Palace some of those that were necessary for her
defense, in the mean time while her friends without drew together the forces
that were at their devotion, when she heard that Perdiccas and Cassander
followed by a great many thousand men, were marching toward the Palace, along
the Key, and were within two hundred paces of her gates: Being desirons to gain
time to put her self in a posture of defense, and to make appear that she was
unjustly oppressed, she thought best to send one of her servants to Perdiccas*
to know his intention, and amongst them all she chose the false Arbates, who
made himself one of the busiest about her in that occasion: Arbates went out
of the Palace, but he was hardly got into the street when he saw the armed
bands advance with Perdiccas and Cassander at the head of them. Arbates, though
trembling at the Commission he had undertaken, drew near Perdiccas to deliver
his Message, but scarce had he opened his mouth when Cassander looking upon him
with an angry eye. Ah, said he, see there the worthy confident of Roxana's
loves; see the man that serves her in her affection to Oroondates, and that
has already betrayed me in imploiments wherein I have trusted him. Arbates was
preparing some excuse for Cassander, but he afforded him not the leisure, for
catching him by the throat with his left hand, he with his right stand a
dagger twice up to the hilt in his body. Behold, said he, the first sacrifice I
offer to Roxana's ingratitude. Perfidious Arbates fell dead at the feet of
Perdiccas, who had not time to prevent Cassanders sudden execution, and the
Gods by a mavelous effect of justice, brought that disloyal wretch to be
punished for his treachery to his Master, by his Masters most implacable enemy
After that action Cassander not caring to dissemble his intentions, rushed
before Perdiccas, and running to the Palace gates, with furious cries, made
those that defended them see he meant to open himself a passage by force. Yet
being faithful to their Mistress, they courageously resisted his intention,
and forming a battalion before the bars, they presently stopd the forwardest
with a shower of Arrows: and in the interim Perdiccas sent Iolas Cassanders
brother with Tentamuus and Argiraspides to the other gate of the Palace.

This strange disunion of these Persons who in probability ought to have been
inseperably joined together against those potent Enemies, that were before
their walls, was undoubtedly a stroke of Divine Justice, and there was little
likelihood that love, hatred, or jealousy could so blindly precipitate them
into such great extreamities. Roxana and Perdiccas in the whole course of their
lives had appeared very prudent in their carriage, and without all question it
was the Gods, who contrary to all humane appearances shut their eyes against
all manner of considerations, and to punish them made themslaves unto their
passions, which in another season they would have been able to command. Roxana
regardlesse of the danger that might threaten her by the arrows, was gotten
out upon a Belcony over against the Gate, from whence she could distinctly see
her Enemies, and at the same time Perdiccas appearing before his men, called
out to Roxana's Soldiers to throw down their Arms, and not to oppose his
passage, swearing they should receive no harm, and that he demanded nothing but
Oroondates; but on the other side they were animated by their Queen, who crying
out to them that Perdiccas and Cassander had an intent against her life, made
them resolve upon a courageous resistance; many men were slain on both sides
with their arrows; but within a while Cassander and Perdiccas trusting to the
number of their Forces, closed up to handy strokes with their Enemies, and
began another kind of Combat far more dangerous then the former. Iolas with
Tentamus and part of the Argiraspides was fighting in the same order at the
other Gate, where they had found a like resistance.

Then did Roxana see her self reduced to great extreamities, the number of
those that defended the Palace was small in comparison of her Enemies, nor had
she any Commanders among them that were considerable, since Neoptolemus and
Andiagoras who took Arms for her, were in a remote part of the Town, where
they were drawing their men together, yet did she endeavor to excite those she
had with her by her words, and powered forth all the reproaches against
Perdiccas and Cassander, that her rage could bring into her mouth. Base men,
cried she, do you turn your Arms against those of your own Party, and against
your lawful Queen, instead of using them for the defense of your walls against
your mortal Enemies? Has Perdiccas lost all that sense of Honor and of
Virtue, which heertofore made him to be considered? and will Cassander plainly
declare to all the World that he is indeed the Murderer and the Poysoner of
his King? The exasperated Roxana spoke thus unto them, but they gave her no
attention, and did so press upon those with whom they fought, that after
having killed part of them, the rest were constrained to seek their safety
within the Gate, and some of the Pursuers entered with them. Cassander rushed
into the first Court with loud cries, and then Roxana quitted her Belcony. In
the troubles that perplexed her, she knew not what resolution it was best to
take; she loved Oroondates too well to abandon him to the fury of his Enemies,
though she was sure by that means she might quiet all; but she also loved him
too well to endanger the losing of him for ever by procuring his liberty. What
shall I do? (said she in that cruel agitation of her thoughts) Shall I suffer
my dear Oroondates to be slain? and shall I suffer his perfidious Enemies to
satisfy themselves by the destruction of what I love most dearly in all the
World? But again, shall I give him the means to escape from me for ever, by
giveing him the means to save himself? and shall I so lightly cast away all
the hopes which his Captivity had made me entertain? She wavered for a while in
this uncertainty, but within a little time she had none left to employ in such
contestations, the whole Court was full of Enemies, her men scarce made
resistance any longer, and for a surcharge of misfortune, Iolas with the same
success, forced his entrance at the other Gate, and marched to the assistance
of his Companions; some trusty men that were placed upon the stairs defended
the ascent with a great deal of courage, but their opposition could not be
long, and Roxana saw her self reduced at last to take a sudden resolution:
Wherefore she then took that which was most reasonable, and most conformable to
her love, and leaving the Gallery from whence she beheld the Combat: The Gods
forbid, Monsters, said she, that I should give a Prince into your hands, whose
life is worth more then a thousand such as yours. Saying thus, she ran
immediately to Oroondates his Quarter, which was yet made good by some of those
she had set to guard him, and calling for the Arms he had on when he was taken,
which then were in his ante-Chamber, she took some of them her self, and
giving the rest to Hesione, with a sword which she commanded from one of her
Soldiers, she went into her Prisoners Chamber. He at that time had his hands
at liberty, for they were unbound as soon as he came back unto his Lodging, but
he was in great trouble at the noise he heard, and partly guessing the cause,
was like to die with grief and anger to see himself in a condition that
permitted him not to do any thing for the defense of his life: While he was in
the midst of these violent disquiets, Roxana came into his Chamber.
Oroondates, said she, as ungrateful as thou art* I have defended thee hitherto
against thine Enemies with the peril of my life; but since my defense is not
able to secure thee, go fight thy self for thine own safety; see there thine
Armor which I restore thee, march on against these cruel men that would
assassinate thee in my protection, and remember that I have made the
consideration of my interests stoop to the care I have of thy life. This act
of Roxana's gave Oroondates occasion to lose some part of his resentments
against her, nor would he have sailed to testify as much to her by words, if
she her self would have given him leisure, and if she had not let him know
that all the time he had was necessary for the putting on of his Arms. He
therefore contented himself with protesting as he received them from her hand,
that he would not be unthankful for that obligation, and putting his Cuirasse
on his back with the help of Hesione, and even of Roxana her self, who needs
would share in that employment, he was quickly in the same estate wherein not
many days before he had struck so great a fear into his Enemies. Then did he
think himself invincible, and going from Roxana with an action that caused a
terror even in her, he ran followed by those of his Guard, whither he was
guided by the noise of the fight. After he had crossed the Gallery, he found
those on the top of the stairs who yet were making good that passage, and who
nevertheless began to yield by little and little to the fury of their Enemies.
Before he could get to them, he encouraged them with an exceeding fierce cry,
and at the same instant flying in amongst them like a whirlwind, he showed
himself at the head of them in a posture which froze the stoutest of their
Enemies hearts with fear. Courage my Friends, cried he, I Will fight with you,
as you have fought for me, and if I must die amongst you, I Will die like a man
that will not give you cause to repent what you have done for his safety. These
words made him presently known to both Parties, but his first Actions gave much
better marks to assure them who it was, and to strike the greater terror in
his Enemies, he left the Beaver of his Cask half open that they might see his
face. Cassander had no sooner cast his eye upon it, but a deadly shivering ran
through all his Veins, and Perdiccas himself, though he was Valiant, could not
look upon him without growing pale; but their fears were redoubled in them when
at his two first blows they saw two men fall dead, who tumbled down the stairs
to their very feet, and that at the same time the Prince knowing who they were,
threw himself upon them through the midst of all their men, with a furry
which nothing was able to oppose. Behold Oroondates, cried he to them, behold
Oroondates, whom you have such a mind to kill, come on valiant men, behold him
now unbound, coming himself to offer you this life you seek. Cassander not
daring to stay for him, was gotten a good way into the throng amongst his
Soldiers, and Perdiccas who knew that as valiant as he was, he could not
escape him, and that in a more open and less advantageous place, he would not
be able to defend himself long against the great number of his men, thought
best to employ some of them to receive the first fury of his blows. The Prince
flying into the thickest of them, like a man that contemned his life,
dispatched them with the greater facility because he fought upon the higher
ground, having the advantage of the place; and he was so courageously seconded
by those that fell on with him, and by those that had begun the fight, that
after having washed the stairs in a stream of blood, he by little and little
made his Enemies quit them. They fly, the Cowards (cried he to those of his own
Party) they fly from a small handful of men, but their flight shall not serve
their turn, for if you follow me like valiant Soldiers, they shall love their
lives in this Palace of their Queen, where they have slaughtred your
Companions. Saying these words he ran upon Antigenes the Chief Commander of
the Argiraspides, whom he observed among the eagerest of them, and brought down
his sword upon his head with such a mighty force, that although the Cask could
not be cleft by the edge, it was beaten into his skull by the weight thereof.
Antigenes as stricken with a thunderbolt, fell without sense or motion at the
feet of his Companions, where he lay bleeding at all the passages of his head;
his fall took away the courage of his men, and the Prince followed them so
close, that after having made them forsake the last steps of the stairs, he
drove them on before him into the very Court* His fury did precipitate him so
that he rushed on thither like a Lion; but there it was Perdiccas desired to
have him, and having imprudently engaged himself in a place too spacious to
keep his advantage in it, the Enemies began to ^ay hold of theirs, and at the
same time Iolas and Tentamus appearing in the Court with the rest of the
Argiraspides, he with a small number of those that stuck to him, was presently
environed by that multitude. Roxana who from the Gallery beheld that spectacle,
found new matter in the Princes admirable actions to redouble the love she
already bore him; but she could not see him in that extremity of danger
without giving her self over to her sorrow, nor without repenting that she had
so long deferred to give him the means to defend himself. In the interim she
by her cries declared the interest she had in his preservation, and by her
words encouraged those few that were left with him, to persist in his defense
to the last man* expecting the arrival of Neoptolemus and Andiagoras, upon
whom she had grounded her latest hopes, and whose delay she impatiently
accused. Oroondates who looked for help from nothing but his sword, knowing the
fault he had committed in quitting the narrow passage, strove to repair it by
actions altogether prodigious, and by the greatness of his blows sent such a
terror into his Enemies as made them not dare to come within the length of his
sword; but in the end some of those that fought in his company being slain at
his feet, and the rest hardly longer able to make resistance, he being neither
immortal nor invulnerable, was even ready to be overwhelmed with number, when
a great noise was heard at the Palace Gate, and presently after Seleucus entered
at the head of his Macedonians. That Gallant man having by the care he took
heard the Princes danger, and the horrible violence of Perdiccas and Cassander,
had stifled all the remaining consideration he had of them, and was resolved to
proceed no longer with them, but as his mortal Enemies. He had found Nearchus
his mind suitable to his, and at the same time, having sent Orders to their men
who kept themselves in a readiness for their first Command, they quickly were
in arms to serve them; but their prudent Leaders well understood that with them
alone they could never be able to defend themselves against all the Forces that
were in Babylon, and remembering the advertisement they had given Araxes, they
had divided their men, and Nearchus was gone with half of them toward that
Gate they intended to open to Perdiccas his Enemies, after having placed men
with red Ensigns upon the walls to give the Signal they had promised Araxes,
while Seleucus marched toward the Palace to succor Oroondates. He was gotten
thither just at the time when his assistance was most necessary, having forced
the resistance of those that withstood his passage, and having overthrown all
them that would have hindered his entrance, he broke into the Court, where with
his sword in his hand he hewed out his way to the Prince through the midst of
Perdiccas his Soldiers. The fright that seized them at his arrival opened the
throng that enclosed the Valiant Prince, and gave him liberty to see him, which
he no sooner did, but desiring to make himself known. Courage brave
Oroondates, said he, behold Seleucus your obliged Friend is come to rescue you,
or die with you. Saying these words he laid about him so furiously that at last
he got up to him, and placed himself by his side. Oroondates seeing so
powerful a relief, immediately aspired to Victory, and receiveing Seleucus
with a cry of acknowledgement; we have conquered, said he, since Seleucus takes
our part: The place where they were, and the employment that took them up
would not permit a longer discourse, but they both fought with such wondrous
valor, and Seleucus his men seconded them with such courage, that within a
little time those of Perdiccas his side began to quit the place, and even he
himself grounded his hopes upon the rest of their Forces that were drawing
together, went out of the Court with Cassander, and left it free unto the
Conquerors. They drove him into the next Market place, and into the streets
thereabouts with an exceeding fierceness, but scarce was he out of the Palace,
and gotten upon a Horse that was held ready for him, to go himself and fetch
up the rest of the Forces that were at his devotion, when he saw Neoptolemus
and Andiagoras, who with four or five thousand Persians, Bactrians, and
Parthians, were marching to assist Roxana. Perdiccas knew very well they came
not to do him service, but being prudent he found a way to make them change
their intention. You come most opportunely to relieve the Queen, said he,
Seleucus with his men has forced the Palace; he has freed Oroondates, and now
both of them together followed by Seleucus his Macedonians, and the Soldiers
of Nearchus and Leonatus, are Masters of the place, which they have made us
quit by the death of our Companions: The Town is lost if we take not some
speedy course, for certainly this treachery of Seleucus and Nearchus, is not
without holding some intelligence with our Enemies. While Perdiccas was
speaking on this manner, they saw Peucestas come galloping as fast as possibly
he could, who as soon as he was near, cried out to them that the Enemies were
falling on at the Gates, and were ready to force them open by the assistance of
Nearchus, who with above three thousand men did all he could to facilitate
their entrance, and to kill all those that offered to oppose it.

This news troubled Perdiccas exceedingly, and absolutely changed the
intentions of Neoptolemus and Andiagoras, who united themselves immediately with
Perdiccas, forgetting the consideration of those petty differences he had with
Roxana, to join their forces against their common enemies for the defense of
their lives. Neoptolemus went presently away with half their men, to defend the
gate which was assaulted by Nearchus within, and by the enemies without.
Perdiccas and Andiagoras with the rest, marched aginst Oroondates and Seleucus;
and Peucestas ran up and down through the whole Town to make the Inhabitants
take Arms, and to lead them to the defense of their gates and walls. Perdiccas
returned very seasonably to reinforce his men, who at last did nothing but fly
before their Conquerors; but that supply changed the form of the combat, and
they began to face about, whom the image of death before had terrified. The
Prince of Scithia and his valiant Companion lost not courage for that accident,
but animating their men by their words and by their example, made them resolve
generously to dispute the victory; never did warriers fight with so much
resolution, and all that Oroondates and Seleucus had done in the late battle,
was not comparable to their actions then. The number of their enemies was
greater then theirs, but the valor of Commanders made amends for that defect,
and held the combat in much equality; nay they were beginning to have some hope
of the better, when Cassander who was gone out of the hurly burly a while
before, came to assault them with the Energetes and the Pelasgians. The son of
deceased Ariston, (who died the day before of the wound he had received from
Oroondates) came at the same time another way with above three thousand men. At
the arrival of so considerable a supply, Perdiccas no longer doubted but he
should conquer, and the two valiant Princes no longer doubted but they should
be slain. Seleucus received that knowledge first, but he received it without
changing countenance, and looking upon Oroondates whom that danger had
animated, in stead of danting him. Brave Prince, said he, we must die, but I
do not grudge my life, since I lose it for the defense of so gallant a man.
Oroondates had not time to reply, because he was charged by Cassander and his
men, who eager of his death rushed headlong upon him with more resolution then
before; Iolas was one of the forwardest, and the Prince knowing who he was,
flew so suddenly at him, that his fatal sword finding passage through his
body, in a place ill defended by his Arms, appeared all bloody on the other
side, and laid Cassanders brother dead at the foot of his companions. Behold,
(cried the Prince, seeing him fall) behold a victime which I offer to the Ghost
of Alexander, and a just execution of one of his perfidious poysoners. These
words, and the death of Iolas, pierced so deeply into Cassander, that despi^ng
the danger there was in coming near his enemy, he would have run to meet a
certain destiny in the point of his Arms, if many of his men had not
interposed, who all falling at once upon the Prince, reduced him to the
greatest extreamities, in which he had ever been. Many of those that fought for
him had already lost their lives, and the rest forced by the abundance of their
enemies, gave ground apace defending themselves, and compeld their valiant
leaders, either to retire with them, or let their enemies have the satisfaction
of taking away their lives too easily. Seleucus who had yet some hope in
Nearchus, counseled the Prince to yield a little to the multitude, and by that
advice obliged him to retreat before a world of enemies that hotly prosecuted
him; he quitted the place to them with a great deal of trouble, but still
showing them a fearlesse countenance, and keeping them at a distance from him
by the greatness of his blows; they drove him back on that manner to the end of a
street that brought them to the Key, and there having more liberty to enlarge
their front, they put them in greater danger then before. He still retired from
them with Seleucus, and still the small number of his men made opposition, till
they came to the great stone Bridge that divides the Town into two equal
parts; that place was something favorable to them, for spreading their
soldiers the whole breadth of the Bridge, they put themselves in such a
posture, that they could not be charged any where except in front; but
weariness began to lessen their strength, though they had yet been so
fortunate as to have received but very little hurts, and it was evident that
without some speedy succor, they could not protract their fate much longer.

In the mean while, Roxana had no sooner seen her Palace clear of enemies, but
she went down into the Court, where she had rallied all the men she could see
in a condition to fight; she yet found three or four hundred, and at the same
time saw seven or eight hundred Draches, and Argeans, who were coming up with
great affection to serve her, and who among all other Nations were they on whom
she had the greatest power; she then resolved to make use of it, to requite
Perdiccas in his own kind, and in taking revenge upon a man that had offended
her, take also the life of her Rival, deprive her of the means of drawing
benefit from the liberty she had given to Oroondates. I have saved my
ungrateful Scithian, said she, from the cruelty of Perdiccas, but I do not
mean Statira shall be the better for his safety, and if I had not saved him for
my self, I will be sure not to have saved him for my Rival. With these
words, she placed her self at the head of those men, and after they had loudly
protested to her that they would follow her any whither without consideration,
she marched in fury toward the house where the two Princesses were kept.
Alcetas had staid to guard it for some time, but when he thought there was
nothing more to be feared from Roxana, and that he had heard Seleucus with his
men were fighting with Perdiccas, and that Nearchus was gone to set the gates
open to the enemy, he believed he could no longer stay with honor in that
house, while all his Companions were engaged in fight; wherefore leaving three
hundred of his men to defend It, he was marched away with the rest to seek in
what place his assistance would be most necessary. No sooner was he gone but
furious Roxana came, and presently seeing the gate was guarded, she commanded
her soldiers to break in, and put all to the sword that made resistance. They
found a great deal more then they expected from the small number of their
enemies; for being valiant men, and faithful to Alcetas, they with success
did long make use of the advantage of the place, to supply the difference in
number: they shot arrows exceeding fast from the top of the gate, and from the
windows, and kept their enemies a great while in play by that defense; but they
at last were so encouraged by Roxana's cries, that in spite of all opposition
they got up to the gates, and having beaten them open, entered the Court, and
drove Alcetas his soldiers as far as the stairs; there they made head again to
win time for the coming of relief, and there they slew a great many of
Roxana's men, and stopped their progress a good while longer. The fair Queen
Statira, and the Princess her sister, having heard that noise, and partly
guessed the cause of it, ran to a window that looked into the Court, and there
they saw cruel Roxana, who was come in thither, after her men had made
themselves masters of it, and who by inciting words pressed them still forward
to an absolute victory. That sight begot not so much fear in those great
Princesses, as to make them stoop to any thing unworthy of their great courage;
and the illustrious Widow of Alexander, beholding her cruel Rival with
disdain: Complete thy crimes, Roxana, cried she, carry them on to the highest
degree, and if thou have abandoned Oroondates to the rage of Perdiccas, wreak
thy malice without further delay upon her whom he abandons unto thine; thou
never ought to hope that Oroondates, if he be alive, can love a Monster,
black with so many horrid crimes, and if thou can reap no other advantage by
my death, thou at least may thereby revenge the contempt he has of thee.
Roxana heard these words distinctly enough, but being they put her to confusion
by the knowledge of her faults, she made no answer, and heartned up her men in
such a manner, that in the end their enemies were constrained to quit the
stairs, and retire disorderly into the Hall. Thither they pursued them with
such haste, that they had not time to shut the door, and there despair made
them fight a little longer, which was a means to retard, but not divert
Roxana's intentions. Then did these two great Princesses no longer doubt but
that the end of their life was come, yet in that fear they did not any thing
that misbecame their greatness; and if they made show of any grief, 'twas
only out of a sense wherewith neernesse of blood and affection inspired them
mutually. The Queen embracing the Princess her sister, and bathing her face
with tears shed out of love to her. Dear sister, said she, if it please the
Gods that you survive me, as there is some likelihood you may, since Roxana
has no cause at all to desire your death, and if they also permit Oroondates
to outlive me, assure him, dear sister, that my last thought was that of
keeping my self his by my death, and that this death is dearer to me receiving
it for his sake, then the Empire of the whole World with any other than. Give
him this assurance, dearest sister, if you love me, and for that of my
friendship, receive this latest kiss. The fair Parisatis whom her own danger
had but little affrighted, was not able to hear the Queens words, nor to behold
her action, without falling from her constancy of mind, and receiving her
embraces with a tenderness which she testified by pressing her closely between
her arms; Madam, said she, lay no command upon me to be performed after your
death, since the resolution I have taken not to survive you a moment, dispences
with me for all the obedience I ow you. As she had ended these words, they
both heard a greater noise then the former, and then it was they believed for
certain, that all those who had fought for their defense, were utterly
defeated, and that they had nothing more to do but to offer up their breasts to
the enemies sword.

That which passed in the heart of the Town, has hindered us from relating what
was done upon the skirts of it, and what an alteration the affairs of Babylon
then received. Nearchus with his men was gone down to the gate which Craterus
was to assault; and at the same time had caused Ensigns to be set upon the
Walls, and by the sound of many Trumpets roused the Camp, which with mavelous
impatiency expected so desired a signal. The first that spied it had carried
the news with loud cries to their Commanders, and all those famous warriers had
received it with an extraordinary joy. The valiant Prince of Persia,
Lysimachus, and all the rest of their Companions, had in a moment put on their
Arms, and in almost as little time their forces who waited for that command,
were in a readiness to march. Prince Artaxerxes followed by Lysimachus,
Ptolomeus, Orontes, the brave Thalestris, young Demetrius, and Theodates* was
advanced with fifteen thousand Macedonians Thracians, and Egyptians, to
Craterus his gate where the signal was set up; and to make a diversion to
facilitate their design, Oxyatres, Antigonus, Eumenes, and Polyperchon fell on
at other four. Never did great Arsaces appear so fierce and terrible as that
day, at the gates of Babylon, nor ever did Lysimachus employ his valor with
greater satisfaction, nor with greater hope, then at that time for the liberty
of Parisatis. Nearchus fought on the inside against those that defended the
gate, and though their number was little different from his, he pressed them in
such manner, as made them soon despair of victory. Artaxerxes and his Companions
batterd the gates in the mean time with their Rams, and the small resistance
they found, by reason their enemies were so employed within, suffered them
quickly to make a breach large enough to be entered. Lysimachus was the first
that broke in at it, and would needs expose himself to the first danger before
Prince Artaxerxes, who rushed in next; they two were presently followed by all
the rest, and Nearches no sooner saw them appear, but discovering himself to
them by a joyful cry, he drove the terror of their enemies to the utmost
extremity. They that first opposed the fury of the Prince of Persia and his
Companions, lost their lives gloriously by the hands of those renowned men, and
in the mean while their Soldiers entered rushing after them; and when they were
absolute masters of the gate, they let down the Bridge, and opened a large
passage to their squadrons.

All they that had opposed Nearchus were either killed or taken flight, when
N^optolemus with his men came up to their relief, but he came only to lead
them on to slaughter, for the conquering Princes falling furiously upon them,
covered the streets with mangled bodies, and made the channels run with blood
Neoptolemus was one of the first that charged Prince Artaxerxes, but he found
his strength to be far unequal, and though he lost not his life by that
unresistable hand, he received so weighty a blow, that not being able to
sustain it, he fell among the slain with all the signs of a dying person; his
men no longer made opposition, and they that could escape the Conquerors hands,
sought the preservation of their lives by flight. The Son of Darius had no
sooner gotten to join with Nearchus, and testified his acknowledgements at that
meeting, but he learned from him the danger Oroondates was in, and not being
able then to give way to other thoughts save those of succouring his dear
Brother, he advanced with part of his Forces toward the Palace, and left others
the care of opening the Gates that were assaulted by Antigonus, Oxyatres,
Eumenes, and Polyperchon. Such was the destiny of Babylon, and the division of
those that commanded in that stately City, having drawn all the Soldiers to
their Factions, left almost none at all for the defense of the Gates and Walls,
and then the Conquerors roved all about with as much liberty as if they had had
no Enemies to fight with. Artaxerxes had marched part of the way which led
toward the Palace, when by some Soldiers that cast themselves at his feet, he
heard how Roxana was then employed, and in what danger the Queen, and the
Princess her Sister were, unless they had some speedy succor: This News
troubled the Prince extremely, but Lysimachus had no sooner heard it, but
transported with the fury which his passion inspired, he parted from him,
taking some of his men along, and marching with a marvelous haste to relieve
his Princess, left him at liberty to assist his Brother. He was not a little
comforted by Lysimachus his resolution, knowing the Valor of that Prince, and
judging well that his Sisters could not desire a more generous Champion, and
prosecuting his former design with a great deal of diligence, he came to the
end of the Bridge, where the Prince of Scithia, and brave Seleucus defended
their lives with very little hope of safety. They were already so exceeding
weary, that they were hardly able to lift their swords, and their weakness
having redoubled the courage of Perdiccas and Cassander, made them a great
deal bolder in assailing them. They were going to summon their utmost Forces
together, that they might finish the combat with their death, when casting an
eye to the other end of the Bridge, they heard the cries of their Enemies, and
saw them appear at the same instant. Artaxerxes running up toward Oroondates
with an incomparable swiftness: Courage, cried he, dear Brother, you are a
Conqueror, and your Enemies are defeated. He had hardly ended these words when
he was gotten to his side, and with him Orontes, Demetrius, Thalestris, and the
faithful Theodates followed by many thousand Soldiers. As Oroondates and
Seleucus recovered strength by that relief which was then so necessary to
them, their Enemies were so terrified by the knowledge of their misfortune of
the loss of their City, and of the ruin of their Party, that they were almost
quite defeated without the trouble of fighting. Yet did their Offices labor to
encourage them, though not to such a degree, but that they presently quitted
the Bridge, and retired to a more open place, where they gave the Princes a
greater liberty of defeating them. The slaughter then was such, that in many
places the blood ran down the Key into the Euphrates, and the resentment of
those Warriers whose lives a while before were in so great an extremity, made
it self known then by most bloody tokens. O Statira! O Prince of Scithia! how
fully were your wrongs revenged, and how many lives were sacrificed to their
reparation? The Son of Ariston who to revenge his Fathers Death, had appeared
most eager in seeking that of Prince Oroondates, lost his resentments with his
life, which was gloriously cut off by the sword of Great Arsaces. The Prince of
the Massagetes, and the Son of Antigonus slew a very great number of them, the
fair Amazone Queen made her self remarkable by a thousand valiant Actions, and
Theodates plainly showed by his how worthy he was of Arsaces his affection; but
Oroondates in whose remembrance the cruelties of Perdiccas and Cassander was
very fresh, sought them every where amongst their men, and made those hated
names resound which way soever he turned. Where are your Valiant men? cried he,
is the hot desire you had to take my life, so quickly cooled? and do you fly
so soon from those whom but a few minutes before you had condemned to death?
have you forgot I am your Rival? and do you so easily resign Statira and
Roxana to me? Scarce had he said these words, but he repented that he had
spoken them, as thinking them contrary to modesty, and judging that a soul
like his, ought not to have grown proud upon the change of his Fortune: Yet
were they over heard by Perdiccas and Cassander, though they had thrust
themselves amongst their men, whether it were to prolong their lives, or to
seek means to fight yet once again with more advantage. Perdiccas, who indeed
was valiant amongst the valiantest, could not without shame hear those
reproaches from his Enemy, and at the same time considering the condition he was
in, the defeat of his Forces, the taking of the Town, and the loss of those
pretensions he had had upon Cassandra, he believed he no longer ought to love
his life enough to save it by an act of Cowardice, and in that thought inspired
either by his courage, or by his despair, he rushed once more before his men,
and calling Oroondates with a loud voice, he drew him presently to meet him;
but before they came to blows, Perdiccas demanded a little attention, and
having obtained it of the Prince by the power he had amongst his Soldiers.
Behold Perdiccas whom thou seek, said he, if he had killed thee when he
could have done it, he needed not have feared he should have been slain by the
hands of those about thee; but if thou art truly generous, and truly worthy of
Statira, whom ill fortune forces me to abandon to thee, thou will endeavor
either to take my life, or to defend thine own without advantage: Thy Friends
and mine shall be witnesses of the last actions of one of us, and though
perhaps the usage thou have found from me, does not oblige thee to observe the
Rules of Generosity toward me, thou may remember that I preserved Cassandra
for thee, and that but for me she had not now been in the World. The Prince of
Scithia's fury was so moderated by these words of his Enemies, that he partly
laid aside the design he had against his life, and looking upon him with a
milder countenance. It is true, said he, that thy actions might excuse mine
well enough, which way soever I should seek to revenge my self: but that which
thou have lately done for the safety of my Princess, breeds in me so great a
consideration of thee, that I not only will forbear to assail thy life with
odds, but will freely give it thee, if thou will receive it from me. No,
replied Perdiccas, the Friends and Kinsmen of Alexander the Great do not use to
receive their lives from their Enemies, and 'twill suffice to confirm me
absolutely in the Opinion I have of thy Virtue, if thou secure me against thy
men, and make the conquest of Statira, and the defeat of Perdiccas to be the
merit of thy single Valor. Oroondates without further reply, turning toward
Arsaces and his Companions. Dear Brother, and you my Generous Friends, said he,
you love my glory too well to envy me the occasions to preserve it; I by all
your friendship toward me beg the liberty of fighting with Perdiccas upon
equal terms, and if it please the Gods I die by his hand, let me conjure you
by the same friendship, to let him have his life and liberty for the prize of
his Victory. Artaxerxes and his Companions who in all Oroondates his Actions
admired the greatness of his Courage, yielded to his desires, which perhaps
they would not so easily have done, if their confidence in his Valor had not
secured them against the fear they might have been in for the success of the
Combat. The conquering Part, and all that yet were left of the conquered, stood
in a manner unmovable to be the Spectators of it, and then did those two
Enemies precipitate themselves upon each other with an animosity which plainly
made appear what the issue of their fight would be. Oroondates was wearied with
the toil he had undergone, and wounded though lightly in some few places, yet
that of disadvantage was seen but little, and his anger did so stir him up,
that Perdiccas as valiant as he was, quickly perceived his blood run down in
many parts of his body. Oroondates his friends beheld those happy beginnings
with a great deal of joy, but Perdiccas lost not his courage with his blood,
for he rushed upon his enemy with a fury, which without doubt would have been
fatal to any other man. Yet was he utterly weakened presently after, by a
thrust which he received into the body, and the Prince who saw him in such a
condition, that he could no longer fear him, took pity of his fortune, and
retiring two or three steps. Thou art no longer able, said he, to dispute the
victory against me, but receive thy life, which I am willing to leave thee, and
of which I will have as great a care as thou could desire from a friend. My
life, replied Perdiccas, is no longer at thy disposing, nor can I, but with it,
give up Statira and the victory. At these words he strove all that possibly he
could to fly upon his enemy, but his strength absolutely forsook him; and
after having staggered a while, he fell at his feet, where his life and blood
ran forth together. Thus died the greatest of all Alexanders successors, and
the Gods to give a terrible example of their justice, decreed he should be
slain in that same Town wherein he had unworthily abused his power, and by the
hands of that same Enemy, whose death he a few moments before had attempted
with so much injustice and inhumanity. He was a man of excellent natural
parts, but his passions had extinguished them, and the glory of his former
actions was much eclipsed by the last minutes of his life. His pride was
humbled at the feet of his Conqueror, but the Prince being moved with pity,
kneeled down upon one knee close by him, and was putting up the Beaver of his
Cask to see if he were yet in a condition to receive assistance, when
Cassander, enraged by the loss of his friend, or rather his despair, coming
from amongst his men with his sword up, fell upon the compassionate Prince, and
while he was in that posture, charged him with so weighty a blow, as made him
sink upon the pale dying face of Perdiccas, and but for the goodness of his
helmet, would perhaps have put him in the same condition. Oroondates getting up
again in very great fury, would have run to take revenge, but he was already
prevented; for amongst those many that were animated against Cassander for that
base foul play, the Valiant Thalestris who knew him, and who still was
sensible of the injuries he had done her in the first combats against Orontes,
made at him with a threatening cry, and with the first stroke she gave having
cut the straps of his Cask, his head remained unarmed and bare to the eyes of
all his Enemies.

The fair Queen who remembered with what cruelty he formerly had rushed upon her
with his Horse after having thrown her down with a violent shock, was lifting
up her arm to give him a death which he had but too justly deserved, when
Orontes knowing him, and calling to mind their ancient friendship, received the
blow upon his Shield, and stepping before her: Madam, said he, give me
Cassanders life I beseech you: And you Cassander, continued he, yield your
self to Orontes who was heretofore your Friend. Orontes obtained his desires
from both, the fair Queen conquered her indignation to grant her dear Orontes
what he demanded, and Cassander presenting his sword unto Orontes, did by that
action stop all those that were already turned against him.

While these things happened, Lysimachus and Ptolomeus had run with their men
to the house where the great Princesses of Persia were reduced to the utmost
peril of their lives; and Roxana's Soldiers after having filled the Hall with
dead bodies, were ready to break open their Chamber door, when the two Princes
came. It would be hard to tell all the particulars of their actions. Lysimachus
excited by his passion found no resistance capable to stop him, he made
himself way with his sword through the thickest of his Enemies, and the
violence of his wrath having for that time suspended part of the pity which was
natural to him, he sacrificed those cruel men with pleasure, to the
remembrance of those injuries they would have done to Parisatis. After having
covered the whole Court with slaughtred carcasses, he made himself Master of
the stairs, and from thence passing into the Hall, he there prosecuted his
Victory, and his revenge with such success, and Ptolomeus with his soldiers
seconded him so courageously, that within a little time they were both
Conquerors, and revenged of their Enemies, whom they put almost all to the edge
of the sword. That sight was horrible, and all that house oreflowed with blood,
when Lysimachus finding no more obstacles in his passage, broak open the same
doors his Enemies had assaulted, and entered all bloody into the Queens Chamber.
At that object the two great Princesses resolved absolutely for death, and
desiring to receive it both together, they lockd each other in close embrace
which they believed to be their last. In that posture they cast their eyes upon
Lysimachus, who out of respect had made a stand as soon as he was come into
the Chamber, and the equipage they saw him in having confirmed them in their
opinion. Whosoever thou art, said the Queen, that art the minister of Roxana's
will, defer not the execution of it longer: come, kill the Wife, and perhaps
the Daughter of thy King; but spare the innocent Parisatis, since Roxana has
no cause to hate her, and that she has no pretensions upon Oroondates.
Parisatis at these words getting loose from the Queens embraces: Ah, cried she
to Lysimachus, hearken not to that discourse, and if any pity can be found in
persons that take imploiments like this of thine, let me conjure thee to
dispatch me first: it is not just Hephestions Widow should be spared, when
there is no consideration had of Alexanders; and though I have no pretensions
upon Oroondates, I shall have some upon the Empire, and I shall have some upon
the life of Roxana. This generous contestation would have lasted longer, if
Lysimachus could have longer suffered it; it mollified him so, that for all his
courage, he was hardly able to retain his tears, but if he was touched with the
Queens words, his love made those of his Princess pierce him so deeply, and in
that posture which begd and commanded both at once, he found so much occasion
of redoubling his passion, that he had hardly any knowledge left, or any power
to moderate himself in that encounter. Yet would he no longer suffer those
great Princesses to continue in the cruel opinion they had of him, but
throwing his Cask at their feet, and himself likewise at the same time, he by
his action, and by the sight of his face, made them find how happily they had
been deceived in their belief. I am not, said he, the minister of Roxana's
cruelties, and the Gods make use of Lysimachus for more glorious occasions;
they for the highest pitch of his felicity, have permitted him to destroy your
Enemies, and have made him able now to give you notice that you are free, and
Sovereigns in Babylon. The joy of those virtuous Princesses at the knowledge,
and at the words of Lysimachus, was such as in probability it ought to be for
so great* and so sudden an alteration of their fortune. From a cruel, and as
they believed, an inevitable death, they saw themselves in a moment brought
into security, and into the condition they could have wishd; and they received
that office from a Prince whom they infinitely esteemd* or rather from a Prince
whom Parisatis loved as much as she was capable of loving: to say truth, all
their moderation hindered them not from testifying their satisfaction, and the
Queen knowing the respect her sister bore her, permitted not a free discovery
of her sense of that adventure, strove to oblige her to it by her example, and
casting her own arm about Lysimachus his neck; 'Twas from you, said she, 'twas
from you indeed we were to hope for our deliverance, and 'twas also in your
virtue, and in the assistance of the Prince our Brother, that we had grounded
our expectations; we ow our lives to you Lysimachus, but besides the general
obligation, Parisatis ought to add this last service to those many others
whereby you have so well deserved her affection. She pulld him up as she spoke
these words, which made the Princess blush, but yet her modesty could not keep
her then from testifying her acknowledgement, and she believed that an
engagement of such importance, might well dispense with her for her severer
rules; she did it by a salute, and an embrace full of affection, which she then
bestowed upon that Prince whom she had never favored so much before, and
opposing the intent he had to cast himself once more at her feet, that he
might receive her favors, with greater respect. Generous Lysimachus, said she,
I am totally your debtor, since besides my own life, I ow you that of the Queen
my sister, and this last action is of the same nature with many others which
you have done to my advantage; I most dearly preserve the memory of them, and
have as great a sense of this last as you can desire. I am then, replied
Lysimachus with a sigh, a great deal more happy then I had hoped to be, and the
care you took to conceal your self from me, and to keep me from the occasions
of serving you in a season when the services of all those that had any fidelity
toward you were no more then necessary, had put me into a very ill opinion of
my fortune. I had reasons, answered the Princess, which would perchance be
well approved by any other but your self; but if ^ did amiss in your opinion,
I Will make amends for my fault by all the reparations that so virtuous, and so
reasonable a Prince as Lysimachus will demand. The glad Lysimachus not being
able to express his joy by words, contented himself to testify it by his
actions and putting one knee unto the ground, he kissed the Princesses hand,
with raptures suitable to all those gallant proofs he formerly had given her of
his passion. Ptolomeus came then into the Chamber, and as he took a very great
share in the contentment of his friend, he received as great a one himself in
the acknowledgement of the two Princesses, and they both assured him with
affectionate speeches, that they were extremely sensible of what he had done in
favor of them. After that first discourse, the Princesses enquired concerning
Artaxerxes, Oroondates, and the general state of their affairs. Lysimachus
told them in a few words, and though by the knowledge of that happy event he
confirmed them in the joy they had conceived for their own liberty, he left
them in some apprehension, for the uncertainty of Oroondates his safety, and
for the danger of their Brother. Let Us go, said the Queen to Lysimachus, let us
go and take our part in the danger which those dear persons still are in for
our sake, and let us no longer stay in a house where we have suffered so much and
which we have so much reason to detest. At these words she gave her hand to
Ptolomeus, and leaving her sisters to Lysimachus, went out of the Chamber, and
passed into the Hall, which she found full of dead and dying bodies; and where
she quaked with horror at the sight of so dismal a spectacle. The Princesses
turned away their eyes, but they met with the same objects upon the stairs, and
in the Court, and in all places found new occasions to abhor Roxana's cruelty.

In the mean time that unfortunate Princess was in a condition very different
from theirs, and when Lysimachus and Ptolomeus came to relieve the Princesses,
her fear had made her go up the stairs, where she then was, to the highest
story of the house; from thence she had heard the noise, from thence she had
sometimes looked into the Court, and from thence by the words of the victorious
Soldiers, she had learned that it was by ^ysimachus her enemies were rescued,
that the Town was taken, and that she was upon the point of falling quickly her
self into the power of those persons she had so cruelly injured. She received
not that assurance without being cast into despair, and horror, and the
solitariness of the place where she was, joined to the remorse of her guilty
conscience, inspired her with the most furious thoughts a heart is able to
conceive. She could not call to mind the cruelties she had executed upon the
Queen, without justly fearing those punishments that were her due; nor could
she dispose her self to los^ Oroondates for ever, without desiring the death
she was afraid of. What shall I do said she in these ^^^^solutions? shall I
give my enemies the satisfaction to make me suffer a death I have so well
deserved? and shall I undergo the shame they are preparing to reward my
cruelties? Shall I implore the mercy of those I have so unworthily abused, and
shall I beg my life of my Rival, after having assaulted hers with so much
inhumanity? Ah! no Roxana* think not upon that utmost baseness, after so many
others that d^shonour thee: if thy Rival should be generous enough to grant
thee a pardon which thou have so little merited, would thou receive it from
her by giving up Oroondates? Would thou live without that ungrateful cause
of all thy crimes, and could thou see them both conquerors over those crimes
that have so little profited thee? Ah Roxana! this thought's unworthy of the
wife of Alexander, and if thou have made thy self unworthy of that quality by
thy shameful actions, blot out the shame of thy life, by a death full of
resolution. Die, miserable woman, but die by thine own assistance, without
standing in need to beg that of thy enemies. She then began to consider which
way she might kill her self* not having any weapon that could serve her for
that purpose: she was in a high Gallery that looked into the Court, which she
saw full of men slain for her quarrel, and 'twas from thence she thought she
might easily find her death, by throwing her self headlong into the Court,
where in regard of the height, and the hardness of the pavement, she must
needs in probability be dashed in pieces. Already had she given her self over to
that resolution, and was preparing to execute it, when she remembered her great
belly, and the Child of so great a Father which she carried in her womb. That
consideration staid her at the first, and drew tears immediately after from her
eyes. Ah! wretched mother, cried she, will thou destroy a son of Alexanders,
and shall this only pledge thou have left of the affection of the greatest man
that ever was, perish for the expiation of thy offenses? This unfortunate Child
of so glorious a Father, is innocent of all thy crimes, and thou were more
cruel then Medea, if thou thy self should sacrifice him to thy ill fortune.
This thought bred such a tenderness in her heart, that she remained a good while
unable to get out a word, and expressed her compassionat yearnings only by her
tears. At last, by the force of her despair, she banished those irresolutions,
which seemed to precipitate her a fresh into her miseries, and breaking forth
again in sighs. Ah! my poor Child, continued she, why cannot I divide my life
from thine, and give death to guilty Roxana* without killing the innocent son
of Alexander? Pardon me, most precious blood of the Gods, the inhumanity which
my cruel fate compels me to commit against thee* peradventure also thy life
would have been very different from thy Fathers, and that thou would have
less inherited his virtues, then thy Mothers vices. Then did she again draw
near that fatal window, which she had destined for the execution of her
despair; and casting her eyes into the Court, she upon the lowest steps of the
stairs without, saw the fair Queen her Rival, who with the Princess her
sister, Lysimachus and Ptolomeus, were going away from that detested house.
That sight redoubled her transported fury, and not being able to master it.
Statira, cried she, Statira, hearken to the last words, and behold the last
actions of Roxana. The Queen and those that were in her company cast up their
eyes toward that call, and Roxana no sooner perceived that she was seen and
heard, but raising her voice according to the distance; I will not ask thee
pardon, went she on, for the wrongs I have done thee, they are of a nature not
to hope for any and I have been too bold in committing crimes, to be so meanly
spirited as to repent them. I desire no mercy of thee for my l^fe, triumph
therefore both over it and over my ill fortune, since the Gods permit thee so
to do; enjoy those felicities with Oroondates, which I in vain have so much
opposed: I will not envy them, being I shall not see them, and that now I am
upon the point by throwing my self headlong at thy feet, to give thee as full a
revenge upon thine enemy, as thou thy self know how to wish. For thy more
perfect satisfaction, I sacrifice to thee ^his son of Alexanders, but by the
memory of that great man who was our common husband, and who ought to be held
in veneration by us both, defend my body from the abuses that may be offered it;
afford it the honor of Burial; and if I may be suffered to demand it after the
injuries I have done his memory, give leave that it may rest in the same Tomb
with Alexanders. As Roxana ended these words, she put her hands upon the
window, and was getting up to cast her self down into the Court; when the Queen
whom that pitiful adventure had very deeply touched, desiring to oppose that
cruel effect of her despair, cried, Hold Roxana, hold, I conjure thee by the
memory of Alexander* Roxana who by reason of the height of the window and her
own unweldiness, had much ado to raise her self for the execution of her
design, deferd it a w^i^e at these words, and was content to prolong her life
for a few moments, to hear what her Rival had to say to her. When the Queen
saw she lent her some attention; Roxana, continued she, as thou desire the
mercy of the Gods, envy me not the glory which they grant me, if thou oppose it
not by a last effect of cruelty; it is true, thou have done me many injuries,
but I forgive them all in consideration of thy love, and of thy present estate;
and though neither were sufficient to plead for them, remember that I ow thee
the life of Oroondates, and that what thou did for his preservation, is of
power enough in me to efface the memory of far more cruel wrongs: if thou wi^t
give me any reparation, do nothing else but live to satisfy me; that is all I
now desire of thee, neither do I pretend to any right over thy liberty, or over
the Empire of that Son whom thou would murder with thy self, nor shall thou
receive so much as a reproach from me that can disoblige thee. These
Testimonies of Statira's goodness touched Roxana with a true repentance; but
then she found her self more guilty then before, and remorse of conscience
tormented her with greater violence, confirmed her more and more in the
resolution of dying. I am unworthy, cried she, of the mercy thou offerest me,
and thou redoublest my despair by this knowledge of thy goodness; but thou
shall not see that I Will abuse it, nor will I receive my life from thee, after
having persecuted thine with cruelties which make my death most dreadful to
me. As she ended these words, she strove to get upon the Window, and raised her
self with so much force, that one part of her being already without would have
pulled the other after it by it is weight, if at the same instant she had not
been seized upon behind, and seized with so strong a hand, that her body which
before was equally balanced, came back again into the Gallery.

'Twas Ptolomeus that did her that good Office; he at the sign the Queen had
made him during their discourse, was gone from her with that intention, and had
run so fast up stairs, that he came time enough to save the life of that
desperate Princess. She turned about to him much afflicted and surprised, and
having known him. Ah! Ptolomeus, said she, how cruel are you to hinder my
repose? I should be far more cruel, replied Ptolomeus, if I consented to the
cruelty you would exercise against your self, and to the offense you commit
against a Queen, who desires nothing now with so much passion as your safety.
Roxana looked upon Ptolomeus with eyes in which her fatal thoughts had
imprinted something extraordinary, and yet for all she was so troubled, and had
so wild a countenance, she was still so extremely handsome, that nothing but
the beauty of her Rival, could defend the most insensible hearts from being
charmed with hers. That loveliness being a powerful incitement to compassion,
imprinted it so deeply in Ptolomeus, that he omitted nothing that could serve
to drive the despair out of her soul, which had so totally possessed it; and
he endeavored it with so much care and so much success, that in the end he
overcame her to see her Rival, and to suffer the expressions of her goodness.
Before they were half way down the stairs, they m^^ the Queen* who was come
back into the house to receive her with as much gentleness as if their former
friendship had not been interrupted by any accident. Roxana could not bear her
reproach without a great deal of confusion; but when she saw her stretch forth
her arms with a face all bathed in tears which compassion had made her shed,
she drew near to her a little more confidently, but yet she cast down her eyes
with shame, and knew not how to sustain the looks of her whom she had so little
obliged to afford her that noble usage. Statira embraced her tenderly, an^
beholding her with eyes that had nothing in them of an Enemy. You have wronged
me more, said she, by the opinion you had of my cruelty, then by all your
former actions; and if you were not enough afflicted already, I should complain
of the injury you have done me, in preferring death before my friendship: Live,
Madam, to testify that you cease to hate me, and never fear any thing from me
nor mine that can any way trouble your repose. Roxana by this confirmation of
the Queens goodness, was absolutely brought to a hearty repentance, and
receiving her kindnesses with more assurance then before. You are worthy,
answered she, of the care the Gods have had of your preservation, and I have
but too justly merited my unhappynesse; in my present estate, Madam, death
without doubt would be my most fortunate condition, but yet I Will live for to
obey you; nor can I better testify my repentance, then by receiving my life
from you, and in living at your command, notwithstanding the many reasons I
have to wish for death. Statira's resentment, and Roxana's despair were
appeased in this manner, and they were upon these terms, when a great noise was
heard in the streets, and at the same time some of the Soldiers brought notice
that Alcetas was returned with part of his men, and had again begun the sight
against those of Lysimachus and Ptolomeus. Lysimachus started at the name of
his Rival, and praying Prolomeus to stay for the defense of the Princesses, he
went from them, and ran to his men with as much haste as could be imagined. It
was true that Alcetas with some Soldiers as desperate as himself, had already
charged in amongst them. He had run in vain to all the Gates, which were seized
upon by his Enemies, and after having lost part of his men against them, he had
been up and down at many other places, and every where had found his Foes
Victorious. He had seen death wandering about on every side, confusion,
disorder, and cruelty reigning in all the streets of Babylon. He had heard the
groans of dying men, the cries and lamentations of tender Mothers, Children,
and weak old men, and every where had met with dreadful pictures of horrible
desolation. He often had broke in upon his Enemies, but had still come off
again with loss, till he arrived at the place where the unfortunate Perdiccas
had lost his life: Then by the knowledge of his Brothers death he had banished
all the desire he before had had to live, and seeking nothing but an occasion
of dying honorably, he believed he could not do it better then in the presence
of his Princess whom he had abandoned, and to whom he thought he owed the
latest moments of his life. With this belief, forcing all the obstacles that
were in his passage, he was come back again to that house, where he had fallen
so fiercely upon Lysimachus his Soldiers, that at the first he had laid many
of them dead upon the ground. Lysimachus being come to their relief, no sooner
knew him, but desiring to discover who he was. Alcetas, cried he, behold
Lysimachus, turn thy sword against him alone, and let us dispute this last time
for Parisatis. Alcetas stayed not for a second challenge, but receiving his
Rival with a furious cry, he ran to meet him with an impetuousnesse as great
as his; all their men afforded them passage, and they closed in sight of either
party, though so unluckyly for Alcetas, that having hurt Lysimachus but lightly
in the left hand, Lysimachus his sword found the defect of his Arms, and ran
through his body to the very Hilt. Alcetas fell dead with that single thrust,
and yielded up Parisatis with his life unto his Rival. All his soldiers
sought death by his example, and were going perhaps to find it amongst Enemies
grown cruel by blood and slaughter, when Prince Oroondates, Artaxerxes,
Orontes, and Thalestris with their Companions came altogether to that place.
They had cut in pieces whatsoever had made them any resistance, and at the same
time Oxyatres, Craterus, Antigonus. Leonatus, Eumenes, and Polyperchon had made
themselves Masters of all the several quarters of the Town; all those that had
been obstinate in making opposition, were put every man to the sword, and
Peucestas who had gotten some of the Citizens to take arms, having seen a good
number of them slain, was constrained to ask quarter for the the rest, and to
yield himself to the discretion of Prince Oxyatres. The Conquerours had
promised the Inhabitants their lives, but they had found it very difficult to
take off the Soldiers, whom desire of Pillage precipitated thronging into
every house, and at first they met with very little obedience amongst them, but
in the end they had so carefully endeavored it, knowing how much they should
oblige Prince Artaxerxes by sparing the blood of the old Subjects of his
Family, that they had saved all them that had escaped from the first fury of
their men, and after having made themselves M^sters of all places, where they
could suspect any resistance, they had drawn up a great part of their Forces
under their several Standards and Colors. Thus the most stately Town in all
the World was taken, and that proud City which might have held out whole years
against a world of Enemies, saw it self (contrary to all humane appearance)
brought in subjection in half a day, by the imprudent and blind dissension of
its Defendants: Yet was it happy in its misfortune, since the Conquerours used
their Victory with moderation, not defacing any of its Beauties, and washing of
the faults of its Commanders a great deal more with the blood of strangers,
then of its Citizens. While some of these great Princes were busy in that
employment, they in whom the interests of love were the most powerful, had
affairs of a different nature to take them up. Alcetas was no sooner killed
with part of his men, and the rest fled quitting the place and Victory to their
Enemies, but Oroondates drawing near to conquering Lysimachus* testified by his
joy, and by his endearments, how much he was concerned in his good success,
and Lysimachus having at the same time told him of the liberty of their
Princesses of Roxana's repentance, and of the Queens goodness toward her,
ravished his heart with an excess of contentment. He hardly stayed the end of
his discourse (while his Companions appeased the rest of the disorder, and
saved the lives of those miserable Wretches that implored their mercy) but
burning with impatiency to see his Princess free, he ran immediately to that
house, and went to find her in her Chamber, whither she was retired with the
Princess her Sister, and Queen Roxana, under the Guard of Ptolomeus, with a
good number of Soldiers. Oroondates had no sooner cast his eyes upon her, but
unarming his head, he threw himself at her feet, and embraced her knees with
transports that were peculiar only to his passion. The Queen who was seized
with joy as much as he, embraced him also with motions little different from
his, and Roxana during that action not being able to conquer hers,
notwithstanding all the violence she used to do so, was like to have fallen
dead through an extremity of grief and jealousy. Yet had she this advantage
at least, that her actions were but little taken notice of, and all the persons
there present were sufficiently employed, without suffering their thoughts to
come beyond the limits of their particular interests, or beyond the expressions
of their own satisfaction. You are at liberty my adored Queen, said glad
Oroondates, and I am now permitted to see you out of Perdiccas his power. You
have triumphed over your misfortunes by your Virtue alone, and have made
Oroondates triumph over his miseries by your goodness. How glorious is he now,
and how great an obligation he has to all these crosses, by which he has been
able to find you had not forgotten him? all the afflictions he has suffered,
ought in his esteem to be accounted blessings, since by their means he had
obtained this knowledge of your goodness. He uttred many other such like
Speeches, disjoynted through the excess of his contentment, and the Queen
answered him with a sweetness full of Majesty. Yes, my dear Prince, I now at
last am free after having endured so many miseries, but by your example my
sufferings are dearer to me then my liberty, since you by them have seen that I
was not ungrateful to your affection; yet set not too high a value upon a
Fortune you have well deserved; I owed you a great deal more then one single
life, and if the Gods had given me many, I would have sacrificed them all to so
precious a remembrance. They had said more to one another if Oroondates having
espied Roxana, had not thought himself obliged in generosity to give her some
consolation; but before he went to do so, he commended the Queens goodness to
her, and thanked her for it in terms that made Roxana see how much he was
interessed in her safety. She was withdrawn to a window with Ptolomeus, where
holding a Handkerchiefe at her eyes, she wiped away the tears her sorrow caused
her to shed, and Oroondates going to her had no sooner opened his mouth to
comfort her, but she prevented him, and looking upon him with eyes which for
all they were watery sources, might have shot fire into any other heart but his:
Remember, said she, that you have received your life from me to day, as well as
I received mine from the Queen, and that you ought not to aggravate my sorrows
by your presence, nor by your discourse, seeing fate has happened contrary to
expectation: As you respect the Gods permit me to avoid them, and it not being
possible for me to hate you, be pleased that I may never see you more. The
Prince was touched a little with these words, and being unwilling to trouble
her, he only said as he retired: It is not my intention, Madame, to redouble
your discontents, nor to disavow the obligation I have to you; I should have
perished had it not been for your assistance, but I am no way insensible of
that good turn, and instead of aggravating your sorrows, I wish I were able
with part of my life to contribute toward your consolation: In the mean while
if my presence be troublesome to you I Will withdraw my self, and if all these
objects be unpleasing, I Will tell you with the Queens permission, that you may
return when you will unto the Palace, and take your Lodging there again, with
all the liberty, and all the Authority you were wont to have. The Queen
confirmed this offer of the Princes with words full of civility to Roxana, and
that afflicted Lady desiring nothing so much as retirement, and solitariness,
accepted the favor that was done her, and after having given the Queen thanks
for it, went out of the Chamber, and so out of the House, under the conduct of
P^olomeus, who took the care to wait upon her* She was but newly gone away when
Prince Artaxerxes, Lysimachus, Seleucus, the fair Thalestris, Orontes, and
Demetrius came in together. At sight of that dear Brother the Great Princesses
of Persia ran to him quite transported, and throwing themselves into his Arms
bedewed his face with tears, which a tender affection drew from their lovely
eyes immediately. After having bewailed him eight whole years, during which all
the accidents of their lives, had scarce been able to divert them now and them
from the sorrow they had felt for his supposed death, they had recovered him
contrary to all their hopes, and though they saw him divested of the Titles he
had lost with his Fathers Empire, they considered him as a Prince of as fair a
Reputation as any in the World, and one whose gallant Actions might repair his
losses with advantage. At their former encounter, when upon the banks of
Euphrates he had rescued the Queen out of Perdiccas his hands, and fought
against his men for the liberty of Parisatis, the Queen had had the happiness
to embrace him, and to enjoy his conversation a few moments, but Parisatis had
not seen his face till then, and 'twas only by the Queens discourse and the
relation of Oroondates that she had learnt he was alive, and heard some part of
his adventures; wherefore she now engrossed him from the Queen, and held him in
her arms so long as if she meant to repair that disadvantage.

None of the Company could behold the illustrious family of Darius in that
condition without an extraordinary tenderness, nor was there one of all those
that were present but appeared most sensibly concerned in that alteration of
their fortune. The Queen was hardly gotten loose from her Brothers arms, when
with astonishment she saw her self in the chase of an armed man, who embracing
and kissing her, surprised her and made her blush at his familiarity; but
Prince Oroondates took away her scruples, by making known that warrior to be
the fair Amazone Queen, whose sex allowed her privileges that were denied unto
her habit. The Queen was not ignorant of Thalestriss's reputation, and having
heard she fought her quarrel, had bred a very great affection toward her,
wherefore she then gave all the testimonies of it that could be desired; and
after having held her long between her arms, she praised her virtue, and
returned thanks for the assistance wherewith she had favored her, in such noble
and obliging terms, that she instantly won the heart of the fair Amazone, and
made her to approve of all those pains Oroondates had undergone for a Princess
so worthy of his affection. Oro^tes whom the Prince of Scithia presented to the
Queen, was received by her with those kindnesses that were due to his virtue,
and to his near alliance to Oroondates; and the Queen could not remember that
name of Orontes, under which her Prince had lived so long in her Fathers Court,
without calling to mind the former actions of his life. When these persons who
were before unknown, had received from the two Princesses what they believed
their due after that knowledge, they turned all together toward Seleucus, and
called him their Deliverer, with acclamations full of acknowledgement.
Oroondates offered him his life, which he confessed he owed to him; the Queen
and the Princess her sister professed themselves indebted to him for theirs,
Artaxerxes interessed by the safety of his dear brother, and by that of his
dear sisters, and Lysimachus by that of his Princess, could not worthily
enough express their sense of so high an obligation, and all of them extold it,
and the virtue of their defender, with praises which his modesty could not
suffer. He disingaged himself as well as possibly he could from those
civilities wherewith he was in a manner overwhelmed, and desirous to stop the
current of them; Nearchus and I, said he* have done nothing to which we were
not too powerfully obliged; the usage we had received from our friends and from
our enemies, did with a great deal of justice make them change those qualities
in our opinions, and unless we would have been the basest men in the world, we
could not suffer the greatest and most considerable persons of it to perish so
unjustly.

That which gave the liberty of this conversation to those illustrious Princes,
was the confidence they had in their Companions, who in the mean while appeased
the slaughter, pillage, and disorder, and settled all parts of the Town in as
much quietness as could be possible; but that day wherein so many memorable
things had happened, was now ready to give place to darkness, and the Princes
thought not fit that the Queen should stay any longer in that house all full of
blood and of dead bodies. The Palace which was of receipt sufficient to lodge
them all commodiously, though they left Roxana her quartet free, was likewise
in a horrible condition, and while the bodies were removed and the blood washed
away, they resolved to pass that night at Seleucus his house, which was fair
and spacious, and had very convenient lodgings. In the mean time they took care
to fetch the Princesses Berenice, Deidamia, Barsina, and their companions who
had staid in the Camp under the guard of Artabasus and his sons, with six
thousand men, and four thousand Amazones, and the Queen who had a longing
impatience to see them, and who knew what was due to their quality, would needs
have gone to the Gates to meet them, but Prince Oroondates hindered her for
doing that honor to his sister, by representing that in the condition the City
was at that time, it could not but be very incommodious to her, and that she
might lawfully be dispensed with for so great a trouble. Prince Artaxerxes
envying that any other should have the glory to serve Berenice, would by all
means take that employment himself, and went thither accompanied by the Prince
of the Massagetes, and by Demetrius, who gladly did the same office to
Deidamia. The Queen having crossed the streets where she found the same objects
of p^ty she had seen in her own lodging, came to that of Seleucus, and he
paying her those honors he was obliged to in that place, waited upon her with
a great deal of civility to a very fair Chamber, causing others to be made
ready for the Princesses, and for the Princes of Persia and Scithia, being they
also had room enough to lie there without incommodating the Ladies; all the
other Princes went either to their former lodgings, or else to those of their
several friends. The Queen was hardly in her Chamber when she was visited by
Oxyatres, Eumenes, Antigonus, Nearchus, Craterus, Leonatus, and Polyperchon;
she rendered to the Prince her Uncle whatsoever the consideration of his
neerness in blood, of his virtue, and of his services, could require from her
in a like occasion, she received those that came in his company with all the
acknowledgement and civility she owed them, but she forgot not to show the same
sense of her obligation to Nearchus, she had done before to Seleucus, since her
engagement to them both was equal, and in that action Prince Oroondates
seconded her, protesting to Nearchus that for his service he would be ever
ready to lay down that life which he had acquired to himself by having so
valiantly preserved it.

Darkness had already begun to overspread the face of the Earth, when by the
light of many torches, the fair Princess of Scithia under the conduct of her
dear Arsaces, the Princess of Epi^us under that of amorous Demetrius, Barsina
and her Sisters under that of their Father and Brothers, with Cleone and the
other Ladies, came all together to Seleucus his house. The Queen who had notice
of it, went out of her Chamber with the Princess her sister, and met them upon
the top of the stairs; Statira and Berenice were both enflamed with an equal
desire to see the sisters of Oroondates and Artaxerxes; to both these
Princesses their brothers were so dear, that they could not without a most
affectionat impatiency expect the sight of what they loved, and in the persons
of those their brothers loved, they also met the sisters of those they loved
themselves. They found this double satisfaction in that interview, which was
lighted with torches enough to discover their admirable beauty mutually to one
another; it instantly produced a reciprocal effect in the minds of those two
great Princesses, and they beheld each other a good while with an intentiveness
that suspended both their action and their discourse. In Berenices face there
was more sweetness, but more majesty in Statira's: yet in that difference
Statira's majesty was so sweet, and Berenices sweetness, and majestic, that
all the other beauties in the world could not have shown so great a sweetness,
and so great a majesty together. After they had spent some minutes in their
equal astonishment. O Gods! cried Berenice first, how gloriously has my
brother imployd his life? And how happily, added the Queen, did mine recover
his since he recovered it for you? They had not spoak these words e're they
were closely linked in most affectionate embraces, in which they could have
continued whole hours together, if Parisatis as sister to Artaxerxes, had not
claimed her share in Berenice, and if Barsina had not interrupted Berenice to
have her part in the kindnesses of that virtuous Queen whom she so extremely
loved, and to whom she was so dear. They were neither of them frustrated of
their desires, for while Berenice and Parisatis expressed their endearments to
one another as sisters, in whom friendship had been long confirmed, Barsina was
in the Queens arms, who forgot not any thing that could make her see she had
preserved her friendship to her most entirely. Ah my dear Barsina, said she,
and where were you during all these misfortunes wherewith the Gods have
afflicted me since our separtion, and why did you forsake me in a time when
your consolations would have been so sweet? Barsina hearkened to these words
with tears of joy, and was going to make reply, when Deidamia hindered her: The
Queen and her sister rendered to that fair Princess (who was already known to
them by the report of Oroondates) whatsoever was due to her Birth, and to the
merit of her Person, and after her Cleone casting her self at the feet of her
good Mistress was very much made of by her in a most dear and obliging manner;
the Princes of Persia and Scithia, who were present at the actions of their
Sisters, and of their Mistresses, looked on with ravishments of joy, and with
the most perfect satisfactions they had ever wished. But Oroondates whose
captivity had cost Berenice and Barsina so many tears, challenged his place
next after the Princesses, and in the arms of that dear Sister, and of that
dear Friend, received the testimonies of an excessive gladness, which
succeeded a most violent sorrow. It would be hard to repeat all the discourses
which passed at the same time amongst so many fair and illustrious Persons; all
that ever friendship, or civility had at any time suggested, was put in
practice then in that Assembly, and in the end after a contestation full of
mutual respect, the Princess Berenice was const^ained to suffer the Queen to
conduct her to the Lodging that was prepared for her, while Parisatis did the
same to Deidamia. Being come into Berenice's Chamber, these two Princesses fell
afresh into Discourses and Actions, that favored more of an ancient
friendship, then of an affection then taking birth.

But Prince Oroondates seeing them in the condition he had so much desired,
began to think of some light wounds he had received, which did a little pain
him, and being retired privately to his Chamber, he went to bed by the advice
of the Physicians, while Seleucus who was in the like condition did the same;
of all the other Princes, only Craterus and Antigonus were wounded, but their
hurts were very inconsiderable. Those of Oroondates would have disturbed the
joy of the Princesses, if they that searched them had not presently brought
word, that they were neither so dangerous, nor so great as to keep him in bed
above two days. All that good Company passed the Evening in his Chamber, and
there it was that by the counsel of Artaxerxes the Queen was persuaded to
present Theodates to him, and inform him of the King his Father's death. The
Prince of Persia took the same care with Berenice, and though that news plunged
her at first into an extremity of sorrow* it began by little and little to
receive some abatement by that Prince's consolations. Oroondates received
Theodates rather as his Brother then his Subject, and the remembrance of what
he had done for Artaxerxes made his presence so dear to him, that he knew not
how sufficiently to express his affection toward him: But when he asked him
the cause of his coming, the Queen after having prepared him by her discourse
for the news she meant to tell him, did at last acquit her self, of the
Commission the Company had given her. Oroondates was as deeply touched as could
be exspected from so excellent a nature, and the remembrance of the ill usage
he had received from his Father, was not capable to blot out that of his Birth
and Education, nor those Characters of affection which necessity of blood had
engraven in his heart. He wept upon so joyful a day, and made complaints that
mollified those that were least concerned in all the company; but in fine he
had too great a courage to sink under that affliction, after having supported
so many others, too much moderation not to give ear to reason in that action,
and too perfect a resignation to the Queens will to receive her consolations
without effect; when the first violonce of his grief was appeased, that fair
Company leaving him to the care of his faithful Araxes, went out of his
Chamber, and withdrew to their several Lodgings to take the repose that was
necessary for them, after a day of so great toil and danger.

The next morning by the endeavors of Oxyatres, Ptolomeus, Eumenes, Nearchus*
and Polyperchon, all things were fully quieted in Babylon, the Citizens were
settled again in their Houses, the wounded of each party received all needful
assistance, and the dead bodies were carried in a great number of Carts out of
the City to be burnt, except those whom their Kindred or Friends had fetched
away to give them bu^yall. The bodies of Perdiccas, Alcetas, Iolas, Ariston,
and his Son, were taken up with Honor, and among the dead were also found
Neoptolemus. Antigenes, and T^utamus grievously wounded, yet did not the
Chyrurgions despair of their recovery. Cassander, Peucestas, and Andiagoras
were P^isoners, and kept with a strong Guard* The obligation which they who
were most concerned had to Seleucus and Nearchus, had wrought so far upon them,
that they left not only the Princesses, but even all Babylon to their absolute
disposal, and though they with much submission resigned all up to the Queen,
and upon her refusal to the Princes of Persia and Scithia, they pressed it
back upon him so earnestly, that Seleucus was at last constrained to submit
unto their will, rather to ease them of the trouble that care would have
obliged them to, then to draw any advantage by it to himself: Yet did he not
do any thing but by the motion of all the rest; and as for what concerned the
Prisoners, he presently freed Peucestas, whom he had known to be an honest man,
and far from having the ill intentions of those to whom he had adhered.
Andiagoras also had his liberty, yet because he was a Persian, and that without
any reason he had followed the party of strangers against the Children of
Darius, to whom he was born a Subject, and from whom he had received many
preferments* neither the Princes, nor the Princesses would see him, and Arsaces
swore, that as soon as he was in a condition to attempt the recovery of part of
what he had lost he should be the first man whose Territories he would invade.
They promised liberty to Neoptolemus, Antigenes, and Teutamus, as soon as they
should be able to make use of it; but Antigenes and Teutamus by the Queens
command were used like Andiagoras, for having followed Perdic^^s in his
intention to kill Oroondates. Only Castander was still in hold, and the Widow
of Alexander the Great, notwithstanding all her goodness and generosity, could
not handsomely consent he should be set at liberty, after the accusations that
had been cast upon him of having poisoned the King her Husband. Her resentment
was approved by all the World, but by good chance for Cas^ander, Antigonus his
two Soldiers that were his Accusers had been slain before that time, and they
had nothing left against him but conjectures, which were not sufficient to
prove him guilty. This was it that did the more encourage Orontes who had been
his Friend, and upon whose promise he had yielded, to intercede in his behalf:
The Amazone Queen out of compliance used all her power to second him, and they
both of them had so much with those Persons who had greatest interest in the
business, that Seleucus in consideration of his ancient frienship with
Cassander, being joined with them at last in the same request, and having
helped them to solicit those who had too fresh an obl^gation to refuse him
any thing, they in the end obtainned the pardon of that unworthy man, upon
condition he should not come into their ^ight, and that he should depart that
very day from Babylon with all his retinue, not ^^aying a minute in those
Countries where they had any power. Thus did Cassander receive his liberty, and
went from Babylon with this satisfaction, that Oroondates would not take Roxana
from him, and that by the troubles he would raise in Greece, he might bring her
more then ever, into a condition either to desire his friendship, or to fear
his power. In the mean while by the care of Peucestas, and of Seleucus
himself, Perdiccas and his Brother were interred with Honors suitable to
their Quality; but Queen Statira who had not yet had time to pay those Funeral
Rites she owed unto the King her Husband, did then perform them with as many
tears as his Ghost could require from her affection, and with all the pomp
that could be imagined: All the Princes assisted in that solemn action, and
after that memorable Ceremony was over, the Queen took order to have the Body
of that Great King removed according to his last ^ention, and the last commands
he had given, unto the New City of Alexandria, which was under the Dominion of
P^olomeus.

Four or five days were spent in these general employments, which have
diverted us from the recital of particular ones, during which Oroondates was
cured of his wounds, and Babylon was settled again in a condition little
different from that it was in before the siege. The Forces were drawn out of it
by order from the Commanders in Chief, and none kept in the Town but those
that were necessary, the rest marching away toward their several Countries.
Roxana had obtained from the Queen that none should visit her but those she was
desirous to see; and though many would have gone to her out of curiosity, yet
did they bear her so much respect, as not to make her suffer visits which she
would have been troubled to receive, and she had passed that time in a
melancholy and discontented solitariness. When she saw all things peaceable in
Babylon, and that the Queen to whom all the Princes submitted themselves as to
their Sovereign, had time to hearken to her proposition, she entreated
Ptolomeus who had been always very ready to serve her, that he would do her
the favor to speak to her, and know if she would not permit her to retire to
Queen Olimpias her Mother in Law into Macedonia, which of right belonged to the
Child that should be born of her, if it pleased the Gods to let her see that
day.

Ptolomeus made that motion to the Queen, who after she had lent him favorable
attention, and demanded time to ask advice of all the Princes before she gave
her answer. You may tell Roxana, if you please, said she, that I will not
dispute for Macedonia against the child she now goes with by Alexander, and
that I quit all the pretensions to her, which with some appearance I might have
upon that Kingdom; that she may go and take possession of it when she will;
and that in stead of hindering her in that design, we shall be ready to assist
her in whatsoever she shall desire of us; but I could wish she would stay to
lie in here, and that she would not go in a condition wherein she cannot without
a great deal of danger expose her self to so long a journey. Roxana by this
message from Statira, and the care she took of her health, came to a perf^ct
knowledge of her admirable goodness, and absolutely lost all those resentments
she might have had against a Rival that deprived her of all her joy, yet could
she not be persuaded to expect her utmost discontent in Babylon, and the rather
chose to hazard her child's life and her own also, then to stay longer in a
place where she believed she should shortly see Oroondates married to the
Queen. That thought alone made her heart to tremble, and she would certainly
have killed her self, if she had had no other way to avoid that unpleasing
spectacle. She therefore got the Queen to be again i^treated to give way that
she might depart the next morning; whereupon that obliging Princess who was
unwilling to constrain her, sent her word she had full liberty to do what she
pleased her self. Roxana being no longer able to look upon Babylon but with
horror, after having once prayed Ptolomeus to ask the Queen pardon, if the fear
she had to present her self again before her whom she had so cruelly offended,
made her depart without seeing her; and to testify in her behalf that the
sense she had of her goodness, obliged her to wish her all manner of prosperity,
began her journey the day following, and took her way toward Macedonia, under
the conduct of Peucestas and Andiagoras, who would needs wait upon her with
three thousand men that were left of those they had commanded, and two thousand
Macedonians, whom Seleucus permitted to return into their Country.

The last actions of Roxana had caused so general an aversion against her,
that very few were sorry for her departure, and King Oroondates who was better
satisfied with it then all the rest, began to breath with greater liberty. All
things being then settled peaceably in Babylon, 'twas only Love that made war
there; and the wounds which he had given were not heald up like those that had
been received in the late occasions. Oroondates languished in flames at the
Queens feet, not knowing how to be secured against her scruples, after the
cause she had given him to fear them, in all that had befallen him since the
death of Alexander. Arsaces lived in a little better assurance with Berenice,
and was hardly in any doubt at all of establishing his fortune. Lysimachus was
more uncertain by reason of Parisatis's humor, though he began to find by many
signs that she really loved him. Orontes was the best satisfied of them all,
and knowing his fair Queens affection, his impatiency alone caused the greatest
part of his discontents. Oxyatres was as in good hope of Barsina, and finding
no repugnance in the inclinations of that fair Princess, he expected his
felicity with that of his friends, by the assistance he believed they would
afford him. Young Demetrius was the least advanced in his suit, and though by
his services, and by his power to make himself be loved, he had gained much
upon the heart of Deidamia, yet had he not been able to banish the memory of
Agis, which was too deeply rooted in it. Though in the hopes of all these
illustrious Lovers there was some difference, their sufferings yet were equal,
and all of them sighed equally, either through fear, or through desire. Chance
brought them all together one day in the Queens Chamber, with their Princesses,
and it seemed as if it had been for the decision of their fortunes. Oroondates
who could no longer live in his cruel uncertainties, resolved to put them to a
period, and trusting with very good reason to the greatness of his services,
and to the marks of acknowledgement he discovered every day in the Queens
actions, he had a mind to draw a final assurance from her. Artaxerxes and he
were by the Bed side with the Queen and the Princess Berenice; Lysimachus,
Oxyatres, Orontes, and Demetrius, were at the other end of the Room conversing
with their Princesses, when the King of Scithia not being longer able to master
his passion, fell suddenly upon his knees before the Queen. His action was very
unconfident, and never in all the greatest dangers had that fear appeared in
his countenance which then was easily to be seen in it by whosoever observed
him. At length he strove to conquer it, and dispelling all show of it by the
greatness of his courage, he began to speak, fixing his eyes upon her face, but
in so submissive and so dependent a manner, that the Queen did not less
discover the force of his love by that last action, then by the most important
ones of his whole life.

I Go about a business, Madam, said he, which truly I cannot venture upon
without trembling, and that which I have now to beg of you, it so infinitely
above my services, that the memory of them is not able to secure me against my
fears and my distrusts; yet am I forced to make use of them, having nothing
else so powerful to strengthen my pretensions; and if you will pardon me for
it, I Will call to your remembrance that after some light actions which my
fortune in Persia, the Prince your Brother laid the first foundations of it by
his goodness, you approved of them by yours, and the deceased King your Father
established my highest felicity by his: He was pleased to suffer that
Oroondates should be yours, and if I may be permitted to use that term, he
engaged himself by his word to give you to Prince Oroondates; you were
afterward taken from me by the treachery of our enemies, and by the violence
of a Conqueror. I had not, (if I may say so) pulld that misfortune upon my
self by any of my actions, and if I bore it without dying, 'twas because the
Gods had destined me to live still for you: I consented without complaining to
the banishment you ordained me, and if I since returned to you, 'twas not ^ill
according to your own terms, you were in a condition to receive me. Before you
were so, I desired nothing from you, nor did I so much as murmur against that
duty the Enemy you opposed against my happiness. But Madam, may I not now be
suffered to raise my thoughts to what I lost by nothing but my ill fortune, and
may I not look upon my Queen as she whom the Prince her Brother, and whom the
King her Father had given me, nay as she who had given her self unto my love?
Though I cannot be worthy to succeed in the place of Alexander by greatness of
power, by victories, nor by the qualities of my person, may I not supply all
these defects by the greatness of my love, and by my services? May I not
believe with some show of reason, that never man loved better then my self, and
if in my own interest I may speak it with modesty, that never Princess was
better served then Queen Statira has been by Prince Oroondates? All my life is
known to you, all my thoughts are clearly discovered, and it is needless for me
to put you in mind of what the accidents of your life cannot have suffered you
to forget. I have endured all that a man could possibly undergo, and by those
sufferings which have not been the less sensible for being glorious, have I
not some reason to aspire unto the highest pitch of my felicity? Have I not
cause to seek the haven after so many storms wherewith you have seen me tossed
for the space of ten whole years? And is there any thing left for me to do, or
to suffer for my Princess? As you desire the favor of the Gods, (continued he
embracing her knees) consider the miseries of my life with pity, deliver me
out of so many torments, which I bore with patience, while they depended upon
fortune, and not upon your will, and dispose with compassion, of a life which
is now in no other hands but yours alone, and which now no longer depends upon
any thing, but what you shall ordain for its preservation, or destruction.

The Prince as he ended these words, (to which all the Company lent an
attention that diverted them from their own affairs) fixed his eyes upon the
ground, fearing to behold some presage of his misfortune in the Queens face;
She remained for a good while in the like posture, and then if Oroondates was
tortured by his fears, Artaxerxes was not less disquieted then he, and looking
upon his sister with eyes that condemned her irresolution, he sufficiently made
appear how great an interest he took in the happiness of his friend. At last
the Queen lifted up her head, and with a very serious countenance spoke on this
manner.

I Ow too much, Sir, to your services, to lose their remembrance, or ever to
diminish the value of them: if I were capable of such an ingratitude, I were
too worthy of those miseries wherein I have spent my life. I know I am often
indebted to you for my friends, my liberty, my life, and my honor, and that
all that ever the most generous men, and the most faithful, the most
passionate Lovers have undertaken for the persons they have loved, comes
infinitely short of what you have done for me. It is also true that I was
yours, both by the will of my Brother, by that of my Father, and by my own. I
indeed was yours by inclination, and by a most lawful acknowledgement, and
when to my misfortune I ceased to be so, 'twas not out of any inconstancy, or
change of humor, Treachery, and sovereign power took me from you, and when
your innocence was known to me, 'twas only duty that opposed the affection I
had for you. It Is that alone, dear Prince, that represents unto me now, that I
was Wife to the greatest and most fortunate man in the world, I say most
fortunate, because I very well know that nothing but fortune could give any man
an advantage over you. In fine, I was the Wife, and am the Widow of him, who
but a few months since, was master of the greatest part of the Earth. This
consideration ties me to much severer rules, then if I had been in another
condition, and all my engagements to your love, and to your services, cannot
hinder Alexanders Widow from being accused of lightness, if after the loss, and
the so late loss of such a Husband, she can consent to give her self unto
another. All the world that was concerned in his life, and in his death, looks
with another eye upon my actions, then if I were only the Daughter of Darius,
and all the world could not choose but wonder, that I should turn my thoughts
upon any man after the loss of him that extended his Dominion over all others;
of him who by his glory had obscured all those that went before him, and
perhaps all those that shall live after him, and who had seated me in the most
considerable place of the whole Universe.

While the Queen spoke thus, Oroondates his face grew pale, but Artaxerxes was
enflamed with an excessive color, and the different motions of those two
Princes, seemed to precipitate one of them into the grave, and transport the
other into a violent anger and resentment. What sister, (cried the impatient
Artaxerxes) is it with these scruples you mean to repay the services of
Oroondates, and will you kill us both by your ingratitude? It Is I alone will
die (added the King of Scithia with a feeble voice) and I Will die without
complaining, if my Queen pronounce the sentence of my death. You shall not die,
my dear Oroondates, said the Queen falling upon him with open arms, and I my
self will die a great deal rather then give you any reason to accuse me. I
have represented to you all the considerations that might cross the happiness
I wish for you. I have told you what the world would censure in this you desire
of me; but now I tell you that to satisfy what I ow you, and to follow my
inclination, I Will pass over all these maxims, and over all the considerations
of peoples discourse, to give my self wholly to you. I had rather be accounted
light and imprudent, by them that know you not, then faithless and ungrateful
in your opinion. I am yours by too powerful reasons to be ever able to retire,
and would it pleased the Gods that in giving my self to you, I could give you
something more worthy of you, and of your love. I do not wrong the memory of
Alexander by bestowing my self on a successor not inferior to him either in
birth or virtue, and one who might have extended his conquests as far as he, if
his passion for me had not given him other employments, then that of invading
his neighbors territories. Live then with an assurence, (continued she
offering him her hand) not only that Statira will never be another, for that's
a thing whereof you are already certain, but that she will be yours by lawful
ways whenever you shall desire it. This answer was solemnized with an
acclamation of the whole Company, who with an extraordinary joy saw the
conclusion of a fortune in which their own seemed to be involved. Oroondates
could not find words that were able to express the height of his contentment,
and showed it only by embracing the Queens knees, and by doing many other
actions full of transport and ecstasy. His happy success made all the rest to
think at the same time which way they might bring their pains to the like
conclusion. Artaxerxes was not disquieted with any doubt, and having often had
assurance from his Princesses mouth, that she would give her self to him as
soon as the King her Brother should desire it, he was too confident of
Oroondates his friendship, to enter into any distrust of his happiness. And
indeed he then received very potent considerations of it, for the King of
Scithia turning toward him after having spent some time in the expressions of
his joy; Brother, said he, now that by my Queens goodness, and by yours, I have
attained the top of my felicity, I cannot but desire our satisfactions should
be equal, and since you judge my sister worthy of your affections, she shall
be yours the same day the Queen shall vouchsafe to consummate my happiness. I
wish that with her I could restore you the Empires you have lost, but I know
your virtue disdains them, or can recover them by that sword which may make you
aspire to the most glorious conquests; and in the interim dear Brother, give me
leave to resign one half of a reasonable spacious Empire, which the Gods have
left me.

It is equally divided you know, one part in Asia, the other in Europe, and
Mount Imaus makes the separation of them. You if you please shall have the
Asiatique Scithia, where you shall reign with the Authority that I shall have
in Europe; I offer you that as being nea^er to those Countries upon which you
may have some design, and with it I offer you not only all the other, not only
the strength of all my Dominions to assist you for the recovery of yours, but
even the lives of my self, and of all my Subjects, which you may dispose of
with a most absolute power. Oroondates spoke on this manner, and the Prince of
Persia having harkned to him with attention: Brother, replied he, after the
Gift of Berenice, there is no Empire that I can consider, and I prefer my
Princess not only before that which was the King my Fathers, but before the
Monarchy of all the Earth; yet do I not refuse the effect of your generous
Friendship, and if I accept not of that part of your Kingdom which you offer
^e, it is because I shall believe I reign in all places wheresoever my dear
Brother shall command and that I will not possess any thing that can be
separated from your Domi^ion. I Will retire into Scithia with you, and when I
shall have breathed there a while in the felicity you allow me; I Will make use
of those Forces you offer me to reestablish my self, if it be possible, in
part of those Territories that were ours, and to give my Princess a Crown that
may not suffer her to fall beneath her Dignity. I Will begin the War upon the
Parthians, upon the Hircanians, and their Neighbors, and it is on that side I
hope with your assistance, and that of the Gods, to establish a Monarchy over
the Countries our Enemies poss^sse, without pretending to the recovery of those
which Fortune has bestowed upon our Friends. Artaxerxes declaed his intentions
thus, and Oroondates protested to him once more, that if he would not accept of
half his Kingdom, he should have it all, and that he would not exercise any
Authority that should not be common to them both. Lysimachus was then at the
^eet of Parisatis, where by the Queens example he endeavored to draw
assurances of his happiness from her mouth. She had no repugnance in her heart
to grant him them, and she was so much indebted to Lysimachus his services, and
had so great an esteem of him, and even so great an inclination to his Person,
that she could not think of settling her self any way more to her contentment,
but her severe humor had much ado to declare it self, and perhaps she would
not have done it of a long time, if the Queen her Sister, and the Prince her
Brother, who were much obliged to Lysimachus, and who considered him infinitely
had not joined with him, and had not in his favor employed all that interest
which friendship and nearness of blood allowed them with their Sisters.
Parisatis believed she could not err in following the example, and the
counsel of Persons who then had some lawful Authority over her, and giving
Lysimachus her hand, and promised him that she would always be ready to follow
the advice of the Prince her Brother, and of the Queen her Sister. After having
taken this order about Lysimachus his affairs they altogether began to think of
theirs that yet remained. Orontes had no need of their assistance, and he by
promise from his Queen was assured of a felicity which nothing was able to
disturb: He received a most pleasing confirmation of it in that Illustious
Company, and Thalestris freely declared that his happiness should not be
deferred longer then that of his Friends. Oxyatres had no great difficulties to
conquer in Barsina's heart, and that fair Princess remembering his former
services, and considering his h^gh extraction, and the qualities of his person,
was already so far disposed to receive him, that King Oroondates, the Queen,
and Prince Artaxerxes mediating in his behalf. overcame her with as much ease
as they could wish. Only Demetrius believed himself unfortunate amidst the
happiness of all the rest, and when he saw them all contented: Shall I then be
the only miserable man* cried he, and while you all abandon your selves to joy,
shall I alone abandon my self to despair? Cannot the example of so many
virtuous Princesses move unsensible Deidamia? and shall not I vainly have
fought in your behalf against our living Enemies, if the dead make War against
me, and if I am conquered by the dead? Must that which no longer has a being
triumph over me with so great advantages? or must I cease to have a being
mys^lfe, to touch her in my death, in whom during my life I cannot stir up any
sense of pity? Ah! how willingly would I precipitate my self into my Grave,
if I believed that by my death I might render my destiny equal to that of
fortunate Agis, and how freely would I pour forth all my blood, if by it I
could hope to merit the tears of Deidamia? Demetrius spoke on this manner with
so passionate an action, that all the Company was touched with it. Deidamia was
so as well as the rest; and the excellent qualities of that Young Prince had not
wrought so little upon her, but that they had produced a great deal of
affection toward him. She began indeed to love him, but the memory of Agis
fought still against her affection, and even the fear she had of being accused
of inconstancy would not suffer her to declare it. She remained without reply
to Demetriu's words, and keeping her eyes fixed upon the Ground, discovered by
her action that she was unresolved. All the Princesses whom Demetrius had moved
to compassion, and who also desired to advance Deidamia's settlement, came to
her, and represented that she alone ought not to oppose the public rejoicing.
They set before her eyes the little reason she had to persist so obstinately in
her passion for a man that had so long been dead* and who though he were able
to observe her actions in the lower shades, could not complain of her after
having spent three or four years in lamenting continually for his loss* they
told her that in her present condition, being so young as she was, deprived of
her Friends, and of all her Fortune, she could not live in the World without
settling her self some way or other, and they made appear to her, that among
the most potent Princes of the Earth, she could not find any one whose support
was more considerable, or whose Alliance more important for her then that of
Demetrius, who by the power of Antigonus and his own* might not only restore
her to all the Honors she had lost, but recover even that Crown that was
usurped from her little Brother Pyrthus, who being then but three or four years
old, stood in need of the assistance of a powerful Alley to protect him
against his Enemies, as well as of the pity of King Glaucus with whom he was
brought up To all these Arguments those Great Princesses added whatsoever they
thought capable to persuade Deidamia, the Princes endeavored it likewise with
their utmost power, and when she was already shaken, Antigonus being come into
the Chamber, and desiring the contentment of his Son, as much as his own life,
joined his Entreaties to the Reasons of so many Illustrious Mediators, with
such success, that Deidamia not being longer able to defend her self against
so many Adversaries, nor against so many motives which she understood, and
which she could not dispute against without obstinacy, yielded at last either
to love, or to importunity, or to the consideration of her affairs. At a
confession so desired by Demetrius, his joy brake forth with great excess, and
he did many actions which nothing but his youth and passion could excuse.
Deidamia appeared for a good while out of countenance at her change, and begged
pardon for it of Agis with a great many tears, but in the end she was so well
encouraged by the examples, and by the discourses of the Queen and of the
Princesses, that she approved what she had done with a little more confidence
then before, and no longer had any thought of repenting her self. That little
company made up of the greatest persons of the Earth, was then in so perfect a
contentment, that all the words in the World would not be sufficient to
express it, and the six Princes being no longer able to moderate themselves in
their felicity, solicited their Princesses so earnestly, that in the end they
were fain to promise them their happiness should be deferred no longer then
till the next day following. More time would in probability have been requisite
to prepare for those Pompes which seemed due to the Marriages of the Chief
Persons in the World; but their delights were far more solid, and they found
too much conten^ment in the possession of what they desired, to seek for any in
unprofitable Magnificences. Yet was the remnant of that day employed by
Ptolomeus, Seleucus, Antigonus, and the rest of their Friends in necessary
p^^parations, and the young Princes made themselves ready for Courses, and
Combats of pleasure, to which they did not think it fit to call the Elder, and
more Famous Captains.

This remarkable Day which was to be dedicated to so solemn and so memorable
an action, did no sooner begin to appear, but Queen Thalestris got her self
made ready, and taking Horse with Orontes, Ptolomeus, Eumenes, and Hippolita,
she rode to the Amazones quarter, having sent before to Menalippa to draw them
together; when the rest of the Forces were dismissed, they had been kept behind
for the design the Queen intended to effect that day, and she no sooner was
come thither, but she found them all in the readynesse she had commanded: When
she saw she might be heard by all her Women, and that she had prepared them to
give her a quiet audience, she began to explain her intentions to them with a
great deal of Eloquence and Facility. First, she represented to them the shame
and misery of their condition, and with it the error of their Predecessors,
who having thought by the institution of their Laws, to free themselves from
the Tyranny of men, had submitted themselves unto it with infamy, and had
reduced themselves to run after them over all the Earth, and to prostitute
themselves unto them in a most ignominious manner, instead of having preserved
that Empire amongst them, which their Sex in all other places had maintained.
She exaggerated whatsoever was most odious in that Custom, in ^earms that were
capable to make them abhor it, and in spite of that confidence their
institution had bred in them, she made some of them blush at the remembrance of
things which they had done. When she perceived that that discourse which had
always been most odious amongst the Amazones, was hea^kned too with attention,
she excit^d them to take a generous resolution for the recovery of their
Honor, and either to cast off men for ever, or to suffer them only by lawful
means, and such as were approved through all the world. She told them that
their institution had proceeded only from the despair of certain women, not
from any reasonable motive; and that in the condition the affairs of Asia were
reduced to since the death of Alexander, they could no longer hope their
Monarchy should subsist. Then she promised them the alliance of their
neighbors, who would receive them with open arms, (as Eumenes who at that time
was absolute over Cappadocia, and who was present at her discourse to confirm
it to them) and with their alliance an eternal repose in all their families,
and a sweetness in employments more conformable to their sex. She at last
declared how she was resolved to marry Orontes, as well in regard of the
services he had done her, and of the love she bore his person, as of the shame
she had discovered in those Laws to which she would no more submit her self.
Yet did she protest she had undertaken nothing to the prejudice of what she
owed them, and that if by her example they could not oblige themselves to
abolish their customs, she was ready to deliver up the Crown to them, and
retiring with Orontes, into his Country, leave them the liberty of choosing a
Queen* under whom they might live in their ancient Privileges. She said a
great deal more to them which they hearkened to very favorably, and when she
had done speaking they deliberated a good while what resolution they should
take. Some amongst the most zealous of them opposed that alteration, but those
that were less passionate found so much reason in it, and the Queen had
already so well gained the Chief of them, amongst whom she was esteemed as a
person altogether Divine, that her party in the end was found the strongest,
and by little and little the desire of Novelty easily imprinting it self in in
the minds of Women, added to the imagination of many delights which they
fancyed to themselves in that change of life, in a short time drew them all to
yield to her desires. When they were confirmed in that intent, they all cried
out aloud that they would obey their Queen, that they had rather change their
custom by her example, then submit themselves to the Authority of another, and
that they would with joy receive him for their Prince, whom they formerly had
loved and honored as Orithia. The fair Thalestris found marvelous cause of
satisfaction in this event, and after having promised her Women a sweetness
and tranquillity of life very different from that they had enjoyed, she alighted
from her Horse, and embraced them almost every one, with testimonies of a very
tender affection. After that they gave her new assurances of the desire they
had to obey her punctually, and to make all the rest of them that were in
Themiscira follow their example, and when the Queen had settled them in that
determination as firmly as was possible, she returned into the City and before
the Queen and the Princesses were quite dressed, she arrived at the Palace,
where they had all been lodged since Roxana's departure.

That Day the lovely Daughters of Darius having cast off all the grief in
which they long had languished, did also lay aside that mournful color, and
that sad attire which had accompanied their sorrow, and to appear to the eyes
of their illustrious Lovers in the highest splendour of their Beauty, they set
it forth at their request, by all those embellishments which the misfortunes of
their life had made them to neglect. Then Gold and Jewels of inestimable value
glittered with a Magnificence suitable to the Quality of those Great
Princesses, and their Beauty receiving its former luster by those exterior
Ornaments, after having been a long time buried in afflictions, showed it self
like the Sun, when after tedious Storms, and foggy Mists, it breaks forth of
the Cloud that had obscured it, and appears to our eyes again with it usual
brightness. Berenice by reason of the late death of the King her Father,
clothed her self in a much graver habit, but her eyes shot Rays surpassing
those of Diamonds, and her natural dress had far more comeliness then all
that the power of Art could have added to it. Thalestris having quitted her
Martial Apparel, conformed her self to that of her own Sex, and appeared no
less charming in that estate, then she had before been terrible in Battle.
Deidamia and Barsina decked themselves at the entreaty of their Lovers, and
both of them discovered such Beauties, as out of that fair Company could find
no parallells. When all of them were ready to come forth, they were conducted
together to Juno's Temple, where that memorable Ceremony was to be performed,
and where the people flocked with so great a crowd as cost the lives of many
persons. Those that had been the Subjects of Darius, could not behold his Son
and Daughters in that condition without sending forth loud cries and shouts
that pierced the Heavens, accompanied with tears of joy and tenderness, and
whether it were among the Soldiers, or amongst the Citizens, there was a
general rejoicing observed, little different from that of those who were most
concerned. The fair Widow of Alexander was led by Seleucus, Berenice by
Antigonus, Parisatis by Ptolomeus, Thalestris by Eumenes, Deidamia by Craterus,
and Barsina by Leonatus: The six Princes having left that glory to their
Friends, were gone altogether to the Temple before, and had themselves
forgotten nothing in their clothes, that without effeminacy, or a too affected
curiosity, could please the eyes of their admired Princesses. After having
expected them there a few moments, which to their impatience seemed as many
hours, they saw them enter with a Pomp that brought new light into the
Temple. Berenice, Deidamia, and Thalestris as valiant as she was, walked with
more fear and bashfulnesse then their Companions; but the Queen, the Princess
her Sister, and Barsina who had already been in the same condition, went up
toward the Altar with more confidence. Why should this Narration be drawn out
to a greater length? There it was that in the sight of many thousand people,
and in the presence of the Gods, who by Prayers and Sacrifices were called to
behold that action; the greatest Persons in the World of either Sex, were by
the usual Ceremonies joined together with Bonds which could not be untyed,
which never were broken but by death, and which through the whole course of
their lives kept them as closely united as they were that day. There it was
that by such famous and important Nuptials, Virtue saw it self tryumphant over
so many misfortunes that had vainly fought against it, and that seemed to have
crossed it for no other end, but that it might shine forth with more luster and
glory. Those glad and fortunate Bridegrooms having delivered back their Brides
into the hands of those that had led them thither, followed them home again to
the Palace, where all things were most stately and magnificent. O! how tedious
did that day seem to them? and how little pleasure did they find in the Games,
Courses, and Combats which the young Princes made with infinite Pomp to honor
so solemn an Action? The Son of Polyperchon, Menelaus and brave Ilyoneus made
themselves remarkable in them by their dexterity, but after long contestation
'twas young Alexander that bore away the Prize. After the Courses and Combats,
followed most graceful Dances, and admirable Music, and after all those
entertainments came the most delightful, and most glorious Night that ever
was. Never had the brightest day showed any thing comparable to it in the
judgment of O^oondates, and his Companions, and those that might boast to be
most memorable by the winning of battles, and by the conquest of Empires, were
obscure and gloomy in respect of that pleasing darkness which tryumphed over
light with so great an advantage. Then were the greatest Beauties in the World
delivered as a Prey to the passions of the merciless Conquerors, who revenged
themselves for the torments they had made them to endure, with resentments
which for all they were so violent they could not justly disapprove. To say the
truth they were in some sort pardonable, and it was but reason that they whose
sufferings had been so long and cruel, should make themselves equivalent
reparations. Never had the God of Love been present at so solemn a Festival,
and in all the Sacrifices that had been offered to him at Paphos, or at Cythera,
he never had received such honor as he did that Night in Babylon. But I am
afraid to say too much of it, and to go beyond the bounds of respect and
modesty with my Princes, who exceeded them a little that night of liberty. They
without all question thought it a great deal too short, and one might
perchance have doubted in what employments they had passed it, if the blushes
that appeared next morning in the cheeks of Berenice, Thalestris, and
Deidamia, had not given the Company great suspicions. Yet did they pardon their
Lovers the offenses they had committed, by the example of their Companions, who
had born them with more moderation. Those constant fires were not extinguished
of many years, and the love of those virtuous Persons was placed upon too sure
foundations, to find any thing in possession that could abate it; on the
contrary it grew far more ardent by a more perfect knowledge of those Beauties
and rare qualities that had given it birth, and time which ruins all things
had never power to slacken the first violence of their flames.

Many days were spent in these contentments, which cannot possibly be
imagined, and the happy Princes took plentiful draughts of th^se delights
after which they had so long impatiently thirsted. When they had nothing more
to wish, they began to think of retiring. King Oroondates was recalled into
Scithia by his Subjects, and he himself had a desire to go thither that he
might give his Queen the Crown of his Dominions. Arsaces also had a mind to see
those Countries again, where he had passed some years, and where he had so
powerfully gained the peoples hearts: All the other Princes were obliged to
return into their several Provinces, to be crowned themselves in the Kingdoms
which their valor had won, and which Arsaces freely left them in
consideration of the good Offices they had done for him and his* and in the
hope he had to recover others from them that had not merited his friendship.
They all prepared themselves for that separation, but not without a great deal
of trouble to every one of them: Before they went away they thought fit to take
order in what remained to be done, and because Babylon, and all Assyria
belonged to them by the right of Arms, they all offered it to Seleucus, as to
their valiant Deliverer and Benefactor; but he refused it, and protested openly
that not having had any other aim in what he had done, then to succor Virtue
unworthyly oppressed, he would not give his Enemies cause to make an ill
interpretation of his intent, and to judge that he had quitted his Party out of
a shameful interest, and vile hope of recompense. All the World esteemed that
thought to be worthy of Seleucus his Generosity, and when they saw him so firm
in his resolution, that it was impossible to shake him, they altogether cast
their eyes upon Oxyatres, who did not then possess a Territory suitable to the
greatness of his Quality, and pressed it so urgently upon him, that in the end
he was constrained to accept the Sovereignty of Babylon, and there to setle his
abode. Seleucus had Armenia and Mesopotamia, which the death of Phrataphernes
and Archesilaus had left vacant, and because Cylicia was so likewise by the
death of Philotas, all the Princes would needs have Eumenes take it, and give
that part of Cappadocia he possessed, in exchange to Queen Thalestris, leaving
that Kingdom entire to Prince Orontes, who also quitted the Province of the
Massagetes, because it was one of those that composed the Asiatick Scithia,
which King Oroondates had destined for Artaxerxes. After having ordered the
Provinces on this manner, they all prepared for their departure, and when they
had bestowed a few days more in the confirmation of their Alliance, and in the
tears that were shed at that separation, they all of them went from Babylon the
same day. Oroondates, and the Great Arsaces with their Brides, and an Equipage
befitting their Quality, took the way toward Scithia with Lysimachus and
Parisatis, who would accompany them as far as Byzantium* where they were to
keep their Court, it being the Metropolis of Thrace, and where Parisatis hoped
for a great deal of comfort in the Neighborhood of the Queen her Sister,
since their Kingdoms bordered upon one another. Orontes and Thalestris went
toward Cappadocia, which was to obey them totally by the agreement they had
made with Eumenes, who with the fair Arsinoe his Wife kept them company the
greatest part of their Journey. Ptolomeus traveled toward Egypt, which much
desired to receive him: Antigonus and his Son with the fair Deidamia toward
Phrygia* Seleucus marched toward Armenia with Forces to make himself Master
of it, in case he should find any difficulty to be admitted: Nearchus and
Leonatus went home into their own Provinces, and no body remained at Babylon
but Prince Oxyatres, who with his dear Barsina did there establish his
Dominion. Cleonimus and Alcione, with good old Polemon stayed there also with
him, as in their Native Country, and that Prince remembering the request
Berenice and Statira had made to him in favor of that, labored all he could
for their satisfaction, and having taken away those scruples that opposed it
in Alcione's mind; he married her at last to Cleonimus whom he settled in all
the Wealth of Theander, and Bagistanes, and whom for his Virtue (and for the
consideration of Polemon, who had done all his Friends so many good services)
he honored with the most important Offices of his State*

THe Design to which I regularly enough have tied my self not to wander from
the Banks of the Euphrates, and the Walls of Babylon, hinders me from following
my Heroes in their Voyages: I will not therefore relate their fortunate
successes, their arrival in their Kingdoms, and the crowning of so many
Gallant Princes, who established a brave and happy Sovereignty, which they
enjoyed through the whole course of very long and prosperous Raigns. You may
learn the end of their Lives from Historians Famous in Antiquity who have
written them: From me you shall only know that the Great Arsaces stayed not long
in his Brothers Kingdom; but having received such an Army from him as he
desired, he marched into the Province of the Parthians, where he defeated and
killed Andiagoras in a pitched Battle; from thence, when he had made himself
Master of that Province, and had won many other Victories over them that
opposed his Conquests, he subdued Hyrcania, Bactria, Zogdia, the Country of the
Mardes, and a great number of other Provinces, of which he composed that Famous
Empire of the Parthians, which was called the Empire of the East, and which was
the most potent of the World till the time of ^^lius Caesar, under whom it fell
into the power of the Romans; the Founder of it still retained that Great Name
of Arsaces, under which he had gained his first reputation* and that Renowned
Name descended to his Successors, who to render that homage to his Virtue, made
themselves all be called Arsaces, and made the whole World talk of the
illustrious Blood of the Arsacides. He dyed not till he was exceeding old,
having by the report of all Historians, left as great a veneration of his Name
in the East, as that of Alexander amongst the Greeks, of Cyrus amongst the
Persians, or of Rumulus amongst the Romans; they are the very words of the
Historians, though amongst many of them the Birth of that Great Emperor was
not known* Oroondates if he had would might have enlarged his Conquests as far
as his Brother, but he kept himself to the Religious Custom of his Ancestors,
and believed according to their example, that he could not without injustice
divest a Lawful Prince of his Dominions: Yet did he make himself so terrible
in his own, that all his Neighbors trembled at his Name, and desired nothing
so much as his Alliance. He gave himself wholly to the love of his fair Queen,
and that Great Princess for ever laid aside the Name of Statira affected by
the Queens of Persia, and passed the rest of her life under that of Cassandra;
that was it that made Plutarch believe she was killed indeed after the Death of
Alexander, she having lived from that time forward in far Countries, and under
a Name he knew not. That Virtuous Queen and the King her Husband, requited the
affection of Theodates, and that of faithful Araxes, by the Gift of Theomiris
and Cleone, and by that of many Provinces, and places of importance in Scithia;
nor was Criton less rewarded by his Master the Great Arsaces. Lysimachus with
his dear Parisatis, passed his life in so great Glory, that after having
conquered most of the Kingdoms that had been Alexanders, he was slain in the
last Battle that was fought amongst his Successors, being then fourscore years
of Age. The life of Demetrius was so remarkable, that it gave the greatest
Authors of those Times occasion to write it: Macedonia and many other
Kingdoms obeyed him, and little Pyrrhus his Brother in Law being come to years
acquired the reputation of the Valiantest man in all the World. Orontes reigned
very peaceably in Cappadocia with Thalestris, and all the Laws of the Amazones
were so utterly abolished, that there never was any mention of them afterward.
Ptolomeus governed Egypt with so much Glory, that his Name, as that of
Arsaces, remained to his Posterity, and Seleucus made himself so Great, that
before his Death he became the most Potent of all Alexanders Successors.
Cassander still persisted in his Crimes, and his passion for Roxana turned into
so violent a Rage, that in the end he put her to death, with the Son she had by
Alexander, and also Queen Olimpias, the Mother of the Great King. He by their
death usurped Macedonia, and after his Demetrius took it from his Children.
Eumenes perished in the War he had against Antigonus, after having killed his
Enemy Neoptolemus with his own hand, and by many Gallant Victories, acquired
the reputation of one of the greatest Captains in the World. And Prince
Oxyatres passed his life most happily with Barsina. I should perhaps say more
of every one, if all Famous Historians did not amply relate their Actions;
particularly Justin, and Plutarch in the Lives of Pyrrhus, Demetrius, and
Eumenes: If I were not out of my Scene, which I have limited within the
Confines of Babylon, and if it were not just that after such a long winded
piece of Work, I my self should seek that repose which I now have given to
others.

The End of CASSANDRA.
THere is newly published in English an excellent new Romance, called IBRAHIM,
or the Illustrious BASSA. The whole work in four parts, written in French by
Monsieur de SCUDERY; Author of ARTAMENE, or the Grand CYRUS.

LONDON, Printed for HUMPHREY MOSELY, at the Prince's Arms in S. Paul's
Churchyard, WILLIAM BENTLEY, and THOMAS HEATH, in Covent Garden. 1652.

To the Reader.
YOu will have the patience I hope to read these few Lines I am obliged to
add, that I may justify part of those things which I have written. I have
been bound up in many passages of this Conclusion by the truth of History,
though perhaps I have altered it in some places, where it is least known. If I
make Statira and her Sister live again contrary to the report of Plutarch, who
says she was killed by Roxana's cruelty; I have followed the Opinion of many
Historians, and I make her pass the rest of her life in Countries very remote
from ^^ose where she spent her younger years, and under a different name from
that by ^^ich she was known to Plutarch. I well might give Darius a Son without
con^^adicting the Historians that write of Alexander, who only mention his
Daughters; I make him dead in the opinion of the World before Alexander entered
upon his Fathers Territories, he comes thither no more till after his death,
and therefore those Authors might well have been ignorant of Artaxerxes his
life, he having passed it in very far Countries, and under another name, after
he had lost it in the general belief. I with the same license might make him
to be that Great Arsaces, who founded the Empire of the Parthians, and
Historians not ^aving given him any certain birth, have offered me the liberty
to make him be born of Darius: I should undoubtedly have made him recover his
Fathers Empire, if I could have done it without falsifying truths which are
known to all the World, and which have not left me a free disposing of my
Adventures: I should have changed something in the destiny of Roxana and
Cassander, if I might have been permitted, and if I had pardoned Roxana in
consideration of her Sex, I should have killed Cassander to show the punishment
of Vice, as well as the recompense of Virtue; but the rest of his life was too
well known by his crimes, and by his ruling in Greece, I have been freer in
those of perdiccas and his Brother; it is certain they were slain within a while
after Alexanders death, by a Sedition amongst their Forces, and there is so
little spoken of the particulars of their death, that I believed I might
lawfully frame it to my History.

FINIS.

