A TRUE NARRATIVE Of the Particular PROFITS and GAINS Made by ME WILLIAM
LENTHALL, From 164^ during the time I was SPEAKER.



London, Printed in the Year 1660.

HAving seen a Letter, which I may judge comes from a friend, it reciting the
truth of what Losses I have sustained, as well as the Profits I have made: And
perceiving it is more necessary at this time to show the truth of what I have
gained since I was Speaker, to undeceive the many that believe, and relate the
contrary; and which I may hope will in some measure plead my Vindication, that
the Errors I have fallen into were not willingly, but accidentally committed.

When I was first called to be Speaker of the House of Commons, I think it is
known to most that I had a plentiful fortune in Land, and ready money too, a
good sum; and that if I had continued my way of practice, I might as well
have doubled my fortune as got what I did, because the Estate I had then
gained, was the profits of my beginnings, and having lost now twenty years of
the best part of my life, and the greatest of my advantages, it will appear I
have been a greater loser then an improver of my fortunes, by those public
places, I have with so much hazard and danger under-gone.

I received by the last years of my practice, five and twenty hundred pounds
by the year, which I quitted when I was made Speaker; and instead of making any
advantage by that, I added a great charge, keeping a great Retinue and public
Table for two years, which his Majesty taking notice of, gave me six thousand
pound, of which to this day I have not received above the one half.

Immediately after the Office of Master of the Rolls falling by the death of
Sir Charles Caesar, I was admitted Master of the Rolls: but if any one will
look back they will find I could not, as well as I have not made the benefit of
that employment as others my Predecessors had done; not only by reason of the
distractions that then were, but also by reason that the Court of Wards was
thought to be taken away, which yielded a yearly profit to that Office of at
least eight hundred pounds: also the Bishops either for their Creation,
Translation or Restitution to their Temporalties, paying a fee of a hundred
pounds, which one year with another made five hundred pound profit. Then there
was taken away from me the Fines on Original Writs, which in truth was all that
was left of advantage to the Office; and by the loss of these fees upon the
Wardships, Bishops and Fines on Originalls, there was two and twenty hundred
pounds yearly taken from the profits of the Place.

But that which makes the greatest noise, and reflects on me to my greatest
prejudice, is the Gains I should make by being Speaker; when there is due
only to the Speaker five pound per diem, as a standing fee, and five pound on
every private Bill; it is true both Houses were pleased to add five pound upon
the Composition of Delinquents. As for the five pound a day, from my first
sitting to my last I never received one farthing of it: As for private Bills
their profit was very inconsiderable, and so it will appear, is that of the
five pound upon Pardons, I having not made by both of them two and twenty
hundred and twenty pounds: and this will most evidently appear, because I am
checked by the Journall Books of the House, where every private Bill is
entered, and so was every Pardon; as also by the Sergeant that attends the
House, and the Clarks, they having a fee also where I have one, and receiving
what I had from their hands; and certainly if my gains should be so great,
theirs could could not have been so mean, especially the Clarks, who have a
profit out of Orders, which the Speaker has not; and yet there was one of them
that served in the time of my greatest Gains, and as able a Person as has
executed that Employment, whose Condition was such, that the Charity of his
friends contributed to the expenses of his Funeral.

Other places I executed for some short time, but I think rather from necessity
than choice, for there was no one would undertake the execution of them without
some other recompense than their fees: As I was one of the Commissioners of the
Great Seal, which how unwillingly I received, will appear by my sudden putting
of it off, and where none has since executed it without a Salary. I was also
Chancellor of the Duchy, but had only my labor for my pains, and as soon
discharged my self of it.

I never had any recompense from the House in money, land, or by other reward,
and from 1648. to the last time that I sat, I never received any profit by Fee
or otherwise from them.

And, because the truth may fully appear, and I may apply a cure to those
wounds uncertain Relation has given me, I will here following set forth to the
view of all, what my Estate is both Real and Personal.

In Real Estate I have not above Eight hundred pounds by the year, on the Rack
rent to my use. The residue of my Estate I formerly settled on my Son in
marriage, and is in his possession, and on the Rack rent is not above Eight
hundred pounds per annum. This all my Real Estate.

My Personal Estate in Money, Jewels, Plate, Houshold-furniture and Debts, is
not above two thousand pounds, and of this I owe Eight hundred pounds.

There is a Widow, one Mrs. Staveley, that diverse years since made use of my
name in putting out Four hundred pound upon the security of the Excize, but she
constantly receives the Proceed thereof, and the Money is her own.

This is a true and impartial particular of my Estate Real and Personal, and
whatsoever I have besides, or any one to my use, or in trust for me, I freely
relinquish, renounce and disclaim, and shall willingly part with it, and
confirm it to any who shall discover it.

I shall only add for the satisfaction of those who may doubt the truth
hereof, that I never lent nor put out any money, nor any one for me in my name
or in trust for me, or to my use, upon Interest, or upon Morgages of Lands, or
any Security whatsoever, whereby or whereupon I might, did, or could receive
any Interest or recompense for my Money.

And I am ready to attest the truth of this upon my Oath.

June 25. 1660.
FINIS.

