AN Historical Account OF THE DIVISIONS IN POLAND: From the DEATH of K. JOHN
SOBIESKI, To the Settlement of the Present KING on the THRONE.

CONTAINING A Particular Relation of the Late KING's Death, and of all the
Intrigues of the several Candidates, till the Coronation of the Elector of
Saxony. Translated from the French Original.

Written by M. de la Biazdiere.

LONDON, Printed for H. Rhodes, at the Star near Fleet-Bridge; T. Bennet, at
the Half Moon in St. Paul's Churchyard; A. Bell, at the Cross-Keys and Bible
in Cornhill; and D. Midwinter and T. Leigh, at the Roseand Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, MDCC.

TO THE READER.
THis Work is a Continuation of the History of the Diets of Poland, that was
Published in 1697.

The Poles engaged the Author to write this Second Relation, and sent him
according to Promise, all Necessary Instructions. The Sincerity that appears in
their Memoirs is such as an Historian would wish for, to enable him to give an
Account of a Transaction, of which all the Circumstances are almost unknown to
the Public.

Poland may be looked upon as the most famous Theater of Europe for Variety of
Scenes. Persons of the most refined Wits were the Actors in this Affair; and
whilst the Princes of Christendom were at War every where else, it would seem
they reserved Poland for a place of Intrigue.

The Polish Nobility being as Zealous for their Religion as Jealous of their
Liberty, had not hitherto suffered any thing to escape them that Humane
Prudence could suggest, for maintaining themselves in the Possession of their
Right, which they had enjoyed Time out of Mind, to choose their Sovereign: They
had preserved this Right, whilst other Nations had lost it. This Valorous
Nation had also signalized themselves by their Courage, and won almost as many
Battles as they had Fought. In short, the Poles seemed to have surpassed the
Generosity of the Ancient Romans, in the most innocent State of their
Republic, because the Latter made War merely to extend the Limits of their
Empires, and the Former had often neglected or despised the Fruits of their
Victory, like those first Conquerors of whom 'twas said, Contenti Victoria,
Imperio Abstinebant.

The Poles had a way of making Conquests peculiar to themselves. The Mildness
of their Government made other People wish to be partakers of the same Laws.
The famous Jagellon having embraced the Christian Religion, by that Means
became K. of Poland, to which he reunited Lithuania, whereof he was Apostle as
well as Sovereign.

His Posterity governed that State till the Death of Sigismund Augustus, who
dyed at the Castle of Knichin in Lithuania, in 1572. It was in the Person of
that Prince, that this Illustrious Family was extinguished.

Henry de Valois who succeeded him the next Year, Reigned too short a while in
Poland to be regretted there.

Stephen Battori, who mounted the Throne next, comforted the Poles for all the
Losses they had Sustained, but by a new Misfortune greater than those that had
gone before that Prince, left no Children, and by his Death deprived Poland of
the Hopes of finding a Successor equal to himself.

The Eldest Branch of Vasa did by the Election of Sigismund III, Quit the
Throne of Sweden to mount that of Poland, and the Alliance of these two Great
Monarchies became a Subject of War, which made the Poles lose the Conquests
they had made in the preceding Reign.

Uladislaus Son to Sigismund, gave his Subjects cause to hope that he might
repair those Disgraces by his Valor and Conduct, but the Misfortune with which
they were overwhelmed after his Death, by the Revolt of the Cosacks, and the
War with Sweden, deprived the Poles of all hopes of Remedy for their incurable
Maladies.

The Mighty Courage of K. Casimir, gave his Subjects time to come to themselves
a little. Hereby that Prince found a Way to allay that Distemper that he could
not perfectly Cure, but by his Abdication he involved the Kingdom in New
Misfortunes.

K. Michael who succeeded him, lost Caminiec and Podolia: It was then the Poles
began to fear the Loss of their Kingdom, but Providence not designing its
Ruin, did by the Death of that Prince deliver the Poles and all Europe from a
danger which they had so much cause to Apprehend.

The Defeat of the Turks at Choczin and the Election of John Sobieski, raised
the Courage of the Poles, who believed that under the Conduct of so Great a
Prince they could not be Unfortunate. Their Thoughts were Just. That Prince
saved Vienna and the Empire, and by that Great Action made his Subjects look
upon all that he had done for them as nothing.

His Insensibility of their Condition joined with one Mistake, was the Cause or
Pretext at least that they made use of, to deprive his Posterity of the Crown,
which the Custom of the Nation seemed to have assured them of; but that Custom
was abolished, and after his Death his Family was Excluded. Their Resentments
have carried them further. The Aversion they entertained for the Memory of that
Prince made them renounce their own Interests, and the Blindness of that Nation
became so excessively Great, that they could not see their own Ruin before
them, though they had carefully avoided the same ever since the Foundation of
their Monarchy.

The Hatred they always entertained, for the Germans, made them in 1386, prefer
Jagellon D. of Lithuania, to William D. of Austria. Sigismund Marquis of
Brandenburg was excluded from the Succession at the same time, and on the same
Account. The other German Princes that offered themselves to the Poles since
the Death of Sigismund Augustus, had no better Success. And if Ernest, the two
Maximilians of Austria, and so many other German Princes had not been excluded,
it might have been said that the Poles loved their Money, as much as they hated
their Persons.

So many and such repeated Denials did not baulk the Germans, they always
presented themselves as Candidates when ever an Interregnum happened, and
Poland which in 1621 was not in the least afraid of an Army of 200000 Turks,
was daunted in 1697, by 12000 Saxons. This is a Mystery that is not easy to be
unfolded. The Polish Memoirs which afforded us the Subject Matter of what
follows will illustrate abundance of things. The Reader may blame the Conduct
of that Nation, and at the same time commend their Sincerity.

The Affairs of this Kingdom are at present in a deplorable State. But the
Poles have Piety and Courage. They may perhaps put on Resolutions agreeable to
their Genius. They came formerly to seek one of their Kings in the Abbey of
Cluny, whither he had retired; they may find this at the Court of France, if
the Peace continue long enough to prevent his being employed, in commanding the
Armies of that Crown.

ADVERTISEMENT.
IT was thought fit for to publish this part of the Secret History of Poland
first: There is in the Press, and will speedily follow the Secret Memoirs of
Poland, etc. during the Reign of John Sobieski III. which will complete the
Secret History of Poland from the beginning of that Prince's Reign, to the Time
that the Elector of Saxony their present Sovereign mounted the Throne. It
contains abundance of Original Letters, writ by the Emperor, K. of Poland,
Senate of Venice, D. of Lorrain, Count Teckley, and other Great Persons and
Generals, during the Campaign of Vienna; discovers many Intrigues of those
Courts, and others not hitherto made public, and contains Geographical Remarks
on Poland, Hungary, Germany, etc. no less pleasant than profitable to the
Reader.

AN Historical Account OF THE DIVISIONS IN POLAND, From the Death of King JOHN
SOBIESKI, To the Settlement of the Present King on the Throne, etc.
THE Death of any Prince is always attended with a Change in the State. That of
his Polish Majesty made but little Impression on the Republic; they forgot his
Merit, which they supposed to have received a sufficient Reward; and his
Subjects, who ought to have been affected with the Loss of their Sovereign, to
applaud his Piety, and to esteem his Valor, had their Eyes fixed on one single
Fault, which had tarnished his other excellent Qualifications. They excused it
in the Person of Sobieski, Grand Marshal and Great General of the Crown, but
could not pardon it in John III. King of Poland.

It was his Opinion, That, in order to ensure the Crown to his Family, it was
requisite to make himself Master of large Treasures which being distributed
just at the time of Election, might gain his Son those Votes which he had
acquired by his great Actions. Had he been as good a Politician as he was a
Commander, he would have followed another sort of a Conduct; he would have left
less Money and more Friends to his Family; who are more useful for the carrying
on of great Designs.

The States of Poland, which after the Defeat of the Turks at Choczin, had seen
their General make his Appearance at the Diet of Election with a Magnificence
worthy of a King, thought fit to reward the Virtue of a Gentleman who seemed to
have been born to wear a Crown. They granted to his Merit what they refused to
the Birth, Promises and Intrigues of so many Princes who were his Competitors.
He had the Glory of carrying the Day from them all, and dyed in Hopes that the
Prince Royal his Son would have been Heir to his Fortune. He imagined, that he
had taken all the Precautions, that Humane Prudence could direct, without
considering, that this has often failed those who thought themselves to be the
wisest of Men, and that it is Divine Providence, which disposes of the Crowns,
as it thinks fit.

After the King had taken such Measures, which were as false as he esteemed
them safe; he left the Execution of them to the Queen his Consort, a Princess
of a Genius far above those of her Sex, and yet such as had its Faults. She was
for making more of the Post she was in, than the King desired, and had the
Satisfaction for two and twenty Years together to see her Designs succeed,
which have since raised such Regrets in her, as will last while she lives.

Her first Project was to preserve the King's Health, and to prolong a Life,
that was so precious to her. A Jew of Casal named Jonas was then in Poland, and
passed for a learned Man among those of his Religion, and had neglected Trade
and Usury, which are so alluring to the Men of that Sect, that he might wholly
apply himself to the Study of Physic. The Queen made this Man his Majesty's
Physician in Ordinary, whose Reputation was established and soon after
increased, more perhaps by the good Constitution of the King, than by the Art
or Skill of the Doctor.

The Success of Dr. Jonas drew a great many Jews to him, in hopes of having a
share in his Favor. Among the rest he introduced one into the Queen's
Acquaintance, who may be looked upon as one of the Occasions of the Misfortunes
of her and her whole Family.

This Jew's Name was Bethsal, born in Russia, and had no other Qualification
but what the Jews are all endowed with; but understood his Talent so well, that
even whilst he practiced Usury with the utmost Rigor, he had the Address of
appearing Magnificent and Disinterested. This Man waited upon the Queen, whose
blind side every one was acquainted with. He brought his Recommendation along
with him, being resolved to throw away a considerable Sum of Money, which he
foresaw he should make up again in a little time. He proposed to take the
King's Lands by Lease, and offered one third for them above their real Value.
His Proposal was very well received, and they engaged him to take his Majesty's
other Demeans, which he accepted of upon the same Conditions.

The King seemed so well satisfied with his Conduct that he began to bestow
several Favors at his Request. They waited upon Bethsal to buy those Offices
that were vacant, and he who bad most was always looked upon as best qualified.
This buying and selling of Offices was not at first publicly known; those who
could not get into any, imagined that this Jew was the Opposer of their
Fortunes, and resolved to assassinate him. But his Prudence prevented the
Effects of the Public Odium, he maintained thirty Poles for his Guard, and
paid them so well, that he preserved a Life against which, had not their
Interest interposed, they would perhaps have been the first that would have
made any Attempt.

Bethsal looked upon himself rather as a Minister of State, than a Farmer of
the Kings Revenue. All Offices, several Starostas and other Dignities, that
rose not so high as Palatins and other great Dignities of the Crown, were
distributed to none but those who made their Application to, and bargain with
him. The Poles cried shame on their Prince's Blindness, and the Author of this
so vile a Mismanagement. On the contrary, the Jews looked upon Bethsal as
another Mordecai, and Sobieski a second Ahasuerus.

The K. of Poland could not be ignorant of the Artifice of this Man on whom he
had too much relied. The Poles to this Day accuse him of having heaped up so
much Treasure, by the Sale of Offices, and such a Conduct so full of
Self-Interest has made his Memory to stink among them. He had the Misfortune,
during his Life, never to be acquainted with the odiousness of this buying and
selling of Places, and this Disgrace happened to him by a Fate incident to
Princes of having too many Flatterers, but no True Friends about them.

The Poles, whilst the King was living, could not dissemble their hatred to
Bethsal; whom they accused of Extortion and Sacrilege. The first Crime was
easy to prove; He was convicted of the second by all those who had entered
Foreign Merchandises into the Kingdom. This Jew who had farmed the Customs
caused the Merchants to appear before him, presented a Crucifix to them, and
after he had made them worship it, took an Oath of them that they had not been
guilty of any Fraud: Afterward he threw that precious Image into the nastiest
Place of his Office; and by this Profanation incensed the rest of Poland
against him. The Diet which met at Grodno in the Year 1692. were for taking
away his Life. The Bishops thought nothing but Fire could expiate his Crimes;
most of the Lords meditated another sort of Death, and all they disagreed about
was the manner of his Punishment. The King who sits as President, is not
obliged to pronounce Sentence, according to the Plurality of Voices, but such
an Action would have been resented in such a Juncture as this. The Prince
therefore without making use of his Authority, was for making up the business
calmly, and declared that the Evidence did not appear sufficient. Thus the
Affair stood undetermined, the Accused lost his Credit, but his Master saved
his Life. This Indulgence was attributed to another Motive than that of
Clemency. Bethsal had managed his Affairs so ill, that he stood indebted to the
King for above 400000 Livres. It was thought the King would give him time to
pay it off, but the Jew died insolvable in 1695. and the King survived him but
one year. The Poles, who saw that the Death of the Prince and his Farmer
rendered their Complaints and Revenge useless, turned all their Resentments for
the future against the Queen and her Family.

In this Condition was the Royal Family, and the Kingdom it self was in as bad
a State. The Turks had taken Caminiec, under the former. Reign; Sobieski was
obliged by his Pacta Conventa to make amends for this Loss as well as for
others, which Poland had suffered for a Century last past, and which had so far
lessened its force, that every Body wished for that happy turn, without
expecting it. The new King seemed to have altered his Inclination by the Change
of his Circumstances: The Turks remained in quiet Possession of Podolia, and he
never put himself into a Posture of dispossessing them. This Coldness in the
King lessened his Reputation, and it was thought that the Acquiring of a Crown
had taken off the edge of his Courage. The Importunities of Innocent XI. and
those Intrigues that all the World know, reanimated this Prince, and roused up
his former Vigor. The Authority of the Pope prevailed upon him to relieve
Vienna, and at his Instances he saved the Capital City of the Empire, and at
the same time retrieved his former Reputation.

Poland was therein Hopes that its King would undertake as much for that
Republic, as he had done for a Neighbor Prince; and this Action had enhaunced
the Esteem which they formerly had of his Valor and Conduct. The Campagnes he
made in Budziac, Moldavia and Valachia, wherein he took Jassii, Campo-longo,
Soczawa, Niemiek and Soroka, together with the Relief of Vienna upheld his
Reputation. But the Distempers with which he was troubled the three last Years
of his Reign hindered him from pursuing his Conquests. The Turks and Tartars
took care to keep fair with him; and though they desired Peace, which would not
be granted them, yet they made no considerable Attempt against Poland; looking
upon the King as in a deep Lethargy, out of which they thought it not advisable
to rouse him.

They looked upon him as a Lion, of which other Animals are afraid, even whilst
he sleeps. The Terror with which he had struck them was not taken off but by
his Death, which happened after two Fits of an Apoplexy, June 17. 1699. at
Villa Nova, near Warsaw.

It is hard to say whether the News of his Death was more pleasing to his
Enemies, than indifferent to his Subjests. The former raised several Commotions
in the Kingdom capable of making it too sensible of the Loss of their Prince;
and the latter testified so much Aversion to his Memory and Family, that in
several Parts of Poland they resolved to seize upon the Estate he had left. It
was feared that those Resentments proceeding from the Hopes of a considerable
gain, would have had dangerous consequences. Potoski Grand Huntsman of the
Crown went to Zolkiew to take possession in the Name of Prince James of the
Treasures which the King had left in that place. But forasmuch as this
Officer's Intention was not known, and it was uncertain whether he designed to
advance his own Interest, or that of the Royal Family, the Great General clapped
his Seal upon it, and two hundred Men as a Garrison. This disappointed those
who would have taken an Advantage of the public Disturbances, they had
resolved to seize upon the King's Treasures, but those precautions prevented
them. But because they could not gratify their Avarice, they were enraged and
would have prosecuted their Rage, if the Dignity of the Person to whom they
applied themselves, had not put Bounds to their Passion.

The Queen and the three Princes went to Zolkiew to divide the King's Estate
among them. The Cardinal d'Arquien the Queen's Father, who was going thither,
was not above three Leagues off the Place, when several Gentlemen of the
Country, through which he passed, fell foul upon his Retinue, who put
themselves into a Posture of Defense, and after they had killed and wounded
some of them, put the rest to flight. The Opposition which the Aggressors met
with raised their Spleen, and to be revenged for the Blood of their Comrades,
they called together the Inhabitants of their Neighborhood to the Number of
three hundred. But as soon as they were sensible of the Quality of the Person
for whom the others had so little Respect, they soon drew off. The Cardinal,
who had other Cares upon him than to demand Satisfaction for his Assault, did
not think it proper to complain of the Affront, which he judged to be
sufficiently made up, and the Criminals were only concerned to heal their
Wounds.

This Insult was a sufficient Demonstration of the ill Will that the Poles bore
to the Royal Family, which met with so many Affronts afterward, that they
quite forgot all the former Injuries.

Cardinal Michael Radzieiowski; Arch Bishop of Gnesna, and Primate of Poland,
was absent when the King died. He came to Warsaw, took upon him the
Administration of the Government; and in the Senate it was resolved to call a
Diet on the twenty eighth Day of August, which Diet was to precede that of the
Election.

During this Inter-regnum the Preliminary Diets were convened, in which nothing
was determined. All their Heats were about the Succession of the King, and
because the Pacta Conventa were not executed, most of 'em were for having the
Queen, the Princes, the Foreign Ministers; and particularly the French
Ambassador, who had too great a Correspondence with her Polish Majesty, to
withdraw: That the Election of the King should be made by an universal
Convocation of the Nobles, which is what the Poles call Postpolite, and that a
Piasto should be excluded. The others, though few in Number, were for leaving
the Queen at her Liberty. Every one for maintaining his Sentiments, few Reasons
were alleged, but many Sabres drawn in the Quarrel.

The Preliminary Diet was opened the 29th of August, and the Cardinal Primate
said Mass. They had a great many Heats about the Choice of a Marshal or
Speaker, which were at last happily accommodated by the Election of Humiecki
Stolnik of Podolia, one more considerable by his Merits, and the Interest of
his Uncle, who was Palatin of Kiowia, than by his Dignity. This new Officer
explained at first the Authority from which he derived his Commission; he
examined the Powers of the Deputies, and declared, that the Deputy of Cracow
ought not to sit in the Diet, since he had abused a Gentleman, who had prefered
his Complaints against him. The whole Gentry were concerned in that rigorous
Proceeding, and to testify their Approbation of it, they drew up an Order in
Form of Law, That the Deputies against whom any Accusations were brought,
should not have any active Vote in the Diet, till they had cleared themselves.
The Marshal and the Deputies went afterward to the Senators Chamber, to return
them Thanks, for the Care they had taken of the Republic during the
Inter-regnum. The Cardinal represented to them, that since they were all
Members of the same Republic, it was their Common Interest to take all
necessary Precautions for the Welfare of the Kingdom: That this consisted in
providing for the due Regulation of the Coin, which was so far adulterated,
that Trade was quite ruined by it: That the Armies should be paid off, to put
them in a Posture of opposing the Turks and Tartars, who to be sure would make
their Advantages of this Juncture: That the most necessary Order for the
present was to issue out Articles concerning the Election of a King, and to
consider how and when it should be made; but above all they should avoid the
Abuses which were introduced into the two former Elections: That the Election
of King Michael was tumultuary; and that of the late K. carried on by Deputies;
that the smallness of the number should have produced Tranquillity in the State;
but on the contrary, that the Candidates by their large Bribes (a Shame to any
Nation!) had bought Votes: That it was for the Honor of Poland to avoid at
this time so many Inconveniences: That since their Business was to provide
such a Head for the Republic as might restore it to its former Splendour, their
Duty obliged them to make Choice of him, who was the most worthy among the
Competitors: That he conjured them to remember, that the Crown was given, and
had never been sold.

Whilst the Cardinal was giving them these wholesome Counsels, News was brought,
that the Tartars had made an Incursion into the Parts about Zolkiew; that after
they had carried off a great many Slaves and Heads of Cattle, they had set Fire
to the Corn; and that the Harvest was quite spoiled. Upon the Neck of this came
another Piece of News of more dangerous Consequence than the former, since it
put the Republic out of a Condition of revenging those Acts of Hostility,
committed by those Infidels.

The Army of the Crown was in Confederacy, under a Pretense, that for several
Years last past they had received no pay. If this had been the only Reason, the
Diet would have used their utmost Endeavors to have satisfied the Army, and
the Breach would not have been remediless. It was perceived that they had other
Motives, the difficulty was to penetrate a Mystery, which the Power of the
Authors of it kept from being searched to the Bottom.

Boguslas Baronowski had been elected Chief or Marshal of this Confederacy,
which a Kingdom less indulgent than that of Poland would call a Revolt. He is
of the District of Gzersk in the Palatinat of Mazovia, betwixt thirty and forty
Years old. An Archbishop of Gnesna of the same Name, had rendered his Family
illustrious: His Nobility made him considerable, and stood him instead of
Wealth and Merit; his Boldness and the Talent he had of speaking in Public,
made him looked upon as a proper Instrument for carrying on the Ambition of
those who employed him. They found in him all those Qualities, that they could
wish in a Man, whom they would choose for the promoting of a rash Enterprise.
That Avarice which he had for Riches rendered him insensible, and kept him from
foreseeing the Disasters which might afterward happen to him. He considered
Poverty as the greatest of Evils; and thought it more eligible to run the
risque of a shameful Death, than to lead a Life of Misery.

He was a Hussar belonging to the Company of Lancers, commanded by Prince
Joseph Lubormiski, the Under Marshal of the Crown. That small Estate which his
Father left him was almost spent the very first Campaign. A Woman whom he had
married, more out of Necessity than Inclination, helped to keep him in his
Employment, and to continue in the Service: The Portion she had brought him was
soon squandred away, through Mismanagement, which is a common Thing among Men of
the Sword, and Baranowski was without Supplies, when the Army demanded their
Pay. He was the loudest of any, and declared, that it was a shame to suffer so
many brave Souls to perish; that since the Republic set so slight a Price upon
their Lives, which they had hazarded so often in its Service, they ought to
take Care of themselves, and what they should hereafter do, would justify
their Conduct: That it was no hard Matter to get themselves paid; That the
Turks and Tartars had carried off so great a Booty, a Part of which would have
been enough to have cleared the Debts of the Government; that they ought to
have seized upon it at first, which would have preserved the Estates of the
Public, by employing them in the Discharge of its Debts; and that by this
means they might have prevented the Enemy from being the better by it.

Among Mutineers the most insolent always pass for the ablest Men. Baranowski
had no sooner ended his fine Speech, but they unanimously chose him for their
Leader, and each of them engaged to obey his Orders. The first thing he did was
to raise Contributions, and sent Deputies to the Diet, to demand what was due
to the Army. They were admitted to Audience, and spoke so insolently that they
seemed to be rather Heralds, who denounced War, than Subjects who preferred
their Remonstrances.

This insolent Behavior made them believe that Baranowski was supported
underhand, the Suspicion fell upon those, who might be supposed to take an
Advantage of the Revolt. The Law of Nations would not allow 'em to dismiss the
Ministers of Foreign Princes. By the Law the Candidates and their Relations
ought to be absent during the Sitting of the Diet. The three Princes of the
Blood were withdrawn; but the Queen kept still at Warsaw, where her Presence
was neither necessary nor approved of. The Cardinal had represented to her the
Wrong she did her Family by staying, but she would not hearken to any of his
Arguments. On the 10th of September that Matter came under Debate. The Marshal
of the Diet made a Speech in the Senate, and spoke by an innuendo against the
Interests of that Princess, with so much warmth, that the Cardinal who had too
openly declared himself in her Favor, thought himself obliged to interrupt
him. This seemed so much the greater an Affront to the Marshal, because the Law
forbids such Interruptions. He had said, that they ought, Mediam tenere viam
inter praefractam contumaciam and deforme obsequium. The Primat had desired him
to explain what he meant by those Words, and Hamiecki asked him the reason of
the Affront which in his Person he had offered to the whole Body of Gentry. The
Deputies took his Part, and being of the Mind, that the Queen should withdraw
during the Sitting of the Diet, they most of 'em went out, and were followed by
the greatest part of the Senators. Their pretense was, that the Archbishop had
abused the Marshall. They were very glad of giving him this Mortification,
purely because they thought him too much wedded to the Queen's Interest, and
the Bishop of Cujavia, out of Envy to the Primate fomented the Division, that
so he might sit as President in the Diets.

This Difference lasted four days, but was adjusted by the Prudence of the
Bishops, who offered themselves as Mediators. The Deputies met again on the
nineteenth. Several Bishops and Senators waited upon them at their Chamber,
where the Bishop of Cujavia declared, that the Queen, in compliance with the
repeated Instances of the Primate, Bishops, and himself, and to remove all
occasion of complaint, had resolved to retire. She kept her word, and the same
say, set out for Bialana near Warsaw, after she had received the sad News from
Leopold, that the Confederate Army had committed great Outrages upon her Lands,
and upon those that belonged to the late King, that it had exacted very large
Contributions from the Inhabitants, and even threatened to seize upon the whole,
if they were not speedily satisfied. They committed the same Disorders on the
States of the Clergy and Gentry. The Misfortune was Universal, and every Day
they expected fresh News of more Disasters.

The Turks and Tartars, by their Preparations, continually alarmed them, and
the Muscovite, who used to make an Advantage of the Misfortunes of his
Neighbors, seemed to be willing to break with the Crown. His Resident had some
Days before presented a Letter to the Senate, wherein the Czar his Master
demanded of the Republic, that the King they chose should maintain the
Treaties concluded with Muscovy, and should no longer take upon him the Titles
of the Provinces of Smolensko, Kiovia and Czernichovia, which he pretended had
been granted to him in the last Treaty of Leopold. They were neither surpized
nor daunted at this Demand, for they all knew that the Muscovites are as
insolent in Prosperity, as they are abject in Adversity.

Besides the Czar had too much Business upon his Hands with the Turks and
Tartars, against whom he had declared War, for no other Reason, but because he
saw them attacked by the Empire, Poland and the Republic of Venice, against
whom those Infidels had made but a weak Defense, ever since the Confederacy
which these three great States had concluded betwixt themselves.

The Czar John died in Jan. 1696. not at all lamented by his Subjects, who had
so great a Contempt for him, that contrary to the Custom of the Nation, they
obliged him to make his younger Brother Colleague in the Throne.

The Czar Peter invested with the Authority which he had unjustly usurped from
his eldest Brother, was willing to let his Subjects see that he was not
unworthy of the Favors they had bestowed upon him. He laid Siege to the City
of Asoph a second time, and was more successful in it than the first. This
Place was surrendered to him on the 28th of July, and had obtained as honorable
Conditions as they could have hoped for, from a Nation that makes use of the
very least Advantages. The Garrison went out on the 29th, being 3000 Turks,
with their Arms, Bag and Baggage, and were transported ten Leagues by the
Czar's Galleys. The Muscovites had lost at this Siege the very best of their
Troops, and two or three such Victories more would undoubtedly ruin their
Empire.

The Poles were well satisfied, that the Haughtiness of the Muscovite was not
so much raised by the taking of Asoph, as by the vain Promises which the
Germans had made him of causing a powerful Diversion, and of putting the Czar
into a Capacity of conquering Tartary, whilst the Imperialists drove the Turks
out of Europe. The Muscovites thought it a noble Project, whilst the Poles, who
knew the State of the Affairs of Germany, looked upon it as Impracticable; so
that they returned Answer to the Czar's Resident, That the King, who should be
chose, should advise with the Republic, whether it was proper for the Welfare
of the State, to give him Satisfaction as to his Demands, or to retake by force
the Provinces, which his Master had unjustly usurped.

The Proposal of the Muscovite did not so much alarm the Poles, as the
Confederate Army did, whose Deputies demanded Pay for ten Years past, and
threatened, Military Execution, if the Republic did not give them speedy
Satisfaction: It was hard for the Diet to get out of these Troubles, they were
all for paying off the Army, though none of them were for contributing the least
Penny toward it. The Public Treasure was exhausted, by the Mismanagement of
those who had the Care of the Finances Several Persons disaffected to the late
Government, were, on this urgent Occasion, for making use of the Money which
the late King had heaped up. They remonstrated, that since those vast Riches
were gotten out of the State, it was but just to apply them to its present
Necessities, and to the Discharge of its Debts.

The Queen and the Princes of the Blood had still some Friends left, who
opposed this Design, and even when the Interest of the Royal Family was
sinking, Horodenski, Deputy of the Palatinate of Czereniechovia, left the Diet
about the end of September, after he had protested against all that should be
resolved upon in his Absence. Such a Protestation as this is enough in Poland
to break up a Diet. The Republic could not conquer the stubbornness of the
Deputy: Whereupon, according to Custom in the like Case, they made a General
Confederacy, whereby it was ordered, That the Diet of Election should be in the
open Field, by the Convention of all the Gentry, and it was further added, That
those who should propose a Piasto or a Pole by Birth, should be looked upon as
Enemies to their Country. But, to the great Surprise of the Royal Family, whose
Interest it was, that the Diet should be held before Winter, that so all
Foreign Competitors might be prevented, the opening of it was fixed for the
15th of May, in the Year next ensuing, which was attributed to the Intrigues of
some private Faction.

Horodenski after having hroke the Diet, made his Escape, for supposing that he
should be chastised if he staid, he sought out for a Sanctuary, and fled for
Protection to Baranowski. He proposed to that General the trusting him with a
Detatchment of 6000 Men to go into Lithuania; and assured him, That with this
Force he would oblige the Gentry to enter into a Confederacy, to which they
were already pretty much inclined. Baranowski had attempted as much before, but
without Success; he thought another would not be more successful and dextrous
in it; and the Revolt of the Army was too Advantageous to him, to think of
sharing this profit of it with others.

He looked upon Horodenski rather as a Refugee, whom he honored with his
protection, than as a Man capable of assisting him in the carrying on of his
Designs. He bore with him, because he had broken up the Diet, and hazarded his
Life for their Interests, by whose Ministry it was that he was at Head of the
Confederate Army. Before the Deputy came, Baronowski had solicited Lithuania to
join his Troops, and they answered him, That if they had any such Design, they
would make Choice of a General, who was more skilful and better experienced
than him. Accordingly the Gentry did enter into a Confederacy, and the News of
it was brought to Warsaw, a little after the breaking up of the Diet. The
pretense they made for this Confederacy was very specious, though it was not more
just than that which the Confederates of Poland had made use of.

The Family of Sapieha was become the most powerful of any in Lithuania; it
enjoyed the largest Estates and the highest Dignities of that Duchy. The
Fortune of this Family had raised a Jealousy in the Mind of the late King,
who, to humble its Greatness, had raised the Family of the Krziezpins,
originally of Konigsberg, to so high a pitch, that they could hardly tell how
to pretend to it. He had made One Palatine of Witeps, and his Brother obtained
the Bishopric of Samogitia. These 2 Senators after their Benefactor's death,
did not forget the Obligations he had laid upon them; they not only maintained
the Interests of his Family, but also engaged their Friends to do the like, and
at the Queen's desire they hazarded their Estates and Lives to make the Army
enter into a Confederacy, as soon as they saw that the Family, whom they were
desired to oppose, had openly declared against that Princess and her Family.

John Casimir Sapieha Palatin of Vilna, and Great General of the Duchy, had
much ado for several Years last past to get Subsistence for the Army, which he
commanded. The Treasure of that Province was exhausted, as well as that of the
Crown, and it is impossible for a General to keep his Troops under Discipline,
when they want their Pay. The Necessity this Officer lay under, obliged him to
quarter his Army upon the Lands of the Ecclesiastics and Gentry. Both those
looked upon this Proceeding as a Breach of the Public Liberty, and what should
have been attributed to the Misfortunes of the Time, was imputed to the
General's Resentment, whom no Body had in the least offended; and though it was
told them, that the Army must perish, if a Method of Subsistence was not found
out for them, yet each of them looked upon himself as one that suffered a
Grievance, and none had any Regard to the Public Good. By this means the
Disorder increased every Day, by the Insolence of the Soldiery, and the
Impatience of those who were exposed, to their Rapines. They who had the most
to lose, were more offended than others with the General, whom they made the
Author of a Misfortune, which neither he, nor they could remedy.

The fiery Temper of the General increased their Indignation toward him. The
Church and the Gentry of Poland are exempted from quartering of Soldiers.
Lithuania, which is annexed to that Crown and governed by the same Laws,
pretended to enjoy the same Privileges. The Palatin of Vilna disputed this
last Head, and maintained that he might lawfully do, what he had hitherto done
out of pure Necessity. Thus by elevating the Authority of his Office, he seemed
too much to depreciate the Immunity of Ecclesiastics, and the Privileges of
Gentlemen, who though of meaner Fortunes, were as haughty as the General.

Constantine Brzostowski Bishop of Vilna, thought since he was the Chief
Prelate and Senator of Lithuania, that he was bound in Duty and Honor to
oppose the Ambition of the General, and the Licentiousness of his Troops. He
talked with, threatened, and when Words would do no good, he excommunicated the
Palatin of Vilna. Sancta-Cruz the Nuncio had backed the Excommunication; and
the Primat, a Friend of Sapieha's Family, had suspended it in quality of Primat
and Legate of the Holy See. The General was so offended at those Censures that
were issued out against him, that he no longer kept within Bounds. He sent
Troops into all the Dependencies of the Bishopric of Vilna, he increased those
that had been quartered on the Lands of the Bishop's Friends, and by this too
great Severity he strengthened his Enemy's Party, without thinking of it.

The Nuncio Davia, Successor to Sancta-Cruz, offered his Mediation as Minister
of his Holiness, which was accepted by the Parties. But they were not so well
agreed upon what he proposed to them, and he had the Dissatisfaction to see
that the Committee of Privileges, which was by the Pope's Order met toward
the latter end of the Year 1696. disapproved of his project of Accommodation.
The Bishop of Vilna was at Rome, whilst the Army ravaged the Diocese. His
Friends took Care of his Interests and their own, which were inseparable; and
at last by the Influence of the Queen's and Prince James's Money, prevailed
upon the Army of Lithuania to enter into a Confederacy. The pretense was so
much the more specious, since the Authors of this Undertaking gave out. That
they only took up Arms in Defense of the Church. The Palatin of Vilna was
sensible at last, that it is dangerous to make use of all the Advantage which
Authority gives us over our Enemies.

George Oginski, Great Ensign of the Duchy, put himself at the Head of the
Confederates, which as yet were not above 4000 Men. The quality of the Leader,
the hatred they had conceived against the Palatin of Vilna, the Friends, of the
Queen, and those of the Bishop, who were no less considerable, quickly
increased the Number. The Gentlemen of Samogitia, of the Palatinates of
Novogrod, Witeps, and Brzesce joined with the Malcontents. Oginski, to revenge
the Public, and to make himself popular, began with ravaging the Estates of
the General, and of all those that belonged to him. He who was most in
Sapieha's Interest became the Object of their Fury, who so warmly had set
themselves against that Family. The Palatin of Vilna could not endure to be
treated as he had treated others; he called together as many Gentry as he
could; with 2000 regular Troops, which had still kept to their Duty. He was
preparing to march against the Rebels, when he heard that two Companies of
Hey-dukes of Prince Radgzivil's Regiment were coming to join him, and that
Oginski was soliciting the Cossacks to come over to his party. The Palatin of
Vilna stayed at Grodno for the coming up of the new Supplies; his Friends
represented to him, That it was dangerous to give the Enemy time to fortify
themselves. A Council was called, wherein it was resolved to force them in
their Retrenchments, and the Event showed that the most daring Advices are not
always the wisest.

Upon the General's Approach Oginski retired with his Army to Brzesca, which
Sapieha invested and shut up so close, that it was hoped, tnat the want of
Provisions and the Amnesty which was proposed, would make them return to their
Duty. Both Threatenings and Promises signified nothing, it was necessary to make
use of Force against those who cannot be reduced by Reason. The Palatin of
Vilna set upon them in November, and had at first all the Advantage which the
valor of his Troops could promise him. The Confederates were giving Ground,
when Oginski by his Example and Words reanimated them, and led them to fight
with so much vigor, that after an Engagement that lasted above two Hours, they
repulsed Sapieha. The Great Master of the Duchy, his Eldest Son, commanded a
Party in Samogitia, which at the same time were put to the Rout. That young
Lord run a greater hazard than the rest to save himself, and he was pursued so
closly, that he was obliged to shut himself up in one of his Castles, where the
Gentry of Samogitia besieged him to no purpose, his Resolution having given his
Friends time to come up to his Relief.

This Defeat increased the Great General's passion, he looked upon himself as
conquered, because his Enemies had ventured to dispute the Victory with him.
The Confederates for their parts did not esteem an Action advantageous to them,
which had cost them so many Men. They retrenched themselves, and the Palatin
marched a second time to force them; but they defended themselves with the same
Bravery as at first. The loss on both sides was equal, the two Parties accused
Fortune, and hearkened to Reason.

At the same time, some of the Great General's Scouts had taken a Courrier of
the Palatin of Witeps, who was carrying Letters to the Queen, by which he
entreated her to send some fresh Supplies of Money, e^^e it would be impossible
to rescue Oginski out of the danger in which he then was. This Senator sent her
word, that it had been better for her never to have undertaken this Business,
than not to support it. These Letters were given to the General, who caused
Copies to be taken of them, and to be sent to all the lesser Diets of the
Kingdom, and so accused the Queen of being the occasion of the Rebellion in
Lithuania. These Diets did what he desired, and this Accident was so fatal a
stroke to the Queen's party, as they could never recover of.

The French Ambassador made his Advantage this Disorder, he foresaw that the
Division of Lithuania was an obstacle to the designs which he kept secret. This
Minister insinuated himself into the Under Marshal of Lithuania, the Great
General's Son, and the intimate Friend of Oginski, he desired him to go upon
the spot and mediate an Accommodation, promising to defray all the necessary
Expenses, upon Condition that one of the private Articles should be the Reunion
of the two parties in favor of the Candidate which he should propose to them.

This young Lord and several others, whose Estates were endamaged by this
unhappy Division, hearkened to the Proposals of the French Ambassador. The Heats
on both sides abated, and each of them being more fatigued with the misery they
endured, than pleased as the mischief they occasioned, consented to to
Agreement, which was concluded Nov. 26. 1696. upon those Conditions, that
Oginski and the Confederates should return to their Duty, that the Great
General should grant them an Amaesty, that he would cause the Republic to pay
the Moiety of what was due to them, and that the same Quarters of refreshment
should be assigned them, as were allowed to the Army that kept in their duty.
The next day, the Head of the Confederacy took the Oath of Fealty to the Great
General, who returned God thanks for a Peace, which it seems was not to last
long.

Krziszpin Bishop of Samogitia was comprehended in the same Treaty. That
Prelate, though a Man of an indifferent head, yet was too forward a Designer. He,
as well as the Bishop of Vilna, stood up stiffly for the Immunity of his Church,
and at the Provincial Diet held in the beginning of the Year 1696. had
declaimed so sharply against those who he said had infringed that Immunity,
that his Speech (contrary to his Intentions) nettled a great many Gentlemen,
who suspecting that they should be over-charg'd with Soldiers, in case the
Church could get themselves Eased of 'em, drew their Sabres, and would not have
spared the Prelate himself, had he not been relieved. He was for
excommunicating them, but the Example of the Bishop of Vilna, and the
Remonstrances of his Friends, made him alter his Resolution.

By the same Intrigue, and the self-same day his Brother the Palatine of Witeps
was likewise reconciled with the Great General. This Man had sided with the
Confederates under a pretense of defending the Church and the Gentry, and in
reality to satisfy the Intentions of the Late King, and the pressing
Solicitations of the Queen and her Family. The Palatine of Vilna, to be
revenged of him, had ordered a Troop of Dragoons to go and lay waste his Lands.
Krziszpin had sent several of his Peasants after them, who were so punctual in
obeying their Master's commands, that they killed them all except their Leader,
whose Life they spared, that he might carry the News of what had happened. The
Massacre of the Dragoons was balanced against the disturbance which they had
caused, and so was no Let to the Accommodation

The greatest Difficulty was about a Gentleman, that had made some Speeches
reflecting on the Family of the Krziszpins, and had attacked them in the
tenderest part. He had informed against them to the Supreme Tribunal, where he
had produced several Articles against them, which had so much weight with the
Judges as to prevail upon them, to declare the Palatin of Witeps and his
Brother Usurpers of the Title of Nobles, and divested of all their privileges.
The Informer had too little Interest in this Affair to persuade the public,
that he undertook it upon his own head. The Krziszpins did not question but the
Sapieha's had set him on, and that if that unknown person had not been sure of
their protection, he would not have been so insolent. The Palatin of Witeps
demanded Satisfaction for that Affront, and they were forced to grant it him,
because he threatened not to consent to any Accommodation, unless this Clause
was inserted.

After any Sentence is passed in Poland by a Supreme Court of Judicature, there
lies no Appeal, nor can any Petition be allowed to take off the Judgment. All
that can be done in this Case is to have recourse to the Accuser to make him
recant. This Remedy commonly proves to no purpose, since he who has had the
better of it before the Supreme Tribunal, must be forced to own himself a
Rogue, and to declare that by false Allegations, he has surprised them to pass
a wrong Sentence.

He who accused the Palatin of Witeps and his Brother, was a Man charged with,
and convicted of so many Crimes, that the very Recital of them would make one
tremble. This Villain did well to add to his other Offenses of Murder, Robbing
and Burning of Houses, the Sin of Forgery and Calumny. It was therefore agreed,
that this Wretch should give the Palatin of Witeps such an Acknowledgment as he
should demand of him; and that the Satisfaction might be the more Authentic, a
Clause was added, that it should be done publicly in the Diet of Samogitia,
which was to be held in January 1697. and the Gentleman was there to make
Reparation. Had the Diet been held in the open Field, he would perhaps have
made his Escape. By the Advice of Benedect Sapieha, Great Treasurer of
Lithuania, the Speaker ordered them to meet in the Church, by reason of the
Cold which was then very sharp. The Friends of the Palatin of Witeps shut up
the Doors, summoned the Gentleman to make good his Word, and to recant the
Calumnies which he had uttered. He was ready to do all they desired of them,
when a fatal Accident to him and the Palatin of Witeps, occasioned the one's
death, and raised new Disturbances in the other.

The Palatin was looked upon as a Man that did not tie himself up servilely to
his Word, which he had broken several times, and 'twas thought he would break
it again as soon as this Business was well over. One of Sapieha's Friends who
was resolved to prevent it, made use of such a Stratagem, as Matchiavel himself
would have admired if he had been alive

Most of those who composed the Diet of Samogitia, knew the Gentleman we have
been speaking of* and were incensed against him, for the Cruelties he had been
guilty of. He who had conspired his Ruin, said, and handed about this Saying
to the rest, See the Villain that killed your Relation, that burnt your House,
and that has disgraced your Family. There was no need of more Words to raise
their Spleen against him; they fell upon him in the Church, and pursued him to
the Vestry, where they killed him with their Sabres; and the sacredness of the
Place, to which he was fled for Sanctuary, could not protect him from the
Danger, to which his Crimes had exposed him.

The Palatine of Witeps was the only person that did not partake in the public
Joy of this Man's death, which afflicted him, because that Reparation which
should have reestablished his Honor, could not now be made him. He who was
the contriver of this Murder, waited upon him with several others, to
complement him for having been revenged of one who had cast a blemish upon his
Family.

There was no mention made in the Articles of Agreement, either of the Bishop,
or the Chapter of Vilna, who seemed to be the persons most concerned. It was
not because they were abandoned by their Friends, though Krziszpin and Oginski
never interested themselves any more in the Prelate's Quarrel, after he had
declined espousing their Sentiments right or wrong. Another reason which
hindered the Accommodation, was the difficulty of finding a Medium to reconcile
those persons, who made such extravagant pretensions. The Bishop demanded a
promise, that the Troops should no more be quartered in the Dependencies of his
Diocese, with two Millions to satisfy him for the Losses he had sustained. The
Great General would not agree to the first Article, because if the Church were
exempted from the Quartering of Soldiers, the Gentry would be over-burden'd
with them. He required that the Bishop should take off the Excommunication
issued out against him, and suppress the Libels which had cast a Reflection upon
his person; upon those Conditions, he offered to pay him 100000 Franks, at
several payments. The Prelate's Friends advised him to accept of that Sum, and
said, it was better to rest satisfied with a little, than to run the risque of
losing the whole. He seemed to be moved by their Remoustrances, and it is
thought he would have accepted of these offers, if the Deputies of the Chapter
of Vilna had not started an Objection to it, giving out that it was
unreasonable, since the Loss was common, that the Bishop only should receive
satisfaction. They added, that if he proceeded any farther, they would prefer
their Complaints of it to his Holiness. The Pope was accordingly informed of
the business, but it is uncertain whether by those who threatened to complain, or
by the Remonstrances of the Palatine of Vilna and his Emissaries. Perhaps both
of the parties had a hand in it, and the Complaints were so severe, that the
Bishop thought it proper to clear himself, and for that reason he went to Rome.
Whilst that Prelate was on his Journey, the Peace of the Confederates was
concluded, by which means he was not comprehended in the Treaty, and they
excused it upon the account of his Absence, which had incapacitated 'em from
entering into the Debate of his Rights, and because the holy See had taken
cognizance of his Affairs. Though the Nuncio had to no purpose used his
Endeavors to accommodate the business, yet it was not quite desperate. The
Bishop did not return till April 1697. and then he brought with him an ample
Commission, that the Committee of Immunities should address themselves to the
Nuncio of his Holiness, to put an end to a Difference which had lasted too
long, and might be attended with dangerous consequences. The Attempts which
this Prelate made, were not wholly insignificant; and though they did not procure
to him the Traquillity which he aimed at, yet they occasioned his Enemies to
keep within bounds.

Oginski was blamed for having made the Peace without comprehending in it the
Bishop of Vilna, who had been in part the most specious pretense that had
authorized his Rebellion. Every one knew, that he could not declaim against
Sapieha, since that General had reaped no advantage by it; but necessity forced
Oginski to make such an Agreement as he could get. The French Ambassador had
dived into the true cause of the Confederacy of Lithuania, he revealed the
Mystery to those who were not able to unravel it, and who would give no credit
to the Letters which the Palatine of Vilna had intercepted This Minister gave
them to understand, that the Great Ensign had been won by the Queen's Money,
and that all he did was only to support the Interests of Prince James. There
was need to say any more to draw off the most faithful of Oginski's Party; so
that this General of the Confederates was so prudent as to put an end to this
Affair, which else would have turned to his ruin.

Whilst the Confederates of Lithuania were in Contest, and discoursed of an
Accommodation; the Confederate Army of Poland was more quiet in outward
appearance, Baranowski had killed no Man, yet had ruined all Russia. He levied
32000 Florins of the City of Leopold, and the Jews were forced to give him
14000 to exempt them from quartering the Army upon them. The City of Zolkiew
and its Dependencies which were part of the King's Estate, met with no beter
treatment; they demanded 100000 Florins of them, and in case they refused to
pay that Sum, they threatened them with Military Execution.

The Turks and Tartars advanced with 50000 Men within 8 Leagues of Leopold, and
plundered all that the Rebels had left behind them. Baranowski looked upon
their Booty as a prey which had escaped his Hands; and to force them to restore
it, sent out a Detachment, who after several slight Skirmishes, returned back
to their General very much discontented, that he had employed them in a
Service, where they got nothing but blows.

Those few Troops, who still remained in their Duty, did their utmost to put a
stop to the Incursions of the Tartars, some of which they took, who declared,
that they fell into the Kingdom only at the Solicitation of some Poles, and
that the Chief of them had only invited them in order to make the Republic
sensible how necessary it was to hasten the Election of a King, and to call the
Diet during Winter. This Declaration sufficiently satisfied them of the wicked
Intention of those Persons, whom they had already suspected to prefer their own
Interests before the Public Good.

The Tartars threatened them with a second Incursion; and it was so much the
more to be feared, by how much he who had invited them was in a Capacity of
soliciting them to raise new Disturbances; nor was Poland (for want of Money)
in a condition to put a stop to their Designs. The French Ambassador, as a
Testimony of the sincere Friendship which the King his Master bore to the
Republic, offered 100000 Florins which he had by him to keep the Sultan off
from the Frontiers of Poland, during the Inter-regnum. This Minister received a
thousand Thanks from those, whose Intentions were only for the public Good;
but the Castellan of Cracow, who had other designs in his Head, eluded as much
as possible the Ambassador's Proposal. However, this Affair was treated of at
Constantinople, without costing France or Poland any thing. The Sultan did not
commit those Acts of Hostility which he had designed, rejected the Offers of
those who had invited him, and sent an Express to give the Republic an
Assurance of it. But the Castellan of Cracow's injustice rendered those
advantageous Offers a second time useless; he kept this Envoy in Person,
contrary to the Public Faith, did not release him till after the Election, and
by this Treachery put the Affairs of Poland into a miserable Condition.

The Republic was not able to redress all these Grievances. The Army which it
maintained had declared against it: they had not Funds to levy fresh Troops;
whereupon the Senate found themselves obliged to send Deputies to the
Confederate Army, to confer with them about the Grievances which they proposed,
and to satisfy their Demands.

Baranowski, who was afraid of nothing so much, as that the Republic would
resolve upon granting the Satisfaction, which he had demanded, had recourse to
fresh Difficulties He forbad them coming nearer to his Camp than within half a
League, and declared that he would not suffer the Great or Little General to be
present at the Conferences, for fear they should take particular Notice of some
Officers and Soldiers of the Confederacy, and punish them as soon as the
Accommodation was made. The Senate was obliged by necessity to do that which
the Dignity of the Republic would never have allowed in less dangerous
Circumstances.

The Deputies entered into a Conference upon those Terms, that the Rebels were
pleased to allow them: There were great Concessions made to them, they knew how
to take the Advantage of it, and declared, that they would not separate till
after the Election was over. The Army, which ought to have defended the
Republic, continued its Disorders and lived upon Discretion The Marshal with
Menaces demanded of the Primate 150000 Florins, and of the Burghers of Warsaw
100000; and upon refusal sent his Troops to commit Acts of Hostility in the
Parts that lay round the City. Regal Prussia, though at some distance, was not
free from Insults, and twelve Companies entered into it by the same Marshal's
Orders. That Bravery which the Gentlemen of Great Poland testified, kept them
secure; they had returned the Rebels Answer, That in case they advanced toward
them, they would meet them above half way. Baranowski who was for pillaging
without fighting, dissembled his Resentment, and was for striking Terror only
into those who were the most capable of Receiving it.

In the mean time, the Deputies of the Republic, who were in Conference at
Leopold with those of the Rebels, were for buying their Peace at any Price, and
to this end they offered the Army a part of what was due to them, with Bills
for the Remainder on the Palatinates, and an Amnesty without any Exception.

The Bishop of Plosko, Chief of the Commissioners, who had in behalf of the
Senate managed this Accommonation, thought that the Rebels would return to
their Duty, because the Deputies approved of the Offers. This Prelate was
blessing himself for having acquitted himself so successfully of his
Commission, when he received Intelligence, that Baranowski disapproved of the
Terms, and had condemned the Chief of their Deputies to death as a
Prevaricator, who had exceed his Powers. However, the Execution of this
Sentence was respited at the Entreaties of the Commissaries of the Republic,
who two Months after renewed their Conferences at the Castle of Sambour,
whither Baranowski was retired: This Interview was no happier than the former,
the Head of the Mutineers who had no more reasons to allege, sought out for a
Pretense, which his Malice soon furnished him with.

He suborned one of his Companions who cried out in the Conference, That those
Collocutions were useless, since the Deputies of the the Senate were for
surprising them; that he was advised of the Design that was laid, of beheading
Baranowski and his Counselors, so soon as the Confederacy was broken: That
those brave Persons ought rather to fall with their Swords in their Hands, than
suffer their Throats to be cut as Victims: That he did not think there was any
among them so cowardly as to accept of such ensnaring Proposals; and that it
was not reasonable that Men, whom they could not conquer with their Arms,
should suffer themselves to be caught by Promises.

No sooner had this seditious Person finished his Speech, but his Comrades gave
him their Approbation, crying out that they were for no Accommodation, and that
they would lay violent hands on those who should hearken to their Proposals.
The Marshal immediately issued forth a Manifesto, wherein he justified his
Conduct, as being absolutely innocent. The Senators convened at Leopold,
declared him seditious, and the Confederate Army Rebels, and Enemies to their
Country.

Desperate Remedies often prove to be the most sound. No sooner was this
Declaration published, but the Confederate Army desired three Week's time to
consider on it, which was granted them. The Time was long enough for them to
make their Reflections on what was past, and to be the better for the Amnesty
that was so often offered them. Those who were not so seditious as others,
looked upon Baranowski as a Tyrant whom they had placed over themselves. The
Riches which they suspected he had acquired, and those Expenses he was at, as
if he had been a Prince, raised a jealousy in his Companions, and made them
distrust a General who was so intent upon making his own Fortunes. That
Sentence of Death which he had passed upon the Chief of his Deputies, excited a
Compassion in those, that were the least capable of it, and every one declared,
that if that unhappy Man was in any fault, they were as guilty as he, in having
too blindly followed the Sentiments of their Commander.

Those Reflections made such an Impression, that above forty Companies
renounced the Confederacy. This Example shocked the rest, and Baranowski was so
terrified, that he resolved upon doing the same. He considered, that he had
equally offended both the Clergy and Gentry, and that if every one should
abandon him, as a part had done, he should be in danger of losing what he had
scraped up, and even his Life too, which he was not willing to lose as yet,
since by his Exactions he had changed his Fortune. But nothing tended more to
determine him as to that Point, than the approaching Diet, which drew on apace.
For fear that that numerous Assembly would call him to an Account for the many
Disorders he had occasioned, he was for taking the Benefit of the Amnesty,
which had been so often offered to him, and sent word to Count Jablonowski
Great General of the Crown, that he was ready to submit himself with the Troops
that were still under his Command.

It might easily be seen that necessity obliged him to this Submission. Several
of the Senators were of opinion to make an Example of Justice upon him; but
Jablonowski of a tenderer Make rescued him from that Danger, to which several
said he had justly exposed himself.

The Senate had given this General a full Power of treating with the Rebels,
even upon such Conditions as might be advantageous to them, provided they would
return to their Duty. By this Baranowski seemed to be assured of his Favor,
and Jablonowski frustrated of his hopes, that the Confederacy would be useful
to him, was for having the honor of putting an end to an Affair that could be
of no advantage to him.

He declared to the Confederate Army that the Republic would pardon them; that
they might be assured of it; and that a speedy and sincere Repentance was the
surest way of expiating their faults. Upon his word they met at Leopold, their
General was at their Head, very well satisfied with his good Fortune, and ready
to do whatever Count Jablonowski commanded him, who neither attempted any thing
against his Life nor his Estate.

The eleventh of May was fixed upon for this famous Action; and the Ceremony
appointed to be at Leopold in the Church of the Bernardines. A Canopy was
raised, under which Jablonowski was seated. Afterward Baranowski appeared,
more like an Officer, who suffers a Reprimand for having not discharged his
Duty, than as a Criminal, who was to be punished for an heinous offense. He
threw himself down at the General's feet, kissed the Footstool of his Chairon
which he was sat, begged pardon, renounced the Confederacy, tore the
Commission by which he was made Commander in Chief, and laid down his
Standards. Te Deum was sung with the same solemnity as if it had been for the
gaining of a Battle. Jablonowski was so well satisfied, that he looked upon
himself as Sobieski after the Expedition of Choczin, which had procured him the
Crown. He was in the same Station, and it was thought that he flattered
himself, that this Action would have acquired to him the same Reward.

Baranowski disappeared after he had played such differenr parts. Some thought
that he absented himself because of being ashamed of those Condescensions he
had made: Others pretended that the fear of being Assassinated made him fly for
it: Several thought that he had been really murdered, or that the Authors of
his Rebellion kept him close, for fear he should reveal a Mystery, the secrecy
of which was of so great Importance.

The Amnesty granted the Rebels, their Party being weakened, forty Troops having
already deserted them, and the time of the Diet drawing on, were very powerful
Motives to reduce the Seditious to their Duty; but yet there were other causes
that contributed still more toward it. The most powerful Families of Poland
accused one another of having excited this Rebellion. The Lubomirski's threw
all the blame upon the Jablonowski's, whom they charged publicly of having
raised the Tumult in favor of the Elector of Bavaria: The Jablonowski's, to
acquit themselves, said, that their Enemies had fomented this Division, to make
way for Pr. James's Ascending the Throne. The more clear-sighted gave out, that
these two Heads of different Factions, had only been at work for themselves.
This Report, which rendered them equally Odious, obliged them to concur
together in breaking the Confederacy; which they would have brought about
sooner, had not an Inseparable Jealousy betwixt them crossed their designs.

Each of 'em aspired after the Honor of allaying those Heats, which were
capable of putting all Poland into flames. Both of 'em knew, that Money was
wanting, and with its assistance they might easily adjust even the most
desperate Affairs. Lubomirski ordered the Bishop of Plosko to write to the
Cardinal and Senators, that if they would contribute 50000 Crowns, they might
satisfy the Army. The Cardinal made the Overture to the Senate, and offered a
Third for his part; the Bishop of Cracow, though absent, promised as much for
his. Bonski Bishop of Varmia, the Queen's Friend, and one of the Richest
Prelates in Poland, declared, that he would not give any thing: The other told
him, that they would furnish the rest, and they were the more surpised to see
the Bishop oppose the Debate. But they were more obliged to him than they
thought for: He made this Scruple only to oblige the Queen, who desired to have
the Honor of suppressing the Confederacy.

Whilst Lubomirski wrote to the Cardinal, Jamblonowski advertised the Queen of
what had passed at Sambor, and she had sent him the same Sum to pay off the
Army. This General was for making up the business secretly with Baranowski, and
to this purpose had dissolved the public Negotiation, and did not begin his
own private Treaty till after the Commissioners were gone. As they were half
way on the Road, they were informed of the design by their Spies, and spurred
back again with so much speed, that they got time enough to be present at the
conclusion of the Treaty, and to dispute the Glory of having terminated this
great Affair. The Queen was for attributing the whole Honor of it to her self,
because it had cost her the Money; she expected to have received the
Compliments of the whole Nobility, after such an Act of Liberality. But they
who made any Reflections upon it, only said, That those who excited Rebellions
were more obliged than others to suppress them.

The Queen, Prince James, and Count Jablonowski, were still looked upon by most
Persons as the chief Fomenters of a Confederacy, which had been the occasion of
so many Disorders. This Count was Sobieski's intimate Friend, when he was
elected King, and had employed all his Interest to set the Crown upon his Head.
This piece of Service had raised him to be Great General, Castellan of Cracow,
and by that means the the Chief Secular Senator of the Kingdom. Out of
Gratitude, he took such Measures with the Queen as might bring about a Design,
the Execution whereof he foresaw would be very difficult: The Intimacy which he
held with that Princess, gave an occasion to those who had no good will to
either of them, to give out, That the Queen being convinced of that Aversion,
which the Gentry had for her Family, concerted with the Great General to
espouse his Interests upon these Conditions, viz. That she should supply him
with Money to purchase Votes; and that he should share a Crown with her, which
she could not procure for her Children.

This was no new Opinion in Poland, they were afraid of such a thing, even
fifteen Years before the King's death; so that to prevent the Execution of this
Project, the principal Lords had entered into private Confederacies, which
appeared too visibly in the Diet, wherein the League against the Turks was
concluded, and wherein there was so much discourse concerning the Affairs of
Count Morstyn, Great Treasurer of the Crown. These Reports flattered the Great
General's Ambition, who did not trouble his head much in suppressing them: And
if he thought that his familiarity with the Queen, would facilitate his
ascending the Throne, he was mightily mistaken, since that was the Pretense
which his Enemies made use of to hinder him from it.

Maria de la Grange d' Arquien, Q. Dowager of Poland, did not think fit to
undeceive him. The Gentry spoke very loudly of the severity of the former
Reign, and it was not prudence by an unseasonable haughtiness to increase the
Number of the Malcontents. There were e-now already, and the design she had
laid of abasing the greatest Families, drew upon her every day new Enemies.

It was a difficult Matter to quiet such angry Spirits by such a Conduct: the
Princess therefore to clear her self, opened her Coffers, and believed that her
Liberality would put a new Face upon her Affairs; as if the Memory of Good Turns
would be as lasting, as that of Injuries.

The wound was so great, that the Remedy proved useless. They who had received
the Money gave out that she had made those Restitutions, which Father Lewis of
Amsterdam, a Capuchin (who they said was her Physician and Confessor) had
enjoined her to make, and that Poland was indebted to that holy Man, who took
an equal Care of the Health of the Body, and of the Salvation of the Soul of
his Penitent.

But it was not this alone, which had estranged the Minds of the Poles: The
Queen and Prince James had contributed as much as others to the weakening of
their own party. Ever since the Eldest Son was married, she had showed a
particular Affection to Prince Alexander, and this preference she had given him
in her Love, had made her think him not unworthy of a Crown. She had perhaps
explained her self too openly upon that Subject, and Prince James had conceived
so great an Indignation at it, that he quite forgot those Sentiments which
Nature it self should have inspired in him. This happened a little before the
King's Death. The Queen never since looked upon Prince James as her Son*
because he had not respected her as his Mother. At first she neither declared
for nor against him, and it seemed as if she would rather have been the Wife,
than the Mother of a King. In this Suspense she waited till time should give
her such Advice, as the present Posture of Affairs would not admit her to take.

James Sobieski, the late King's eldest Son, did not renounce his Pretensions,
though the Queen seemed indifferent, or rather disaffected to his Designs. He
knew that the Poles had always chosen their Sovereigns out of the Royal Family,
and though the Gentry had a Right of choosing whom they pleased, yet he thought
his Brother's had no more merit to plead than he, he never found that the
younger had been preferred before the Elder, and therefore he flattered himself
that they would not make him the first example of that kind.

His Reputation was established by a Passage, which the Poles could not but be
pleased with. He had attended the King his Father at the raising the Siege of
Vienna, and had fought near his Person in the two Battles of Barcan near
Strigonium, wherein the Turks had been totally defeated. The Emperor ought to
use his Interest in assisting him, and the honor of that Prince, whose
Brother-in-Law he was, would not allow him to be engaged for any Body else.

The Elector Palatin, whose Sister he had married, promised to do as much for
him, as he had endeavored for himself the last Election.

The Elector of Bavaria gave him the same Assurance, though he was employed too
much otherwise, than to do any thing else besides praying for his Success.

Charles XI. King of Sweden, had rather see Prince James on the Throne, than
any other of his Competitors. Livonia was up in Rebellion, and it seemed these
People over-burdened with Taxes, and Grievances, were weary of the Government
of their old Masters. A designing and busy Prince, might have favored their
Revolt and so robbed the Crown of Sweden of a Province, that was very
advantageous to it. He who should have formed a design of reuniting it to
Poland, could not have been blamed by any Prince; for they all knew that Sweden
had seized upon it, contrary to all the Rules of Equity and Justice, and they
had not so much as the least Pretense for what they did. They had made their
Advantage whilst the Poles were engaged in a War against the Turks in the Year
1621. and whilst they were defending Christendom against those Infidels, those
Swedish Christians had robbed them of this Province.

Time could not make the Poles forget so considerable a Loss, and though they
have not for so many Years together been in a Capacity to remedy it, yet by
their Complaints they have testified, That they only waited for a fair
Opportunity of doing it. For this Reason the Election of a Prince, who loved
and understood War, would have caused those Alarms in Sweden, from which the
Choice of Sobieski would free them. He passed among his Neighbors for a quiet
and peaceable Prince, and one who being contented with the Possession of a
Kingdom, would leave his Successors to take Care of enlarging its Bounds. It
was likewise thought that he had promised Sweden, to abandon to it Samogitia,
the Sovereignty of the Duchy of Courland, and the Bailiwick of Piltin, which
POLAND was still in Possession of, in Livonia.

These Measures seemed to be so very well taken, that a favorable Success
might have been expected from them; but the Death of the King of Sweden
happening at Stockholm, the 15th of April, 1697: made all those Projects to
vanish into Smoke.

The Elector Palatin, and the Elector of Bavaria fell from their Words, and it
was supposed that the latter had himself some Pretensions to the Crown. The
Abbot of Scarlati had been in his Name at Warsaw, to make his Complements of
Condolance to the Queen, upon the Death of the King. This Minister had made his
Observations on the Sentiments of the Gentry, with Respect to the Interests of
the Royal Family, and perceived that it was no hard Matter to supplant the
three Princes of the Blood. The Reasons which kept them from the Throne was a
Bar to the Elector's ascending it, because (besides his being a German) he had
married their Sister. Scarlati informed his Master how the Gentry stood
affected.

This Prince considered how little Pretensions the Younger Brothers had to the
Crown, which themselves had renounced because of their Youth, and that the
Queen how passionate soever she was for Prince Alexander, thought no more of
it. The Elector, who likewise saw how odious it would be in him to dispute the
Crown with those, whose Sister he had married, thought of nothing else but
serving Prince James, and so preferred his Honor before his Ambition*

The vast designs which he had in hand, contributed likewise to the making him
lay aside one, which was not as yet ripe for Execution. He was entered into the
Confederacy with the Empire, England, Spain, Holland and Savoy had concluded
against France. So many united Forces seemed at least to be able to reduce that
Monarchy within its Ancient Bounds. The Confederates had already shared the
Provinces among themselves, even before they had conquered them. But the
Prudence and Undauntedness of his Most Christian Majesty, had rendered their
great Designs useless, and seconded by the valor of his Troops and the
Affections of his Subjects, he took Towns, won Battles, and conquered
Provinces. All Europe had their Eyes upon him, and looked on him with
Admiration, and his Enemies wished for a Peace, which they were only ashamed to
beg.

The Elector of Bavaria reflected seriously on all that passed in Europe, and
without thinking of Poland, he was very intent on making himself Satisfaction
by the Monarchy of Spain.

This was not enough to reanimate the Friends of Prince James, and the Queen's
Indifferency was a great Affliction to them. They remonstrated to her, That she
did more injury to her Family, than those who disputed the Crown with them,
that if she would espouse his Interests more heartily, and when she recommended
him, would forbear mixing her Complaints agianst him, his Faction would become
more powerful. She hearkened to their Reasons, but she had so far cried down
that Prince, in those former quarrels, and especially since the King's Decease,
upon the Account of their Domestic Interests, that she came too late to apply
a Remedy to an evil that was become incurable.

Martin Matezinksi, Palatin of Russia, dyed about this time, and by his last
Will bequeathed the Queen and Prince James part of his Estate, which they
thought to be very considerable, and enough to comfort them under the Loss
which they had sustained. The Pictures which they met with in his Closet were
not so pleasing to the Legatees, as the rest of his Estate.

The first was a lively Representation of a Battle; wherein a Conqueror was
described, giving out his Orders for a general Assault: the place besieged
seemed to be in the utmost Extremity; its Bastions thrown down, and the Number
of the Besiegers, showed that it had nothing else to trust to, but the Clemency
of the Conqueror.

The second, quite different from the first, represented a long Procession,
whose march was closed with a Jesuit beating time as he went. This Religions
was followed by a Prince, who had a Crown on his Head, with a Scepter in one
hand, and a Globe in the other. Two other Jesuits held before him a Book of
Music, on which he seemed to have fixed his eyes.

If this Picture inspired Piety, the next excited Compassion. A meager Prince
appeared upon the Lap of a young Woman, and sucking the Breasts of an old One.
She whom he sucked, seemed to be no stronger in Health, than he was. Those many
Crowns which the sick Man had upon his Head, pressed him down, and contributed
as much to his Weakness, as his Constitution did. He wanted a great many Jewels
in most of his Crowns, which seemed to be in as bad a condition, as he who wore
them.

The last Picture was more pleasing to the sight, especially to the Covetous.
Men of several Nations were telling out of Money, and Bethsal the Jew being
represented to the Life, was examining, whether the Ducats were passable or
not; in one Corner of his Garment was his Master placed, and if the Crown had
not been discerned on his Head, one would have taken him for a Banker or
Stock-Jobber.

The Estate which the Palatin had left was designed by the Queen to strengthen
the Party, to which he was absolutely wedded. However, this supply was not so
useful as was expected, because the Money was sequestrated, by order of the
Cardinal and the Executors of the Will* The Reunion of the Royal Family, would
have excited great hopes in them, had not a fresh Candidate caused new alarms.
The Queen was of Opinion, That France would espouse no other Cause but here is,
and indeed that Crown would have stood up for the Prince Royal, if he had
consulted his own Interest; but the Kindness which he had expressed for the
Enemies of France, put it upon taking other Measures.

It was then remembered, what had passed at the Diet of Election, in the Year
1674. wherein Sobieski appeared seemingly to carry on the French Interest, and
was so successful in the Attempts he had for himself, that he supplanted a
Prince, as easy to be deceived, and as hard to be conquered.

Sobieski was so happy as not to see, before his death, the Misfortunes of his
Family, and his illustrious Rival did not live long enough to comfort himself
for his Disgrace, and to see the Royal Family of Poland lose a Crown which it
had robbed him of.

The Remembrance of this Intrigue, joined to the Indifferency and Hatred, which
Prince James bore toward the French, none of which he would admit into his
Service, whilst he entertained Followers of all Nations, was perhaps the reason
why the Most Christian King hearkened to the Proposals, which his Ambassador
had made to him, of placing a Prince of his Blood in the Polish Throne. The
Undertaking was Noble, and no question but it would have succeeded, had so
great a Prince set himself heartily upon the Execution of it.

Melchior de Polignac Abbot of Bonport, had resided at the Polish Court ever
since the Year 1693. in quality of Ambassador Extraordinary from France. This
Employ could not choose but be very agreeable to him, by the Satisfaction which
the King his Master took in his Conduct, and the confidence which the King and
Queen of Poland had of him. Their Majesty's kept nothing secret from him, and
nothing was determined in their Councils, but what his Advice was asked upon,
which was always followed. The Senate, and Gentry had the same esteem for him;
his Genius seemed to them to be Superior to that of other Ambassadors, and
this vast Jdea which they conceived of him, made them find Defects in those
that were invested with the same Character. The good Offices which he had done
for several Lords under the late Reign, made the Poles extol him at a strange
rate, and none of them questioned his sincerity.

The Reputation of a Minister is always honorable and serviceable to the
Prince; that has made choice of him. The Credit of this Ambassador was so well
established, that so soon as ever the King was dead, a great many Gentry waited
upon him to offer him their Service, without desiring so much as to know the
Name of the person, in whose Favor he would declare himself. Sobieski before
his Death, had recommended to his Children to maintain a strict Correspondence
with, and to follow the Counsels which that Able Minister should give them, of
whose Fidelity and Capacity he was very well assured. He had likewise conjured
the Queen to take this Counsel, if she were willing to maintain the Crown in
her Family.

Every thing is promised to a Man at his last Gasp, but when he is dead, Men
think themselves disingaged from their Word. The Queen had other Designs in her
Head; she looked indeed upon the Ambassador as the Supporter of her Family; but
after she had declared to him the Desire, which she had to see one upon the
Throne, with whom she might share the Authority; she entreated him (without
naming the Person) to concur with her toward his Advancement.

Polignac hearkened to the Queen, the depth of whose Design he could not
fathom. She should have spoken for her Sons, but she did not open her Mind
plainly upon that Head. There were several Lords who would not have despaired
of ascending the Throne, if that Princess would but assist them, and several
were in a Condition of sharing an Authority with her, which she should procure
for the person she most approved of.

Prince Ketlerus of Courland had privately embraced the Roman Catholic
Religion, and those who were acquainted with his Design, did not question, but
the Queen was the true Cause of his Conversion.

However, had she been minded to have married a Prince, whom the French King
should have approved of, his Ambassador would never have opposed it. But she
declared, that she could not prevail upon her self to Marry, but all her Care
was for a Prince, whose Duty would oblige him not to desert her.

Polignac having refused to follow the pleasure of that Princess blindly, she
was forced to explain her self more clearly, and that she might not seem to
dissemble with the Ambassador, she first of all discoursed to him in the behalf
of Prince James, of whom she had formerly drawn so frightful an Idea, that it
was impossible for her to efface those lively Impressions out of her Mind.

Her best Friends had given her such Counsel, which if it had been duly
followed, would have proved the most judicious and most safe Course, she could
have taken. The King of Poland had left behind him very considerable Sums of
Money, and common Fame had so far multiplied his Riches, that he passed for the
richest Prince in Europe. These Treasures were deposited in the Castles of
Warsaw, Marienburg and Zolkiew. Those Friends we have been speaking of, advised
the Queen, to affix her Seal and the Seal of the Republic to the Treasures,
without enquiring how much they amounted to. Afterward they proposed to her to
offer them to the State, as a Supply to its present urgent Occasions. By this
piece of Generosity she would engage the Armies, and the whole Gentry in her
Interests, and prevent any Foreign Prince from opposing her pretensions. They
made her believe that she might choose Prince Alexander, or Constantine, or
even the Elector of Bavaria, if she pleased, and that they would obtain the
Most Christian KING'S Consent. The Princess rejected the proposal, because she
could not abandon Prince JAMES: Her chief reason was lest she should thereby
dispoil her self of the Treasures that she had gathered together with so much
trouble.

She communicated her Design to the French Ambassador, and conjured him by the
Memory of the deceased King, which he ought to revere, to employ his Interest
for the Prince Royal.

This Minister declined, alleging, That the Prince had rendered himself too
odious to the King his Master, and represented to her the Difficulties that
would traverse that Election.

His Remonstrances were not able to make her change her Mind; so that he was
obliged to declare to the Princess, That Prudence would not suffer him to
embark on Board a Vessel* which could not avoid being Shipwrack'd.

The Queen could not bring her self to abandon the Prince her Son, and much
less to sacrifice her Money. The Abbot de Polignac found a Method to deprive
her of that Chief Support, and ordered Matters so as that which was upon the
Point of being employed against France, became a help to that Crown in the time
of its need. After having proposed to that Princess, an Annual Income for that
great Sum, he possessed her with an Account of its being safe, and of the
Profit she would reap by it, which so far blinded her that she made that false
Step, which rendered all her posterior Efforts against France of no Effect.

At that time she followed in part the Ambassador's Council, and that the
presence of the Princes Alex. and Constantine should not give any umbrage to
her eldest Son, she sent them to France with that Sum which completed the
Ruin of Prince James's Party, without strengthening that of his Competitor.

The Abbot de Polignac gave Advice to his Master of every thing that passed. He
knew that the two Princes would have less Interest for the Crown, than their
elder Brother, that their Youth and want of Experience, were Causes sufficient
to exclude them at a time when Poland wanted a King that understood War. Prince
James's Pretensions were more specious than those of his Brothers. The Aversion
the Queen had showed for him augmented his Party, and some of those who owed
him no good Will, began to forbear wishing him any hurt, in hopes that if he
mounted the Throne, he would entertain Resentments against the Queen, who under
his Reign should have no part in the Government.

This was not capable however of raising Prince James's Party; for besides
that, they could not forget the Hardships put upon them in the preceding Reign,
he committed an irreparable Mistake. One of the Conditions which the Poles
impose upon their Princes is, that they should not marry without the Consent of
the Republic. Sigismund III. for having contraveened this Law, and married Ann
of Austria in 1592. run the risk of being dethroned After the Death of that
Princess he threw himself Headlong into the same danger, and by a second
Contravention to the Laws of the Kingdom, married in 1605. with Constance of
Austria, Sister to his deceased Queen. His Holiness indeed had given him a
Dispensation for it, but not having obtained the Consent of the Nation, they
took Arms, and formed a Confederacy against them, which he had no small Trouble
to appease.

Uladislaus his Son improved the Severity of the Poles, his Father's Mistake
proved Advantageous to him. This Prince who in 16^5. demanded in Marriage the
Daughter of Fredrick Elector Palatin, communicated his Design to the Senate,
and represented to them the Advantage which the Realm might reap from a
Princess, who was Niece to the King of Great Britain. This August Assembly was
not ignorant, that Princes ought to have an Allowance, so long as it is not
prejudicial to Religion. An Embassy was deputed to that Princess and the King
her Uncle, but upon her Refusal to turn Catholic, the Poles made no Hesitation
in refusing her their Crown.

John III. did not improve those Examples, he neither communicated to the Senate
nor to the Nobility, the Design that he had to marry the Prince his Son, but
suffered himself to be dazzled with the Luster of a great Alliance, without
foreseeing the dangerous Consequences of it. The Marquis de Bethune, though of
kin to the Royal Family, represented to him, That Prince James, by being
engaged with the House of Austria would lose the Friendship and Protection of
the King of France, but his Remonstrances were Vain, and the King of Poland,
without any Regard to such judicious Advice, married his eldest Son on
Elizabeth Amelia, Princess of Newburg, whose Sisters were married to the
Emperor, Kings of Spain and Portugal. Such a near Alliance with the Germans and
the House of Austria, did not at all affect the Poles, because the Right of
choosing their Sovereigns, delivered them from the Sn^^^ which the Court thought
they had involved them in.

The French Ambassador had ever since the Interregnum given Advice to the King
his Master, of the Queen's Waverings, and of every thing that passed. He
informed him of the Design of that Princess to have Prince James elected,
because she had lost all her Hopes for her younger Son. He did not forget to
inform his Majesty of the Hatred the Poles had conceived against that Prince,
and that they only wanted an Occasion to show it: That if the Prince of Conti
were proposed to them, he would quickly find a very strong Party: And that that
was the surest away of excluding ^^ince James; (...) at the same time the most
Advantageous since by taking the Crown from an Enemy, his Majesty should give
it to a Prince of his own Blood.

The Orders of the Court were conformable to the Project. He began to speak in
Poland of a Candidate, whom he had promised without telling his Name. The Joy
was almost universal, when he declared, that he did not make use of his
Interest, neither for Prince James, nor for the Royal Family. Some Lords had
Ambition enough to aspire to the Crown, but this Minister diverted their
Thoughts from it, alleging, That they were (...) many in Number, that if they
pretended to choose Sovereigns from amongst themselves, the Example of the two
last ought to scare them from it, and that the Grandees would never willingly
submit themselves to those to whom they thought themselves equal in Merit and
Birth.

The Ambassador afterward run through all the Nations of Europe, that might
furnish Princes to their Republic. They could no more think of a Prince in
Sweden, since that Kingdom was become Heretical. England and Denmark had
occasioned too many Disorders by the tumultuary Elections of the two
Maximilians; so that they must resolve to lose their Liberty as the Bohemians
and Hungarians had done theirs, if they did not exclude them.

Italy and France were the only Dominions whence they could choose a Prince to
their Mind. Most of the Lords to whom he spoke had traveled in Italy, the
peace that people had enjoyed of a long time, made them sensible, that there
were no such Captains there as those of the former Age, and that Poland stood
in need of an Hero, which the present Juncture of their Affairs would not allow
them time to breed up; but he must be formed to their Hand.

So that France alone was the Place which could furnish Poland, with what 'twas
in Vain for them to seek for elsewhere; and in fine declared to them, who it
was that he himself would Name, if it were in his power to choose. This Prince
was by Birth the last of the Blood Royal of France, there being ten, who by the
Right of Nature ought to ascend the Throne before him; Poland had no Cause to
fear, that he would abandon her, as King Henry did after the Death of Charles
IX. his Brother; so that the only thing that the Poles had to apprehend, was
left a Prince so well accomplished as he, whom he named to them, should make a
Difficulty to accept a Crown, which they were resolved to offer him.

The contrary Party, being alarmed by the Reputation of the Candida^^, reunited
all their Forces to divert the impending Stor^^ The Emperor represented to his
Allies, the Jealousy that all Europe had at the grouth of the House of
Austria, when they saw that Family possessed of the Empire and Spain. He put
them in mind how often they had accused them of aspiring to the Universal
Monarchy. What Wars had been raised against them, to traverse the Designs they
supposed them to have formed; that their Business was at present to set
Boundaries to a Potentate, whose Ambition ought to be so much the more
suspected, that he had enriched himself with the Spoils of all his Neighbors:
That the League of Ausb^^g, into which so many Princes had entered, could not
put a stop to the Rapidity of his Conquests, and if the Poles submitted
themselves to that fiery Nation, they and all Europe would find themselves
involved in such a Slavery, as no Prince would be capable of delivering them
from any more.

All those Complaints were spread even into the Dominions of those Princes, who
did not concern themselves in the Matter. The Ministers of the Allies published
them through all the Provinces of Poland. Polignac in his Audiences,
Conversation, and at Meals, showed the Vanity of those Discourses, and that the
Poles had nothing to fear from a Nation at such a distance from them, that
those who attempted to possess them with that Notion did them wrong; that they
were too brave to fear that any Nation could accomplish that which the Romans
durst never Attempt; that the French assisted their Allies, but were far from
oppressing them; that Sweden was a very fresh instance of it; that that Kingdom
would remember the Alliance they had with France, as long as they preserved the
Provinces, which the King of Denmark, and the Elector of Brandenburgh, had
restored them, by means of the Crown of France.

He afterward discoursed on the Genius of the Germans, who were not baulked by
repeated Denials, but had the Crown of Poland in view at every Interregnum.
That France and Poland were the only Kingdoms in Europe, where the Germans had
not been able to extend their Dominion: That the Empire, the Kingdoms of
Hungary and Bohemia had fallen to the Share of the Cadets of the House of
Austria: That the Eldest Branch had succeeded to the Monarchy of Spain, and the
Kingdoms of Naples, Sicily and Sardinia: That they had invaded that of
Portugal, only because it lay convenient for them, and without the Assistance
of France it had remained under their Dominion still, That Denmark and Sweden,
and lately Great Britain, had fallen under the Dominion of Princes that were
originally Germans: That the Poles might, if they pleased, add their Crown to
all those Conquests: That he had not Power enough to prevent them; but he was
too much their Friend to give them such pernicious Advice.

The Enemies of France did not give over their Designs, though hitherto every
thing had succeeded ill with them. The Queen perceived her Son excluded in all
the petty Diets. She was very much incensed against France, and her hatred
increased the Prince of Conti's Party. Her Resentments came to such an height
against the Ambassador of that Crown: That in Nov. 1696. she ordered her
Picture to be taken out of the Palace of that Minister, which contributed more
than all that the Abbot could do or say to confirm the Poles on his side, who
were always afraid that there was some secret understanding betwixt him and her
in favor of the younger Princes her Sons; whereas had the Queen been so much
Master of her self as to have carried it fair outwardly with that Minister, she
would have thereby rendered him suspected. Some further Endeavors were used to
calm her, by representing to her that since the Indignation which France had
conceived against her Eldest Son was just, she had no reason to complain, but
she shut her Eyes upon all those considerations, and only ruminated upon the
French's depriving her Son of a Crown, which the Custom of his Country seemed
to have assured him of, she expressed her Resentments very highly against that
Minister, who being more addicted to the Interest of his Master, and to his own
Duty, than dazzled with the hopes of making his Fortune, which that Princess
offered him, or with the personal Esteem she discovered for him, became the
Instrument of the Ruin of her Family, by raising up the Prince of Conti as a
Candidate for the Crown.

There were two things she could never forgive him. The first, that he had so
much Courage as to prefer his Duty to that which she demanded of him. The
second, that without informing her of his design to advance the Prince of
Conti, he had found a way to deprive her of two Millions. This Reflection was so
much the more cutting to her, that by her Complaisance she had weakened the
Party of her Son, and fortified that of the only Competitor that he had reason
to fear.

She had every day some New Subjects of Mortification by the Results of the
petty Diets, who after the Convocation assembled according to Custom in the
Provinces. That they might not be without Council during the Inter-regnum, they
unanimously refolv'd to meet every day six Weeks* or at least every two Months
on different days, and to communicate their Deliberations to one another by
Deputies. These were new Cares laid upon those who were to inspire so great a
Body with Resolutions.

The first Assemblies were very tumultuous, because of the rupture of the
Convocation or Preliminary Diet, of the Confederacy of the Armies of the
Complaints of the Palatine of Vilna against the Queen, and of the
Correspondences that were discovered with the Enemies of the State. It was also
believed that there would have been great Contestations upon account of the Act
of the General Confederacy drawn up by the Cardinal after the Rupture of the
Diet. The Primate had then as many Enemies as the Queen, because he had
maintain^d her Interest with so much heat, that he was accused of stubbornness.

But Reason carried it against Prudence, and the Act of the Confederacy was
generally received in all the petty Diets: But some Restrictions were made in
it, according to the Genius of the Palatinates. The Articles generally agreed
on were, 1. That they obliged themselves by Oath to choose no King, but one that
was certainly a Catholic, and the Princess his Wife, if he were married, the
like. 2. That they should not propose any Piasta or Native. 3. That the Diet of
the Election should be held from the 15th of May, to the 26th of June, and that
all the Nobility should attend there on pain of Infamy and Military Execution,
which they call the Postpolita of Rigor. But the fourth Article proposed was
abundantly more severe. They designed to terminate at the Election, the Process
bgeun at the Preliminary Diet at the Succession of the King for the Grievances
of the Nation, which consisted in this, that he had not in so long a Reign
fulfilled any of the Agreements to which he was engaged by the Pacta Conventa.
That Prince had promised to retake Caminiec, he had not made any Military
Expedition, that had been profitable to Poland: He had not founded in the
Kingdom an Academy for the Instruction of 300 Polish Gentlemen, nor had he
satisfied the Elector of Brandenburg as to his pretensions upon Elbing. Those
that were Men of sense foresaw that this omission would sometime or other
occasion a fatal War to the Republic.

The unanimity of the Poles on those four Points gave them the force of a Law,
as if the Convocation had not been broke, but in the petty Diets following they
had a mind to enquire after the true Authors of so many Disorders. They
excluded those that were accused and convicted of them. The Storm fell in
diverse Places, and all at once upon the Head of Prince James, who then
perceived the sudden Change of his Fortune, and began to repent him of his
useless profuseness. He who thought himself sure of the Crown in November, saw
himself excluded in December, by the different Results of the petty Diets.
Prussia was the first Province that gave him the fatal Blow, and described him
so well, without naming him, that no Body could mistake him. Volhinia
afterward Russia, the Palatinates of Lublin, Plosko, Vilna, Novogrodok and
many others did likewise exclude him; so that it was astonishing to find such a
great unanimity betwixt Provinces so remote from one another. The Bishop of
Cujavia, to mortify the Prince of Conti's Party, and to advance that of Prince
James, sent Circular Letters to all the Nobility. In some Palatinates they were
rejected, and in others not read. A Gentleman amongst those that assembled at
Sroda, having demanded the Bishop's Letter, put it to such an use as Modesty
forbids to mention. The Nobility of Russia assembled at Visnia, treated this
Affair with more seriousness, and ordered the said Letter to be burnt by the
hand of the Hangman.

Prince James, during this time, lost his Courage. The Ardor and Zeal which
some of the Senators had testified for his Interest, cooled exceedingly. He
himself had a mind to discover the Sentiments of the Nobility in the
Neighborhood of Warsaw; and that he might do it with more ease he went in
disguise from Czersko, which is the first District of Mazovia, where a petty
Diet was held, but the Prince was known, and some Gentlemen pursued him with
Sabre in Hand into the very Church, where he was forced to hide himself amongst
the Organs, and had he been found, they would certainly have killed him.

After this the same Diets excluded all German Princes. The Party that opposed
France made Efforts to obtain the like advantage in some Diet or other, against
the Pr. of Conti, but could not effect it. They could not express their malice
against him any other way, but by such dull insipid Writings as those of the
Bishop of Cujavia. This obliged the Queen, the Court of Vienna and the Allies
to have recourse to other Methods than Negotiations. Every one took different
Measures, but all of them tending to the same end.

The Enemies of France perceiving that the Prince of Conti's party increased
every day in Poland, thought fit to retard its progress at the French Court.
They wrote Letter after Letter to Paris to ridicule the Abbot de Polignac's
Hopes, alleging, that he had suffered himself to be blinded by the Enemies of
the Royal Family, they aggravated his Promises and Liberalities, they
maintained, that the Poles would never choose in prejudice of their King's Son,
a Foreigner, who would engage them in War with all their Neighbors. Those
Discourses, some of which made Impression, together with the fear of rashly
hazarding new Sums, occasioned that the Court for more surety, did send a
Person they could confide in either to verify those Accusations against their
Minister or to justify his Conduct.

The Abbot de Castagnetes de Chateauneuf, was honored with this Commission,
and the Quality of Envoy Extraordinary, he set out secretly in Feb. 1697. with
the Count de Touanski, Nephew to the Cardinal Primate, who in July 1696. had
been sent by his Uncle to notify to the Court the death of K. John III. The
Abbot arrived in Poland the beginning of April; he found the Affairs of France
in as good a Condition as the Queen had represented them bad. He himself found
that most of the Lords and Gentlemen were for the Prince of Conti, and that
only two things were wanting, viz. the Prince's Presence, and the Money
promised to the Armies. He was entrusted with a Letter from the King his Master
to the Queen, according as he found her Affairs and Intentions, and the need
that France should have to make use of her Service.

That same Day this Envoy Extraordinary arrived at Warsaw, the Queen left it by
order of the Palatinats, who forced the Cardinal and Senate to that Rigor. The
absence of that Princess was not the only cause why the Most Christian King's
Letter was not delivered to her. The Lords of the French Faction demanded it,
because of their Apprehensions that a Princess, who was for making her
advantage of every thing, might make use of it with the Public, and persuade
them that the Abbot de Chasteauneuf was come to overturn what the Abbot de
Polignac had done, to serve the Royal Family against the Prince of Conti, and
by that means to baffle all the hopes of the Republic. The Envoy did not think
fit to oppose those demands which appeared so Just. It was his prudence to give
no cause of Suspicion to the Friends of France, and not to suffer himself to be
surprised by the Queen, who did not allege that the Prince of Conti's party
was so weak in the Kingdom, but to have Pr. Alexander substituted to him, to
the end that he who was so unacceptable to the Poles being supported by France,
her Son Prince James, as she thought, would have no other Competitor to dread.

These were the Measures that the Royal Family took. The Court of Vienna and
the Allies took far different Methods to have the Prince of Conti excluded.
They proposed other Candidates, who were no other ways agreeable to the Poles,
but because of the Money they hoped they might receive from them. The Prince of
Newburg would fain have been proposed, till such time as another came to take
his Place, and to furnish the Sums of Money, that he had neither Will nor
Power to distribute. He knew what the two last Elections had cost his Family,
and so took warning by that Example.

Leopold, Duke of Lorrain, was also proposed. He had no greater reason to
expect success than the Duke of Newburg. His Mother had no great Cause to be
content with the Poles, who after having prefered a Fr. Lady to her, had also
refused her her Dower. The Family of Patz, that stood up for her at the last
Election, had now lost all their Credit, and such of them as remained were
young, and had no public Posts; so that she saw it was in vain for her Son to
pretend to th^^ ^rown which had been twice refused to so Great a Prince as
Charles ^^. of Lorrain her Husband.

This Proposal however gave new Allarms to the Queen and Prince Sobieski. They
looked upon it as an Intrigue of the Court of Vienna. They expressed their
Resentments of it, and complained that it was an ungrateful Retribution from
the Germans to the Family of a Prince who had saved the capital City of the
Empire. These complaints were very touching, because they were just. The
Imperial Court was as high on the other hand, and answered, that Sobieski had
hindered the Poles from paying the Dower of the Queen Widow to K. Michel, that
his Imperial Majesty would make Reprisals upon the Estates of those who had
been the Authors of that Injustice, and that the Duchy of Olaw which Prince
James possessed in Silesia, should serve in part to make good that damage.

The Surprise was extraordinary when Don Livio Odese Chalci was proposed with
the Emperor's protection, and recommended (according to common fame) by his
Holiness. His Merit was founded upon that of Innocent XI. his Uncle, who had
Governed the Church with that Integrity which Christians admire in the
Sovereign Pontiffs of the first Ages. Don Livio was a proof of it, since his
Fortune was the same as before the Exaltation of his Uncle, and the Emperor who
had a mind to acknowledge the services which that Sacred Pontiff had done him,
made his Nephew a Prince of the Empire, and by a second Liberality, which cost
him as little as the former, he would have given him a Kingdom, or at least
made him believe he had such a design.

Don Livio believed that those promises were sincere, because they flattered
his Ambition; he sent into Poland the Abbot de Monte Catini, a Consistorial
Advocate, to support his Interest, which they pretended to be so far advanced.
The Poles, who love Raillery, and don't spare even those from whom they get
Money, asked one another, if Odestchi had any Trial in Poland, and whether that
Roman Advocate was come to solicit the Cause.

They did not rest here, but served the Italian after the Mode of his own
Country, and by Pasquils more outrageous than the preceding Railleries, they
cured him of his Ambition to appear any more as a Competitor. They published in
writing that Davia his Holinesses Nuncio, declared himself highly for
Odeschalchi, that he offered thirty Millions to the Republic, and that Italy
would despoil her self of what she had most considerable in favor of him.
There was published at the same time a List, and a Valuation of all his
precious Jewels and Movables; amongst which were three of Raphaels best
Originals, six by Paul of Verona, four of Julius the Roman, seven of Titian,
thirteen of Hannibal Carache, and abundance more of other Great Masters, the
first time perhaps that ever the Poles heard of them. There were two Ancient
Statues of Romus and Romulus, that were valued at a great Rate, as also a Brass
Medal of Otho, destined to pay two quarters to the Army; In fine, they were
resolved to deliver to the Poles on the day of Coronation, the Statues of
Pasquin and Marforio.

After this there was little more spoken of Odeschalchi. The Poles well
perceived that they must have a Warrior to oppose to the Prince of Conti. The
Elector of Brandenburg proposed Prince Louis of Baden to the Allies, whose
Reputation was equal to that of the greatest Captains of his Age He had
preserved Transylvania to the Emperor, at a time, and in such a conjuncture
when Germany would have thought that they had been very well quit, if they had
come off with the Loss of that rich Province only. He had routed the Turks at
Salankement, and given 'em such an entire Defeat, that the Visir Cuproli, who
seemed to be the only Stay of the Ottoman Empire, was killld in that Action.
This Prince, after several glorious Campagns in Hungary, took upon him the
Command of the Confederate Troops on the Rhine: The Germans reckoned it for a
Signal Victory in this General, that he declined fighting with the French, so
that he was as much esteemed for this amongst the Allies, as was the Roman
Dictator Fabius, who thereby set bounds to the Conquests of Hannibal and the
Carthaginians

The Elector promised to furnish all the Necessary Expenses for this Great
Design, and the Prince of Baden, to make him a Compensation, was, when advanced
to the Throne, to yield him the Sovereignty of the Royal Prussia, and to
discharge him of the Fealty and Homage which he was obliged to perform for the
Ducal Prussia to the Republic of Poland. The Elector was civil enough to
promise such great Sums, but not able enough to pay them, and the Confederacy
was exhausted by the excessive Expenses of a War, which went on but slowly.

The Affairs of Poland were in too great disorder, neither the Elector's Money,
nor the Merit of the Prince proposed to them, were able to re-establish them.
The Money must be paid that was owing to the two Armies, the War must be
maintained against the Turks, and Caminieck re-taken from those Infidels. The
Prince of Baden was very fit to command their Armies, but not rich enough to
pay them.

France found in Poland another Enemy, and Heresy, a new Protector in the
person of Stanislaus, Dombski B. of Cujavia, who at first embraced Prince
James's Party, because he owed his Fortune to his Father the Late King. The
acknowledgments he testified of it would have honored the Memory of the Prince
that made Choice of him, if Motives of Self-interest had not stifled his first
Virtuous Sentiments.

The French Ambassador perceived, that the Bishop of Cujavia did openly oppose
his Designs, and having a mind to know his Sentiments, found that he was for
Prince Sobieski; That Prelate confessed that the Prince of Conti had all the
good Qualities, which the Poles could wish for in a Soverign, and that he would
not be for excluding him, were it not that he and his Princess were both
French, alleging, that those of that Nation could not be acceptable to the
Poles, after the ill Treatment they had received from Queen Mary, Wife to the
late King, as if it had been more dangerous to choose a King of that Princesses
Country, than to set the Crown upon the Head of her own Son.

This was not the only Difficulty that the Bishop of Cujavia found in the
Proposal made him. He was apprehensive that the choice of a French Prince would
be displeasing to the Emperor. The Poles, since the death of Sigismund
Augustus, had made no such scruple, and in five Elections, they made no
objection of provoking the Germans and the House of Austria by their Refusal.

Those Reasons, and many others, which the Abbot de Polignac alleged in diverse
Conferences that he had every day with the most considerable Lords, were
capable to move any Man that had had nothing else in view but the public
Welfare, but he was acted by other Motives. Malakoski Bishop of Cracovia was
above 80 years old. He enjoyed the richest Benefice of the Kingdom, and lived
too long in the Opinion of those that thought of nothing else but enjoying his
Spoils.

If Sobieski were chosen, and that the Bishop of Cujavia had contributed
thereto, the Bishopric of Cracovia had been his Reward: He could not have
expected the same gratuity from the Prince of Conti, who he suspected had
promised it to the Bishop of Plosko This Motive was known, and made the
Nobility to murmur against the Ambition of that Prelate, who was too intent
upon making his Fortune: He thought then of clearing himself, and answering the
Ambassador at the same time; this obliged him to write his Political
Considerations, in Latin: But the most learned in that Art perceived nothing
curious therein, and those who sought after the purity of the Language, found
nothing but what was very dull.

The first part of the Libel contained the feeble Reasons brought by that
Prelate for excluding the Prince of Conti; he pretended that his Election would
be as prejudicial to Poland, as little advantageous to France, that Nation in
the present Conjuncture of the Affairs of Europe, having attracted the hatred
of all its Neighbors, without having preserved the Friendship of any.

This Reproach had a contrary effect to what the Author had fancied: The French
were commended for maintaining a War with so much Vigor against so potent
Enemies.

He added, that the League concluded against the Most Christian King, would not
admit of the Choice of a Prince of his Blood for King of Poland; anst that the
Confederates would do their utmost endeavors to prevent the same.

'Twas not believed that the Polanders were capable of the same fear as the
Bishop of Cujaavia; and no body doubted but the Confederates used all possible
Efforts to oppose the Pretensions of France: But to judge by the Events of a
War which had lasted eight Years, one might have guessed that their Enterprise
would succeed as ill as all the rest they had projected.

The reason that the Bishop alleged against France, as most plausible, was
that which was in least consideration with the Polanders. If we choose a
Frenchman, says he, it is a rupture with the House of Austria and the Germans,
who under the Reign of Casimir succored us so advantagiously against the
Swedes, who had violently possessed themselves of part of the Kingdom.

This Reflection caused the Polanders make others quite contrary to it: They
called to mind what had happened under the Reign of Sigismund III. when in the
Year 1628 he lent his Fleet to Ferdinand the second, to make use of it against
Denmark, although he had oceasion for it himself in Prussia, against the
Swedes, who took this opportunity to insult the City of Dantzick.

So signal a service made Sigismund believe that the Emperor would succor him
upon the like occasion. The following Year he had need of some Troops to defend
Prussia against Gustavus, who wasted that Country. Walstein General of the
Imperial Army was ordered to send some Troops to the succor of the Polanders;
he sent 2000 Horse, and 5000 Foot thither under the command of Colonel Arnhem,
a Man of no Honor, and who was convicted of holding a Correspondence with the
Enemies of those to whose succor he was sent. Sigismund complained of the
Conduct of this Officer; he was recalled; and as they had taken a resolution to
deceive the Polanders in effect, and at the same time to oblige them in
appearance, they sent two other Commanders successively in his place: The first
was Henry Julius Duke of Saxe Lawenbourg, and the other Philip de Mansfeld, who
were both as useless to the Polanders as the first; and who were as much blamed
for their Cowardice as Arnhem had been for his want of Conduct and Treachery.

This Army, though it was so fatal to Poland, yet was well paid. Walstein in the
Year 1630. demanded the pay due to them, with his usual Haughtiness. The
Republic would have balanced it with what the Emperor owed for the Fleet that
was employed in h^s Service. But Interest going commonly beyon reason, the
Proposal, though just, was not hearkened to, and the Polanders were obliged in the
Year 1631. to pay down 50000 Florins of Gold for them, and had the
mortification to pay so dear for Troops who had done them as much hurt as those
of the Enemy.

The Polanders notwithstanding this rigor, had afterward recourse to the
Germans, in the Reign of King Casimir, who in his War with Sweden, received
some succors from the House of Austria. Those succors lived after the German
way; they plundered one part of the Kingdom, while the Enemy laid the other
waste: Notwithstanding which, these Auxiliary Troops must be paid: The
Republic was quite drained, and had no other way to satisfy the Germans, but
by Mortgaging to them the Salt Pits of the Kingdom, for some Years, which they
almost ruined by the great quantities of Salt they carried from thence, with a
greediness that cost the Polanders dear; they left no pillars to support the
Vaults of those vast Quarry's, in so much that they themselves were afraid of
being buried under their ruins, which obliged them to supply this defect by
wooden props, which they brought with little charge from the Neighboring
Forests. The time they were to enjoy them being expired, they set fire to the
props, and thereby hindered Poland from reaping any advantage from that which
they could no longer detain from them.

The second part of the Bishop of Cujavia's Book was an Encomium of Prince
James Sobieski, though at the same time there was nothing therein but what might
as justly be applied to any of his Competitors; he is, says he, sober,
watchful, liberal, and he loves Justice. But the Confession he made that that
Prince was no Warrior, effaced the Great Idea he would have given of him to a
Nation, which reckons Valor to be the first, and perhaps the chiefest Virtue.

The barbarous expressions which the Prelate made use of in describing his
Hero, were not to be understood by every body, Nque patrisat, neque matrisat;
every body put a different construction upon it, some saying, that, according
to this expression, he had neither the Courage of the King his Father, aor the
Cunning of the Queen his Mother. Others explained it more favorably, and
believed that it was said only to express his mildness and liberality. To put
the greater contempt both of the Book, and the Author, it was questioned to
whom the Bishop had done the greatest Injury, whether to the Prince, whom he
would have excluded; or to him for whom he designed the Crown.

The Abbot of Polignac printed some Reflections upon this Libel, and made use of
terms that were very well pleasing to the Polanders, whose Genius he knew, and
flattered, as well as their Sentiments, but it had not the same effect upon
Foreign Kingdoms. However this piece was applauded, and published in the
Country, for which alone it was composed, without being answered.

The Queen, who at last perceived the weakness of her Party, wrote to the
Emperor, and confessed to him, that almost the whole Nobility had declared for
France; that the only hope she had remaining, was to cause the Projects of that
Crown to miscarry; and that if his Imperial Majesty would concur with her in
this Design, the Enterprise would be easy. She proposed either Prince Charles
of Nieubourg, or the Duke of Lorrain, whose Faction being joined with hers,
would exclude their common Enemy. The Emperor, who knew that Prince James had
no share in the Election, was glad to see that the Queen was disabused. One of
the Princes she had proposed to him, was his Brother-in-law, and the other his
Nephew; and so near an Alliance would not suffer him to engage them seriously
in an Enterprise from which he foresaw they could not come off with Honor.
However, he was willing to make some advantage of the disposition the Queen was
in; and a Polish Senator one of his Inconstancy, presented a new Candidate,
whom the Council of Vienna thought fit not to neglect.

John Przependowski, Castellan of Culm, was the most intent of all the Polish
Gentlemen upon advancing his Fortune: He was an ingenious Man, and capable of
Intrigues; but his Courage was not answerable to his Address; which his Enemies
knowing, they often assaulted him, which he bore with an such Insensibility, as
rendered him despicable among all brave Men, and made them say, that a Man who
knows himself a Coward, ought not to be so Intriguing. This Defect had so much
stained his Reputation, that his Authority was considerably diminished thereby,
particularly in Prussia, after the time that he came the Burger-Master Deputy
of the City of Dantzick. He had been a Lutheran, and in the Late King's Reign
he turned Roman Catholic, to be made a Senator; the hopes of advancing himself
higher, made him side wih Prince James, as long as his Faction was superior to
that of the other Candidates. But when he found it began to decline, he in
November. 1696. became of the French Faction, and carried all the Prussians with
him; but his restless and turbulent Genius soon drew him over to another, only
because the Ambassador of that Crown did not confide enough in him, nor furnish
him with Money enough for his Insatiable Avarice.

His Treacheries to Prince James, and to the Prince of Baden, caused that
Minister to suspect him, and rendered him odious to the Lords of his Party, who
saw that this Man, being too much self-interested, did not adhere to the Prince
of Conti, neither out of Zeal to his Country, nor from any regard for true
Merit, but only in hopes to make his Fortune great under a Prince whom he
thought in a fair way of succeeding. This Senator reflecting on the other hand,
that those who were more deserving than himself, had embraced the French
Faction, and so prevented him; he was fully persuaded that they would have the
first Dignities of the Kingdom conferred upon them, to his prejudice. This
consideration obliged him to take other measures, and to search out such means,
as that the Sovereign who should be chosen, might wholly owe the Crown to him.

So sudden a Change joined to his former Treacheries, made those who could not
yet revenge themselves of his Perfidy, to curse and revile him, and to apply
this passage to him, Intravit autem Satanas in Judam qui cognominabatur
Iscariotes; meaning that the Devil had entered into a Traitor called
Przependowski.

He had married a Daughter of General Flemmings, who was in the Elector of
Brandenbourg's Service: He desired his Father-in-law to acquaint him with what
was said in the North of Germany, of the approaching Election in Poland. He
understood that the Elector of Saxony had an excessive desire for the Crown,
and that he only wanted the necessary Instructions for carrying on that
Enterprise. Przedendowski wrote immediately to the Chevalier Flemming, Colonel
of a Regiment in the Troops of Saxony, and Cousin German to his Wife; he
offered his Service to the Elector, and upon his Answer he went privately, in
February 1697. to Dresden, where he was received with all the demonstrations of
Friendship, Esteem and Assurance that Princes express to those who are useful
to them. He represented to the Elector the present State of Poland, That Prince
James was lost; that his Younger Brothers had no pretensions to the Crown; that
the Queen kept up her Faction with great difficulty, with the few Friends that
in Honor had not yet abandoned her; that her Complaisance for the French
Ambassador had stripped her of two Millions, which was the only thing could
re-establish the Affairs of her Eldest Son; that the Princes Charles of
Nieubourg, Leopold of Lorrain, and Lewis of Badcn, had no party; that that of
the Prince of Conti was really strong; but that it would not be impossible to
overthrow it, and to put his Electoral Highness in his place, if he would
follow the same Plan for himself, that the Fr. Ambassador had laid down for the
Prince of Conti: That that Minister had brought all Poland over to the Interest
of his Candidate, by making a solemn promise to the Republic to disburse three
Millions for paying the Army, and to pay the said Sum to the Commissaries
before the Election. That the second thing which that Minister desired of the
King his Master, was the Princes presence, which seemed to be necessary to
avoid the difficulties that might happen by by a Divsion, and the trouble of an
Embassy which could not go into France in a time of War.

Przependowski added, that the Abbot of Polignac could never perform his
promises, that since the five or six hundred thousand Franks which he had
received, only 600000 Livers were sent him by Bills of Exchange upon Dantzick;
that he had been obliged to protest the said Bills, and that the Queen was sure
enough of the Bankers of that City, to hope that that Minister would not be
better served hereafter: That it was not observed that the Court of France
pursued this Affair with the same vigor as others which they undertake; that
if they should pursue it with the same Zeal, they would be necessitated to send
their Money in specie that they might not be subject to the ill designs of the
Bankers; that they had occasion for their Money elsewhere, and that the War
which that Crown had with the most formidable Potentates of Europe, would
hinder him from exposing three Millions, and the person of the Prince on board
of Ships, which besides the danger of being cast away, would run a great risque
of being taken by the Fleet of England and Holland, which being superior in
strength, guarded all the Passes so narrowly, that the lightest Frigates could
not escape them. In fine, he concluded that it was his Electoral Highnesses
Interest to make good use of the sincerity of his Counsel, and to find the Sums
necessary for succeeding in so glorious an Enterprise, which was not difficult:
That for his part, he had not quitted the French Faction, had he not foreseen
better than another by assisting several times in Council, the Impossibility of
executing his designs without Money, and that the Ambassador of that Crown
waited in vain for new Bills of Exchange; that he had examined the Bankers, and
that by their Answers he knew very well that that Minister was in an error, of
which he did not think it proper to undeceive him.

The Castellan of Culm had reserved for his last proposal, that which he
believed would have been the most disagreeable to the Elector, which was, that
his Highness should turn Catholic, and promise that the Electress should also
abjure her Religion: He durst not quote himself for an example, but he cited
two others, by whose Authority he pretended that what he had done was not
criminal. The first was of the Elector of Saxony in the year 1530. when the
Emperor threatened to strip him of his Electoral Dignity, if he did not do his
Office of Constable of the Empire at a solemn Mass that was celebrated by the
Catholics at Ausbourg; the other happened ten years after in the person of the
Landgrave of Hesse, whom the Protestant Divines suffered at first to do the
Functions required by his Dignity, to draw himself out of the danger he was in
of losing it; that they would not have been more rigorous in regard of the
second; that they had authorized Polygamy in his favor, and had given him
leave to marry a 2d Wife, without requiring him to be divorced from his first;
that he did not believe the Saxon Divines were less indulgent for their Prince
than Luther and his Disciples had been in the past Age; that the present case
was more allowable, because a Crown depended upon it.

Przependowski spoke with so great a demonstration of love, as made him listen
to his discourses: That Prince applied himself more to satisfy the greediness
of his Nobility, than to consult his Divines, whose scruples might perhaps
retard a design which required to be forthwith put in execution. The Castellan
was charged to use his utmost Efforts in Poland, and in the mean time nothing
was to be omitted in Saxony that should be thought necessary to make it
succeed. He was promised that the Chevalier Flemming should be sent to put his
Orders in execution, before the meeting of the Diet; he received, at his
departure, some Presents, and was loaded with Honors and great Promises.

The Elector followed this Project exactly: He had some Conferences with the E.
of Brandenbourg, and caused some Troops to advance to Torgau, near Silesia,
under color of entering upon the Affair of the Succession of Mecklenburg, in
the Emperor's Name, which was disputed between the Princes of Swerin and
Gustraw; he sold his Right to the Duchy of Saxe Lawenburg, ^. to the Duke of
Hannover for 500000 Crowns. He demanded of the Emperor the payment of the
Subsidies that had been above three years due to him, and treated with the Jews
in his own Country; the chief of whom he sent to Warsaw to get Money in a
readiness against the time he should have occasion for it; he sold the Revenue
of his demain of Misnia, to the Lutheran Clergy of Saxony, and raised
extraordinary Contributions in his Dominions, pretending that it was for the
Campaign in Hungary. New Money was by his Orders coined at Breslau, which did
not give content to those who received it. In fine, he put in practice all the
Artifices that could be used by any Man who designed to procure a Crown to
himself, and who is capable enough of finding means to attain it.

After having thus taken all his measures, he sent the Baron de Rose, who was
one of his Lieutenant Generals to Rome: This Officer was admitted to Audience
of the Pope, and unfolded to him the Mystery of the pretended Conversion of his
Master, and his designs of obtaining the Crown of Poland. This News was the
more agreeable, because it was hoped that Saxony, which in the last Age had
been the Cradle of Lutheranism, might now in this, be its Grave.

4. This News was no less agreeable to the Court of Vienna, than it had been to
that of Rome, but the Motive of it was not so pure. It was not doubted but that
the Elector designed to turn Catholic, and that he would abjure Lutheranism.
It was known that the proud Humor of this Ambitious Prince would attempt any
thing to put a Crown upon his head; that Religion was never regarded by the
Saxons, but with reference to Politics; that in the Age past Frederick and his
Successors embraced Lutheranism, that they might enjoy the Church Lands; and
that Frederick Augustus their Successor, would renounce it with as much ease as
his predecessors had embraced it, so soon as he should find the like; or
greater advantages therein.

Some other Reasons than those of Religion obliged the Court of Vienna to
support his pretensions. The Emperor had a War to maintain upon the Rhine, and
upon the Danube. The Efforts of the League were not sufficient against two
potent Enemies, and the Forces of the Empire, and of their Allies, would have
had much ado, in a profound Peace with the Turk, to stop the progress of the
French. The Elector of Saxony had engaged himself to furnish 10000 Men, besides
his Quota, to act against the Turks in Hungary; the Emperor, who had not
wherewithal to pay his Troops, had Mortgaged the Duchy's of Brieg, Lignits, and
Wolau in Silesia, to him, for the same. It was foreseen that this Prince would
have more to do in Poland than he imagined, and that the Protection of the
Emperor would be absolutely necessary for him; therefore they were resolved to
make him buy it dear, and perhaps to give up that Mortgage without paying any
thing for it. The Elector seemed resolved to grant every thing, provided he
were not crossed in his Election; and being dazzled with the Luster of a Crown,
he was willing to expose himself to the Charges and the Danger there was in
obtaining it.

The Council of Vienna had still other pretensions, far more considerable than
the former. The House of Austria had in the beginning of this Age disputed the
Kingdom of Bohemia with Frederick Elector Palatine; the Duke of Saxony
preferring his own particular Interest to that of the Protestant Religion, he
sided with the Emperor, and in conjunction with the Duke of Bavaria, he had
taken upon him to execute a Decree whereby the Elector Palatine was banished
the Empire. As those two Princes had thereby engaged themselves in great
Charges, the Investiture of the Electorate whereof the Palatine was to be
stripped, was given to Bavaria, and Saxony had stipulated that Luzace, which is a
dependence of the Crown of Bohemia, should be given to him. This Province was
promised him by the Treaty of 1620. and it was executed in the Year 1622.
because the Emperor had still occasion for him.

The Electors of Saxony have ever since kept Luzace, and the House of Austria
has often contrived how to snatch from them a Province which it grieved them
to part from.

The present Conjuncture seemed to favor the Designs of the Council of Vienna.
They upheld the Elector, and confirmed him in the thoughts he had of being King
of Poland. He wanted Men and Money to dispute that Crown. The Emperor offered
him both, to engage him, and he did not despair but that Prince would be
willing to lose a Province to gain a Kingdom: In case of Refusal he might be
obliged by force (while he was employed elsewhere) to part from that which he
would not have been willing to do with consent. If his Affairs should prove
better than 'twas wished, the Emperor had another advantage, though less
considerable, yet nearer in view. Hungary was the Theater of a Bloody War: The
German Garrisons ruined what the Turks had not destroyed: And under pretense of
succouring the Elector, it was proposed to send some Troops to Poland, to which
that Kingdom should give Winter Quarters and Provisions.

While the Elector of Saxony was Treating in Foreign Courts, the Polanders, who
were at Paris, wished to see the Prince, who was mentioned to them in all the
Letters they received out of their own Country. Francis Fredi du Moulinet the
French Gentleman, mentioned in the Election of King Casimir, introduced them to
the Palace of that Prince, who received them after so obliging a manner, that
they began to regard as their Sovereign, a Prince who treated them as his
Friends.

These Lords being ready to set out for Poland, in order to assist at the Diet,
prayed du Moulinet to give them some Information of the Life and Actions of a
Prince for whom they had conceived so great an Esteem.

Du Moulinet, who had already wrote to the Bishop of Plosko, to the Abbot
Theodore Wolf, and to the Palatine of Culm upon the same Subject, was very
willing to give those Gentlemen the satisfaction they desired; and he also
thought it proper to speak of the Princess, to remove the scruple that the
Polanders might have to see a French Woman upon the Throne, after what had
happened in the former Reign. We shall here relate Du Moulinets own words,
because they were agreeable to the Polanders, and had the Effect desired.

Francis Louis of Bourbon, Prince of Conti, of the Blood of France, born the
30th of April 1664. began his first Campagn in 1683. and continued it in 1684.
but seeing that a Truce was concluded between France, the Empire and Spain, he
thought that Glory called him elsewhere.

This Prince went out of France in the Year 1685. in order for Poland: But the
Elector of Bavaria, through whose Dominions he past, persuaded him to go into
Hungary, where he was the Subject of the Admiration of the Germans, as he would
have also been of the Poles, if he had pursued his first design.

In 1686. he returned to France, and retired to the Great Prince of Conde his
Uncle, who died the same Year; Providence not having been willing to call him,
till after he had trained up a General, who one day should be as great as
himself.

The Year 1688. was no less Glorious to that Prince than the preeeding Years;
he accompanied the Dauphin to the Siege of Philipsbourg. Those two young Hero's
were looked upon by the Enemy as if they had been the greatest Captains of
Antiquity; they knew that they had the same Virtues, while France rejoiced that
they were not so old.

We will not say what Pr. Conti did during that War, no body is ignorant of it.
The Germans, the Spaniards and the Hollanders have proofs of it, that were as
advantageous to France, as fatal to the League of Ausbourg.

The Valor, Prudence, Mildness, Moderation, and other great Qualities of that
Prince, make him to be thought deserving of a Crown; if the only Nation that
can give it him does Justice to his Merits, they will know.

Ad sciti quantum praemineant genitis. He married Mary Theresa of Bourbon,
Granddaughter of the Great Prince of Conde. This Princess is an Example of
Virtue for persons of her Sex, of whose weakness she had nothing; Pious without
Ostentation, is Liberal without Prodigality, and far from being vain; she knows
how to keep the Dignity of her Rank. When the Prince is in the War, she strips
her self of those things that are most precious to her, and after the example
of her whom the Ancients proposed as a Model of Virtue, she says, Induat illa
Quae -- Bellante potest gaudere Marito.


While the Prince of Conti's Friends neglected nothing that could contribute to
his Elevation, John Przependowski, whom we have mentioned, was returned from
Dresden into Poland; he had so little Credit in the Kingdom, that he knew not
which way to begin his New Negotiation: It was agreed that it must be kept
secret, because if he had openly proposed the Elector, they would have accused
him, that he had a design to pervert Poland: It was equally dangerous for him
to speak, or to hold his Tongue; and he who had so boldly given counsel, found
himself not in a condition to follow it himself. In this trouble he wrote to
the Chevalier Flemming, that the Ambassador of France was quiet, that no body
fell off from him, and that without Money he had overthrown the Factions of the
Queen, and of the other pretenders; that he must address himself to that
Minister, who being disappointed of the Fundamental Succors that he had so
long expected, had apparently, a secret Order from the King his Master, to
abandon that Negotiation, and to make the best of a bad Market.

Upon these Advices Flemming arrived secretly at Warsaw, and on the second of
May delivered a Letter from his Master, to the Abbot de Polignac; by which that
Prince would make him believe that he had treated these two Months at Rome with
the Most Christian King, by the Mediation of Cardinal Janson; That in all
appearance he had Orders from the King, and that he prayed him to confide in
the Bearer of his Letter, and to agree with him about all things, as well for
the satisfaction of the King his Master, as for his own particular. Flemming
delivered also a Letter to the Cardinal, who returned an Answer to it, which
was as disagreeable to the Court of Dresden, as that of the Ambassador. This
Minister had answered in very civil terms, that he had no Orders to Treat; that
the Affairs of France never had better footing in Poland than now; that the
Report that was spread abroad, that he wanted Money, was nothing but an Artifice
of the Queen; and that the Prudence of the King his Master was too great, to
let him want in time of need.

The French Ambassador was touched to the quick to see a New Candidate appear;
if he had had earlier notice of it, he would have obtained his Exclusion in the
petty Diets, but they were over, and the Nobility were flocking from all parts
to Warsaw, with displayed Colors, to assist at the General Assembly. He
foresaw very well that Przependowski had caused his Advice to be highly
esteemed at Dresden: The little Confidence that Poland had in this Senator,
persuaded him that some other persons must be concerned in the same Intrigue,
and at last he discovered a Mystery, which they studied to keep concealed from
him.

Davia the Pope's Nuncio had formerly carried Arms in the Morea, in the Service
of the Venetians: He afterward turned Priest, and had been Inter-Nuncio at
Brussels, Nuncio at Cologne, and from thence nominated to the Nunciature of
Poland. He was Nephew to Marshal Caprara, so noted in the Wars of Hungary. The
Marquis Davia his Nephew, was in the Service of his Imperial Majesty, when he
was taken some Years ago Prisoner by the Turks. The Infidels, who would not set
him to Ransom, had confined him to the Castle of the seven Towers, so that
'twas thought he would end his days in Slavery. The Nuncio being alarmed with
the Captivity of his Nephew, made his Application to the Countess d' Altemonte,
his Sister-in-law, who was Lady of Honor to the Queen of England, who was very
willing to pray the King of France to Interpose his Authority to procure the
Liberty of a Gentleman who was under her protection. The King's Ambassador at
the Port had Orders to Negotiate the Liberty of this Young Lord; the Turks
refused to treat, and the Nuncio made Poland to Echo again with his
Complaints, as if that Minister had done him an ill Office, because he could
not do him a good one. Nevertheless the Nuncio understanding that the Elector
of Saxony detained a Bassa, who was taken Prisoner at Temiswar, he proposed to
that Prince to exchange him against the Young Marquess Davia; his Electoral
Highness consented thereto, and the Proposal was made to the Turks, who
approved of the same, and accordingly put it in execution.

There needed no more to make the Nuncio a Friend to the Elector, Enemy to
France, and suspected by the Ambassador of that Crown. That Minister went to
see him in order to discover his Sentiments in relation to the Election. The
Nuncio declared that he would never suffer the Crown of Poland to fall upon the
Head of a Heretical Prince, or whose Conversion was suspected: Notwithstanding
his protestations, and the sincerity which he affected to make show of, his
Sentiments were known as well as the dissimulation that is so customary to
people of his Country.

While the Ministers of the several pretenders to the Crown were carrying on
their Intrigues the time of the meeting of the Diets was come. The Primate,
according to custom, opened the same by a Mass of the Holy Ghost. There was
never so great Debates in any Election as in this, about the Choice of a
Marshal. This Officer was to have been chosen out of the Deputies of Great
Poland, because it was his Rank. The Queen's Faction, and the great General
used their utmost endeavors to make it fall upon Starosta Odalanowski,
Grandson to the Great General, and Son to Count Leszchinski, Palalatine of
Lencicia and Starost General of Great Poland; but those three Lords were found
to be too ill-affected, to give them that satisfaction, and the other
pretenders agreed in nothing else among themselves, but to exclude them.

They would all have conferred that Honor on Count Humiecki, Master of the
Household of Podolia, as well because of his own personal Merit, as that of the
Palatine of Kiow his Uncle, who past for the uprightest Lord of Poland, and one
who best understood the Art of War. Humiecki, as I have already told you, had
been Director of the Preliminary Diet, and the Law hindered him from being
continued in this. There were eight others of the French Faction who would not
yield their Pretensions, and the Ambassador of that Crown found it more
difficult to make th^^ agree among themselves, than to exclude his Enemies.

Prince Casimir Czartoreski of the Ancient House of Lithuania, was not of a
Constitution strong enough to undergo the Fatigues of that troublesome
Employment, and therefore quitted his pretensions to it; his Moderation, and
the Justice he did himself, was an example to some others.

In effect Count Branicki, great Master of the Household of the Crown, and
Son-in-law to the Palatine of Vilna, confessed that his slowness of Speech
rendered him less fit for that Employ than another, and that he wished his
Friends might reap the benefit of his Misfortunes.

Potuliski, Starost of Borzekow; and Czapski, Starost of Klek, had equal Voices
in Prussia; the Emulation of those two Lords was so great, that there was no
appearance that they would give way to one another. It was therefore
represented to them, that there was but one Office to fill; that they could not
both have it, and that it was their parts to agree between themselves: But each
of them chose rather to quit his pretensions, than to yield to his Rival.

The same means were used in regard to the Count Sapieha and Dzialinski, the
former was great Carver of Lithuania; and the latter of the Crown, and
Treasurer of Prussia; Sapieha was jealous of him. They were promised that the
Master of the House of Lithuania, their Relation, should be Marshal of the Diet
of the Coronation, if they would desist from their pretensions this time, to
which they agreed. His Competitor, who knew nothing of this Treaty, consented
to do the like, and thought he had gained enough in depriving his Rival of an
advantage, which the Credit and Alliance of his Party would hinder him from
procuring to himself.

There remained only the Counts Mieszinski Starost of Wielun, and Bielinski
great Chamberlain of the Crown; the giving over of these before, was not
favorable to the first, who making a Virtue of the weakness of his Party,
agreed with the other pretenders to that Employ to give his Vote, and to
procure those of his Friends for Count Bielinski. The Abbot of Polignac, whom
those eight Lords had chosen to be Judge of their Difference, inclined for the
last; because he had married the Daughter of Count Morstein, formerly great
Treasurer of Poland, who in the Year 1683. retired into France, where he had
made great Purchases; besides that his Lady, who had as much Credit among the
Nobility of the two Orders, as power over her Husband's Mind, was entirely
devoted to France.

The contrary Party had also resolved that no other Director of the Diet should
be chosen than the Son of the Palatine of Le^cicia; and the Obstinacy of both
Parties occasioned the Election to be deferred; while this was in debate, there
were some Deputies who would examine the Grievances of the Nation against the
Royal Family, before all things; and the Partisans of the latter demanded that
the two Treasurers should be called to an Account. Thus the two Parties by
Mutual Accusations thought of nothing but to shift off this Inquiry, and did
not trouble themselves about the Election of the Marshal.

Others were obstinately resolved to convict and punish the Authors of the
Confederacy of the Armies, and they applied themselves the more vigorously
thereto, because every one hoped to be gamers thereby. Toward the end of the
Year 1696. a Detachment of the Army which remained faithful, being out upon a
Party, returned laden with Booty, but such as was more considerable in effect
than in appearance: The Soldiers had seized some Barrels of Herrings that were
a carrying to the Confederates; twenty thousand Ducats were found in them; such
sorry Fish had never so good pickle before: Every one was desirous to know the
Author of this Stratagem, some to punish him, and the most part to feel the
like effects of his Liberality.

All those Debates deferred the Choice of the Marshal; they were obliged to
choose him by Poll; all the Gentlemen gave their Votes one after another to
Humiecki, who was appointed to take the same, which took up much time. In fine,
the French Ambassador had the satisfaction, that he for whom he concerned
himself, carried it on the 15th of June by many thousand Voices. Bielinski at
this rate obtained a Dignity, which he was to enjoy a much less time than he
spent in arriving to it.

The Choice of the Marshal was not the only thing to be terminated, that of a
King was of Greater consequence: The Diet was to last but twelve days; the
Nobility were impatient of this delay; they began to want provisions, Money,
and Hungarian Wine; and the Sums that the pretenders to the Crown distributed
among them, did not answer the Avarice of those who were only come to sell
their Votes.

The Lords were as much tired as the Gentry because of the great Expense they
were obliged to be at, which was so excessive, that the great Treasurer of the
Crown had defrayed the whole Palatinate of Russia, which is composed of 12000
Gentlemen, for several days, and the other Heads of Factions had been no less
prodigal.

The Election of the Marshal was a lively representation of that of the King;
the two Parties had measured their strength; that which was forced to yield,
was in a confusion, and breathed nothing but Revenge, they desired that the
Votes should be cast up, and this small comfort was granted them. Odalanowski
was the most Interested, and shame had made him to retire, that he might not be
a Witness of the superiority of his Enemies, and his own weakness. His
Partisans were more constant than he; they demanded that the Marshal Elected,
should give out no Diploma in case of a Division, without the Consent of the
Republic; this had been formerly practiced in the Election of King Michael,
wherefore they were willing to follow his example; and though it was perceived
that they designed a double Election, yet this favor was granted them, which
in reality seemed to be just, but which ought to have been refused to people
whose Invention it was to make ill use of it.

They endeavored to repair, by this Negotiation, the disgrace which had happened
to them: Przependowski redoubled his efforts to ruin a Faction which he had
represented to be so weak, and remonstrated that the Elector performed his
promises, while the Minister of France would do nothing but give fair promises.
He treated at the same time with the contrary Party, and sought by the same
Artifices and means to put them out of conceit with Pr. James and the other
Candidates; and in fine, he flattered himself that the two Parties would concur
with his design without knowing it. The Irresolution of the Palatine of Vilna
gave him great hopes. In effect, this Lord being blinded by the discourses of
the Castellan of Culm, complained in the Council held on the 16th of June at
the Cardinals, that the promises of France were not put in execution, that the
Prince was at too great a distance, and that the Sums for paying of the Army,
were not yet arrived. The Ministers of that Crown refuted his discourse with so
much vigor, that he was forced to submit, and to promise by a new Oath which
the Cardinal took first, and the rest afterward, never to choose another King
than the Pr. of Conti And as they still hoped that the remittances would arrive
at Dantzick by the time of the Election, and that they doubted not but that
France would remove this Obstacle, they resolved to remove the other, and to
sign and dispatch the Letters, which they had already wrote, to the Prince of
Conti, to hasten his departure, of which they had suspended the signing only in
expectation of the Remittances.

The 17th of June, and the two following days were employed in Intrigues, and
secret Negotiations by the Ministers of the several pretenders to the Crown,
and the same days were spent in Debates in the Diet. The Enemies of the Royal
Family spoke a second time of Accusations, and Recoveries against the Late
Kings Heirs. It was answered, that they must before all things examine the
Accounts of the Treasurers: The discussion of those two heads was too long for
the little time that remained, so it was remitted to the Diet for the
Coronation, and the parties did not obstinately insist upon the same; every one
was willing to defer an Examination which could have nothing but troublesome
Consequences. If they could have been as easily appeased, as to the rest, they
would not have been irreconcilable, and their Enmity would not have proved so
fatal to the Republic.

It is very difficult for those that only design mischief, to be long quiet.
The Queens friends revived the Coequation, the Enemies of the house of Sapieha
Joined with them, and the Nobility of Lithuania being Jealous of the fortune
and Splendour of that Family, backed this proposal. The Partisans of France
would not uphold the Sapieha's in this affair, but in so far as they should see
them faithful to the Prince of Conti; Nevertheless as that might have divided
the Partisans of the Prince, those who were the most addicted to him, referred
the decision thereof till after the Diet of the Coronation; and it was resolved
to give Audience to the Ambassadors after next Morning.

The Popes Nuncio was Introduced on the 20th of June with the usual Ceremonies;
he exhorted the Nobility to make Choice of a Catholic King, and of one who
might be useful to the Church and Kingdom. His Harangue though not long was
tiresome; because he who pronounced it had meddled too much with Intrigues, and
had not had the Moderation which he whose Minister he was recommended to him,
in respect of the most worthy of the pretenders to the Crown.

The Bishop of Passaw had been Chosen by his Imperial Majesty to be his
Ambassador; he was Son to Count Lumberg whom the Emperor had done the honor to
Confide in, and likewise had a great esteem for; he had received sensible
proofs of it in his life time; and his family had received the like after his
death. This Prelate arrived at Vienna the latter end of April, and set out the
third of May, by post, to assist at the Diet; He had received with his
Instructions Bills of Exchange which he was forced to protest upon his Arrival:
He knew that without Money business languish'd and had no success particularly
in Poland. He sent back to Vienna for a supply; that Court was not Ignorant of
the Necessity there was of Satisfying his demand: In the Mean time the report
was spread abroad that that Minister had no money. He neglected to give out
that he had remedied that misfortune, and the want of this precaution might
perhaps be partly the cause of the disgrace that happened to him.

He set out from Vienna with a small train, and Decency obliged him to have a
retinue worthy of him whose person he represented; he gathered together Several
Germans he had found at Warsaw, who served him in stead of a life guard when
the Marshal of the Diet came to Conduct him to the Assembly. That Officer
perceived that the guards of this Minister carried their drawn Swords about him
with their points up; he threatened to Cut them in pieces if they continued
their March in this Ceremony, and he being the strongest they were forced to
obey.

The great Secretary of the Crown received from the hands of this Prelate, the
Emperors Letter: As that Officer carried it to the Primate he saw that the
Direction was inclytae Reipublice. This was thought to proceed from pride, and
the opinion was grounded, upon that the Emperor Maximilian, being Competitor
with Battori for the Crown, affected the same style, and that his Letter had
then met with a bad reception. The Ambassador who had not foreseen this
difficulty, demanded leave to excuse it in a full Diet. On the 21st he was
permitted to do it on condition that he would add the word Serenissimae with
his own hand, and promise that his Imperial Majesty should Agree to it; he
excused it, by reason he was not permitted to alter any thing of the style of
the Chancery, and so his Letter was not received.

These Mortifications were but a Preludium of those that were to happen to him
that same day. Those of this Retinue had placed themselves about him, which
hindered him from being seen, wherefore a sign was made for them to retire,
upon which they prostrated themselves upon the Ground and put themselves into
the posture of Malefactors who expected to receive the fatal blow. The
Ambassador began his discourse, which he read upon his paper, and recommended
Prince James Sobieski as a fit person for the Crown. He was interrupted several
times during his harangue because he made use of the terms of Vos, instead of
those Terms of honor, which ought to be used when one Speaks to a free and
Crown^d Republic; As he continued to read the same way, and did not change his
Expressions, the Poles ceased not to reproach him; this so enraged him that he
was seized with a bleeding at the Nose which together with the Clamours of the
People, hindered him from going on, and deliverd him a little sooner out of
that great perplexity.

The Ambassador of France was to speak the Next day which was the 22th. The
opposite function prepared to Interrupt him and to revenge themselves of what
had happened the Night before. They knew that Minister to be a man who would
not have suffered this affront tamely; he had Notice of it, and that
Jablonowski great Ensign of the Crown and Son to the Castellan of Cracow had
said to Prince Lubomirski Starost of Olsztin; You have Insulted our Ambassador,
to Morrow we shall have Satifaction upon yours. This and some other particular
reasons made the Abbot de Polignac think that it was not proper to Venture
himself; But he Printed his proposals and Caused them to be distributed
throughout every Palatinat, signed with his own hand and sealed with his Coat
of Arms. This precaution had all the Effect he could expect from his harangue.

The 23d which was Sunday and the 24th being St. John's day were spent in
private Negotiations. The Complement that was passed upon the French Ambassador
the 23d was enough to puzzle an Able Man. The Bishop of Plosko Dzialinski and
Wapowski came to wait upon him, saying, that his Friends would do nothing
without first acquainting him with it; That they prayed him to have regard to
the misfortunes wherewith all Poland was threatened, that the Division that was
foreseen was Inevitable, since he could not give orders for the essential
succors which alone were Capable either to hinder or to extinguish it; that a
medium was found out which would settle the Quiet of the Republic, secure the
honor of France, and be no prejudice to his Excellency. This Expedient was to
Consent to the Choice of the Elector of Saxony; whom they would oblige to
restore to the most Christian King, the Money which he had expended, and that
the said Prince would do for the Ambassador all that the Acknowledgements of a
Prince, who should owe the Crown to him, could require.

The Abbot of Polignac had been acquainted with the design over Night, by Count
Wladislas Priemski, Castelan of Kalish, the truest Friend he had; and withal
the bravest Man in Poland. He was a Man that tempered his Courage with
matchless Prudence, and knew how to turn the Crossest Accident to his own
Advantage. Every one wondered that such contrary Virtues should agree to lodge
in one Breast; and indeed 'twas a hard matter to determine whether his Conduct
in Peace or War was his greatest Excellency.

The Ambassador and he had agreed upon what they were to say; and in order to
discourse the Deputies upon the Resolutions they had taken, the former appeared
among 'em in the Council, where he represented to them that 'twas their
interest to prevent the Election of the Duke of Saxony; that he believed the
Nation was two jealous of their Liberties, to deliver themselves up to the
Germans, whom they had always rejected upon such occasions; and should that
Elector compass his design, that the Catholic Religon and their Liberties
would be equally in danger. He remonstrated to them, what a shame it was for
the Poles, at a time when their Senate consisted only of Popish Members, to
suffer their Crown to sit on a Lutheran Prince's Head. He added, that he knew
not how Poland could answer the just reflections of the Holy See, which would
never grant King Casimir a Title to Orthodoxy, till he had expelled the
Heretics out of the Senate, and several parts of the Kingdom.

Having thus charged them with weakness, he came at length to threats; and told
them, that, without dependence upon them, he had a Body of Nobility to stand by
him; and, if after all, his Candidate could not mount the Throne, that his
Party would at least be strong enough to fortify Prince James's, which he was
going to join, and hoped the Cardinal and other Lords would follow his Example.

It Is certain the Ambassador had some ground for what he said: For the
Cardinal, and the Houses of Sapieha, and Lubomirski, were sure of fourteen or
fifteen Palatina^^. Besides, this Minister had by some other ^^triegues secured
those of Prussia, Plosko, Novogred, and a part of Sandomiers. And at the same
time Count Priemski was Master of those of Posen and Kalish. Accordingly the
sequel gave them to know that the Ambassador was able to put his Threats in
E^^cution, and that the French faction which was given out to be so low, was a
third part stronger than they imagined.

Nearness to danger gives courage to encounter it. The Threats of the
Ambassador, and the fear of falling under the Government of the Queen,
confirmed them in their first sentiments; and accordingly they promis^^ a third
time to act honorably in the matter, and without any further failure. There
was only Krziszpin Palatin of Witeps, and Morstein Castellan of Czerske who
were engaged by the Castelan of Culm, by a bribe of two thousand Crowns given
them, upon Promise and Oath: But the other Lords were ashamed of their
perfidiousness, and declared openly that the baseness of two men whose quality
was disputed, ought not to reflect upon the true Nobility of Poland, that
abhorred their Treachery.

From the time of the Election of the Mareshal, Przependouski had flattered
himself with hopes of improving his Interest by the Inconstancy of the Palatin
of Vilna, thinking that others might follow his Example* But he was out in his
measures upon the score, though he succeeded well in another Project. The Queen
had conveyed her two Millions to France; and was glad they were not returned to
Poland. She had laid out Thirty Thousand Crowns, to no purpose, upon the
Election of a Mareshal; and what by that and other prodigal measures had quite
exhausted her Treasures; and was galled to see the French faction rise upon the
ruins of hers', without expending such large Sums. Prince James had spent all
his Money, and the Heads of his Party threatened to abandon him, if he did not
find some before the Election: His last shift was to make his address to the
Bishop of Passaw. Accordingly he sent the Bishop of Cujavia, the Castelan of
Cracow, and Palatin of Braslaw to ask some Money of him, which the Promises and
Protection of the Emperor had given him Ground to hope for. That Bishop had an
Hundred and Fifty Thousand Crowns by him besides Jewels; but thought it scarce
worth the while to revive a party that was already so far gone: He told them,
in that juncture of Affairs, 'twas indifferent to his Imperial Majesty, whether
they chose Prince James or any other Candidate, providing they kept out the
Prince of Conti: That the only effectual way to prevent that Prince's being
Elect was to make the best advantage of his Distance, the difficulty of his
Passage, and the scarcity of French Money in Poland; that 'twas their business
to examine which of the Candidates was best able to make his pretensions good,
and endeavor to support him; unless they had a mind to sink under the Triumphs
of the Cardinal and the Families of Sapieha and Lubomirski, and their other
declared Enemies; and that for his part, both his Money and his Credit should
be at the Service of him that could make the strongest faction.

They ran over all the Candidates of the House of Austria. The Duke of Lorrain
was at Olmutz with the Queen Eleonor his Mother. The Duke of Nieubourg was at
Breslaw in Silesia. Both of them knew the importance of their Neighborhood;
but to what purpose should Princes stir, that are at once destitute of Money
and Troops? The Elector of Saxony was likewise in Silesia at the head of his
Troops, ready to enter the Kingdom: His pretended abjuration was then public,
and believed by all those whom Przependouski's Credit, or that Prince's
Interest could prevail with: His Money was in readiness, and those who could
not satisfy their avarice with three Millions from the Queen and Prince James,
might be gained by his Twelve; and besides, he had an Army able to repair the
weaknesses of their Party. Upon this consideration they resolved to declare for
him, and told Prince James he must lay down three hundred thousand Crowns,
ready Money, or else expect no service from them. Prince James replied, 'twas
to no purpose to a^^ Money of him, after they had taken all from him; that
since he was so unhappy as to be abandoned by those whom he took for his
Friends, he renounced his Pretensions, and entreated them to employ all their
Interest for his Brother in Law the Prince of Nieubourg; that by so doing they
would serve him under his misfortune, and perhaps engage the compassion of the
Emperor and Empress in his behalf. But these good Friends minded but little a
recommendation that was not accompanied with liberality.

The 24th in the Morning, the Heads of the Party met in Council, to consult
what Faction they should join themselves to. Potoski Palatin of Cracow and
little Crown-General, had no inclination for the Duke of Saxony; but would have
preferred the Duke of Lorrain, if he had had Money to give him. He gave the
Cardinal and French Ambassador to know, that if they would consign sixty
thousand Crowns, and give him the half on it by way of advance, he would deliver
up himself and his whole faction to them. But they had not Money enough to buy
him, and so lost the opportunity. In fine, he sold himself to Saxony, more out
of Avarice than Affection. Jablonowski Crown General, Joseph Sluska Castelan of
Vilna and little-General of Lithuania, the Bishop of Cujavia, the Vice
Chancellor Tarlow, and several others followed their Example. The Palatin of
Lencicia was not among them. He expected his Son should have been made Mareshal
of the Diet; and being disappointed fell into a Fever that rendered him
senseless, till a few days after the Election.

Borouski Castelan of Dantzick, gave the French Ambassador Intelligence of the
Resolutions of that Assembly: And the Ambassador presently acquainted his own
Faction with it. His Faction was composed of two sorts of Men, that seemed
equally to favor the Prince of Conti: the one had a Personal respect for him;
the other acted with no other view but to exclude Prince James and the Royal
Family. Prince James's Renunciation made them look more indifferently upon all
the Competitors, so that in two or three Palatinates, they gave in Conti in the
first place, and the Duke of Saxony in the next. It Is true those who did so,
were afterward troubled about it; but 'twas in vain to repent when they had
not time to remedy it.

The French Ministers endeavored to redress the fault, though 'twas not
committed by them. For that end they drew up three Arguments against Saxony,
which would certainly have cast him, had they been able to back them with
bounty. They objected first his Country, which had always been odious to the
Poles, but his Money answered for that: Then they represented his strength and
power, and indeed 'twas that that supported his feeble Pretensions: And lastly,
they put the Poles in mind of his Religion, which was the strongest Motive of
all. To obviate this Objection, that Prince's Favorites had spread a report
that he had been converted to the Romish Faith two years before: But that was
looked upon as fabulous. So they were forced to look out for some better
evidence; and accordingly met with a Prelate that was not very scrupulous in
serving them.

Christian Augustus of Saxezeitz, a Kinsman of the Elector's, had formerly been
of the Lutheran Communion: Upon what motives he departed from it, we shall not
enquire. His Preferment he owed to the Emperor, who in the Month of April,
1696. removed him from Cologne, where he had been Canon and Grand Provost, and
put him in possession of the rich Bishopric of Raab in Hungary: And upon the
Emperor's recommendation his Holiness's Bull was obtained Gratis. This New
Prelate being willing to serve his his Family, and withal to give proof of his
grattude his to Benefactor, did yield to their importunity in signing an
Attestation, that on the second of June, being Trinity Day, the Elector of
Saxony had made an Abjuration at Vienna before him. General Fleming showed the
Certificate to every one, but could convince none. They credited this
Attestation, no more than the report of his Abjuration at Rome two years
before; because neither the Church nor Witnesses were mentioned, and they would
not take a Lutheran's Abjuration upon a Calvinist's word. Besides, the Duke had
been observed to follow the Lutheran Communion since that time; and those who
were convinced of the matter of Fact, could not excuse such a sinful relapse;
nay the most judicious looked upon the action as a Crime that Politics might
disguise, but Repentance alone could expiate.

The Abbot of Polignac and his Colleague improved these Reasons to that
advantage, that the more reasonable sort of People were guarded against all
surprises upon that Head. They represented the whole as an Artifice to procure
a Rupture; and told them his Favorers furnished themselves with those
pretexts, in order to get an Army into the Kingdom to attack their Laws and
Public Liberty. These Reflections had a great influence upon the Body of the
People, but those who had sold themselves to the Saxons did not trouble
themselves, having resolved to sacrifice their Liberties, Religion and Country
to sordid Avarice.

The 26th of June all the Palatinates assembled. That Day was appointed for
adjusting the preliminaries, for the Election was to be determined as next Day.
All the Gentry being in number above a Hundred Thousand, appeared in the Fields
of Warsaw; every Palatinate under their own Standard, divided into Companies,
the biggest containing eight or nine Hundred Men, and the least two Hundred.
They were all on Horseback, excepting a few on Foot, that followed the Cavalry,
and were drawn up behind them. These were the poorer sort of Gentry which could
not go to the charge of a Horse; they were armed with Scythes, without Sabres,
and appeared as formidable as the others, and had an equal right to Vote.

Each Senator made Harangues to his own Palatinate, in order to recommend his
own designs, and direct them in the Election. The Bishop of Plosko had no
sooner made an end of his harangue, but the Palatinate of the same Name cried
long live Conti; and drew their Sabres. This universal acclamation did at once
encourage the French, and mortify the opposite Faction.

The Palatinates of Siradia and Rava followed the Example of Plosko; and the
three from Prussia did the same. Nay the Election was almost anticipated
through the impatience of the Noblility to be under a Sovereign that seemed
only capable to restore the Kingdom to its ancient Splendour.

Przependouski observing the fury of the Prussians endeavored to put a stop to
it, in telling them the Duke of Saxony was as good for them as the Prince of
Conti: Whereupon Czapski, Chamberlain of Mariembourg replied, Why Traitor, is
this thy Oath? And at the same time shot a Pistol at him, which would have
killed him had, not a Priest put it by with his Cane. Though 'twas an act of
Charity that merited approbation, yet it drew more Curses than Thanks upon the
Priest.

Others were stunned with their forwardness, and apprehensive of a surprise;
and to put a stop to the Career protested against the Cardinal, the Bishop of
Plosko, the Palatin of Culum, the Lubomirski's, Sapieha's, and Radgivil, as
having concerted a disorderly Election, in opposition to the Laws, which
require that the Candidates should be first proposed. They on the other hand,
out of tenderness to some of their Party, yielded to the Legal form, and so
lost the opportunity of compassing their designs, that was now a second time
thrown into their Lap.

Had they kept up to the ardor of the Palatinates, the Duke of Saxony had been
buried in Oblivion: For the greater part of the Gentry, had never heard of any
other Candidates beside the Prince of Conti and James Sobieski, and were
entirely engaged to the former, without dreaming of any other pretensions. Br
(...) aw prevailed, and stifled their Acclamations; the Decision being put off
till the next Day.

Both the Ministers of France and their Adversaries were equally in suspense,
and run busily about all that Day and the succeeding Night. The one entertained
the Gentry with the Story of the Elector's Conversion, which they would fain
have passed for a truth: The other cndeavoured by all means to convince them of
its falsity. Both of them made their Address to the Pope's Nuncio, who found
himself in a quandary; but to satisfy both Parties, promised the one he would
confirm the Bishop of Raab's Certificate with his own Attestation, and at the
same time assured the other he would not do it; perhaps for a salvo to his
word, he meant he would not do it next day.

On the 26th they assembled early in the Morning in St. John's Church, were the
Cardinal Primate said Mass, and the Bishop of Plosko made a Sermon, in which he
compared himself to the Prophet Samuel, that demanded of God a King, not like
Saul, but such a one as David was: And interlaced his Discourse with ingenious
little hints, that gave his Audience to know where his wishes and hopes were
pointed. After Sermon the numerous Assembly marched in order to the place of
Election: And the Senators being placed in the Kolo, the Cardinal Primate made
an Eloquent Speech upon the due qualifications of a new King, and then Named
the Candidates; giving every one a Panegyric, either upon his Personal
Qualities, or those of his Family. When he came to mention the Duke of Saxony,
who was the last in Order, he declared that in Honor they could not forget
him, but he was not fit to be chosen because he professed Lutheranism, and no
Body was sure of his Conversion, though the Public was imposed upon with
insufficient Proof. Then the Elector was named openly in the Ranks, which
surprised even those who were best acquainted with the Laws of the Kingdom:
However his Party was so weak, that the terror was not equal to the surprizal.

The Cardinal having made an end of his Harangue, kneeled on the Ground of his
own accord, and lifting up his Eyes to Heaven, declared he would never Nominate
a King without their unanimous consent, provided they did not insist on one
incapable to be Chosen. After the Primate's Oath, all the Senators, both
Ecclesiastical and Secular, Mounted their Horses, and repaired to their
respective Palatinates. But this being contrary to the Custom, those who
assisted at the Election of King Michael, told them that when the Gentry was
divided between the Prince of Neuborg and Prince of Lorrain, they drew upon the
Senators. This Advice obliged them to alter their Resolutions, and accordingly
they returned, partly out of regard to the Laws, and partly for the security of
their Persons. In the mean time the Cardinal and the Director of the Diet,
remained by themselves the in Kolo, standing opposite to one another, in order
to receive the advices which came very frequently, and to give them necessary
Orders-

The Castelan and Palatine of Cracow made their last efforts to serve Prince
James, in soliciting the Palatinate of Cracow, which by right speaks first,
and that of Posen that speaks next, to cry, Long live James the Son of the
King: Three Companies of Cracow obeyed them; and one of Posen did the same, but
very faintly: The other three of the former, and five of the latter cried, Long
Live Conti; and that with so loud an acclamation that his Name was heard all
over the Field. Vilna, which Votes in the third place, was entirely for him;
and all the others followed their Example till it came to Samogitia's turn,
which comes in after the first eight Palatinates; two Companies of this
Province had been retained by the Krziszpins whom I mentioned above, and
accordingly declared for the Duke of Saxony. His Name was so odious to those
who stood for Conti, that they spoke of nothing less than putting those to the
Sword, that proposed a Lutheran. But his new promoters, gave them fresh
assurances that he was a good Catholic, and had abjured the Lutheran
Profession at Rome in the presence of the Pope himself; and because the Gentry
would not take their words for it, told them the Nuncio would attest it in his
Holiness's Name. Some credited the Story, especially some poor Gentlemen that
Przependouski had regaled with Brandy, and given them a Crown a Man. Others
believed the nomination of Saxony was only a blind to advance Prince James's
Party, which sunk so quickly under his own name.

This conjecture was grounded on a certain misfortune that happened in the
Palatinate of Plosko, where a Gentleman devoted to the Royal Family had the
Generosity to check them when they repeated Conti's Name, with as much ardor as
they had done the preceding Day; and having proposed Prince James, was
preparing to give in some Remonstrances, when another Gentleman stopped him,
and killed him with a Pistol shot. But the inhumanity of the action had not so
much influence upon the Gentry, as to procure an avenger.

All Prince James's hopes were buried with this imprudent and misfortunate
Friend. The Palatine of Plosko had absented himself from the meeting, either
out of fear of the like disgrace, or in order to avoid the affront he had
received in the Particular Diet of his Palatinate; where, after he had
encouraged the Gentry to declare against France, he was so universally
forsaken, that he had not one to back him. Or perhaps the Intrigues of the
opposite Party had made him absent himself; for the Ministers of France had so
much Interest with the Gentry, as to get those they suspected turned out of all
places of command, and others of their own Faction put in their Posts.

While the Palatinates were Voting, they gave notice to the Bishop of Passaw,
that 'twas absolutely necessary to have the Nuncio's Attestation to back the
Bishop of Raab's, which no body credited, after Conti's Party had exposed it
for an imposture. The Nuncio was gone to visit the Princess Lubomirski the
Grand Marshall's Lady at her Castle Viasdow, about a quarter of a League from
Warsaw. The Emperor's Ambassador finding it necessary to speak with the Nuncio,
went straight thither, and told him that if he did not immediately give the
Attestation they had demanded over Night, and now solicited for more than ever,
he must expect to see Prince Conti chosen with an unanimous consent. The Nuncio
staggered no longer; but wrote under the Bishop's Certificate that he knew the
subscription to be his, and added a Panegyric upon the Bishop, blended with
another upon the Prince, and a great deal of impertinent stuff: So that upon
the whole 'twas rather a Commentary than a legal Confirmation.

Przependowski returned about eleven a Clock in the Morning with this Paper,
and a guard of his Friends to secure him from the Chamberlain of Mariembourg
that had threatened him the Day before. When he arrived in the Electoral Camp,
he held up the Paper in his hand, and made those about him cry out with a loud
voice, that the Pope's Nuncio had declared to the meeting that the Elector of
Saxony was a good Catholic, and that his Holiness required the Crown should be
given him. Those who fancied Saxony's Name was made use of to favor Prince
James, took all this for an Illusion; and looked upon the proposal of Saxony as
a Monster that must perish when it comes into the World, and be stifled by
those that gave it a being.

The siiller sort of the Gentry, together with those that were hired to
Authorize the Fable, were by this means engaged on his side, and about Noon
made a Party bigger than that of Nieuborg, Lorrain or Baden, but much inferior
to Conti's. The Confusion of Voices, and the noise of Arms, caused so great a
disorder that 'twas impossible to gather the Votes. To appease the Tumult the
Cardinal proposed that Conti's party should go off to one side, and those of
the other Candidates to draw themselves up on the other. In a minute his Advice
was put in execution, and so great a number of Companies passed to the Right of
Schopa to appear for Conti, that his Enemies thought the whole Meeting was
filing off to that side. However they redoubled their efforts to form a Body
upon the left hand, which did not amount that Day to above 36 Companies for all
the four Candidates; whereas, Conti's Party by it self had at least two hundred
and fourteen.

Those who favored France sent expresses almost every minute to acquaint the
French Minister what a great number of Palatinates was on their side. As they
passed along to the Right, one came* and told them of twelve, another of
fifteen, and so on till they came to nine and twenty. The Nuncio himself, when
he saw five and twenty of them declare for Conti, though he was sorry for it,
yet he sent his Secretary to congratulate the Ministers. They finding every
thing so favorable solicited the Cardinal and the other Heads, by repeated
Messages to improve the Advantage that fortune had offered, and to nominate the
Prince of Conti that day, without putting it off till the next.

Indeed the occasion of nominating was very inviting, when all the Palatinates
were ranged in two Battallions, and Conti's Line was so long, and the other so
short; that the one was animated with fresh Courage, and the other seized with
fear: Nay, the Great Treasurer of the Crown and the Castelan of Kalish,
designing not to lose the advantage they had got, exhorted all the Gentry to
prepare to fight. The Castelan, being mounted on his Charging Horse, appeared
at the Head of the Palatinates of Posen and Kalish, with a Crucifix in one
hand, and a drawn Sabre in the other, without any other harangue, but the
warlike shout, For God, Conti and our Liberties. The Bishops of Cujavia, Posen,
and Livonia, who were on the Saxon side, did not doubt but they would come to
an engagement, and that their Party would be cut to pieces. Being under this
apprehension, they took Horse and fled to Warsaw, and shut themselves up in St.
John's Cloister. At this time there was no Division to be feared, if the
Primate had nominated Conti; for these three Prelates being gone, there was no
body behind to nominate another.

But the Primate was Master of more Probity than Courage: He had a mind to
spare the Polish Blood, and to stand to the Oath he had made. Being possessed
with such scrupu-Reflections, he listened to the entreaties of the Generals,
who begged the Election should be put off till next day: Though the fourteen
Companies of Sandomiers and Mazovia, who were the better part of the opposite
Party, had promised to abandon that side so soon as the Darkness of the Night
should give them an opportunity to get off: Though all the Companies of the
twenty Nine Palatinates that stood for Conti, were already drawn up, and the
Cardinal was just giving them the Benediction, in order to proceed immediately
to the Nomination, when that fatal proposal of delay was handed about; yet he
presently agreed to it, without acquainting the Palatinates who would never
have suffered it; and instead of making an end of what he was about, told them
the Night approached, that the Election of a King was not a work of Darkness,
and that the next Day it should be determined.

Several entreated him to gather the Votes without delay, which is always
dangerous in such junctures: They remonstrated to him, that the opposite Party
had not above 36 Companies, and those were divided among four Competitors; that
by this delay he furnished them with an opportunity of uniting, and conspiring
to support the Interest of some one that they might find strongest, or capable
to distribute most Money; and that 'twas not at all prudential to give them
time to join in a new Faction. Had the Primate followed this advice, Conti had
been King, and Poland's Divisions had been prevented. But such was their fatal
misfortune, that he depended upon the hopes of seeing all the Factions
reunited, and a King nominated with an unanimous consent. To satisfy the
Entreaties of the one, and the Importunities of the the other, he endeavored
to find out a medium betwixt them. This was the fatal Temper, which never
almost meets with success, and is only carress'd by those who are Enemies to
all Resolution. The Accommodation he made was, that both Parties should keep
the Field all that night upon Horeseback, and no Man should quit his Post. This
they jointly agreed to, and he himself spent the Night in his Coach.

This Interval of time gave occasion for new Intrigues. Przependouski came
privately to Warsaw to the Bishop of Passaw's House, where the Envoy's of the
Electors of Saxony, Bavaria, and Brandeburg; the Dukes of Nieubourg and
Lorrain, and the Resident of Venice were all present, Montecatini Agent to Dom
Livio Odescalchi was not called thither; and perhaps if he had presented
himself he should not have got access, because his Money was gone. For he had
but just distributed six or seven thousand Livres (which was all he had left)
to some Gentlemen, who to the number of fifteen or twenty had nominated
Odescalchi King of Poland; and sounded up his Name more effectually than all
the large offers he had published, notwithstanding that they were greater than
any other, and set off under the Title of his most Serene Highness. But all
their efforts served only to revive the raillery I mentioned above.

All these Ministers met at the Nuncio's House, and concluded, that since they
had so much time given them, they must improve it to the best advantage, and
not only throw up all their different Pretensions to the Duke of Saxony, who
was the strongest, but likewise assist him with Money. The Baron Overbeck Envoy
from the Duke of Brandenbourg, gave the two hundred thousand Crowns that were
designed for the Prince of Baden's use; the Bishop of Passaw gave a hundred and
fifty thousand Crowns, and the others advanced according to their Proportions;
nay even the Venetian Resident signalized his good will at the Queen's cost to
the sum of thirty thousand Crowns, which she had put into his hands, in order
to assist Prince James in his necessity. All these Contributions, together with
the Money Monsieur Flemming had by him, and what the Jews advanced upon his
Bills of Exchange to Dresden, Leipsic, and Breslaw; made in all a sum of
eighteen hundred Thousand Livers, which they reckoned to distribute among the
two Parties. With this they ranged all the Night long up and down the Electoral
Camp; and indeed they found that method a more effectual persuasive, than all
the Eloquence of the Generals that had been employed to that effect to no
purpose.

However the success did not answer expectation. It Is true they united and
engaged for Saxony most of the thirty six Companies that had been divided
betwixt Nieuborg, Lorrain and Baden: But this they looked upon as a small
Conquest; for they could not inveigle above eleven of Conti's Companies, and in
lieu of them they lost seven of their own: So that all that vast huge sum
purchased more than four Companies, increasing their number from thirty six to
forty. Finding this sorry progress would not answer, they carried their
Negotiations yet further.

The three Generals Jablonouski, Potoski, and Sluska addressed themselves to
Sapieha Grand General of Lithuania, whom they knew to be a Man of no
Resolution; and made use of some Reasons, which he had often alleged himself
at the Cardinal's House, thinking thereby to win him over to their side. He was
afraid lest they, being the Queen's Ancient Friends, should carry on Prince
James's Interest; but they assured him they were so far from entertaining any
such thought, that they had jointly resolved to put up Saxony, if the Cardinal
insisted upon Conti. Sapieha was still mistrustful, and would fix upon no
Conclusion. So at last they forbore to solicit a Man that had not the power to
determine his own thoughts.

The 27th at two a Clock in the Morning Przependouski and Flemming came to the
Abbot of Polignac, and told him they had brought things to bear that Night,
that their Faction was very Rich, and strongly reinforced; and that he had yet
time to accept of the advantageous offers that were formerly made him. That
Minister, for answer, accused the former of Treachery, and the latter for not
keeping his Word: He put him in mind that on the 2d of May, as he delivered him
a Letter from his Master, he assured him that the Elector would claim no
pretensions to the Crown, without the Countenance of his most Christian
Majesty, and the Failure of the Prince of Conti; and that contrary to that
promise, the Elector of Saxony was the only obstacle that stood in the way of
Conti's unanimous Election. So they parted without concluding upon any thing.

The French Ambassador had galled them more without Money, than they could him
with all their Sums. They had stopped his Couriers, and his Bills of Exchange
were not arrived. The Queen had so much interest at Dantzick as to prevent the
payment of the six hundred thousand Livres; and without Money 'twas a hard
matter for him to win the Bishops and three Generals that stood by the opposite
Faction. But his Prudence supplied the want of Money, and his Carriage to the
Lords of his Party was so engaging, that not one of them forsook him. And the
number of his Party was much augmented by the respect he showed to the second
Rank of Gentry; of whom he entertained six at his Table, every Day, from the
beginning of the Diet. The Poles themselves owned that this cautious conduct
had gained him whole Palatinates: But the Queen's eternal complaints of his
Conduct, and her open Aversion to his Person, procured him yet more.

In the Morning the Cardinal began to repent that he had not determined the
Election the Day before. The opposite Party was not so sensible of his
complaisance in delaying as he expected: On the contrary, the Heads spent the
time upon new intrigues, and no body thought of an Union. Besides, they
complained of his Conduct the preceding Day. He had gone through all the
Palatinates of his own side to require their Votes, and exhort them to
constancy. But omitted to do the like honor to the opposite Faction. This they
resented, and would have persuaded the World that the Primate's slighting
carriage was the occasion of their declaring for Saxony. The Primate had
declined going among them, by reason of some advice sent him, that if he
appeared at their Head the followers of the Castelan of Cracow would
assassinate him: I know not whether they truly designed so, or had only spread
that report to scare the Prelate from coming to make such Remonstrances as
might take off any of their thirty six Companies. However this put both Parties
in such a ferment, that the Primate declared he would not consent to any
Accommodation.

At the same time the Rupture was resolved upon by the opposite Faction; only
they were galled with one difficulty, viz. They had only four Prelates in their
whole Division, for the Bishop of Samogitia was not present at the Diet, and
those of Cujavia, Posen, and Livonia could not shake off the terror which the
Castelan of Kalish had put them into over Night. The last of the three was very
scrupulous of meddling with what belonged to the Primate; and loath to give his
Brethren an ill example, though he was not unwilling to follow theirs. As for
the Bishop of Cujavia there was no hopes of bringing him back, after what had
passed. And Stanislas Witwicki Bishop of Posen, declared he had business,
enough of his own upon his hands, without engaging in more. He called to mind
the Judgment given in against him by the Pope's Nuncio, which branded him with
a dishonorable Character. I shall not mention it here, because I would spare
the memory of the dead, and am unwilling to sully his Character.

In order to put an end to the Election betimes, the Heads of both Parties
began to review them. They perceived the three Generals had brought their
Guards and Domestic Servants into the Field, to enlarge the bulk of their
Troops, and murmured a little, but without any consequence. But the Primate was
much more surprised, when he perceived, that of the fourteen Companies he
expected to join with him, there came but seven; that the Palatinate of
Volhinia, the District of Wielun, and some Companies of the Lithuanians, had
marched out of their Ranks, and posted themselves between the two Battallia's,
for a sign of Neutrality, and that the Palatin of Vilna appeared at their head,
though his whole Family continued at their first Post. Immediately he
dispatched an Express to know the reason of that motion. The Palatin answered
he had set himself there as Umpire between the two opposite Parties, and
reckoned his Example might sway those who stood out. They fansied he himself
had a mind to put in for a third between the two Candidates: And the Great
Treasurer his Brother, his Children, his whole Family, the better sort of
Lords, the Mareshal of the Diet, the Bishops and the Primate himself entreated
him not to put such a scandal upon their own, and encourage the opposite
Faction. He put them off with some of his old Reasons, and pretended he was
afraid of the Emperor, Brandenburg, and the Muscovite. They told him 'twas no
time to examine these things after so many Promises and Oaths, and the
receiving of so many Rewards. At last when they had spent the whole Morning in
such interviews, he returned with his Company to his former Post, and withal
told them, 'Twas their importunity more than their Reasons that brought him
back.

During this Conference, which continued but too long, the meeting was silent;
and the opposite Faction expecting to reap advantage from Sapieha's
Irresolution, who was a Man that was always confused in Matters of Duty;
singled out Gorowski Castelan of Gnesna, who walked softly up, and made a sign
for a Parley: Upon which Szwienziski Bishop of Kiow was deputed, and the
Castelan gave him to know his Party wanted a Conference to be managed by
Deputies in the Kolo before the Primate and Mareshal. Upon the Bishop's report
'twas agreed to; though they perceived the design was only to gain time till
the morrow; yet they had a mind without loss of more time, to hear what they
had to say.

They declared openly that since a Rupture would be fatal to the Republic,
they were utterly against it; and if the opposite Party would abandon Conti,
they were willing to do the same by Saxony, Nieubourg, Lorrain, Bavaria, and
all the Royal Family. But the others looked upon their proposal as ridiculous;
they reckoned it a piece of imprudence for those who were superior in force,
to treat upon an even lay with the weaker side; since those who were conquered
ought to obey the Conqueror's Law. They fansied that if they had been able to
make good the pretensions of any of their Candidates, they would not have
dropped their Remonstrances; that one day would put an end to the matter, and
those who had a mind to stand out must either submit or prepare to fight.

Others again, who would seem to be more moderate, were almost overreached a
second time, when the opposite Party complained that they were unjustly charged
with obstinacy, since they offered to part with seven Princes, providing they
would part with one. To lay the blame upon them, the Great Treasurer of the
Crown proposed that the Primate should offer them the Prince of Baden: Next to
Conti the Primate would have given him the Preference. The Bishop of Plosko
came to Warsaw to acquaint the French Ambassador with the Proposal. Immediately
the Ambassador wrote to the Primate and all his Friends, desiring him if that
Proposal was seriously entertained, to remember the strength of Conti's
Faction. When the Bishop returned he found the Great-Treasurer had proposed the
Prince of Baden to the Deputies of the contrary Faction; and that Jablonouski
had rejected the Proposal only because it was motioned by Lubomirski, and as he
fansied promoted by Sapieha; so he embraced it because his Enemies disliked it.
The Palatinates that stood for Conti were displeased with these two Senators;
but they excused themselves as much as they could, and declared that what they
did was only with a design to affront Jablonouski in the face of the whole
Republic: However that Plea did not satisfy them; their indignation against
the opposite Party was so violent, that with one consent they interrupted the
Primate while he offered to nominate.

The Bishop of Cujavia being persuaded their heat would relent if he could
procure a delay, wrote a Letter to the Primate, half Latin half Polish. 'Twas
to this purpose: Since your partiality for France has made you forget the
acknowledgments ye owe to the Royal Family, and Prince James's Interest is now
sunk; I give you notice that we have forty Companies resolved to choose
Saxony, if you nominate Conti: In the mean time I will not incroach upon your
Rights, unless Threats and Arms oblige me. The Letter concludes in his own
words thus, Sunt nobis 40 vexilla Nobilium pro Saxone Conjurata, si nominabis
Conti. Attamen non involabo in Jura Primitialia V.E. nisi coactus minis and
armis. This Letter was delivered to the Primate when he was going to give the
Benediction to the Palatinates that had assembled round the Kolo in order to
take possession of it. He read it out to them; and the Gentry found it such as
they wished for, as being a proof of the obstinacy of a small number against a
great one, and the C^mbination of 40 Companies against 210. Then their Patience
was exhausted: They obliged the Cardinal to pronounce the Benediction, mount
his Horse and make an end of the important Affair. The Primate, in compliance
with those whose violence he could not avoid, about six a Clock at Night
nominated Francis Louis of Bourbon, Prince of Conti, King of Poland, and Great
Duke of Lithuania.

The Nomination was followed by the Acclamations of above fourscore thousand
Gentlemen, while the opposite Party were projecting how to manage the designed
Rupture. A Protestation would have cost them too much Blood, which they thought
it their interest to spare: But their Confusion and Chagrin suggested other
measures for recalling an Election, which they themselves owned under hand to
be the safety of Poland.

While they were consulting, the Cardinal, accompanied with the Gentry, went in
Triumph to Warsaw to sing Te Deum in St. John's Church. They found the Gates of
the Church shut, by the order, as they said, of the Bishop of Posen Ordinary of
the place, and the Bishop of Livonia, Dean of that Collegiate. But they were
quickly opened by Orders from the same Prelates. For a Detachment of the Gentry
fired so many Pistols at the Windows of their Palaces, that they presently
satisfied their demands. Afterward they excused themselves, and would have
laid the fault upon the Pope's Nuncio. But the Gentry who were equally ill
pleased with them and him too, gave answer, that the contempt with which they
treated his orders. was equal to the respect they paid to those of his Holiness.

The Primate having finished the thanksgiving in the Church of Warsaw, went
home attended by the Gentry, which passed by the Palace of the French
Ministers, and with their Hangers and Pistols, saluted the Kings Arms, that
were upon the Gate. A great many Lords and Gentlemen came to compliment them,
and indeed the Hungarian Wine was not spared.

The Cardinal was scarce arrived at his Palace, when a Crowd of the Gentry came
to acquaint him that the Bishop of Cujavia having retired from the Electoral
Camp with the three Generals, took advantage of his absence, and at the head of
the Forty Companies quietly nominated Frederick Augustus Elector of Saxony,
King of Poland and great Duke of Lithuania.

Some Lords represented to him the Necessity of reducing that seditious Party;
that since they would not submit, they ought to be forced to it; that when the
Heretics had made a Conspiracy to prevent the Election of King Henry, they
were happily dispersed by the Courage and Resolution of Albert Laski Palatine
of Siradia, and John Kothewiecz Great-Mareshal of Lithuania, who threatened to
cut in pieces all that withstood the Senate's Orders: That the same Remedy was
now needful; and though it might appear violent, yet 'twas proper for desperate
Diseases.

The Primate, with a Moderation suitable to his Genius and Character,
disapproved the Design; and the Lords submitted to his Advice so readily, that
one would think there was more Ostentation in the Project, than Eagerness to
put it in Execution.

The Bishop of Cujavia and his Accomplices were not so scrupulous. Having
nominated the Elector out of the Electoral Camp, and sung Te Deum in the same
place, he came to repeat the Thanksgiving at Warsaw, while the whole Town was
busied in making of Bonefires; and Conski Palatine of Kiow, and Great-Master of
the Artillery, was ordering the Guns to be discharged for the Prince of Conti.
The Bishops of Posen and Livonia opened the Gates of the Church to him, which
had been shut upon the Primate by their Orders, but three or four hours before;
and there they celebrated the same Thanksgiving, with this difference only,
That the Bishop added the Benediction of the Holy Sacrament, and by that
Ceremony rendered the Action more odious.

Among all the Nullities in the Nomination of Saxony there was one which the
Bishop was not aware of; viz. that 'twas performed out of the Electoral Camp.
His Friends acquainted him with the Oversight, and obliged him to return next
Morning by Break of Day, to make a new Nomination, as if that Ceremony could
have rectified a Proclamation that was irregular in all its parts.

The Bishop returned from thence to the Church of Warsaw, where at six a Clock
in the Morning he tendered the Pacta Conventa to General Flemming, giving him
the Title of Envoy Extraordinary, though he had no Right to that Character.
This Minister promised, in his Master's Name, to advance Ten Millions for the
Use of the Republic; to maintain Fifteen thousand Men during the War with the
Turks; to retake Caminiec upon his own Charges; to re-establish the Catholic
Religion in Saxony; and that the Electoress should make an Abjuration before
she were crowned, or else forfeit all her Pretensions to the Crown. The Bishop
was not ashamed to administer the Oath to a Calvinist Envoy, in the Presence of
the Holy Sacrament, notwithstanding the Opposition of James Halecki, Huntsman
of Podlachia, and Martin Grazewski, Vice-Chamberlain of Vilna; upon whom they
drew their Hangers in the very Church where the Sacrament was exposed. And this
Prelate instead of redressing the Disorder, cried, Kill, Kill; whereupon they
made a verbal Process before the Nuncio, who publicly disapproved the action,
but did not think fit to punish it.

When the Election was over, the Cardinal hoping the smaller number would be
brought to comply, proposed a Conference between the two Parties. Accordingly
it began on the 28th, the most noted Lords on both Parties being present.
George Albert Denohoff Bishop of Premislia, and Great Chancellor of the Crown,
opened the Conference with a Speech; in which he told them the day of the
Election, was a representation of the day of Judgment; and the Favorites of
France on the Right represented the Elect, and alluding to the Lamb upon the
Primate's Arms, quoted that passage of Scripture, Hi sequentur Agnum, quocunque
ieret: And compared Saxony's Faction to the Goats that put all in disorder,
applying to them that other passage, Vos enim depasti est is vineam.

Then the Deputies were named. Conti's Party demanded that according to Law the
two Competitors should not enter nor send Troops into the Kingdom, nor seize
any Place, or claim aright for Coronation, till the public were assembled
again in a second Diet to confirm the Election; and determine which of the
Candidates should mount the Throne. Saxony's Party, considering Conti was far
off, and Saxony just at hand, gave no other answer but a flat denial; and on
the fifth of July, which was the last day of the Conference, declared that they
saw the French had a mind to gain time, but the Saxons would not loose the
opportunity.

While the Conference was held, those who were not admitted enjoyed themselves
in Feasting, and their heat was so much abated, that they seemed to bury the
Old Polish Humor. By their Voices one would have thought they were rather
pleading upon some particular cause before Judges, than managing the Election
of a King in a General Diet of the Kingdom.

Some wondered the Bishop of Cujavia should encroach on the rights of the
Primate, in nominating a King in a tumultuous Assembly; but they were more
surprised to hear him say the Elector had made an Abjuration at Rome two years
ago. 'Twas Publicly notorious, that he had not performed one external act of
the Catholic Religion: On the contrary he continued openly in the Lutheran
Profession. And the more zealous among them owned that if his Abjuration was
true, he should be looked upon as an Apostate.

Others examined the qualities of the two Rivals. They extolled the Prince of
Conti, whose Virtue they had sensible impressions of, from the French
Ambassador. Prince Lubomirski Great Treasurer of the Crown, and many other
Polish Gentlemen, were witnesses of his Bravery at the Siege of Newhausel, and
they could not but credit their Report, that 'twas by his means chiefly that
that important Place was taken. Others would have spoke on the Elector's
behalf; but his Defeat at Temeswaer in the Month of April, 1696, was too fresh
in their Memories, to consist with his Glory: Though afterward the disgrace
was in some measure extenuated by Prince Eugene of Savoy's Reprisals.

They boasted of the Elector's strength, which indeed was extraordinary; and
declared every Day by fresh instances. His Enemies could not deny it; but they
distinguished between Hero's and Gladiators, and affirmed that Milon of Crotone
went beyond him.

When the News of the Election of the Elector, came to his own Country, they
were as much disturbed as Poland. Prince Eugene of Furstemburg their Governor
having caused Te Deum to be sung at Dresden on the 4th of July, would have said
Mass in the Castle Chapel: But Christian Ebrarde the Electoress, Daughter to
the Marquess of Brandebourg Baroth, being a Calvinist, ordered the Gates to be
shut, and refused to take upon her the quality of Queen. The Electoress Dowager
was not less zealous: So that both these Princesses, upon this occasion, showed
all the transports of anger, that Women in a passion are capable of.

I know not whether they did it out of Zeal, or to serve the Elector's
Interest, in seeming to stand by the Country of Saxony. However the States were
as resolute as the two Princesses; and declared they would admit of no change
in the point of Religion. They went upon the latter will of John II. the
Elector's Grandfather, which obliged all his Successors to Profess the Lutheran
Religion. This Act they would have looked upon as Authentic, had not some
former accidents given them a jealousy of what might come after.

George Duke of Saxony Died in 1539. He was the most Zealous Prince of his
time, for the Catholic Religion; as it appeared by many proofs in his
lifetime, and at his Death, by his latter will. He had no Children to Succeed
him. Henry his Brother, Maurice and Augustus his Son had embraced the Lutheran
Profession in 1537; and he was unwilling his Country, which by his means had
kept up the Purity of the Gospel, should fall into the Hands of Heretics that
had corrupted Saxony, and a great part of Germany. In order to compass his
Pious Design, and at the same time to give his Family no occasion to complain
of Injustice, he made a latter Will, in which he determined the Succession to
Henry and his Children; providing they introduced no Change of Religion into
the Countries which he gave them: And declared that if they counteracted that
Condition, they had no Right to his Heritage. He entreated the Emperor Charles
V, and King Ferdinand his Brother, to be Executors of his Will, and not to give
the nearest of his Relations Possession of his Country, without they Professed
the Catholic Religion.

Had these Executors been possessed by the same sentiments of Piety with that
Prince; Leipsic might have been a Catholic City this Day; but their particular
Interests prevailed above Religion: They gave Henry and his Children the
liberty of establishing Heresy in that City, at a time when they were
pretending to extirpate it out of the whole Empire. Henry took advantage of
their weakness, and invited Luther to that Town, which he perverted as well as
many other Cities in Germany. Now the Saxons considering how Prince George's
Will was executed, were apprehensive of the like Treatment for Prince John's,

They and the Poles were equally in fear, the one for the Lutheran, the other
for the Catholic Religion. The Primate wrote to the Elector, that the Diet had
chosen the Prince of Conti; that he hoped he would not look upon the Tumultuous
Election of a few Seditious Persons, as the Unanimous Consent of the whole
Nation; and that he in the behalf of the greater and better part of the Nation,
entreated his Highness to be rather their Friend than their Sovereign. This
Letter the Elector would not receive, because 'twas not addresed to him as King.

The Cardinal gave Advice also to the Emperor and the Elector of Brandebourg of
the Election of the Prince of Conti: That Elector answered that he was sorry
for the Divisions of the Republic, and offered himself as Mediator. The
Emperor's Answer came later; 'Twas wrote to the Envoy in these words, Non est
nostrum dare consilia Domino Cardinali and aliis Nobilibus Polonis, tamen
optaremus ut amici fierent Regis Poloniae, quando quidem aliter fieri non
potest. It Is not our business to give advice to the Cardinal and Polish
Nobility; however we wish they would make a Virtue of Necessity, and stand by
the King (meaning the Duke of Saxony).

These Letters were as ineffectual as the Conferences. After the 5th every one
followed his own measures. The Cardinal called a Diet on the 26th of August, to
confirm the Election: The Bishop of Cujavia, in opposition to the Primate,
proclaimed that the Coronation of the Duke of Saxony was to be solemnized on
the 15th of September, and the preceding Diets should meet on the 6th of August.

In the mean time the French Ministers were not idle, On the 27th about two
hours after the Election, the Abbot of Polignac dispatched his own Secretary
for France, to acquaint the King and Prince with the welcome News. The Courier
being big with hopes of success, and full of the great News he brought; was
afraid of lessening their agreeableness, by keeping too close to the naked
truth, or to his Instructions; especially since the Ambassador had once
thoughts of employing another, and upon his solicitation the Prince had
desired that he should be sent. So his Vanity not being satisfied with a simple
Recital of what passed; he added a great many particulars, which could not have
happened till after his departure, and by that means betrayed his Levity.

He had Orders to give an Account of what passed at the Election, where he was
an Eye Witness, and to represent how much Poland stood in need of having their
Elected Prince immediately at their Head, to draw together their Armies, and
prevent the Saxons marching into their Kingdom, who would not fail to take
advantage of his absence.

The Secretary arrived at Versailles the 14th of July, and being interrogated
about the Divisions, said, they were not at all to be feared; and perhaps by
that time they were already appeased. The Prince asked if 'twas necessary for
him to set out immediately. He answered he had no occasion, and that 'twas more
proper for him to wait the arrival of the Embassy which the Republic would
send him.

These News filled the Court, City, and Armies with Joy, but the next Day made
a wonderful alteration; when they received the Copy of a Letter, wrote by the
Elector of Saxony to his Minister at the Hague, in which he gave Advice of his
own Election, without mentioning Conti's: Doubtless his design was to put off
Conti's Departure for Poland, in case the Couriers with the true News were
stopped in Germany. Some Letters wrote from Dantzick with the same view, and to
the same purpose, increased their trouble. Thus they passed the 14th, 15th and
16th in great uneasiness, and in admiration of the Prince, who carried the
uncertainty of his Lot with such firmness and constancy of Mind, as proclaimed
him worthy of a Crown.

They looked impatiently for the arrival of the Ambassadors, that the first
Courier had mentioned: But on the 16th at Night the Abbot Rioux, having been
dispatched by the French Ministers, arrived; who gave a solid and
circumstantial Account of the Rupture; Remonstrated the necessity of the
Prince's Presence; and in fine told them, They were not to expect an Embassade,
by reason of the difficulty of the Passage during the War: for which, and
several other reasons, the French Ministers had dispensed with that Ceremony,
in their Propositions Printed a few Days before the end of the Diet.

When the Prince knew how things stood, he made Preparations for his Departure;
but since he was not to expect an Embassade, thought it convenient to wait till
the Cardinal notified his Election to him by a Letter. This Letter of the
Cardinal's was ready the 30th of June, and given to one of the Abbot of
Polignac's Gentlemen, to be sent by the Abbot of Rioux; but the Gentleman being
designed for a third Courier had a mind to deliver it himself, and accordingly
kept it; for he thought to set out that same Day, and fansied he would pass
more speedily and safely than those who went before him.

A certain Missionary called Mommeian, who was Superior of the Boarding-School
of Lowitz, the Cardinal's Favorite, and very Zealous for France, discovered
the Intrigue; and gave the Abbot of Polignac to know that the Gentleman had
reason to be impatient to be gone, for he had shown him the Cardinal's Letter.
As Cases stood then, the Abbot could not but chide the Gentleman. The Elector's
Preparations and Profuseness were likely to gain him new Favorites; those who
confided so much in Conti's distance, and Saxony's nearness, would not listen
to the moderation of the Law in case of Divisions: And these Reflections did so
frighten Conti's Party, that in a Grand Council held in the Great Treasurer of
the Crown his House; they declared to the French Ambassador, that they could
stand no longer by him, that the Act of Election, which he demanded so
earnestly, was useless; that they had resolved they would not deliver it, till
they saw the Execution of his Promises of Paying four Quarters due to the Army;
since 'twas that alone could put them in a Condition to resist the Elector's
Forces. Then the Ambassador asked what should become of the Prince they had
called; they answered, That he must be Countermanded.

The Ambassador finding this Answer both positive and unfavourable, was in a
quandary, whether the Primate's Letter should be sent: For he considered, that
if the Prince was already on the Road, in compliance with his own Letters, as
he hoped he was, then he would arrive in time enough to recover his Party; if
he was not yet set out, 'twas not prudential to call him in such an
unfavourable juncture, unless he were sure of the Constancy of his Faction. In
the mean time he made it his business to make sure of those who had not yet
abandoned him.

At length he compassed his Designs, in having the Act Signed by the Cardinal,
Archbishop of Leopol, and all the Prelates of his side, excepting the Bishop of
Cracow, who absented by reason of his great Age. 'Twas likewise Signed by all
the great Officers of the Crown and Lithuania; all the Palatines and Castelans,
excepting the Great-Mareshal Lubomirski, who remained neuter, and the Vice
Chancellor Tarlo, who was gone over to Saxony. Then the Ambassador dispatched
the third Courier on the 18th of July; who had the misfortune not to arrive
before the 9th of August.

The Ambassador could not presume the favorers of France would stand so long
out, as they did: So by that Courier he gave the King notice, that he feared
all the Polish Gentry would join with Saxony; unless the Prince of the Money
promised to the Army were there before the 31st of July; because the Lords who
Signed the Act, had only engaged to continue in their Union till that day, as
being sure by that time the Elector of Saxony would pay the Troops, and then
they had nothing to Object against him. The Prince was so far from being able,
in so short a time, to reach Poland, where he was expected so impatiently; that
he was yet at Paris, waiting for the Original Letter from the Cardinal: And
when that came, the the Court received this we now speak of. So the Prince saw
himself Called and Countermanded by two Letters received both in one Day; only
that which called him was of an older Date than the other by 18 Days.

Then the Prince's Journey was put off a second time, and by a necessary, but
fatal consequence, The Orders for the Remitments were recalled. Good
Politicians will easily perceive that the most studied precautions are often
times to no purpose; especially if they consider, that such mean matters as the
Private Designs of a Courier, have influenced the most important Affairs of
this Age.

However, a little time discovered that the short Day which the Polish Gentry
had given to the Abbot of Polignac, was only threats; for when they received
the News of the Elector's Arrival, their Zeal revived with fresh Vigor. In the
mean time it was needful to engage the Town of Dantzick in the French Interests:
The Abbot of Polignac was obliged to continue in the Center of the Kingdom,
where his presence was necessary; so the Abbot of Neuf-Chattle set out for that
Place on the 2d of July, in order to appease the Queen, to keep the Migistrate
of the Place right, to satisfy the Poles that were about to come thither for
Money, to persuade the Banquiers to have the Money ready to be paid as soon as
the Bills of Exchange arrived, and in fine, to make sure of Prussia where the
Prince was to pass when he arrived. He delivered to the Queen the King's
Letter, and with a great deal of submission told her the Reasons that retarded
the performance of that Duty. She refused to enter into any Negotiation with
him, and continued Resolute to maintain the Elector's Party, as being the
weakest, and the least able to withstand her, when Conti's Faction, being the
strongest, came to be broke.

The Magistrate was as obstinate as she; and alleged as weak Reasons: The
chiefest were, the Losses the Town had sustained by Sea during the War: The
solicitation of the Queen and Elector of Brandebourg, the Elector of Saxony's
Country and Religion, which were more agreeable to the Inhabitants than that of
the Prince of Conti, who was but too good a Catholic. It had been an easy
matter to refute all these Reasons; but the Magistrate thought he eluded all
possible Replies, when he told him that the Town, in pursuance of its Statutes,
would acknowledge either of the two Princes that should be first Crowned; and
till that time they would stand Neuter. The Abbot of Neuf-Chattel perceiving
the Magistrate went upon the hopes of Saxony's preventing the Prince of Conti,
represented the advantage that would accrue to a Trading City, by a Commerce
with France; and told him that if the Citizens would act regularly, they were
obliged to acknowledge him as King who was first Elected according to the Laws
of the Kingdom, by a plurality of Votes, and by the better part of the
Republic; that if bad Counsel prevailed with them, to take other measures,
they ought to call to mind, how on the like occasion they acknowledged the
Emperor Maximilian, to the prejudice of King Stephen, and drew upon themselves
such disgrace, as in prudence they ought now to avoid. But all these Reasons
had no influence upon a set of People prepossessed with a Zeal for their own
Religion, and an implacable Hatred against France.

The other Citizens were more tractable. Some lent him Sums of Money. It Is true
they were very small; however they served to stop the Mouths of some of the
great Lords Residents that teased the Abbot with perpetual Demands. His abode
in Dantzick was likewise useful in keeping the Prussians in order, and securing
the Town of Mariembourg for the Prince till he arrived.

While the Abbot of Neuf-Chattel was taking care of Prussia, the French
Ambassador at Warsaw was endeavoring to retain the rest of Poland; which his
Enemies had a mind to seduce. The Elector of Brandebourg in his Letter to the
Primate had offered his Meditation, and out of respect to a Neighboring Prince
they accepted it, though they expected to reap no advantage by it, but that of
gaining time. The Public Conferences commenced on the 9th of August. Saxony
motioned that the Diet for Confirmation should be Revoked; or if the Revocation
was inconvenient, that the Cardinal should oblige himself by Writing to
Nominate Saxony instead of Conti; that the Primate by his Vniversalia should
call the petty Diets, as Preliminaries to the Coronation, and come himself to
Warsaw, to put the Crown upon the Elector's Head; that in case they listened to
these Conditions, the Elector would not admit the Bishop of Cujavia to Crown
him: That the Date of his Election should Commence from his Confirmation in
that Assembly; that he would Swear to such Pacta Conventa as they offered him;
and in fine, would Pay in ready Money to the Heads and Lords of the opposite
Faction, the sum of Eight Hundred Ninety Two Thousand Crowns, to be divided
among them as they should think fit.

These Proposals were Answered in the following Articles; a Copy of which was
given to the Baron of Overbeck, the Elector of Brandebourg his Envoy. They
required the Elector with his Troops should depart the Kingdom, and send an
Ambassador from the Frontiers to the Diet for Confirmation, to desire the
Crown; That he should give better proof of his Conversion and renew his
Abjuration in the Presence of some Bishop of the opposite Faction; and in fine
should renounce the Act of his pretended Election, and all the other means
which he and the Bishop of Cujavia had made use of to that purpose. Upon these
Conditions, and the Execution of the Offers made by him, they promised to
consider of his Pretensions; to treat him not as an Usurper, but as a legal
Candidate; and to regard the Merit of a Prince that would submit himself to
Reason.

Both Parties were stiff and bold; and not without Reason. The French Faction
was encouraged by what passed at the Diets Summoned by the Bishop of Cujavia to
meet on the 6th of August. That Prelate's Circular Letters were universally
slighted. The Gentry that met, had no other view but to oppose Saxony's
Election: They chose no Deputies for the Coronation; and their only Study was
to give reproachful Answers. The Diet of Sroda were more serious upon the
matter: They entered into a Confederacy of several Palatinates to declare War
against the Elector, the Castelan of Kalish was to be their General, and
Radomicki a a Man of Merit and known Bravery, their Mareshal. The Palatinates
of Lencicia and Rava joined with them: In fine, this Rokosz was so universally
approved, that it served for a model to that concerted two Months after by the
General Meeting of the Gentry.

The News of this Confederacy came to Warsaw on the 12th of August; and about
two Days after a Courier arrived from France, namely Lowis Etler the Count of
Oldenbourg's Gentleman, and an ancient Officer in the Polish Troops; who during
the Interregnum had made several Journies into France; and behaved himself very
handsomely and faithfully. Among other dispatches he brought a Letter from the
Prince of Conti, Dated August 1. and addressed to the Cardinal Primate; in
which he returned thanks to the Republic for the Choice they had made; and
assured them he was fully resolved to come and head their Troops, and shed his
Blood for their Liberty, so soon as he received the advice of his Election from
the Cardinal. This Letter was translated into Polish, and Copies of it were
carefully distributed over all the Kingdom. They were persuaded, the third
Courier with the Cardinal's Letter and the Act of Election, was arrived at
Paris as next Day, or two Days, after the Date of the Prince's Letter. And
therefore having broke up the Conferences with the Envoy of Brandebourg, they
had no further regard to the Remonstrances, he continued to give in; namely,
That France did not mind Poland, since contrary to their custom, they walked so
slowly in their measures relating to it; and did not transmit the Sums of Money
that were so much wanted, and which they used to advance so liberally upon all
other occasions. He added that the blindness of the Polish Nobility was
deplorable; that the Elector would never be kind to them upon a forced
submission, but would treat them coldly, if not as Rebels; and spend all his
Bounty and Rewards upon their opposites, who were not their equals.

The hopes of tasting of the Elector's Favor, and the fear of his Threats,
made an alteration upon, some: And The Head of the French Faction went to meet
with the Ambassador, who, though he was equally perplexed with themselves, yet
he found Reasons to hearten them. He told them the Affair was so important that
the Court of France could not be indifferent about it; which they never were
with respect to their Allies. He complained of the Intercepting of his Letters,
and stopping of his Couriers, and of the unfavourable Offices of the Queen and
Migistrate at Dantzick, who threatened the Banquiers of the City, He
represented the Interest of the Court of Berlin in avoiding the Neighborhood
of such a King as the Prince of Conti; and in fine, charged the Poles with
being the Cause of all the danger they were in, in refusing the next Day after
the Election to send the Act to oath Prince, by one of their own Gentry,
according to his repeated solicitations. This last Reason being such as they
could not answer, made them approve of all the others.

While the Ambassador encouraged his Party with Reason, the Bishop of Cujavia
and his Accomplices were strengthening theirs with fresh Violence. A few Days
after the Election, they sent an Ambassade to the Elector to entreat him to
come and take the Crown. The Deputies met him at Tarnowitz upon the Frontiers
of Silesia, where the Palatine of Volhinia, the Great General's Son, made a
Speech to him; standing while the King sat. He took care that the Envoy's were
regaled, but did not bring them to Eat at his Table: Then the Palatine began to
condemn himself for interlacing his Speech with so much flattery and meanness,
that perhaps was the occasion of the contempt he met with.

The Elector entered the Kingdom, attended by the Deputies of Poland, and the
two Krziszpin's. At Pickari he renewed his Abjuration in the Jesuits Church, in
the Presence of the Bishop of Samogitia; from thence he set out for Cracow,
accompanied by two thousand Germans, all Protestants; who, according to the
custom of their Country, brought their Wives and Children along with them. They
profaned the Churches in making them serve for Stables: They out-raged the
Curates, and snatched the Sacred Plate out of the hands of the Priests,
endeavoring to save it. In short, he did not march like a Warlike Prince. The
Poles compared his march to that of Vitellius, when he went to take the Capital
City of the Empire that he was not to hold long.

On the 21st of July the Elector made his Entry into Cracow, with no great
demonstrations of Joy. He had been there incognito for some Days before, and
was lodged in the Royal Palace of Lobzow, where Francis Lubomirski Starost of
Olszteyn had lived for some time; he being obliged to turn out, and give place
to the New Guest. However that did not hinder him to join in with the Elector's
Friends; to break up the Petty Diet of the Palatinate of Cracow which was then
held at Proszowice, and return with the Gentry to Cracow, without seeing the
Elector. From thence the Starost went to Warsaw, which had taken the Alarm upon
the News of that Prince's arrival at Cracow with his Troops. But he endeavored
to hearten them, in upbraiding them with a groundless fear so far off, while he
and his Friends were not afraid when just at hand.

The Elector was not yet Master of the Castle. The Governor, Count
Wielopolski, declared he would not surrender it, because the Devoir of his
Charge obliged him not to deliver it, but to a King Elected by the consent of
all the Gentry. This Faint brought him a better Market. When the Elector could
not prevail with Threats, he plied with Presents: He presented the Starost's
Lady with a Bracelet, and himself with Five Thousand Crowns. Upon which the
Castle was delivered, and all the good Resolutions forgot.

The Saxons were overjoied with this Conquest: And the Flatterers, amidst the
sumptuous Feasts, with which the Elector regaled them, spoke of nothing less
than marching to Lowitz to storm the Primate, and by his Example reduce the
whole Kingdom. But the Council's deliberations were more peaceable; they gave a
more moderate advice, viz. That they should attend the Issue of the Diet which
the Primate had called; and in the mean time continue at Cracow, and Fortify
it as much as the present juncture would permit. They added that in case the
Resolutions of the opposite Party proved too Violent, or threatened Danger to
the Elector, in a Day's Journey he might fly from thence to Silesia, where he
would be secure.

That Language did not please the Elector, who had sold his very Jewels, to
compass a design, that they had given out to be so easily put in Execution. He
entreated the Bishop of Cujavia and the rest, to think of some measures more
worthy of a Prince that they looked upon as their Sovereign. The Bishop and
Accomplices commended his Courage; and told him that in order to maintain his
Interest, he must bring more Foreign Troops into the Kingdom; bribe the Gentry
of the Second Rank by liberal Presents; and take care immediately to pay the
Army of the Crown. Upon this Advice the Elector sent for the false Ducats that
were minted at Breslaw by his Order; and burdened Saxony with Taxes; preferring
the Ruin of his Hereditary Country, to such a disgraceful Flight as was
proposed to him.

In the mean time the French Ambassador was endeavoring to make the Army
declare for Conti. It was a difficult undertaking without Money. However on the
10th of July, he sent the First Master of the Household of the Crown with a
Hundred Thousand Livres, which the Primate had pawned his Jewels for, in order
to raise the Cosacks. That Officer had likewise an engagement, signed by the
Ambassador, and confirmed by a separate Note from the Primate, That before the
end of that Month the Army should be Paid the four Quarters that were Promised
them. When the 31st of July came, the Day they had granted to the Ambassador,
was elapsed, and he had heard nothing from France: The Twelve Commissaries of
the Army were then at Warsaw, where they stayed to the 20th of August. So that
after three Weeks Stay, to no purpose, they were obliged to return, without any
other satisfaction, but the continuation of Promises and Fair Words.

The Elector took advantage of their delay; and sent two Millions in Specie to
the Castelan and Palatine of Cracow, with Orders to divide it among the Army.
These two Generals were glad the Money was to pass through their Fingers, upon
two accounts; one, because they would have an opportunity of keeping a good
part of it to themselves; the other, because by that means they had an occasion
of being reconciled to the Army, which after the Confederacy refused to
acknowledge their Authority, or admit them into the Camp. Przependouski
accompanied them, and told the Soldiers, they were come to give them all that
France had promised. But after all their Profuseness, of fourscore and Six
Companies, of which the Army consisted, they did not purchase above eight;
which they sent to the Elector, under the Conduct of Potoski Great Huntsman of
the Crown. All the rest, at the solicitation of Twelve Commissioners, who had
been gained by the Abbot of Polignac, would not receive the Pay: And this was
the first time that the Polish Army, was ever seen to refuse Money.

The fidelity of the Soldiers, and the hopes of suddenly seeing the Prince of
Conti; revived the Party of France till the 24th of August, that they met at
the Castle of Viazclow, whither the Ambassador was summoned. Every Body
appeared extremely consternated, that they could hear no News, at a time when
the Prince's Presence, and Returns of Money were so absolutely necessary for
the putting in Execution of what they had projected. However, in the first
place they greatly applauded the French Minister, for the Precautions he had
taken in that time; and among other things, for having maintained at his own
Charge, ever since the Election, the Foot Regiment of the Palatine of Vilna,
which Guarded the Bridge of Boats upon the Vistula; by means whereof he had
preserved the Communication between Poland and Lithuania. The Sistem which he
had proposed, of having at the Diet of Proparcie, some Troops of Nobility who
should both give their suffrages as Gentlemen, and serve as Soldiers in the
Military Expeditions, was universally approved; but there was no appearance of
Money, which like the Soul was to enliven this great Body. Thereupon they asked
him what supplies he could afford in this same time of oppressing need? Upon
which the Abbot that he might still more and more assure himself of the
Fidelity of his Friends, whom he had carried so far, maugre their frequent
Menaces, and to bind them by a faster knot than that which tied them as yet to
France, demanded two things: First, That the Prince of Conti might be confirmed
by a second Proclamation; and in the next place, that the Republic according
to the Example of great Poland, should make an Association, bound with an Oath,
against the Elector, and declare War against him.

The first Point was hotly debated, and it was resolved, that if before the
beginning, or though it were the breaking up of the Diet of Proparcie, they
received more substantial News of the Prince's arrival, than that of the 14th,
there should be no hesitating upon the Embassador's Proposal: But if no Prince
or News came, Prudence would not permit them to enter farther into that
Engagement; and that in this Case, it was better to suppose the first
Nomination valid and effectual, than to infring it by a new one, which perhaps
would be looked upon as done to no other purpose, than to rectify the Defects
of the former.

The Second Proposal underwent no difficulty; for it was by common consent
resolved to Summon a Rokosz, and to declare War against the Elector as an
Usurper; and that the Reason was, because whoever declares the War, is a Party
capable to treat of the Peace. Thus the Ambassador of France, who was summoned
to that Conference, merely to have been laden with Reproaches, had the
advantage to obtain the best part of what he had presumed to demand, and more
than perhaps he ever hoped for.

This piece of Success rendered ineffectual all the Attempts of Prince James,
who could not pardon the pretended Friends of his Family, their Perfidiousness
to himself, by forming a Faction for Saxony, which they might have raised with
as much ease in favor of his Interests. He made his Addresses to the French
Party, and declared by Grochus, Castelan of Samogitia, and the only Friend that
stuck to him; that he threw himself into the Arms of true Persons of worth, and
besought them, that in case the Prince of Conti did not come, to set him up in
his Room. But the Proposal came to nothing; for they to whom he addressed
himself were engaged too far in the Interests of France. The Prince for whom
Grochus interceded was too universally abandoned; and in truth, his
faithfullest Friend, had too little Credit, and was a Man of too mean Parts, to
bring about an Enterprise, which was above the reach of his management.

The Palatine of Vilna, followed by all the Senators of Lithuania, except the
two Krziskpins, and the Castelans of Vilna and Troke, arrived the 26th of
August, that he might be present at the Diet of Confirmation, which was to sit
down the next Day. Four Thousand Men of his Army also marched after him; but
upon advice that there was no Money yet come, he countermanded them till
farther Orders.

Upon the 26th of August the Cardinal, and all the Senators who had Elected
Conti, repaired to the Church of St. John, where they met above Sixty Troops of
the Choice of the Nobility under their Standards. The Mareshal of the last
Election was at the Head of them: They heard Mass, which was solemnized by the
Bishop of Kiovia; and a Jesuit Preached the Sermon. Which done, they went to
the Electoral Field, where the Count Biesinski, Director of the Crown opened
the Sitting, and declared against the Elector, and all those who had delivered
the Castle and City of Cracovia into his Hands; while the Factious had no other
design than to break the Diet by some Protestation. To which purpose Donowski,
Nuncio of Wisna, more bold than any of the rest, stood up and said, the
Assembly was to no purpose, since the Nation had chosen the Elector of Saxony.
He was about to have gone on, when a threatening murmur watched his Ears from
all parts of the Room, and at the same time he perceived several Sabres drawn;
which constrained the Nuncio to betake himself to his Heels, while the rest
pursued him out of the Field of Election; and gave him so many Wounds, that
they left him almost for Dead, in the Arms of those that durst not undertake to
defend him.

The Nuncio was cured of his Wounds, but he lost the use of one Side of his
Body, and was so disfigured, that after he had given this bad Example, no body
was more capable than he, to amend it. His Accomplice had better luck; for he
threw himself at the Cardinal's Feet, who touched him with his Cross, as
Ahasuerus, did with his Cane, and and saved his Life.

Krassinski, Palatine of Plosko, had given order to his Son to second
Danowski's Protestation. But the imminent danger was a lawful dispensation with
his Obedience: He presently got a Horseback, and made his escape to Warsaw;
though above twenty Gentlemen pursued him with their drawn Swords to the very
Turnpikes of the City.

Upon the 27th nothing was decided, because the Ambassador of France tarried
for News, which did not come. Thereupon Rietinski demanded what answer he
should give to two Gentlemen; the one of the Palatinate of Cracow; and the
other of the Palatinate of Sandomiria, who, astonished at the misfortune that
had befallen Danowski; and the Day before durst not make their Appearance,
unless the Diet would grant them a safe Conduct for the security of their
Persons. But those two Gentlemen were ordered to be told, that if they came
with the same Design as Danowski did, they should be answered as he was.

Upon the 28th, the Articles of the Rokosz was proposed; at what time the
Cardinal painted forth in all its Colors, the Invasion of the Saxon; he also
excused the slowness of the Prince of Conti, and the Defect of Returns of
Money, which he attributed to the Intercepting of the Bills of Exchange; The
Brabbles of the Dantzickers, the Queen's Credit with the Merchants, and the
obliging fear that France was in of making the least Attempt upon the Liberty
of a Nation to whom she was unwilling to show the least suspicion: He assured
them that the Prince, in conformity to his Letter received the 14th, would
appear so soon as the Republic should show their forwardness to receive him.

The Rokosz was resolved upon, in opposition to those, who to the prejudice of
the Religion, Laws, and Liberties of Poland, had brought an Army of Heretics
into the Kingdom under the Conduct of a Lutheran Prince, who had delivered to
him Cracovia, and the Castle belonging to it, and put the Republic into the
danger from which they were now endeavoring to deliver her.

Humiecki was declared Mareshal of the Rokosz, who so well acquitted himself of
that Commission at the Preliminary Diet, and during a Month, at the Diet of
Election, that the Efforts and Intrigues of Constantine Wapowski, Ensign of
Sanok, who alone durst contend with him for that Dignity, were absolutely
frustrated. Prielinski delivered to him the Battoon of Command, and reserved to
himself only the privilege of presenting the Diploma to the King lawfully
Elected; which was granted him.

The Palatine of Vilna was the same day chosen Generalissimo of the Forces of
the Republic, but excused himself from accepting that Honor, till the
necessary Funds for Defraying that Charge was arrived. The Palatine of Kiovia
also, to whom the same Preferment was offcr'd, returned the same Answer: So
that it was resolved that the Prince should confer that Honor upon whom he
should think fitting. Several Regulations were likewise made, which would have
been very beneficial had they been well put in Execution.

The Bishop of Kiovia at the same time disingaged all the Senators from a great
deal of trouble, when he offered to go to Cracovia, and admonish the Elector in
the name of the Rokosz to depart the Kingdom. And the Prelate was upon his way
in order to Execute his Commission, when he understood that they expected him
with Impatience, that they might give him the same Entertainment which Donowski
had received; nor did he need any new Advice to prevent him from continuing his
Journey.

After the Enclosure of the Camp was broken down, to the end the Mutineers
should not hold their Conferences therein; the Palatine of Plosko was summoned
upon the 29th to Surrender the Castle of Warsaw, of which he was Governor; who
thereupon demanded two hours respite: But upon his answer the Palatine of
Kiovia drew Twelve Pieces of Cannon out of the Arsenal, which were pointed just
against the Palatine of Plosko's Palace: So that this Palace, which for a
Private Lord is one of the most Magnificent in Poland, had like to have been
laid in Ashes, if the Owner of it had not presently delivered the Castle; where
they held their Conferences, and where the Act of Association was generally
approved; To which, when every one had signed, he swore the observance of it by
his Head and Soul.

A Gentleman whose name was Kortechowski, and who followed the Law, was
discovered to be the Person who drew up the Elector of Saxony's Pacta Conventa;
upon which he was apprehended by another, who urged with great Earnestness that
they were not to let such a Man go unpunished, who was as wicked a Citizen as
he was a bad Lawyer; and several there were who flocked about him with their
drawn Swords, and the most merciful would have had him thrown out at a Window.
But fear sometimes infuses strength and wholesome Expedients; insomuch that the
Gentleman had the good luck to get out of their Clutches: For he threw himself
at the Cardinal's Feet, who covered him with his Mantle, and saved his Life.
But Kortechowski, after he had been the Object of the Fury of One, became the
Derision of the other, who asked him which of the two he thought to have most
Virtue, the Cardinal's Cloak or the Prophet Elias's Mantle.

Przependouski by the Elector's Order had hastened from Leopold with 50000
Crowns, to be present at the Diet; but he had been there massacred, if
Providence by that Scourg^ had not determined to chastise Poland. That Senator
arrived the very same Day and Hour that Kortechowski had like to have been
Assasssinated; the more unlikely, they would not therefore have let this 2d
Victim escape. This Curiosity led him to ask a Lacky as he was going up Stairs,
what was the reason of the great concourse of Nobility; to whom the Lackey, who
knew him not, making answer that it was the Rokosz which was Assembled in
opposition to the Elector of Saxony Adherents; Przependouksi who thought he
should have met with the Palatine of Plosko there in Conference with his
Friends, fled upon the News, and hid himself in the Brandenburgh Envoy's House.
Of this the Nobility had Information, and sent him word the next Day, that if
he did not depart Warsaw within three Hours, they would give him no Quarter;
and the Brandenburgher was desired not to afford him any Sanctuary, if he meant
to avoid the fury of the Rabble from which perhaps they could not protect him,
To which he answered that the Polander went away in the Night, but kept him
till the Storm was quite over.

The Troops of the Nobility after they had done what was desired from them in
this Diet, desired leave to return home; though had they had Money, they would
have been made use of for that second Piece of Service, for which the French
Ambassador had designed them, and they had taken the same Resolution; but in
regard that no body had wherewithal to pay them, they returned home; so that
there remained at Warsaw none but the Senators, the Mareshal and the Council,
which consisted of two hundred fourscore and Twelve Deputies of Palatinates,
and of all the Districts that compose the Body of the Republic.

Przependouski, delivered from the Terrors of Death, returned upon the Stage,
more fierce than before, and thought he should have been more at ease in that
perpetual Diet, than with the multitude that had proscribed him. In a word,
timid Reflections succeeded the Vigor they had showed before; and the the fear
of the Lords was greater than that of the Nobility, because they had more to
loose. The Kings of Poland, so soon as they are Crowned, have a Prerogative to
confer the vacant Employments, which were very numerous, by reason of the
length of the Interregnum, and flattered the Ambition of those who thought
themselves worthy to obtain them. There was no doubt but that the Elector after
his Coronation would make a Distribution of those Preferments; and it behooved
them either by force to prevent the Ceremony, or to delay it by Negotiation.
The Army of Saxony in Cracovia; those of the Crown in Lithuania immovable for
want of Money; the departure of the Nobility for the same reason hindered them
from putting in practice the first Remedy; therefore they resolved to try the
second: And the same Lords who had proscribed Przependouski some Days before,
began to flatter hm, and to talk to him of an Accommodation. The Arrival of
Danouski, Grand Squire of the Crown, caused this Revolution. He had stuck close
for six Weeks together to the Abbot of Neuf-Chattel, with some Troops, and a
good Number of the Prussian Nobility to receive the Prince; but having received
from Paris a Letter of the Bishop of Plosko's Resident, Dated the 13th of
August; wherein the Polander sent word that the Cardinal's Letter was arrived,
but that the King for all that would not hazard the Person of the Prince: The
Grand Squire carried this dangerous News to Warsaw; and added, that the returns
of Money were not arrived at Dantzick; and or if they should be, yet the
Queen's Credit, and the Menaces of the Magistrates would hinder the Payment;
and there needed no more to constrain the whole Party to throw themselves into
the Arms of a Mediator.

The Pope's Nuncio would fain have been the Arbitrator, but he had too openly
declared himself; and upon the Complaints that had been made of him, he had
received Orders to observe an exact Neutrality. He knew his own Infirmity, and
was therefore retired into Prussia, under pretense of regulating some
differences that had happened in the Chapter of Varmia; but really that he
might not expose himself to the danger of losing his Fortune.

Thus the Mediation of Brandenburgh, that had been laid aside for above three
Weeks, was reimbraced by the Heads of the Rokosz. Their first Proposals were
like to those which had caused them to break off their first Conferences. The
second, though more moderate, were not any better received: So that they were
reduced to content themselves that the Saxon should put off his Coronation to
the Month of October, that they might have time to discuss the three Capital
Points, that concerned the dismissing of the German Forces, the Conversion of
the Electoress, and the Reparation of the Primate's Honor which had suffered
so cruel a Dilaceration.

And now the Grand Mareshal of the Crown, who had always observed a Neutrality,
joined himself to the Mediator's Minister, out of a belief that the two
Interested Parties would be obliged to him for so doing. After several
Conferences, as well private as in Council, where the Cardinal would never
engage himself in Writing to any thing that might prejudice the Prince of
Conti; it was decreed among the Heads of the Rokosz, that for the satisfaction
of Przependouski, whom till then they had so much contemned, that a Writing
should be given him, wherein they should Promise to acknowledge the Saxon,
provided he should not admit himself to be Crowned before the 30th of
September; The same Lords also offered another secret Writing to the Cardinal,
by which they would oblige themselves never to separate from him; and that he
on his side should persist in his Resolution not to sign any thing; but that to
amuse the Factious only, he should summon the Nobility to meet upon the 26th of
September, to the end they might represent to him the Elector's Inclinations to
satifie the Republic in Relation to her Grievances, and that the necessity of
consulting with the Mareshal of the Rokosz, should serve as a pretense both to
the one and the other, to evade all manner of Signatures.

But they who sought for Truth and Honesty in Treaties, could never approve
this Precaution, the Elector and his Council found it too gross and palpable to
be surprised at it; however they were overjoyed to see that the Polanders,
contrary to their Custom, preferred Negotiation before open Force; and they
minded nothing more than to employ to advantage the means which their Enemies
neglected to make use of.

The Ambassador of France had the most reason to complain in this Conjuncture.
The laying of him aside, had nothing in it that was sufficient, besides that it
was not honest; for if the Elector granted the Proposal, that Minister's Party
would be quite lost; and the Saxon would be universally acknowledged; if he
rejected it, the Rokosz would be plunged again into the former Troubles and
Anxieties which the fear of a Coronation had infused into them. The two Events
were equally dangerous, there was but one Remedy, which was become useless,
because it had been often promised, but was never attended by performance.

The Palatine of Vilna Triumphed in his own weakness, and attributed to his own
Prudence all the Irresolution which he had so often made appear. He had sent
his Son to Cracow, to know whether or no the Elector would hearken to an
Accommodation, and the Answer he received was, that if the Sapieha's did not
quickly submit themselves, they would see their most Mortal Enemies, presently
after the Coronation, advanced to all the great Preferments in Lithuania. The
Friends of France being Repulsed, desired the Coronation and Accommodation with
Saxony, for no other end but that they might be easy in their minds, and hear
no more talk of an Affair, the tediousness of which had quite tired them out.
Polignac could no longer built upon any, but only some certain Friends, who in
truth were proof against all Trials, and upon the Nobility, very formidable
when they are in a Body; but which it was impossible for them to muster
together so many times without being at great Charges: So that he had no other
Hope left, than in the overhasty and-precipitated Resolutions of the Elector.
Things were in this Condition; when he understood that the Elector had sent for
his Equipage and his most precious movables from Dresden, to render his
Coronation more Magnificent; and that by the Counsel of the Palatine of
Lencicia, he was so far from delaying his Coronation, that he had laughed at all
the Conferences held upon that Subject, and performed the Solemnity upon the
15th of September as had been ordered in his Council.

In short, the vigor and weakness with which the Rokosz had Alternatively
acted, infused strenuous Resolutions into the Factious. of eight Officers, who
kept the Keys of the Treasury, there were six who adhered to the Prince of
Conti's Interests. But the Council of Saxony resolved to force a Place, which
had been always accounted Sacred, and for the Execution of this Piece of
violence to make use of two Monks; whose Character ought to have better
instructed 'em.

Wizicki, the regular Abbot of Czermin, of the Order of St. Bernard, and Grand
Secretary of the Crown, was a Man in the Kingdom, the most given to Wine, and
as well known by the Name of Sitis, as by the Title of his Abbey, his Dignity,
or his Family. Wihowski, Regular Abbot of St. Croiz, a Benedictine, formerly
Excommunicated by Pope Innocent XI. and who after so many Years, had never put
himself to the trouble to release himself from lying under the scandal of these
Censures.

These two Monk who durst not break open the Treasury, because the Law forbid
it, bethought themselves of breaking down a Pane of the Wall, and fierce as
Conquerors that enter a Breach, they seized upon the Royal Ornaments, maugre
the Protestations of Panskokonski, Guardian of the Crown, and the Burgraves of
Cracovia, whose Consent is necessary to Authorize a proceeding so irregular,
and all those other proceedings which the Pishop of Cujavia had done and was to
do, in usurpation of the Primate's Prerogatives. The Elector's Council however
composed of four or five Senators, declared the Archbishopric of Guesna
vacant, and the Marshal of the Confederacy an infamous Person and a Traitor to
his Country.

After this the Bishop of Cujavia observed no more Measures: He looked upon
himself as the Arbitrator of the State of Poland, and believed that every thing
was to give way to the Impetuosity of his Genius and the violence of his
Counsels. In vain his Friends all laid before him, that in conformity to the
Statute of 1550 the King's Coronation was not to be Solemnized but by the
Archbishop of Guesna, with the unanimous consent of the Nation, and that the
Queen was to be a professed Roman Catholic. To this they also added a Bull of
Sixtus Quintus, forbidding under pain of Excommunication, all Bishops of Poland
to Crown the King to the prejudice of the Archbishop of Guesna, and prohibiting
that Prelate himself to Crown a King who was in the least suspected of Heresy.

The Bishop of Cujavia made answer that Battori had been Crowned without any
regard to the Oppositions of contrary Faction: That upon such an extraordinary
occasion he might do what one of his Predecessors had done at the Coronation of
that Prince. That as for the Conversion of the Electrice he knew not what might
fall out: that if She refused to abjure, they might follow the same Rule that
had been observed in reference to Queen Helena the Wife of King Alexander, who
because she was the Daughter of the Czar of Muscovy, and consequently professed
the Rites of the Greek Schismatics, was acknowledged by the Polanders for
their Queen, tho they would never consent to her Coronation: He cunningly
alleged that the Regulation in 1550, was made for no other Reason, but because
that Princess had too much favored the Schismatics. But it was sufficient for
that Prelate to produce feeble Reasons, provided they were but plausible.

Upon the 13th of September began the Ceremonies of the Coronation. The
Obsequies of the Deceased King were Solemnized by way of Representation,
because the Mutineers were not Masters of Warsaw; where the Corpse lay in
Deposito. The 14th the Elector went to the Church of St. Stanelaus, according
to Customs, to honor the Memory of that Martyr, who was killed at the Altar,
saying Mass, upon the 8th of May 1079. by the Hand of King Boleslaus to whom
that Holy Man had adventured to make the same reproach, that the forerunner of
Christ made to King Herod.

Upon the 15th of the same Month the Bishop of Cujavia, assisted by two more,
Crowned the Elector and omitted none of the Ceremonies that were practiced upon
the like occasions. The greatest part of the Officers of the Crown and of
Lithuania were absent: The Germans, tho Lutherans performed the Duties of their
Places, upon the refusal of some other of the Polish Lords; and out of the fear
they were in, least the Polanders should testify their Resentments, the Saxons
were distributed into several Quarters of the City, and a good Garrison was put
into the Castle. The choice of the German Troops were drawn up above the Church
during the Ceremony; and the Elector made a new Abjuration, which was thought
to be as Sincere as the former.

It Is not known whether the length of the Ceremony, or the News of the Prince
of Conti's departure, or the Electors being tired, was the reason that a
fainting fit seized him a little before the Crown was put upon his Head. Such
an Accident might happen naturally; but several after the manner of the
Ancients, looked upon it as a very bad Omen. But they who with more Reason
believed that those sort of Superstitions were to be contemned, turned the
matter into Raillery, and asked what was become of that Hercules whom the
Germans had sent into Poland? And to make some difference between the two
Heroes, they cried, that the Ancient Hercules sustained Heaven, but that the
other fainted away at the sight of a Crown.

And now the Elector permitting those to open their Mouths who suffered him to
act, distributed the vacant Charges, and made himself both Friends and Enemies:
After that, he gave a splendid Collation, to which the Polish and German Ladys
were invited. However the German Ladys had the Precedence; which the Polish
Ladys took with as much Indignation as Women are wont to do that think
themselves despised. Revenge was the only Consolation which they sought for in
the midst of so sensible a disgrace, and they found above a hundred Gentlemen,
who either out of Complacency for the Female Sex, or hatred of the Elector,
protested against all that had been done before, or should be done after the
Coronation. There went also sixty more that came from the Palatinate of
Sandomiria; who by the Intrigues of the Party opposite to the Elector, made a
Protestation of the same Nature and upheld it more strenuously.

The pretended Diet of the Coronation sat down the 16th with a strange
confusion which lasted as long as the Assembly, that is to say, fifteen days,
instead of six Weeks prescribed by the Laws, and then it was put off till the
Month of February. The first occasion of discontent arose from the invalidity
of the Deputations; but in regard the defect was Universal, it was as soon
repaired, while all were willing to treat themselves as true Nuncio's, because
not one of 'em was truly qualified. But for all that the Confusion ceased not;
there was a dispute about the Choice of a Marshal: The young Prince Wiesnowski
put in to have been the Man, but Zwisza carried it before him, and created as
many Malcontents as his Rival had Friends. The Tumult augmented every day
upon occasion of the Pacta Conventa, of which some demanded to see the
Original, and others affirmed that it lay at Warsaw: It contained in express
Terms, that the Elector should renounce the Right which he had acquired by his
Act of Election, if he caused himself to be Crowned before his Queen were
become a Roman Catholic. But the King was not not so Impolitick to let all the
World see that the very next day after his Coronation he had violated the Words
which he had so solemnly Sworn. However no other remedy could be found to
defend him against the Importunity of the Nuncios, but only to say that the
Original of the Act was lost. However the sixty Gentlemen of Sandomiria, before
mentioned, presented a compared Copy of it, to which Przependowski would give
no Credit; and that Lord, by his lies, so embroyled the Affair in dispute, that
it was put off till the Month of February.

Upon these several Actions, there appeared a Pasquil, which contained the
Arguments of five Acts of the Comedy of Cracow. The First, a King without a
Diploma: The Second, a Burial without a dead Body: The Third, a Coronation
without a Primate: the Fourth, a Diet without Nuncios: And the Fifth,
Protestations without effect. Thus it was that the Polanders comforted
themselves for the Violences committed upon their Religion, the Violation of
their Laws, and the oppressions of their Liberty, while their Wives at their
Wits ends, did not believe themselves sufficiently revenged for a Slight
affront, unless the Elector were thrown quite out of Possession.

Soon after the Factious received News which alarmed 'em much more then what
we have already related. For the Prince of Conti left Paris the 2d of
September, and upon the 7th took Shipping at Dunkirk under the Convoy of the
Chevalier du Bast, as much dreaded as well known in the Northern Seas: And Fame
that magnifies Objects, had spread abroad all over Poland, that the Prince was
coming with such considerable Numbers of Men and Sums of Money, that he was
expected with Extreme Impatience.

So soon as they had received Advice at Warsaw, of the Saxon's being Crowned,
it was presently seen that there were no longer any Measures to be observed,
seeing that dissimulation and submission had been so useless, and therefore
being unable to amend what was past, they took precautions for the future. The
Cardinal, the Heads and Council of the Rokosz, assembled together, at what time
the Primate revoked his last Universals, and by new Ones, instead of the
general Assembly Summoned against the 26 of September, he convoked three
particular Assemblies to meet upon the 10th of October; the one in great Poland
at Sencicia, under Count Wladislaus Przienski Castellane of Katifck. The other
in little Poland, at Zawichot, under the Orders of Adam Sieniaustis Palatine of
Beltz: And the third at Grodno in Lithuania, under the Palatine of Vilna. The
Design of calling these Assemblies was to oppose with more ease the Elector's
Enterprises, and to prevent a disorder like to that which had happened at
Prostowice, where the petty Diet of the Palatine of Cracovia met, which tho it
had been only Summoned to elect Deputies to the Sovereign Tribunals, yet the
Saxons would have made a second advantage of it, which was to have obliged 'em
to receive the Result of their Master's Council against the Primate and the
Rokosz. With this Design, six Regiments of Saxons had surrounded the Diet,
threatening to put all to the Sword, if they did not agree to what was demanded
from 'em. And they would have gained their point, but for the Starost of
Olztein, who seconded by his Friends, protested against the Diet, and the
Violence of the Germans.

The Cardinal made the most of this Act in his Universals, and to avoided
surprises of the like Nature, called three Assemblies instead of one. By means
of this Precaution he hindered the Elector from coming to Warsaw with his
Troops, so soon as he had dispatched the Coronation Diet. In a Word, it would
not have been prudently done of the King to engage in the Center of the
Kingdom, where three Bodies of Nobility Equally exasperated against him, might
have joined together, surrounded and taken him after the Slaughter of all his
Men.

Requisite Orders being issued forth, the Cardinal, the Marshal and Council of
the Rokosz retired to Lowitz attended by the Palatin of Vilna's Regiment of
Foot, which had guarded the Bridge of Boats upon the Vistula, and six hundred
Reiters, with the Artillery of Warsaw which consisted of Sixty Brass Guns of
all Sizes.

Scarcely was the Primate arrived in his Castle, when the Ambassador gave him
to understand, that the Prince of Conti had passed the Sound, which made them
believe the Prince would arrive in a little time. Nevertheless, he appeared not
till the 26th in the Road of Dantzick, and upon the 28th came to an Anchor
before Olivia; at what time the Burgesses of Dantzick were in a great
perplexity which part to take: While the Reputation and Presence of the Prince
swayed one part of the Council to his Interests, and the Queen solicited the
rest in behalf of the Elector; and the Jews who had been treated so favorably
under the Reign of that Princess, employed all their Credit to second her
desires.

The Body of the City met, and Opinions were divided, They who held for Conti,
represented the Advantages which a Trading City might have by a free Commerce
with France, that they might fetch from that Kingdom Wine, Salt, and many other
sorts of Merchandise, with which they might furnish all the Northern Parts:
That the Trade with that Kingdom had contributed in part to render that City
one of the most Flourishing of all the Hans Towns; that it was not Prudence to
renounce all these Advantages to gratify the solicitations of the Queen; and
that they might give the Jews leave to speak in her behalf, since they were the
only Persons that had tasted the sweets of her Reign.

On the other side, they that held for Saxony made answer, That Trade was an
Advantage, which in truth was not to be neglected, but that they were rather
Germans than Polanders: That they ought to favor their own Nation, and
preserve the Lutheran Religion, which was threatened with imminent danger, if
the Prince of Conti carried the Crown from his Competitor; and therefore that
it was better to acknowledge for lawful King a Protestant Prince, under whose
Reign there would be no Invasion upon their Religion; that the Elector's
pretended Abjurations were not such as the Catholics gave out; and that he was
too steady in his Resolutions to betray his first Sentiments; and lastly; That
their Statutes ordained, that in case of a Fraction the City should declare for
the first that was Crowned.

The more Judicious earnestly desired the rest to stay till the Senate and
Nobility had by unanimous consent decided in favor of one of the Competitors,
and to forbear acknowledging either, till Fortune had declared on his side: And
this Party seemed to be so much the more swayed by reason, because they ran no
hazard; they further Remonstrated, that their own danger ought to render them
more circumspect in such a Nice Conjuncture; that because they declared
themselves in 1575 with too much precipitation, in favor of the Emperor
Maximilian against Stephen Battori, the City had like to have been ruined; that
he had declared her to be a Rebellious City, and compelled her in 1577 to
rebuild the Abbey of Oliva, and to quit the one half of the Revenue of her Haven
which the Kings of Poland at present enjoy.

But the fear of the same usage could not prevail with the Magistrates to make
them observe a Neutrality. From the 26th that the Prince arrived in the Road,
they had not sent to Compliment him: Their Ships passed by his Squadron without
either Saluting him or the French Flag: But on the 29th they Discharged their
Cannon in favor of the Saxon; and the rest of the Cities of Prussia within a
very little followed their Example.

And indeed they had soon reason to Triumph, for having taken the Party they
had chosen. The News of the Victory won from the Turks made them hope to see
Ten Thousand Saxons in Poland; which were part of that Victorious Army; which
being useless to the Emperor, would not fail to be called off to the Succor of
their Prince. On the other side it infused Consternation into the contrary
Party: Several that had flocked to Dantzick slunk back again; and some began to
complain that the Prince had brought no Forces along with him; as if France had
foreseen, Prince Eugenius's Victory; and that all Poland had not been able to
defend her King and her Liberties against Ten Thousand Germans.

However the Consternation was not so Universal, but that several Lords and
Gentlemen came to Kiss the Prince's Hand, who went every Day ashore to Oliva,
in order to confer with them. Nevertheless, he had that Prudence and
Moderation, though they all gave him the Title of King, to refuse it, till he
had obtained the Consent of the contrary Party.

But while the Primate and the Deputies of the Rokosz kept at Lowitz, the
Ambassador of France concluded a Treaty with the two Sapieha's, by which it was
agreed, That for the Sum of Four Hundred and Sixty Thousand Livres, that should
be deposited in the presence of Commissioners of Lithuania, the Son of the
Grand Treasurer should come with Ten or Twelve Thousand well Disciplined Troops
to Guard the Prince wherever he pleased to go. It was also farther
stipulated, that the Grand General of that Duchy, and all the Officers of the
Army should Swear Fealty to him; and march afterward with all their Forces to
the Place assigned by the Prince, who should put himself at their Head, and pay
them the same Sum of Four Hundred and Sixty Thousand Livres for two other
Quarters, before they Marched against the Enemy. The same Minister sent away
the Postoki of the Crown for Podolia, where the Body of Cosacks which he had
mustered there together lay encamped with three select Troops of the House of
Lubomirski. He agreed also with the Grand Treasurer of the Crown, the
Palatinates of of Beltz and Kiovia, as to what concerned them; and then
presently with Prince Czartoreski departed for Dantzick, where he arrived the
2d of October, and found the Prince expecting him a Shipboard that they might
settle together such Affairs as were of greatest Importance.

The first Proposal which the Polanders made the Prince, was go to Mariemburg,
Dzialinski who was Steward of the Town and Commanded the Place in the room of
Bielinski his Brother-in-Law, had mustered together a Garrison of Five Hundred
Men, and was bound to supply that place with every thing for the Sum of Twenty
Seven Thousand Livres, which the Abbot of Neuf-Chattel had given him. But the
Prince did not think it convenient to shut himself up in a Pound; that is the
last thing that a Soldier can do after a Misfortune, and in expectation of new
Succors to enable him to take the Field. Besides, the danger was too great to
trust himself with Dzialinski after he had proved so unfaithful to the Abbot of
Neuf-Chattel. That Minister had trusted him with a Hundred Thousand Livers, and
he desired him a little before the Prince's arrival to send them to the
Cardinal for the supply of pressing Exigences; more especially, to encourage
the Troops at Lowitz to advance toward Dantzick. But that Officer kept the
Money for himself; nor could they ever force him to make restitution, or oblige
him to give an account of such an Irregular and interested Act.

The second Proposal made to the Prince was to go directly to Lowitz; which
they pretended might be done with so much the more ease, because all the
Palatinates he was to ride through, embraced his Interests; and for that the
Nobility that lay upon the Seashore might serve him for a Guard. But because
he had no Disciplined Men, the very Authors of the Counsel submitted; and
judged it more to the purpose to stay and see the Effects of Sapieha's
Promises; from whom Couriers came every Day, and assured the Prince of theirs,
and the speedy arrival of the Senators of Lithuania, who were to join with the
Polish Ambassie, and jointly offer the Crown to the Prince.

But the Elector who had no need to look after Soldiers at such a distance,
seeing he had his own Men about his Person, entered into a deep Consideration
with his Secret Council, what Course to take against a Rival, whose Valor and
Conduct would not permit him to commit a fault, without paying dearly for it.
To this purpose therefore, they gave him their different sorts of Advice.
First, To March to the Crown Army, that he might hinder them by his Presence,
and some new effects of his Liberality, from joining with the Prince of Conti.
The Second was, to go to Warsaw, and disperse the three Assemblies of the
Nobility, that were to meet in as many different places; and withal to surprise
the Cardinal. The third was to march in Person with all his Men into Prussia,
to hinder the Prince's Landing, and cut off all Relief that came to him from
Remote parts.

But the Assurance they had at Cracow that the Prince would not quit the Road
till the disciplined Troops were come up, made 'em prefer the last Advice
before the two former, only with this difference, that the Elector in stead of
going himself into Prussia, sent 3000 Horse under the Command of Galecki
Castellan of Posnania, to whom he had given the Palatinate of Fnow-Loclaw; and
with whom he also joined in Commission the Major General Brandt and Flemming,
with Orders to all three, to settle the Tribunal at Pietrikow, whieh the
Nobility would not permit to officiate, because the Members of it by an
unanimous, tho tacit Consent, had approved the Coronation, and for that the Law
required that all the Tribunals should cease, during an Interregnum.

The Troops marched from Cracow upon the 10th of October, the same day that the
Nobility were to have met in the three different Places appointed by the
Primate. The Assembly of Grodno was sufficientiy numerous and governed by the
Conduct of the Sapieha's, who had assured the Cardinal by several Expresses,
that instead of going to Warsaw to the general Rendevouz of the 17, they would
go to Dantzick. That of Zawichod was not so numerous, because the Palatine of
Beltz was gone to Brzezani, to the Crown Army, where his Presence seemed
absolutely necessary. The Castellan of Kalisch carried near two thousand Men to
Lenoicia, where every thing might have past to their Wishes, if that Nobility
out of their too great caution, which is oftimes prejudicial when over
scrupulous, had not obliged the Cardinal and the Marshal of the Rokosz to come
upon the 18th to Warsaw, to make a second Nomination of the Prince of Conti, to
no purpose, because that at the same time they they did not allow him
sufficient Forces to take possession of the Crown which they had given him.

After that Proclamation the Assembly appointed Ambassadors, some Senators and
some of the Episcopal Order, and Authorized 'em to draw up the Pacta Conventa.
Orders also were given to Bielinski, Marshal of the Diet of Election, who was
at Dantzick with others, to present the Diploma to the Prince. All this might
have been done as well at Lowitz, as at Warsaw; and time had not been lost at
that Ceremony, where those of the lesser Poland were not expected, yet by their
complaints failed not to display their Discontent.

After this the Cardinal returned to Lowitz, and the Castellan of Calisch and
the Marshal resolved to depart the next day for Dantzick, accompanied with five
or six hundred Gentlemen, and the disciplined Troops which he had in his City,
where he meant to have a Garrison only. But upon the advice that the Saxons
were upon their March to intercept him in his way he shut himself up in his
Castle, out of which he suffered none to stir, but the Bishop of Kiovia, the
Castellan of Kalisch and some others that were of the Embassy, with a Convoy
of three hundred Horse and a hundred and sixty Reitres beloging to the Palatine
of Vilna. And no sooner were they arrived at Oliva, but the Prince received an
Express from the Cardinal with Letters, by which that Prelate besought him to
come to his Succor.

The Prince of Conti at the same time had dispatched the Starost of Olstreyn,
Glinski, Kochanowski and Gniewosz with thirty six thousand Crowns to bring away
nine hundred Horse that stayed for 'em in the Palatinats of Cracow, Sandomiria,
and the Duchy of Zator; and the first of these Lords who was to command this
Reinforcement, departed the 17th of October. The Prince had also given thirty
thousand Crowns to the Palatine of Kiovia, to put the Artillery of Lowitz and
Mariemburg into a good Condition; and that Senator had faithfully discharged
his Trust.

In the mean time the Dantzickers began to commit new Insolences every day, as
well against the Officers of the Squadron who went to their City, as the Seamen
that belonged to the Shallops. Of all which the Ambassador made his complaints
to the Magistrate, who thought it sufficient to deny a Fact of which he had
been an eye witness, and perhaps the Author himself.

And now they were preparing to require satisfaction for these Affronts, so
soon as the Troops of the Republic should be arrived. But at the same time
that they expected 'em as well as the Cardinal, they received Letters from the
Sapieha's, importing that the same day that the General of the Vanguard, was to
have set forward, the grand Treasurer of the Crown was come to the Grand
Treasurer of Lithuania, and had set forth as well to Sapieha as to the rest of
the Nobility, the danger of sending the Detachment which was intended for
Prussia, if they should meet the three thousand Saxon Horse, who had orders to
Fight all they met of the French Party, and not to give any Quarter. The same
Senator assured 'em that Oginski was gone secretly to Cracow to receive Money
from the Elector to cause a Revolt of the Lithuanian Army and the Nobility of
Samogitia. His Malice made him also add, that it may be the Prince of Conti
would be far enough off before their Detachment arrived: He also produced
Letters, whether true or false is uncertain, which spoke of his return, as of a
thing resolved upon. However little Credit would have been given to those
Letters, had not the Sapieha's showed others from the Bishop of Ploskow, much
after the same Style, wherein the same Prelate Complained that France was too
niggardly of her Money while the the Saxon scattered it abroad with as much
profuseness: and that of the two Princes, of whom the one was so reserved while
the other ventured at all, there was little doubt to be made but that the most
Liberal would carry it.

However it were, the Sapieha's who stood in fear of Oginski the Defender of
the Coequation, and it may be had less Stomach to Fight the Saxons, gave so
much Credit to the Fictions of the grand Treasurer of the Crown, that they
countermanded Straznik Commander of the Vant Guard, with his Detachment. And to
cover their weakness, they wrote to the Cardinal and the French Ambassador, the
Bishop of Ploskow and the Palatine of Kiovia, the Reasons that made 'em alter
their Conduct, which consisted chiefly in this, that the Money promised the
Lithuanian Army, had not been deposited: That the Coldness that appeared at
Oliva begat a Chillness in the Kingdom, among those who had been the most
Zealous; and who durst not embark any further in an Affair where France did not
set 'em the Example. After this they proposed a remedy for all these
inconveniences, and this Remedy was that the Prince would be pleased forthwith
to send Money to be deposited in Lithuania, with a French Commissary to pay the
Soldiers, and take an Oath of Fidelity from the Officers and Companys, as they
received their Money. As if the way had been more open and free to carry Money
through the midst of the Germans, than to conduct a Body of Men.

But Sapieha's fear together with the Irresolutions of the Palatine of Vilna,
and the bad reasons which he alleged, made People believe him to be a General
who wanted Courage, Credit, and Fidelity.

However it were, the Perfidiousness of the Grand Treasurer of the Crown
hindered the making all the Reflections that might have been made upon the
Conduct of others. This Officer from the beginning of the Interregnum, had
declared for France, and had appeared the most Vigorous, and the most Zealous
of all the Adherents. On the other side, the Crown of France, had all the
Confidence imaginable in him, who for that Reason had had the greatest share of
her Liberality.

The other Competitors therefore despaired of success, if they could not draw
him into their interests; however he had resisted all their Temptations, but
succumb'd under those of Constantia Boteum his Wife. For the Elector caused a
Proposal to be made to that Lady of Forty Thousand Crowns for her Husband: She
accepted the Offer, and had so much Authority over her Husband as to oblige him
to prefer that sum before the the merit which he had acquired by his
commendable Actions. And he was so much the more capable, because that a few
Days before he had Written to the Prince of Conti as to his lawful King; and
had assured him, that he would forthwith be one of those that should attend his
Person.

The Polanders therefore made use of the blackest Colors to paint forth this
Action. Some fansied it to be a resemblance of the Fall of Adam, who was so
weak as to suffer himself to be deluded by his Wife, whom the Serpent had
seduced; and others compared it to the Treason of Achitophel.

But letting this pass, upon the 21st of October the Sapieha's received an
Express, importing the Confirmation of a Treaty which the French Ambassador had
concluded with them; and it was signed by the Prince, and accompanied with ten
Thousand Crowns for the Straznick, to the end he might pay the Troops that were
under his Command. About the same time the Grand Treasurer of the Crown was
departed from the Grodno, and by his Discourses had so intimidated the Palatine
of Vilna, that he became more inconstant and irresolute than he had hitherto
appeared to be. On the other side, the Grand Treasurer of Lithuania looking
with Indignation upon Lubomirski's Persidiousness, of which he had had a full
Relation; and ashamed of the Levity of his Brother, used his utmost endeavors
to infuse into him better sentiments. But he, incapable of following good
Counsel, when there was a necessity to determine, promised his Brother to Write
to the Prince, as he really did; and the Letter was very respectful and
submissive, wherein he brought his Majesty to excuse all past delays, and that
he would be pleased to apply the speedy Remedy, to what had been done amiss;
which he might easily do, if he would send a French Commissary into Lithuania
with Money to pay the Army: A thing that had been already proposed; and which
any Body but the Palatine of Vilna would have been ashamed to have repeated.

On the other side, the Prince of Conti who came only to fight, tired out with
the slowness of those whom he came to Succor, saw well that there was but one
Course for him to take, and in a Conference which he had at Oliva upon the 29th
of October, he declared to the Lords that were there present, That he believed
he had done all for Poland that could be desired for him; that he was ready to
satisfy what the most Christian King had promised in his Name; that he was
come to put himself at the Head of so many brave Persons, to free them from the
Oppression that threatened 'em, and which they had escaped for a whole Century
together: But since they were willing to submit to it, he could not brook to
see the Expiration of a Liberty which they had defended ever since the
Foundation of their Monarchy; That it became not his Dignity to be a spectator
of their Disgraces; and that he should attribute to the misfortune of the
times, the irregularity which other Nations might observe in their Conduct.

The Lords to whom the Prince directed his Speech, conjured him not to
precipitate his Departure: And he no less willing to give them Demonstrations
of his Esteem, made no great have, upon their Assurances, that in a little time
there would come News from Lithuania. However the Prince's Complaisance did not
hinder him from taking all necessary Precautions. To which purpose, the next
Day he sent away all his Domestic Servants from Oliva, and caused them to go
on Shipboard. Upon the 2d the Mareshal of the Duchy arrived with a small
Train, accompanied by Casimir Oginski, Starost of Godzin, and Prince
Czartoreski, who together with the Mareshal and Prince Radziville, who was
expected in two or three Days, were to perform the Duties of Ambassadors for
Lithuania. At the same time also came the News that the Saxons to the number of
Three Thousand Six Hundred Soldiers had passed the Bride of Thorn. In the mean
time, the Prince gave Audience to the Mareshala Shipboard, and asked him why
Straznick or he, had not brought the Detachment that had been so many times
promised, and for the payment of which, Money had been delivered. The Mareshal
answered, that the superior Number of the Saxon Troops, and the Acts of
Hostility committed against his House, were the cause of it. But it was no
difficult thing to percive that this Answer of the Palatine of Vilna, signified
little or nothing. Or if it might have deserved a more favorable Construction;
what reason was there that a Prince should stay at least Six Weeks for
Soldiers, when there was a present occasion to fight the Saxons; and that a
Person whom Poland had acknowledged for their Sovereign, should spend the
Winter upon the Sea, while his Kingdom was not able to afford him any more than
one pitiful place of War, without Men, or the least present supply in his
pressing extremity,

The rest of the Ambassadors of the Republic arrived the 4th of November at
Oliva. The Bishop of Kiovia whom the Cardinal had made Chief, brought the
Commissions for the rest. The Castelans of Kalish and Sicadia were for Great
Poland. The latter of which had been with the Prince for some time, and the
former arrived with Three Hundred Horse which he brought through Mariemburg;
and if the rest had brought as many Men, Poland perhaps had not now groaned
under the Dominion of the Saxons. The Palatine of Kiovia, and the Castelan of
Lublin, were appointed for Little Poland; and for Lithuania, those whom we have
already mentioned, Bielinski Mareshal of the Diet was joined with them; and in
the present Conjuncture, had a greater desire to present the Diploma, than the
other had to receive it, Prince Lubomirski, Starost of Sondeck, arrived at the
same time from Podolia and reported that he had given order to fifteen Hundred
Horse to march, which the Postoki of the Crown would bring in three Days. The
Prince overjoyed at this News, testified his impatience to put himself at the
Head of these Troops, that he might Fight the Enemy. But this beam of Hope
lasted not long. For presently News was brought that the three Thousand Saxons
were divided into two Bodies; of the which one would March directly to Oliva,
the other to Mariemburg. The French Ambassador gave this intelligence to the
Prince upon the 5th of November in the Morning; at what time he was come ashore
to Advise with the Polanders upon the Reception of the Diploma and the
Embassy. But this new accident changed all their measures, because the Troops
expected were still at too great a distance; and for that there was no certain
Advice where they were. The Castelan of Dantzick also, who was present at this
Council, gave notice that the Saxons had passed into his Starosty of Grodentz
upon the Vistula; and that they had ruined all his Lordships. An Express
likewise from the Cardinal, that Day confirmed, that by a Letter from Cracow
which he had intercepted, he understood, that the Saxons had orders to handle
roughly, and carry away all the Polanders they should find in Oliva; and a
Council was thereupon held in a House upon the Shore of the Sea, which perhaps
was not more disorderly that Day, than the various Advices proposed in that
Assembly.

Grudzinski, Castellan of Brzescia, and Lubomirski Starost of Sendek were of
Opinion, that the Prince, passing through the by and unfrequented Ways of
Pomerania should enter into Great Poland with all the Nobility that he had
about him: But this advice was Universally blamed as being too rash for a
Prince to follow: And the deficulty was to find out a better that was opposite
to it, and less subject to Inconveniences. However at length they submitted to
that which appeared the most rational, which was to lay before the Prince, that
since Succor would arrive in three days, His Majesty instead of returning into
France should write to Stettin, a City, so much the more Commodious, because it
was more near the Frontiers: That in the mean time the Loyal Troops which the
Saxons had left behind 'em should join themselves with those at Lowitz, and the
Crown Army, and march into the Palatinate of Kalisch, where the Castellan
allowed his Lands which lie upon the Frontiers on that side for a general
Rendevouz: To which the Prince replied, that since the Troops were so near at
Hand he would stay their coming on Shipboard, and would not forsake his
faithful Friends. They asked him then, whether he would be pleased to receive
the Ambassy and the Diploma, but he excused himself, alleging that it was not
proper to take possession of a Kingdon, out which he was advised to depart.

The same day, by the Prince's order, the Chevalier du Bast seized upon five
Merchant Men belonging to Dantzick, which lay in the Road laden and ready to
set Sail. The Affronts which the Burghers had offered the French for a Month
together, and the injury done to the Admiral's Notary, drew this misfortune
upon 'em. The Abbot of Polignac also being informed of the Seizure of these
Vessels, gave order to his Servants to remove out of the City all his most
precious movables, which he had brought thither from Warsaw for the Prince's
Service: And his Servants were preparing to put his Orders in Execution, when
the Magistrates caused the Gates of the City to be shut, imprisoned his
Officers and the Merchants that had done the King any Service; Seized upon the
greatest part of the Embassador's movables, and after they had sold his Horses
by the Inch of Candle, had the insolence to send him a Trumpet with a letter,
wherein they demanded the Restitution of their Vessels, and without mentioning
what belonged to 'em, declared that they had secured the Merchants effects. To
which the Ambassador made answer, that the Affair of the Vessels did not at all
concern him; that to plunder and pillage his goods was not the way to oblige
him to speak to the Prince in their Favor; that they should call to mind that
they had violated the Law of Nations, and failed in their Respect to a great
King, whom no Body had ever offended but that he Suffered for it.

At the same time, advice came that the Saxons had slipped through the Guards at
Stum, a City of Prussia; that they had surprised a a hundred and sixty of
Sapieha's Reitres, and made their Commander a Prisoner of War.

Kraiczi, Grand squire Carver of the Crown, was retired some days before to
Mariemburg, not so much out of a design to preserve the place, as to make use
of it in order to make an Advantageous Capitulation for himself.

Andrew Zalouski Bishop of Plosko departed the 29th, immediately after the
Council had been held, wherein the Prince declared his Resolution to return
into France. That Prelate minded his own Interest more then any Body, and
thirsted to get the Bishopric of Varmia upon any Terms, because the Revenue of
it was more considerable than his own. So soon therefore as he saw that the
Prince to whom he had adhered would not be in a Condition to procure him that
advantage, without losing time, he would not abandon his Hopes, but threw
himself into the Arms of the Saxon Party, which it is probable he had so managed
that he might not fail whatever happened.

Upon the 6th, Advice came from all parts of the March of the Saxons. Upon
which the French Ambassador thought it high time to look after his Affairs; and
after he had sent his Papers, his Servant's and the rest of his Equipage into
the Abbey of Oliva, as the only Sanctuary that remained upon the Seashore, and
whither the most part of the Senators were retired, he went the 7th to wait
upon the Prince, and desired of him some long Boats to carry aboard his Ships
the Goods he had saved in the Abbey of Oliva. At the same time the Castelan of
Kalisch and Count Towianski were with the Prince, and advised him to retire to
Stettin, notwithstanding he had declared to 'em his design to return into
France. As for the Ambassador he could not that day obtain the Shallops that he
desired, because the Chevalier du Bast had sent 'em for fresh Water; but he
promised them the next day with a Guard of sixty men commanded by the first
Captain of the Squadron. Which precaution was so much the more necessary,
because that the same day in the Morning, one the Prince's domestic Servants
had been stripped in the Woods by three German Troopers.

The next Morning by break of Day the Shallops carried the Soldiers a shore;
and the Abbot of Neuf-Chattle went along to fetch away what he had left at
Oliva. But before twenty Soldiers were Landed, they perceived a great Body of
Horse drawn up in the Plain. These were the Saxons, that arrived the preceding
Night to the Number of four or five hundred, followed at the heels by the rest
of their Troops. The Castelan of Kalish, for whom they sought in particular,
had the good look to escape them; but he fell into an Ambush, where he so
bestirred himself, that thirty Horse detached after him, pursued him in vain in
the Woods, not being able to overtake him. As for the Starost of Sondek, he
took a Resolution as bold as the Counsel which he had given three Days before;
for he fought his way through his Enemies, with his Sword in his Hand; no less
than five times fired at without being wounded. His Equipage was pillaged, and
that was it which hindered the Germans from pursuing him.

The inside of the Abbey was forced as well as the outside, at what time the
Bishop of Kiovia, and the Castelan of Brzec fled into the Church, where the
latter was rifled and very ill used; the other was at his Prayers upon his
Knees before the Altar: But the Saxons without any respect to the Sanctity of
the Place, or the Character of the Prelate, fell upon him, tore his Clothes,
and never left him till they had torn from him a Cross set with Diamonds, which
the Bishops of Poland wear as a Badge of their Dignity.

After this they forced the Door of the Vestry where the Ambassador had put his
Papers and his Plate: Peter Hubert his Secretary was left in the Abbey to take
take care of them, though he had much ado to get admittance into it: However he
found a way at length to mollify the Savage Breasts of those that should have
been more Civil, and by the means of three hundred Ducats which he distributed
among the Monks, they gave him a Habit of the Order, and assisted him neatly to
take off the Seal which the Saxons had fastened to a little Chest wherein the
Papers were enclosed. Which done, he put something else in the Trunk instead of
the Papers which he carried away in the Night, with the hazard of his Life, and
sent them by a faithful Peasant wrapped up in Bean Straw to Dantzick, to the
Grand Chamberlain's Wife, who afterward caused them to be delivered to the
Ambassador.

Upon the 8th in the Forenoon the Seashore was full of Saxon Horse, who gave
the Chevalier St. Paul, first Captain of the Squadron to understand, that it
was impossible for him to execute his Orders. Thereupon, being a good Soldier,
he re-embarked his Men; standing his Ground so long as one remained on Land,
causing his Seamen to fire continually from the Shallops, so that some Saxons
were killed, and on the Captain's side, the Chevalier de Tomur, an Ensign in
the Halcyon, received a Musket shot in his Breast, of which he died that
Evening.

And thus the Ambassador of France lost all the Goods he had both at Dantzick
and Oliva. The same Day, being the 8th in the Evening, the young Count
Towianski, the Cardinal's Nephew, went abroad, disguised in the Habit of a
Bernardine Monk; and upon the 9th about Noon, the Prince set Sail in order to
return for France. As for the French Ambassador it was the Prince's pleasure
that he should Land in the Isle of Rugen, that he might go from thence to
Stettin, from whence he might re-enter Poland if the Conjuncture of Affairs
would permit, or else stay there for farther Orders.

In the mean time, the Polanders that were in Dantzick were as ill used as the
French. The Palatine of Kiovia, the Mareshal of Lithuania, Prince Czartoriski,
the Starost of Pereslaw and the Grand Chamberlain were imprisoned in their
Houses by the Dantzickers, who set Guards upon them; and those Lords beheld
several Gentlemen whom the Rabble dragged by the Hair.

This Disorder inflamed the indignation of the Nobility against the Saxons; and
though they were much cast down upon the Prince's departure, they were so far
from losing their Courage, that they continued firm in their Resolutions,
excepting only a small Number, to whom the Elector extended his Arms, and was
very liberal of his Presents, conformable to his Genius and the necessity of
his Affairs.

Upon the 5th of February School, the Elector summoned a Diet, called the Diet of
Pacification: for the holding of which he repaired to Warsaw. Never was an
Assembly worse culled; for there met not above twenty, take Nuncios and
Senators altogether; and of those, twelve protested against him, and broke up
the Diet the same Day that it began.

On the other side, the Cardinal summoned a Diet of the Rokosz against the 18th
of the same Month; where met a great Number of Senators, and the Nobility.
Thither the Elector sent his Plenipotentiaries to treat of an Accommodation. But
his Proposals were rejected, and the Rokosz persisted in their Vigor.

And now the Elector, though delivered from the apprehensions caused by the
Presence of his Competitor, and the Intrigues of the French Ambassador, panted
after nothing so much as Peace, and seriously made it his business to reconcile
himself with the Lords that had been opposite to him. But this was an Affair
not so easy to be composed, as it seemed to be: There were many who had still
the Generosity to uphold a Party that rested upon such solid Foundations. The
Rokosz therefore persisted in its Vigor till the 15th of May; when destitute
of all hopes of the Prince of Conti's Return, and solicited by Fabricio
Paulucci, Bishop of Ferrara, and the Pope's Extraordinary Nuncio, more cunning
and more biased than the former, the Elector gained by his Favors those that
would not confide in his Promises. Thereupon, a General Agreement was concluded
upon the 21st of May, School, upon such Conditions as they were pleased to like
who make a forced submission; and this Accommodation was so agreeable to the
Prince, that he never disputed any of the Articles. And this Resolution he
took, upon what his Friends had laid before him; that Mildness was always
necessary for Princes that were not well fixed in their Thrones.

FINIS.

