The keeping of Holy Days Recommended in a SERMON PREACHED at HADHAM BEFORE THE
Right Honorable and Right Reverend FATHER in GOD HENRY LORD Bishop OF LONDON,
etc. AT His Lordships late Conference with his Clergy there.

By Thomas Leigh B. D. Vicar of Bishops STORTFORD.

LONDON, Printed by H. Hills Jun. for Walter Kettilby at the Bishop's Head in
St. Paul's Churchyard. 1684.

Cujus mandato Hoc quicquid est, dudum aures multorum, Nunc oculos omnium
metuit; Villae meae natalis Domino primario, Vicariatus, quo ibidem fungor,
Patrono extraordinario; Ecclesiae Londini, and quaqua patemus Trinobantes,
Antistiti Vigilantissimo: Ecclesiae Anglicanae Lumini and Columini, Pietatis
primaevae Cultori Eximio, Reformatae Religionis Adsertori fortissimo. Cleri sui
Inspectori simul and Speculo, Vindici pariter ac Judici integerrimo, HENRICO
Praenobilis COMPTO Norum Familiae Summo Decori and Ornamento, Viro nullis non
nominibus Honorando, Me meaque omnia Quanta licet demissione atque observantia
LMQDDCQ.

T. L.

Psalm 118.24. This is the day which the Lord has made; we will rejoice and be
glad in it.


THE Occasion of our present Meeting is to inquire into the reasons of setting
apart and keeping certain days for the more special Worship of God; which are
therefore called Holy; and into the reasons why they are no better kept. The
former I shall chiefly speak to from the words now read; which the Jews
understand of the Day of David's advancement to the Throne; and accordingly the
Chaldee Paraphrast renders the 22th. ver. thus, The Builders despised the Youth
that was among the Sons of Jesse, and yet he deserved to be made King and
Ruler; and then brings in the Builders and the Sons of Jesse with others
singing alternatim thus; the Builders begin, This is the Lords doing; the Sons
of Jesse answer, It is mavelous in our eyes: The Builders go on, This is the
day which the Lord has made; the Sons of Jesse, Let us rejoice and be glad in
it: The Builders again, Save now we beseech thee, O Lord; then Jesse and his
Wife, O Lord we beseech thee send now prosperity; and lastly, David and Samuel
and the whole Tribe of Judah are brought in bearing their parts in this Psalm
of Thanksgiving. And they had good reason to understand the Day spoken of, to
be the Day of David's coming to the Crown; but we have greater, to understand
it of the Day of our Lord's Resurrection from the dead; which was the Day
whereon he began his Reign or the exercise of his Kingly Office. For our Lord
appropriates to himself those words of the 22d. ver. The stone which the
Builders refused is become the head of the Corner, Matt. 21.42. adding also the
words of the 23. ver. and St. Peter (himself a great stone in that Building)
applies the same to our Lord after and upon account of his Resurrection. Act.
4.11. 1 Epistle 2.4. To which add the Hosanna and Benediction of the two
following verses, which were the Acclamations of the multitude, when our Lord
rode in Kinglike manner to Jerusalem, Matt. 21.5, 9.

We have in the words, the Constitution of a Holy or Festival day, and the
Celebration of it.

The Constitution, This is the day which the Lord has made.

The Celebration, We will rejoice and be glad in it.

First, For the Constitution: Here is the ground and reason for the ordaining
and keeping of a Day Holy; because it is that which the Lord has made; where
by making, 1. We don't understand the creating of a Day, which is done by
dividing the Darkness from the Light; for so all days are of Gods making, and
made without any distinction of Festi and Profesti, Fasti and Nefasti, Holy and
Unholy, Lucky and Unlucky, or any other differences than what the course of the
Sun and the seasons of the year do necessarily cause. 2. Nor do we understand
here only Gods appointing of a Day to be kept for Religious purposes; for that
has and may be done by man. But

We understand thereby the making of a Day signal and remarkable by some
extraordinary deliverance or other Mercy bestowed upon Mankind in general, or
some Nation or great body of Men in particular. Such a Mercy, such a
Deliverance leaves a certain stamp or impression upon that Day, whereon it was
bestowed, as to make it be called a Holy day, a High day, a day of days, a day
more extraordinary and notable than its fellows. Such was the day of David's
Exaltation to the Throne, a Day of great Mercy and Deliverance to the People of
Israel, and such was the Day of our Lord's Resurrection, a Day of great Mercy
and Deliverance to all mankind. Such Days are, if I may so call them, (...),
Days of a singular make, and which God has as it were redeemed and purchased
to himself from the rest of the days of the year. Grant me this ground to go
upon, and I shall hope to give you some tolerable account of the Institution of
Holy days. What I have to say, shall be comprehended under a very few Heads.

First, Upon this ground it is that we hear of no special Day set apart for
above two thousand years, unless that of the Sabbath. For although I doubt not but
that, as there were some days whereon the Sons of God came to present
themselves before the Lord (as we find twice in Job,) so there was also some
time whereon the Sons of Men made their Religious addresses to Him; And I
understand, when it is said after the birth of Enos, Then men began to call upon
the name of the Lord, thus, Then men being increased into a multitude the
Worship of God became more public: Yet, I say, we are not sure, whether the
time was fixed and unalterable, or whether chosen or commanded upon occasion.
We read of Holy Persons or Priests of Holy things, as Sacrifices and Tithes,
and of Holy places often before the Deliverance out of Egypt; but not of Holy
times: Altars several, built by Noah, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and several of
them upon the score of Gods appearing to them; when it might have been said to
them as it was to Moses and Joshua, upon the same account, The ground whereon
thou stand is Holy; and, they might have said, as the Psalmist does here of
a Day, This is the Place, which the Lord has made; that is, signalised by his
special appearance in a way of Mercy. But no fixed times; because God for the
first Two thousand years of the World had rather given public tokens of his
Justice and Displeasure, than of his Goodness and Mercy; as in the drowning of
the Old World, the burning of Sodom and the three neighboring Cities, the
confounding of Tongues; several Famines and Plagues. The favors which God
bestowed at any time, were only on single Persons or their Familes; which,
although we need not doubt but they did most thankfully acknowledge; yet if we
grant, they did yearly commemorate the same during their own lives, that they
did obblige their Posterity to do the same, we have no ground to think. For, I
suppose, he that finds in an Eastern Calendar, exhibited by Mr. Seldom,
Ingressus Noachi in Arcam, and Egressus Noachi ex Nave, will not think it
signifies much against what I say.

Secondly, Upon this ground, as soon as any other, I would conclude the
Sabbath Day was kept from the beginning of the World, in honor of the great
maker of it; and that God by ceasing from the making of all other things made
that a signal Day, a Day of Rest and Joy. For, if at the laying of the
foundations of the Earth, the Morning Stars sang together, and all the Sons of
God shouted for joy, Job 38.7. can we think the Sons of Men were silent and
stupid; when they not only beheld that great work completed, but constantly
enjoyed their shares therein, and were themselves no small part of it? So
stupendous a work deserved to be Celebrated as soon as it was finished, and in
that portion of time which God had sanctified. And it was surely, a greater
work to make a World, than to deliver a small People out of a Tyrants hands;
and yet this had not only a yearly, but also this weekly Commemoration of it. I
would, I say, upon this ground conclude that of Genesis 2.3. to be more than
Proleptical; but that there are some other reasons on the other hand, wherein I
have not yet satisfied my self. But as from such a conclusion the Morality of a
Seventh day could not be inferred; so without such a conclusion we need not
doubt our obligation to keep the Christian Sabbath; from this very ground we
now go upon, as may be seen anon. Wherefore I pass on, and say in the third
place.

3. Upon this ground we shall find the Jewish Festivals to have been founded;
as well those that were ordained by Men, as those that were commanded by God
himself. The chief of Gods own commanding were the weekly Sabbath, and those
three that required their yearly attendance in person at Jerusalem. All which
were commemorative of something passed and Typical of something future; and
they all related to the redemption of the Israelites out of Egypt.

1. The Sabbath Day had that respect. Wherefore it is observable that in the
Deuteronomy ( c. 5. v. 15.) the reason fetched from Gods resting on the seventh
day is omitted (the reason expressed Ex. 20. and still retained by us) and this
is inserted in the room thereof: Remember that thou wast a Servant in the Land
of Egypt, and that the Lord thy God brought thee out thence with a mighty hand,
and by an outstretched arm; therefore the Lord thy God commanded thee to keep
the Sabbath Day.

2. That the Passover was therefore also commanded, is so notorious, that I
need say nothing. This was a Feast of seven days, on the first whereof this
Deliverance was wrought. This (says Ex. 12.14.) day shall be to you for a
Memorial, and ye shall keep it a Feast to the Lord throughout your generations,
ye shall keep it a Feast by an Ordinance for ever.

3. That of Pentecost, which was ordained in Memory of the giving of the Law;
and therefore the Jews called it Festum Legis. A great Blessing this was. For
though then other Lords had no dominion over them, yet Anarchy would have been
little better than Tyranny, and their deliverance out of the house of Bondage a
delivery into a Wilderness of violence, tumult and confusion; had they not been
afterward formed into a Polity, and received certain Laws, Statutes and
Judgments, whereby they should be governed both in Religious and Civil affairs,
and this was done or began to be done upon the day of Pentecost, and this also
had a special reference to their Emancipation from Egyptian bondage; according
to, Deuteronomy. 16.10, 12. Thou shall keep the Feast of Weeks unto the Lord thy God,
Thou, and thy Son, and thy Servant; and thou shall remember that thou wast a
Bondsman in Egypt.

4. The Feast of Tabernacles had the like reference, Levit. 23.42, 43. Ye shall
dwell in Booths seven days, that your generations may know that I made the
Children of Israel to dwell in Booths, when I brought them out of the Land of
Egypt, I am the Lord your God.

5. Add, how the Feast of Trumpets called a Sabbath, a Memorial of blowing of
Trumpets, a Holy Convocation seems to have been ordained in remembrance of the
taking of Jericho by the blowing of Trumpets; the taking of which City was the
first Possession the Israelites took of the Land of Promise, and an earnest of
all the rest. We need not here dissemble what P. Fagius tells us, how on the
Seventh day of the Feast of Tabernacles they went seven times round the Altar,
in memory of the taking of that City, the City of Palms, bearing Palm-branches
in their hands; and indeed of such chiefly they were required to make their
Booths, Lev. 23.43. It is all one to our purpose. But I will not stand so much
on these things, nor on the Feasts that follow, which were of human ordination.
As 1. The Feast of Purim, ordained by Esther and Mordecai, and received by the
Jews with general consent to be remembered and kept throughout every Generation,
every Province, every City, every Family in Memorial of their deliverance from
the Bloody Conspiracy of Haman. 2. The Feast of Dedication; those (...), (which
our Lord honored with his presence) ordained in memory of the Dedication of
the Temple and Altar made by Judas Maccaboeus after the horrid Profanations of
Antiochus. 3. The Feast of Fire, which was given from Heaven, when Nehemiah
offered Sacrifice after his building the Temple and the Altar whereof read 2.
Macc. 1.18, etc.

Fourthly, Come we now to our Christian Feasts and to show that the days and
times of them were made by God also; signalis'd and exempt out of the number of
common days, by far greater Mercies and Deliverances, than ever were bestowed
on the Israelites, and of more universal concern. These are of Gods making
rather than Man's; He has set his Seal upon them, and by his own deed plainly
pointed out our duty. We in keeping them adore Gods extraordinary Providence in
the greatest managements, that could possibly be in order to our welfare. What
Man does in these is but his sealing to the Counterpart of that which God
himself has dictated and wrought with his own hand; It is but a testification
of his Thankfulness, and that is no human Invention, but a result of the Law of
Nature. For the Church of England (and I doubt not the like of all other
Reformed Churches, which have their Holy days too) has no other end in
appointing these days but as they are days of Thanksgiving to God; and that,
either for those great Mysteries of his Goodness, Wisdom and Power, that
concurred to the completing of the work of our Redemption; Or for those
gracious means, whereby the glad Tidings of Salvation have been made known, and
become saving unto us. 1. For the Mysteries themselves, the first great Mystery
of Godliness, or Christian Religion, is God manifested in the Flesh; and this
we think our selves bound to commemorate on the days of his Incarnation
(commonly called the Annunciation) and of his Nativity. The next is his being
Justified in the Spirit at his Resurrection, and this we Celebrate, as on every
Lord's day, so especially on that day of the year, whereon he rose. Then his
being received into Glory on Ascension day; his being Preached to the Gentiles
on the Epiphany, whereto are premised and subjoined that of the Circumcision
and Presentment of our Lord in the Temple, to show our hope of the Conversion
of the Jews, and that we and they must expect to be saved by one and the same
Savior. 2. Others are in contemplation of the Means whereby so great a
Salvation has been published for the benefit of all mankind. As 1. The Descent
of the Holy Ghost, for which we have our Whitsunday. 2. Our Lords being seen of
Angels in order to make them his Ministering Spirits, to Minister to them that
shall be Heirs of Salvation; for which we have that of Michael and all Angels.
3. His being believed on in the World, through the Preaching and Writing of the
Apostles and Evangelists, and the means of all those Persons and Things,
whereby so great a Mystery was made credible to the World; as was that of our
Lords Birth by the little less miraculous Birth of John the Baptist (the only
Saint therefore whose Nativity we observe) and the dreadful Massacre of the
Fourteen thousand Infants at Bethlehem: And that of his Resurrection and
Ascension by the aforesaid Effusion of the Holy Ghost, the death of the
Protomartyr Stephen (who saw our Lord standing at the right hand of God) and
all other Saints and Martyrs their Holy lives and painful deaths. And now after
all, when the great Creator and Redeemer of Mankind, and Sanctifier of the
Elect have been devoutly acknowledged on distinct days; If there be one added
to recognize the Ineffable Trin-Vnity, I hope none will gainsay it, though the
ground I go upon will not reach it. Ye see now our Church has not stuffed her
Calendar with the Invention of the Cross of Christ, of the Head of John
Baptist, the Bones of St. Luke, the Relics of any other Martyrs, with the
Names of seign'd or real Saints, that had not a special Commission to Preach
the Gospel, or were not extraordinary instruments to assert the Credibility of
it. So that our Church Calendar is a kind of Catechism, instructive even of
them that cannot read, where Holy days are duly observed.

Fifthly, Upon this ground we may build the true degrees and distinctions of
Holy days. All the Rubricks are not of an equal dye; there are, if I may so
say, dies (...), scarlet days, Festa duplicia, majora and minora, as they used
to speak. God has left a greater impression and mark upon some than upon
others, as he did upon the Jewish; and as they had, so have we upon the same
score three distinctions of Days. And this threefold degree of Holiness might
be made out as well in Persons and Places, as Times, both in the Jewish and
Christian Church; but that is alien from our business.

First, The Lords day is (as the Sabbath was with them) the Queen and Empress
of Days; a day which God has Crowned more than any other, by extraordinary
Acts of his own. It Is the first day that God made, that whereon he began the
Creation of the World, and that whereon our Blessed Lord finished the work of
our Redemption. It pleads the greatest Antiquity, as a day set apart for all
Religious Performances; that whereon our Lord twice visited his Disciples, that
whereon the Holy Ghost descended upon them; that whereon St. Peter Preached and
Converted Three thousand Souls, whereon St. Paul gave the Holy Communion and
used to have his Collections for the Poor; that whereon the Primitive
Christians used to Pray standing, and always forbid Fasting. A Day, which the
Great Constantine took care to be wholly devoted to Divine Worship, and
Christian Instruction; on it he caused all Courts of Judicature to be shut up;
all public Suits and private Arbitrations to be superseded. The Great
Theodosius forbid all public shows and spectacles on that Day; The other
Theodosius did the like, and moreover provided in case the Day of the Birth or
Inauguration of the Emperor happened on the Lord's day, the solemnities usual
in honor of the Imperial Majesty should be deferred till another day. A Day
which always, as far as we can find, had the Pre-eminence in this our Land. Of
the British Church we have scarce any Records; but for our Antecessors the
Saxons, it is demonstrable, that they, after they became a Christian and settled
People for above Three Hundred years gave the preference to this above all
other Festivals, although a certain Historian has born us in hand to the
contrary. The Laws of King Ina and of King Withred at the Council of
Berghamsted; the Canons of the Council of Cloveshow or Cliffe held under
Cuthbert Archbishop of Canterbury; the Excerptions of Egbert Archbishop of
York. The Laws of King Alfred and Edward the Elder, in conjunction with Guthrun
the Dane. The Laws of King Athelstan, King Edgar the Peaceable, and King
Ethelred in a General Council of all England, and King Kanute; All take most
especial care for the observance of the Lords day above others; and, if I
mistake not, in one place it is called The Holy Day. This is plain to any one
who consults that great lover of Church and Clergy, the Learned and Industrious
Sir Henry Spelman. I should not doubt to answer the Pompous Arguments that are
brought to the contrary from the times of the Norman Confusions, and
afterward; but I hold not my self so much bound to account for those times;
because if they did reduce the Queen of Days to a common Peerage with the other
less Holy; it is no more to be wondered at than twenty things besides: For they
made the Virgin and other Saints, fellows with our Lord, or rather Superiors in
all other Honors. Where one Church was built in Honor of our Lord, there were
ten Dedicated to St. Mary; ten Ave-Maries said for one Paternoster, and in
several other things, the Mother had ten to one odds of her Son; and Men were
grown so sottish at last as with a small distinction to allow that Peter-noster
might be said to the Mother of our Lord.

And now let me speak alittle to the Honor of of the Church of England, as it
has stood ever since our happy Reformation. Some that have taken good pains to
deliver us from the Superstitious and Judaising Doctrines of others about the
Observation of our Lords day, have run into another Extreme, and levelling that
with other Holy days, intitl'd to our Church their own private Persuasion.
Surely our Church intended a difference, when Ordaining the incomparable Litany
to be always a part of the Service of the Lord's day, which is only
accidentally a part of any other Festival Service; and certainly the Solemn
recital of the Ten Commandments, and the Fourth among them, with the same
ejaculatory Prayer on the Peoples part, is very tempting to them to think that
our Church had her Eye chiefly on this Day, having told us nothing of her mind
to the contrary. Nay, I think, who ever can construe English, will find how in
the Homily of the Place and Time of Prayer, the far greatest stress is laid
upon this day; and no Comments or Distinctions have yet evinced the contrary.
Add that no Apocryphal Lesson is appointed for any Lord's day throughout the
whole year; but for other Holy days, several. Add how in the Explications of
the said Fourth Commandment in the Catechism of King Edward VI. and in the
Greater Catechism set forth in the days of Queen Elizabeth (which only is
allowed to be taught with the Lesser by the Canons of 1571. and the Canons of
the first of King James) there is no notice taken of any other but our Lords
Day. As for any Statutes made on this behalf (as one or more have been in every
Reign of our Reformed Princes) I leave you to the Learned in the Law; observing
this only, that care has been taken for the Suppression of all Markets and
Fairs on this day.

And what if, after all this, Tindall said, that our Lords Day might be
translated from Sunday to Monday, and Calvin would have it to Thursday, what is
that to our Church? I think they are much mistaken, if the ground, whereon I
build, have any solidity in it. Sunday is that day on the Week which our Lord
has made, made more signal than all the rest by his Resurrection from the
dead, and raising us up from the state of death, etc.

And now (my Christian Friends) tell me what harm is done, if the Queen take
place of the Ladies of Honor; and they are not at all shut out, but admitted in
their proper orders. For

Secondly, There is some difference to be made, and has always been between
the rest of the Holy days, though all are Holy. Precedence has been given
especially to those that record some Eminent Particularities of our Lords great
Undertaking; such as his Nativity, Passion, Resurrection, Ascension and Mission
of the Holy Ghost. Which are too great Mysteries either to be huddled up all in
one day, and not Celebrated distinctly on some peculiar days; or to be no more
regarded than the deaths of our Fellow Christians. Three of them have a more
than ordinary mark set upon them, as they are Antitypes to three Typical Feasts
of the Jews or (if that Phrase please not) as they are successive to them, and
commemorative of greater Things, which those lesser Celebrated by them, did but
fore-shadow. For

First, As the Deliverance out of Egypt did Typifie, our Redemption from a
greater Bondage; so the Feast kept in memory of the former might justly
Typifie, or Usher in, or give sufficient Intimation for the keeping of a Feast
in honor of the later, both happening at the same time of the Year.

Secondly, As the Feast of Weeks did commemorate the giving of the Law upon
Mount Sinai, so does our Whit-Sunday the publishing of the Law of the Spirit or
Doctrine of the Gospel upon Mount Sion, in a no less extraordinary manner, upon
the same day; and therefore the later Feast deservedly took place, or came in
the room of the former.

Thirdly, If the Feast of Tabernacles did prefigure our Lords Nativity (as the
Learned Mede not unhappily conjectures) for then the Word was made Flesh and
Tabernacled among us; then the Feast of the Nativity rightly succeeds in the
room thereof. I will not meddle with the contemporising those two great Feasts
(much has been said pro and con) but instead thereof, ask how or when that
Prophecy of Zachary was fulfilled, but by the Succession of this later Feast in
room of the former? That I mean of c. 14.16. It shall come to pass that every
one that is left of all the Nations that come, or shall come against Jerusalem
(for so it may be rendered, and is by the Chaldee, Syriack and Arabic; (...)
the Latin of Arias Montanus and the Tigurin Translators, rendered in the present
or future Tense) shall even go up from year to year to worship the King, the
Lord of Hosts, and to keep the Feast of Tabernacles. This Prophecy certainly
was not fulfilled by the famous Feast of Tabernacles kept in Nehemia's time:
See Nehem. c. 8. v. 14, and 17. For, according to the Law but newly read to the
People, they that kept that Feast were to be Israelites born. See Levit. 23.42.
when yet of the Passover strangers were bound to eat. The Jews themselves think
it was not then fulfilled; for, as S. Hierom on the place says, Haec Judaei
cassa spe in mill annorum Regno futura promittunt. That it is only an
Israelism, I am not yet persuaded to think; Whereto give me leave to add, that
the Sacrifices of that Feast had according to the Jews a peculiar respect to
the Gentiles. For whereas on the first day they Offered thirteen Bullocks, on
the second twelve, and so abated every day one, insomuch that on the seventh
day there were but seven Offered, but in the whole Seventy, according to the
number of the Nations; This (say they) signifies the gradual diminution of the
Nations, until they should all submit to the Kingdom of the Messiah, who was to
be the desire of all Nations. See Menass. Ben Israel Vindic. Jud. p. 22.
Hospin. de Orig. Fest. Jud. p. 41.

How the day of Atonement did Typify that of our Lords Passion, though at a
different time of the year, I will not now undertake to show, because it is not
a Festival day, and falls not so properly under our consideration; we will
therefore pass on.

Thirdly, And now after these, why may not the Memories of the Apostles be
preserved on certain days, whereon, without doing any Worship to them, we bless
God for the excellent Graces and Virtues, wherewith he enabled them to be
successful Preachers and Champions of the Holy Gospel; so successful that among
other Nations, We in this Outskirt of the World, in this remote Isle, heard the
joyful Sound, within five years after our Lords Ascension (that is, before Rome
it self) according to Gildas? I say, why on those days, which God has made so
remarkable with the Martyrdoms of the Apostles, should we not glorify God on
that behalf? These were according to St. Paul (Ephesians. 2.20.) the Founders under
our Lord, of the Christian Church, and the Representatives of the same
according to the Revelation of St. John, and the Patriarchs of us Gentiles, by
whose Ministry all the Kingdoms of the World have become the Kingdoms of our
Lord and of his Christ. Shall the Founders of small Guilds and Fraternities be
honored with yearly Celebrities in every City and Country, they that only gave
their temporal Goods, which they could not long keep; and shall those great
Hero's, the Founders of the Ancientest, Largest and most Noble Society (whereof
we all boast to be Members) that resisted unto Blood, and counted not their
lives dear, be remembr'd once in the year, to the honor of God, and good
Edification of his People, which are the two great ends of all Religion, and
the ends of all the Festival Solemnities, which our Church has thought good to
observe; which I will but shortly speak to, because out of place.

First, For the Honor of God. It is requisite, in order to the preserving of a
due sense of God upon our minds, that such days as these should often recurre.
There is a great deal of secret Atheism lurks in men's hearts, and would grow
more rampant in their lives, were not such days as these stated and fixed to
put some stop to their Mad Careir. And doubtless, if they were duly observed,
and the horrid deaths of those stout Champions often inculcated and well
considered on; the Religion for which they suffered would appear more true and
excellent, and useful, than vain Scepticks now think it, and the neglect
thereof more dangerous. It has been observed by judicious Travellours, that
were it not for the keeping of some Holy days, the Christian Religion would be
in a manner lost among the poor Greeks and others under the Turkish Dominions;
and I am afraid, even among us, who should know better, were not times, as well
as places, set apart for Divine Worship, the common People would soon
Heathenise, and those that seem now of sprucer Wits, herd among the Vulgar.
Common experience tells us, what is left to every body is done by no body, and
what to be done at any time is done at no time, and what to be done any where
is done no where. Wherefore the Honor of God is concerned in keeping up those
days that still remain, and restoring those that are almost lost.

Secondly, It is also for the good of man, not only upon the account of what
has been already said, but this also, that he may have frequent opportunities
of retiring out of the hurry and tumult of the World, of bethinking himself,
and considering what he is, and ought to be, and hopes to be; of what our Lord
has done for him, and what he expects from him. There is need of such
breathing times as these, or else men would be quite overwhelmed with the cares
of this World, or habituated in sin past all hopes of recovery.

Sixthly and Lastly, Upon this Ground of ordaining Holy Days, because God has
made them signal by some extraordinary benefit then conferred, I think we may
soon answer several of those little Objections that used to be made against
them. As 1. Why no days for Abraham, and David, and Samuel, or any of the
goodly Fellowship of the Prophets, as well as for the Glorious company of the
Apostles, etc. Why? Because, though they were excellent Persons in their times,
and are still great examples of Virtue to us, yet they were not, could not be
any ways instrumental to the Publication and Propagation of that Gospel, upon
which we ground our Faith and Salvation; and from which, as from the beginning
of the World, we date all our actions and all our concerns. The Prophets
Preached for the most part to the Jews, and few of them were Martyrs, and they
that were, suffered in a less noble cause and of less concern to the World.

2. When they say the Great Michael and all the Angels are Crowded into one
day, who still continue to be instrumental to our Salvation; and almost every
one of the Apostles has his distinct day of commemoration, although their
Ministry was soon over; which seems to be no fair distribution. It is soon
Answered, That the Ministration of Angels is invisible, and we can fix no
particulars upon them, but such as are rehearsed upon the greater Festivals of
our Lords Incarnation, Resurrection, Ascension, etc. That they did not, could
not suffer Martyrdom, as all the Saints did, whose days are kept; and 'twas
their Martyrdom that Crowned both them and the days that bear their names,
whereon our Lord enabled them to meet death in the Face, though armed with
utmost Rage and Malice; and verified and magnified the Christian Cause thereby.
This was the Lords doing, and not theirs; He made the days and not they, and we
keep them to his Glory and not theirs. And therefore when they farther object,
the Sunday collect gives place to that of the Saints, Philip and James are
feign to share one day between them, as also Simon and Jude, and the like; they
run upon a fond mistake, as if we did Worship to any of them upon those days,
which they could not surely have done, had they read the Collects proper for
those days.

It is high time I should now say something to the second part of my Text, how
a Holy Day is to be kept; We will rejoice and be glad therein. This is that
which distinguishes a Fast from a Feast, and makes the latter more Holy than
the former, according to that in Nehem. 8.9. This day is Holy unto the Lord
your God, mourn not, nor weep, and v. 10. Go your way, eat the fat, and drink
the sweet, and send portions for them for whom nothing is prepared, for this
day is Holy unto the Lord; neither be ye sorry, for the joy of the Lord is your
strength. God makes days of joy, and they are Holy to Him; we cannot so truly
say of a day of mourning, of a Fast Day, This is the day which the Lord has
made; for indeed, Man made it by his sin, and on it therefore it is his
business to bewail his sins, and deprecate the Judgments felt or feared upon
their account. But when God has made a day to our hands, a day signal for some
great mercy, let us rejoice and be glad therein. Rejoice and be glad therein,
but how? Not in Riot and excess, and making provision for the Flesh to fulfill
the Lusts thereof. No, but let us first give Public thanks to God for the
Mercy of the day, and then if we have opportunity, let us partake of that Holy
Feast of the Body and Blood, a Feast which he has not only instituted but
wonderfully made of himself, a Feast whose name and end is (...), Thanksgiving.
What should we render to the Lord for all his benefits toward us, but
according to our Psalmist, Ps. 116.12. Take the Cup of Salvation, and call upon
the name of the Lord. And then, when we have made a difference between the Holy
and the Common day by a more plentiful Table, testify our farther thankfulness
and due resentment of Gods Mercy, by works of Mercy and Charity. Fasting does
stir up Choler, the hungry are soon angry; we find how the Hypocrites in Esaias
58.2. Fasted for strife and debate, and smote with the Fist of wickedness, and
exacted all their labors, they brought forth their Bills and Bonds, (...), as
the Seventy have it, whom the Arabic exactly follows, and the Chaldee, Syriack
and other Interpreters agree thereto. Although some of our Festival days are
the common days of Payment of Rents and Debts, yet we should not exact all our
labors, use our utmost rigor then upon failure: Feasting uses to make Men
placid and easy to be entreated, and is then most pleasing to God, as well as
Fasting, when Men deal their bread to the hungry, and cover the naked, and
lodge the harbourless, when they loose the bands of wickedness, undo the heavy
burdens, and let the oppressed go free, and break every yoke, moreover
reconciling our selves to our Enemies, and making up differences between
Neighbors, Catechizing Children, Visiting the Sick, and all such works of
Charity are proper works for a Holy day. I need not tell you how Religious the
first Christian Emperors were this way, not only in giving, but forgiving, how
at Easter they set all Prisoners at liberty, except Traitors, Murderers,
Ravishers of Women and such notorious Malefactors. I could tell you how our
Saxon Laws provided, that no Man should be put to death upon the Lords day,
that the Ordeal Trial should not be undergone upon any Feast or Fast day, and
took care for the relief of Prisoners every Lords day. But these are things,
which no Man will gainsay, and therefore I will pass on, and come in the last
place to enquire what are the causes of the great and general neglect of these
days, which the Lord has made so signal and worthy to be observed. I shall
touch on three, Superstition, Profaneness and Covetousness.

First, Superstition, even the Superstition of those men that are most afraid
of, or most declame against Superstition, their conceit is no less
Superstitious, than their Notation is fond, in making it to be, Quicquid super
statutum, I would ask them in this case, what Statute have they that forbids
the keeping of any other day, besides the Lords day? 1. If they say, God is the
Lord of time, and he has said, Six days shall thou labor -- I reply, Those
words are no part of the fourth Commandment, I mean, not of it as commanding;
but a permission encouraging the Observance of the thing commanded, as if it
were said, the Lord allows you six days for your own business, and may
therefore more strictly require the seventh of you for his own service; they
are no more a Command, than that in Genesis 3.19. In the sweat of thy face shall
thou eat bread. But the practice of the Objectors who have indicted Fasts and
Thanksgivings on working days, when and as often as they pleased, is
Confutation enough to the Objection. But 2. They urge that to the Galat. 4.10.
Ye observe days, and months, and times, and years; I reply again; If the
Context, and Scope of the whole Epistle did not show it plainly to be written
to Judaising People; those four words in the Text alleged, would tell us the
Apostle means the Jewish Festivals, whereof they had four sorts. But what is
that to us, that keep days in testification of our being Christians, and
disclaiming all Judaism; and keep them not in imitation of the Jews no more
than we do the Sabbath, but rather in order to their invitation and bringing
them over to the Christian Faith, and to show that Christ is greater than Moses.

But the great thing they insist on is, It Is against Gospel purity, to have
mixtures of Human Inventions with Divine Injunctions, and this superstitious
conceit is the great cause not only of this neglect, but of Schism or unlawful
Separation.

Ans. I have already said, To be thankful for benefits is a Law of Nature, and
no Human Invention; and to give thanks yearly on those days whereon those
Benefits were bestowed, rather than any other is so Natural, has so great a
congruity in it, that the Objectors themselves choose to do so. But let them
tell me, is there any more of man in keeping an Easter Day than a Fifth of
November, in praising of God for the first planting of the Christian Religion,
than a late preservation of it. But what? Did they never hear of the Feast of
Purim, and that Feast of the Dedication, whereat our Lord was present; of the
Seven days which King Solomon kept at the first Dedication of the Altar, and
the Seven days that King Hezekiah kept at the Feast of Unleavened bread over
and above what the Law Commanded, 2 Chronicles. 30.23. Of the four Fasts in Zech.
8.19. whereof but one was enjoined?

But, because they call us so often to the Pattern in the Mount, we will take a
View of that, and show you that the Israelites did not only Act super, but
contra statutum in several things; yet no separation was made from Public
Communion with that Church, and therefore every Imperfection can be no just
cause of Separation, nor every Supererogation. I will give three notorious
Instances, whereof two concern Festivals.

The First shall be touching the Feast of Tabernacles, whereof we read, Nehem.
8.17. All the Congregation of them that were come again out of the Captivity
made Booths, and sat under the Booths; for since the days of Joshua the Son of
Nun unto that day had not the Children of Israel done so; that is, they had not
kept the Feast of Tabernacles; at least in that main circumstance of dwelling
in Tents and Booths for a Thousand years together; and that throughout the most
flourishing time of that Church, although it was expressly Commanded no less
than four times in Moses. It is a wonder how it came to pass that neither
David, nor Hezekiah, nor Samuel, nor Jehoiadah, nor any other reforming King,
zealous Priest, or inspired Prophet, no answer by Vrim and Thummim corrected
this neglect in so many Ages, in all which time we find no secession made from
the Church that then was.

My Second Instance shall be in a Holy year, the Observation whereof is
Commanded, Levit. 25.2. etc. When ye come into the Land which I give you, then
shall the Land keep a Sabbath unto the Lord, thou shall neither sow thy Seed,
nor prune thy Vineyard, etc. And now see the Omission in the Punishment
(threatened, Levit. 26.34, etc.) inflicted, 2 Chronicles. 36.21. -- until the Land
had enjoyed her Sabbaths; for as long as she lay desolate she kept Sabbath to
fulfill threescore and ten Years. So long the Babylonian Captivity lasted, that
the Land might rest and lie untilled so many years as the Seventh or Sabbatick
year had been unobserved. Reckon and ye will find just Seventy sevens in four
hundred ninety years; so that for 490 years together they had broken the
aforesaid Law, to wit, from the days of Samuel to the Captivity; and yet no
Separation all that while.

My Third Instance (tho not so near a kin, yet not altogether foreign to our
business) shall be of a sin of Commission against a most plain and positive
Command, in Levit. 17.3. where it is said, What man soever there be of the House
of Israel, that kills an Ox, or Lamb, or Goat in the Camp, or that kills it
out of the Camp and brings it not to the door of the Tabernacle of the
Congregation, to Offer an Offering to the Lord before the Tabernacle of the
Lord, Blood shall be imputed to that man, he has shed Blood, and that man
shall be cut off from among his People. The same denunciation recurs in the 8
and 9 ver. taking in also the Sojourner and Stranger. Ye see the heinousness of
the Offense; It was as bad as Bloodshed or Murder to offer else where. And yet,
according to some the High Places were frequented soon after the days of Joshua
and continued till the most thorough reformation of Hezekiah; and that space
makes near upon Seven hundred years: But, it is infallibly certain, that for
Three hundred years, to wit, from Solomon to Hezekiah, they did Sacrifice in
High Places. It is said of Solomon himself, 1 Kings 3.3. Solomon loved the
Lord, walking in the ways of David his Father, only he Sacrificed and burnt
Incense in high places; and the King went to Gibeon and Sacrificed there; for
that was a great High Place; a Thousand Burnt-Offerings did Solomon offer upon
that Altar, that is, a Thousand Murders did he Commit there according to the
forecited Law; unless ye will say it was enough to free him from such an
imputation that the Tabernacle was there, although the Ark, the Symbol of God's
presence, was at Jerusalem. So indeed it is in 2 Chronicles. c. 1. v. 3, 4. I will
not dispute the thing so far; it is enough that he sinned in burning Incense
either there or in other High Places; of that there need be no doubt. Nor was
it his sin alone, the People did so too, 1 Kings 3.2. Ye cannot think Rehoboam
and Abija discontinued those High Places, when ye find it an abatement in the
Characters of those two good Kings, Asa and Jehosaphat, 1 Kings 15.14. 2 Chronicles.
15.17. and 20.33. that they were not taken away. Jehoram was so far from
removing the old that he made new ones, c. 21.11. The same exception is made in
the Character of Amaziah, 2 Kings 14.4. and his Son Azariah c. 15.4. and his
Son Jotham, v. 35. But the High Places were not removed, etc. Ahaz exceeded
Jehoram in multiplying those forbidden Places, 2 Chronicles. 28.4, 25. at last came
resolute Hezekiah and he swept them all away. Examine the particular Texts, and
ye will find, that to Sacrifice and burn Incense in High Places was grown a
National Custom; insomuch that though totally removed by Hezekiah they were so
restored by his Son Manasseh, that, notwithstanding his deep Repentance and
earnest Reformation of all other things, these stood still, 2. Chron. 33.17.
Nevertheless the People did Sacrifice still in the High Places, yet unto the
Lord their God only; that is, they were great Transgressors, but not real
Idolaters.

These are three great Instances of the deviation of that only then true Church
from the Pattern in the Mount, and yet how many Thousands of good and holy Men
lived and died in the Communion thereof notwithstanding. I say three great
Instances, and I may dare to challenge any Man living to give any one Instance
of so gross corruption and declension from the Commands of our Lord in this our
Church of England. Surely none will allege the Omission of the Women's Veil,
and the holy Kiss, the Non-abstinence from Blood and the like, which yet were
Apostolical Institutions; for by such Allegations they will accuse themselves,
and afford more matter of Argument against their own Superstition and
Separation. But I hasten, and say

Secondly, Profaneness is another cause of the neglect of the Holy Festivals.
Too many there are that have a secret quarrel against all serious Religion;
howsoever they pretend highly for the present establishment; this they do not
because it is the best, but because it is the present, they have not that
value, for what is Relatively Holy, as its Relation to God requires; neither
for Person, nor Thing, nor Place, nor Time. 1. As for Persons, they make
nothing to miscall and deride, misreport and belibel them unseen and unheard.
Private Persons usurp Episcopal Authority, and others do (...), superciliously
mark and fault them that belong not to their Inspection, and gladly receive an
accusation against an Elder without any witnesses. 2. And for Things Sacred,
they are ready upon all occasions to question, dispute, defalcate and intervert
the dues of the Church, as if there were no such sin as Sacrilege, and they
never heard of Ananias and Sapphira. 3. The little esteem they have for Places
is soon found, when you come to crave their Benevolence for the building or
repairing of them; they are as ready as Judas to say, Quorsum perditio haec?
4ly. and Lastly, For Times, all days are alike to them, as appears by their
neglect of the Prayers of the Church and other duties proper to them. They are
for the Festival, but not for the Holy day; for the Mirth, but not for Religion
of the time, any farther than to keep their Credit, and save their Purses; and
this brings to the

Third cause of the neglect we complain of, Covetousness; under which we desire
not to bring in the Day-labourer that has as many Mouths to feed, as there are
days in the Week to work in, nor the sweating Husbandman, who must attend the
seasons of Plowing and Sowing: But those whose Trades and Employments do allow
them fair Intervals and Opportunities of attending Divine Worship. These care
not, though the Church be shut, if their Shops may stand open; let others serve
God, they must serve their Customers, and mind their Trade; they spare not to
say so. There are ('it is well known) few Holy Days in the Year, whereon there
are not held some Marts and Fairs up and down the Country; That of the
Ascension of our Lord not excepted. And there needs no bidding of these on the
Sunday before, nor Bells to toll the People to them; thither they will flock
and hasten without taking the Church in their way, tho never so near it; there
they Buy and Sell, and get gain, it may be only go to see and be seen; but must
think of no other God to serve, but the great Mammon.

Whether this Custom was begun by the Pardonmongers that chose Sundays and
other Holy Days to vend their Bulls and their Relics on; and so occasioning
great Confluences of People, in process of time Grants were obtained to
Authorize and Perpetuate those Meetings, which turned of themselves from the
sale of seemingly holy to that of really useful things: Or whatever were the
cause, it is certain, if Fairs did not borrow their name from Feriae, they have
robbed them in most places of the Religion that belongs to them. Those that
used to be held on the Lord's Day have been all suppressed or adjourned to some
other day. Which shows it possible that some provision may be made for the
regulating of the other. But whether Authority will first think of a way to
restore the Revenues alienated from the Churchmen, or the Honor, whereof these
Secular diversions, have robbed the Church-days I am not able to Divine.

In the mean time let us all do what we can in our own spheres and capacities
to preserve that value and veneration, which is due to all that is called Holy.
And first of all for that Holiness, which is real and intrinsec.

Let us hallow the name of God, and entertain thoughts worthy of so Excellent a
Majesty; becoming Him whose Nature is the very comprehension of all Adorable
Perfection; speak reverently and considerately of Him, and to Him. And in all
our actions endeavor to be holy as He is Holy. Honor all those that bear upon
them any Image of his Holiness, in whatever unhappy circumstances they may be.

And then, whatever is therefore Holy, because it has a proper Relation to
God, and is therefore as it were appropriated to him, let us use and behave our
selves toward the same as such. Let us of the holy Function consider we are
taken from among Men, and set apart for Divine things; and therefore ought not
to make our selves Common and Cheap; and free to all Comers and Companies, and
Customs, and Fashions of the World; ought not to be so Complaisant, as to
comply with the sinful humors, discourses, and excesses of those that hate
Holiness in their hearts, and show no more in their lives than needs must, or
for fashion sake. And yet, let it not be thought but that there is an Honor due
to the Function it self, where the Person is not altogether so deserving;
because of the Relation which he stands in to God, and the usefulness which he
may be of to Man. And for Places, let us Honor them, not by keeping a distance
from them, but by frequenting them reverently and using them to those Holy
ends, for which they were at first designed. Lastly, For Times, let us
sanctify them in like manner, and, while we join with the Church in her
Prayers, possess our selves with a deep sense of the Blessing, which we then
commemorate, and the weightiness of that Religion, which consists of so many
Mysteries, and has been Confirmed and Conveyed to us by so many Miracles and
Martyrdoms. Let us consider there is a Sacrilege belongs to Time as well as
Thing; and the Robbery of the former is the more heinous, because it is not so
easy to make Restitution; and the more to be avoided because more easily
committed.

All this let us practice, that we may, and till we do arrive thither, where
there will be no Sun nor Temple ( Rev. 21. v. 22, 23.) distinction of Time nor
Place, nor Persons neither; but all shall be Kings and Priests unto God, and
keep an Eternal Sabbath, or day of Holy rest, World without End. For which
Happy and Glorious State God of his Infinite Goodness fit us, and then bring us
to it, for the sake of our Blessed Lord and Savior. Amen.

FINIS.
Sermons Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishops Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
A Sermon Preached by a Country Parson September the 9th. 4to. 1683.
Ahitophells Policy Defeated; a Sermon Preached September the 9th. 4to. 1683.
Dr. Calamy's Sermon, September 9th. 4to. Mr. Milbournes Sermon, September 9th.
4to. Mr. Powell's Religious Rebel; a Sermon Preached September the 9th. Mr.
Pains 2 Sermons, September 9th. and Jan. 30th. 4to. Dr. Smith's Sermon at
Norwich, September the 9th. 4to. Mr. Wagstaffs Sermon, September 9th. 4to. Dr.
Bisbies Sermon, Prosecution no Persecution, Preached at St. Edmunds Bury in
Suffolk. 4to. -- Modern Pharisees. 4to. -- s 2 Sermons 4to. Dr. Butlers Sermon
before the King at Windsor. 4to. Mr. Battles Sermon at the Assizes at
Hartford. 4to. Mr. Borastons Sermon of Justice and Charity. 4to. Mr. Browns
Visitation Sermon. 4to. Dr. Calamy's Sermon before the Lord Mayor, May 29th.
1682. -- s Sermon before the Lord Mayor, September the 30th. 1683. Mr. Cutloves
2 Assizes Sermons. 4to. Mr. Evans Sermon before the Lord Mayor about
Moderation. 4to. Dr. Fowlers Sermon at Gloucester. 4to. Mr. Fox's Sermon at the
Herefordshire Feast. 4to. Mr. Fosters Sermon at the Assizes at Rochester. 4to.
Mr. Gipp's 3 Sermons. 4to. -- Gaskarth's Sermon at the Funeral of the Duke of
Lauderdale. 4to. Dr. Hick's Sermon of Temptation. 4to. -- s Sermon at the Act
at Oxford. 4to. -- s Sermon before the Lord Mayor, Peculium Dei. 4to. -- s
Sermon of Persecution. 4to. -- s Sermon at the Yorkshire Feast. 4to. -- s
Sermon before the Lord Mayor, Jan. 30th. 4to. -- s Sermon at the Spittle. 4to.
-- s Sermon Preached at Worcester, May 29th. 1684. Mr. Hopkins Sermon before
the Lord Mayor. 4to. Mr. Inetts Assize Sermon at Warwick. 4to. Mr. Kidders
Sermon before the Lord Mayor. 4to. Mr. Lambs Sermon before the King at Windsor.
4to. -- s Sermon before the Lord Mayor. 4to. Mr. Lewds Visitation Sermon. 4to.
Mr. Lynfords Sermon before the Lord Mayor. 4to. Dr. Mores Sermon before the
Lord Mayor. 1682. 4to. -- s Sermon before the Lord Mayor. 1684. 4to. Mr.
Milbournes Sermon the Originals of Rebellion. 4to. Dr. Meggotts Sermon before
the King. 4to. Mr. Pains Sermon at the Brentwood-School Feast. 4to. Mr.
Richardsons Sermon before the Lord Mayor. 4to.

