Imprimatur.
Rob. Midgley.

Aug. 24. 1685.

A COURSE OF Chemistry. CONTAINING An easy Method of Preparing those Chemical
Medicines which are used in PHYSIC. WITH Curious Remarks and Useful Discourses
upon each Preparation, for the benefit of such who desire to be instructed in
the Knowledge of this ART.

By NICHOLAS LEMERY, M. D. The Second Edition very much Enlarged.

Translated from the Fifth Edition in the French, By WALTER HARRIS, M. D.
Fellow of the College of Physicians.

LONDON, Printed by R. N. for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's-Head in S.
Paul's Churchyard, 1686.

TO THE Most Honorable THE LORD MARQUESS OF WORCESTER.
MY LORD,
IT may seem very improper to address a Translation out of French to Your
Lordship, who have spent so many years to the greatest advantage in France, and
who is not only a Great Master of that Gentile Language, but of all the more
eminent modern Languages of Europe. But those who have the Honor to know any
thing of Your Lordship must needs allow, that no Dedication of what is Useful
to the world, or Learned in any kind, can be more properly tendered than to a
Person who being born in the Highest Rank of our Nobility, has Power to
Patronize whatsoever he takes into his Protection, and who being fully
replenished with all the admirable accomplishments, which a mighty Genius, a
penetrating and vigorous Understanding, an early and exemplary Virtue and
Piety, and all sorts of Foreign and Domestic improvements could bestow; in
order to render Your Lordship either a Great Minister in affairs of State, a
Complete Courtier, an Eminent Patriot in the time of Peace, a Valiant and
Judicious Commander in the time of War, or an excellent Judge both of Men and
Books. My Lord, the Treatise I now offer You, is not writ after the usual way
of ordinary Chemists; it has none of the bombastick expressions, nor ridiculous
pretenses, none of the Melancholic Dreams, and wretched Enthusiasms, none of
the palpable falsities, and even impossibilities wherewith the common rate of
Chemical Books has been stuffed heretofore. The Author is no Believer in that
great and unhappy stumbling block, the Mystery of Projection, nor at all
addicted to the Transmutation, or rather Adulteration of Metals. He is an
excellent Operator, his Reasonings are close and pertinent to the matter in
hand, and all deduced from matter of Fact; insomuch that I think he may be said
to have Purified and Refined Chemistry from the many dregs and feculencies,
which by other men's over-refining, and overcurious diligence it had been
tainted with before. I shall not trouble Your Lordship too much with things so
unsuitable as these are, considering that Your Noble Soul, and Public Spirit
is hourly engaged in serving, and becoming highly useful to your Country upon
the greatest occasions. Your Lordship had a considerable share in the happy
conclusion of this Summers Campaign, with Your most Illustrious Father, his
Grace my Lord Duke of Beaufort, who did maintain, by his Presence, and Wise
Conduct, that great Post of the utmost importance, the City of Bristol, against
the power of the Rebels, who confidently gave out that they were sure of
Bristol, and doubtless might have been so, unless prevented by the Wisdom and
Courage of His Grace, and Your Lordship. These things, My Lord, are but the
beginning of what the World is to expect from You, and may now very reasonably
promise it self, under the auspicious Government of our most Potent, and most
Invincible Monarch. What great thing may not reasonably be presumed, when the
Head and Body are so admirably fitted for the Conquest of the World! and the
rather, now the Body is so well Purged from the sour Leaven of Intestine
Rebellion. May Your Lordship long continue to partake of His Majesty's Royal
Favor, and to Ennoble the most Illustrious House of the Somersets, with
thousands of gallant Actions, worthy Your self, and worthy Your high Descent
from some of the Greatest Men in the World, for many Generations past. I am,

MY LORD, Your Lordship's most Humble, and most Obedient Servant, WALTER HARRIS.

THE PREFACE.
I Shall easily acknowledge that the world is in no want of Chemical Books;
Germany alone can sufficiently furnish those who are much inquisitive after
them, with as great variety as their heart can wish. And yet in this great
plenty, or rather superfluity of Books of Chemistry, when we have weighed
things a little maturely, we shall find that something very material is still
wanting, in order to render Chemistry of good use to the World; and that is, to
give a just and impartial judgment of the benefits and the mischiefs, the
safety and the danger of many great and common, but those very Active Chemical
Medicines, according to the proper use, or irregular application of them, and
according to the innocence, or destructiveness of their composition. In order
to this end, I do conceive that this Author's plain and natural way of
examining every Operation by Reason and Experience together, his singular
perspicuity in his Discourses and Remarks, and his universally avoiding all
Imaginary Notions in the explication of the accidents and circumstances which
do attend the Operation, may be a good foundation upon which some Judicious
Practisers may hereafter raise cautions and instructions of excellent use to
mankind.

This Author is one of the first through-pac'd Chemists who has had the
ingenuity and sagacity to suspect the influence of Fire on the chief
Preparations made with it. For though Chemistry has by some been called
Pyrotechnia, or the ART of FIRE, and Fire has seemed to be as much deified by
most Chemists, as Scaliger tells us, Exercit. 258. it was by the barbarous
Lybians, who did worship it as a God; yet this worthy man has in many places of
his Book abundantly acknowledged, or at least sufficiently hinted at the hurt,
as well as the good, which medecins may receive from its violent nature.

He says, p. 21. If we consider impartially how Fire does act, we shall be
forced to acknowledge, that it rather destroys, and confounds the greatest
part of the bodies it opens, and does not leave them in the natural state they
were in before, and especially when it is driven with that force which is
necessary to draw them.

He proves all Alkali Salts, whether Volatile or Fixed to be changed from their
Natural state, by the means of Fire, and also to have received, and to retain
the very particles and substance of Fire in its full activity; and shows how
the great ebullition which happens upon the mixture of Acid and Alkali is or
may be presumed to be wholly or in great part owing to the fire contained in
them. The heat, and fume, and ebullition, the noise and detonation, which do
attend the making Spirit of Niter Dulcified, do show what a Fire is drawn into
the body of that Corrosive Spirit that can make so remarkable a conflict and
bustle, that it is even ready to take flame of it self, though the operation or
Dulcification be made without coming near the fire, and though there is no
appearance of Alkali contending with Acid, to cause the aforesaid tumult, see
the Remarks on Spirit of Niter Dulcified, p. 302, 303. The same thing happens
upon mixing Oil of Vitriol, (another Corrosive Acid) with Oil of Turpentine,
which is no Alkali; the mixture grows so hot, through the Fire contained in the
Acid, that it sometimes breaks the Viol, and often produces a considerable
ebullition, see p. 342.

He observes, that water thrown upon Tartar newly Calcined, does heat and cause
ebullition, after the manner as it does with Quicklime, the Fire that was
entered into it making a violent eruption.

He is the first perhaps who has taken such particular notice, what an
augmentation of weight is added to many Preparations by the concurrence and
incorporation of the substance of Fire into their composition, as you may see
in the Calcination of Lead, p. 107. in the Distillation of Spirit of Saturn
from the Salt of Saturn, p. 116. in the Calcination of Regulus of Antimony, p.
208. and even in the Calcination of Antimony by the heat of the Sun with a
burning-glass, p. 228. which few instances may possibly lead the way to
Inquisitive persons to discover the same augmentation in diverse other
Preparations.

His addiction to Chemistry has not heated his head with fond and groundless
hopes of attaining Projection, nor led him to abuse the world with
Counterfeiting the Nobler Metals, but he has heartily exposed the impostures of
Alchymists at large, in the Chapter of Gold, p. 49, etc. I shall say nothing of
his description of the Phosphorus, and diverse other new matters delivered in
this Edition. I dare presume the Judicious Reader will not dislike many things
in the Book, when he has a little considered them.

Therefore although we may possibly be overstockt with Books that pretend to
Chemistry, yet I hope the discerning Reader will think it no dis-service, that
I become an instrument of adding one more good Book of this kind to the number
of our bad ones: the kind reception which the former Edition met with, when
comparatively short and imperfect, has already in some measure bespoke the
welcome, which this may reasonably hope for, being revised, and very much
enlarged by the ingenious Author, and when compared with the former Edition
will be found to bear the proportion of a Man in his full strength and vigor,
to that of a growing hopeful Youth.

I will not detain you from the work it self, only would advise young Students,
for whose instruction it is principally designed, not to be too bold in the use
of such Medicines as have undergone great Fires, nor to be over-credulous in
believing the strange wonders, and most mighty Cures which too many other
Chemists have extravagantly boasted, and most solemnly, but groundlesly assured
us. The wise Hippocrates will acquaint them, that (...). And Galen frequently
teaches, that Nature is abundantly wiser in her works than Art can be; and that
the Works of Nature are far above our greatest praises, and deserve our highest
admiration, as may be seen more at large in his 7. and 11. Books of that
excellent Tract, de usu partium.

A good Physician must have studied Art and Nature too. And a Chemist of the
first rank will find himself never the worse an Artist, by his being likewise a
skilful Naturalist.

A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS.
OF Chemistry in general. Page 1 Of the Principles of Chemistry. 2 Remarks upon
the Principles. 5 Of Chemical Vessels and Furnaces. 31 The Figures, or Cutts.
32 Of Lutes. 37 Of the Degrees of Fire. 38 Explication of many Terms that are
used in Chemistry. 40
FIRST PART. Of Minerals. 45
Chap. I. OF Gold. 48 Purification of Gold. 61 Amalgamation of Gold with
Mercury, and its reduction into an impalpable Powder. 65 Aurum Fulminans,
called the Saffron of Gold. 66 Chap. II. Of Silver. 74 Purification of Silver.
75 Crystals of Silver, called Vitriol of the Moon. 80 Infernal Stone, or
perpetual Caustic. 83 Tincture of the Moon. 85 Diana's Tree. 89 Chap. III. Of
Tinn. 92 Pulverisation of Tinn. ib. Calcination of Tinn. 93 Salt of Jupiter, or
Tinn. 94 Sublimation of Tinn. 96 Magistery of Jupiter, or Tinn. 97 Flowers of
Jupiter, or Tinn. 98 Chap. IV. Of Bismuth, called Tinn-glass. 101 Flowers of
Bismuth. 102 Magistery of Bismuth. ib. Chap. V. Of Lead. 105 Calcination of
Lead. 106 Salt of Saturn. 108 Magistery of Saturn. 111 Balsom, or Oil of
Saturn. 113 Burning Spirit of Saturn. 114 Chap. VI. of Copper. 118 Calcination
of Copper. 122 Purification of Copper. 123 Vitriol of Venus, or Copper. 124
Other Crystals of Venus. 126 Spirit of Venus. 128 Chap. VII. Of Iron. 130
Opening Saffron of Mars. 132 Another Opening Saffron of Mars. 138 Another
Opening Saffron of Mars. 139 Binding Saffron of Mars. 142 Salt, or Vitriol of
Mars. 143 Another Vitriol of Mars. 145 Tincture of Mars with Tartar. 147
Opening Extract of Mars. 148 Binding Extract of Mars. 150 Mars Diaphoretick.
152 Chap. VIII. Of Mercury. 154 Artificial Cinnabar. 156 Reviving of Cinnabar
into Quicksilver. 158 Sublimate Corrosive, 170 Sweet Sublimate, or Mercurius
dulcis. 183 White Precipitate. 186 Red Precipitate. 191 Turbith Mineral, or
Yellow Precipitate. 195 Oil, or Liquor of Mercury. 196 Another Oil of Mercury.
197 Other Precipitates of Mercury. 198 Chap. IX. Of Antimony. 202 Common
Regulus of Antimony. 204 Golden Sulphur of Antimony. 209 Regulus of Antimony
with Mars. 210 Glass of Antimony. 214 Crocus Metallorum, or Liver of Antimony.
217 Antimonium Diaphoreticum. 222 Another Antimonium Diaphoreticum. 225 Flowers
of Antimony. 229 Red Flowers of Antimony. 230 Butter, or Icy Oil of Antimony.
231 Butter of Antimony, together with its Cinnabar. 233 The Emetick Powder of
Algarot, or Mercurius vitae. 236 Bezoar Mineral. 238 Caustic Oil of Antimony.
240 Another Oil of Antimony. 242 Chap. X. Of Arsenick. 244 Regulus of Arsenick.
245 Sublimate of Arsenick. 246 Caustic Arsenick. 248 Corrosive Oil of
Arsenick. 249 Chap. XI. Of Quicklime. 251 Phagedenick water. 254 Caustic
Stones, or Cauteries. 255 Sympathetical Inks. 258 Chap. XII. Of Flints. 263
Calcination of Flints. 264 Tincture of Flints. 265 Liquor of Flints. 266 Chap.
XIII. Oil of Bricks. 268 Chap. XIV. Of Coral. 270 Dissolution of Coral. 272
Magistery of Coral. 274 Salt of Coral. 276 Chap. XV. Of Common Salt. 277
Calcination of Common Salt. 281 Spirit of Salt. 282 Chap. XVI. Of Niter, or
Saltpeter. 289 Purification of Saltpeter. 291 Crystal Mineral, called Sal
Prunellae. 293 Sal Polycrestum. 296 Spirit of Niter. 298 Spirit of Niter
dulcified. 300 Aqua Fortis. 304 Fixation of Saltpeter into an Alkali Salt. 306
Chap. XVII. Of Sal Armoniack. 310 Flowers of Sal Armoniack. 311 Aqua Regalis.
312 Volatile Spirit of Sal Armoniack. 317 Another Preparation of the Volatile
Spirit of Sal Armoniack, together with its Flowers, and Fixed Salt against
Fevers. 321 Acid Spirit of Sal Armoniack. 328 Chap. XVIII. Of Vitriol. 329
Gilla Vitrioli, or Vomitive Vitriol. 331 Calcination of Vitriol. 332
Distillation of Vitriol. 338 Styptick Water. 346 Lapis Medicamentosus. 347 Salt
of Vitriol. 348 Chap. XIX. Of Roche-Alom, and its Purification. 350
Distillation of Alom. ibid. Chap. XX. Of Sulphur. 353 Flower of Sulphur. ib.
Magistery of Sulphur. 355 Balsom of Sulphur. 357 Spirit of Sulphur. 358 Salt of
Sulphur. 361 Chap. XXI. Of Succinum, or Ambar. 363 Tincture of Ambar. 364
Distillation of Ambar, and the Rectification of its Oil and Spirit. 365
Volatile Salt of Ambar. 370 Chap. XXII. of Ambar-grease. 372 Essence of
Ambar-grease. 373
SECOND PART. Of Vegetables.
Chap. I. OF Jalap. 375 Rosin, or Magistery of Jalap. ib. Chap. II. Of Rhubarb.
379 Extract of Rhubarb. 380 Chap. III. Of the Wood Guaiacum. 383 Distillation
of Guaiacum. ib. Chap. IV. Of Paper. 386 Oil and Spirit of Paper. 387 Chap. V.
Of Cinnamon. 389 Oil, or Essence of Cinnamon, and its Celestial water. 390
Tincture of Cinnamon. 392 Chap. VI. Of the Bark of Peru. 393 Tincture of the
Peruvian Bark. 395 Extract of Peruvian Bark. 397 Chap. VII. Of Cloves. 399 Oil
of Cloves per Descensum. ib. Chap. VIII. Of Nutmegs. 401 Oil of Nutmegs. 402
Chap. IX. Distillation of an odoriferous Plant, such as Balm, its Extract and
Fixed Salt. 404 Chap. X. Distillation of a Plant that is not Odoriferous, such
as Carduus Benedictus and its Essential Salt. 406 Chap. XI. Of Sugar. 408
Spirit of Sugar. 410 Chap. XII. Of Wine. 412 Distillation of Wine into Brandy.
417 Spirit of Wine. 421 Spirit of Wine Tartarised. 425 Queen of Hungary's
Water. 427 Chap. XIII. Of Vinegar. 429 Distillation of Vinegar. 430 Chap. XIV.
Of Tartar. 433 Crystals of Tartar. ib. Soluble Tartar. 435 Chalybeated Crystals
of Tartar. 437 Chalybeated Soluble Tartar, 438 Soluble Emetick Tartar, 439
Another Soluble Emetick Tartar, 441 Distillation of Tartar, 441 Fixed Salt of
Tartar, and its Liquor, called Oil of Tartar per Deliquium, 444 Tincture of
Salt of Tartar, 447 Magistery of Tartar, or Tartarum Vitriolatum, 450 Volatile
Salt of Tartar, 462 Chap. XV. Of Opium, 467 Extract of Opium, called Laudanum,
468 Chap. XVI. Of Aloes, 477 Extract of Aloes, 478 Chap. XVII. Elixir
Proprietatis, 479 Chap. XVIII. Of Tabaco, 481 Distillation of Tabaco, 482 Chap.
XIX. Extractum Panchymagogum, 484 Chap. XX. Of Turpentine, 488 Distillation of
Turpentine, 489 Chap. XXI. Of Benjamin, 491 Flowers of Benjamin, and its Oil,
492 Tincture of Benjamin, 493 Chap. XXII. Of Camphire, 494 Oil of Camphire, 495
Chap. XXIII. Of Gumm Ammoniack, 497 Distillation of Gumm Ammoniack, 498 Chap.
XXIV. Of Myrrh, 500 Tincture of Myrrh, 501 Oil of Myrrh per deliquium, 502
THIRD PART. Of Animals.
Chap. I. OF the Viper, 505 Distillation of Vipers, 512 Chap. II. Distillation
of Urine, and its Volatile Salt, 520 The PHOSPHORUS, 523 The Hermetick
PHOSPHORUS of Baldwinus, 538 Chap. III. Of Honey, 542 Distillation of Honey,
543 Chap. IV. Distillation of Wax, 545
A COURSE OF CHEMISTRY.
Of Chemistry in General.
THE Word Chemistry is derived from the Greek word (...), a Juice, or from
(...), to melt; because it teaches us to separate the purer substances of Mixed
bodies, which are sometimes called Juices; and because it shows us how to melt
things that are of the most solid nature. The Chemists have added the Arabian
particle Al, in the word Alchymy, intending to give it a sublime signification,
as particularly when the Transmutation of Metals is understood by it, though
otherwise Alchymy signifies no more than Chemistry. It is called the Spagirick
Art, from (...), and (...), to separate, and to gather together, because it
teaches how to separate the useful parts of a body from the unuseful, and how
to join them together again. It Is called the Hermetick Art, from Hermes, one of
the first Inventors of it. Lastly, it has been called Pyrotechnia, from (...),
and (...), signifying the Art of Fire; for in effect it is by Fire that we
bring all Chemical Operations to pass. Other names have been given to this Art,
but because the knowledge of them is to no great purpose, we will be contented
with having related some of the chief.

Chemistry is an Art that teaches how to separate the different substances
which are found in Mixed bodies: I mean by a Mixed body those things that
naturally grow and increase, such as Minerals, Vegetables, and Animals. Under
the name of Minerals, I comprehend the Seven Metals, Minerals, Stones, and
Earths; under Vegetables, I understand Plants, Gumms, Rosins, Fruits, the
several sorts of Fungus, Seeds, Juyces, Flowers, Mosses, and whatsoever else
comes from them. Among these also I reckon Manna, Honey, and those that are
called imperfect Mixts. And under Animals I contain both the Animals
themselves, and whatsoever belongs to them, as their parts and excrements. But
before I begin to speak particularly of all these things, I believe it will be
convenient to say something of the Principles of Chemistry, and give a general
Idea of Furnaces, Lutes, the degrees of Fire, and Terms that may occasion any
obscurity.

Of the Principles of Chemistry.
The First Principle that can be admitted for the composition of Mixts, is an
Universal Spirit, which being diffused through all the world, produces
different things according to the different Matrixes, or Pores of the earth in
which it settles. But because this Principle is a little Metaphysical, and
falls not under our senses, it will be fit to establish some sensible ones;
wherefore I shall relate those that are commonly held.

Whereas the Chemists in making the Analysis of Mixed bodies have met with five
sorts of Substances, they therefore concluded that there were five Principles
of Natural things, Water, Spirit, Oil, Salt, and Earth. Of these five, three of
them are Active, the Spirit, Oil, and Salt; and two Passive, Water and Earth.
They called them active, by reason they do cause all manner of action; and the
others passive, because being in repose themselves, they only serve to stop and
hinder the quick motion of the actives.

The Spirit which is called Mercury is the first of the Active principles, that
appears to us, when we make the Anatomy of a mixed body. It Is a subtle,
piercing, light substance, that is more in motion than any of the others. It is
this which causes all Bodies to grow in more or less time, according as it
abounds in them more or less. But it happens that the Bodies wherein it abounds
are more liable to corruption, by reason of its too great motion, and this is
observed in Animals and Vegetables. On the contrary the greatest part of
Minerals, as containing but a very small quantity of it, do seem to be
incorruptible. It cannot be drawn pure, no more than the others I am going to
speak of. But either it is involved in a little Oil, that it carries along with
it, and then may be called a Volatile Spirit, such as the Spirit of Wine, of
Roses, of Rosemary, of Juniper; or else is detained by some Salts, which check
its Volatility, and then may be called a fixed Spirit, as the Acid Spirits of
Vitriol, Alum, Salt, etc.

The Oil which is called Sulphur by reason of its inflammability, is a sweet,
subtle, unctuous substance, that rises after the Spirit. This is said to cause
the diversity of Colors and Smells, according to its disposition in Bodies:
this gives them their Beauty, and Deformity, uniting together the other
Principles: this also sweetens the acrimony of Salts, and by shutting up the
Pores of a mixed, hinders it from corrupting, either through too much moisture
or cold. Wherefore many Trees and Plants that have a great deal of Oil, are
wont to last green much longer than others, and can resist the extremity of ill
weathers. It is always drawn impure. For either it is mixed with Spirits, as the
Oils of Rosemary, of Lavender, which swim above the water; or else it is filled
with Salts, that it draws along with it in the distillation, as the Oil of Box,
Guaiacum, Cloves, which do precipitate to the bottom of the water by reason of
their weight.

Salt is the last of the Active Principles, which remains disguised in the
Earth, after the other Principles are extracted. It is drawn by pouring water
upon the earth to imbibe its Salt; then filtring the dissolution, and
evaporating all the moisture, a Salt is found at the bottom of the Vessel. It
is a fixed, incombustible substance, that gives Bodies their consistence, and
preserves them from corruption. This causes the diversity of tastes, according
as it is diversely mixed.

There are three different Salts, as the Fixed, Volatile, and Essential. The
Fixed Salt is that which remains after Calcination: the Volatile is that which
easily rises, as the Salt of Animals: And Essential Salt is that which is
obtained from the Juice of Plants by Crystallization. This last is between the
Fixed and Volatile.

Water, which is called Phlegm, is the first of the Passive Principles: it
comes in distillation before the Spirits when they are fixed, or after them when
they are volatile. It is never drawn pure, but always receives some impression
from the Active Principles. And this causes it to have a more detersive virtue
in it than common Water. It serves to separate the Active Principles, and to
bridle their motion.

The Earth, which is called Caput Mortuum, or Terra Damnata, is the last of the
Passive Principles, and can no more be separated pure than the rest, but will
still retain some Spirits in it; and if after you have deprived it of them as
much as you are able, you leave it a good while exposed to the Air, it will
recover new Spirits again.

Remarks upon the Principles.
The word Principle in Chemistry must not be understood in too nice a sense:
for the substances which are so called, are only Principles in respect of us,
and as we can advance no farther in the division of bodies; but we well know
that they may be still divided into abundance of other parts, which may more
justly claim, in propriety of speech, the name of Principles: wherefore such
substances are to be understood by Chemical Principles, as are separated and
divided, so far as we are capable of doing it by our weak imperfect powers. And
because Chemistry is an Art that demonstrates what it does, it receives for
fundamental only such things as are palpable and demonstrable. It is in truth a
great advantage to us, that we have Principles so sensible as they are, and
whereof we can have so reasonable an assurance. The fond conceits of other
Philosophers, concerning Natural Principles, do only puff up the mind with
grand Idea's, but they prove or demonstrate nothing. And this is the reason
that going to discover their Principles, we find some of them do frame one
Systeme, and others another. But if we would come as near as may be to the true
Principles of Nature, we cannot take a more certain course than that of
Chemistry, which will serve us as a Ladder to them; and this division of
substances, though it may seem a little gross, will give us a very great Idea
of Nature, and the figure of the first small particles which have entered into
the composition of mixed bodies.

Some modern Philosophers would persuade us, that it is altogether uncertain,
whether the substances which are separated from bodies, and are called Chemical
Principles, do effectually exist and are naturally residing in the body before:
these do tell us that the fire by rarifying the matter in time of distillation
is capable of bestowing upon it such an alteration as is quite different from
what it had before, and so of forming the Salt, Oil, and other things which are
drawn from it.

This objection does at first seem to have much weight and reason in it,
because it is certain (as hereafter shall be shown) that the Fire does give a
very considerable impression to the preparations, and that very often it does
put such a new face upon things, that they are very hardly to be known when
compared with what they were before. But it is easy to show, that though the
Fire does so diversifie and alter substances, yet it does not make those
Principles; for we see them and smell them in many bodies, before ever we bring
them to undergo the Fire. For example, it cannot be denied, but that there was
existent Oil in Olives, in Almonds, in Nuts, and in many other fruits and
seeds, because it is drawn, only by beating and pressing them. Turpentine,
which is a thickened Oil, and many other fat, or unctuous liquors, are drawn by
mere incision into the trunk, or root of trees; and what else I pray is the fat
of animals but an Oil, or Sulphur coagulated? Nor can it be denied, but that
there is salt actually in mixed bodies, since that by bruising a Plant, and
making expression to draw out its juice, and then leaving the juice to settle
in some cool place for a few days, a salt will be found fixed about the vessel
in form of little Crystals.

I know that some doubting Scepticks (who make it their business to doubt of
every thing) will still say that by beating the Almonds, and then pressing
them, and by making incision into Trees, the parts which compose the plant are
agitated and put in motion after such a manner as they are by Fire, and that
this agitation of parts is capable of ranging them so, as to make the Oil and
Salt. But such reasonings as these do destroy themselves by too much niceness,
and there is no sober understanding man but easily perceives the falsehood; for
can a man well perceive that mere trituration or incision are able to make
Salt, Oil, Earth? it is abundantly more probable, nay, and it may be
sufficiently demonstrated, that those substances did exist in the bodies
before, and that by incision and trituration the gate has only been opened to
let them come freely out.

Others again do attack the Principles of Chemistry after another manner a
little differing from this, these do acknowledge that the foresaid substances
are naturally in the Mixts, much as we draw them by Art, but they assert that
we have no proof that the Mixts are compounded of these same substances, called
Principles, and that they are not drawn from the juice of the earth in such a
form; that Salt, Sulphur, etc. may indeed have been formed in the natural
Fermentations, and other elaborations, which happen in the Mixed during its
growth, and therefore they conclude that those substances cannot properly be
called Principles, because we do not know sufficiently whether the Mixed was
composed of them at first.

But since we are satisfied that the earths which serve for a matrix to Mixed
bodies, are impregnated with Salt, Sulphur, and other substances of the nature
of those which we do find in the bodies, and since we can perceive nothing else
which can contribute to their composition, it remains beyond all doubt that
they are even compounded of them.

It must be granted that the Fermentations, or other Elaborations which come to
pass in mixed bodies, have given the Principles a certain order of parts, or
some dispositions they had not before, but they do by no means form, or compose
them.

The five Principles are easily found in Animals and Vegetables, but not so
easily in Minerals. Nay there are some Minerals, out of which you cannot
possibly draw so much as two, nor make any separation at all (as Gold and
Silver) whatsoever they talk, who search with so much pains for the Salts,
Sulphurs and Mercuries of these metals. I can believe, that all the Principles
do indeed enter into the composition of these Bodies, but it does not follow
that they must remain in their former condition, or can be drawn as they were
before; for it may be these substances which are called Principles are so
strictly involved one within another, as to suffer no separation any other way
than by breaking their Figure. Now it is by reason of their Figure that they
are called Salts, Sulphurs, and Spirits: For example, if you mix an Acid Spirit
with the Salt of Tartar or some other Alkali, the edges of the Acid will so
insinuate into the pores of the Salt, that if by distillation you would
separate the Acid Spirit again from the Salt, you will never be able to effect it,
the Acid will have lost almost all its strength, because the edges of these
Spirits are so far destroyed or changed, that they no longer preserve their
former Figure.

Every body knows that glass is made of Salt, but because the Fire has wrought
so great a change upon its Texture, or Figure, it can do nothing at all that
Salt is used to do; nay, and it is in a manner impossible to draw any true Salt
from it by Chemistry.

There are three sorts of Liquors that are qualified with the name of Spirit in
Chemistry; the Spirit of Animals, the Burning spirit of Vegetables, and the
Acid spirit.

The first of them, as the spirit of Hartshorn, is nothing but a Volatile salt
dissolved by a little Phlegm, as I shall show when I treat of Animals. The
second, as the Spirit of Wine, the Spirit of Juniper, and the Spirit of
Rosemary, is an exalted Oil, as I shall show speaking of Wines. And the last,
as the Spirit of Vinegar, Tartar, and Vitriol, is an Acid Essential salt,
dissolved and put in fusion by the fire, as I shall prove, when I speak of
Vinegar, and the distillation of Tartar: this last is called a Fluid salt.

These three sorts of liquors comprehending all that can any way be called
Spirit, this may pass for one Principle very well; for seeing that the Spirit
which is drawn from Animals is nothing but a Salt dissolved by a little Phlegm;
that Spirit of Wine is only an Oil exalted, and that the Acid Spirit is a Salt
become fluid, we can observe nothing in these liquors but an Oil, Salts of a
different nature, and water. Wherefore it must be concluded, that the Spirit or
Mercury which Chemists have talked of is a mere Chimaera, that serves only to
confound men's minds, and render Chemistry unintelligible; for men might if they
would, have called these liquors by more proper names: thus what hindered them
from calling the Spirit of Animals, by the name of a Volatile salt dissolved?
the liquors which come from Oils might have been called an exalted Oil; and the
Acid spirits a Fluid salt; and hereby we should not have been troubled about an
imaginary Principle, and Chemistry would have been better understood.

But it is impossible to change a name that has been so long fixed and
appropriated to these liquors. All that I can do is to explicate, as I have
done, what is meant by the word Spirit, in order to avoid Equivocations.

Nothing but the Oil, can properly be said to be Inflammable, and the Oil is so
much the more so, as the Salts, with which it is closely united, have been more
or less spiritualized. For that which I call Spirit in the Oil, is nothing but
an Essential or Volatile Salt; this Salt is not of it self Inflammable, but
serves to Rarifie and Exalt the parts of the Oil to render them the more
susceptible of Motion, and consequently of Flagration; after the same manner as
when Saltpeter is put to mix with some Oily substance, this Oily matter fires
much more easily than when it is alone; though Saltpeter of it self is not at
all Inflammable, as I shall prove hereafter. We have examples of the truth of
what I say in Spirit of Wine, Oil of Turpentine, and all other Inflammable
Liquors; for they are only Oils subtilized and refined by the Volatile Salts
they contain. Vegetables have a great deal of Salt much like to Saltpeter;
this Salt being straightly united with their Oil makes them the more apt to
flame, than if they had been deprived of it. The Fat of Animals as well as
their other parts, is full of a Volatile Acid salt; Wax, Rosine, and all other
matters that are inflammable, are impregnated with an Acid Salt, Essential or
Volatile.

I say the Salt which causes the flagration of Oils, must be either Volatile or
Essential, for if it were a fixed Salt, 'twould have a contrary effect, it would
allay in some measure the quick motion of the parts of an Inflammable body; and
this we see happens when Sea Salt is flung into the fire, it serves to put it
out. Common Sulphur yields us another instance of the same kind: consisting of
one part Sulphurous or Oily, and another Saline or Acid fixed, which plainly
appears in the opening of it, the Oily part fires, and would soon rise like
other Oils into a great white flame, but that the Acid part being a load to its
activity hinders it from rising, and so forces it to cast but only a small blue
flame; and a proof of what I affirm may be had from mixing Saltpeter with
Sulphur; for the Volatile salt of Saltpeter does Volatilize the Salts of
Sulphur, and causes a white flame to burn violently, as I shall show hereafter
in the Operation of Salt Polychrest.

Many things are called Oils very improperly, as the Oil of Tartar made per
Deliquium, the Oil of Vitriol, and the Oil of Antimony. The first is nothing
else but a Salt dissolved, the second is the strongest, and most caustic part
of the spirit of Vitriol, and the last is a mixture of Acid Spirit, and
Antimony.

As for Salt, I am apt to think, that there is one chief, of which all the rest
are compounded, and do conceive it to be made of an Acid liquor sliding through
the veins of the Earth, which does insensibly insinuate and incorporate in the
Pores of stones, which it does dilate and attenuate: afterward by a long
fermentation and concoction of several years, a Salt comes to be formed, that
is called Fossile; and this Opinion is the more likely to be true, because from
the mixture of Acids with some Alkali matter we always draw a substance very
like unto Salt. Now stones are an Alkali. I add, that the long fermentation,
and concoction which is made in the stone, serves to digest, and perfectly
unite the Acid with the stony parts, for the making of Salt.

This Fossile salt, which is called Gemma, by reason of its transparency, is
found in many high Mountains of Europe, such as those in Poland, Catalonia, and
Persia, and in the Indies; it is altogether like that we use for nourishment,
which is called Sea salt, insomuch that the Waters of the Sea may be said to
receive their saltishness from nothing else but this Salt dissolved in them.

Is it not likely enough that the bottom of the Sea, or its shores, may be much
like the surface of the Earth we inhabit, and that there may be Mountains,
Rocks, different sorts of earth, and consequently inexhaustible Mountains of
Salt in a Million of places at the bottom of the Sea, whence it receives its
brackishness?

And it may be there are Waters, which after taking Salt from several earths,
do at last discharge themselves into the Sea through an infinite number of
subterranean channels, which do much contribute likewise to making Seawater
salt.

That which confirms me in this opinion is, because there are Lakes in Italy,
Germany, Egypt, the Indies, and many other places, which are as Salt as the
Sea, and can have no other cause but that their waters have happened to run
through Mines of Salt.

I doubt not but many will be apt to object against my opinion, that the Sea
being of so prodigious boundless an extent, all the Salt I have spoken of,
would not be able to salt it as it is; but if they please to consider, that
this great extent of the Ocean may meet with Mines of Salt in abundance of
places, and that what is once dissolved can never be separated from it, I am
persuaded their doubt will soon vanish. Add to what is said, that Sea water
does not contain so great a quantity of Salt as is commonly imagined: and this
is easily proved, if you take the pains to evaporate some of it over the fire,
or dissolve salt in that water; for it will receive a considerable quantity
into it, which is a certain sign, that the water was not so salt before, as it
might have been, for if it had been impregnated with as much as it could, it
would have dissolved no more.

Therefore we have good reason to believe, that the Sea, which may be called a
large Lake, becomes salt through the Mines that are therein, and the Salt
Currents that in several places empty into it. Some Fountains are also seen to
yield a Salt like this; because their waters having passed through places
filled with this Salt, have dissolved and carried along with them some of it.

Saltpeter differs from these salts I speak of, in that it contains more
spirit; so that when you take the pains to exalt a part of it, what remains is
like unto Sal Gemme.

It may be objected that Salt peter is found in places where no Acid liquor can
be thought to come; but no body can doubt but that there is an Acid in the Air,
which though a very insensible body, is able enough to enter into Stones and
Earths, the truth whereof is seen every day in Earths that have lost their Salt
as much as could be drawn by Art, which upon being exposed some time to the
open air get new additions of Salt, and increase their weight considerably. Now
the liquor that I speak of, which runs in some places of the earth, receives
its Acidity from this Acid Spirit of the Air, which condenses in some places
better than in others, by reason of the coolness, or some other disposition it
finds there.

I conceive therefore that Salt peter is formed in Stones and Earths by the
Acid spirit of the Air, after the same manner as Sal Gemme in Mines by an Acid
liquor, and that this Aerial acid entering insensibly into the body of stones
produces a Salt at first much like Sal Gemme; but afterward new Acid spirits
still coming and mixing with it makes it of a middle nature between Volatile
and fixed. And it is for this reason that a great deal of Salt peter is taken
from old ruined buildings, for the stones there continuing a long time exposed
to the air, receive greater quantity of spirits than other stones; it is
likewise to be found in Cellers and other places where the Sun casts no heat,
because the spirit of the air does there easily condense by reason of the
coolness and moisture. But I shall discourse more amply of that, when I come to
treat of the Preparations that are made upon Salt peter.

Vitriols, Alums, and all other Salts, that are naturally found in the Earth,
may be explicated upon the same Principle; for according as Acid liquors do
meet with different earths, they produce different Salts.

All Earths being impregnated with an Acid Salt, as I have said, it is not hard
to conceive how that the salt of Vegetables is communicated to them from the
earth wherein they grew. Their growth must needs have proceeded from a Saline
juice of the earth they grew in, which having opened the Seed through the
Fermentation it caused, insinuates and filtrates into the Fibers that
constitute the Plant; and the leaving grounds fallow some years, is in order to
preserve and retain the Salt that is continually increased in them by the Acid
spirit of the air. Likewise Dung, and other matters, which are said to fatten
and fructify Lands, do so by nothing else but their Salt. Neither need we
wonder at the barrenness of sandy and stony soils, for that the Acid spirit of
the Air cannot unite and fix with them in sufficient quantity to render them
fertile. Nevertheless it is worth observation, that there are Lands which
remain barren, through too great an abundance of Salt they contain, and for
this reason in Egypt they are forced to temper their grounds with Sand after
the ebbing of the River Nile, to make them Fertile; because the earth, till
that is done, is so full of Salt, that its Pores are quite choked up with it.
So that instead of causing any Fermentation in the Seed, the Salt fixes and
depresses it, so that it cannot have its motion free enough to rarifie, and
raise a stalk; but now when Sand is mingled with it, it is able to divide and
separate the Salt, which not having then such power of fixing the Seed, it
Ferments and rises into a Plant. Whence it may be seen, that too much Salt is
at least as Offensive to the earths fertility, as too little, and that it is
the same thing with other Fermentable matters as it is with Earths, they come
to ferment by means of a moderate quantity of Salt mixed with them; for if you
add too much, the Fermentation will be spoiled.

Again, every kind of Salt is not fit to fertilize lands, it must be a Volatile
Salt, or approaching to the nature of Saltpeter, to serve for Vegetation; a
Salt too fixed would rather spoil it, and it has been observed that places which
should fructify, have brought forth nothing, when Sea Salt has been sprinkled
upon them; the reason of which is for that this fixed Salt hinders the
Fermentation that was necessary to fertilize.

Nevertheless it sometimes happens, that the Ashes of Vegetables, though full
of a fixed salt, do serve to fertilize; and this Contrymen are well
acquainted with, who in some places where they find their Lands too poor and
barren to yield any thing without assistance of Art, do use at certain seasons
of the year to burn Fern and Turfs upon them, and spread about the ashes. Now
it is by reason of a Lixivious salt in the ashes, that the Lands are hereby
improved.

But this happens for the same reason as I said before, for the fixed Salt of
Vegetables that lies in the ashes is very porous, as I shall prove hereafter;
and so does very well mix with the Spirits or acid Salts of the Air, and turns
easily into Saltpeter, as when Spirit of Saltpeter is mixed with an Alkali
salt, it makes a good Saltpeter.

As for sea salt, possibly it might happen, that if it were left in the Earth
for some considerable time, it would impregnate with the Spirit of the Air, and
so being at length Volatilized would render a place fertile. But because it is
a very compact body, and its parts closely united, the Volatilizing of it would
be a tedious business, and so the present requisite Fermentation failing, the
place would remain barren too long to gratify our expectations.

It is very likely that the Volatile or Nitrous salt meets in the Earth with
some Sulphurous or fat matter, that is continually raised by the subterranean
heat toward the surface of the Earth, and unites with it. This mixture of a
Volatile salt and Sulphur together may much contribute toward explicating the
manner of Vegetation; for just as the mixture of Sulphur and Saltpeter does
excellently dispose to an Exaltation by heat, which will not happen while they
are separated; so the Bituminous or fat part of the earth mixing with
Saltpeter, which all Earths have, the subterranean heat exalts them much more
easily, than if the Salt were alone. And now let us see what happens from this
Exaltation to the production of Plants.

Some part of this Sulphurous salt, meeting with seed in the earth proper to
grow, does enter into the seed, and cause a Fermentation, that is to say,
suppling the parts of the seed, disposes it to open it self. Now it is very
certain, (and what has been sensibly demonstrated by Microscopes) that each
grain of seed contains in little the whole Plant with all its parts. Wherefore
this opening the body of the seed is by reason that the sulphurous salts
entering at the pores of the root of this small Plant, and by their Volatile
quality insinuating along the Fibers which constitute the Plant, do orderly
display before us what was before but very confused in respect of us.

These salts do never enter at the head of the Plant, and so descend to the
Root, though often the Root of the Seed lies uppermost, and the head or stalk
downwards, because the Pores of the stalk are not of such a Figure as is proper
to receive them, whereas those of the Root have a proper contexture.

The Volatility of these Salts does also cause the stalk, though seated
downwards, to rise upwards, and follow their tendency, which is always up; and
this is that which by extending and enlarging the Fibers of the Plant, makes it
grow to that height which their nature requires.

It Is probable that this fat part of earth insinuating with the salt, as I have
said, does make the Oil of a mixed body; for we find that those matters which
help best to fertilize, are full of Volatile Salt and Oil, as Dung, Urine, and
Plants corrupted.

It Is fit to observe here, that the salt does act after another-guise manner
than the Oil in hindering the Fermentation or corruption of the matter it is
mixed with; for it does not only stop the pores, and hinder the air from
entering, but fixes it likewise by its hooked parts, that it can neither have
motion nor rarefaction, for which reason it is that meat is salted in order to
keep it sweet, and does thereby remain firm and compact for some time.

Three kinds of salt are drawn from Vegetables, an Acid salt called Essential,
a Volatile, and a Fixed salt. The first is sometimes like Saltpeter, and
sometimes like Tartar, according as it contains more or less earth; this salt
is drawn from the juice of the Plant, as I said before; for after expression
and purifying this juice, it is set in a vessel in some cool place a few days
without stirring, and the salt shoots into Crystals every way. This Acid salt
may be said to be the true salt that was in the Plant, because the means that
are used in drawing it are Natural, and such as cannot change its nature; but
this cannot be said of those others, because the violent fires that are used
about them make impressions of another nature, and their effects are very
different, so that the fire seems to alter and disguise them, as I shall show
in the following discourse.

The second salt, or the Volatile salt of Plants is usually drawn from seeds or
fruits Fermented. While it remains in the Vegetable, it differs from the
Essential salt only in this, that being driven up higher by Spirits, it becomes
more Volatile. The Fermentation that is caused in fruits by beating and
bruising them, does very much assist us in Volatilizing the salt; for it sets
the particles at work, and disposes them for an easier separation; but it
happens that in the great circulation, or continual motion this salt is in, it
unites so strongly with the Oil, which Fruits and Seeds are full of, that they
cannot be separated by Crystallizing the juice, as they can in drawing them from
other parts of the Plant. We must therefore have recourse to the help of fire.
The fruit or seed which contains the Volatile salt, as I shall prove in its
proper place, is Distilled by a Retort, and Water comes forth in the first
place, then an Oil, and lastly a most keen ill scented salt (that easily flies
away) upon increasing the fire to purpose, is driven into the Receiver. Now it
is plain that fire has changed, or else added something to this salt; for when
it was in the Plant, it had no manner of smell like that it gets by
distillation. But to show there is a strange alteration in this salt, as soon as
it is mixed with an Acid, there presently appears an Ebullition, or
Effervescency, which remains until the Acid has thoroughly entered into the salt.
Which circumstance does not happen to it in its Natural state, it is this
Ebullition that gave it the name of a Volatile Alkali, to distinguish it from a
Fixed Alkali, of which I shall speak hereafter. The Chemists will needs have
this Volatile Alkali to be in the Plant, just the same as when it is drawn;
that is to say, they make this a different species of salt, lying hid under the
acid, until it is laid open by the force of fire. But this opinion is founded
on no credible experience, for Anatomize the Plant how you think fit, without
using fire, and you shall never find any other but an acid salt. Doubtless it
will be said, that all other ways of dissecting Plants even into their salts,
prove too weak without the assistance of this grand dissolvent fire. But if we
consider impartially how fire does act, we shall be forced to acknowledge that
it rather destroys, and confounds the greatest part of the bodies it opens, and
does not leave them in the natural state they were in before, and especially
when it is driven with that force which is necessary to draw this salt. So that
I see no reason why the species of things should be multiplied without
necessity, by admitting many kinds of salts in Plants, and I conceive with much
more probability, that the Volatile Alkali salt is a part of the Acid Essential
salt I spoke of, which having been first disposed to a Volatile nature, and
afterward driven by the force of fire, draws along with it a portion of
Empyreumatical Oil, that gives it such a disagreeable smell, and some
terrestrious calcined matter, with which it is so strongly united, and which
changes its nature, by breaking the Saline points, and rendering them Porous, so
that any acid liquor being cast upon it, enters into the Pores, and violently
divides the parts, whence follows the Effervescency. Perchance likewise this
Calx or Calcined earth may have retained igneous particles, and so the edges of
the acid beginning to open the pores of salt, these little igneous bodies being
in a violent motion do strike about, and break open all their small prisons,
and from thence it may be, the violent Ebullition happens. Such as are
prejudiced with the Sentiments of ancient Chemists, will relish very hardly
this new Opinion of mine; but I am persuaded if any one will take the pains to
examine the matter near at hand, and make some Experiments on the salts of
Plants, he will find my Discourse come near enough to truth.

The last salt or the fixed salt of Plants remains mixed with the earthy part
after Distillation of the other substances; the matter is taken out of the
Retort, and calcined in an open fire, for to free it from the soot that
blackens it; afterward the salt is drawn by a Lixivium as I have shown before.
This salt is called fixed, in comparison with others, because this cannot
sublime.

It is observable, that because a great quantity of this kind of salt is drawn
from a plant called Kali, the name Alkali has been given to the fixed salt of
all plants; and that because an effervescency does rise upon mixing an acid
liquor with this Salt, all Volatile or fixed salts, and all terrestrious matters
which ferment with acids, have come to be called Alkali's.

The Chemists do assure us, but with little foundation for it, that in
Terrestrious bodies, in Metalls, Coral, Pearl, and generally in all bodies that
Ferment with acids, there is an hidden Alkali in them, which is one of the
Principles of Fermentation, wherefore they give them the names of Alkali's; but
because no manner of Salt can be drawn from them, to prove their Opinion, and
they have no other rational Argument to persuade me, they must give me leave to
think otherwise than they have done, and I conceive that the contrary to what
they have established will serve me better to explicate the truth.

Following therefore the Principle I have laid, I believe that those
Terrestrious bodies are themselves Alkali's, rather than that the Ebullition of
Acid and Alkali proceeds from a salt supposed to be contained in them; and
further that the salts are never Alkali's until they have undergone the force
of fire, and been reduced into a Calx. I have proved, speaking of the nature of
Volatile salt, that the fire did very much change the substances of things; and
as I have shown there is good reason to think there is but only one species of
salt in Plants, and the Volatile salt is but a change wrought by fire; I shall
proceed upon the same Principle, and affirm that there is no fixed Alkali salt
in Plants, but that by Calcination the fire has fixed a part of the acid
Essential salt with the earthy part that has served to break the keenest of its
points, and rendered them Porous, like a Calx. It is by reason of these Pores
that this kind of salt grows humid, and melts so easily when exposed to the
Air; and the Terrestrious parts do turn it into an Alkali, for if they were not
mixed with it, it would continue still an acid salt, and opposed to Alkali. But
to clear up this point the better, we must consider as nicely as may be the
nature of an Acid and an Alkali.

Whereas the nature of a thing so obscure as that of salt, cannot better be
explicated, than by admitting to its parts such figures as are answerable to
the effects it produces; I shall affirm, that the acidity of any liquor does
consist in keen particles of salts, put in motion; and I hope no body will
offer to dispute whether an acid has points or no, seeing every ones experience
does demonstrate it, they need but taste an acid to be satisfied of it, for it
pricks the tongue like any thing keen, and finely cut; but a demonstrative and
convincing proof that an acid does consist of pointed parts is, that not only
all acid salts do Crystallize into edges, but all Dissolutions of different
things, caused by acid liquours, do assume this figure in their
Crystallization; these Crystalls consist of points differing both in length and
bigness one from another, and this diversity must be attributed to the keener
or blunter edges of the different sorts of acids; and so likewise this
difference of the points in subtilty is the cause that one acid can penetrate
and dissolve well one sort of mixed, that another cannot rarifie at all: thus
Vinegar dissolves Lead, which aqua fortis cannot: Aqua fortis dissolves
Quicksilver, which Vinegar will not touch: Aqua Regalis dissolves Gold, whenas
Aqua fortis cannot meddle with it; on the contrary Aqua fortis dissolves
Silver, but can do nothing with Gold, and so of the rest.

As for Alkali's, they are soon known by pouring an acid upon them, for
presently or soon after, there rises a violent Ebullition, which remains until
the acid finds no more bodies to rarifie. This effect may make us reasonably
conjecture that an Alkali is a terrestrious and solid matter, whose pores are
figured after such a manner that the acid points entering into them do strike
and divide whatsoever opposes their motion; and according as the parts of which
the Alkali is compounded, are more or less solid, the acids finding more or
less resistance, do cause a stronger or weaker Ebullition. So we see the
Effervescency that happens in the dissolution of Coral is very much milder than
that in the dissolution of Silver.

There are as many different Alkali's, as there are bodies that have different
pores, and this is the reason why an acid will Ferment with one strongly, and
with another not at all; for there must be a due proportion between the acid
points, and the pores of the Alkali.

The nature of Alkali's being thus established, there will be no need of flying
to an imaginary salt in Plants for explication of the Effervescency; and 'twill
be easily conceived that if an Alkali salt is full of a terrestrious matter
that renders it porous like other Alkali's, it must cause an Ebullition. That
which I said, speaking of Volatile salts, may here be added, that the Igneous
particles breaking in through the Pores of the Alkali salt, wherein they became
imprisoned by the Calcination, do much contribute to the raising this
Effervescency. And really when the Acid Spirit of Vitriol, or Aqua fortis is
cast upon an Alkali salt, there happens as strong an Ebullition, as when this
liquor is flung into the fire it self.

Acid Salts do rarely cause any effervescency with Acid liquors, because their
pores being very small, the common acids are not able to pierce into them; but
we do sometimes meet with Acids whose points are so fine and so proportioned to
the pores of the Salts, that they will find an entrance even into the exceeding
little pores of these Acid Salts, and thereby cause a commotion. And then these
Salts, although they be Acid, yet may be called Alkali's in respect of such
keen Acids. This does happen to Sea Salt, which is an Acid, for though it will
make no Ebullition, neither with Spirit of salt, nor with Spirit of Niter, nor
with Spirit of Alom, nor with Spirit of Vitriol; yet if you mix it with the
strongest Oil of Vitriol, there will rise an Effervescency. Wherefore it may be
said that one Acid Salt is an Alkali in respect of another, because there being
few bodies without some pores, few of them will prove to be impenetrable, when
they meet with Acids of an extraordinary subtlety.

The Fermentation that happens to Dow, to new Wine, and such like things,
differs from that I now spoke of, in that it is more gentle, and slow; this is
caused by the Natural Acid salt contained in them, which expanding and exalting
it self by its motion, does rarifie and raise up the grosser and sulphurous
part which endeavors to allay its motion, from whence it comes that the matter
swells up.

The reason why an Acid does not make Sulphurous things Ferment, with so much
noise and suddenness as Alkali's, is, because that Oils consist of pliant parts
that yield and make no resistance to the points of Acids, as a piece of Wool or
Cotton will yield and give way to needles that are thrust into it. Thus
methinks two sorts of Fermentations may be admitted of, the one of an Acid with
an Alkali, which may be called Ebullition, and the other, when an Acid does by
little and little rarifie some softish matter, as Dow, or clear and
Sulphurous, as Must, Syder, and all other juices of Plants. This last sort
may rather be called Fermentation.

It is further remarkable that the Acid and Alkali do so destroy one another in
their conflict, that when as much Acid has been by degrees poured as is
necessary to penetrate the Alkali in all its parts, it is then no more an
Alkali, nor can it be so again, though you wash it to carry off the Acid,
because it has no longer that disposition of Pores which is requisite in an
Alkali; and the Acid breaks and loses its points in the contest, especially
when the Alkali is pretty compact and solid; so that if you would recover your
Acid again, you will find it has in a manner lost all its acidity, and retains
only a sharpness. But the Sulphur or Oil consisting of supple yielding parts
does only receive some Acid impression, and no such close union, so that it can
be drawn from Sulphurous bodies much the same as when it was mixed.

Animals do yield us two sorts of Salt, the one Volatile, and the other Fixed;
of the first sort they yield greater quantity than of the second, because they
do abound much in Spirits, which by their continual circulation do Volatilize
it. This Salt differs but little from the Volatile salt of Seeds and Fruits,
both which are drawn in a Retort; they have the same kind of smell, taste, and
other virtues. The Volatile salt of Animals keeps dry a longer time than the
others, because it carries away with it more fixed salt than those others. As
for fixed salt, animals do yield but a very little of it, and in some animals
you shall find none at all; it is drawn as the fixed salt of Plants; they are
both Alkali's.

There is no salt that can be called alkali, to be found in the parts, or
humors of Animals, until they have passed the fire; a Saline serosity may be
observed in them, but that salt is acid; and it proceeds doubtless from the
Aliments that are taken for nourishment. Now as I have shown that there is only
an acid salt in Earths and Vegetables, so I may say the same of Animals, and
the rather because no other kind of Salt can be found in them in their Natural
state; the alkali salts that are drawn from them, are only several mutations of
an acid salt, made by fire, which mingles with them earthy particles after the
manner I have spoken of treating of the Alkali's of Plants. But it is
observable, that whereas there is a greater proportion of Spirits in Animals
than Seeds, these Spirits do serve to exalt all the Salt; which is the reason
that less fixed salt is to be found in Animals than Plants.

As for what many do say that Choler causes an Effervescency like an Alkali,
when an acid is cast upon it, it is a mistake through want of right Observation,
for no Ebullition at all happens for some time. Nevertheless I will not say,
that an acid produces no Fermentation in Choler, Blood, and other parts of the
body, for it does very often really do that; but that is no more than uses to
be done in new Wine, Beer, and other liquors of the like nature. I have already
explicated this sort of Fermentation.

We ought not to omit speaking of the Coagulation that is made in Milk after a
Fermentation caused either by Heat, or some Acid put into it.

Methinks here is no need at all of supposing an Alkali salt, that ferments
with the Acid of this liquor, as many suppose for explicating this Effect,
since if we consider but the natural composition of Milk, we shall find it to
be nothing but a Creamy substance swimming on the Serum, and mixed only
superficially with it, by the intermixture of some salt; so that it is in a
fitting state of separation, as soon as the salt gains a little more motion
than it had, whether it be by Fermentation, or by increasing its activity by an
acid of its own nature. Thus when the heat of the Summer, or fire has stirred
up the acid that is in the Milk, or else some acid is poured into it, the edges
of the acid do cut and divide the Creamy part, to gain a free motion in the
Serum, and separate into Curd all the Butter and Cheese. Now there is nothing
strange in the Precipitation of the Curd, especially when an acid has been
poured upon the Milk, for besides the weight it gains by thickning, some part
of the acids do mix with it, and increase its weight; for according as the acid
that was mingled is stronger or weaker, the Curd does Precipitate more or less.

Perhaps some will say, for as much as acid is always the cause of Coagulation
in Milk, there is no great likelihood that a salt of the same nature should be
the instrument of uniting the several parts of Milk.

But it must be considered, that although there is an acid in Milk (as no body
can doubt, seeing it sowres of it self, when stale) this acid is as it were
imbodied in the ramous parts of the Oil, so that there is loses all its motion
and cannot come to action but by rarifying the Oil, and making it fit to mix
with the serous part; it is the due proportion of this salt, Oil, and serum,
that makes the Butter and Cheesy part of Milk.

Now I hope I have said enough to establish what I have affirmed, that there is
no salt in nature besides the acid, out of which all other Salts are made, and
that the Alkali salt has no Natural existence in mixed bodies. My discourse will
be the better relished when I speak of the Operations of Chemistry, and you will
find that by this Principle, which I may call the most Natural and impartial of
all that have been laid till now, I shall be able to give account of many
Phaenomena's that have never been explicated by common Principles.

Of Chemical Furnaces and Vessels.
It is not my design to relate here exactly all the kinds of Vessels and
Furnaces that Artists have invented to use in Chemistry. I shall describe only
those with which you will be able to perform all Operations, and send curious
persons, who would be more particularly instructed in them, into the
Laboratories, where they may learn more on this subject than ever they will be
able to do by consulting all the Books in the world. These then are the
principal.

The Furnace which is most in use among Chemists is that which is called the
Reverberatory; it must be large enough to hold a great Retort, for the
Distillation of acid Spirits, and other things. This Furnace must be fixed, and
made of Brick, joined together with a Lute compounded of one part of Potters
earth, so much Horse-dung, and twice as much Sand, the whole kneaded together
in Water; let it be two Bricks breadth, that the Furnace being the thicker, the
heat may be retained the longer: let the Ash-hole be a Foot high, and the Door
contrived, if possible, on the side that the air comes, that when you have a
mind to open it, the Fire may be lighted or increased the more easily; the fire
room need not be quite so high; you must lay across it two Iron-bars of the
bigness of your thumb, which will serve you to set your Retort upon; and the
Furnace must be still raised near about a Foot higher, to cover the Retort; fit
to it a Dome, or Cover, that may have a hole in the middle with its stopple,
and a small Chimny a foot high, for to place upon this hole, when the stopple
is taken out, and when you would raise a great heat; for the flame preserving
its self by means of this little Chimney, it reverberates the more strongly
upon the Retort. This Cover may be made of the same Paste, that I shall
presently describe, speaking of Portable Furnaces.

It will be necessary to have several Furnaces of this same fashion; but they
must be of different sizes, to work conveniently according to the bigness of
the Vessel you would place in it. For that the Fire may act more vehemently
upon the Retort, there must be left but only the space of a fingers breadth all
round between the Furnace and the Retort. These Furnaces may also serve for
Distilling by the Refrigeratory, in the Sea-Bath, the Vaporous and the
Sand-bath; for you may place the Copper body upon the Iron bars, when you would
distill by the Refrigeratory. It is easy to do the same with the Balneum
Mariae. As for the Sand-bath, lay an iron or earthen pan on the bars, and put
sand enough into it for to cover the bottom and sides of the Vessel you desire
to heat.

As for Fusions, you must build a Furnace of the same matter and form as those
spoken of before; only you must forbear laying the two Iron bars in it, that
you did in the others, for support of the Vessel.

Moveable Furnaces are made of a paste that consists of three parts of broken
pots in powder, and two parts of clay tempered together with Water. Their
structure is just like that of the

An Explication of the FIGURES of the FIRST TABLE.
A Great Reverberatory Furnace. a The Ash-hole. b The Fire-room. c A Retort
supported on two Iron bars. d The Dome, or Cover. e The Receiver. f A little
Chimny. g The Dome taken off the Furnace. h A Retort. i A small Reverberatory
Furnace ready to work with. k A fixed little Furnace for Fusions. l An Iron pot
to hold the sand. m The Fireplace. n The Ash-room. o A Furnace in which is
placed a great Copper Body. p The Copper Body tinned of the inside, supported on
two Iron bars. q The Head. r A copper Pipe tinned, passing through a vessel
filled with water. s A glass Receiver. t A small Iron Furnace. u An Iron pot. x
The Cover to the Iron pot. y A Cock to let the water out of the vessel, when it
grows too hot. z A Mattress, or Bolt-head.
The FIRST TABLE.


The SECOND TABLE.
a a A Moveable Furnace for fusions. b Registers, or holes to let the air into
the fire. c A Dome divided in two. d A little Chimny, and the flame passing
through it. e An Iron trevet to support the furnace. f A glass Mortar, with its
Pestle. g h A pot with a coffin of paper over it, for receiving the Flowers of
Benjamin. i k l A Mattress, or Bolt-head, and its blind-head, for sublimations.
m n A great earthen pan, with a little Cup turned upside downwards. A Crucible
containing the lighted Sulphur. A great glass Tunnel, to draw Spirit of
Sulphur. o A Mould. p A copper Body. q Its Refrigeratory. r The Receiver. s A
Circulating vessel. t A Pot with a hole in the middle of its height, and the
stopple of the hole lying by. u Three Aludels, or Pots upon one another. x The
glass head. y A Mould to make the balls of Regulus of Antimony, which are
called perpetual Pills. z The Mould wherewith to form the lapis infernalis. a a
A little furnace, and its pan with sand in it, and an earthen pan filled with
liquor to be evaporated. b b A Coppel. c c A little Coppel to make trials with.
The SECOND TABLE


The THIRD TABLE.
A Moveable Furnace to distill in Sand. a The Ash-hole, and its door. b The
Fireplace, and its door. c The Cucurbite, or Body. d The Sand, wherein the
Body is placed. e The Head. f The Receiver. g The same Furnace empty. h A Body.
i A Head. k A glass in which Oil of Cloves is made. l A Copper Balneum to
contain, and distill with four Alembicks. m n A Pipe through which the hot water
is poured into the Balneum, according as it evaporates. o The Receiver. p A
Balneum to distill with one Alembick. q A Mold to make Cups of Regulus of
Antimony. r A French Crucible. s A German Crucible.
The THIRD TABLE.


Reverberatory Furnace. You may also leave holes through which the Iron-bars
may pass, which support the Retort that they may be easily taken out, when you
have a mind to use this Furnace for Fusions.

A Furnace of this form may be called Polychrest (or general) because such a
one may be used for all sorts of Operations.

It is likewise convenient for Fusions, to have a moveable Furnace of the same
matter as the others; it must be round, and may be set upon a stool: it is to
have only one grate, and six Registers, or holes on the sides, to let in the
air to the fire. The Dome may be made of the same matter, for to cover it, and
a small earthen Chimney for to place upon the hole of the Dome, that the fire
may keep the stronger. See the figure of it in the second Table.

You must be sure to put sand, or broken pots, or such like things into the
Paste that you use for the building Furnaces, either fixed, or moveable, to
hinder them from cracks, when they come to dry; for these matters rendering the
clay more porous, the wet breaths out much the more easily.

Again, Lime and Sand tempered together, might serve for the building your fixed
Furnaces, and stones might be used instead of bricks; but because it is
necessary to increase and lessen the Furnaces, to proportion their size to the
vessels you would place in them, the description which I gave before is the
more convenient, for that a man may very easily break them, and build them
again, without the help of a Brick-layer.

A small Iron Furnace with its iron pot, and a cover to it, is convenient for
performing many operations; this pot may serve for a Balneum Mariae, and for a
Vaporous Bath, when there is no other. It may be likewise used to distill by an
Alembick, in a Bath of Sand, Ashes, or of filings of Iron. See the description
of it in the first Table.

A great Iron Furnace should likewise be had, whereon to place a Copper Balneum
Mariae, for to distill with four bodies at once. In the middle of this Bath
there should be a pipe raised, the top of which must be made like a Funnel,
into which you are to pour hot water, in place of that which consumes away in
vapor. See its figure in the third Table.

As for Vessels choose them as much as may be of Earth or Glass; for it is to be
feared that those which are made of Metal will communicate some particular
impression to the Liquors you put into them: but because sometimes you may have
occasion to distill a great many things in a little time, you may use the
Copper-Cucurbit, or Body Tinned, because that Tinn is not so soluble as Copper,
and besides has no such pernicious quality: upon this Cucurbit place a fit
head, round about which must be made a kind of basin to hold the water that
cools and condenses the vapors which rise from the Matter contained in the
Vesica so soon as it is heated. See its description in the second Table.

You may likewise provide a Copper pipe tinned of the inside, which may pass
sloping downwards through a vessel filled with water; and when you would distill
Essences with it, you must fit the upper end of it to the nose of the head, and
the lower end of it to the mouth of the Receiver; but you must remember to
empty the water out of the vessel, according as it grows hot, for to cool the
liquor that is distilling; and to this end there must be a hole made at the
bottom of the vessel, to be stopped with a wooden stopple, which may be taken
out, and put in again, as often as you would let out the water.

The Moor's head is a Copper cap tinned on the inside, made like to a head. See
the figure of it in the first Table.

Many Retorts of different sizes are necessary in a Laboratory; those which are
of Earth are convenient for the distillation of Acid Spirits, because they are
able to endure the utmost degree of Fire, and will not melt as glass do. The
Vessels made of Earth have their pores as close as glass it self, and preserve
the Spirits as well. They who want Earthen Vessels may coat their glass Retorts
with the Lute that I shall describe hereafter, that if the glass should melt,
when they are distilling Acid Spirits, the Lute may preserve the matter safe.

Earthen, and Glass Cucurbits, with their heads, do serve for a great many
Operations.

Matrasses both great and small, when they are fitted to the nose of a Limbeck,
are called Receivers; at other times we put things into them to digest: and
they are also fit for sublimations. When the neck of one Mattress is put into
the neck of another, they are called a double vessel, and this is done when we
desire to circulate Spirits, but then the junctures must be very well luted.

You must also provide many large capacious Recipients for the Distillation of
Acid Spirits by a Retort. They must be so very large, that the Spirits may have
room to Circulate the better.

Lingots are Iron molds of diverse shapes, into which melted Metals are wont to
be poured, in order to harden in the form that we would have them. That which
is used for the making Lapis infernalis must consist of two pieces joined
together with two little Iron rings, and the melted matter is poured into the
upper part of it. See its figure in the second Table.

Coppels are porous vessels made in form of a cup, to be used for the trying
and purifying of Gold and Silver. They are made of Ashes well washed, or of
bones calcined. See their figure in the second Table.

Ashes deprived of their salts are rather used than others, for the composition
of this sort of vessels, that they may be made the more porous, by such
deprivation. See the Chapter concerning Purification of Silver by the Coppel,
and the Remarks upon it.

Many glass Funnels great and small, Viols of glass, Crucibles, Pans, Mortars
of glass or stone, or Marble or Iron, must not be forgotten.

Aludels must also have a place there; they are Pots without a bottom, joined
together, and are placed over another Pot with a whole in the middle, to serve
for Sublimations.

Of Lutes.
The Fire is often raised to so high a degree as will melt glass Retorts in a
Reverberatory Furnace, wherefore it will be convenient to coat them over with
such a Lute, as when dry is able to preserve and contain the matter that is put
into them to be distilled. This Lute may be made after the manner which follows.

Take Sand, the dross of Iron, Potters earth in powder, of each five pounds,
horse-dung cut small a pound, glass beaten into powder, and Sea Salt, of each
four ounces, mix them all, and with a sufficient quantity of water make a Paste
or Lute, with which you must coat the Retort all round, to half its neck, and
so set it a drying. This same Lute will serve to stop close the junctures of
the neck of the Retort with the Recipient; but because when it dries, it grows
exceeding hard, and it proves difficult to unlute it, it is needful to wet it
with wet clothes, when you would take the Retort asunder from the Receiver.

The Lute that I commonly use my self for such occasions, is compounded only of
two parts of Sand, and one of clay tempered together with water.

As for the conjunction of Limbecks, ordinary Glue upon paper will serve turn:
but when something very spirituous is distilled, such as the Spirit of Wine,
use a wet Bladder, which carries a Glue along with it, that sticks very well.
But if the bladder happens to be eaten or corroded by the Spirits, have
recourse to the following Glue.

Take Flower, and Lime slackt, of each an ounce, Potters-earth in powder half
an ounce, mix them, and make a moist Paste with a sufficient quantity of the
Whites of Eggs well beaten before hand with a little water. This Paste may
likewise serve to stop the cracks that happen in glass vessels, there must be
three lays of the Paste bound on with paper.

To Seal Hermetically, is to stop the mouth or neck of a Glass-Vessel with a
pair of Pincers heated red hot. To do this, the neck is heated by little and
little with burning coals, and the fire is increased and continued, until the
Glass is ready to melt. This way of sealing a Vessel is used, when you have put
some matter within it that is easy to be exalted, and you have a mind to make
it Circulate.

Of the Degrees of Fire.
To make a Fire of the First Degree, two or three coals lighted will suffice to
raise a most gentle heat.

For the Fire of the second degree, three or four coals will serve, to give
such a heat as is able sensibly to warm the Vessel, but so as a hand may be
able to endure it for some time.

For the Fire of the Third degree, you must cause heat enough to make a Pot
boil, that is filled with five or six quarts of water.

For the Fourth Degree, you must use Coals and Wood together, enough to give
the most extreme heat of all.

The Fire of Sand, of the filings of Iron, and of Ashes, is made, when the
Vessel that contains the matter that is to be heated is covered underneath and
on all sides with Sand, or the filings of Iron, or with Ashes; this is done to
heat the Vessel the more gently.

All these Fires have their Degrees, but the Ash-fire is the mildest, because
the Ashes cannot contain so great a heat as the others.

The Reverberatory Fire is made in a close Furnace, that the heat or flame
which always tends upwards, may reverberate or return upon the Vessel which is
placed on two Iron bars. This fire has its Degrees, but may be raised to a
greater violence than the rest.

The Wheel fire, for Fusion, is made when with lighted coals you encompass all
round a Crucible, that holds the matter you desire to melt.

The Balneum Mariae is, when an Alembick containing the matter that is to be
heated, is placed in a Vessel filled with Water, under which the Fire is made;
thus the water growing hot, heats the matter contained in the Alembick.

The Vaporous Bath is, when a Glass vessel containing some Matter is heated by
the vapor of hot water.

Explication of many Terms that are used in Chemistry.
To Alcoholize, or reduce into Alcohol, signifies to Subtilize, as when a Mixed
is beaten into an impalpable powder. This word is also used to express a very
pure Spirit; thus the Spirit of Wine well rectified is called the Alcohol of
Wine.

Amalgamate is to mix Mercury with some melted Metal; this Operation serves to
render the Metal fit to be extended on some Works, as Gold, or else to reduce
it into a very subtle powder, which is done by putting the Amalgame into a
Crucible over the Fire: for the Mercury subliming into the Air leaves the Metal
in an impalpable powder; neither Iron nor Copper can by any means be
Amalgamated.

Cement is a manner of purifying Gold. It Is done by stratification with a hard
paste made of one part of Salt Armoniack, two of common Salt, and four of
Potters earth, or Bricks powdered, the whole having been moistened with a
sufficient quantity of Urine: this Composition is called Royal Cement.

Circulation is a motion given to liquors contained in a double vessel, excited
by fire, and causing the vapors to ascend and descend to and fro. This
operation tends either to subtilize the liquors, or to open some hard body that
is mixed with them.

Coagulate, is to give a consistence to liquids, by evaporating some part of
them over the fire, or else by mixing liquors together that are of a different
nature.

Cohobate signifies to repeat the Distillation of the same liquor, having
poured it again upon the matter that remains in the Vessel. This Operation is
used to open Bodies, or to Volatilize the Spirits.

Congele, is to let some matter that is melted fix, or grow into a consistence,
as when we let a metal cool, after it has been melted in a Crucible; or else it
is when wax, fat, butter, or the like, are taken from the fire and set to cool.

Detonation is a noise that is made when the Volatile parts of any mixture do
rush forth with impetuosity; it is also called Fulmination.

Digestion is, when some body is put to steep or infuse in a convenient
menstruum, over a very gentle heat.

Dissolve, is to turn some hard matter out of a hard into a liquid form, by
means of a certain liquor.

To Distill per ascensum, is, when fire is put under the Vessel that contains
the matter which is to be heated.

To Distill per descensum, is, when fire is placed over the matter that is to be
heated; for then the moist parts being rarefied, and the vapor which rises
from them not being able to arise away upwards as it would do if not hindered,
it precipitates and distills at the bottom of the vessel.

Edulcorate, is to sweeten some matter, that is impregnated with Salts, by
means of common water.

Extract, is to separate the purer part from the grosser.

Fermentation is an ebullition raised by the Spirits that endeavor to get out
of a Body; for meeting with gross earthy parts that oppose their passage, they
swell and rarifie the liquour until they find their way out; Now in this
separation of parts, the Spirits do divide, subtilize and separate the
principles so, as to make the matter be of another nature than it was before.

Filtrate is to purify a Liquor by passing it through a Coffin of brown paper.

Fumigate is to make one Body receive the Fume of another.

Granulate is to pour a melted Metal drop by drop into cold water, that it may
congeal into grains.

Levigate is to reduce a hard Body into an impalpable powder upon a marble.

Mortify is to change the outward form of a Mixed, as is done in Mercury. Also
Spirits are said to be Mortified, when they are mixed with others that hinder
or destroy their strength.

Precipitate is to separate a matter that is dissolved, so as to make it fall
or settle at the bottom.

Rectify is to Distill Spirits, for the separation of what Heterogeneous parts
might have been drawn along with them.

Reverberate is to cause the flame of the Wood or coals that is lighted in the
Furnace, to beat back upon the Vessel, by means of a Dome placed over it.

Revive is to restore a Mixed to its former condition that lies disguised by
Salts or Sulphurs. Thus Cinnabar, and the other preparations of Mercury are
Revived into Quicksilver.

Stratifie is to lay different matters bed upon bed. This operation is
performed when we would Calcine a Mineral or Metal with a Salt, or some other
matter.

Sublime is to raise by Fire any Volatile matter to the top of the Cucurbit, or
into its Head.

THE FIRST PART. Of Minerals.
WHatsoever is found Petrified in the Earth, or upon the Earth is called
Mineral.

Petrification is made by a Coagulation of acid or salt waters, that are found
in the pores of the Earth.

This Petrification differs according to the diverse dispositions, or different
nature of the Earth, and according to the time that Nature uses in its
perfection.

The growth of Minerals proceeds from an accumulation, or from several veins of
congeled Waters, that do as it were glue together, and these veins are the
cause that all the adjacent parts have their Sinus, and meetings a travers one
another, and not running directly downwards.

These Sinus, like so many joints, are of great help to Laborers to cut in the
Quarries; for by those cavities the stones are in great measure separated
before hand, whereas 'twould be extreme hard working them out, if nature had
not so concurred.

The growth of Minerals is very different from that of Vegetables, and Animals;
for whereas the former does happen through an agglutination of congeled waters,
as I have said; the latter is performed by means of juices that insinuate and
spread in the vessels and fibers, that Animals and Plants do consist of.

Metals do differ from other Minerals in being malleable, which the others are
not.

They are counted seven, Gold, Silver, Iron, Tinn, Copper, Lead, and
Quicksilver, this last is not malleable of it self, but is so mingled with the
others; and because this is thought to be the Seed of Metals, it is numbered
with the rest.

Astrologers have conceited that there was so great an affinity and
correspondence between the Seven Metals before named, and the seven Planets,
that nothing happened to the one, but the others shared in it; they made this
correspondence to happen through an infinite number of little bodies that pass
to and from each of them; and they suppose these corpuscles to be so figured
that they can easily pass through the pores of the Planet and Metal they
represent, but cannot enter into other bodies because their pores are not
figured properly to receive them; or else if they do chance to get admittance
into other bodies, they cannot fix and stay there to contribute any nourishment;
for they do imagine that the Metal is nourished and perfected by the Influence
that comes from its Planet, and so the Planet again the same from the Metal.

For these reasons they have given these seven Metals the name of the seven
Planets, each accordingly as they are governed: and so have called Gold the
Sun, Silver the Moon, Iron Mars, Quicksilver Mercury, Tinn Jupiter, Copper
Venus, and Lead Saturn.

They have likewise fancied that each of these Planets has his day apart to
distribute liberally his Influence on our Hemisphere; and so they tell us that
if we work upon Silver on Monday, Iron on Tuesday, and so of the rest, we shall
attain our end much better than on other days.

Again they have taught us that the seven Planets do every one govern some
particular principal part of our bodies; and because the Metals do represent
the Planets, they must needs be mighty specific in curing the distempers of
those parts, and keeping them in good plight. Thus they have assigned the Heart
to Gold, the Head to Silver, the Liver to Iron, the Lungs to Tinn, the Reins to
Copper, and the Spleen to Lead.

Thus you see in short what some of the most sober Astrologers do fancy
concerning Metals, and they draw consequences from hence, which 'twould be too
long here to relate. I have told you what the soberest among them say; for
nothing can be so absurd as what some of them would have us believe.

It Is no hard matter to disprove these conceits, and show how groundless they
are; for no body ever yet got near enough to the Planets, to satisfy himself
whether they are really of the same nature with Metals, or whither any
Effluviums of bodies do fall from them to us.

Nevertheless if we could be satisfied that Experience did confirm what these
persons have offered to maintain, we might then have some reason to think there
were some likelihood in their doctrine, although their principles were found to
be altogether false; but in truth there is nothing to confirm their Opinion, and
we find it every day plain enough, that the Faculties and Virtues are utterly
false, which they do attribute to the Planets and Metals; the Metals indeed are
of good use in Physic, and excellent Remedies may be drawn from them; but
their effects may better be explicated by Causes nearer at hand than the Stars.

CHAP. I. Of Gold.
GOLD is most esteemed among the seven Metals, because it is more perfect, more
weighty, and is thought to receive the influence of the most glorious body
among the Stars, which is the Sun. It is also called the King of Metals, for
the same reason; it is a matter the most compact of any, malleable, unequal in
its parts; insomuch that Pores of different figures are observed in it, when it
is viewed with a good Microscope.

Gold is found in Mines in several places, both in Europe, and other parts of
the world; it is usually attended with Water and very hard stones, such as are
extreme hard to dig; there are likewise with several stones that contain
particles of Gold, such as are called Golden Marcassites, the Lapis Lazuli, and
Lapis Armenus.

Gold will spread under the hammer more than any other Metal; it is beaten
into leaves exceeding fine, for the use of Gilders, and to be used occasionally
in Physic; they will easily mix in compositions, and with powders.

Covetousness that has always prevailed on the minds of mankind has not left
the Chemists without continual hopes of making Gold by their Art, they have
conceited that the production of Gold was the End that Nature always aims at in
all her Mines, and that she is hindered in her design, as often as she produces
other Metals which are called Imperfect.

And upon this fancy they have spared no time, nor pains, nor cost, in exalting
and perfecting these other Metals, and turning them into Gold; this is that
which they call the Grand Operation of all, or the search after the
Philosophers stone.

Some of them to compass their end do make a mixture of these metals with such
other matters as serve to purify them from their grosser parts, and work their
Preparations with great fires, others do put them a Digesting in Spirituous
liquors, in imitation of Nature that always uses a gentle Heat in her
Operations, and so do reduce them into a state of Corruption, to draw thereby
their Mercury, which they think to have the aptest disposition to make Gold.
Others again do search after the seed of Gold, in Gold it self, and these make
no doubt to find it there, as the seed of a Vegetable is more likely to be
found in the Vegetable it self than otherwhere; in order to this they open the
body of Gold by proper Dissolvents, then set it a digesting either by a
Lamp-fire, or the heat of the Sun, or that of Dung, or some other degree of
Fire, to be kept all along at an equal height, and such as is nearest to a
Natural heat, and this to draw out the Mercury of Gold; for they are persuaded
that if they could once obtain this same Mercury, sowing it in the Earth, it
would bring forth Gold, as certainly as a seed does a Plant.

Another sort of these men do take wonderful pains to find out the seed of Gold
in Minerals, as in Antimony for example, thinking there is a sulphur and Mercury
in it as like to those in Gold as can be. Others hope to find it out in
Vegetables, and things that come from them, as in Honey, Manna, Sugar, Wine,
Rosa solis, Rosemary, Spleenwort. And others pursue after it in Animals, and in
their Gums, Blood, Urin. But the most Curious and delicate of all, who think
all the rest but Fools in comparison with them, do hunt after the seed of Gold
in the Sun, and in the Dew; for the wisdom of Astrologers has found out that
the Sun is a Body all of Gold melted in the Center of the World, and Coppel'd
by the fire of the stars that environ it about; nay they dare affirm that this
same Gold when it was a purifying did sparkle as Gold does in the Coppel.

I should never make an end of this subject, if I should speak of the labors,
and pains, watchings, vexations and frettings, and especially the cost these
unfortunate men do plunge themselves into, in following their several fancies;
they are so extremely prepossessed with the conceit of becoming Rich all of a
sudden, that they are altogether incapable of any sober admonition, and they
shut their ears to any thing that can be said to disabuse them; so that all
other Philosophers, that are not besotted with their fantastical opinions, are
by them thought and called Profane, reserving to themselves the name of the
only True Philosophers, or Philosophers paramount.

But the saddest consideration of all is, to see a great many of them, who have
spent all the flower of their years, in this desperate concern, in which
nevertheless they pertinaciously run on, and consume all they have, at last
instead of recompense for their miserable fatigues, reduced to the lowest
degree of poverty. Penotus will serve us for an instance of this nature, among
thousands of others, he died a hundred years old wanting but two, in the
Hospital of Yverdon in Switzerland, and he used to say before he died, having
spent his whole life in vainly searching after the Philosophers stone, that if
he had a mortal Enemy he did not dare to encounter openly, he would advise him
above all things to give up himself to the Study and Practice of Alchymy.

This man did indeed at last perceive his error and folly, and did acknowledge
that he had spent his time most unfortunately and idly; but there are few men
who prove so ingenuous as to do so; for they think that their honor is
concerned in maintaining whatever error they have once openly defended, and
they are quite ashamed to have it believed, that they had labored in vain, so
long, and spent their substance in an enterprise that had not good probability
of success.

Many of them to avoid such reproaches, and to make the world believe that they
have found out some realities, and especially to engage some particular person,
they have designs upon, to join with them in the pursuit of their projects,
have contrived a great many cheating Legerdemain tricks, some with the
pretended Powder of Projection, others with their Aurum Potabile, some by
fixing Mercury with Copper, or Verdegreese, lastly others with Cinnaber, which
they turn into Silver.

They say for themselves that their Powder of Projection is the Seed of Gold it
self, which seed has the faculty of multiplying or increasing the Gold, when
some small quantity of it is used. And to give a proof of their skill, they put
some melted Gold over the fire, then they cast a little of their powder into
it, they stir about the matter with a rod of iron, or some other metal, then
they cast their Gold into an iron mold, and it proves to have received a
considerable augmentation. At first this Experiment surprises strangely the
spectators, and they are ready to cry out, a Miracle, a Miracle. Then some are
greedy to buy this Powder of Projection, but the Artist will not part with it,
unless he is paid dearly for it. The purchaser thinks he has now got the Bird
sure in the nest, he runs in haste home to make multiplication of his Gold, he
melts it, flings in the powder, stirs the matter about, lastly, he observes the
same circumstances he had seen observed before, but at last finds that his Gold
has made no increase of its weight. Then he thinks he failed in some thing that
was to have been done, and so begins the Operation again, once, or twice, but
all in vain, he poor man can make no Augmentation, and finds too late that he
has been wretchedly imposed upon. Now the mystery of this egregious knavery was
thus:

He that stirs the matter, is privately provided with several small pieces of
Gold, to convey dexterously into the Crucible, or Coppel, at different times, so
cunningly that none of the Assistants does at all perceive it; but when he
finds that he is too narrowly observed, and foresees that it will be too hard
for him to slip in any more Gold to that which is melted, without being
discovered, he then takes a rod of iron or copper, in the end of which he has
inlaid Gold so as it may not be discovered, and then stirs about the melted
Gold with this artificial rod. The copper or iron melts, and with it the other
Gold mixes with the rest, and so makes an Augmentation. Now if any body demands
what is become of the end of the rod, he answers as plainly enough appears,
that it is separated into dross, for copper cannot mix with the body of Gold.
And if we should examine further into the Powder of Projection, we should find
that it is only Quicksilver in Powder, or some such matter, that consumes away
by the heat of the fire, or else turns into dross.

Their Aurum Potabile which they crack with so loud, and which they sell at so
dear a price, is commonly nothing else but a tincture of some Vegetable or
Mineral, whose color comes near to that of Gold, and because this Tincture is
prepared with some spirituous Menstruum, it sometimes causes a breathing sweat.
Now this diaphoretick effect they never fail to attribute unto Gold, which yet
generally is no occasion of it. This same cheat of theirs is none of the least
that they use to get by, for in point of Medicines, abundance of people prove
extreme credulous, and especially when an Universal medicine is talked of, such
as they pretend their Aurum Potabile to be. Now I shall show in the sequel,
that the business of Aurum Potabile is in reality a mere Chimaera.

They prepare their Mercury by fixing its body with Verdegreese, and thus they
prepare a matter that comes very near to the color of Gold; for the
Verdegreese, which is a kind of Copper does give the Mercury a yellow color,
and for fear it should not be colored high enough to their purpose, they
color it with Turmerick, or some such thing of the like quality: and now they
will needs persuade the world that they have performed the feat, even of making
Gold; but if a man will never so little examine this pretended Gold by the
Coppel, the whole flies away in fumes, as quicksilver does commonly use to do.
Now if after such trial a man tells them, that their Gold is all gone into the
air, they answer for themselves, that indeed this Gold had not received its
last Fixation, but that the main business of it being thus achieved, they make
no doubt by working a little longer upon it they shall soon find out the way of
fixing it wholly, and bringing it to its last perfection.

But again, if they could fix their matter so as to make it resist and undergo
the Coppel (which is a thing in a manner impossible) still they would not be
able to maintain their Assertion that they had made Gold; for there are several
other trials that their matter must be able to pass, such as the dissolution by
Aqua Regalis, the Depart, the being malleable, the weight of its substance,
without all which qualifications it can never be properly called Gold.

Moreover they have a way of turning Cinnaber into Silver, and this contrivance
is full of curiosity. And thus they use to do it:

They stratifie Cinnaber grossly bruised in a Crucible, with Silver in grains:
they set the Crucible in a great fire, and after some time for its Calcination
they take it off, and pour the matter into a basin, and then they show the
Cinnaber, pretending it to be turned into true Silver, although the forefaid
grains do remain in the form they had before. Hence they conclude the
possibility of Transmutation of metals, because the Mercury of the Cinnaber is
turned into Silver, whereas the Silver did remain as it was before.

This Experiment amazes people much, and it is hard to see those same pieces of
Cinnaber, which were put into the Crucible before them, changed from Mercury
into pure silver, without inclining to believe an Augmentation of this last
metal; nay, many conclude that there remains no longer doubt of it. And men
continue possessed with this error, until some body has the curiosity of
examining the granulated silver, and then the abuse begins to be discovered,
for it is found to be exceeding light, and if it be pressed between the hands, it
crushes in pieces as easily as membranes. The Augmentation comes to be no
longer believed, when the grained pellicles are weighed with the pieces of
Cinnaber, for the whole weighs no more than the silver in grain did before it
was put into the Crucible. Lastly, it must of necessity happen (which appears
very strange) that the Mercury does first Amalgamate with the silver, that it
conveighs this silver into the pieces of Cinnaber, and then being evaporated
over the fire, it leaves the silver all alone.

I could here relate diverse other subtle inventions of Alchymists, by which
they too often impose on such as have plenty of money, to make them become
fellow-partners with them in their Operations; but I should prove too tedious
on this subject, I have only touched upon them by the by, in order to disabuse
such men as are prepossest with an opinion of the Transmutation of metals.

Although I cannot absolutely deny, but that some certain Artist, by a
particular method, might have got the way of making Gold heretofore, nor that
some body may be as lucky in time to come; yet there is more appearance of
Impossibility than possibility in the case, because of the small knowledge that
any of us have of the Natural Composition of this mixed; for seeing that Gold as
well as Silver is drawn from Mines environed with Waters, it is very probable
that these Waters do bring along with them some Saline Principles that congele
and incorporate in Earths of a particular composition, and whose Pores are
disposed in such a manner as it is impossible for Art to imitate. Nevertheless
in order to make Gold, a perfect knowledge of the Salts that the Waters of the
Mines do convey, is very requisite as well as the disposition of the Matrixes
or Earths in which they do congele. Wherefore a man must be soundly prejudiced,
before he can believe that by the help of artificial fires, he can concoct
metals so as to turn them into Gold.

As for the Mercury which men pretend to draw out of Minerals and Metals, and
which they believe to be the seminal principle of Gold, it is a thing merely
imaginary; for first of all, it is a great question and may be doubted, whether
there be any Mercury in those metallic matters wherein it is sought after, but
if we should suppose it in them, what reason shall we have to make it be the
seed of Gold? we can no ways find that Mercury is able to produce Gold, nay
further, as I said before, the growth of metals and minerals is quite of
another nature than that of Vegetables.

Now say they, the seed of Gold is communicated unto all bodies, and that it
does abound in the Universal Spirit. And because Manna, Dew, Honey, are
impregnated with this Spirit, that Gold may by Art be drawn out of those
substances.

We grant unto them, that the Universal Spirit does contain an Acid which
serves toward the production of Gold, because the acid waters or salts which
do enter into the composition of this metal, do proceed from the Universal
Spirit; but if you go to call this acid a seed, it will prove to be the seed of
all other mixed bodies as well as that of Gold, and there is no more reason for
thinking that the Universal Spirit does abound in the seed of Gold, than in the
seed of the grossest metal, or the most unuseful plant, or the most
contemptible of animals; so that we may conclude, that to spend ones time in
making of Gold, seems properly to lose it by working in the dark, and I find
that Alchymy has been very well defined to be, Ars fine art, cujus principium
mentiri, medium laborare, and finis mendicare, an Art without any Art, whose
beginning is Lying, whose middle is nothing but Labor, and whose end is
Beggary.

Gold is a good Remedy for those who have taken too much Mercury; for these two
Metals do easily unite together, and by this union or Amalgamation the Mercury
fixes, and its motion is interrupted. This is plainly enough perceived in such
as have received the Frictions with Mercury; for if they do but hold a piece of
Gold in their mouth a little, it will grow white by the vapor of the
Quicksilver.

Gold taken inwardly is thought to be a most potent Cordial, because
Astrologers tell us it receives its Influence from the Sun, which is as it were
the Heart of the world, and by the communication of those Influences to the
heart, it serves to fortify and cleanse it from all impurities; upon which
ground a great many Operations have been invented in order to open this Metal,
and separate its Sulphur from its salt. Moreover this Operation by way of
bravery is called Aurum Potabile, because this salt or this Sulphur dissolving
in a Liquor, can be taken by way of Potion: And because this Aurum Potabile can
be thought to be distributed into all parts of the body, they fancy it can
drive out every thing that interrupts the Functions of Nature, that it can free
him that takes it from all fear of any Diseases for a long time, and can
prolong life.

But this Opinion is built upon a weak foundation, and Experience does not
confirm any of these glorious effects; for what assurance can we have, or what
Evidence is there, that the Sun is such a great friend of Gold, or that it
bestows more Influence on it, than on other mixed bodies; it is a thing that can
never be proved, and we fee that the Sun casts its light and heat in general
upon all bodies, without making any difference. Who can understand, that the
Pores of Gold are so disposed, as to have a greater facility of retaining the
Suns Influences, than other metals or things? This will be full as hard to
prove as the other.

But though we should grant Astrologers this supposition concerning the Suns
Influence on Gold, the consequence they draw from it, that therefore it
Fortifies the heart, would be never a-whit the truer; for all that we are able
to apprehend in Gold is, that it is a most compact and weighty body, the union
of whose Principles is extraordinary close; which is proved from hence, that no
Art can instruct us to dissolve it Radically, so as to separate its salt, and
its sulphur. This Gold being beaten into the thinnest Leaves that can be
imagined, and taken inwardly receives not the least change in our bodies, and
is voided the very same it was before, excepting when Quicksilver has been
taken beforehand, for it unites with that, as I have said.

Wherefore we must conclude, that if Gold has received more Influence from the
Sun than other Metals, yet it is never the fitter to dissolve in our Bodies,
nor to produce those rare effects that are talked of.

I know that stories are told to prove, that Gold does communicate virtue to
the bodies of those who have taken it, and that it loses in the body some of
its quantity; and among other stories it is said, that several persons, who had
fed upon Capons, nourished with a Paste made of a mixture of Vipers flesh and
Gold together, have been cured that way of several Diseases; but there is a
great deal more reason to attribute this effect rather to the Vipers than Gold;
for we know by experience that Vipers taken inwardly without any thing else, do
use to produce diverse sensible effects, whereas we observe none at all in Gold,
when it is given alone.

As for the diminution they imagine of Gold in bodies, they prove it by their
gathering together all the Excrements of those Capons, and Calcining them, for
they could obtain again but the fourth part of the Gold that was used in the
Paste the Capons had fed upon. But this proof is as weak as the former; for the
Excrements of the Capons being full of a Volatile Salt, that Salt may have
Volatiliz'd and carried away the greatest part of the Gold during the
Calcination, after the same manner as we see several Volatile liquors to
sublime Gold. I know well enough by my own Experience, that there are such
Volatiles as are able to sublime Gold; for having one day mixed three ounces of
Gold with about three pounds of matter consisting of diverse Volatile
ingredients, I put the mixture about a month afterward into the Coppel, and
the Gold appeared very resplendent in the middle of the mixture; but blowing,
as we use to do, in its purification, I was astonished to see it Exalt away by
little and little into the air, until there was not a grain of it left.

Thus no body can be assured that Gold did nourish those Capons; but besides,
though some of it should be dissolved in the body, as it does in Aqua Regalis,
which is very hard to conceive; though some of it should exalt, nay though some
should plainly glitter in the Chyle, here is no proof nevertheless that it
produces such wonderful effects.

Now although I have asserted that Gold taken alone does not receive any change
as for health, yet I value very much several preparations of Gold made with
Spirits; for it is these Spirits that give certain determinations to Gold
according to their nature, and make it operate as it does. When I speak of
Aurum Fulminans, I shall give an instance of what I now say.

Purification of Gold.
To Purify Gold is to separate from it the other Metals which are mixed with
it.

Put as much Gold as you please into a Crucible, make it red hot, and when it
begins to melt, cast into it four times as much Antimony in powder, the Gold
will presently melt; continue a strong Fire, until you perceive the Matter to
sparkle.

Then take your Crucible out of the Fire and knock it, that the Regule may fall
to the bottom. Break it when it is cold, and separate the Regule from the dross
that remains a top of it. If you have a mind to save your Crucible, pour out
the matter that lies in Fusion into an Iron Mortar made like a Founders Mould,
which you shall have heated a little and greased beforehand, then strike about
the Mortar with pincers, till the matter settles in a Mass.

Let this Mass cool a little, then flinging it out, separate the Golden Regule
from the dross. Weigh this Regule, melt it again in a Crucible over a strong
Fire, and when it shall come to melt, throw into it by little and little three
times as much Saltpeter: continue a good strong Fire, that the matter may
remain in Fusion, and when the Fumes are all gone, and it appears clear and
clean, cast it into your Iron Mortar warmed and greased as I said but now, or
else leave it in the Crucible that you shall beat while it is cooling, for the
separation of the Regule from the Dross that remains a top, and your Golden
Regule will prove perfectly pure.

Remarks.
The ordinary way of purifying Gold is the Coppel, in which the same method is
used that I shall speak of in the Purification of Silver. But the Coppel not
being able to separate Silver from Gold, recourse is had to another Operation,
that is called the Depart.

Melt three parts of Silver with one part of Gold, in a Crucible over a good
Fire, and when this mixture is in Fusion, cast it into cold water, and it
condenses into Grains, which being dried, a separation of the Silver from the
Gold is made by the means of Aqua fortis; for this Menstruum dissolves Silver
very well, but the Gold remains in powder at the bottom of the Vessel, for the
reason that I shall relate in the Chapter of Aqua Regalis. The Dissolution of
Silver is poured off by Inclination, then the Powder of Gold is washed to be
made sweet.

But it often happens that some particles of the Silver do still remain united
with the Gold, so that this Purification cannot be said to be altogether
perfect.

There is another method of Purifying Gold, to wit, Cementation, which is thus
performed.

Stratifie in a Crucible thin plates of Gold, with a dry paste, that is called
Cement, in which the Salts Gemma and Armoniack do enter; cover the Crucible,
and having made a fire round about it, Calcine the matter for ten or twelve
hours with a violent heat, that the Salts may eat and consume the impurities of
the Gold: but nevertheless they often leave it still impregnated with other
Metals.

The Purification at Gold by the means of Antimony is better than any other;
for there is nothing but Gold that is able to make resistance against this
devourer; it often eats some portion of it, but never leaves it in any other
Metal.

You must remember to lay a Tile under the Crucible, for fear that the air
which comes by the Ashhole, should happen to cool the bottom of the Crucible.

Gold presently melts as soon as Antimony is cast into the Crucible, by reason
that Antimony contains some Saline Sulphurs, which do increase the force of the
Fire, and do separate the parts of this Metal; it is then that the more porous
and volatile part uniting with the Antimony, one part evaporates away in Smoke,
and the other remains fixed in the Dross.

The sparkles which toward the end do fly out of the matter do proceed from
some Particles of Antimony, which finding themselves entangled in the Gold do
use violence to get out.

Then take your matter off the Fire that it may lose none of its substance, and
pour it into an Iron Mortar as I said before. After this the Regule is melted
once more, and Saltpeter cast into it to absorb or receive all the Antimony
that may yet remain, and so by this means you have a Regule as well purified as
may be, and even that of four and twenty Caratts, if there be any such Gold.

A Carat of Gold is properly the weight of one Scruple, or four and twenty
grains, and four and twenty Caratts make an ounce.

If you take an ounce of Gold, and find that it loses not a jot in the
Purifications that may be made of it, this is called Gold of four and twenty
Caratts; if it be found to have diminished but one Caratt, then it is said to
be Gold of three and twenty Caratts; if it loses two Caratts, then it is Gold
of two and twenty Caratts, and so of the rest. But it is commonly held that
there is no such thing to be found as Gold of four and twenty Caratts, because
there is none but contains some small proportion of Silver, or Copper, purify
it as much as you will.

Red Gold is the less valuable, because it contains the more Copper, which
gives it this color; the Yellow is the better, and it ought to remain Yellow,
even whilst it is in the fire.

A Caratt of Pearls, Diamonds, and other precious stones, is but four grains.

Amalgamation of Gold with Mercury, and its reduction into an impalpable Powder.
To Amalgamate Gold is to mix it with Quicksilver.

Take a Dram of the Regule of Gold, beat it into very thin little Plates,
which you must heat in a Crucible red hot in a large Fire; then pour upon it an
ounce of Quicksilver revived from Cinnaber, as I shall show hereafter; stir the
matter with a little Iron-rod, and when you find it begin to raise a fume which
quickly happens, cast your mixture into an Earthen Pan filled with Water, it
will coagulate, and become tractable; wash it several times to take away its
blackness; thus you have an Amalgame, from which you must separate the Mercury
that you find not united, by pressing it a little between your fingers in a
linen cloth. The Gold retains about thrice its weight in Mercury.

Now to reduce this Gold into Powder, you must put this Amalgame into a
Crucible over a gentle fire, the Mercury will evaporate into the Air, and leave
the Gold at bottom in an impalpable Powder.

Remarks.
Mercury does easily penetrate Gold, and insinuating into its Pores makes a
soft matter that is called Amalgame; it does the same with other Metals too,
except Iron and Copper, which are too ill digested to receive its impression.

The Amalgamation of Gold is useful to Gilders, for so it is easily extended
upon their works.

Aurum Fulminans, called Saffron of Gold.
This Operation is a Gold impregnated with some Spirits, which cause it to give
a loud crack, when it is set over the Fire.

Take what quantity you please of Gold beaten into thin plates, put it into a
Viol, or Mattress, and pour upon it by little and little three or four times as
much Aqua Regalis compounded after the manner I shall show in its proper place.
Set the Mattress upon Sand a little heated, until the Aqua Regalis has dissolved
as much of the Gold as it is able to contain, which you will know by the
ceasing of the ebullitions, pour your solution into a Glass-vessel of five or
six times as much common Water. Afterward drop into this mixture by degrees
the Volatile Spirit of Salt Armoniack, or the Oil of Tartar made by Deliquium
or Solution, you will find the Gold precipitate to the bottom of the Glass. Let it
alone a good while to settle, that all the Gold may fall down, then pouring off
the Water by Inclination wash your powder with warm Water, till it grows
insipid, and so dry it in Paper at a gentle fire, because it is apt to fire,
and the Powder would fly away with a terrible noise.

If you use one dram of Gold, you will obtain four scruples of Aurum
Fulminans well dried.

Aurum Fulminans causes sweat, and drives out ill humors by Transpiration. It
may be given in the Small Pox from two to six grains in a Lozenge, or
Electuary. It stops Vomiting, and is also good to moderate the activity of
Mercury.

Remarks.
The Plates of Gold are made use of in this Operation, that its dissolution may
be more easily performed.

You must pour the Aqua Regalis by little and little, to avoid the great
effervescency that might be able to drive it out of the Mattress. The
effervescency proceeds from the violent division of the particles of Gold by
the Aqua Regalis; for when it finds no more bodies to act upon, having divided
the Gold into as many parts as it is possible, the ebullition ceases, and though
the Gold does all remain in the Aqua Regalis, it becomes so imperceptible to
us, as it seems the Water has not changed from what it was before, it appears
so very clear and transparent. Indeed the solution has received a Golden
color, and becomes yellow.

The dissolution of Gold is a suspension of this metal in Phlegm, made by the
edges of Aqua Regalis. For it is not enough that the Aqua Regalis does divide
the Gold into subtle parts, but it is further requisite that its edges do hold
up the Gold, as if it were like so many Finns, otherwise it would always fall
to the bottom in a powder, though it were never so subtle.

Now it is objected that the particles of Gold should fall to the bottom of the
liquor, because they being joined to the points of the Aqua Regalis they are
become more heavy than they were before; for the union or adhaesion of two
bodies does cause a greater weight, than when the two bodies were separated one
from the other.

I answer, that we ought to conceive the particles of Gold being suspended or
held up in the Phlegm by the acid points, much after the manner as we do
conceive very well, that a small piece of metal fixed to a staff or a plank,
will swim with the wood in the water; for although the small piece of metal
sinks to the bottom when it is alone, yet it swims when it is affixed to the
wood; the acid edges are bodies exceeding light in comparison with the
particles of Gold, and they have likewise their superficies, more extended, and
consequently do take up more room in the phlegm; this is that which holds them
up, and causes them to swim.

The Oil of Tartar, or the Spirit of Salt Armoniack is used for the
Precipitation of Gold, because both those Liquors do contain an Alkali Salt,
which being mixed with Acids must cause a Fermentation. Now in this
Fermentation the parts of Aqua Regalis that held up the particles of Gold do
grow weak, and having no more force to retain them longer, they must needs
precipitate by their own weight.

Perhaps some may find a difficulty in comprehending how the Volatile Spirit of
Salt Armoniack should come to weaken the Aqua Regalis, that is it self
compounded of Salt Armoniack; but there will be no difficulty at all, when they
shall consider that the force of the Aqua Regalis does not so much depend on
the volatile part of the Salt Armoniack, as on the Sea Salt, that is in good
store in it united with the Aqua Fortis; for Sea Salt, or Sal Gemma, may be
substituted very well in the place of Salt Armoniack for making Aqua Regalis,
as I shall observe hereafter, speaking of the composition of this Water. It may
be also enquired here, why the Dissolvents do quit the bodies they held before
in Dissolution, to betake themselves to some other: for example, why the Aqua
Regalis leaves the Gold it was impregnated with, to give way to the Alkali
Salt. This question is one of the most difficult to resolve well, of any in
Natural Philosophy.

Nevertheless, I Will give you my opinion of what can be said most sensibly on
this Subject.

I do suppose that when the Aqua Regalis has acted upon the Gold, so as to
dissolve it, the points or edges that enabled it to do so, are fixed in the
particles of Gold. But seeing that these little bodies are very hard, and
consequently hard to penetrate, these points do enter but very superficially,
yet far enough to suspend the particles of Gold, and hinder them from
precipitating. Wherefore if you would add never so much Gold, more, when these
points have seized upon as much as they are able to join with, they cannot
possibly dissolve one grain more; and it is this suspension that renders the
particles of Gold imperceptible. But now if you add some body that by its
motion and figure is able to engage the acids enough to break them, the
particles of Gold being left at liberty will precipitate by their own weight.
And this is what I conceive the Oil of Tartar, and Volatile Alkali Spirits are
able to do. They are impregnated with very Active Salts, which finding bodies
at rest do presently move them, and by the quickness of their motion do shake
them so violently, as to break the points by which they were suspended; these
fragments of little points being thus disengaged from the Gold, are still keen
enough to act, and they have action enough remaining to pierce and divide
violently the parts of Alkali Salts, which are much more soluble in their
nature than Gold, and this occasions the Ebullition which presently happens
when these Spirits are poured upon the Dissolution.

These edges then being thus broken, two things must follow thereupon. The
first is that the remaining Aqua Regalis is rendered incapable of dissolving any
more Gold, because it has no more power left of making a penetration. The
second is, that the precipitated Powder of Gold is impregnated with some part
of the Dissolvent, by reason that the sharpest part of these edges remains
within it.

Experience teaches us both the one and the other: to wit, the force of the
Aqua Regalis is quite destroyed for dissolving any more Gold, and the
precipitated Powder has drawn along with it some Spirits that are so closely
locked up, that though it be several times washed in warm Water, they cannot
possibly be disengaged from their hold. And this is evident, when it is put
upon the Fire; for the great Detonation, or noise that it makes, cannot proceed
from any thing else, but the enclosed Spirits which violently divide the most
compact body of Gold to get out quickly, when they are forced to it by the
action of Fire.

I can here explicate by the by, after the same manner, the action of a certain
Powder, consisting of three parts of Niter, two parts of Salt of Tartar, and
one part of Sulphur. This Powder being heated in a Spoon to the weight of a
Dram, gives as Thundering a noise as a Cannon it self. Now the fixed Salt of
Tartar causes in this Powder what the Gold did in the other; that is to say, it
retains the Spirits of Niter and Sulphur so locked up, that they cannot be
separated without violently breaking their Prison; and this is that which makes
such a noise.

Aurum Fulminans taken inwardly causes sweat, because the heat of the Body
volatilises it, and drives it through the Pores. Now if the Pores are very
open, it will only cause an insensible transpiration: but if they are closed up
by the coldness of the weather, so that it must remain some time before it
passes; the vaporous humidity which bears it company, dissolves upon the skin
into what we call sweat.

Some think the Gold contributes nothing at all to these transpirations, and
that the spirit of Niter alone being forced by the heat of the body to pass
through its Pores causes all the action. But I conceive it is more likely that
these spirits do carry along with them some parts of the Gold, with which they
are so intimately mixed. And by this explication may be better comprehended,
how so small a quantity of spirits is able to produce sweat; for suppose there
passes through the Pores one grain of Gold, and two grains of spirits, these
spirits being as I may so say, armed with the grosser parts of Gold, will be
better able to conquer the resistance that shall oppose their passage, than if
they were separate; after the same manner as a good piece of Timber that is
driven along by the stream of a River will strike with much more violence
against the Arch of a Bridge, and endanger it much more, than a single Wave
would be able to do, though never so swift.

There are two sorts of insensible Transpirations, one hapening at all times,
as well in health as sickness, and the other in a Burning Fever, or else
sometimes upon the taking a Sudorifick.

The first Transpiration is insensible, because the vapor which passes
continually through the pores is yet in so small a quantity, that though it
does dissolve in a moisture upon the skin, it is not perceived at all.

The other is caused by a great motion of the Spirits which drive the humors
through the pores of the body after a rapid manner, and whereas at that time
the pores become very open, and the skin is heated more than ordinarily, the
vapor passes away through the skin without condensing upon it.

But if once the rapid motion of humors begins to slacken, then the sweat
appears, and begins to be felt; and this does happen in Agues, for during the
great heat of the Ague, men do not sweat at all, but only in the declination of
the fit; because then the skin somewhat cools, the vapor condenses into a
moisture, which we call sweat; wherefore sweat may be said to issue from a
middle degree of heat, between the first insensible Transpiration, and the
second.

Most men think that there goes out more moisture in the time of the sweat,
than by the insensible Transpiration which is made during the height of the hot
fit; but they seem to be mistaken very likely, for it may easily be conceived,
that there should be a greater disposition in the vigor of the fit, than
afterward in the declination, by reason that at that time the heat is greater,
and so more able to impel forth effluviums.

Distillation in a Retort will confirm what is here maintained. For if you make
only a moderate fire under the Retort, the moisture which rises out of the
matter will distill drop by drop, because the vapors cooling and condensing in
the neck of the Retort do resolve into a liquor; but if you make a great fire
in the Furnace, so that the neck of the Retort comes to be heated too much, all
the moisture is driven in a mere vapor, and there appears not the least
humidity in the neck of the Retort.

I have already said, that Gold does repress the violence of Mercury, because
it does Amalgamate with it; but Aurum Fulminans does it much better, for being
Volatile it is more easily carried through all the body, and fails not to find
out the Mercury, wheresoever it lies.

We need not fear lest Aurum Fulminans taken inwardly, and heated by the
stomach, should cause such a Detonation there, as it does when set over the
fire in a spoon; for so much the more moisture as comes to it, so much the less
noise does it make. Now it cannot be questioned, but there is liquidity enough
in the stomach, besides the liquid vehicle it is usually given in. There is no
need then of calling in the acids of the stomach, as some do, to unite with the
salts of Aurum Fulminans, and drive them out of the body of this Metal: for
besides that the most clear and disinterested Explications and such as fall
most under our sense, ought always to be preferred, 'twould be too hard a
matter to maintain that; it is true if you wet Aurum Fulminans with the spirit
of Vitriol, or Salt, or Sulphur, the Fulmination is thereby hindered, but this
happens from the acids fixing by their weight the Volatility of those Salts
that remain in the pores of the Gold.

In the Chapter of Gold I could reckon up several other Preparations that have
been invented, but because they are out of use, I shall not swell this Book
with an account of them.

CHAP. II. Of Silver.
SIlver has the second place among Metals, it is a very compact body, more
smooth and polished by nature than Gold, and its Pores are more even upon the
surface. it is malleable like Gold, but will not so easily yield or extend
under the Hammer, and is not so weighty.

It is called the Moon, as well from its Color, as from the Influences our
Forefathers thought it received from the Moon. Many properties are attributed
to it against Diseases of the Head; but these pretended Virtues seem to have no
other foundation than the imagination of Astrologers and Chemists, who were of
the opinion that the Moon had a great deal of correspondence with the Head.
There is no need I should enlarge in confutation of this opinion, experience
every day teaches us that it is a pure abuse.

Silver may be also given like Gold for Diseases caused by too much Mercury;
for they suffer an Amalgation very well together.

Whereas there is no certainty, that ever there was drawn out of Gold or Silver
any thing that deserves to be called either a Salt, or Sulphur, or Mercury, I
have not at all followed the method of Authors, who will needs explicate the
differences which are to be found in these Metals, by more or less, of one or
two of these Principles. I am contented to relate only that which may be known
in Gold and Silver, and I think it better to say little of a thing, and be able
to prove my assertion, than form grand Ideas of things that are very doubtful.

Purification of Silver.
To Purify Silver is to separate from it the other metals with which it is
mixed. This operation is done by the Coppel after the manner following:

Take a Coppel made of the ashes of Bones or Horns, cover it and heat it gently
in the coals, until it grows red-hot, then cast it into four or five times as
much Lead as you intend to purify Silver: let the Lead melt, and fill the
sides of the Coppel, which is soon done; then cast your Silver into the middle,
and it will presently melt. Lay wood round about the Coppel, and blow it that
the flame may reverberate on the matter, the impurities will mix with the Lead,
and the Silver remain pure and clean in the middle of the Coppel, while the
Lead being filled with the drossie parts of Silver lies on the sides like a
scumm, that you may gather up with a spoon, and this is that which is called
Litharge, which according to the degree of Calcination it has endured, becomes
of diverse Colors, and sometimes is called Litharge of Gold, and sometimes
Litharge of Silver. If you leave it in the Coppel, it will pass through its
Pores.

For you must observe that the Coppel being expressly made of ashes deprived of
Salt, is very Porous; you must continue the Fire till there rise no more Fumes.

This Preparation cleanses Silver from all other Metals, except Gold, which
resists the power of the Coppel. You must therefore have recourse to the
Operation I described, when I spoke of the Purification of Gold; for Aqua
fortis dissolves Silver, but not being able to penetrate Gold, leaves it in a
powder at the bottom.

Pour off then by Inclination the dissolution of Silver into an Earthen pan,
wherein you shall have laid beforehand a plate of Copper, and ten or twelve
times as much common Water. Let this mixture lie still for some hours, and when
you find the Copper covered all about with the Powder or Precipitate of Silver,
and the water becomes blue, Filtrate it, and you have that which is called Aqua
Secunda: It is good to make the Eschar fall in Chancres, and to consume proud
flesh. Dry the powder of Silver, and if you desire to keep it in an Ingot, melt
it in a Crucible with a little Saltpeter.

If you steep a plate of Iron some hours in the Aqua Secunda, the Copper which
made it look blue will precipitate according as the Iron dissolves. If you
Filtrate this dissolution, and put a piece of the Lapis Calaminaris into it,
the dissolved Iron will fall to the bottom in powder, and the Stone will
dissolve it. If you Filtrate this water, and pour upon the Filtration drop by
drop the water of fixed Niter, the Lapis Calaminaris will precipitate. Lastly,
if you Filtrate this water too, and having evaporated a part of it, set the
rest a Crystallizing, you will meet with a Saltpeter that burns like the ordinary
sort.

Remarks.
The Coppel is an Earthen Vessel that resists the Fire, made like a dish: it is
filled with a Paste made of ashes that have lost all their Salt, such as those
of Bones; which lose all their Salt while they are a burning, because it is so
Volatile: a hole is made in the middle to let in the matter that is to be
Coppel'd, and so the Vessel is set a drying.

You must put Lead into the Coppel, in proportion to the impurities that are in
the Silver; commonly they put four times as much. That which is here called
Impurity is nothing else but some parts of other Metals, that superficially
adhered to the Silver, when it was taken out of the Mine. These Metals do mix
much better with Lead than Silver, because the Lead is full of Sulphurous
porous parts which readily engage and receive other Bodies. On the contrary
Silver has Pores exceeding close and strait, and can neither be penetrated nor
unite with these Matters but only superficially; so that in the Fusion they do
separate and only slide over this Solid body. It is also remarkable that the
hardness of Silver, and strait contexture of its parts do hinder the Fire from
melting it after the same manner as other Metals, that are more porous; and
this is the reason it remains unmixt among them.

Silver melts much sooner by being put into melted Lead, than if you had
endeavored to melt it alone in the Crucible, because Lead contains many
Sulphurous parts that are very serviceable for the Fusion of Metals. The flame
is made to Reverberate on the Silver, to drive all Heterogeneous substances
toward the sides.

That which is called a Caratt in Gold, is a Denier, or penny weight in Silver,
and thus an ounce of Silver well purified is of four and twenty penny weight,
which make 24 times 24 grains. Now this ounce of Silver must lose nothing at
all upon trial; but if it should lose one penny weight in the Coppel, the
Silver then is said to be that of 23 penny weight, and if it loses two
scruples, or penny weight, it is but of 22 Deniers, and so of the rest.

There is no Silver to be had of 24 deniers, no more than Gold of 24 Caratts,
because there is always some mixture with it, use what diligence and
application you please in its purification.

Plate-silver contains one part of Copper to 24 parts of Silver, and the
Coppel-silver contains but a quarter of a part of Copper to four and twenty
parts of Silver.

The Depart, or parting of Metals, is when a Dissolvent quits the Metal it had
dissolved, to betake it self unto another. Thus when Copper is put into the
Dissolution of Silver, the Aqua fortis leaves the Silver, to fall upon
Dissolving the Copper; and the reason of this is, because the Copper-particles
do so stir and shake the edges of the Dissolvent, as to make them let go their
hold. Iron precipitates Copper, Lapis Calaminaris precipitates Iron, and the
Liquor of fixed Niter does so to the Lapis Calaminaris for the same reason; but
you must observe, that Iron does not precipitate all the Copper, nor the
Calaminaris all the Iron, no more than the Copper did precipitate all the
Silver: and the reason of this is, that the points of the Aqua fortis having
entered more deeply into the great pores of Copper and Iron, are much the harder
to be broken by bodies of this nature; but because the liquor of fixed Niter
does contain an Alkali much more active than the others, it precipitates all
the Lapis Calaminaris, and all the Iron and Copper which did remain dissolved.

I shall in the sequel of this Book describe the manner of preparing the Liquor
of fixed Niter: the Salt that it contains reunites with the Volatile Spirits of
Saltpeter that were in the Aqua fortis, insomuch that the Saltpeter revives
again.

Crystals of Silver, called Vitriol of the Moon.
This Operation is a Silver opened, and reduced into the form of Salt by the
acid points of Spirit of Niter.

Dissolve one or two ounces of Coppel-silver in three times as much Spirit of
Niter; pour forth your dissolution into a Glass-Cucurbite, set in a gentle
Sand-fire; evaporate about the fourth part of the moisture, and so let the rest
cool without stirring it, it will turn into Crystals, which you must separate
from the Liquor, and after you have dried them, keep them in a Viol well stopped.
You may again fall to Evaporating half the remaining Liquor, and set it a
Crystallizing as before. You may repeat these Evaporations and Crystallizations
till all your Silver has turned into Crystals.

This Vitriol of the Moon is used to make an Eschar by touching the part with
it. It is also given inwardly for Dropsies, and for Diseases of the Head, from
two unto six Grains, in some Specific Water: it purges gently.

These Crystals might be prepared with Oil of Vitriol, instead of Spirit of
Niter, for inward use.

Remarks.
You must put your Silver purified by the Coppel into a Viol or Mattress large
enough, and pour upon it only as much Spirit of Niter as will serve to Dissolve
it; now that comes to about three times its weight. Indeed you may use Aqua
fortis instead of Spirit of Niter, if you please, in this Operation; but I
rather choose Spirit of Niter, because it is found to act with more celerity
than Aqua fortis. You may read in their proper places the description I have
given you of them both, and the Remarks I have made upon them. Place your
Vessel in Ashes or Sand, a little warm for to hasten the Dissolution. When the
acid Spirits begin to work upon the Silver, an Ebullition presently rises
accompanied with a very considerable heat, because these sharp edges do break
those obstacles that hindered their entrance, and violently force their passage.
It is this great motion, and impetuous dispersion of parts, that produces the
heat and ebullition, and by rarefaction of the Spirit of Niter sends forth
through the neck of the Vessel a Red fume or vapor, that you must be very
careful to avoid, as a thing very unwholsom, and prejudicial to the Breast. The
Smoke and Ebullition do remain until the Silver is all of it dissolved, after
which the Liquor becomes clear and transparent but a little bluish. If the
Silver which is dissolved, were perfectly purified from Copper, the solution
would no more be tinged than Spirit of Niter, but because there is none to be
found so perfectly pure, it always tinges a little. The solution of
Plate-silver is much bluer than that of Silver purified by the Coppel, because
the Plate-silver contains more Copper than the other, as I said before. So that
the purer the Silver is, the less blue is the solution. A little of it is
evaporated, that the rest may Crystallize the easier, for that which evaporates
is little better than a kind of insipid water, the Silver still retaining the
Acid fixed Spirits.

Now you must observe in all Crystallizations not to leave too much moisture,
for fear of weakening too much the Salts, and so hindering their Coagulation. Nor
must you leave too little moisture; for the Crystals not finding room enough to
extend themselves in, would confusedly fall one upon another.

These Crystals can be dissolved in Water like Salt, their strength depends on
the Spirits of Niter that are incorporated with them: wherefore they weigh more
than the Silver did that was employed; and it is these Spirits which pierce and
gnaw the flesh on which these Crystals are applied, when an Eschar is to be
made. It is likewise they which cause that Fermentation of humors by which
they purge, when these Crystals are given inwardly. The Liquor in which they
are dissolved to be taken, and the moisture of the Stomach do serve to correct
their acrimony.

If you have a mind to revive these Crystals into Silver again, you must only
put them into hot Water, and lay therein a plate of Copper. They will then
dissolve, and the Silver precipitate to the bottom in a White powder, that is
to be washed and dried; afterward melting it in a Crucible with a little
Saltpeter, it will return into Ingots of the same weight as before.

Infernal Stone, or perpetual Caustic.
The Infernal stone is a Silver rendered Caustic by the Salts of Spirit of
Niter.

Dissolve in a Viol what quantity of Silver you please, with three times as
much Spirit of Niter; set your Viol in a Sand fire, and evaporate about two
thirds of the moisture; pour the rest as it is hot into a good German Crucible,
that must be large enough by reason of the Ebullitions that are made in it.
Place it over a gentle fire, and let it alone till the boiling matter sinks
quietly to the bottom of the Crucible. Then increase your fire a little, and it
will come to be like Oil: pour it out into an Iron mould a little oil'd and
heated, it will presently coagulate or harden; after which you may keep it in a
Viol well stopped. It is a Caustic that will remain for ever, provided you don't
let it be exposed to the Air. This Stone may be made of Copper instead of
Silver, but will not keep so well; because the Copper being very porous does
suffer the Air to enter easily and dissolve it.

If you use an ounce of Silver, you will obtain an ounce and five drachms of the
Infernal stone.

Remarks.
The Effect of this Stone proceeds from the Corrosive Spirits of Niter, which
do remain incorporated with the Silver. It is more Caustic than the Crystals I
now spoke of, though compounded of the same ingredients. The reason of it is,
that in the Evaporation of the Spirit of Niter, the sharpest part remains at
last; and it is that which gives this strength to the Infernal stone. But in
the Crystal there is a much weaker Spirit, as being impregnated with watery parts.

When you boil the solution of Silver, you must take care to keep but a gentle
fire, for the matter easily rarifies, and rises over into the fire; or else it
spirts some drops upon the hand of the Artist, which make it smart grievously,
and fetches off the skin, because this liquor is not only very corrosive in it
self, but has the assistance of fire to make it the more burning. You must
likewise often cast your eye into the Crucible, especially toward the end,
that so soon as the matter is observed to cease boiling, and gets the form of
an Oil, you be ready to cast it into the mould, for if you should then leave it
longer in the fire, the strongest Spirits would evaporate, and the stone would
not be so corrosive.

If you would melt the Crystals of the Moon in a Crucible, and boil the Liquor
till it come into the consistence of Oil, and afterward cast it into the Iron
mould, you would have an Infernal stone like this I have described.

When Plate silver is used to the making the Infernal stone, an ounce of Silver
gains but three drachms in augmentation, but using fine Coppel-silver, you will
get five drachms. This augmentation of weight does proceed from the sharp acids
of Spirit of Niter, adhering to the body of silver, but the difference of the
increase lies in this, that the Coppel-silver having narrower pores than the
other does retain the acids better, and the stone is thereby the stronger, as I
have found by experience.

Tincture of the Moon.
The Tincture of the Moon is a dissolution of some of the more rarefied parts
of Silver made in Spirit of Wine whetted by Alkali salts.

Dissolve in a Mattress upon Sand a little warm two ounces of Silver with six
ounces of Spirit of Niter. Pour the dissolution into a Cucurbit, or other
Glass-vessel, wherein you shall have put a quart of Salt Water well Filtered,
the Silver will presently precipitate in a very white powder. Let it lie a
while that all the Powder may fall, and then pour off the water by Inclination.
Wash your Powder several times with Fountain Water to take away the Acrimony of
the Salts: dry it upon paper, and put it into a Mattress. Pour upon it an Ounce
of the Volatile Salt of Urine, and four and twenty Ounces of the Spirit of Wine
Rectified with the Salt of Tartar, after the manner I shall show hereafter.
Stop this Mattress with another: that is to say, let the mouth of the one enter
into the neck of the other, and this is that which is called a Double-Vessel.
Lute well the junctures with a wet bladder, and digest the Matter in
horse-dung, or some such gentle heat, for a Fortnight, during which time the
Spirit of Wine will have got a bright Sky-colour. Unlute your Mattress, and
Filtrate the Liquor through a Coffin of Brown paper, and so keep it in a Viol
well stopped. You may use this Tincture for the Epilepsie, Palsy, Apoplexy, and
other diseases of the Head. It is also used in Malignant Fevers, and all other
Diseases wherein it is requisite to drive out the humors by Perspiration. The
Dose is from six to sixteen drops in a convenient Vehicle.

There will remain at the bottom of the Mattress a Calx of Silver that may again
be revived by means of the following Salts.

Take Eight ounces of Niter, Two ounces of Crystal powdered according as I
shall show hereafter, so much Tartar, and half an ounce of coals; Powder them
all, and put it by little and little into a Crucible heated red-hot, a great
Detonation will happen, after which you will find the matter melted, pour it into
a warm Mortar, and let it cool, you will have a Mass that you must powder, and mix
an equal weight of it with so much Calx of Silver. Melt this mixture in a
Crucible over a strong fire, and the Calx will revive into Silver: take your
Crucible out of the fire, and break it when it is cold, then separate your
Silver from the salts.

Remarks.
This Operation seems at first to favor the opinion of those who hold there
can be a separation of the Principles of Silver: for, say they, what is it can
give this blue color, after that the Silver has been a long time digested
with the Volatile Salt of Urine, and the spirit of Wine Alcoholized, but an
inward sulphur of the Silver that separates from it by the means of this
sulphurous Liquor, and mixes with it, much after the same manner as we find
these sorts of Menstruums usually dissolve the sulphur of Vegetables, Animals,
and Minerals, and let alone their terrestrious and saline parts? But when we
consider this Tincture a little nearer, we shall find it to be nothing but a
dissolution of some part of the Silver it self, that has been volatilized by
the salt of Urine, and afterward united with the spirit of Wine; so that if
you draw off, or revive this dissolved Silver, there will remain no longer a
Tincture, and this is the way for you to do it.

Pour your Tincture of the Moon into a Glass Body, cover it with its head, and
fit a Receiver to it, lute the junctures close, and distill in a Vaporous Bath,
about half the moisture, and you will have a Liquor as clear as spirit of Wine.
Put your Cucurbit into a cool place, and leave it there two days without
stirring it, you will find little Crystals on the sides, pour off the Liquor
gently, which has now lost much of its Sky-colour. Gather your Crystals, and
continue to distill and crystalize the rest of the Liquor, till you have
recovered all that is in it. Mix all your Crystals, dry them, and weigh them;
and if you have half an ounce of them, powder them, and mix them with six
drachms of the matter I described for reviving the Calx of Silver remaining in
the Mattress: put this mixture into a Crucible, and covering it with a tile,
light a strong fire about it, to put the matter into fusion; then taking it off
the fire, and letting it cool, break the Crucible, you will find the Silver at the
bottom, which will be fit for the same Operation again, when you please. Note
that all the Liquor which was drawn by Distillation, is as clear as common
water: wherefore I conclude that the Color did consist in the dissolution of
Silver it self, and not of its sulphurs, as some have thought.

You must cut the Silver into little pieces or plates, that it may dissolve the
more easily.

The Salt Water must be made of an ounce and a half of Salt dissolved in a
quart of water: this salt precipitates the Silver, because it engages the
points of the dissolvent, and shaking them violently about makes them let go
the hold they had with other bodies. I shall speak more at large concerning
these kinds of Precipitations in the Remarks which I shall make upon White
Precipitate, and shall then explicate the reason why Sea Salt, which is an acid
does precipitate that which another acid had dissolved. I shall likewise answer
the objections which have been raised on this subject.

Silver may be also precipitated by means of a Copper-plate, as I have said
already.

It is very indifferent which way you please to Precipitate it, for it is done
for no other end, but to reduce the Silver into a very fine powder, for an
easier dissolution.

The Precipitate of Silver made with salt, or Copper, waxes brown in the
drying, and though dried in the shade, which doubtless is by reason of some
small proportion of Copper that it contains.

If you have dissolved an ounce of Coppel-silver, and precipitate it with Salt
or Copper, you will draw an ounce and three drachms of Precipitate well washed and
dried; this augmentation does proceed from a remainder of the points which were
broken in pieces, and yet do still remain in the pores of the metal; for these
pores being very small, they do but hardly let go what they have received into
them.

There is no need of distilling a part of the Liquor, that the Tincture may be
the stronger, as some have presumed to write: for on the contrary, it causes a
Crystallization, which diminishes both its color and strength, for the reason
I have given before.

The effect of this Tincture for Diseases must rather be attributed to the Salt
of Urine, and spirit of Wine, than to the Silver; for they are not only able to
fly into the Head, and open obstructions there, but assisted with the Natural
heat do open the pores of all the body, and drive out ill humors by
transpiration.

The portion of Silver which remains at the bottom of the Mattress being
impregnated with volatile parts would fly into the Air, if it were melted alone
without the addition of something else; wherefore the abovementioned matter is
added to it, that being of a very fixed nature may weigh it down, and hinder it
from flying away.

Diana's Tree.
Take an ounce of Silver, and dissolve it in three ounces of spirit of Niter,
pour your dissolution into a Mattress, wherein you shall have put eighteen or
twenty ounces of water, and two ounces of Quicksilver. Your Mattress must be
filled up to the neck; let it lie still upon a little round of straw in some
convenient place for forty days together, during which time you will find a Tree
spread forth its branches, and little balls at the end, which represent their
fruit.

This Operation is of no use at all in Physic, I have here described it only
to please the Curious.

Remarks.
These branches do proceed from the spirit of Niter, which being incorporated
with the Silver and Mercury do form diverse Figures, according to the room and
moisture it has to expatiate it self in. For if you should put to it but ten
or twelve ounces of water, nothing but a kind of Crystals in great confusion
would be able to appear. On the contrary, if you should use too much water,
nothing would then be seen besides a little precipitated powder. You must let
the mixture lie still for forty days together, because the spirit of Niter
being very much weakened by common water is able to work but very slowly. If the
matter should happen to be removed, the figure would quickly fall into
confusion, but would recover it self again, if you let it lie still long
enough. This Preparation is best performed in a cool place, being properly a
Crystallization.

This Operation may be fitly compared with the manner of Generation and
Nourishment of Plants in the Earth; for if the seed abounds with too much
moisture, the spirits which serve to ferment and dilate its parts, will be
rendered so weak, as not to be able to act, and so nothing can be produced; if
on the contrary there should prove too little moisture, the spirits not finding
room enough to expatiate in, would either continue imprisoned or evaporate into
Air, and so be ineffectual. But when there happens to be a fit proportion of
water in the Earth, then the spirits gently moving about do insensibly
expatiate themselves, and do rarifie and sublime along with them the substance
of the seed, from whence Vegetation does proceed. But to return unto our
Operation.

If you should desire to separate the Silver from the Mercury, shake the whole
together, and having poured it out into an earthen Vessel, make it boil for
half a quarter of an hour, then let it cool a little, till it becomes little
more than lukewarm; pour upon it a quart of water by little and little, in
which you have dissolved two ounces of Sea Salt, and a white Precipitate will
fall down; pour off the water by Inclination, and dry the Powder. Then put it
in a Retort placed in a Sand-furnace, and having fitted to it a Receiver filled
with water, give a small fire at first, then increase it by degrees till the
Retort grows red-hot, and your Quicksilver will distill drop by drop into the
water; continue the fire till nothing more will distill; let the Vessels cool;
pour the water out of the Receiver, and having washed the Mercury, dry it with
linen, or the crum of bread, and keep it for use.

You Will find your Silver in the Retort, which you may reduce into an Ingot, by
melting it in a Crucible with a little Saltpeter in a great Circular fire.

CHAP. III. Of Tinn.
TInn is a Metal that comes near unto Silver in color, but differs very much,
in the figure of its Pores, and in the solidity and weight. The name of the
Planet Jupiter is given unto it, and it is thought to receive its particular
Influence from it. It is a malleable substance, and very easy to put into
Fusion. It will not all of it quite dissolve in Aqua Fortis, as some have
affirmed, but some part will remain undissolved, which shows it is compounded
of different parts, and that its Pores are of a different figure. A virtue has
been attributed to it against the Diseases of the Liver and Matrix, but this
quality is only imaginary, experience in no wise evincing the truth of it.

Pulverization of Tinn.
Tinn being of a malleable nature, cannot be reduced into a Powder after the
usual ways of powdring. Therefore I Will give you a method how to do it easily
enough.

Melt in a Crucible what quantity of Tinn you think fit, and cast it into a
round wooden box, that has been rubbed within on all sides with a piece of
chalk, enough to whiten it, cover this box, and presently shake it about, until
your Tinn is become cold, and so you will find it converted into a gray powder.

Lead may be Pulverized after the same manner.

Remarks.
The wooden box must be round, because that figure is the most proper to shake
a thing in; and the clefts of the box must be joined together as close as may
be; and but little of the Tinn must be put into the box at a time, that the
parts may be the better able to separate and fall into a powder, by means of
the motion or agitation. Indeed the thing may be done without rubbing the box
with chalk, but by this means the melted Tinn is hindered from burning the box,
as it otherwise would. Now though this Operation may seem to be of no great
use, nevertheless it will be found to be of very good use, in order to prepare
several Operations upon Tinn. For by this means it will easily mix with Salts,
and other matters.

Calcination of Tinn.
To Calcine Tinn is to reduce it into the form of a Calx, by the means of fire.

Put Tinn into a large earthen Pan unglazed, place it in a Circular fire, the
Tinn will melt. Stir it with a Spatule, until it is reduced into Powder;
continue a great fire to it 36 hours, and stir it from time to time, then take
it off the fire and let it cool, and you will have a Calx of Tinn.

Remarks.
I use an unglazed earthen vessel, because the Lead which makes the varnish
might mix with the Tinn, and so hinder the purity of it; a Pan is the figure
that is proper for this Calcination, for being able hereby to spread the matter
about with a Spatule, its Sulphurs fly away the more easily; insomuch that Tinn
may be as well Calcined in such a vessel in six and thirty hours, as in four
days time in a Crucible; the stirring it does likewise serve to drive out the
Sulphur.

Salt of Jupiter of Tinn.
This Operation is a Tinn penetrated by acids, and reduced into the form of
Salt.

Take two pounds of Calcined Tinn, put it into a Mattress, and pouring upon it
distilled Vinegar to the height of four fingers, set it a digesting in Sand,
for two or three days, shaking the vessel from time to time; afterward pour
off the liquor by inclination, and adding more distilled Vinegar to the matter
remaining, digest it as before, decant the liquor, and repeat the adding new
distilled Vinegar, and digesting it, three or four times more: then Filtrate
all these impregnations and evaporate them in a glass Body in Sand to the
consumption of three quarters of the liquor, let the remainder cool, and then
remove the Body, without shaking it, into a Celler, or such like cold place, to
lie still three or four days, and you will find Crystals formed on the sides of
the Body; separate them from the liquor, and evaporate some more of it, put
that which remains into a Celler as before, and you will find new Crystals;
continue these evaporations and crystallizations; until you have drawn all your
Salt of Tinn, which you must dry in the Sun, and keep in a Viol. This Salt is
desiccative, when mixed in Pomatums; it may also serve for Tettars.

Those who do not concern themselves to have this Salt in Crystals may
evaporate all the moisture of this dissolution, over a small fire, and they
will have a Salt remain to them as good as the first.

Remarks.
This Salt is only compounded of the acid part of the Vinegar, incorporated
into the Tinn after the resemblance of Salt, but if you should destroy these
acids, the Tinn would resume its former shape. I shall show the way of this
Revivification, when I shall treat of Salt of Saturn, both being performed
after the same manner.

If the Calx of Tinn had not been well Calcined, and dispossessed of some
quantity of Sulphur, the acidity of the Vinegar would never have been able to
dissolve it, because it would have been presently shockt in the supple yielding
parts of the Sulphur without a capacity of acting; for that an acid may be
capable of dissolving a body, it is requisite that the pores be fitly disposed,
so that it may preserve its motion some time in which it may make its jostles.

You may separate one part of the impregnation of the Calx of Tinn, and pour
upon it the Oil of Tartar per deliquium, and you will have a Magistery of Tinn,
because the Oil of Tartar which is an Alkali destroys the acid which kept up
the Tinn dissolved, and forces it to let go its hold; you must wash this
Magistery, and dry it, it serves for the same uses as that which I shall
describe hereafter, but there is but little Magistery got by this preparation.

If a man would persist to Calcine the Calx remaining in the Bolt-head, and put
more Vinegar to it, it would at last all dissolve, but the Operation would be
too tedious.

Sublimation of Tinn.
To Sublime Tinn is to raise and Volatilize it by means of a Volatile Salt.

Take one part of Tinn, and two parts of Sal Armoniack in Powder: mix them well
together, and put your mixture into a strong earthen Cucurbite, that is able to
endure the fire, and whose two thirds at least do remain empty; fit unto it a
blind Head, lute the conjunctions exactly well, and place your Vessel on the
grate in a small Furnace with an open fire, but only open so as that the fire
can pass through the Registers, and for that end you must stop up the top of
the Furnace with Bricks and Lute, leaving some little holes on the sides that
are called Registers. The Cucurbite must likewise enter the Furnace a third
part of its height or thereabouts. Give a small fire at first, then increase it
by degrees, till the bottom of the Cucurbite is grown red-hot, and continue
such a fire till nothing more will Sublime, which you will know by the Heads
growing cool, and then the Sublimation is at an end. Let the Vessels cool, and
so unlute them, you will find Flowers stuck to the Head, and to the top of the
Body, that are nothing else but some parts of Tinn raised up by the Sal
Armoniack, and at the bottom of the Body you will find some Tinn Revived.

Magistery of Jupiter, or Tinn.
This Operation is only a Tinn dissolved by an acid, and precipitated by an
Alkali salt.

Dissolve the Flowers of Tinn, in a sufficient quantity of water. Filtrate the
Dissolution, and pour upon it drop by drop the Spirit of Sal Armoniack, or the
Oil of Tartar made per Deliquium, there will Precipitate a very White Powder.
You must Edulcorate it by washing it several times with warm water, and
afterward dry it. It serves for Paint; for being mixed with Pomatum, it makes
a very curious White.

Remarks.
It is to be considered in both these Preparations, that the Dissolution of
Tinn is performed only by an acid Salt, which the Sal Armoniack is impregnated
with; and this is the reason why the Volatile Spirit of Sal Armoniack does
serve to Precipitate it; for being an Alkali as well as the Oil of Tartar, it
breaks the force of the acid, which therefore lets go what it held dissolved.
That being granted, there will be no longer difficulty in conceiving how the
Volatile Spirit of Sal Armoniack does often Precipitate what Sal Armoniack had
dissolved.

Flowers of Jupiter, or Tinn.
This Operation is a Tinn Volatilized, and raised in form of Meal, by the means
of a Volatile Salt.

Take an unglazed earthen Pot, with a hole in the middle of its height, and a
stopple to it, place the Pot in a Furnace of a just proportion wherein the pot
may enter only as high as the hole, and with Bricks and Lute, take care that
the fire may not transpire; fit upon this pot three Aludels, or open pots of
the same earth without any bottoms, and fit a Head to the uppermost with a
Receiver to the Head, lute well all the junctures, and light a good fire in the
Furnace to make red-hot that part of the pot which lies within it, then mix a
pound of Tinn and two pounds of purified Saltpeter, throw a spoonful of this
mixture through the hole of the pot, and stop it; a detonation soon follows,
which when it is over, throw in another spoonful, and so continue to do, until
all the mixture be spent; let the vessels cool, and unlute them, and you will find
in the receiver a little Spirit of Niter, and in and round about the Aludels
very white Flowers of Tinn, gather them together with a feather, then wash them
diverse times with fountain water, and when you have dried them on paper in the
shade, keep them in a Viol; they serve for Paint, and they make a curious White
when mixed in Pomatums, or in some liquor.

You Will find in the bottom of the Pot a Calx of Tinn mixed with the fixed part of
Saltpeter, boil it in water, wash and dry it, and it may be used in
desiccative unguents.

Remarks.
It is a plain sign that Tinn does contain a Sulphur, because being mixed with
Saltpeter, and put into the pot that is heated red-hot, it will flame; for you
must not imagine that the detonation can proceed from the Saltpeter alone,
this salt being never able to flame without the mixture of some Sulphurous
matter, as I shall prove in its own place. But because the Sulphur of Tinn is
locked up in other substances, it remains quiet for some time to unite with the
Saltpeter, before it raises a detonation. Nevertheless if you be in haste to
dispatch, the detonation may be expedited by introducing a small cole lighted
into the hole of the pot to fire the matter.

These Flowers do proceed from the part of Tinn which is easiest to rarifie,
and which the Volatile salt of Saltpeter, and the Sulphur of Tinn had raised.

You must take care, when you would make Detonations, to proportion the
Saltpeter with the Sulphur, for otherwise they will not endure so long as they
should; either there being too much Sulphur it will not meet with enough
Volatile parts of Saltpeter to raise it all up, or else the Saltpeter being
in too great a quantity for the Sulphur, it causes but a Sublimation in part,
because the great quantity of this salt which remains at bottom, without
firing, does fix some part of the Sulphur. Wherefore there was but little
reason to believe that three parts of Saltpeter to one of Tinn, would raise
more Flowers, than when there are but two, according to my description. For
then there being too much Saltpeter for the quantity of Tinn, the Detonation
will prove imperfect, and almost all the Saltpeter will remain at bottom, and
will only serve to check some part of the Sulphurs of Tinn, hindering them from
Subliming into so many Flowers as would otherwise rise.

Three Aludels and one Head, are used in this Operation, that the Vapors which
rise in the time of Detonation may have room enough; for otherwise they would
burst the Vessels, notwithstanding the casting in of the matter but little at a
time.

The Flowers of Tinn are washed in order to deprive them of a Volatile Salt
derived from the Saltpeter which was mixed with it, and the salt dissolves in
the water, leaving the Flowers in their purity. You must dry them in the shade,
for both the Sun and fire do render them black, and this because they do
reunite the particles of Tinn, which owe all their whiteness to the fineness
of Pulverization, which gives them another Superficies than they had to reflect
the light with.

CHAP. IV. Of Bismuth, called Tinn-Glass.
BIsmuth is a Sulphurous Marcassite that is found in the Tinn Mines; many do
think it is an imperfect Tinn which partakes of good store of Arsenick; its
pores are disposed in another manner than those of Tinn, which is evident
enough because the Menstruum which dissolves Bismuth cannot entirely dissolve
Tinn.

There is another sort of Marcassite, called Zinch, that much resembles
Bismuth, and on which the same preparations may be made that I am going to
describe.

Marcassite is nothing else but the excrement of a Metal, or an Earth
impregnated with Metallic parts.

The Pewterers do mix Bismuth and Zinch in their Tinn to make it sound the
better.

Flowers of Bismuth.
This Operation is nothing but a portion of Tinn-glass raised up in form of
meal by Volatile salts.

Calcine Bismuth as you do Lead, then mixing it with an equal part of Sal
Armoniack, proceed to its sublimation as you did in that of Tinn. Thus you have
Flowers, which you may dissolve in Water, and Precipitate with the Spirit of
Sal Armoniack, or Oil of Tartar.

This Magistery or Precipitate serves for the same use as that which follows.

Magistery of Bismuth.
Magistery of Bismuth is a Tinn-glass dissolved, and precipitated in a very
white powder.

Dissolve in a Mattress an ounce of Bismuth, grossly powdered with three ounces
of Spirit of Niter. Pour the Dissolution into a clean White-ware Vessel, and
pour upon it five or six pints of Fountain Water, in which you shall have
dissolved beforehand an Ounce of Sea Salt, you will see a White powder
Precipitate to the bottom. Pour off the Water by Inclination, and wash this
Magistery several times, then dry it in the shade. It is an excellent
Cosmetick, called Spanish White, that serves to whiten the complexion. It is
either mixed in Pomatum, or Lilie-water.

Remarks.
You must use a large Bolt-head to dissolve the Bismuth in, because the great
Ebullition that happens, as soon as Spirit of Niter is cast upon it, requires
room to move in. You must likewise have a care as much as you can, of receiving
the Vapors at your Nose or Mouth, for they are very offensive to the breast.

This quick and violent Ebullition proceeds from the acids immediate
penetration of the large pores of Bismuth so soon as thrown upon it, and the
acid violently divides all that opposes its motion. It happens also that the
Bolt-head grows so hot, that a man cannot endure his hand upon it, because the
points of the Menstruum do chafe against the solid body of Bismuth with such
force, that you may observe from thence much the same heat, as when two solid
bodies are rubbed against one another. Add to this, that the great store of
igneous particles contained in Spirit of Niter, may much increase this heat.

If the Dissolution becomes turbid through some impurities in the Bismuth, you
must pour into it about twice as much Water and filter it; for if you should go
to filter it without water, it would coagulate like salt in the Filter, and not
pass through. This Coagulation proceeds from the acid spirits of Niter that are
included in the particles of Bismuth, which finding too little liquor to swim
in and disperse, do gather together into Crystals when the dissolution is cold.

The impurity which commonly swims upon the solution of Bismuth, is a fat or
bituminous matter which will not dissolve in the spirit of Niter.

This Magistery may be made by pouring in great quantity of Fountain water
without any salt, into the dissolution, but it is made the quicker, when you
use salt, and the Precipitation is the better because salt does encounter and
break some of the acids that water alone was not able to weaken sufficiently.

Now some difficulty appears in conceiving how plain water alone comes to
precipitate Bismuth, Lead, and Antimony, which the acid had dissolved, and yet
can do nothing at all to the precipitating Gold, Silver, or Mercury, without
the assistance of some salt or other body; I do imagine that the former having
large Pores, the acids cannot stick so close in them but that water is able to
force them out; but Gold, Silver, and Mercury, having finer pores in comparison
than the other, do retain the acids so very closely that the weak impulses of
water alone can make no separation; some more active body is requisite to do it.

The Augmentation which happens to Bismuth when made into a Magistery, does
proceed from some part of the Spirit of Niter that remains still in it,
notwithstanding the Precipitation and Lotion.

Commonly one Dram of this Magistery or Precipitate is mixed with Four ounces
of Water, or in an ounce of Pomatum. It softens the skin very much, and is also
good against the Itch, because it feeds upon those acids or Salts which cherish
this Disease.

CHAP. V. Of Lead.
LEad is a Metal filled with Sulphur, or a Bituminous earth, that renders it
very supple and pliant. It is probable that it contains some Mercury. It has
Pores very like those of Tinn; it is called Saturn by reason of the influence
it is thought to receive from the Planet of that name.

Those who work upon Lead are subject to Colicks, and to become Paralytick,
whether it be that there rises out of it a Mercury which obstructs the Nerves,
or else that the very substance of Lead does act upon them after the manner of
Mercury.

Lead is extremely cold, and for that reason is proper to assuage the heats of
Venus, being applied to the Perinaeum; and it may be the heat of the skin
causes it to lose some particles, which insinuating through the pores do some
way fix the Spirits, and qualify their motion, from whence the part waxes
cold: it is also applied on many Tumors caused by too great an Ebullition of
the Blood.

Lead serves to Purify Gold and Silver, and may be said to act in the Coppel,
much after the same manner as the white of an Egg does in Clarifying a Syrop
that is boiled in a Basin; for as the gross and terrestrious impurities of a
Syrop do stick to the white of an Egg by reason of its glutinous nature, and
are driven to the sides of the Basin in the stirring, so do the Heterogeneous
parts that were mixed with Gold and Silver, stick unto the Lead, and by the fire
are driven to the sides of the Coppel like unto a Scum.

Calcination of Lead.
Melt Lead in an earthen Pan unglazed, and stir it over the Fire with a Spatule
'till it is reduced to a powder. If you increase the Fire, and still Calcine
the Matter for an hour or two, it will be more open and fit to be penetrated by
acids.

If you put this Powder to Calcine in a Reverberatory Fire for three or four
hours, it will be of a red color, and is that which is called Minium.

Lead is also prepared into Cerusse or White-Lead by the means of Vinegar,
whose vapor it is made to imbibe; for it turns into a White Rust, that is
gathered up, and little Cakes made of it.

Two parts of Lead may be melted in a Pot or Crucible, and one part of Sulphur
added to it; when the Sulphur is burnt out, you will find the matter turned into a
black powder, which is called Plumbum ustum.

All these Preparations of Lead are of a drying nature; they may be mixed with
unguents and plasters, they unite with oils or fat substances in the boiling,
and they do give them a solid consistence, and the greatest part of our
plasters do derive their hardness from it.

I spoke of the way of reducing Lead into Litharge, when I treated of the
Purification of Silver by the Coppel, and it is thither I desire my Reader to
return.

Remarks.
There happens an observation in the Calcination of Lead, as well as several
other things, which very well deserves some reflection. It Is that although the
Sulphurous or Volatile parts of Lead do fly away in the Calcination, which
loss should indeed make it weigh the less, nevertheless after a long Calcining
it is found, that instead of losing it increases in weight.

Some trying to explicate this Phenomenon do say, that as long as the violence
of the flame does open and divide the parts of the Calx of Lead, the acid of
the Wood or other matter that burns, does insinuate into tha pores of this
Calx, where it is stopped or fixed by the Alkali; but this reason will not hold,
when it is considered that this Augmentation comes to pass as well when Lead is
Calcined with Coals as Wood, for Coals contain only a fixed Salt that rises not
at all.

It Is better therefore to refer this effect to the disposition of the pores of
Lead in such a manner, that part of the fire insinuating into them does there
remain imbodied, and cannot get forth again, whence the weight comes to be
increased.

If you would revive this Calx of Lead by way of Fusion, its parts do squeez
and express the igneous particles that were enclosed, and the Lead does thereby
weigh less than it did when reduced into a Calx, for by this means the
Sulphurous parts are separated and lost.

Salt of Saturn.
This Operation is a Lead penetrated, and reduced into the form of Salt by the
acidity of Vinegar.

Take three or four pounds of one of these Preparations or Calcinations of
Lead, for example the Cerusse: powder it, and put it in a large Glass or
Earthen vessel; pour upon it distilled Vinegar four fingers high, an Ebullition
will follow without any sensible heat. Put it in Digestion in hot Sand for two
or three days, stirring about the Matter ever now and then; then let it settle,
and separate the Liquor by Inclination. Pour new distilled Vinegar upon the
Cerusse that remains in the Vessel, and proceed as before, continuing to pour
on distilled Vinegar, and to separate it by Inclination, until you have
dissolved about half the Matter. Mix all your Impregnations together, in an
earthen or glass Vessel. Evaporate in a Sand-fire with a gentle heat, about two
thirds of the moisture, or 'till there rises a little skin over it. Then
transfer your Vessel into a Celler or some such cool place, without jogging it;
there will appear white Crystals, which you must separate, and Evaporate the
Liquor as before, and set it again in the Cellar. Continue your Evaporations
and Crystallizations, 'till you have gotten all your Salt. Dry it in the Sun,
and keep it in a Glass.

If you would make it exceeding white, you must dissolve it in equal quantities
of distilled Vinegar, and common water, then Filter it, and Crystallize it, as
I said before. This Purification may be repeated three or four times.

It is commonly used in Pomatums, for Tettars and Inflammations; the
Impregnation of Saturn is also used chiefly for Diseases of the skin; when it
is mixed with a great deal of Water, it makes a Milk that is called Virgins
Milk.

The Salt of Saturn taken inwardly is esteemed very good for the Quinsie, to
stop the flowing of the Menses and Hemorrhoids, and for the Bloody Flux. The
Dose is from two grains to four in Knot-grass, or Plantain water, or mixed in
Garg^es.

Remarks.
I do commonly use Cerusse for preparing the Salt of Saturn, because I find it
to be more open, and easier to dissolve, than the other Preparations of Lead,
by reason of the Vinegar it is already impregnated with.

The Ebullition, that is observed, does proceed from the violent entrance of
the acids, which do forcibly separate the parts of the Matter. But it is
remarkable that the Effervescency which happens upon pouring a like quantity of
acids on any other preparation of Lead, is a great deal stronger; because when
the acid meets with a body not so open as Cerusse, it must use greater
endeavor to enter into it, and consequently raises up the Matter higher.

In these Effervescences as well as many others, you cannot perceive the least
Degree of Heat, nay some presume to assert that Cold is increased in them.
Vinegar loses all its force in the penetration of Lead, and acquires a kind of
sweet or sugared taste.

You must not imagine that a true Salt of Lead can be drawn. It is nothing but
a dissolution of its substance by acids, which do very closely unite with it,
to form a kind of Salt. For if by distillation you should draw off the humidity
of the Dissolution, you would find it to be nothing but an Insipid water, and
consequently deprived of all its acids. I shall prove that better hereafter,
when we come to revive our Salt into Lead.

This Salt called Sugar by reason of its sweetness is good for many Diseases
that are caused by acid or sharp humors, because it asswages them, and
mitigates their keenness. This is particularly observed in Quinzies, whose
cause does ordinarily proceed from a saline or acid serosity, which falling too
abundantly on the Muscles of the Larynx raises a fermentation that dilates
their fibers, and causes the Inflammation we see. Thus whatsoever is able to
dull the edge of Acids is good for the cure of this Disease.

Menstrual Purgations, Flux of the Hemorrhoids and Dysenteries are usually
caused by sharp corrosive Salts which fall into the Vessels. Wherefore the Salt
of Saturn, as all other matters that absorb Acids, do serve to cure these
distempers; for take away the cause of a disease, and the effect will soon
cease.

The sweetness of Salt of Saturn cannot be better explicated than by the
Sulphurous or softish substanee of the particles of Lead, which being actuated
by the Salt of Vinegar, do delightfully tickle the Nerve of the tongue, when it
is tasted.

Vinegar impregnated with some preparation of Lead, is called Vinegar of
Saturn. If it be well tempered with Oil of Roses, or some other Oil, beating
them together in a mortar, it makes an unguent that is called Nutritum, or
otherwise Butter of Saturn; it is good for Tettars, and other disfigurations of
the skin.

Magistery of Saturn.
This Operation is a Lead dissolved and precipitated.

Dissolve two or three ounces of the Salt of Saturn well purified, as I said
before, in a sufficient quantity of Water, and distilled Vinegar, filter the
dissolution, and pour upon it drop by drop the Oil of Tartar made per
Deliquium, it will first turn into a Milk, then a kind of Coagulum that will
precipitate to the bottom of the Vessel in a white Powder. Boil it a little,
and pour it into a Tunnel lined with a Coffin of brown Paper, the Liquor will
pass through as clear as Water, and the Powder remain in it: Wash it several
times with Water to carry off all the impression of Vinegar. Then dry it, and
you will have a very white Magistery, that is used for a Fucus like the Bismuth.
It is likewise mixed in Pomatums for Tettars, etc.

Remarks.
When good store of Water is poured upon the Impregnation of Saturn, it turns
white like Milk, and is commonly called, Virgins milk; it is used in
Inflammations, and to Pimples in the face: if you let this Milk settle, it
becomes as clear as Water, and a White powder sinks down to the bottom; this
Powder does proceed from the particles of Lead which were held up by the
acidity of the Vinegar, and were made let go their hold, by the access of Water
diluting the acid. This Magistery being well washed may serve like the other
that I now described; but because Water alone has not strength enough to
destroy the acid so, as to make it quit every particle that it held dissolved,
some part of the Lead still remains indiscernable in the liquor, and does not
precipitate. Wherefore it is better to follow my description, in the making
Magistery of Saturn. You must use an equal quantity of Water and Vinegar to
dissolve the Salt of Saturn, for if you should use Water alone, it would rather
cause a precipitation than dissolution.

The Oil of Tartar, or rather the Salt of Tartar dissolved being an Alkali
destroys the edges of the Vinegar that suspended the Lead, whence it comes to
precipitate; for finding nothing in the Liquor that is able to hold it up, it
falls down by its own weight.

Now in this Operation there happens no effervescency at all, because the edges
of the Vinegar being broken, the fragments of them which remain have not
activity, and are not keen enough to enter into the pores of Salt of Tartar
with a sufficient penetration. And it is the same thing with all other
precipitations of matters which have been dissolved by Vinegar: but when the
solution has been performed with stronger acids, the precipitations are made
with ebullition, for the reason that I gave in my Remarks upon Aurum Fulminans.

This Powder being washed and dried is nothing but a Cerusse rendered exceeding
fine. It is used for Paint, but this Cosmetick as well as all others that are
made of Metallic substances, such as Tinn and Bismuth, do often black the skin
after having whitened it, because the heat of the flesh does gather together
these Metallic Particles, which owed all their whiteness to an exact
Alkoholisation, and losing that, do often Revive.

Balsam or Oil of Saturn.
The Balsam of Saturn is a solution of Salt of Saturn made in Oil of Turpentine.

Put eight ounces of Salt of Saturn powdered into a Mattress, and pour upon it
Spirit of Turpentine, four fingers above it, place the Mattress in a small Sand
heat digesting for a day, you will have a red Tincture; decant the Liquor and pour
more Spirit of Turpentine on the Matter that remains in the bottom of the
Mattress, leave it in digestion as before, then separate again the Liquor which
remains still a little colored, and there will remain at the bottom nothing
but a little Matter, that you may Revive into Lead in a Crucible. Pour your
dissolutions into a Glass-Retort, place it in Sand, and fitting to it a
Receiver, distill over a gentle fire about two thirds of the Liquor, which will
be Spirit of Turpentine: quench the fire, and when the Retort is cold pour that
which is in it into a Viol, and keep it for use. This is the Balsam of Saturn,
excellent for cleansing and cicatrizing of Ulcers. You may touch Chancres with
it, though they be never so bad, for it mightily resists putrefaction.

Remarks.
The Spirit of Turpentine, to speak properly, is an exalted Oil. It dissolves
Lead, and easily unites with it, because it is very sulphurous.

If you should still persist in putting new Spirit of Turpentine on the
remaining matter, all the Salt of Saturn would at last dissolve.

Some do use to distill away all the Liquor, and keep that for Oil which comes
forth last. But it is a great deal better to follow my description; for when
all the Liquor is distilled, there will hardly have risen any Particle of
Saturn, and therefore it cannot be so good.

Burning Spirit of Saturn.
Spirit of Saturn is an inflammable liquor which is drawn from Salt of Saturn.

Fill two thirds of an earthen Retort, or a glass one luted, with Salt of
Saturn; place it in a Furnace over a very gentle fire, both for gently heating
the Retort, and driving out a Phlegmatic Water; continue this degree of Fire,
until the drops begin to have some taste, then fit to the Retort a large
Recipient, lute well the junctures, and increase the fire by degrees, a Spirit
will come forth that will fill the Recipient with Clouds. When nothing more
will come, let the Vessels cool, and having unluted them, pour what you find in
the Recipient into a Glass-Cucurbite, and rectify in a very gentle Sand-fire
about half the Liquor, which will be the inflammable Spirit of Saturn, burning
like Spirit of Wine, and of a sour taste.

This Spirit is very good to resist putrefaction of humors: It is also given
in the Hypochondriack Melancholy from eight unto sixteen drops in Broth, or
some Liquor peculiar to the Disease, and the use of it is continued every
Morning for a Fortnight.

The other moiety of the liquor that remains in the Alembick, is called
improperly Oil of Saturn; it is good to cleanse the eyes of horses.

If you take out the blackish matter that remains in the Retort, and put it in
a Crucible upon burning Coals, it will reassume the form of Lead.

Remarks.
You must remember not to fill above two thirds of the Retort with the Salt,
and to join a Receiver large enough, because these Volatile Spirits flying out
with violence might be apt to break the Vessels, if they had not room to play
in.

If you use six ounces of Salt of Saturn in your Distillation, you will draw an
Ounce and six drachms of liquor, and there will remain in the Retort six ounces
and six drachms of a blackish and yellow matter; and if you put this matter
into a Crucible, setting it in the fire, 'twill melt, and you will regain four
ounces of Lead, and half an ounce, or it may be six drachms of a yellow earth
colored like Litharge of Gold.

It is evident from this Operation that an ounce and six drachms of the more
Acid parts of Vinegar are sufficient to impregnate four ounces and two drachms
of Lead, to reduce it into Salt; but the strangest thing that happens to it, is
the great change that acids do give it, insomuch that it is not to be known
again in the least.

The Augmentation that the Lead in the Retort does here receive, is as evident
as may be; for six drachms are taken out of it at last, more than were put in
of Salt of Saturn, besides an ounce and six drachms of liquor that were drawn
out. So that we must necessarily conclude, that the four ounces and two drachms
of Lead are increased two ounces and an half.

It is probable enough that the more rarefied the Lead becomes, the more
capable it will be of igneous particles; for although the Salt of Saturn is not
suffered to remain long in the fire, yet the Lead increases apace. Possibly it
may be, that as fast as the acids go out of it, igneous bodies enter in their
place, and open likewise the Pores of Lead by their nimble motion; but these
Pores must needs be so disposed as to shut again like valvules, and hinder the
return back of those fiery parts.

When this Calx is Calcined in an open fire in a Crucible, without stirring it,
the parts of Lead close together and expel the fiery particles, so that the
Lead revives as it was before, and recovers its Natural gravity.

The matter when shut up in the Retort would never be able to revive, let the
fire be made never so strong, because the igneous particles would have no
liberty to get out.

The Yellow earth that is found in the Crucible seems to be of a Golden color,
it is a terrestrious and bituminous impurity that the Lead is purified from.
There should be indeed but two drachms of it, because four ounces of Lead are
recovered, wherefore the Augmentation must needs be from the fiery parts that
remained in it as in a Calx.

Spirit of Saturn becomes inflammable from its containing in it some spirit of
Wine, that remains still involved in the Vinegar, and was carried away with the
acids into the Pores of Lead, when the Salt of Saturn was made; for if you
quicken the Fire to distill this Salt, the acids break in pieces, and leave the
Spirit of Wine at liberty, insomuch that the Spirit of Saturn has no acid
taste.

The matter that remains in the Retort after the Operation may be easily
revived into Lead, as being deprived of the acids which gave it the form of
Salt.

The Salt of Saturn may be likewise revived into Lead by mixing it with an
Alkali Salt melted in a Crucible with a good fire, because this last Salt
destroys the acids that kept the Lead thus disguised; but you must observe that
it will flame before it revives, by reason of the Spirit of Wine that I said
was included in the dissolution of Cerusse made by Vinegar.

CHAP. VI. Of Copper.
COpper is a Metal that abounds in Vitriol and Sulphur: it is called Venus,
because this Planet was thought to govern it particularly, and bestow its
Influences upon it: and for this reason there has been attributed unto it the
virtue of increasing seed, and curing the diseases of those parts that serve
for Generation.

But because Copper contains in it a Corrosive quality, I would advise no body
to use it inwardly.

Copper takes Rust very easily, for if you leave but a drop of Water some hours
upon a piece of it, it makes a Verdegreese. Have a care of drinking water, that
has lain in Copper vessels, for it always dissolves some portion of it, which
appears easily from the taste it leaves in it.

It will not be altogether amiss to make mention here of an effect that is no
less strange than usual. It Is that Water or any other liquor that is heated or
boiled in a Copper vessel for a whole day together, savours not at all, or not
so much of the Copper, provided that it be not removed off the fire all that
time, as other water warmed in a like vessel, and put from the fire but an
hour; for whereas water alone can dissolve something of the Copper, it would
seem that being aided with the heat of fire, it should partake of its nature
the more. Now in my opinion this is the most rational explication that can be
given of this matter.

Every body may perceive that when the water begins to heat in a Copper vessel,
that is set over the fire, little Atoms do rise at bottom like the stirring of a
powder, and these Atoms do increase according as the water receives more heat,
so that at length they make it boil on high; these little Atoms can have no
other cause than the fiery particles, which passing through the vessel, do
drive the water upwards apace, and rarifie its parts; for this reason it is
that the water is not able to dissolve any of the Copper, for being continually
raised upwards, it can make no impression upon the bottom of the vessel.

Perhaps some will tell me, that the liquor might take the impression of the
Copper, at the sides of the Basin; but it is easy to imagine that though there
don't pass through the sides so many fiery particles as do at the bottom, there
do pass nevertheless enough to hinder the liquor from sticking to or dissolving
any particles of the vessel.

But now on the contrary the vessel being removed from off the fire, and the
motion of the igneous particles being quite ceased, the liquor partakes easily
of the Copper, and so much the more easily as the fire has rarefied the metal,
and rendered it more proper for dissolution.

Every thing seems to confirm this Opinion, for if any liquor is put to boil
over a strong fire in a Copper vessel, it will not impregnate in the least, but
if you place it upon a small fire, and leave it so for some time, then because
there will not pass enough fiery particles, to cover all the surface of the
vessel, and raise up the liquor, it will take some taste of the Copper; but
this taste will not be so strong as if you had left it the same length of time
in such a vessel off the fire, after it had been warmed.

Liquors that are full of Salts do take the impression of Copper much more
easily than those that are not. Thus Confectioners do observe what I have
mentioned; for though they boil their Confections in vessels of Copper for a
considerable time, they find them taste nothing of the Copper, but they know
that if they should leave them but half an hour in the vessel taken off the
fire, they would be tainted with a most loathsome Copper taste.

We may learn from this Discourse, not to use a Copper vessel, when we have a
mind to boil or heat a liquor gently, and when we do think fit to use it, to be
sure to keep a good brisk fire underneath, and not to let what we have boiled,
cool afterward in a vessel of this nature.

Another difficulty does here offer it self on this subject, and it is to know
why a Kettle that has been taken off the fire, is not so hot at bottom as at
the sides, so that as soon as it is removed from off the fire, one may touch it
at bottom without burning ones finger, which cannot be done at the sides without
present scalding.

The reason of which is, that the fiery particles tending upwards through the
bottom of the kettle, which is flat, in a direct line, don't make any stop in
passing through, having but a little distance to conquer before they come into
the liquor; but those that rise on the sides, finding a longer space to make
upon the kettle, do many of them stop in the Pores of the Copper.

It is not the same thing in vessels that are made in another form, whose
bottom is Globular, because the fiery particles rising up in an indirect line,
do find more to do to pass through it, than in a flat bottom, and so by
conference more of them do stop.

But it is objected, that if igneous bodies do pass through the bottom of the
kettle without any stop, they would not be able to heat it any more when it is
empty than when it is filled with water; nevertheless it is plain, that when an
empty vessel is set over the fire, the bottom does heat and grow red-hot,
especially if left so a good while.

I answer to this, that when the kettle which was set in a great fire is full
of liquor, the fiery parts having passed through the bottom in a strait line,
as I said, are in a manner absorbed by the liquor, and have no more strength or
action left to reflect again upon the bottom of the vessel, and so to beat it;
but now when it is empty, the fiery parts which pass through the bottom,
finding nothing to drown them and check their motion, many of them do return
back upon the bottom, and that way heat it so much as they do.

And the same reason holds, why an empty Tinn or Leaden vessel being set in the
fire does quickly melt, but when filled with liquor they will not melt, make
what fire under them you please; for the fiery parts finding nothing that is
able to hinder their activity in an empty vessel, do pass to and fro through
its pores often enough to melt it. But these same fiery parts finding moisture
to engage them in a full vessel, they cannot return upon the bottom so as to
melt it.

Copper does not melt so easily as many other matters, because it contains more
terrestrious parts than those others.

Brass, or Yellow Copper is a mixture of Lapis Calaminaris and Copper, and
vessels that are made of it give less impression to liquors than the others.

Calcination of Copper.
To Calcine Copper, is to purify it from its more Volatile parts, by the means
of common Sulphur and fire, in order to render it the more compact.

Stratifie plates of Copper with powdered Sulphur in a large Crucible, cover
the Crucible with a Cover that has a hole in the middle, to give the Vapors
vent. Place your Crucible in a Wind-furnace, and light a very strong fire about
it, until there rise no more vapors; then draw off your Plates as they are
hot, and separate them, this is the Aes ustum that is used in outward remedies
to deterge.

Remarks.
In the making of this stratification we begin with a bed of Sulphur, and lay
over it a bed of Copper Plates, then another bed of Sulphur, and another of
Plates. We continue to do so till the Crucible is quite full; but you must be
sure to let the first and last bed be of Sulphur. This Calcination is thus
performed, that the common Sulphur by its burning may cleanse the Copper of its
superficial Sulphur; but it will be much better purified by the following
Operation.

Purification of Copper.
This second Purification of Copper is to render it fair to the eye, and of a
high color.

Take what quantity you please of Calcined Copper, heat it red-hot in a
Crucible placed among burning coals, and cast it red-hot into a Pot, wherein
you shall have put enough Oil of Linseed to swim above it four fingers; cover
the Pot presently, for otherwise the Oil would take fire, let the Copper steep,
till the Oil is grown pretty cool, separate it, and put it to heat again in the
Crucible, then cast it into Oil of Linseed; continue to made it red-hot, and
quench it in the Oil nine several times, You must change your Oil every third
time; and you will have a Copper well purified, and of its former color. If you
Calcine it once again, to consume the Oil, and powder it, you will have a Crocus
of Copper, that is detersive and good to eat the proud flesh of Wounds and
Ulcers.

Vitriol of Copper or Venus.
This Operation is a Copper opened, and transformed into a Vitriol by Spirit of
Niter.

Dissolve two ounces of Copper cut into little pieces in five or six ounces of
Spirit of Niter, pour the dissolution into a Glass-Cucurbite, and evaporate in
Sand about the fourth part of the Liquor; put that which remains into a Cellar,
or some other cool place, and let it lie there five or six Hours, you will find
Blue Crystals, separate them, and continue to evaporate and crystallize, till
you have drawn them all; dry these Crystals, and keep them in a Viol well stopped.

They are Caustic, and are used to consume superfluous or proud flesh.

If you leave these Crystals in a Pan uncovered, they will turn into liquor,
that may serve for the same use.

Remarks.
You must put the Copper into a large body, placed within the Chimney, and pour
to it by little and little the Spirit of Niter, there does presently rise a
great effervescency, and a red cloud from it, which would be very mischievous
to the breast, if it were not avoided. Then the vessel grows so hot that a man
cannot keep his hand upon it, and the heat continues until the solution be
finished, for then the liquor clears up, and becomes of a fair blue color.

The great effervescency that happens, does proceed from the suitable Pores of
Copper to the edges of Spirit of Niter, so that they can make their entrance
and jostles with a good force; for when these edges, which did before swim with
all liberty in a liquid, do find their motion checked in the body of the metal,
they do strive to disengage themselves, and do thereby separate the parts of
the Copper. It is this violent separation which causes the ebullition and heat;
for the acid edges striking strongly against the solid parts of Copper, do
cause a great agitation in the liquor, and by that means do excite a heat, much
after the manner as when two solid bodies are beaten against one another
violently, they grow so hot as even to strike fire.

The red cloud is derived from the Spirit of Niter, which upon rarefaction does
always acquire that same color.

When the Copper is but half dissolved, it is green, but when it is all
dissolved, it assumes a blue color; if you will separate the acids again from
the Copper dissolved, and reunite the parts by the help of fire, it recovers
its red color.

After that the acids have divided the parts of Copper as much as they are
able, they stick fast to them, and suspend them in the liquor. Some part of the
liquor is evaporated, that the rest may crystallize the more easily. That which
flies away in time of the solution, is the more phlegmatic part.

Vitriol of Copper is nothing but the acids of Spirit of Niter incorporated in
the Copper; and it is these Spirits that cause all the Corrosion; for they are
like so many little knives fastened to the Body of the Copper, which do tear and
gnaw the flesh on which they are applied. This Vitriol dissolves into Liquor,
because the Copper having large Pores, the moisture does easily insinuate into
them.

Other Crystals of Venus.
These Crystals of Venus are the acid part of the Vinegar incorporated into
Copper.

Take what quantity you please of Verdegrease in powder, put it into a large
Mattress, and pour upon it distilled Vinegar four fingers above it. Place the
Mattress in Digestion in hot Sand, and let it lie so three days stirring it ever
now and then, the Vinegar will acquire a blue color; separate by Inclination
the liquor that swims upon the Copper, and pour new distilled Vinegar upon the
matter, leave it in Digestion for three days as before, decant the Liquor, and
continue to put other distilled Vinegar on the matter, until three fourths of
the Verdegrease or thereabouts be dissolved, and there remains nothing but a
terrestrious matter. Then Filtrate all these Impregnations, and evaporate two
thirds of the moisture in a Olass Body in Sand; put the Vessel into a Celler,
and leave it there without stirring it four or five days: little Crystals will
appear, separate by Inclination the Liquor, and gather them up; consume again
about the third part of the moisture, and put it a crystallizing as before;
continue these Evaporations and Crystallizations, till you have got all your
Crystals, dry them, and keep them for the following Operation.

Remarks.
You had better use Verdegrease than crude Copper in this Operation, because it
is more open, and disposed for solution by the acids of Vinegar; for
Verdegrease is nothing but a Copper opened, and reduced to a rust by the
fermenting spirits of Tartar.

For the making of Verdegrease, Plates of Copper are stratified with the husks
of Grapes pressed. They are left so for some time, and part of these Plates is
turned into Verdegrease, which is scraped off with a Knife; then these same
Plates are stratified again with pressed Grapes, and are penetrated as before,
and more Verdegrease made. This stratification is continued until the whole is
turned into Verdegrease. You must observe that Verdegrease is better made in
Languedock and Provence than other places, because in those Countries the
Grapes do yield more Tartar, and consequently do abound in these fermenting
Spirits, which do penetrate the Copper.

The Crystals of Venus are nothing but Copper dissolved, and afterward
coagulated with the acids of Vinegar, that incorporate with it, and form a kind
of Vitriol.

Spirit of Venus.
Put what quantity you please of the Crystals of Venus prepared with distilled
Vinegar, as I showed before, into a Glass Retort, whose third part remains
empty. Place your Retort in Sand, and Fitting to it a large Receiver, and
Luting well the junctures, give a small Fire at first, to drive out a little
insipid Phlegm; this Phlegm will be followed by a Volatile Spirit. Then augment
the Fire by degrees, and the Receiver will fill with white Clouds. Toward the
latter end kindle coals round about the Retort, that the last Spirits may come
forth, for they are the strongest. When you see the clouds disappear, and the
Recipient grow cool, put out the Fire: unlute the junctures, and pour all that
which is in the Recipient into a Glass Body to distill it in Sand until it is
dry. This is the rectified Spirit of Venus.

This Remedy is used against the Epilepsie, the Palsy, the Apoplexy, and
other Diseases of the Head. Seven or Eight drops of it are given in a
convenient Vehicle: many do use it to dissolve Pearl, Coral, and such like
substances.

The black Mass that remains in the Retort may be revived into Copper, if put
in a Crucible in a Fire of Fusion, with a little Saltpeter, or Tartar.

Remarks.
The Acid is drawn from the Copper by fire without breaking its points; for
Spirit of Venus is considerably sharp, which happens not in other Metals. The
reason that may be given of it is, that Copper, which is very full of Sulphur,
does but barely touch upon the Acids by its ramous parts. So that when these
points are stirred by the violence of fire, they come forth whole, because they
do not meet with resistance of a body hard enough to break them in pieces. They
do also draw along with them, some of the most Volatile parts of Copper, with
which they are inseparably united.

It has been thought that this Spirit being poured upon Coral and Pearl, was
able to dissolve them without losing any thing of its force; so that when you
would use the same Spirit, it would corrode the Matters as before. But
Experience does not confirm it; it is true the dissolvent comes from the Coral
with a great deal of sharpness, but it has lost the Acidity which was the
principal Menstruum; and if there remains any sharpness, it proceeds from the
Copper.

If you use a pound of Crystals of Venus in this distillation, you will draw half
a pound of liquor, and the matter which remains in the Retort will be just the
same quantity.

CHAP. VII. Of Iron.
IRon is called Mars from the Planet of that name, whose Influence it is
thought to receive; it is a very Porous Metal compounded of a Vitriolick Salt,
Sulphur, and Earth, ill digested together; wherefore the dissolution of its
parts is very easily performed.

Iron is found in many Mines in Europe, in form of a Stone or Marcassite, which
much resembles the Loadstone, but this last is more heavy and brittle than
Iron. The Loadstone is also found in Mines of Iron, and may be reduced into
Iron by a strong fire. Iron for its part does easily acquire the virtue of the
Loadstone, as every body knows, so that these bodies do seem to differ only in
the figure of their Pores, as has been very well observed by our modern
Philosophers.

Iron in the stone is melted in large Furnaces made on purpose, both to purify
it from some earth, and to bring it into the Form we desire. Having continued
some time in Fusion, it Vitrifies as it were, and much resembles an Enamel of
several colors; and it enters indeed into the composition of ordinary Enamels,
with Lead, Tinn, Antimony, Sand, the Sapphire, the Stone of Perigord, (a
Province in France) Gravelled ashes, and the ashes of a Plant called Kali.

It is turned into Steel by means of Horns or Nails of Animals, with which it
is stratified, and so Calcined. These matters containing a great deal of
Volatile Salt which is an Alkali, do kill or destroy the Acids of the Iron,
that kept its Pores open, and do render it more compact. Besides the Fire
carries off many of the more Volatile and Soluble parts of Iron, whence it
comes to pass, that Steel will remain longer without rusting than Iron.

Steel is to be preferred before Iron for the making of Vtensils; but for
Remedies, Iron is the better beyond comparison. I shall give you the reasons
for what I say in the following Operations.

Although Mars does contain an Acid Vitriolick Salt, yet it ceases not the
being an Alkali, for it ferments with Acids, and no body needs wonder at this
effect, when they consider there is more Earth than Salt in this Metal, and
this Earth containing this Salt within it, retains Pores sufficient to receive
the Points of Acids when thrown upon it, and so does the office of an Alkali;
for as I have said speaking of the Principles, it is sufficient for a body to
be called an Alkali, if it has its Pores so disposed as that the Acids may be
able through their motion violently to separate whatsoever stands in their way.

Mars is almost always Astringent by Stool, by reason of its Terrestrious
parts, and Aperitive by Urine, not only by reason of its piercing Salt, but
also because when the body is bound, the humidities do more easily filter by
way of Urine.

Opening Saffron of Mars.
This Preparation is only a Rust of Iron contracted in the Dew.

Wash well several Iron Plates, and expose them to the Dew for a good while,
they will rust, and you must gather up this rust. Set the same Plates again to
receive the Dew, and gather the Rust as before. Continue to do so till you have
gotten enough.

This Rust is really better than all the Preparations of Iron that are called
Crocus. It is excellent for Obstructions of the Liver, Pancreas, Spleen, and
Mesentery.

It is used very successfully for the Green Sickness, stopping of the Terms,
Dropsies, and other Diseases that proceed from Oppilations. The Dose is from
two grains unto two Scruples in Lozenges or Pills. Many do give Mars with
Purgatives, which is a good Practice.

Remarks.
The Chemists have called Calcined Steel Crocus, by reason of its red color;
and they have given this name to many other Preparations for the same reason.

Though Steel has been always used in the Chemical Preparations that are used
in Physic, and is preferred before Iron for the Cure of Diseases; it is
certain nevertheless that Iron is fitter for that intent than Steel, because it
is more Soluble; for if the action of Iron proceeds from nothing but its Salt,
(as there is no reason to doubt,) the Salt of Iron must be much more easily
separated in the stomach than that of Steel, because as I have shown before,
the Pores of Steel are more close than those of Iron, and therefore this must
have quicker effects; besides that Steel being harder to be dissolved does
sometimes pass away with the excrements, without bestowing any impression on
the Chyle. The reason that has induced People to believe that Steel is better
for use than Iron, was its being thought to be deprived of many impurities by
Calcination, but that which is called Impurity is the more open part of the
Iron, and consequently the more wholesome.

This Preparation of the Saffron of Mars is out of the common road, and longer
a doing than the others; but it is the best of all that ever were invented. The
Dew is impregnated with a Dissolvent that opens very much the Pores of Iron,
and incorporating with it renders it more active and soluble than it was before.

Iron does open Obstructions by its salt, which being assisted with the solid
parts of the Metal, penetrates further than other Salts. But you must always
purge and moisten the Person you give it to with broths before you presume to
give it, because if it should find the passages of the small Vessels filled and
obstructed with gross matters, it stops and sometimes causes Inflammations that
create pains like to those of the Colic.

Many do use the filings of Steel without any Preparation at all.

Iron does frequently open Obstructions by absorbing, as an Alkali, the Acid
that fomented them.

Seeing that some persons have endeavored to contradict the Remarks I have
made upon the Effects of Mars, and particularly concerning the preference I
have given Iron to Steel for Physical uses, I have thought it not convenient to
end this Chapter, before I have laid down and Answered their Objections.

First then they say, that because the different substances of Mars cannot be
separated, as those of Animals and Vegetables can, it is in vain that an
Aperitive virtue is attributed to its Salt.

Answer, I grant, all the substances of Mars cannot be separated so easily as
those of Animals and Vegetables; but because we find Salts to be Aperitive, and
commonly Remedies that are so, are full of Salts, and that water in which rust
of Iron has steeped for some time, is proper to open by way of Urine, it seems
to me rational enough to attribute this effect of Mars principally to its Salt;
for if the water has carried off any taste or penetrating quality from Iron,
there is nothing at all in Mars that is able to contribute such a virtue to it,
besides the Salt therein dissolved.

Secondly, they say, the Earth and Salt of Mars being united and in a manner
become inseparable, cannot act but by consent of both, and receive together
jointly the good or bad impressions, that may happen to them.

I Answer, there is no reason to think the Salt of Mars absolutely inseparable
from the Earth, for the water in which this Metal has steeped or boiled, after
Filtration does contain a Vitriolick taste, and Aperitive quality. Now it is
the effect of Salt to dissolve imperceptibly in Water and drive by Urine, as I
have said; but if any body would take the pains to steep and boil gently the
rust of Iron a good while in water, then Filter it, and Evaporate the liquor
over a small fire to a Pellicle, he will by Crystallization or by an entire
evaporation of the humidity, gain a small quantity of Salt; and it is probable
enough that there was much more in the water, as may be collected from the
strong taste it had of Mars, but it being something of a Volatile nature, it
fumed away in the Evaporation. I do not say nevertheless, that the close
connection of Earth with the Salt of Mars is altogether unuseful for this
effect; on the contrary, I do conceive that this Earth rendering the Salt more
heavy than otherwise it would be, does help to drive it forwards, and causes
the Mars sometimes to penetrate as much by its gravity as by its Salt; but we
must attribute the principal virtue to the Vehicle which is Salt, since without
that, the Earth would be a dead matter, and would have no more action than
other Earths bereaved of their Salts.

Thirdly, They say that in all probability Mars does act only according to the
preparations which the different juices it meets with in the stomach do make;
for these acid juices not failing to encounter with, and to dissolve it, there
results from this dissolution a liberty to the parts of the body on which these
juices did act, and consequently their restoration anew.

I am willing to believe that sometimes Mars may act in the body like an
Alkali, by absorbing and sweetning the acid humor which it meets with, as it
does absorb and sweeten the acid liquors which are poured upon it; but it must
not be concluded from hence, that its Aperitive faculty does always consist in
this effect, because as I before hinted, the water in which Mars has been put
to boil, is Aperitive, and yet there is no Alkali in it to sweeten the acids of
the body, when it is drunk.

Fourthly, They object, that we must not think the hardness of the parts of
Steel above Iron, whose Pores are more open, does render it less proper for all
sorts of Preparations, seeing Spirit of Vitriol, and many other acids are found
to dissolve with the same ease both Iron and Steel.

I Answer, that if Corrosive spirits do dissolve Steel, they can dissolve Iron
more easily; and whereas a smaller quantity of them can operate upon Iron than
Steel, a better effect does thence follow.

Fifthly, It Is objected that the solidity of Steel may be an advantageous
circumstance to it, for the better fixing the dissolving Juices that are in the
stomach, and that for Metals the pure are to be chosen before those that are
not so.

I Answer, that instead of the solidity of Steels being helpful to the stomach,
it is certainly of great prejudice to it, as well as to those other parts it is
distributed into; for the juices that are found in the stomach being but weak
dissolvents, are not able to penetrate nor rarifie this metal, if it be too
hard; so that they leave it crude and indigest, heavy and troublesome to this
part: Wherefore it passes away by Stool, without any good effect, as it often
happens. But now if a little of this Steel does happen to pass along with the
Chyle, it rather causes than takes away Obstructions, for by insinuating into
small vessels, it stops in the narrow passages, and causes grievous pains.

For what is said concerning the Purity of Metals, it is of great use to
Tradesmen, for they by Purifying metals from their more rarefied and Volatile
parts, do make them the less Porous, and so the less liable to suffer prejudice
from Air or time. Thus Steel is much fitter for Utensils than Iron, because its
Pores are closer laid together, and it takes not rust so soon as Iron; but in
Remedies it is not the same thing, for those Metals that are more rarefied, and
are more easily dissolved in the Body, are such as we find best effects from,
for the reason I have given. So that what Workmen call Purity, is often but an
impurity in Remedies.

Sixthly, They say, that if one would hope to find a distinct Salt in Mars, it
would be more likely to find it in that which is Purified, than in the Faeces
which are separated from it, and which are indeed but the Impurities of Iron,
that Steel is made of.

I Answer, there would be some reason to think that Salt might be more easily
found in Steel than Iron, if in the making of Steel, Iron were simply Calcined,
without adding Nails and Horns of Animals in the Calcination; for then it might
be said that the Sulphur of Iron being in part evaporated, its salt would be
the more Soluble: but we must consider that the Volatile salts which come from
these parts of Animals, being piercing Alkali's, do destroy the acid salts of
Iron, and do thereby render the Steel more compact, and unfit to take rust,
because the salts which by their motion did rarifie the metal, are fixed, and
as it were mortified, and have not the capacity of acting as they did. This is
the reason why a plate of Steel that has infused in Water will not give so
great Impression to it, as a plate of Iron Calcined, of the same weight,
infusing the same time, will do.

Another thing remarkable in the Calcination of Iron to turn it into Steel, is,
that it is thereby deprived of its more Volatile salt, which should have most
effect with it, in hopes to free it from Impurities, and that which is called
the Scories, is the better part of Iron that has been rarefied by its salt.
Thus for the same reason that some are pleased to call the rust of Iron its
dross, the whole metal may deserve the same appellation, all of it being
capable of rusting, if it be but laid in the open air.

Another Aperitive Saffron of Mars.
This Preparation is the filings of Iron turned into rust in the Rain.

Put the filings of Iron into an earthen Pot unglazed, and expose it to the
Rain until it turns into a Paste. Then set it a drying in the shade, and it
will rust; powder it, and expose it to the Rain again as before, and so let it
rust; continue to rehumectate, and rust this matter for twelve several times.
Then powdering it very fine keep it for use. You may wet it with the water of
Honey instead of Rain.

This Crocus has the same virtues as the other, and is given in the same Dose.
I cannot but prefer that which I described before, because I conceive it to be
more open than this.

Another Opening Saffron of Mars.
This Preparation is only the filings of Iron Calcined with Sulphur.

Take equal quantities of the filings of Steel, and Sulphur powdered. Mix them
together, and make them into a Paste with water; put this Paste into an earthen
Pan, and leave it a fermenting four or five hours, after which put the Pan over
a good fire, and stir the matter with an Iron Spatula, it will flame, and when
the Sulphur is burnt, it will appear black; but continuing a good strong fire,
and stirring it about two hours, it will be of a very red color, which
declares to you the Operation is ended. Let it cool, and this Crocus may serve
in the same Diseases as the former; the Dose is from fifteen Grains to a Dram.

Remarks.
I have thought good to deliver this Preparation for the convenience of such
who need a great quantity of Saffron of Mars, and who have not leisure enough
to make it according to the other descriptions, for it is sooner Calcined, and
is of a redder color than any that are made with fire.

A Paste is made of the mixture, to the end that the acidity of the Sulphur
being diluted by Water may insensibly penetrate the Iron, and open it the
better; and it is very easy to observe this penetration, seeing that the
matter does grow so hot of it self, that a man can hardly endure his hand upon
it. It is the same thing whether you make a smaller quantity, or make five and
twenty or thirty pounds of this Preparation at a time, it flames, and half
calcines before it is put upon the Fire, which cannot be explicated but by the
violent action and frication of the acid part of the Sulphur against the solid
body of this metal.

This Operation may very well help us to explicate after what manner the
Sulphurs do ferment in the earth when it happens to tremble, and fires do burst
forth, as does too often happen in many Countries, and among others at Mount
Vesuvius, and Mount Aetna; for these Sulphurs mixing in Iron Mines may
penetrate the Metal, produce a heat, and at last take flame after the same
manner as they do in the present Operation. And it will be in vain to object,
that there is no Air in the earth to help to fire the Sulphurs; for there are
clefts sufficient in the earth to give entrance unto Air. But if there were not
enough, the fermentation which happens at the meeting of Iron and Brimstone may
be able to raise the earth in some places and to burst it a-sunder.

The great heat of many Mineral waters may likewise easily be explicated by the
means of these Subterranean Fires, and how they came to receive those Sulphurs
which we see are wont to be separated on the sides of the Bath, when the water
is not disturbed.

It is because those waters do pass immediately over, or else through the midst
of some of these burning earths, wherein they are heated as they pass, and do
imbibe the Sulphur. But when they are arrived to the place of the Baths, and
have there awhile settled, this Sulphur being a fatt body cannot so intimately
mix with the water, but that it will separate to the sides of the Bath.

It may be also, that some Mineral waters do owe their heat to a natural
Quicklime they may meet withal in their passage through the bowels of the
earth; but this Quicklime is only a stone calcined by the Subterranean Fires,
of which I have spoken. And now to return to our Operation.

You must observe to make this Calcination rather in an earthen Pan, than Pot
or Crucible, and to stir it continually with a Spatula, that the Sulphur may
exhale the more easily. I have sometimes tried to do it in a Crucible, but the
matter still remained black, though I persisted in calcining and stirring it
for above twelve hours together.

If you have used a Pound of Mars, you will get at least a pound and four ounces
of Crocus, which proves, the acids of Sulphur, or some igneous bodies to
incorporate in the pores of the Iron, and augment its weight,

The red color proceeds from Vitriol that Mars is full off, which being
calcined grows red like Colcothar.

Many other Preparations of Opening Saffron of Mars have been invented, but
these three are sufficient as being the best.

Binding Saffron of Mars.
This Preparation is the filings of Iron deprived of their more Saline part.

Take what quantity you please of the last Aperitive Saffron of Mars; wash it
five or six times with strong Vinegar, leaving it to steep an hour at a time,
then calcine it in a Pot, or upon a Tile in a great Fire five or six hours;
after that let it cool and keep it for use.

It stops the Diarrhoea, the immoderate flowing of the Hemorrhoids and Terms;
the Dose is from fifteen grains to a dram in Lozenges, or else in Pills.

Remarks.
Because Mars is an impure Vitriol, the more it is Calcined, the more
astringent it is. But seeing that which renders it Aperitive is its Salt, or
more soluble part, I intend by washing it several times with Vinegar to deprive
it of much of its Salt. Afterward I Calcine the matter to carry off by Fire
what Aperitive parts might remain.

Not that I expect by this means to separate entirely all that is Aperitive in
Mars from that which is astringent; that is a thing in a manner impossible, by
reason of the strict union of its Salt and earth in the Mine; but I do believe
it very probable to say, that if there be any thing astringent in this metal,
as it cannot be denied, it must needs be the more terrestrious part,

I may likewise say, that if the astringent Mars has sometimes the effect of
opening, it is by the remaining Salt that it opens; but when this Salt has done
acting, the terrestrious part never fails to bind.

Lastly, I further say, that I do not believe any Preparation of Mars to be
absolutely astringent, and that all we can do is to render it less incisive,
and less penetrating than before, by depriving it of some part of its Salts.

Several other Preparations for making the Astringent Saffron of Mars are
taught, but this one may suffice.

Salt, or Vitriol of Mars.
This Preparation is an Iron opened, and reduced into the form of Salt by an
acid liquor.

Take a clean Drying Pan, and pour into it an equal weight of Spirit of Wine,
and Oil of Vitriol; set it for some time in the Sun, and then in the shade
without stirring it; you will find all the Liquor incorporated with the Mars, and
turned into a Salt that you must dry, and then separate from the Pan, and keep
in a Viol well stopped.

It is an admirable Remedy for all Diseases that proceed from Obstructions: the
Dose is from four to twelve grains, in Broth, or some appropriate Liquor.

Remarks.
The Spirit of Wine serves here to moderate the too great force of the Oil of
Vitriol, which if alone would indeed in a little time penetrate all the parts
of the Iron, and cause a very impure Salt; but the spirit of Wine hinders its
so quick dissolution; so that nothing but the more soluble part incorporates
with the Oil, to make a Salt or Vitriol.

A Drying Pan is more proper for this Operation than another vessel less flat,
because the liquor spreads it self about, and incorporates the better; you must
use a Pan that is new.

If you use two ounces of Spirit of Wine, and the same quantity of Oil of
Vitriol, in a small Drying Pan, you will obtain five ounces of Mars.

You may put your liquor a thumbs height in the Pan, and leave it there a day
and a half, or two days without stirring it.

The Oil of Vitriol is improperly called Oil, being nothing but the more
caustic Spirit, as I shall prove in its proper place.

Riverius in his Practice gives a way of preparing the Salt of Mars like unto
this; excepting that he puts more Spirit of Wine than Oil of Vitriol, but it is
better to put equal parts as I have done.

Its virtue is greater than that of the Crocus, because it is whetted by the
Oil of Vitriol, and therefore is given in a less dose; you must observe that
sometimes it causes a nauseousness as all Vitriols do.

If you put this Salt, or Vitriol of Mars to dissolve in a cold place, you will
have a liquor that is called improperly, Oil of Mars.

Another Vitriol of Mars.
This Vitriol of Mars is an Iron dissolved, and reduced into the form of Salt
by Spirit of Vitriol.

Put eight ounces of clean filings of Iron into a large Mattress, and pour upon
it two pounds of common water heated a little; add unto it a pound of good
Spirit of Vitriol, stir it, and set your Mattress in hot Sand, leave it in
Digestion four and twenty hours, during which time the purest part of the Iron
will dissolve; separate the Liquor by Inclination, and fling away the earthy
part that remains in a small quantity at the bottom. Filtrate this Liquor, and
evaporate it in a Glass-Cucurbite unto a Skin in a Sand-fire, then set your
vessel in a cool place, and you will find green Crystals, which you may take out
after having gently poured off the Liquor. Then evaporate again this Liquor
unto a Skin, and Crystallize it as before, repeat these evaporations and
Crystallizations until you have got all your Crystals; then dry them, and keep
them in a Glass bottle well stopped.

This Vitriol of Mars has the same virtues as the former, and must be given in
the same Dose.

Remarks.
The Spirit of Vitriol is weakened by the Water, to the end that it may be
incapable of dissolving but only the purer part of Mars. Moreover if it were
used alone, it would incorporate with the very substance of Mars, but would not
be able to dissolve any of it, because there would be wanting sufficient
moisture to separate its parts.

During the dissolution the liquor heats and boils considerably, because the
acidity of Spirit of Vitriol does violently enter the body of this metal, and
makes a separation of its parts.

To Evaporate unto a Pellicle, does signify to consume the Liquor until a kind
of thin skin is perceived to swim upon it, which always happens when some part
of the moisture being evaporated, there remains but little more than is
necessary to hold the Salt in Fusion.

An Acid Spirit may be drawn from this Vitriol of Mars by distilling it in a
Retort in a Reverberatory fire, like common Vitriol; this Spirit has been
thought to have the same virtues as ordinary Spirit of Vitriol, but it cannot be
near so good, because it has much blunted or broken some part of its edges
against the body of Mars, in the dissolution and distillation. That which
remains in the Retort after distillation, is that part of Mars which the Spirit
of Vitriol had dissolved. It may be used like an aperitive Crocus Martis.

Those who do attribute the aperitive effect of Mars only to its sweetning (as
an Alkali) the acid juices which do too plentifully abound in men's bodies, will
find it hard to explicate how these two last preparations do come to be
esteemed the best aperitives which are made upon Mars, for the acid does so far
predominate in their composition, that the Alkali is able to do little or
nothing.

Tincture of Mars with Tartar.
This Preparation is a dissolution of Iron performed by the acid of Tartar.

Take Twelve ounces of the Rust of Iron, and Two pounds of White Tartar of
Montpelier, powder and mix them together; then boil them in a great Iron pot or
Cauldron with Twelve or Fifteen pints of Rainwater for Twelve hours time, stir
the matter with an Iron Slice from time to time, and take care to put more
boiling water into the Cauldron, according as it consumes; afterward leave it
a while to settle, and you will have a black Liquor, Filtrate and evaporate it in
an Earthen Pan over a Sand-fire, to the consistence of a Syrup, or till there
rises a Pellicle upon it.

It is a very great Aperitive, it opens the most inveterate Obstructions, and
is given in Cachexies, Dropsies, Obstruction of the Terms, and other Diseases
that proceed from Oppilations; the Dose is from a Dram to half an ounce in
Broth, or some appropriate Liquor.

Remarks.
Water alone would not be able enough to penetrate the Iron, for to make a
Tincture, though you should boil it a Month together. But when it is
impregnated with Tartar, it dissolves it very easily. Nevertheless you must not
think that this Tincture is a perfect solution of Mars; for if there were an
entire solution of it, there would appear no more Tincture than there does in
the solution of it with Spirit of Vitriol and water; but because the soluble
part of Tartar which is the agent in this Operation, is only an impure acid
Salt, it can but grossly rarify the Mars, and after mixing with it keep it
suspended in the water.

After the Tincture is drawn, there remains a whitish matter, that you must
fling away as good for nothing, it is a mixture of the grosser parts of Tartar
and Mars.

This Tincture is called Syrup of Mars, by reason of a certain sweetness that
is perceived in its Taste. It is reduced into the consistence of a Syrup, to
keep the better.

As for its virtues, it is a very great Aperitive, because the force of Mars is
assisted by the Tartar, that serves to be its Vehicle.

Opening Extract of Mars.
This Preparation is a solution of the more open parts of Iron, by aperitive
juices, and reduced into a solid consistence by fire.

Take Eight ounces of the Rust of Iron prepared in the Morning Dew, put it in
an Iron pot, and pour upon it three pounds of the Water of Honey, and four
pounds of Must, or the juice of White grapes perfectly ripe. Add to it four
ounces of juice of Lemons; cover it with an Iron Cover, and set it in a Furnace
over a little fire; leave the Matter in Digestion three days, then boil the
Matter gently three or four hours, uncovering the Pot ever now and then, to
stir up the bottom with an Iron slice, then cover it again, that the moisture
may not evaporate too fast. When you perceive the Liquor to be black, you must
take away the fire, and leave it a while to settle, pass warm through a cloth
that which is clear, and evaporate the liquor in a Sand fire, in an Earthen
pan, or Glass vessel to the consistence of an Extract. It Is a very good
aperitive; it has the same virtues as the Tincture for Obstructions of the
Liver, Spleen, and Mesentery; it delivers the Lymphatick vessels admirably well
of what may hinder the current of Serum. The Dose is from Ten grains to two
Scruples, in Pills, or else dissolved in some proper Liquor. That which remains
in the bottom of the Iron pot is the more Earthy part of Mars, that is good for
nothing.

Remarks.
This Extract does not receive its consistence only from the Iron, but from the
Tartareous juices of the Grapes and Lemons, with which it is mixed; its virtue
is augmented by the Essential Salts, and the Spirit of Honey that leaves in it
a very good impression.

The mixture is left in digestion, for the better Dissolution of the Mars; but
seeing the Menstruum is not very sharp or corrosive, it dissolves only the more
Saline and soluble parts. This Description is not common, but may be preferred
before many others.

Every body grants that Mars is as excellent a Remedy as any in all Physic,
for opening Obstructions, and restoring a good complexion to those that want it
by reason of Obstructions; but you must not be contented with giving it once or
twice, but for a fortnight together; some intervals may be observed, that
nature may not be troubled too much. In hot climes, such as Languedoc and
Provence, where are more Oppilations than in other Countries, they make no
difficulty to take it sometimes every day for a month together, after a due
Preparation, and it is the best Remedy that has been known for that Distemper.

Binding Extract of Mars.
This Preparation is a solution of Iron made with an astringent Wine, and
reduced into a thick consistence, by fire.

Take Eight ounces of the Rust of Iron powdered very fine, put it into an Iron
pot, and pour upon it four pints of a strong Red wine; set the pot over the
fire, and having covered it, make the Matter boil, stir it from time to time
with an Iron slice, till two thirds of it be consumed; pass the Liquor warm
through a cloth, and evaporate it to the consistence of an Extract. It stops
the Looseness, Bloody Flux, the Flux of the Hemorrhoids and Terms; the Dose is
from Ten Grains unto Two Scruples in Pills, or dissolved in some astringent
Liquor.

Remarks.
The strongest Red-wine is of so high a color, that it appears to be black;
with this Vintners do color their White wines, they do make them to be either
pale or red, according to the quantity of it they mix. And the Dyers do
likewise use it.

This Wine becomes impregnated only with some part of the Mars, because the
Tartar which it contains is capable but of dissolving the more rarefied part of
this metal, the rest remaining in the bottom of the pot. The astringent virtue
of the Wine does much increase that of the Iron, and renders it very proper for
the distempers beforementioned. But you must not think that its aperitive Salt
is wholly destroyed, for it still opens Obstructions, and passes by way of
Urine: indeed it does not act this way so powerfully as the aperitive Extract
of Mars, but effects of that kind are observed from it.

The same Remedy may be both astringent by Stool, and aperitive by Urine,
because that when the body is bound, the Serosities, which were wont to pass by
Siege, do become diverted into the Urinary passages. On the contrary, in a
Diarrhoea, the moist humors which would otherwise have taken their course by
way of Urine, do here turn it by siege.

Mars Diaphoretick.
Mars Diaphoretick is only the particles of Iron impregnated with Volatile
Salts.

Powder and mix together equal quantities of the rust of Iron, and Sal
Armoniack, put this mixture into an Earthen Cucurbite, set it in a small
Furnace, and stop up the bottom with Lute and Bricks, that the fire may not be
able to pass upwards, but only through certain holes or Registers; fit to your
Cucurbite a blind head, and give a gentle fire at first; augment it by degrees
to heat the Cucurbite red-hot, and continue this degree of heat, until there
arise no more vapors; then let the vessels cool, and taking off the head
gather the sublimed Flowers, dissolve them in water sufficient only to dissolve
them, filtrate this dissolution through a Coffin of brown paper, and pour upon
it drop by drop the Oil of Tartar made per Deliquium, or else the Spirit of Sal
Armoniack, a powder will precipitate to the bottom of the vessel, decant the
Liquor, and dry this precipitate; it causes Sweat, and is good against all
diseases that proceed from a corruption of Humors; it sometimes also drives by
way of Urine, according as bodies are disposed: it is excellent against the
Hypochondriack Melancholy, and in Quartan Agues: the Dose is from ten to twenty
grains in pills, or some proper Liquor.

Remarks.
This Preparation is Sudorifick by reason of some particles of Sal Armoniack
that remain in the Precipitated Mars; for when these Saline parts are actuated
by the heat of the Body, being of a very Volatile nature, they do insensibly
distribute themselves rather into the Pores of all the Body, than follow the
course of sixth Salts by way of Urine; whence a Sweat does come to follow, or
sometimes an insensible transpiration, because it rarifies and gives vent to
abundance of Humors that were not able to pass, by reason of their viscosity.
Sometimes also finding the Pores too much obstructed, it is forced to become
fixed, and follow the ordinary course by way of Urine, and then it opens the
Lymphatick vessels, and evacuates several matters that were contained in them.

People often find greater benefit from much Urine than Sweat, because the way
of Urine is more natural and weakens less.

CHAP. VIII. Of Mercury.
QVick-Silver is a prodigy among Metals; for it is fluid like water, and though
a very heavy body, yet it easily flies away when set over the fire.

It is probable, that the parts of this Metal are all of a round figure, for
divide it how you will without adding to it, and it always keeps a globular
form to every part; and if you look a little near it, when it dissolves in Aqua
fortis, you will observe an infinite number of little round bodies, which rise up
in the liquor, like smoke.

Now the parts of Mercury being supposed round, it may be explicated how this
metal does remain fluid, and why it Volatilizes so easily by fire, although it
be so exceeding heavy, for the round figure being no ways proper for the
connection or union of parts, the little bodies which do compose the
Quicksilver, cannot adhere together, and consequently they must roll one upon
another, as we see happens to all round bodies; and this is that which causes
the fluidity of this metal.

As for its Volatility, it proceeds from this, that the round parts being only
contiguous, and having no proper union together, nothing hinders its parts from
rising by the force of fire; for that which makes the other metals to be more
fixed than Mercury, and to remain in the fire without consuming wholly, is
because their parts are continued, and so fastened together that fire has no
power to disunite them in order to Volatilize them.

It may be objected that the parts of Quicksilver being granted round, they
should for the same reason be light, because the round bodies which approach
one another, do leave many empty spaces between them.

But though there are such vacuities, the little balls are massive and compact,
and this causes their gravity.

There Is another objection, that is, the parts of Mercury are heavy, how come
they to be volatilized by fire?

I answer, that when these parts are said to be heavy, it is in comparison with
other little bodies that are lighter: but you must not imagine that every part
of Mercury should be heavy enough to resist the rapid nature of fire. But
besides, these little Mercurial bodies, which we suppose to be compact, may
have their Pores of such a texture, that the igneous parts being once gotten
within them, may not be able to find a way out again, and so they and their
small prisons may fly up together.

It is called Quicksilver from its fluidity, and Mercury because it changes
into different shapes, like the Celestial Mercury, from whom it is thought to
receive its Influence.

It is to be found in many places in Europe, as Poland, Hungary, and even in
France; for a few years since there was discovered near St. Lo in Normandy, a
Mine abounding in Cinnabar, from whence good store of Mercury is drawn.

Some of it is also found running in the Mines, and this is passed through a
Shammey skin to purify it from some Earth that it may be joined with; but
because it does sometimes prove very difficult to separate it from the Earths
with which it is in a manner incorporated, they are forced to distill it through
Iron Retorts into Receivers filled with water.

Natural Cinnabar, called Mineral, is a mixture of Mercury and Sulphur that
sublime together by the means of a Subterraneous heat, and this is done near
after the same manner as Artificial Cinnabar is made, of which I shall speak
anon.

Quicksilver by reason of its fluidity is hard to transport, wherefore a great
quantity of it is reduced into Cinnabar, (in the places whence it is taken)
after the manner following.

Artificial Cinnabar.
Cinnabar is a mixture of Sulphur and Quicksilver sublimed together.

Take a quantity of Sulphur, and melt it in a great earthen pan, then mix by
little and little thrice as much Quicksilver; you must stir about and preserve
the Matter in Fusion, till all the Mercury disappears. Then powder your
mixture, and sublime it in pots in an open fire well governed, you will have a
hard Mass, and of a very red color. If any heterogeneous Metal should have
been mixed with the Mercury, it would remain at the bottom of the Pots.

Besides the convenience of easily transporting Mercury by this means, it is
very useful in Painting. It is also used in Pomatums for the Itch, and to make
Fumes withal to raise a Salivation.

Remarks.
A pound of Sulphur is able to incorporate three pounds of Mercury, and to make
a Mass together.

The cause of this mutation of Mercury into Cinnabar does proceed from the
penetration which the more acid part of Sulphur does make into the Mercury, and
the intangling its parts whose motion is now checked. And being raised by the
fire it volatilizes as it does, but the Saline or acid Spirits of Sulphur do
fix it, so as that it is constrained to stop its volatility, and settle in the
upper part of the pot, which is called subliming; whereas when it is all alone,
or else joined with some matter that cannot fix it, it evaporates quite away.

Cinnabar is shaped like needles, by reason of the acid Spirits of Sulphur,
which have entered into its body, and have impressed such a figure; its red
color may proceed likewise from the Sulphur, which is of this color when it
is well rarefied.

This Red appears brown while the Cinnabar is in the Mass, but if you powder it
very fine, beating it a good while, it becomes of a shining, and that so high a
color, that it has been called Vermillion. Some women do rub their Cheeks with
it, when they have mixed it in Pomatum, but they don't consider that so
dangerous an accident may happen from it, as a Salivation.

The Fumigation with it, is made by causing a patient to receive the Fume of
the Cinnabar thrown into the fire.

Reviving of Cinnabar into Quicksilver.
This Operation is performed in order to separate the Sulphur which is in the
Cinnabar.

Take a Pound of Artificial Cinnabar, powder it, and mix it exactly with three
pounds of Quicklime also powdered; put the mixture into an earthen or glass
Retort, whose third part at least remains empty. Place it in a Reverberatory
Furnace, and after having fitted to it a Receiver filled with Water, give your
fire by degrees, and at last increase it to the height, the Mercury will run
drop by drop into the Receiver; continue the fire until no more will come; the
Operation is commonly at an end in six or seven hours. Pour the Water out of
the Receiver, and having washed the Mercury to cleanse it from some little
portion of earth it might carry along with it, dry it with Linen, or the crum
of Bread, and keep it for use.

You must draw thirteen ounces and a half of flowing Mercury out of each pound
of Artificial Cinnabar.

You may again Revive the Cinnabar, by mixing it with equal parts of filings of
Iron, and by proceeding in the Operation, as I have taught.

Remarks.
When Mercury is thus revived, you may be sure of its purity, because if any
Metal should have mixed with it in the Mine, it would remain, as I have said,
at the bottom of the Pot you sublime it in: and if the Cinnabar were
adulterated, that which had been used in the adulteration, either would not
rise with the Mercury, or else would separate from it in the Receiver.

Cinnabar being nothing but a mixture of acid Spirits and Mercury together, if
you mix it with some Alkali, and drive it upwards by fire, the Acids, for the
reason I have already spoken of concerning the Depart of Silver, must leave the
Bodies they were joined to before, for to enter into the Alkali, and this is
what happens here, for the Acids finding the Quicklime very porous, do leave
the Mercury, and adhere to the Quicklime; so that this Mercury being disengaged
from what held it fixed before, and forced by the fire, comes forth of the
Retort in form of Spirit, but the coolness of the Water that is in the
Recipient, condenses it, and resolves it into Quicksilver.

A third part of the Retort is left empty, because the rarefied Mercury comes
forth with such violence as would otherwise be apt to break the Retort.

You must leave the mixture to settle a day or two, before you put the fire
under it, to the end that the Quicklime may slake the while, for if you should
not observe this circumstance, the Retort would burst. You might also use such
a Quicklime as has been already slak't in the air, and then you might begin
your distillation immediately after the mixture, but I do think that the
Revivification will be the more exact, when unslak't Lime is used, because the
Alkali will act more strongly upon the Sulphurous acids.

When the distillation begins, abundance of Sulphurous fume is seen to come
out of the Retort; the juncture of the Receiver with the Retort must not be
luted, because it is better to let this Sulphur fly away; for if it had no
vent, we might have reason to fear lest some part of the Quicksilver would
join and unite with it in the Receiver, and so we might be obliged to make a
second Revivification of it.

If by way of curiosity you weigh the Lime which remains in the Retort after
distillation, you will find three pounds and half an ounce of it, this little
augmentation of weight proceeds from a remainder of the Sulphur of Cinnabar,
and the matter does smell of Sulphur.

Quicksilver is one of the greatest remedies we have in Physic, when it is
used as it should be, but is full as dangerous, when it happens into the hands
of Quacks, who use it upon all occasions for all sorts of Diseases, and give it
indifferently to all sorts of persons without any respect to the Temperament
they are of. Those who draw it out of Mines, or work much with it, do often
fall into the Palsy, by reason of Sulphurs that continually steam from it; for
these Sulphurs consisting of gross parts do enter through the Pores of the
Body, and fixing themselves rather in the Nerves by reason of their coldness,
than in the other Vessels, do stop the passage of the Spirits, and hinder their
course.

Mercury is given in the Disease called Miserere, unto two or three pounds, and
is voided again by siege to the same weight; it is better to take a great deal
of it than a little, because a small quantity might be apt to stop in the
circumvolutions of the Guts, and if some Acid humors should happen to join
with it, a Sublimate Corrosive would be there made; but when a large quantity
of it is taken, there is no need of fearing this Accident, because it passes
quickly through by its own weight.

Mercury mixes so well with rosinous and fat Bodies, as to remain
imperceptible; all Unguents, Pomatums, and Plasters in which it enters, are
good against the Itch, and Tetters, and do dissolve cold tumors, because it
opens the Pores, and drives by perspiration. Furthermore, seeing these
Distempers are fomented by Acid humors, it breaks their edge, and hinders them
from causing any further Fermentation.

Hitherto there is no Remedy found out to be so sovereign for the cure of
Venereal Maladies, as Mercury; wherefore its greatest enemies have been forced
to fly to it, after they had tried a long time to no purpose to drive out the
poison by other Remedies. And in truth if we knew any milder ones that were
able to terminate the Accidents of the Pox as well as this does, 'twould argue
much rashness to make use of Mercury, because it is not always conducted
according to our desires, and sometimes very scurvey consequences do happen
upon it; but we know no other that can be esteemed to approach it in virtue for
all Venereal Diseases, and especially the Universal Pox. It is killed in
Turpentine, then with Suet an Ointment is made of it, that serves to rub the
parts of the Body, and particularly the joints with, several days together,
after the Patient has been prepared by Baths, Broths, and Purges. The Friction
is continued until the Salivation rises, which is caused by a great many
Shancres in the mouth; for these Shancres by an exceeding great acrimony do
open exceedingly the salivating Vessels, and give way to a tickling Phlegm,
that runs down abundantly. A Flux is also raised by applying Mercurial
Plasters upon all the Body, and also by Fumigations by making one receive the
Fume of Mercury. Again it is raised by taking inwardly white Precipitate, or
some other Mercurial Preparation, without using it outwardly. Let us now come
to reason a little upon it.

The effect of Mercury has puzzled almost all Chemical Philosophers; and those
Moderns who have explicated with much probability and likelihood many other
Natural things that lay hid to our Forefathers, have declared those of Mercury
to be some of the most difficult. I know very well that several Persons
governed by false Principles, have not forborne to give us their Explications;
but when their discourses come to be examined by Chemistry, which alone is able
to give us Demonstrations on this matter, they presently come to nothing. I
shall here present you with a Thought of mine, that seems more probable than
any thing I ever met with, and is maintained by Chemical Experiments.

You must first take notice, and it is a thing indisputable among all
Physicians, that the Nodes, Tumors, and other effects of the Venereal Poison
are fomented by Saline or Acid humors which make a certain Ferment, and that
this disease can never be cured, until this Poison is quite destroyed. This
being supposed, we must examine the nature of Mercury, and see what will become
of it, if we mix it with Salts or Acids. I have said that Mercury is a
Volatile, and we shall find hereafter that in the making of Sublimate
Corrosive, Mercury is mixed with Salt and Vitriol, which are Acids; that upon
the increasing the fire, the Spirits adhering unto Mercury, which is an Alkali,
do sublime along with it to the top of the Vessel, and make together that which
is called Sublimate Corrosive; Let us now see in the cure of the Pox, how
Mercury is used.

It is mixed, as I have said, with Suet, and with this Unguent the parts of the
Body are rubbed a long time, that the Mercury may pierce and enter through the
Pores; which it does, as every Body must grant; and this happening, there is no
contradiction at all in thinking that some part of it mixes with the Saline or
Acid Ferment of the venereal matter, after the same manner, as it does with
Salt and Vitriol.

The Acid Salts of the Venereal Poison fixing in the Pores of Mercury, which
is, as I have said, a Volatile Alkali, do sublime together, being driven by the
heat of the body, up to the head, which is the top of the vessel, and the
coolest place, and so most proper to condense them.

At the same time it is that the Head swells, and the inside of the mouth is
full of Shancres, which cause a pain much like unto that a man would receive,
if Sublimate Corrosive were applied some time upon an excoriated part. Moreover
the Salivating Vessels being pricked and corroded with this sharp humor, do
open, and let fall abundance of Phlegm, and this causes the involuntary
Salivation, that uses to accompany these Shancres, and remains sometimes a
longer, sometimes a less time, according as the Shancres are more or less
acrimonious; for the Phlegm trickling down continually, cleanses them from
their keen Salts, and mitigates the pain, whence it comes to pass that they are
often cured of themselves, and then the Salivating Vessels closing up again,
the Flux does cease.

It sometimes happens, when a man is not well prepared to receive a Flux, or
that it is raised too soon; that the Sublimation being too violent, some part
of the Sublimate sticks to some one or more of the vessels, and coroding their
membrane, causes grievous Hemorrhagies, as I have seen to happen several times,
and among others to a man in Languedock, who voided in half an hours time
twelve pints of blood by mouth, without dying of it notwithstanding, because he
was a very stout lusty man.

As for what may still remain of the Venereal Poison, after the Salts are
driven out, its dissolution is then a very easy business, because nothing but
those Salts was able to hold it coagulated; so that it is easy to conceive,
that the subtiler part of it may pass through the Pores, and the more
terrestrious precipitate, and be evacuated by way of Urine.

Perhaps you will object, that Mercury will raise a Flux in Persons who never had
such a Disease as the Pox, and who never had any of those tumors that contain
Acid Salts; but it is an easy matter to answer, that there is no man
whatsoever, let him be never so sound, but has store of Saline or Acid humors
in his body; the Serum which runs into every part is full of Salt, and all the
Ferments that preserve the Economy of Nature, do it by nothing else but Salts
or Acids; Now there is no more difficulty in comprehending that Mercury may
join with the Acids of a sound Person, than those of an impure tumor: for I
don't think that Mercury goes immediately and seeks out the Acids in the
tumors of impure Persons, it must have an understanding to do that; but being
rarefied and moved by the heat of the body, it circulates every where, until it
comes to find a Salt that is able to fix it in some measure, and hinder its
motion.

Sometimes this Mercury not meeting with salts enough to detain it, passes off
by transpiration, and carries along those that were united to it; whence it
comes to pass that many have been cured of the Pox without a Flux.

At other times it meets with Alkali salts which force it to quit its hold of
these Acids, and then it precipitates downwards, and purges by way of stool,
whence it comes to pass that those who have a looseness in the time of their
taking Mercury, are exceeding hard to receive a Flux.

Upon the same Principle may be given the reason of many other Accidents which
follow the use of Mercury. But let us see whether any thing of use may be drawn
from this Discourse for the cure of Venereal Maladies.

Although the Poulains, Phymosis, Shancres, Gonorrhoea's, and other Precursors
of the Pox, may be cured without a Flux, yet nevertheless you must not neglect
the use of Mercury; for these Diseases do contain in them a Poison that is not
at all different from that of the Pox, but only in that it has not fermented
enough to be rarefied and carried by the Circulation into the Habit of the
body; so that there will remain some Salts which cannot be carried away clear
by any thing but Mercury, which when given in a small quantity on these
occasions, drives only by perspiration or by stool, without a Flux. Sweet
sublimate, of which I shall shortly speak, is very much used in these
Distempers, among other general Remedies.

When you undertake the cure of one in the Pox, you must bathe him a good
while, purge, and bleed him for Preparation of the humors, to the end that
Mercury finding them more fluid, may be able to unite with them the more
easily, and so carry them off. This Mercury must be administered by little and
little at first, afterward the Dose is augmented according to the strength of
the Patient, and when the Jaws begin once to ache, you must give no more, unless
it be now and then for continuation of the Flux. They spit commonly three Weeks
together, but if it does not by that time stop of its own accord, you must
endeavor to stop it with Detersive Gargarisms.

It happens sometimes that the Salivating vessels dilate and open so extremely
by the Corrosive Salts which caused the Salivation, that they cannot be closed
again by any kind of Gargarism, and then the Brain dries up by little and
little, and Death is the consequent of all; wherefore you must have a great
care of not letting the Flux run too long.

I could attribute the invention of this discourse to my self, being the first
who have thus treated of this matter in France, and maintained it in public
meetings; but I am not possessed with that vanity of Authors, I leave it to
those who love it: I had no affectation to make a Book on purpose concerning
it, but have only mentioned it as a thing incident to the Subject I treated of.
I shall only say by the by, that those who make pretense of first finding it
out, have happened to make their complaints a little too late, having Printed
their Book a year after mine, and three years after I held a Public Discourse
of it at Monsieur de Launay's, not to speak of what I taught a long time before
in the first Courses of Chemistry that I showed.

Some thinking to invalidate what I have hereupon established, do say that
Mercury cannot be absolutely called an alkali, because the alkali that is in
Mercury is but one part of its Composition, and is not to be separated from its
other parts.

To Answer this difficulty, you need but only read in the Remarks that I have
made upon the Principles, how it is that I do explicate the nature of an
alkali, and you will find that although the name alkali comes from the Salt of a
Plant called Kali, that is, soapwort, yet all bodies that cause a sudden
Effervescency with acids are called Alkali's, without any need of their
containing any Alkali salt within them. So that I have no need to enlarge this
Book without reason, by Answering all the little Objections that have been made
to me upon the supposition of Mercury's being a pure Alkali. It is likely
enough that those who have raised them, have not read with attention what I
have said in my Remarks upon Mercury. For there they might find Solutions
enough. I shall speak neverless to some of the Principal ones.

First, It is Objected that if Mercury be an Alkali, and the Venereal venom an
acid, this same acid should certainly fix it, whereas the Dissolutions of it
that are made by the Juices, do only serve to increase its Volatility, and
render it Corrosive, instead of being at all sweetened by it.

I Answer, it is as false to say, that Mercury is Volatilized by the Acid
juices of the Venereal venom, as it is that Mercury mixed with Acid Spirits to
render it Corrosive, should be Volatilized by the same Spirits. On the
contrary, Mercury alone does easily Volatilize by the heat of the body, and
nothing but Acids are able to fix it at all. I thought I had sufficiently
explicated my self as to this, when I said that sometimes Mercury, finding not
in the body enough Acid Spirits to fix it, does pass by Transpiration, etc.

As for the Corrosive nature that the Mercury assumes, we must attribute it to
the Disposition of its Pores, and the abundance of Acid points it is
impregnated with; and seeing it will not sweeten the Acidity of Salt and
Vitriol, with which it is mixed to make Sublimate Corrosive, why should we
expect it to sweeten the Acid juices of the body? I do not pretend nevertheless
that it never Dulcifies at all; for I do conceive it may destroy much of their
force by dividing and breaking their points, when the Acids are but few, as
does happen in Mercurius dulcis.

Secondly, It is Objected that if the venom of the Pox were an Acid, it might
then be Cured by the use of Alkali Salts, either fixed or Volatile, as by
Crab's-eyes, Pearl, or Coral, and such like bodies as are wont to kill and
sweeten Acid humors.

I Answer, we often find that Volatile salts do give some ease to those that
are troubled with the Venereal distemper, whether it be by opening the Pores,
and so making the subtiler part of it perspire away, or that by being Alkali's,
they do absorb some part of it. For this reason some do use to give their
Patients the Volatile Salt of Vipers several mornings together, but these
Alkali's are in truth of too weak a nature to carry off such an Acidity, after
they are impregnated with it, as Mercury is able to do without losing its
nature. They are Nets of too fine a make, to catch such keen and active bodies;
if these Salts do destroy some part of the Acidity, they destroy themselves
likewise in the conflict, so that they can have no further operation, wherefore
there is need of a more powerful Volatile Alkali than these Salts are, to
eradicate the Acidity of the Venereal poison.

As for Fixed Salts, and Alkali bodies, as Pearl, Coral, Crab's-eyes, whereas
they have no Volatile quality in them, and their tendency is wholly downwards,
it is very uncertain whether ever they reach to Venereal tumors (which
commonly rise in the Joints,) by reason of the long way they have to pass
thither, and the Juices they have to encounter with in their passage, which may
in all likelihood change their nature; but suppose they were carried to those
Tumors with the same qualifications with which they were taken, they would only
serve to weaken a little this Acidity, without being able to carry it off, and
so they would only give a little ease, without removing Radically the Ferment
of the Distemper, as Mercury is able to do.

It may be further asked why Sublimate does not fill the substance of the Brain
with Ulcers, as well as it does the mouth.

I Answer that this Sublimate being in the Brain, finds it self so clogged with
a Mucilaginous moisture, that it is fain to lose there some part of its
Acidity; so that it can do nothing else but cause a Fermentation, which makes
the Phlegm purge away through the Salivating vessels, and this it is that
causes the Spittle of those who have a Flux, to be so sharp and stinking.

This sharp Phlegm may also, as it passes in the mouth, increase the number of
Ulcers, for the mouth is as it were the sink of the whole body upon this
occasion.

Sublimate Corrosive.
Sublimate Corrosive is a Mercury impregnated with acids, and raised by fire to
the top of the vessel.

Put a pound of Mercury revived from Cinnabar into a Mattress, pour upon it
Eighteen ounces of Spirit of Niter: Set your Mattress in Sand a little warm, and
leave it there till it be all dissolved; pour your dissolution, which will be
clear as water, into a glass vessel or earthen pan, and evaporate the Liquor
gently in Sand, until there remains a white Mass, which you must powder in a
glass mortar, and mix with a pound of Vitriol Calcined white, and so much Salt
decrepitated: put this mixture into a Mattress, whose two thirds at least remain
empty; place your Mattress in Sand, and begin with giving a small fire, which
you must continue so for three hours, then increase it with coals to a pretty
good strength, there will arise a Sublimate to the top of the Mattress; the
Operation must be ended in six or seven hours, let the Mattress cool, then break
it, avoiding a kind of Farine or light powder that flies into the air when the
matter is stirred; you will have a pound of very good Sublimate Corrosive, keep it
for use.

The red Scories that are found at the bottom, must be flung away as useless.

This Sublimate is a powerful Escharotick, it eats proud flesh, and cleanses
old Ulcers very well. If half a dram of it be dissolved in a pound of
Limewater, it turns Yellow, and makes that which is called Phagedenick Water.

Remarks.
There needs not half the Spirit of Niter for dissolving a pound of Mercury, as
there does for the same weight of Bismuth, although the pores of this last be
much the larger, and the parts more disposed for separation; the reason of
which is, that the Mercury being Volatile, and very disunited in its parts, it
will divide almost of it self, and is held up more easily by Acid Spirits, than
another body can be whose parts are more united, and whose tendency is
downwards, such as Bismuth is.

When the dissolution of mercury is a making, there appears a great ebullition
in the Mattress accompanied with Red vapors; also the heat is so very strong,
that a man cannot endure his hand upon it: all this great stir proceeds from
the Acids, which meet with resistance in their penetration of this body; for
jostling one against another, they heat the liquor, and cause some part of the
Spirit of Niter to evaporate away in red clouds, as it uses always to do when
it rarifies. When the mercury is all dissolved, the dissolution clears up and
cools, because the edges of the Spirits are all sheathed in the mercury, whence
their motion comes to be interrupted and cease; and this is a thing so true,
that if you should by way of curiosity distill this dissolution, you would draw
off only a weak acid, for the greatest part of the edges do remain involved
with the mercury in a white mass.

That which proves this Remark is this, that the white mass which is drawn from
the Solution of sixteen ounces of Quicksilver in eighten ounces of Spirit of
Niter does weigh at least two and twenty ounces, that is to say, six ounces
more than the weight of the Quicksilver. Now this augmentation cannot proceed
from any thing else but the acid Spirits.

This mass is exceeding Corrosive, by means of the same acid Spirits, which
become very active wherever they are met with.

If instead of Spirit of Niter we should use Aqua, fortis to dissolve the
Mercury, the Solution would become clear like the other, but there would be
this difference between them, that when we have evaporated about a fourth part
of the liquor in a glass-body in Sand, the remainder would be as red as Claret
wine, and if we should let the liquor cool, there would appear in it white
Crystals in form of long needles, and the liquor would still retain its red
color.

I conceive that the Solution acquires this color from the Sulphurs which
remain in the Aqua fortis, for the Sulphurous parts being in great motion may
often turn and whirl about the insensible parts of Mercury round their center.
Now it is easy to Remark by abundance of Experiments, that the red color is a
consequence of the great attenuation, or disposition to circulary motion, which
the matter has received. But the Solution which is made with Spirit of Niter
does not become red, because there is no Sulphur in this Spirit, or else there
is not enough to do it.

You might perform this Operation by only mixing crude Mercury with Salt and
Vitriol, without taking the pains to dissolve it with Spirit of Niter, but you
would be an intolerable while incorporating them together, so as to make the
Quicksilver imperceptible. Moreover there rises up a dust to the Nose that is
very unwholsom: that which we aim at therefore by dissolving it, and reducing
it into a white Mass, is only to prepare it for an easier mixture.

In the Sublimation I have described, the Mercury loads it self with as many
Acid Spirits as it is able to contain; these Spirits are a kind of load to it,
and restrain its great Volatility, so that it does not evaporate quite away, as
it would do if there were nothing to withhold it, but it only Sublimes to the
upper part of the Vessel in fair white Crystals that are called Sublimate
Corrosive; the Mass that remains at the bottom of the Mattress is nothing but a
mixture of the Terrestrious parts of Salt and Vitriol; it weighs eight and
twenty ounces.

Some will needs blame this preparation of Sublimate Corrosive, by saying, that
when it is used to the making Mercurius dulcis, the Spirit of Niter ought to be
suspected by reason of its acrimony, and particularly its Saline Sulphurous
parts.

But by performing this Operation, the way that I have described, there will be
no need of retaining any scruple upon this account, because the Sublimate cannot
be made, without an evaporation of many red vapors through the entrance of the
Mattress, for three hours time at the least, and these vapors can be nothing
else but the Spirits of Niter, for so small a fire is not able to separate and
raise so high the Spirits of Salt and Vitriol. Thus there is no need of fearing
these Saline Sulphurous Spirits, with which Spirit of Niter is thought to be
well stored, because they being of a Volatile nature must necessarily come
before the others. But supposing that Spirit of Niter did still remain in the
Sublimate Corrosive of which we make our Mercurius dulcis, I see no reason why
we should apprehend more hurt from their acrimony than from the other Corrosive
Spirits, because few men scruple to give this Spirit itself inwardly, in
potions for the Colic and other diseases, and they give diverse Preparations
made with this dissolvent, such as white Precipitate, and many Precipitates of
Gold and Silver, without any visible harm. But that which is most remarkable,
is, that even those who cry out upon this Preparation for being made with
Spirit of Niter, do nevertheless themselves recommend and use much a Mercurius
dulcis, which they make by Subliming white Precipitate, that is prepared with
Spirit of Niter.

The Corrosion of Sublimate does proceed from the edged Acids which do fix in
the body of Mercury, and it may be said with great probability, that this metal
always retaining a round figure, (let it be divided never so subtily) does
rarifie by the heat of fire into an abundance of little balls which the acid
Spirits do fix into on all sides, and so interlace themselves in it, that they
hinder its rising higher, and do together make one body that is called
Sublimate. But when this Sublimate is applied to flesh, the heat and moisture
of it do set in motion the Mercurial parts, and the motion of the little balls
being once raised, they roll about with great fury, and tear the flesh with the
edges they contain, which are like so many little knives cutting wherever they
touch; from whence it comes to pass, that if the Sublimate should be taken
inwardly, it kills in a very little time; the humidity which does always
accompany and soften our flesh, gives it a greater hold than otherwise it would
have, which is the reason why Sublimate does act with that celerity it does
upon a soft moist part rather than a dry: nay it is often wetted with a little
water, to make it work the more quickly.

By this Remark may be explicated, why the Lapis infernalis, which is a Silver
filled with the edges of Spirit of Niter, has not so violent an effect as
Sublimate Corrosive; because the parts of Silver have no such aptitude to roll
to and fro, and to rise, as those of Mercury have; for which reason it is
likewise, that it does not make so great an Eschar as the Sublimate, although
it does contain at least as much Spirit of Niter, as the other.

And thus a reason may be given, why even six grains of Crystals of Silver may
be given by mouth without any danger, whenas not two grains of Sublimate can be
given without a manifest danger, because the Crystals of the Moon have not that
circulary motion in their parts, as Sublimate has, all their tendency is only
downwards, and all that they can do is to purge by their Acidity.

When Sublimate Corrosive is dissolved in Limewater, the water presently turns
yellow, as is seen in the Phagedenick water, and it loses so much of its
Corrosive quality, that it may be given inwardly after that, without fear of
poisoning; and the reason of this is, that the greatest part of the acid points
strike off from the Sublimate to enter into the alkali of Lime which is a more
porous body; so that the Mercury losing some of its most keen acids, becomes
the less Corrosive.

It will not be amiss to acquaint you here, that you will often meet in the Shops
of Druggists with a Sublimate Corrosive made of Arsenick. Now to know the truth
of it, you must only rub it with a little Salt of Tartar, and if it turns
black, there is Arsenick infallibly in it; on the contrary if it turns yellow,
it is good.

Those who have thought fit to Criticize upon what I have said about the
effects of Mercury, would methinks have spoken more to the purpose than they
have done, if they had objected to me one difficulty that I have made my self
since the first Edition of my Book, and which has seemed to me to be the
greatest that can be made on this subject. It is this: If the Mercury that is
given in order to raise a Flux, does join with the acid salt of our humors, and
so does make a Sublimate Corrosive, after the same manner as it does in the
Mattress, when it is mixed with Salt and Vitriol; this Sublimate of the body
cannot be well made, so long as there is any watery humor in the part, wherein
the Mercury is mixed with the acids; just as none of it can be made in a
Mattress, until all the Phlegm that is in it, is evaporated away. Now it is not
to be conceived, that there should ever happen such a Desiccation of humors to
the body, for it would be Corroded by the Mercury so loaded with acids, before
it could Sublime.

To answer this Objection I say, That although I have made a comparison between
the Sublimation of Mercury that is made in the body, and that which is done in a
Mattress; nevertheless there is this difference between them, that the first is
not only made with Salts extremely volatile, but is likewise assisted or
carried on by the motion of the humors with all their humidity up to the head,
whereas this other is made with fixed salts, whose acidity is so strongly rooted
in the Earthy part, that it cannot be separated from it, without a very
considerable fire.

Nor must we think that the Mercury in the body is loaded with as many and as
strong acids, as that in the Mattress; for if it were so, it would carry
destruction, and cause a Gangrene, wheresoever it came; but it is enough, that
its Pores are in part impregnated with them, sufficient to diminish a little of
its volatility, and cause those prickings and pains which do happen during the
Salivation.

If you dissolve Sublimate Corrosive in Water, then Filtrate, and separate the
filtred liquor into two Viols, and cast into one of them some drops of the Oil
of Tartar made per deliquium, you will presently have a Red Precipitate, that you
may dry and use. Then if you drop into the other Viol the volatile Spirit of
Sal Armoniack, you will have a fine white Precipitate, of the same virtues with
that I shall describe anon.

Because Sublimate Corrosive is so great a Poison, I have thought it not amiss
to speak here of the Counterpoisons that may be given to such persons who by
misfortune have taken it. But lest some may imagine that one and the same
Antidote can serve for all sorts of Poisons, as the Mountebanks, and Sellers of
Orvietan do pretend, and endeavor to persuade; I shall say something of
Poisons, and their differences.

Whatsoever is able to break and destroy the Economy of the body, and the
orderly connection or derivation of humors, or else to hinder the natural
course of the Spirits, is really a Poison.

It may be taken, or received two ways; the one outward, as when the Pestilence
and many other Malignant diseases (which do proceed from an infected air) do
seize upon a man; or when one is bit or stung by venomous beasts. The other
inward, as when a man takes Arsenick, Sublimate, Hemlock, Woolfsbane, etc.

The same Poison does not kill all sorts of Animals; as for example, the Nux
Vomica is a Poison to dogs, and yet does many other beasts no hurt at all. The
smoke of Tabaco does kill Vipers in a very little time, although there is
hardly a creature that has more life than the Viper, and that this smoke will
only give a little purging to other creatures. The water in which Quicksilver
has been infused will kill Worms, and yet does good to other animals. Arsenick
soon kills a man, and many other creatures; and it will only purge a Wolf, and
render him more lively than he was before.

All these different effects can only proceed from a diversity of natures, and
a difference of humors; for that which is able to tear and destroy one sort,
will cause only a light Fermentation in others.

We must consider two sorts of effects in Poisons; the one does coagulate the
blood by degrees, as that of the Viper, the Tarantula, Hemlock, Wolfsbane, etc.
and whereas these do hinder the motion of the Spirits by this coagulation, the
Animal falls into Convulsions, and dies soon after: much after the same manner
as it happens when some acid liquor is syringed into a Vein, or Artery.

The others, such as Sublimate, and Arsenick, do tear and excoriate the viscera
by their pungent Salts, until they come to gangrene, and then they dye.

The Medicines which are very properly given to obviate the accidents caused by
the first poisons I now mentioned, are volatile Salts, Treacle, Mithridate,
Orvietan, and an infinite number of other remedies of this kind. Vipers flesh,
and the flesh of Scorpions do cure the poison themselves do give, as I shall
show hereafter, when I come to speak of the Viper. And hereupon the Reader will
not take it amiss, if I give him a short story that is very pertinent to this
subject.

One day I put two living Scorpions into a glass-bottle, and then added a
little Mouse to their company. Which Mouse running over the Scorpions provoked
them to bite her till she cried out. Half a quarter of an hour after, I saw her
dye of Convulsions. Some hours after this, I threw in another Mouse (a little
bigger and more active than the first) to the same Scorpions. She leapt upon
the Scorpions as the other had done before, and was bit by them in like manner,
she cried aloud, and was so provoked to revenge her self, that she eat up both
the Scorpions, leaving only the head and the tail. I would needs observe the
end of this Tragedy; I left the Mouse in the bottle, four and twenty hours, and
during all that time she had not the least appearance of being hurt, and was
only concerned at the being imprisoned. I intended to have dissected her, in
order to see whether there were no change in the parts, or in the blood: But a
stander by happening to take up the bottle too carelessly let it fall, and broke
it, so the Mouse escaped. Now the Volatile salts which were in the Scorpions
flesh, might be said by their active power to hinder the coagulation of the
blood, which would soon have ^een in the veins of the Mouse, after she was bit;
but let every body explicate this experiment according to his own principles, I
shall resume the thread of my discourse.

The remedies which ought to be given to obviate the effects of Arsenick,
Sublimate, and other corrosive poisons are of a contrary nature to those I now
mentioned; for instead of agitating the mass of blood, and adding new heat to
all the body, as those do, these must calm and quiet the violent agitation of
humors, and sweeten the acrimony of its salts.

Therefore you must, so soon as you can, make the Patient take a porringer of
old Oil of Olives, in order to make him vomit; fresh butter, fat, and all
unctuous things will very properly be given, because they do not only purge
away the poison both upwards and downwards, but likewise (which is a thing very
considerable) they consisting of unctuous slimy parts do blunt and dull the
edge of those salts which remain of them in the body. You must afterward make
him drink warm milk, and continue the use of it several days, after which you
must purge him.

The effect of Sublimate Corrosive is much quicker than that of Arsenick,
because its acids being presently set to work by the heat of the body, and by
the volatility of Mercury, do tear and cut in pieces all that is in their way.
Wherefore if remedies be not immediately given, after the poison is taken, the
person is in a most deplorably dangerous condition.

What has been here said does show, that it is exceeding necessary for a man to
understand the nature of the poisons which are taken, before he presume to give
a Counter-poison, or Antidote, and that a box of Orvietan must not be esteemed
a sure Antidote in all cases.

And hence it is plain, that if the Quacks and Mountebanks, who show upon
stages, should offer to take Sublimate, or Arsenick by mouth, in order to try
the virtue of their remedies, as they pretend to do, all the Mithridate they
have would never be able to save them. And supposing they did not understand
their Legerdemain tricks well enough, but should be constrained to swallow such
poisons as these, you must not think them such fools as to keep to the remedy
they recommend, which would be sure to do nothing else but increase their
misery by its acrimonious heat. They would have recourse to the Oil, and other
fat substances, to avoid death, which otherwise would certainly follow.

Sweet Sublimate, or Mercurius dulcis.
Sweet Sublimate, is a Mercury reduced to a white mass by some broken edges of
acids.

Powder sixteen ounces of Sublimate Corrosive in a marble or glass mortar; mix
with it by little and little twelve ounces of Mercury revived from Cinnabar:
stir this mixture with a wooden Pestle, until all the Quicksilver becomes
imperceptible; then put this gray powder into several Viols, or into a Mattress
whose two thirds do remain empty; place your vessel in Sand, and give but a
little fire at first, then augment it unto the third degree: continue it in
this condition until your Sublimate is made, which usually happens in four or
five hours. Break your Viols, and fling away a little light earth that is found
at bottom: separate also that which sticks to the neck of the Viols, or the
Mattress, and keep it for Unguents against the Itch, but gather up carefully all
that is in the middle, which is very white; and having powdered it, resublime
it in Viols or a Mattress as before; separate once more the matter in the
middle, and resublime it in other Viols, as before, this third time; lastly,
separate the terrestrious matter at the bottom, and the Fuliginous that lies in
the neck of the Viols, and keep the Sublimate that is in the middle, for it is
sufficiently dulcified. Its use is for all sorts of Venereal diseases, it opens
obstructions, and kills the Worms, the Dose is from six unto thirty grains in
Pills; it purges gently by Stool.

Remarks.
You must observe never to powder Sublimate Corrosive in a mortar made of
metal, because it would corrode it, and carry off some part, which would spoil
the operation; glass, marble and stone mortars are more convenient, because
they can communicate no ill impression to the matter.

Many have written that we should use equal parts of Sublimate and Mercury, but
they did not consider that so great a quantity of Mercury could not be here
used, and that when the Sublimate has received near about the quantity I have
appointed, the rest will remain unmixed.

When a mattress is used for this operation, half its neck must be cut off
beforehand; for when it is performed in common matrasses, a great part of the
Fuliginous matter not being able to rise high enough falls down again on the
Sublimate, and hinders it from becoming sweet, because this Fuliginosity
contains the more acrimonious part, whereas it will easily fly out of Viols, or
matrasses with a short neck. Two thirds of each vessel must remain empty,
otherwise the Mercury, which rarefies like a Spirit, would be apt to break
them. That which sticks to the neck of the Viols being too acrimonious to be
used inwardly may serve for Ointments against the Itch and Tettars.

Sweet Sublimate rises more easily than the Corrosive, because it is less
loaded with acids.

The Sublimate that is made in a mattress, loses half an ounce each sublimation;
so that an ounce and a half is lost in three times, when the operation is done.

Six drachms of Scories and light earth are found at bottom, and consequently
there is but two drachms of matter carried off each Sublimation. But if you try
this operation in Viols, the sublimate loses half an ounce more, as having a
larger aperture to fly out at, than in a mattress, or long neck.

It seems a little strange at first that so strong a Poison as Sublimate
Corrosive should be reduced into so mild a remedy, by the addition of nothing
but Mercury. But you ought to wonder no longer, when you consider that those
Spirits which caused. the Corrosion were then shut up in a strait room, but
being now divided and enlarging their quarters, cannot in reason act with such
force; besides that by the repeated action of fire the subtler part of their
points is blunted against the body of Mercury.

The Purgative quality of sweet Sublimate does consist in the acids that
remain; wherefore if you should sublime it twice or thrice more, the Sublimate
would not be at all Purgative, but only Sudorifick. And it is then more proper
to raise a Flux with than it was before; for having lost those salts which by
irritating the stomach and guts did render it Purgative, it is the more
disposed for rarefaction in the body, and so to join with the ferment of
Venereal Tumors.

Mercury prepared any way whatsoever ought to be taken inwardly no other way
than in Pills, but by no means in potion, for fear it should stick in the Gums,
and so spoil and loosen the Teeth.

White Precipitate.
White Precipitate is a Mercury dissolved by Spirit of Niter, and precipitated
by salt, into a white powder.

Dissolve in a Glass-Cucurbite sixteen ounces of Mercury revived from Cinnabar
with eighteen or twenty ounces of Spirit of Niter: when the dissolution is
made, pour upon it salt water filtrated, made of ten ounces of sea salt in two
quarts of water; add unto this about half an ounce of the volatile Spirit of
Sal Armoniack, there will Precipitate a very white powder, that you must leave
for a sufficient time to settle; then having poured off the water by
Inclination, wash it several times with Fountain water, and dry it in the
shade. It is used to raise a Flux with, the Dose is from four to fifteen grains
in Pills. It is also used in Pomatums for Tettars and the Itch, from half a
dram to two drachms, for an ounce of Pomatum.

Remarks.
Although I do recommend eighteen or twenty ounces of Spirit of Niter for the
solution of sixteen ounces of Mercury, yet you must know that it is not very
necessary to keep too strictly to this same quantity. You may use either a
little more, or a little less, according to the strength of the Spirit, or
according as it is more or less dephlegmated. I my self do commonly use but an
equal weight of it with the Quicksilver, because the Spirit of Niter I do use
is exactly dephlegmated. You might likewise use Aqua fortis instead of Spirit
of Niter.

The Dose of white Precipitate must be less than that of sweet Sublimate,
because it retains more acid Spirits; but if you would Sublime this Precipitate
alone in a mattress, in a gradual fire, you would obtain a Sublimate as sweet as the
other; because the fire having acted upon it, breaks most of its points, and
then it may be given in as great a Dose as ordinary Mercurius Dulcis.

If you desire to make this Precipitate exceeding white, you must dissolve the
Mercury in a vessel whose mouth is very large, that so the red vapor of the
Spirit of Niter may sly out the more easily. When the dissolution is made
without the help of fire, the Precipitate is the whiter.

The Precipitation of Mercury may be made with the Spirit of Salt, as well as
the salt in substance.

This is not so easily made, as that of Bismuth, because the pores of Mercury
being smaller than those of Bismuth, do retain with more force the acids which
are fixed into it. Moreover Quicksilver being of a volatile nature does remain
suspended in the liquor more easily than Bismuth, which is a body altogether
fixed.

It may well seem strange that an acid salt, such as sea salt, should be able
to precipitate that which the acidity of Spirit of Niter had dissolved. To
resolve this difficulty, you must know that, though our Senses tell us that
acids do all perform the same effect, which is to prick and to pierce, yet
nevertheless they all do differ in the figure of their points; for according as
they have received more or less fermentation, they have also consequently their
points more subtle, sharp, and light; and this is attested not only by taste,
but the sight also; for if you should Crystallize the same body, by dissolving
several parts of it in several vessels by Spirit of Salt, Spirit of Niter,
Spirit of Vitriol, Spirit of Alom, and by Vinegar, you will observe so many kinds
of Crystals different in figure, as there were different dissolutions. The
Crystals made by Vinegar will be more sharp than those prepared by Spirit of
Niter; those made by Spirit of Niter will be sharper than those by the Spirit
of Vitriol; those made by Spirit of Vitriol will be sharper than those by the
Spirit of Alom; but of all these Crystals none will be found to have grosser
parts than those prepared by the Spirit of Salt; for these Crystals do all
retain the figure of their constituent parts. This now being supposed, it will
be an easy matter to explicate our Precipitation, for the salt or its spirit
containing points more gross or less delicate than those of Spirit of Niter,
and falling on this dissolution, do move, jostle, and easily break the points
impregnated with the body of Mercury, and so do make them let go their hold,
whence it comes that Mercury precipitates by its own weight.

The same Principle may serve to explicate, why Lead dissolved in Vinegar
precipitates by means of the Spirit of Vitriol, or Salt.

You must observe not to make the water too salt, for then the great quantity
of salt would hinder the Mercury from precipitating.

The Volatile Spirit of Sal Armoniack containing an alkali salt, does much help
the Precipitation, for its agility carries it into every recess of the liquor,
where the sea salt, whose parts are not of so active a nature, was not able to
go: which is proved from hence, that if you use only sea salt dissolved in
water to make this Precipitation with, it will then happen that if after
pouring off the clear liquor, which swims upon the Precipitate, into another
vessel, you drop the Spirit of Sal Armoniack into the liquor, there falls a
considerable quantity of Mercurial Precipitate, which may serve like the other.
If instead of the volatile Spirit of Sal Armoniack you would use the Oil of Tartar
made per Deliquium, the Pricipitate would then be reddish.

Two objections have been made against my manner of explicating the
Precipitation, of such matters as Spirit of Niter had dissolved, made by
Sea Salt.

First they say, it is not proper to make the jostles and encounter of
salt water with Spirit of Niter loaded with bodies which it had dissolved, to
be the cause of its precipitation; whenas the most violent jogs that can be
given to the solution, either from an arm, or with matters much more heavy and
solid than sea salt, are not able to cause the precipitation.

This Objection will raise no difficulty to any that are a little skilled in
Natural Philosophy: for although I have said, that by reason the edges of
sea salt are grosser than those of Spirit of Niter, the sea salt does
precipitate what Spirit of Niter had dissolved and suspended; I never meant
that if these edges were as big as a man's arm, they would do it the better. It
is sufficiently known that there must be a proportionable subtilty of parts
between the dissolvent and that which does precipitate, and that the edges of
an acid must be otherwise treated than with a cuff of the fist, in order to
make them let go their hold. But I intended to make it appear that if sea salt
does jog and shake the edges of Spirit of Niter, it does it by dividing into
very minute parts, and thereby entering into the pores of the phlegm, which in
would not be able to do if these parts were as big as a man's arm, or were like
the solid heavy matters now spoken of.

Secondly, if the grossness of the edges of sea salt, or the shock they give,
did make the precipitation of substances dissolved by Spirit of Niter, we
should expect afterward to find the first, with its gross edges separated from
those of Spirit of Niter; whereas upon evaporating and crystallizing the
liquor, their edges are indeed reciprocally confounded the one with the other,
making together a new body.

I answer, that the shock and jostle which the edges of sea salt do give to
Spirit of Niter, when loaded with some bodies, does not hinder the edges of
Spirit of Niter remaining after the precipitation, from uniting with the
sea salt, by which union the Crystals do become confused.

I shall here add one preparation more, that is very proper to raise a
Salivation with.

Take an ounce of the solution of Mercury made in Spirit of Niter, put it into
a glass-vessel, and pour upon it three or four and twenty ounces of water, all
the liquor will turn white, let it settle until it becomes clear, filtrate the
liquor, and keep it for use.

This water may be given from half an ounce to an ounce, in a glass of Ptisan,
or broth. It vomits gently, and provokes a Salivation; some do drink half an
ounce of it to cure the itch, but they ought to be purged and bled beforehand.

Red Precipitate.
This preparation is a Mercury impregnated with Spirit of Niter, and calcined
by fire.

Take eight ounces of Mercury revived from Cinnabar, dissolve it in a
sufficient quantity of Spirit of Niter, which is eight or nine ounces; pour the
dissolution into a Viol, or Mattress with a short neck, set it in Sand, and
evaporate all the moisture with a gentle heat, until there remains a white
Mass; then quicken the fire by little and little to the third degree, and keep
it in this condition till all your matter is turned red, then take it off the
fire, let the Viol cool, and break it to obtain your Precipitate, which weighs
nine ounces.

It is a good Escharotick, it eats proud flesh; it is used for the laying open
of Chancres, mixed with burnt Alom, AEgyptiacum, and the common Suppurative.
Some do give it inwardly to four grains for to raise a Flux with, but this is
dangerous, unless rectified Spirit of Wine be burnt two or three times upon it.

Remarks.
This Preparation is improperly called Precipitate, here being no Precipitation
at all.

Many Authors have thought they could much increase the redness of this
Precipitate, by Cohobating it, or distilling Spirit of Niter three times upon
the white mass; but I have found by experience both ways, that these
Circumstances are of no use.

The white Mass which remains after Evaporation of the humidity is a mixture of
Mercury with a great many acid Spirits, for it weighs three ounces more than
the Mercury did which was dissolved; it is extreme Corrosive, and fiery, if
applied to the flesh, but according as it is Calcined in order to make it red,
the edges of the Spirit of Niter which caused the Corrosion do strike off, and
fly into the Air; whence it comes to pass, that the more we desire to increase
its redness by Calcination, the less it weighs, and the less it corrodes. Some
Surgeons observing this effect do choose the Precipitate that is not so red
as usual, when they would make an Eschar quickly.

If you still continue the fire some hours under the red mass, it will sublime,
and still retain its color; this sublimate is not so Corrosive as the other;
which makes me think that the points of Spirit of Salt are necessary to make a
sublimate very Corrosive. The reason why it sublimes, is because the Mercury
being delivered from a great many acid Spirits, which did fix it, has power to
rise with those that remain. But because these remaining Spirits do moderate a
little its volatility, it makes a stop in the middle of the Viol.

Some do put red Precipitate into an Earthen Pot, and pour upon it Spirit of
Wine well rectified, then fire it, and when the Spirit is consumed, they add
more, and burn it as before; they repeat the adding Spirit of Wine, and burning
it six times, and then call this Preparation Arcanum Corallinum. The Spirit of
Wine by burning does carry off some edges of the Precipitate, and joins it self
to the rest, so that this Precipitate is sweetened and rendered fit to be taken
inwardly.

If by way of curiosity you pour Spirit of Vitriol upon common red Precipitate,
such as I have described, a dissolution will soon follow, because Spirit of
Vitriol joining with the Spirit of Niter that remained in the Precipitate, an
Aqua fortis must happen from their union, which is able to dissolve
imperceptibly the parts of Mercury; but this dissolution will happen without
any Ebullition, because the Mercury has been already rarefied by an acid, so
that the Spirit of Vitriol does only dissolve them without making any
commotion. The solution is clear like other solutions of Mercury, without any
appearance of redness, and the same Preparations may be made with it, as are
used to be by the solution of Quicksilver in Aqua fortis.

If instead of Spirit of Vitriol you pour Spirit of Salt upon the red
Precipitate, it turns presently into a curious white, because the Spirit of
Salt does break the force of the Spirit of Niter that was in the red
Precipitate; and the same thing must happen here as does when Spirit of Salt is
poured upon the solution of Quicksilver; for although red Precipitate be a dry
body, yet it is nothing else but a mixture of Quicksilver, and Spirit of Niter.

I have given the reason why Spirit of Salt comes to weaken Spirit of Niter, in
my Remarks upon white Precipitate.

As for the sudden change of color, it is indeed somewhat strange, that a
matter which is grown red by Calcination, should in a minutes time turn so
exceeding white.

This Effect can be attributed only to the dislocation which the acid spirit of
Salt does cause in the parts of red Precipitate, and to the disposition it puts
them anew into, so that their Superficies is put into a capacity of reflecting
the light in a right line to our eyes, to give the appearance of a white
color; for if by means of another sort of liquor, or else by fire and some
alkali body, the disposition of the parts of your Precipitate is again changed,
it will obtain some other color, or else it will return and revive into
Quicksilver.

If you pour the volatile spirit of Sal Armoniack upon red Precipitate, it
turns into a gray powder, but if you throw a great deal of water upon it, it
becomes a milk, though none of the whitest. The same thing happens, when you
drop Spirit of Sal Armoniack into the solution of Quicksilver made with Spirit
of Niter; for soon after the effervescency is over, a gray powder is seen to
Precipitate, and if you add to it water, it becomes a milk of the same
whiteness as the other.

Common red Precipitate then is subject to the same alterations as the solution
of Mercury, the red color giving no particular impression to it; which truly
is a good proof that color is no real thing, but wholly depends upon the
modification of parts.

Turbith Mineral, or Yellow Precipitate.
This Preparation is a Mercury impregnated with the acidity of Oil of Vitriol.

Put four ounces of Quicksilver revived from Cinnabar into a glass Retort, and
pour upon it sixteen ounces of Oil of Vitriol; set your Retort in Sand, and
when the Mercury is dissolved put fire underneath, and distill the humidity;
make the fire strong enough toward the end, for to drive out some of the last
Spirits of all; afterward break your Retort, and powder in a glass Mortar a
white Mass you find within it, which weighs five ounces and a half; pour warm
water upon it, and the matter will presently change into a yellow powder, which
you must dulcifie by a great many repeated Lotions, then dry it in the shade,
you will have three ounces and two drachms of it. It purges strongly, both by
vomit and stool, it is given in Venereal maladies, the dose is from two grains
unto six in Pills.

Remarks.
Though that which is improperly called Oil of Vitriol, be the strongest and
most Caustic acid of this Mineral Salt, it is nevertheless much weaker than
Spirit of Niter, and so requires a greater quantity of it, and longer time to
dissolve the Mercury in, for there is much a-do to dispatch the solution in ten
hours. That which is distilled is exceeding weak, because the Mercury retains
the greatest part of the acid Spirits, and they are the things that purge so
strongly although many of them be carried off by the Lotions.

All these Preparations are nothing but so many different shapes of Mercury
made by acid Spirits which according to their different adhesions, do cause
such different effects.

All these Precipitates and Sublimates may be revived again into flowing
Mercury, by mixing them with Lime, and distilling them, as I have said i^ the
reviving of Cinnabar into Quicksilver, because the alkali of Lime destroys
those acids tha^ disguised the Quicksilver.

Oil or Liquor of Mercury.
This preparation is an acid liquor loaded with Mercury.

Put the lotions of the white mass, that Turbi^^ Mineral was made of, into an
earthen pan, o^ glass vessel, evaporate in Sand all the liquor, until there
remains at bottom a matter in form o^ salt, which weighs two ounces and a
dram, pu^ the pan in a cellar, or other cool place, and then leave it until
this matter be almost all dissolve^ into liquor. It is used for the laying open
Venereal Shancres, and eating the flesh, Pledgets being dipped into it.

Remarks.
This liquor is nothing but Mercury so penetrated and divided by the acid
Spirits of Vitriol, that it can dissolve like a Salt: now for that it contains
these corrosive Spirits, it eats and corrodes wherever it touches, like unto
a Sublimate Corrosive.

This liquor may be made with spirit of Niter, and then it will be more violent
in its Operation, but because it would then pierce too much, and cause
dangerous accidents, I would rather choose to prepare it with Oil of Vitriol.

If you drop a few drops of the Oil of Tartar made per Deliquium into this
liquor, there will fall immediately a Mercurial Precipitate, because the alkali
of Tartar will break the edges that held up the Mercury dissolved.

Another Oil of Mercury.
This preparation is a Sublimate Corrosive dissolved in spirit of Wine.

Powder well an ounce of Sublimate Corrosive, and put it into a Bolthead, pour
upon it four ounces of Spirit of Wine well rectified upon salt of Tartar, stop
well your Bolthead, and let it infuse cold, six or seven hours, the Sublimate
will dissolve; but if any sediment remains at bottom, decant the liquor from
it, and pouring upon the sediment a little more Spirit of Wine, infuse it as
before, to finish the solution, mix your solutions, and keep them in a Viol
well stopped.

This is an Oil of Mercury milder than the former, it is good in Venereal
Shancres, especially when there is any fear of a Gangrene, you may use it with
pledgets like the former.

Remarks.
Spirit of Wine well rectified can dissolve sublimate corrosive, but it is not
able to dissolve Quicksilver, nor even Mercurius dulcis; the reason of which
is, that the Sublimate being a Mercury extremely rarefied, and already as it
were suspended by acids, the Spirit of Wine insinuates into it by little and
little, and dissolves its parts; but Quicksilver and Mercurius dulcis,
consisting of parts too close and compact, the Spirit of Wine which is a
rarefied Sulphur, cannot give shakes strong enough to disjoyn or separate them.

This liquor is milder than the former, because Spirit of Wine, which is a
Sulphur, does so blunt the acid edges of Sublimate Corrosive, that they cannot
act with that strength they did when they were at liberty.

Other Precipitates of Mercury.
These preparations are only Sublimate Corrosive dissolved and precipitated
into powders of different colors.

Mix 7 or 8 ounces of Sublimate Corrosive powdered, in a glass or marble Mortar
with 16 or 18 ounces of warm water, stir them about for half an hour, then let
the liquor settle, and pour it off by Inclination, filter it, and divide it
into three parts to be put into so many Viols.

Pour into one of these Viols some drops of the Oil of Tartar made per
Deliquium, there falls immediately a red Precipitate.

Drop into another of these Viols some volatile spirit of Sal Armoniack, and
you have a white Precipitate.

Pour into the last of these Viols about a spoonful of Limewater, you have a
yellow water that is called Phagaedenick-water, or a water for Ulcers, because
it is good to cleanse and heal Ulcers, the Surgeons do frequently use it,
especially in Hospitals; if you let the liquor settle, it will let fall a
yellow precipitate.

To obtain these three Precipitates, you have only to pour off the clear water
by Inclination, wash them, and dry them apart.

Red precipitate may be used like that I described before, but it is not so
strong; it is the truest red precipitate of any.

The white precipitate has the same virtues as the other.

Yellow precipitate may be used in Pomatums for the Itch, half a dram or a
dram of it is to be mixed with an ounce of Pomatum.

The Sublimate which remains at the bottom of the Mortar, being dried may be
used in Pomatums for the Itch, like yellow precipitate.

Remarks.
Sublimate being a Mercury loaded with acids, common water is able to dissolve
some of it, because these acids do rarefie it, and make a kind of salt of it;
but because there are not acids enough in it to dissolve all the Mercury, the
most compact part of it remains at bottom, the liquor is filtrated to clear and
purify it the more, it is as clear and transparent as Fountain water.

If by way of Curiosity, you should drop into the Viol of red precipitate, that
I now described, some spirit of Sal Armoniack, and would shake the liquor a
little, it would presently turn white, and your precipitate would be white; but
if instead of spirit of Sal Armoniack you would use spirit of Vitriol, an
Ebullition would rise in it, and the red liquor would become clear and
transparent as common water.

Because the Oil of Tartar is an alkali salt dissolved, it breaks the edges of
the acid which held up the Mercury imperceptible, and served as Finns to make
it swim in the water, so that this Mercury having nothing left to bear it up,
must needs precipitate by its own weight. The same thing happens when spirit of
Sal Armoniack is thrown upon the other part of the solution of sublimate
Corrosive. For this spirit being in like manner an alkali, produces the same
effect as the Oil of Tartar.

But although alkali's do all agree in this, that they break and destroy acids,
nevertheless there is always some difference in their action.

And this evidently appears in those differently colored precipitates, for
this diversity can be attributed only to this, that they having in several
manners wrought upon acids, do dispose and modifie the parts of the
precipitated body, so as they may be capable of making different Refractions of
Light.

These precipitates are no longer poisons, though they come from sublimate
Corrosive, and there is the same reason for it, as there is for the
precipitations; for seeing that which gave the Corrosion was an acid, when this
acid is destroyed by such powerful alkali's as are spirit of Sal Armoniack, and
Oil of Tartar, that which remains must become sweet.

When spirit of Vitriol is thrown upon the liquor of red precipitate, there
rises an Ebullition, because the acid does penetrate the alkali salt of the Oil
of Tartar, and this alkali being destroyed, the acid dissolves what was
precipitated before, whence it comes that the liquor clears up, and turns into
poison as it was before.

If you would again pour Oil of Tartar, then spirit of Sal Armoniack upon it,
there would happen new red and white precipitates, which might again be
dissolved, and the liquor made clear again, by adding to it more spirit of
Vitriol, but only a greater quantity of this Spirit must be used than was
before.

CHAP. IX. Of Antimony.
ANtimony is a Mineral consisting of a Sulphur like unto common Sulphur, and of
a substance near approaching to Metallic: it is called Stibium in Latin. It is
found in many places in Transylvania, Hungaria, France, Germany. Sometimes you
may meet with some of the mineral Antimony at the Druggists, that is to say,
just as it is taken out of the Mines, but that which is commonly brought among
us has been melted, and molded into cakes of a Pyramidal form.

You must choose that which is in long shining needles, and not expect to find
it of a reddish color, as many Authors do advise; for in a hundred weight of
this Mineral, you will hardly find one piece of this kind. The occasion of this
error came from the Alchymists, who thought that Antimony did contain a Sulphur
like unto that of Gold, and that the reddish sort had more of it than the
black; but this pretended Sulphur is as imaginary as that of gold. This reddish
color does doubtless proceed either from the heat of the Sun coming to it, or
from a participation of the subterranean heat, bestowed more on such pieces,
than the rest; for when the Sulphur of Antimony is rarefied, it assumes a red
color, as may be seen in the operation, called Golden sulphur of Antimony.

Antimony will not dissolve, but with Aqua Regalis, which has made a great many
Alchymists think, that this Mineral was an imperfect Gold.

Although nothing but a metallic substance mixed with Sulphur can be perceived
in the analyzing of Antimony; nevertheless considering its Figure, somewhat
like that of saltpeter, and its Emetick quality, which can proceed from
nothing but a punction made in the stomach, there is reason to think that it
contains an acid salt; but because the edges of this salt are sheathed in a
great deal of Sulphur, it cannot exert its activity, without opening a way for
it, either by salts which divide the Sulphur, or by Calcination which carries
off its grosser part. Notwithstanding it is not to be understood that the
Emetick faculty of Antimony does consist in this salt alone; for if it were
alone, it would no more produce this effect than other acid salts do, but it is
assisted by the Sulphur, which serves for a Vehicle to exalt it toward the
upper Orifice of the stomach. Thus Antimony may be said to vomit, by reason of
the Saline sulphur it contains.

Crude Antimony is used in Sudorifick decoctions, when we would dissipate a
tumor by Transpiration; but great care must be had that no acid may enter into
the Decoction, for then it would open its body, and render it Emetick. It is
dangerous also to take it in substance, because it may be apt to meet with an
acid in the stomach that would open its body, and thereby cause a great
vomiting to follow.

The reason that Crude Antimony causes sweat, is because of some Sulphurous
Particles that separate from the Antimony, which not being strong enough to
make one vomit, do therefore work by transpiration.

Common Regulus of Antimony.
This preparation is an Antimony rendered more heavy, and more metallic by the
separation that is made of its grosser Sulphurs.

Take sixteen ounces of Antimony, twelve ounces of crude Tartar, and six ounces
of Saltpeter purified; powder them and mix them well together, then heat a
large Crucible red-hot, throw into it a spoonful of your mixture, and cover it
with a Tile until the detonation is over, continue to throw into the Crucible
spoonfuls of this mixture one after another, until all of it is spent; then
light a great fire about it, and when the matter has been some time in Fusion,
pour it into a Mortar, or an Iron mould greased with suet and heated, then
strike the sides of the said mould or mortar with tongs to make the Regulus
precipitate to the bottom; when it is cold, separate it from the dross that
remains on the top of it with a hammer, and after you have powdered it, melt it
in another Crucible, then throw into it a little Saltpeter, there will rise
some little flame from it, then pour out the matter into the iron mortar well
cleansed and greased, let it cool, and you have four ounces and a half of
Regulus.

If you melt it over again, and form it into balls of the bigness of a Pill,
you have a perpetual Pill, that is to say, such as being taken and voided fifty
times will purge every time, and yet there is hardly any sensible diminution.

This Regulus is melted in a Crucible, and then cast into moulds to make Cups
and Gobelets. But it is somewhat hard to do it, by reason of a sharpness in the
Regulus that hinders its parts from uniting so as to spread well. If you put
Whitewine into these Cups or Gobelets, it becomes Vomitive, like the Vinum
Emeticum I shall speak of anon.

Remarks.
The name Regulus signifies Royal, and is given to the most fixed and hardest
matters of many minerals and metals.

This Preparation is made in order to open the Antimony, and purify it from a
great deal of gross Sulphur that it is impregnated with, and to this end it is
Calcined with Tartar and Saltpeter, which do easily flame, and carry off with
them good store of this Sulphur, the rest remains in the Faeces, as I shall
show in the following Operation.

The mixture is cast into the Crucible by little and little, for fear least if
it should be put in all at a time, the detonation growing too violent, and the
matter rarefying too much, it might rise over the Crucible.

You must not grease the Iron Mortar with Oil, by reason of a little humidity
that it contains, which would make the matter rise and tumble out. It is
greased, to the end that the matter not sticking to the mortar may separate
from it the more easily.

The Regulus is melted again, and Saltpeter thrown into it, to the end, that
some little superficial sulphur, which remained of the dross, may fly away, and
the Regulus may remain the purer.

Fifteen ounces of dross will be found to four ounces and a half of Regulus,
and there was used four and thirty ounces of mixture in this operation, so that
there loses fourteen ounces and a half during the time it is on the fire.

Although good store of the Antimonial Sulphurs do exhale, the Regulus is
notwithstanding still loaded with them, and it is they which chiefly give it
its Vomitive virtue; for the Vomiting does proceed from a very quick motion
that these Sulphurs do give to the stomach, by pricking its Fibers with some
salts that they carry along with them.

If you mix this Emetick with an Infusion of Senna, or some such purgative, it
works as much by stool as by vomit, because these Remedies do precipitate with
them some part of the Sulphurs.

When a man swallows the Perpetual Pill, it passes by its own weight, and
purges downwards: it is washed and given again as before, and so on perpetually.

Almost all Chemists have written that this Pill loses nothing at all of its
weight, though taken several times. It Is true indeed the diminution is but very
small, yet nevertheless it would not be hard to remark it in some measure. It
may be said also that in place of the Sulphurous parts which do exhale to
cause the vomiting, some extraneous bodies do succeed in their place, as it
happens when Antimony is Calcined in the Sun.

When this Pill has been taken and voided twenty or thirty times, it purges
not so much as it did at first, as well because the more soluble parts of the
Sulphur are gone, as that what remains does pass without any great effect. The
same does happen to Cups or Gobelets, which cannot make the wine so Emetick as
before, after they have been filled twenty or thirty times.

Some do prescribe the Perpetual Pill, in the disease called Miserere, but this
practice is not without danger, because the ball stopping sometime in the
Intestines, which are knotted or twisted together in this disease, may cause an
Inflammation, and so exulcerate the part. It is given in the Colic, and then
it does well.

Wine draws out the Emetick virtue of the Regulus much better than water or
spirit of Wine, or vinegar can do; the reason of which is, that this virtue
does consist in a saline sulphur which water could not penetrate; spirit of
Wine indeed does dissolve some of the more sulphurous part of it, but does not
take enough of the salt; the vinegar by its acidity does fix too much what it
has dissolved; but Wine contains a sulphurous spirit, and a saline Tartar,
which do make a most convenient Menstruum to dissolve and to preserve the
saline and sulphurous part of the prepared Antimony.

Upon considering the different ways of evacuation caused by Antimony, and many
other Medicines, I do find it very probable, that Emeticks do work as they do,
because their operation being quick is exerted in the stomach, before the
medicin had time to descend more downwards, and then this viscus is very
sensible when irritated, and undergoes commotions sufficiently violent to make
rise what is within it. But if the medicin proves slow in its operation, and
descends into the gutts before it raises a purgative fermentation, it then
forces downwards, whence it comes to pass that those who do not vomit upon
taking emeticks, are commonly purged by stool.

Thus Vomits and Purges do differ only in this, that the first do work in the
stomach, the others in the gutts.

Oil, and lukewarm water do vomit, by relaxing the fibers of the stomach, and
changing the motion of the spirits which do then act only by shaking, or
turning the stomach to a discharge upwards.

If by way of curiosity you would Calcine four ounces of the Regulus of
Antimony powdered, in an earthen cup unglazed, set in a small fire, stirring it
all the while with a Spatule, there will rise up a vapor for an hour and a
halfs time, or there-abouts, and when the matter fumes no longer, it turns into
a gray powder, that weighs two drachms and a half more than the Regulus did at
first.

This augmentation of quantity is the stranger, for that the fume which
ascended from it during the Calcination, should seem rather to have diminished
its weight. It must be therefore granted, that a great many fiery particles
have entered into it, in the room of that which fumed away.

This Fume proceeds from some grosser Sulphur, that remained in the Regulus,
and indeed it smells strong of the sulphur.

Golden Sulphur of Antimony.
This preparation is the sulphurous part of Antimony dissolved by Alkali
salts, and precipitated by an acid.

Take the dross of the Regulus of Antimony, powder and boil them with common
water in an earthen pot half an hour; strain the liquor, and pour vinegar into
the expression, there will precipitate a red powder; filtrate and separate your
precipitate, dry it and keep it, you will obtain twelve ounces, and two drachms
of it, it is called the Golden Sulphur of Antimony, and is an Emetick: the dose
is from two grains unto six in broth or in Pills.

Remarks.
You must put about sixteen pints of water to boil with the fifteen ounces of
the dross of Regulus of Antimony, though the liquor does coagulate like a Jelly
when it is cold, by reason of the salts and sulphurs joining together; for the
dross of the Regulus is nothing but a mixture of the fixed parts of Saltpeter,
and Tartar, that have retained with them some of the more impure Sulphur of
Antimony.

Now seeing that these salts do become Alkali by means of Calcination, the acid
which is poured upon them, does break or destroy their strength, and makes them
quit the sulphur which they held dissolved, from whence the precipitation of
the Golden Sulphur of Antimony does proceed.

So soon as vinegar is poured on the dissolution of the dross, volatile
sulphurs do arise which are very disagreeable to the smell; the precipitate
which is afterward made, is like to a Coagulum or curd, in great quantity.

This Sulphur does operate much like to the Crocus metallorum, of which I shall
soon speak. The Chemists have called it Golden sulphur, by reason of its
color, which is near like unto that of Gold; but it is probable that the
Ancients did understand by the Golden Sulphur of Antimony, some other sulphur
than this, because almost all of them have writ, that there was a gross
superficial sulphur in Antimony, like unto common sulphur, which is this of
which our present preparation is made, and another more fixed, and like unto
that of Gold, which they held to be Sudorifick.

You must not imagine that our Golden Vomitive Sulphur is altogether Pure, it
is still loaded with a great deal of earth and salt, which it has still
retained in the precipitation, and it is this salt which by rarefying its parts
does give it this color.

Regulus of Antimony with Mars.
This preparation is a mixture of the more fixed parts of Antimony, and some
portion of Iron.

Put eight ounces of small Nails into a great Crucible, cover it, and set it on
a grate in a Furnace; surround it above and below with a good fire, and when
the Nails are red hot, throw into them a pound of Antimony in powder; cover
again the Crucible, and continue a great fire; when the Antimony shall be in
perfect Fusion, cast into it by little and little three ounces of Saltpeter, a
detonation will happen, and the nails will melt; and when there do rise no more
sparkles, pour out your matter into a Cornet or Iron mortar, that you shall
have greased with a little Suet, and heated beforehand: then strike the sides
of the mortar with pincers, to make the Regulus fall to the bottom; when it is
cold, separate it from the dross with a hammer: melt it in another Crucible,
and cast into it two ounces of Antimony in powder; when it is melted, add to it
by little and little three ounces of Saltpeter, which being burnt, and the
matter casting forth no more sparkles, pour it into the Iron Cornet greased and
heated as before, then strike it with pincers, that the Regulus may fall down,
and when it is cool, separate it from the dross as I have said; repeat melting
the Regulus twice more, and each time cast Saltpeter into it, but the last
especially; you must observe to melt it well, before you cast the Saltpeter
into it, that the Star may appear. There is no need of adding any more crude
Antimony to the two last Fusions This Regulus is used as the other, and has
the same effects.

Remarks.
The Iron in the first Fusion mixing with the Antimony turns almost all of it
into dross, because it joins with the more impure Sulphur, so that the Reguline
part being more weighty falls down to the bottom. Saltpeter is used in order
to open the Antimony, and cause a more perfect Fusion, that a separation of the
grosser parts may be made the better. Moreover it carries off some Sulphurs by
its volatile parts. The dross then does consist of Iron, Sulphur, and sixth
Saltpeter.

The Fusion is repeated three times over, because some portion of Iron does
always precipitate with the Regulus; and a little crude Antimony is added to
the first of all, to the end the Mars, which easily joins with Antimony by
reason of a gross Sulphur it contains, may leave the Regulus and stick to it.
The two last Fusions do make a gray or white dross, and this is a mark, that
the Saltpeter can receive no more.

After the first Purification, ten ounces of Regulus, and thirteen ounces of
Scories do remain; after the second Purification, nine ounces and a half of
Regulus do remain; after the third, eight ounces and two drachms of Regulus;
and after the fourth you will have seven ounces, and six drachms.

The Star which appears upon the Martial Regulus of Antimony when it is well
Purified, has given occasion to the Chemists to reason upon the matter; and the
greatest part of these men being strongly persuaded of the Planetary
Influences, and a supposed correspondence between each of the Planets, and the
Metal that bears its name, they have not wanted to assert, that this same Star
proceeded from the impression which certain little bodies flowing from the
Planet Mars do bestow upon Antimony for sake of the remaining Iron that was
mixed with it; and for this reason, they wonderfully recommend the making this
preparation upon Tuesday rather than another day, between 7 and 8 a clock in
the morning, or else between 2 and 3 in the afternoon, provided the weather be
clear and fair, thinking that day which is denominated from Mars to be the time
that it lets fall its Influences most plentiful of any. They have likewise
conceited a thousand things of the like nature, which it would be too much
trouble to relate here.

But all opinions of this kind have no manner of probability, for no bodies
Experience did ever evince, that the Metals have any such correspondence with
the Planets, as I have maintained otherwhere; much less can they prove that the
Influences of the Planets do imprint such and such Figures to Metals, as these
men do determine. It would be no hard matter for me here to show how little
reason or foundation there is in discourses of that nature, and how very weak
and uncertain are the Principles of Judicial Astrology; but this would be too
long a Digression for this place, and serve only to swell this Book with things
that may be found treated of at large elsewhere, and particularly in the
Epitome of Gassendus made by Monsieur Bernier.

My thoughts therefore shall not soar so high as these men's do; and though I
may seem dull and mean in their eyes, I shall not search in the Celestial
Bodies for an explication of the Star we now contend about; seeing I can find
it out in causes near at hand. There have been who gazing too earnestly upon
the Stars above, have not perceived the stone at their feet, that caused them
to stumble.

I say then that the Star which appears upon the Martial Regulus of Antimony,
does proceed from the Antimony it self; for this Mineral runs all into Needles;
but because before it is Purified, it is loaded with sulphurous and impure
parts, which do make it softish, these Needles do not appear but confusedly.
Now when it is purified with Mars, not only a great many of the more
sulphurous parts of Antimony, and such as are fittest to hinder its
Crystallization, are carried away, but also there remains the hardest and the
most compact part of Iron, which makes the Antimony firmer than it was. So that
the Purification does serve to lay open the natural Crystals of Antimony in
form of a star, and the Iron by its hardness does expatiate these Crystals,
from whence it comes that the Martial Regulus of Antimony is harder than the
other Regulus.

The Crystals then do appear in form of a star in the Martial Regulus of
Antimony, because they were so naturally in the Antimony before. This star does
not appear exactly the same in the common Regulus of Antimony, let it be
Purified never so much, because its parts have not the same tension as those of
the other.

Glass of Antimony.
This preparation is a Regulus of Antimony become vitrified by a long fusion.

Calcine in a small fire a pound of Antimony in powder, in an earthen pot
unglazed, stir the matter continually with an Iron Spatule, until vapors arise
no longer; but if notwithstanding your stirring, the powder should chance to
run into lumps, as it often happens to do, put it into a mortar and powder it;
then Calcine it again, as I have said, and when it will fume no more, and is of
a gray color, put it into a good Crucible, cover it with a tyle, and set it in
a wind-furnace, in which you shall make a very violent coal-fire round about
the Crucible, to the end the matter may melt. About an hour afterward uncover
the Crucible, and putting the end of an Iron rod into it, see whether the
matter that sticks to it is become Diaphanous; and if it be, pour it upon a
Marble well warmed, it will congeal, and you will have the Glass of Antimony,
which you must let cool, and so keep for use. It is a strong Vomitive, and one
of the most violent that is made of Antimony. The Emetick Wine is made of it,
by setting it to steep in White Wind. It is given also in substance from two
grains unto six.

An Emetick Syrup is prepared with the Glass of Antimony infused in the juice
of Quinces, or Lemons, and Sugar. If instead of these acid juices, one should
use Wine, the Syrup would be the more Vomitive. The dose of the one and the
other Syrup, is from two drachms to an ounce and a half, and is given
especially to nice persons, and to Infants.

Remarks.
The Antimony must be Calcined within the Chimny, and the vapors that fly from
it must be avoided as being very injurious to the Breast.

This Calcination is performed to divest it of some gross Sulphurs that might
hinder its Vitrification. Some do add to this gray powder Borax, others crude
Antimony, and others Sulphur, that it may Vitrifie the more easily.

The Vitrification happens not, until the parts of Antimony have been rendered
more firm and stiff than they were before, to the end the fiery particles
passing and repassing through the matter may form the pores into a strait line,
so that they can remain in this condition, when the Antimony is grown cold; and
it is the figure of these pores, which causes the transparency, because they
suffer the light to pass through them directly.

The sulphur and antimony do help it to melt, wherefore some do add them to the
matter, though in a small quantity, and their volatile part flies away before
the Vitrification.

The Borax does not only help the fusion, but likewise serves to harden the
matter when cold, that the pores may the longer be preserved strait; for,
although a great part of the sulphurs of Antimony flies away, yet there remains
enough still in the very substance of the glass, which yet do not very long
continue in their first position, but shutting the pores of the matter do
render it opake.

This accident does not happen to such glasses as contain no Sulphur, because
their parts being always preserved stiff and firm, their pores do never become
obstructed.

Glass of Antimony receiving more Calcination than the other preparations,
should consequently be less Vomitive, by reason of the dispersion and loss of
much Sulphur, wherein its Vomitive virtue does consist: Nevertheless experience
shows us the contrary, for it works with more force, as I have said; and the
reason of it is, because no Salt is used in the making of this glass, whereas
in the other preparations Saltpeter is used, which by its fixed parts hinders
the activity of some part of the Sulphurs; thus although there does remain but
a small quantity of Sulphur in the Glass of Antimony, yet as little as there is
being in great motion, it causes a greater disposition to Vomit.

The Glass of Antimony may be corrected by Calcining it in a crucible with a
third part of Saltpeter, then washing it diverse times with hot water, it is to
be dried. This powder is not so strong in its operation as the Glass of
Antimony, because the Saltpeter has fixed some part of the Sulphurs of
Antimony. It works much like the Crocus metallorum, of which I am to treat.

Liver of Antimony, or Crocus Metallorum.
This preparation is an Antimony opened by Saltpeter, and by fire, which have
made it half glass, and which have given it a Liver-colour.

Take a pound of Antimony, and so much Saltpeter, powder them, and mix them
well together, put this mixture into an Iron mortar, and cover it with a tyle;
leave an open place nevertheless through which you may convey a coal of fire,
and take it out again, the matter will flame, and cause a great detonation,
which being over, and the mortar grown cold, strike against the bottom that the
matter may fall down; then separate the dross with a hammer, from the shining
part, which is called Liver of Antimony from its color.

To make the Emetick wine you must infuse an ounce of this Liver of Antimony in
powder in a quart of White Wind four and twenty hours, and so let it settle;
the Dose of this wine is from half an ounce to three ounces.

That which is called Crocus Metallorum is nothing but the Liver of Antimony
washed several times with warm water, and afterward dried. It is used as the
Liver of Antimony to make the Emetick wine, and it is given likewise in
substance to Vomit strongly: the dose is from two to eight grains.

Remarks.
This preparation is a more impure Glass of Antimony than that I described, and
consequently it is more opaque; it works not so violently as the glass.

The Liver of Antimony has a different strength according to the proportion of
Niter that enters into it; when there is more Niter than Antimony, it is the
less Vomitive, not only because great store of the Sulphurs of Antimony are
lost in the strong detonation that it raises, but also because there remains
more fixed parts of the Saltpeter, which do join and unite with the Sulphurs
that remain in the matter. Thus if instead of a pound of Saltpeter you should
use twenty ounces, as many do, you would have a Liver of Antimony less Vomitive
than that I described. Now on the contrary when less Saltpeter than Antimony
is used, the Liver that proceeds from this mixture is not so Vomitive as that I
now described; the reason of it is that the Sulphurs of Antimony have not been
sufficiently stirred by the Saltpeter in so little a quantity: for Antimony
becomes not Vomitive, but only when it has been sufficiently opened, either by
fire, or some Salts. The most convenient proportion then that can be observed
to render the Liver of Antimony as Vomitive as may be, is to take equal parts
according to my description.

The strong detonation that happens when fire is put to the matter, is not
caused through the flagration of Saltpeter, as almost every body has thought,
through want of sufficient reflection; I shall prove in its proper place that it
can never take flame, and that its volatile parts do serve for a kind of
Bellows, or Vehicle to rarifie and exalt the Sulphurs of Antimony.

A Liver of Antimony is prepared with equal quantities of Antimony, Niter, and
Sea Salt decrepitated; and because these salts do give it a red color like
unto the Opale, this preparation has been called Magnesia Opalina; it is less
Emetick than the other, by reason of the addition of sea salt, which fixes the
saline Sulphur of Antimony.

Several other ways of preparing the Liver of Antimony have been invented; but
I am contented with having given you the best of all, and the easiest to
prepare.

If you use ordinary saltpeter in this Operation, you will obtain eight ounces
and two drachms of Liver of Antimony; but if you use purified saltpeter, you will
get but six ounces and a half.

This difference of quantity proceeds from the nature of saltpeter, for the
more volatile parts this Mineral salt contains, the more apt it is to carry off
some parts of the Antimony. Now purified Saltpeter is much more volatile than
the common sort, wherefore the Liver of Antimony, where it is used, is in
lesser quantity.

The Liver of Antimony that is made with common saltpeter is the redder, and
comes nearer to the color of an Animals Liver, than that which is made with
purified saltpeter; this happens through the fixed salt which is in this
preparation more than in the other; for common saltpeter contains much fixed
salt, as I shall show in its proper place; this salt does likewise make the
matter the heavier.

As for the virtues of these Livers of Antimony, the difference is not very
great, but only that which is made with purified saltpeter is a little more
Emetick than the other.

I cannot pass by here the false imagination of some men who think that
preparation of the Liver of Antimony, of which half a dram, or two scruples
may be given, is much better than that whereof 3 or 4 grains perform the same
effect; for there is no doubt but the taking so great a quantity of Antimony
will give an impression to the stomach, that a lesser quantity is not able to
do. Furthermore, whereas these kind of preparations do commonly open the
Antimony but little, or but half-fix the saline sulphurs, it is to be feared
lest some salt they may meet with in the stomach, should open them too much, or
volatilize them, and so cause most unhappy accidents.

When the Liver of Antimony is washed with warm water, some part of the fixed
Niter that remained in it is separated. Many have believed that the more
violent part of the Emetick was carried off by this Lotion: but on the
contrary, this fixed part is more capable of mitigating than augmenting its
violence for the reasons I have spoke already.

You must observe that if you should put four ounces of prepared Antimony into
a quart of wine, the wine will not be more Vomitive than if you should put but
an ounce; because being loaded with as much of the substance of it as it is
able to contain, the rest remains at bottom, and cannot be dissolved unless
more wine be added. Now an ounce of Crocus Metallorum, or Liver of Antimony is,
according to experience, capable of impregnating not only one quart of wine,
but after having poured off the liquor by Inclination, if you put as much more
wine to the matter that remains, and leave it in digestion two or three days
together, you will have an Infusion as Emetick as the first. You may if you please
renew the wine that is poured upon it to be infused, nine several times, and it
will always prove Emetick; after which, if you Calcine your matter a quarter of
an hour in an earthen pot unglazed over a small fire, stirring the matter
continually with an Iron Spatule, you may infuse it again as before, and it
will render the wine Emetick.

That Emetick wine which is made with the Crocus Metallorum is most in use; it
is likewise prepared with the Regulus and glass, as I have said speaking of
them.

You might likewise make another sort of it, by infusing warm some days crude
Antimony in white wind; for the tartarous salts of the wine do open the
Antimony, but it would not prove so vomitive as the other.

The Emetick wine is given alone, or mixed with Purgatives, that convey it
partly by stool. When you find an Inclination to vomit, you must be provided of
broth a little fat, and take some spoonfuls to facilitate the Vomiting, and
hinder the great efforts which sometimes break vessels, and cause mortal
Hemorrhagies to follow. You must also consider that those who have their
breasts strait, and bodies thin, are much harder to vomit than others. But let
us leave those particulars to the wisdom of Physicians.

Antimonium Diaphoreticum.
This preparation is an Antimony, whose sulphurs are fixed by Saltpeter, and
are thereby hindered from working otherwise than by sweat.

Powder and mix well together one part of Antimony with three parts of purified
Saltpeter; and having heated a Crucible red-hot in the Coals, cast into it a
spoonful of your mixture, you will hear a noise or detonation; after that is over,
cast in another spoonful, and continue to do so 'till all your powder is in the
Crucible. Leave a great fire about it two hours, then throw your matter which
will be white, into an earthen pan almost filled with Fountain Water, and leave
it a steeping warm ten or twelve hours, that the fixed Saltpeter may dissolve
in it; separate the liquor by Inclination, wash the white powder that remains
at bottom five or six times with warm water, and dry it. This is called
Antimonium Diaphoreticum, or mineral Diaphoretick, or the Calx of Antimony.

This Preparation is esteemed good to procure Sweat, and to resist Poison, and
consequently is good in Malignant Fevers, the small Pox, the Plague and other
Contagious diseases. The dose is from six grains to thirty, in some appropriate
liquor.

All the Lotions may be evaporated, and a fixed Saltpeter will be found at the
bottom of the vessel, which works much like the Sal Polychrestum.

Remarks.
In this preparation three pounds of Saltpeter are used for one pound of
Antimony, that after sublimation of the volatile parts there may remain store
of fixed Niter, which unites with the Antimony, and hinders it from being
Vomitive.

It is observable, that three parts of Niter with one of Antimony do not cause
so strong a detonation, nor so great a diminution of the parts of Antimony, as
when there are but equal quantities. And the reason of it is, that there is too
little sulphur of Antimony for the quantity of Niter, and that some part of the
sulphur does remain unactive in the fixed Niter, which admits not of flagration,
for the volatile part of Saltpeter does not burn, but according to the
proportion of sulphur with which it is mixed. And this is a proof of my
assertion in this matter, that if you throw upon lighted coals, a little of
that Saltpeter which you shall have drawn from the lotions of Antimonium
Diaphoreticum, it will still cause a flame to arise, by reason of new sulphur
which it meets with in the coals, which sulphur does join together with the
volatile part of Saltpeter that remained. I shall speak more at large of the
flagration of Saltpeter, in the Chapter of this Salt.

You must put the mixture into the Crucible spoonful after spoonful, that the
Calcination may be done the better. When it is ended, the matter is washed, for
to separate the Saltpeter that is unuseful. But let there be never so many
lotions, they can never wash away a certain inveloping or cover that is given
to the Antimony by the fixed Saltpeter; for each particle of Antimony is so
closely united, that it cannot any way be separated without recourse to some
reductive Salt; and this is it that makes this preparation of Antimony to be
not at all Vomitive. Many do say it is Sudorifick, but I could never observe
any such effect sensibly. Nevertheless I would submit to think so, both because
many Authors have written so, and because the heat of the body may possibly
separate some of its Sulphurs, which not being strong enough to make one Vomit,
may only drive by Transpiration sensible or insensible, according as the pores
are more or less open. Others do think Antimonium Diaphoreticum is merely an
alkali, that is good for nothing but to destroy acids, and on this principle do
give it for the same ends as Coral, Perle, Calcined Hartshorn, and such like
things as do absorb sharp or acid humors, which abounding too much in the body
do cause diverse diseases; but without doubt they that follow these principles
have not built them on Experience; for pour any kind of acid on Antimonium
Diaphoreticum, it will never dissolve at all, and take away the acid after a
very long Infusion, it will be as strong as ever; which proves it to be no
alkali, and therefore not to produce the effects that are pretended.

The Cornachine Powder is made of equal parts of Antimonium Diaphoreticum,
Diagryde, and Cream of Tartar. The dose is from 20 to 45 grains.

Another Antimonium Diaphoreticum.
This preparation is a Calcination of Antimony, by which it is fixed, and
rendered sudorifick, without losing the volatile part which sublimes from it.

Take a good earthen pot unglazed, able to resist the fire, with a hole in the
middle of its height, and a stopple to it; set it in a Furnace of an equal
proportion, and fit to it three pots more of the same earth, all three open at
the bottom, and fit a glass head to the uppermost pot, with a little Viol for a
Receiver. Lute the junctures well, and by the means of some Bricks and Lute
together, let the fire transpire only through some little holes, and be but
strong enough to warm the bottom of the lowermost pot; then give your fire by
degrees, to heat this pot by little and little red-hot.

In the mean time mix three parts of Saltpeter, with one of Antimony in
powder; cast a spoonful of it into the red-hot pot through the hole, and stop
it again quickly, you will perceive a great detonation, and after it is over, cast
in another spoonful, and continue to do so until all your matter is spent. Then
increase the fire to the utmost for half an hours time, and so let it go out.
Unlute the vessels as soon as they are coid, you will find a little Spirit of
Niter in the Receiver; white flowers in the three upper pots, and a white mass
in the lowermost, which may be washed as the other Antimonium Diaphoreticum,
and so dried. This Mineral Diaphoretick is as good as the former; you must wash
the flowers several times with warm water, and then dry them. They are not so
Emetick as those I shall describe hereafter; the dose is from two to six grains.

Remarks.
In this preparation the volatile or Sulphurous parts of Antimony do stick to
the sides of the pots like flower; if you don't wash them, they will not be so
Vomitive, because the Saltpeter that rises with them, hinders their activity.

The acid spirit which is found in the Recipient may be used in the Colic; the
dose is from four to eight drops in Broth, or some appropriate liquor.

If you use in this operation five ounces of Antimony, and fifteen ounces of
Saltpeter, you will draw half an ounce of Spirit of Niter, two drachms of
flowers of Antimony washed, and dried, and five ounces of very white Antimonium
diaphoreticum, after that it is well washed and dried; and if you evaporate and
crystallize the lotions, you will find ten ounces of Salt, which will be a
Saltpeter half fixed, and which will flame being thrown upon the coals;
insomuch that there will be lost in the whole of the mixture, four ounces and
two drachms. This diminution comes from what loses through the hole of the pot,
during the detonation, for stop it as well as you can, there will always vent
out a great deal of fume, which will incommode the Artist, unless he takes care
to turn away his head from the steam.

The purified Saltpeter loses no more than the other, because the sulphur of
Antimony can take of the volatile parts of Saltpeter but such a proportion as
it requires to raise it. So that in fifteen ounces of Saltpeter, (whether it
be the purified sort or the common) there are much more volatile parts than are
necessary, in order to join with the sulphur of five ounces of Antimony.

Although there do rise a great many parts of Antimony with the volatile
portion of Saltpeter in the detonation, yet we find that the Antimonium
diaphoreticum which remains, does weigh as much as the Antimony which was
employed in the operation; the reason of which is that in place of the part of
Antimony that exhales, a great deal of Saltpeter does as it were inseparably
join with the remainder, and this is that which fixes it, and hinders it from
being vomitive, as I have said.

Again, although Antimony is naturally black, it becomes altogether white, when
it has been well rarefied; for all that we see in this operation, is a pure
white, as well the volatile as the fixed, which shows very well that colors
have no real being.

An Antimonium diaphoreticum may be prepared, and at the same time likewise a
sulphur of Antimony, after the following manner.

Dissolve within the chimney, what quantity you please of crude Antimony with
three times as much Aqua Regalis, in a glass body, there will appear a strong
ebullition with red vapors, which must be avoided as being very injurious to
the breast; when the dissolution is over, pour upon it a great quantity of
water, in order to weaken the Aqua Regalis, upon which the whole turns into a
milk, and then a Precipitate in a white powder falls to the bottom of the
vessel.

You will likewise see a kind of gray scum swim upon the liquor, which you must
gather up with a Spatule, or with a wooden spoon, and dry it in the shade; it
is a sulphur which fires like common sulphur, and is good for nothing else.

You must decant the water from the body, and washing the precipitated powder
diverse times, and drying it, you will have an Antimonium diaphoreticum that may
be used as the former; this preparation indeed is not much in use, but many do
prefer it before all the others.

When Antimony is Calcined by the heat of the Sun, as through a Burning-Glass;
instead of losing its weight, as one would think it should by reason of the
evaporation of Sulphurous parts, it does increase in weight: which shows that
some more ponderous bodies have succeeded in the place of those that are gone.

Flowers of Antimony.
This preparation is the more volatile part of Antimony raised by fire.

Fit the same pots I spoke of in the last Operation, one upon another; set them
in the same Furnace, and observe the same circumstances for their situation,
and for heating the lowermost. When its bottom is red-hot, cast into it a small
spoonful of Antimony in powder through the hole, and stir the matter at the
bottom of the pot with an Iron Spatule crooked a little on purpose to do it the
better; draw out your Spatule, and stop the hole, the flowers will rise and
stick in the upper pots. Continue a great fire, that the pot may still remain
red-hot, and when you see nothing more sublime, cast in so much more Antimony,
observing to do what I have said. Repeat the casting it in through the hole,
till you have flowers enough. Then let the fire go out, and when the vessels
are cold, unlute them, you will find flowers all about the three upper pots, and
the head, gather them together with a Feather, and keep them in a Viol.

It is a powerful Emetick; it is given in Quartan Agues, and other Intermittent
Fevers, and also in the Epilepsie; the dose is from two grains to six in
Lozenges, or Broth.

Remarks.
In this preparation, as in the former, you must leave room enough; otherwise
the flowers of Antimony being driven fiercely by the fire, would be apt to
break the vessel for want of room to move in. And this is the reason why many
pots are here placed one upon another. There Is no need of any Receiver, because
there is no liquor to fall into it, so that a blind head may serve.

At the bottom of the pot which contained the matter, there remains a mass of
the more terrestrious part of Antimony, that must be flung away as being good
for nothing.

If the Flowers of Antimony do happen to be of different colors, it is because
the fire was not managed equally strong; these Flowers are more Vomitive than
the former, because they have no Saltpeter in them.

Red Flowers of Antimony.
These Flowers are the more sulphurous part of Antimony rarefied and exalted
by fire.

Powder and mix well together four pounds of common glass with one pound of
Antimony, put this mixture into an earthen, or glass Retort luted, whose half
is empty; set it in a Reverberatory Furnace, and fit to it a large Receiver,
lute the junctures lightly, and give a little fire at first to warm the Retort,
then augment it by degrees, and you will see Red flowers come forth into the
Receiver: continue the fire until no more can come, which you will know as you
unlute the junctures; and taking off the Receiver gather your Flowers, and keep
them for use. They are more Vomitive than the former, and are given to the same
intents: the dose is from two grains to four in a Lozenge, or some appropriate
liquor.

Remarks.
That which makes these Flowers more Vomitive than the former, is the more
terrestrious or fixed part of Antimony's being kept from rising by the glass, so
that what is exalted by the fire is more Sulphurous, and consequently more
Emetick.

The red color of these Flowers does proceed from the abundance of Sulphurs
they are impregnated with, and it may be said that glass, which is an alkali,
acting on this Sulphur gives it this color after the same manner as
Quicklime, or the alkali Salt of Tartar makes common Sulphur turn red, when
they are boiled together in water.

The time that you take these Flowers of Antimony, you must often drink broth,
both to facilitate the vomiting, and dull the great activity of this Remedy;
for it is one of the strongest vomits that is in Physic. But because it
sometimes happens that this Powder sticking in the membranes of the stomach, or
some of its folds, does cause a continual vomiting, notwithstanding the
frequent use of broths, you must then add the Cream of Tartar, and dissolve it
in the broth, and so take some spoonful every quarter of an hour. This Cream of
Tartar stops the vomiting, because it joins with the Sulphurs of Antimony, and
fixes them, so that they precipitate by stool.

Butter, or Icy Oil of Antimony.
This preparation is an Antimony rendered caustic by acids.

Powder, and mix six ounces of the Regulus of Antimony, with a pound of
Sublimate Corrosive; put this mixture into a glass Retort, whose half remains
empty; set your Retort in Sand, and after having fitted to it a Receiver, and
luted the conjunctions, you must first make a small fire under it, and there
will distill a clear oil; after that, augment the fire a little, and there will
come forth a white thick liquor like Butter, which would stop the neck of the
Retort, and break it, if you did not take care to set live Coals near it, that
it may melt and run into the Receiver. Continue the fire, until you see a red
vapor come forth. Then take away the Receiver, and put another in its place
filled with water. Increase the fire by degrees, to make the Retort red-hot,
and the Mercury will run into the water, dry it, and keep it for use as other
Mercury.

The Butter of Antimony is a Caustic, it eats proud flesh, and cleanses
Ulcers; the Powder of Algarot is made of it, as I shall show hereafter.

Remarks.
This Butter of Antimony is nothing but a mixture of the acid Spirits of
Sublimate Corrosive with the Regulus of Antimony, and those Spirits are they
that render it Caustic.

The spirits of Salt and Vitriol in this operation do leave the Mercury to
adhere unto the Antimony which is more porous; insomuch that the Mercury being
divested of that which kept it in a Crystalline form, and being driven by a
strong fire, rarefies into vapors, which pass through the neck of the Retort
into the Receiver filled with water, wherein it condenses into Quicksilver by
means of the coolness.

I doubt not but some will find difficulty in conceiving how the acids that
adhered to the solid body of Mercury should strike off to join with the
Antimony; but it may be said to that, that the acids being so many edges
fastened at one end in the body of Mercury, may by the other end be separated and
drawn off by the soft and ramous parts of the Antimony, that are in greater
motion than the Mercury.

Instead of Regulus, the Liver, or Glass of Antimony might serve if you please.

Butter of Antimony, together with its Cinnabar.
The first of these preparations is an Antimony opened, and rendered caustic,
by the acids of Sublimate Corrosive; and the second is a mixture of the Mercury
that was in the sublimate, and of the Sulphurs of Antimony sublimed together.

Fill a Retort half full with Sublimate Corrosive, and Antimony powdered and
mixed well together. Set your Retort in Sand in a small Furnace, and fitting a
Receiver to it, and luting the junctures, proceed in the distillation the way I
showed in the preceding operation with Regulus, observing the same
circumstances.

When the red vapors begin to appear, take away the Receiver, and put another
in its place without luting the junctures; increase the fire by little and
little till you make the Retort red-hot: continue it so three or four hours,
then let the Retort cool, and break it, you will find a Cinnabar sublimed, and
adhering to the neck, separate it and keep it: it is a good Remedy for the Pox,
and the Epilepsie, it purges by sweat, the dose is from six to fifteen grains
in Pills, or Bolus, with some proper Conserve.

This Butter of Antimony is Caustic like the other I now spoke of. It may be
rectified by distilling it anew in a glass Retort.

Remarks.
In the Receiver are found little crystals sticking to its sides, which do
curiously represent the branches of trees; these figures do proceed from the
acid spirits of sublimate mixed with Antimony.

If you have used five ounces of Sublimate Corrosive, and the same of Antimony,
you will draw two ounces and a half of very good Butter of Antimony, three ounces
and six drachms of Cinnabar of Antimony, and half an ounce of Quicksilver.

The mass which remains in the Retort, does weigh two ounces and a half.

Thus the matter has lost six drachms, which loss happened, whilst the Cinnabar
was rising.

The Quicksilver is found in the neck of the retort with the Cinnabar, and in
the last receiver.

Sometimes a kind of mossey substance is found at the end of the neck of the
retort, which does represent many little figures; it is the more rarefied
Cinnabar.

The mass which is found at bottom of the retort is the more terrestrious part
of the Antimony, and is to be flung away.

In the preceding operation the Mercury did not find sulphurs enough to adhere
to, whence it happened that it came forth flowing; but in this operation wherein
crude Antimony is used, which has all its sulphur, whilst the Corrosive
spirits sticking to the Antimony come forth in Butter, the Mercury joins with
the sulphur, and by the action of fire sublimes afterward into Cinnabar in the
neck of the retort; for to make Cinnabar, Sulphur and Mercury must be sublimed
together. Now if you have the curiosity to anatomise Cinnabar, you must powder
it, and mix it with a double quantity of Salt of Tartar; then putting it into a
Retort, distill with a great fire the Mercury into a Receiver filled with water,
the Sulphur will remain in the Retort with the Salt of Tartar, but may be
separated from it by boiling it in water. Filtrate the Decoction, and then pour
upon it distilled Vinegar; a gray powder will precipitate, which may be washed
with water and dried, thus you have the Sulphur of Antimony, which is much
esteemed for diseases of the Breast, six or eight grains of it are given for a
dose in some liquor appropriate to the disease.

If you mix Butter of Antimony with double its weight of oil or spirit of
Sulphur prepared according to my description, you will have a liquor that is
good for foul bones, and for venereal ulcers and Chancres; it is applied on
pledgets, and works much like the oil or liquor of Mercury that I have
described.

The Emetick powder of Algarot, or, Mercurius vitae.
It is a Precipitate of Antimony, or Butter of Antimony washed.

Melt in hot sand the first butter of Antimony I described with Regulus, and
pour it into as earthen pan wherein are two or three quarts of warm water, a
white powder will precipitate, that must be sweetened with many lotions, and so
kept; it is improperly called Mercurius vitae. It purges upwards and downwards;
it is given in Quartans and Intermitting feavours, and all the maladies wherein
it is required to purge strongly; the dose is from two grains to eight in
Broth, or some other convenient liquor.

If you join all the lotions together, and evaporate about two thirds, or until
the liquor becomes very acid, you will have a Philosophic spirit of Vitriol, that
may be used like common spirit of Vitriol in Juleps, to give them an agreeable
acidity.

Remarks.
I have said before that the Butter or Icy Oil of Antimony was nothing but a
mixture of the spirits of Salt and Vitriol with the Regulus of Antimony. This
last operation confirms this opinion, because when this Butter is cast into
warm water, these spirits render the liquor very acid, letting the Regulus of
Antimony fall down to the bottom, so that the powder of Algarot is an Antimony
transmuted much like the white flowers I spoke of before.

The water does separate or take off very well the acid spirits from the Butter
of Antimony, because they cannot have a good hold in the pores of this softish
and sulphurous mineral, but it was not able to separate those same acids from
the Sublimate Corrosive, because the pores of Mercury being of a closer fabric
than those of Antimony, they do retain what they once receive into them, with
greater strength.

The powder of Algarot may be made after the same manner as the Butter that may
be drawn from crude Antimony, or else with the Liver, or Glass, but that which
is made with crude Antimony is not so white as the rest.

If you do use four ounces of Butter of Antimony, you will draw an ounce and
six drachms of Mercurius vitae, after it is well washed and dried, insomuch
that four ounces of this Butter do contain two ounces and two drachms of acid
spirit, in which its corrosion does consist.

The acid liquor, called Philosophic spirit of Vitriol, does grow in a manner
insipid in length of time, because its acidity has been volatilized by the
Mercury, and afterward by the Antimony.

Bezoar Mineral.
This preparation is an Antimony fixed by spirit of Niter, and rendered
sudorifick.

Melt in hot ashes two ounces of the Butter of Antimony, and pour it into a
Viol or a Bolthead, drop into it good spirit of Niter until the matter is
perfectly dissolved, commonly so much spirit of Niter is requisite as there is
Butter of Antimony; during the dissolution there will rise up vapors that you
must have a care of, and therefore will do well to place the vessel in the
Chimney. Pour your solution into a glass body, or an earthen dish, and
evaporate it in a gentle sand-fire until it is dry; there will remain a white
mass, which you must let cool, and then pour upon it two ounces of spirit of
Niter; set the vessel again in sand, and evaporate the liquor as before; once
more pour two ounces of spirit of Niter on the white mass, and having
evaporated the humidity, increase the fire a little, and Calcine the matter for
half an hours time, then take it off the fire, and you have a white powder,
which you must keep in a Viol well stopped. It is sudorifick, and serves for the
same uses as Antimonium Diaphoreticum: the dose is from six to twenty grains,
in broth, or some appropriate liquor.

Remarks.
The Spirits of Vitriol and Salt were not strong enough, nor in quantity enough
to make an entire dissolution of the Antimony, they only made a light adhesion
to it, but when they are joined with spirit of Niter, they act with much more
force; for they penetrate and divide every particle, and do render them
imperceptible, and incapable of receiving a more exact dissolution. Now in this
penetration, as in the solution of Mercury, there happens a great
effervescency, for which reason I advise to pour the spirit of Niter by little
and little, for fear the matter should rise above the vessel. This
effervescency does proceed from the resistance, that the edges of the spirits
do meet with, when they enter into the pores of the Antimony: for so soon as
the dissolution is ended, there is no further Ebullition. Afterward the
humidity is evaporated, and new spirit of Niter poured twice more on the fixed
mass, as I have said; after which the Butter of Antimony that was so great a
Caustic, and Emetick, becomes one of the mildest medicines we have, and near
approaching the preparation of Antimony that is called Diaphoretick.

This great change may well make us wonder at it, and it is hard to conceive
how an acid Corrosive spirit, such as spirit of Niter, should be able to to
sweeten a matter that became Caustic only for being impregnated with acid
spirits.

To give this difficulty some solution, it may be said, that the Butter of
Antimony became Caustic, for that the acids which it contained did but
superficially adhere, and were so adapted that the motion of the Antimonial
parts did serve them for a vehicle to distribute their keenness as they did;
but that after the solution, the acids being in great quantity, do fix the
Antimony, and not only destroy its aptitude to motion, but do so sheath or lock
themselves in the pliant sulphurous parts of this mixed, that they lose thereby
all their corrosion.

In the evaporation, abundance of the sulphurs, which were in the Butter of
Antimony, are lost.

This powder is called Bezoar Mineral, because it causes Sweat, like the Bezoar
stone.

You must know that these preparations are nothing but so many transformations
of the Regulus of Antimony, made by acid spirits or by fire; so that by Fusion,
or by the means of some reductive salt, they may be recovered into Regulus
again, by destroying those salts which kept them under this form.

Caustic Oil of Antimony.
This preparation is a portion of Antimony dissolved in the acid spirits of
salt and vitriol.

Put into a glass retort six ounces of Antimony finely powdered, pour upon it
four ounces of good spirit of salt, and the same quantity of the Caustic Oil
of Vitriol, shake and mingle them all together, and stopping the retort, set it
in sand, with the nose upwards, give it a small digesting fire for four and
twenty hours, then turn the nose downward, and when you have unstopt it, fit to
it a glass receiver, lute the junctures with a wet bladder; make a little fire
gradually to the second degree, and there will distill a whitish liquor;
increase it a little at last, and continue it until nothing more comes forth
into the receiver. Let the vessels cool, and unlute them, keep what you find in
the receiver well stopped in a bottle.

It is an Escharotick liquor, and will serve to open Venereal Shancres, to eat
proud flesh, to cleanse old ulcers, to use in carious bones, and in the
gangrene.

Remarks.
The Retort must be big enough for at least half to remain empty, that the
vapors may find room enough for their rarefactio(...)

I put the whole in digestion four and twenty hours, that the acids may have
time to open the Antimony. If I should add unto this mixture eight or ten
ounces of spirit of Niter, the Antimony would dissolve with a great ebullition,
because those three sorts of acid spirits would together make an Aqua Regalis,
with which Antimony is easily dissolved, but there is no need of making so
exact a dissolution for this operation.

This liquor is improperly called oil, for it is nothing but a solution of
Antimony by acid spirits. It differs from the Icy Oil of Antimony only in this,
that it contains more phlegm, for the acids of sublimate corrosive have no
aqueous moisture to dilute them, as there is in the acids we do here use.

With this Oil may be made the powder of Algarot, after the same manner as with
the Butter, but only then it would not be so white. This liquor might be
likewise used for the making Bezoar Mineral. Spirit of Niter being poured upon
it, there rises an ebullition, as when it is poured on Butter of Antimony.

This Oil of Antimony is not so Escharotick as the butter, because it contains
more phlegm. It is also more easy to use by reason of its liquidity.

Another Oil of Antimony.
This preparation is a solution of some parts of Antimony, by the acid spirit,
and oil of Sugar.

Take equal parts of Antimtny and Sugar Candy, powder them and mix them, put
this mixture into a glass retort large ^^^ugh for the matter to fill but a
third part or it; set your retort in sand, and fit a receiver to it, give a
gentle fire for the first hours to distill off a phlegmatic water; and when red
drops begin to come forth, fling away that which is fallen into the receiver;
then refitting it, lute the conjunctions, and make the fire a little stronger,
but manage it prudently; for otherwise the matter will rarefie and run into the
receiver in substance, so that you will be forced to begin the Operation anew;
continue the fire until nothing more comes forth; and when the vessels are
cold, take and keep what you find in the receiver.

This liquor is Oil of Antimony It is proper to cleanse Ulcers with, and for
Tettars and Itchings which infect the skin. If it proves too sharp, you may
temper and qualify it with the water of honey.

Remarks.
The Sugar contains an essential acid salt, and an oil, which being mixed with
a portion of the sulphurs of Antimony, do make an oily liquor.

The sweet taste of Sugar does proceed from a natural mixture of this acid with
the oil, for if you separate these two substances one from the other, neither
of the two will prove at all sweet.

The Oil all alone is insipid upon the tongue, because it makes little or no
impression on the nerve that serves for tasting, but when the acid is entirely
mixed with it, the edges of this acid do serve for a vehicle to the oil to make
it penetrate, and tickle superficially the nerve, whereby the sense of tasting
is produced.

The acids therefore being alone, do become incisive, and prick the tongue by
their edges, but when they are dulled and blunted by the ramous parts of the
Oil, then they have another sort of determination, and can no longer pierce the
nerve of tasting but with a great deal of tenderness, and gentleness.

CHAP. X. Of Arsenick.
ARsenick is a Mineral Body consisting of much Sulphur, and some Caustic
salts, There are three sorts of it, the White that keeps the name of Arsenick,
the Yellow called Auripigmentum, or Yellow Orpin, and the Red called Realgal,
or Sandaracha; the White is the strongest of all, and is sometimes transparent
like crystal. Some do add to these for a fourth kind of Arsenick, a Yellow
Arsenick, which is an Orpin differing from the other only in this, that it is
not so transparent, nor of so high a color.

None of these Arsenicks may be given inwardly, although several persons that
have ventured to use the white, do pretend to have cured with it diverse
diseases, and among others the Quartan-Ague. They venture to give of it as far
as four grains, in a great deal of water, and after that manner it will Vomit,
like Antimony. But I can by no means allow of this Febrifuge, and would never
advise any body to use so dangerous a Remedy. Nature does furnish us with
Medicines enough of Conscience to provoke Vomiting without recourse to Arsenick.
It is used outwardly with sufficient success, because it eats proud flesh.

People sometimes cover the Corns of their feet with Arsenick in powder, and it
eats them to the root without any pain, but they must be sure to cover the
adjacent flesh with a plaster of Diapalma, after the same manner as when
Causticks are applied.

Regulus of Arsenick.
This preparation is the more fixed and compact part of Arsenick.

Powder and mix together a pound of Arsenick with six ounces of gravelled
Ashes, incorporate this powder in a pound of soft soap, and make a paste of it,
put it in a great Crucible, and cover it with an earthen cover, that has a
hole in the middle; set your Crucible in a wind-furnace, and give a little fire
at first, then augment it gradually, that the matter may be in a clear fusion:
throw it into a mortar greased at the bottom, or into a Culot, strike it round
about a little with pincers, and let the matter cool, then knock it out, you will
find in the bottom of the mortar a Regulus of Arsenick, separate it from the
dross. It is not so Corrosive as Arsenick it self, and its effect is milder.

Remarks.
The soap being full of an alkali salt, and the gravelled Ashes do correct or
fix the great activity of the sulphurs of Arsenick.

A hole is made in the cover that the more volatile part may sublime with the
Oil and humidity that are in the Soap, the alkali salts do remain in the dross
with some part of the more gross sulphurs of Arsenick.

If by way of Curiosity you should boil the dross in water, Filtrate the
decoction, and pour Vinegar upon it, or some other acid, to break the force of
the alkali's, a Sulphur of Arsenick will precipitate, that is stronger than
Arsenick it self.

Arsenick being compounded of abundance of sulphurs, is not so quick in its
operation as Sublimate Corrosive, because these sulphurs do not know so fast as
the acid salts.

If Arsenick should happen to be taken inwardly through any mistake, the person
may still be saved half an hour afterward, by swallowing good store of warm
oil, to Vomit and Purge; after that he must be purged with Cassia, and Salt of
Tartar, and he must often drink Salt of Tartar in Broths, that if any sulphur
should chance to remain, it might be fixed by this Salt; for when Arsenick is
in the body, the heat of the body raises and rarefies the sulphurs on every
side.

Sublimate of Arsenick.
This operation is an Arsenick corrected from its more malignant sulphurs, and
raised by the means of fire to the top of a mattress.

Put what quantity you please of Arsenick grossly powdered into a Crucible, set
it in a small fire under the Chimney to Calcine and evaporate about the third
part of the matter. Avoid as much as may be this malignous vapor, pour into a
mortar that which remains, and when you have powdered it, weigh it, and mix it
with an equal quantity of Salt Decrepitated: put this mixture into a mattress,
whose two thirds remain empty; set your mattress in sand in a small Furnace, and
making a little fire at first, increase it by little and little to the third
degree, in order to Sublime the Arsenick: continue it in this condition until
there rises no more, the operation is ended in five or six hours, let the
vessel cool, and break it, gather that which sticks to the top of the mattress,
and keep it, fling away that which remains at bottom.

If you should repeat the Sublimation four or five times, adding salt each
time, a sweet Sublimate of Arsenick would be made, that is to say, abundantly
less corrosive than common Arsenick.

Some Authors tell us that this sweet Arsenick is a Counterpoison, but I shall
never think it convenient to trust to such an Antidote, seeing we don't want
those that are safer.

The Sublimate of Arsenick eats proud flesh, and cleanses old Ulcers, being
mixed with the common Suppurative, and Aegyptiacum.

The same Operation may be performed with Orpin.

Remarks.
The Arsenick is Calcined, to the end the more volatile part may fly away in
fumes; if you should continue the fire, and increase it toward the end, every
jot of the Arsenick would fly away. Some do sublime it without addition of any
thing else, after it is Calcined, but it is better join some body that may fix
it a little, such as Salt.

Seeing the sublimate of Arsenick does resemble sublimate Corrosive in color,
some Cheats do falsify sublimate Corrosive by mixing with it that of Arsenick.
I have shown the way to discover this imposture in the Chapter of sublimate
Corrosive.

The Salt Decrepitated does six the great volatility of Arsenick, and the fire
carries off some of its more active sulphurs, insomuch that the oftener it is
sublimed, the more it does dulcify, and becomes proper to apply to flesh, where
we would gently corrode.

If you sublime Arsenick alone in a bolthead, with a great fire, without having
Calcined it at all before, the sublimate will be converted into a glass, much
resembling common glass both in color and transparency.

Caustic Arsenick.
This operation is an Arsenick rendered more fixed, and more burning than it was
before, and in form of a Calx, by the means of fixed salts.

Powder and mix together a pound of Arsenick, so much Saltpeter, and half a
pound of Sulphur; put this mixture into an Iron mortar, cover it with a Cover
that has a hole in it; thrust a red-hot Iron, or a lighted coal, through the
hole, the powder will take fire with a great noise called detonation; this
noise being over, and the matter cold, powder it grossly, and calcine it in a
covered Crucible for two hours time over a great fire, then let it cool, and
you will have a Caustic matter that you must break into little pieces, and stop
close in a Bottle to use as common Causticks.

If you set it in a Cellar, or other moist place it dissolves into a liquor,
like the salt of Tartar.

Remarks.
This great detonation proceeds from the flagration of common sulphur, and that
of Arsenick, which being violently driven about by the volatile part of
Saltpeter finds a little hole to fly out at. The more fixed part of Arsenick
remains at bottom with the fixed saltpeter. The matter is Calcined again, that
being the more open, it may be the more Caustic; but this must be done in a
covered Crucible; for otherwise the Arsenick, which is almost all of it
sulphur, would fly quite away by the great fire.

Corrosive Oil of Arsenick.
This liquor is an Arsenick opened, and become of the consistence of butter, by
the acids of sublimate Corrosive.

Take equal parts of Arsenick, and Sublimate Corrosive, powder and mix them,
put this mixture into a glass-retort, and set it in sand; fit to it a Receiver,
and luting the junctures, distill with a gentle fire a butter-like liquor,
resembling the butter of Antimony; and when no more will distill, take away the
Receiver, and put another in its place filled with water. Increase the fire,
and you will see the Mercury fall into the water drop by drop; continue the
distillation till there comes no more.

You may use this Mercury on all occasions, like to another, after you have
washed and dried it.

The Butter of Arsenick is a very strong Caustic, it makes an Eschar more
quickly than that of Antimony.

Remarks.
The same thing happens in this operation, that I spoke of in the Butter of
Antimony: that is, the Spirits of Sublimate Corrosive do leave the Mercury to
join with the Arsenick, which they draw along with them in a gummous liquor:
the Mercury being afterward disengaged, and finding no sulphurs to fix it,
comes forth in a vapor, and condenses into water.

CHAP. XI. Of Quicklime.
QVick-lime is a Stone, whose moisture the fire has quite dried up, and
brought into its place a great many igneous bodies. It is these little bodies
that cause the Ebullition, when water has opened the matter that kept them
enclosed: and this Ebullition lasts until all the parts of the Lime are
dilated, and the fiery particles set at liberty, so that there is no need of
further trouble to get out. These little igneous bodies do likewise render the
Lime Corrosive, for the stone is not at all so of it self.

When the stone, that Quicklime is made of, is grown red hot in the Furnaces,
the Workmen have a special care to keep up the fire at an equal height, until
the stone is quite Calcined; for if the flame which has begun to burn among the
stones, should be suffered to lessen for a while, and so the heat be checked
before the end of the work, they would never afterward be able to make
Quicklime with those stones any more, though they should be at the charge of
burning fifty times as much wood as is commonly required; and this, because in
that interval of heat, the pores of the stone, which were begun to be opened,
do close and shut, and the matter sinks down in a lump to the destruction of
the whole. And then again the flame cannot rise in it any more, for it finds
none of those interstices, or spaces between, which were frequent before, for
it to pass through. The matter therefore is rendered incapable of receiving the
fire any more, because all the small cells that were useful for its reception,
are shut up and destroyed in this confusion.

It is objected, that if igneous bodies were they that caused the Corrosion of
Quicklime, Tiles, Bricks, and all stones that are not of the nature of
Limestone, and Iron, Copper, Silver, Gold, and many other bodies should be as
Caustic as Quicklime, after having endured the fire as long if not longer
than it.

But this does not follow, for Tiles, and other Calcined stones have not the
pores disposed like those of Quicklime, to retain fiery particles; and if some
metals are found impregnated with them during their Calcination, they are known
to retain them so well by the solidity of their parts, that neither the heat
nor moisture of the flesh are able to draw them out of the places they are fixed
in, to cause a Corrosion upon the part. It is easy here to give you an
example; for if you take the Calx of Lead that increased its weight in the
Calcination, as I have said before, and steep it in water, the water will not
act at all upon it, and the Calx may be taken from the water in the same weight
it was put in; you must melt it by fire, if you would separate the igneous
bodies: but now as for common Quicklime, a small matter of moisture is able to
separate the tender parts of the stone, and drive out the fiery particles in
abundance.

It is said likewise that the ebullition of water which happens when flung upon
Quicklime, must not be imputed to fiery bodies, seeing neither spirit of wine,
nor oil, when thrown upon it, do at all cause heat, although they are both of
them Inflammable bodies, nay on the contrary they are observed to quench the
heat that uses to happen to Quicklime when water is joined with it.

I Answer, that these effects do proceed from, this, that Oil, spirit of wine,
and other Sulphurous liquors of the same nature, instead of separating the
parts of quicklime, as water does, do rather hinder any separation from being
made by stopping up the pores.

That which withdrew me from the Sentiment of those who will have all the
effects of quicklime derived from its salt, was, that I could never find any
in it, though I have sought after it with care enough; for some through mistake
do take a certain Bituminous scum, which often swims upon the Limewater, for a
salt.

Neither can I be of the opinion of those who will needs have an acid to be in
quicklime, which being drawn out by the water, and meeting an alkali, does
cause the effervescency which is observed, when water is poured upon
quicklime; for although according to appearance an acid may enter into the
natural composition of the stone that quicklime is made of, this acid has lost
its nature, not only by breaking its points in its strict union with earth at
the Petrification, but also in the violent Calcination that is given to this
stone to reduce it to a Calx. So that we may here say, the same thing happens
to the acid which enters into the composition of the stone, as I have said did
happen to the salt of Vegetables and other mixed bodies, which though naturally
an acid salt, changes into an alkali by means of its union with earth, and the
fiery particles in time of the Calcination; there is only this difference
between them both, the acid of the stone is mixed with more earth than the salt
of Vegetables.

When Lime is once slackt, it neither causes any more ebullition, nor heat,
with water; but if you add to it an acid, it makes both a considerable
ebullition, and heat, because the acid edges will penetrate into the particles
of the Lime, where the water was not able to go.

There is not made any ebullition, or precipitation, by the mixing acids with
Limewater.

Phagedenick Water.
This water is a mixture of Sublimate and Limewater.

Put a pound of Quicklime into a large earthen pan, and quench it with seven
or eight pints of hot water; after the Lime has infused five or six hours, and
is sunk to the bottom, pour off the water by Inclination, and Filtrate it, this
is called Limewater.

To each pint of this water are added fifteen or twenty grains of Sublimate
Corrosive in powder, and the water presently turns yellow; they are stirred
together a good while in a glass or marble mortar, and this water is used for
cleansing old Ulcers: it eats proud flesh, and is likewise used in the
Gangreen, by adding Spirit of Wine to it, and sometimes Spirit of Vitriol.

Remarks.
Limewater changes the color of Sublimate Corrosive, because being an alkali,
it destroys some part of the acids, which, according as they are diversely mixed
with the Mercury, do give it different colors.

The precipitate of the Phagedenick water being washed and dried, is esteemed
by some to be a good Purgative in Venereal cases: It is given in Pills, for
fear of blacking the Teeth: the dose is from one grain to three; it purges
upward and downward, and works much like Turbith mineral.

Caustic stones, or Cauteries.
This operation is the salt of Gravelled ashes, or the Lees of wine Calcined,
rendered more corrosive than it was before, by the igneous parts of Quicklime.

Put into a great earthen pan, one part of Quicklime, and two parts of
Gravelled ashes, or Calcined Tartar, powder and mix them; pour good store of
hot water upon your matter, and leaving it in infusion five or six hours, boil
it a little; afterward pass that which is clear, through brown paper, and
evaporate it in a Copper basin or earthen pan, there will remain at bottom a
salt, which you must put over the fire in a Crucible, it will dissolve and boil
until all the remaining humidity is evaporated. When you find it at the bottom
like to an Oil, cast it into a basin, and cut it into pieces while it is warm;
put these Cauteries quickly into a strong glass bottle, stop it with wax, and a
bladder, for the air would easily dissolve it into a liquor: you must also take
care to keep it in a dry place.

These Cauteries are the strongest of all that are made; and they are but half
an hour in making.

Remarks.
Gravelled ashes are only a Calcined Tartar, for they are made by burning the
Lees of wine; but because these Lees, by reason of their liquidity have
fermented more than common Tartar, the salt which is drawn from them is of a
more penetrating nature than other Tartar, and consequently is fitter to make
Causticks with. The Quicklime does also help to make them much the stronger,
for the igneous parts which it contains do mix with this salt, and make it the
more active, and corrosive.

You must not powder the Quicklime, for the little fiery bodies would then fly
away, before they could be received into the water.

When you Filtrate the solution, you must put a cloth under the brown paper to
support it, otherwise it would be presently corroded.

Ten or twelve ounces of salt would be drawn from the Gravelled ashes alone,
but the slakt Lime retains a great deal of it.

If you have used in this operation sixteen ounces of gravelled ashes, and
eight ounces of quicklime, you will have eight ounces of your Causticks.

If you would have the Causticks in edges, you must put a hot Iron Spatule into
the Crucible, whilst the matter is in Fusion, and form the edges in a flat
basin.

This Caustic salt is very easily dissolved, and in the making of it you must
not stay till it appears dry at the bottom of the vessel, as you do for other
salts; for it remains still fluid, though all the humidity of it be gone;
therefore you must put a little of it to cool, that you may see whether it be
in its due consistence.

The reason why it thus remains in Fusion is, because it is full of little
fiery bodies which it has taken from the Quicklime, and which have so disposed
its parts to penetration; for all solid bodies which are put in Fusion by fire
do receive this liquid form for no other reason, but because the little fiery
bodies are become mixed with their parts, and have set them into a great
agitation.

If you should use lime that is slakt, the Causticks would not so easily melt;
and if you draw the salt from Gravelled ashes alone, it will coagulate in
drying, much as other salts do; wherefore this Fusion of the Causticks must
needs proceed from the fiery bodies which were contained in the Quicklime.

Causticks may likewise be made diverse other ways, but this description will
deserve a preference before others, when you would have them be of a quick
operation.

Inks called Sympathetical.
These operations are liquors of a different nature, which do destroy one
another; the first is an infusion of Quicklime and Orpin; the second a water
turned black by means of burned Cork; and the third is a vinegar impregnated
with Saturn.

Take an ounce of Quicklime, and half an ounce of Orpin, powder and mix them,
put your mixture into a mattress, and pour upon it five or six ounces of water,
that the water may be three fingers breadth above the powder, stop your mattress
with Cork, Wax, and a Bladder; set it in digestion in a mild sand-heat ten or
twelve hours, shaking the mattress from time to time, then let it settle, the
liquor becomes clear like common water.

Burn Cork, and quench it in Aqua vitae, then dissolve it in a sufficient
quantity of water, wherein you shall have melted a little Gumm Arabic, in
order to make an Ink as black as common Ink. You must separate the Cork that
cannot dissolve, and if the Ink be not black enough, add more Cork as before.

Get the Impregnation of Saturn made with Vinegar, distilled as I have shown
before, or else dissolve so much salt of Saturn as a quantity of water is able
to receive: write on Paper with a new Pen dipped in this liquor, take notice of
the place where you writ, and let it dry, nothing at all will appear.

Write upon the invisible writing with the Ink made of burnt Cork, and let it
dry, that which you had writ will appear as if it had been done with common Ink.

Dip a little Cotton in the first liquor made of Lime and Orpin, but the liquor
must be first settled and clear; rub the place you writ upon with this Cotton,
and that which appeared will presently disappear, and that which was not seen
will appear.

Another Experiment.
Take a Book four fingers breadth in bigness, or bigger if you will: write on
the first leaf with your Impregnation of Saturn, or else put a paper that you
have writ upon between the leaves; turn to the other side of the Book, and having
observed as near as may be the opposite place to your writing, rub the last
leaf of the Book with Cotton dipped in the liquor made of Quicklime and Orpin,
nay and leave the Cotton on the place, clap a folded paper presently upon it,
and shutting the book quickly, strike upon it with your hand four or five good
strokes, then turn the book and clap it into a press for half a quarter of an
hour; take it out and open it, you will find the place appear black, where you had
writ with the Invisible Ink. The same thing might be done through a wall, if
you could provide something to lay on both sides, that might hinder the
evaporation of the Spirits.

Remarks.
These Operations are indeed of no use, but because they are somewhat
surprising, I hope the curious will not take it ill, that I make this small
digression.

It is a hard matter to explicate well the effects I have now related,
nevertheless I shall endeavor to illustrate them a little, without having
recourse to Sympathy and Antipathy, which are general terms, and do explicate
nothing at all, but before I begin, we must remark several things.

The first is, that it is an essential point to quench the coal of Cork in Aqua
vitae, that the visible Ink may become black with it.

Secondly, that the blackness of this Ink does proceed from the fuliginosity or
sooty part of the coal of the Cork, which is exceeding porous and light, and
that this fuliginosity is nothing but an oil very much rarefied.

Thirdly, that the Impregnation of Saturn, which makes the invisible Ink, is
only a Lead dissolved, and held up imperceptibly in an acid liquor, as I have
said, when I spoke of this metal.

Fourthly, that the first of these liquors is a mixture of the alkali and
igneous parts of Quicklime with the sulphurous substance of Arsenick; for the
Orpin is a sort of Arsenick, as I said before.

All this being granted, as no body can reasonably think otherwise, I now
affirm, that the reason why the visible Ink does disappear, when the defacing
liquor is rubbed upon it, is that this liquor consisting of an alkali salt, and
parts that are oily and penetrating, this mixture does make a kind of soap,
which is able to dissolve any fuliginous substance, such as burnt Cork,
especially when it has been already rarefied and disposed for dissolution by
Aqua vitae, after the same manner as common soap, which is compounded of oil,
and an alkali salt, is able to take away or make disappear spots made by grease.

But it may be demanded, why after the dissolution the blackness does disappear.

I answer, that the fuliginous parts have been so divided, and locked up in the
sulphurous alkali of the liquor, that they are become invisible, and we see
every day that very exact solutions do render the thing dissolved
imperceptible, and without color.

The little alkali salt which is in the burnt Cork may also the better serve to
join with the alkali of the quicklime, and to help the dissolution.

As for the invisible Ink, it is easy to apprehend how that appears black,
when the same liquor, which serves to deface the other, is used upon it. For
whereas the impregnation of Saturn is only a Lead suspended by the edges of the
acid liquor, this Lead must needs revive, and resume its black color, when
that which held it rarefied is entirely destroyed; so the alkali of Quicklime
being filled with the sulphurs of Arsenick becomes very proper to break and
destroy the acids, and to agglutinate together the particles of Lead.

It happens then that the visible Ink does disappear by reason that the parts
which did render it black, have been dissolved, and the invisible Ink does also
appear, because the dissolved parts have been revived.

Quicklime and Orpiment being mixed and digested together in water, do yield a
smell much like that which happens when common sulphur is boiled in a Lixivium
of Tartar. This here is the stronger, because the sulphur of Arsenick is loaded
with certain Salts that make a stronger impression on the smell. Quicklime is
an alkali that operates in this much like the Salt of Tartar in the other
Operation; you must not leave the mattress open, because the force of this water
does consist in a Volatile. The Lime retains the more fixed part of the
Arsenick, and the Sulphurs that come forth are so much the more subtle, as
they are separated from what did fix them before, and this appears to be so,
because the Sulphurs must of necessity pass through all the book to make a
writing of a clear and invisible liquor appear black and visible: and to
facilitate this penetration the book is struck, and then turned about, because
the Spirits or Volatile Sulphurs do always tend upwards: you must likewise clap
it into a press, that these Sulphurs may not be dispersed in the air. I have
found, that if these circumstances are not observed, the business fails.
Furthermore that which persuades me that the Sulphurs do pass through the book,
and not take a circuit to slip in by the sides, as many do imagine, is that
after the book is taken out of the press, all the inside is found to be scented
with the smell of this liquor.

There is one thing more to be observed, which is, that the infusion of
Quicklime and Orpin be newly made, because otherwise it will not have force
enough to penetrate. The three liquors should be made in different places too;
for if they should approach near one another, they would be spoiled.

This last effect does likewise proceed from the defacing liquor; for because
upon the digestion of Quicklime and Orpin, it is a thing impossible but some
of the particles will exalt, stop the vessel as close as you will; the air
impregnated with these little bodies does mix with, and alter the Inks,
insomuch that the visible Ink does thereby become the less black, and the
invisible Ink does also acquire a little blackness.

CHAP. XII. Of Flints.
FLints, as all other stones, are made by different Salts, or by acid liquors,
which do penetrate and incorporate with earth, which is an alkali, so that from
their mixture there does result a Coagulum, which by little and little does
harden by means of the subterranean heat, or else do petrifie by the cold. Now
you must observe, that according to the quantity of earth which incounters with
this acid liquor, there are made such different sorts of stones. Thus precious
stones and Crystals do obtain their hardness and transparency, from a just
proportion, such as is needful to make an exact penetration, and a strict union
of the acid with the earth. There are found some waters in several places,
which falling upon stones do soon petrifie, as particularly in a Grot at Arsi
in Burgundy. The reason that may be given of this petrification, is that these
waters do contain an acid, which in passing through earths do dissolve some
part of them, which is capable to make them petrifie, but the great agitation
they are in whilst they run with rapidity down mountains, does hinder their
coagulation; for that can never happen until these waters have fallen into some
place fit for them to repose and lie still in.

Calcination of Flints.
This operation shows the way to open the bodies of Flints and Crystal, so that
thereby they may be easily reduced into a powder.

Heat red-hot some Flints in the fire, and quench them in water; repeat heating
and quenching them three or four times, or until they are friable, and can be
finely powdered; you must choose River-Flints, that are full of veins of several
colors.

Crystal is Calcined after the same manner, but it is more easily made friable
than Flints. A liquor and Tincture may be likewise drawn from it, the same way
I am going to show for Flints; their virtues likewise are both alike.

Tincture of Flints.
This operation is an exaltation of some parts of Flints, and salt of Tartar in
spirit of wine.

Mix well four ounces of Calcined Flints finely powdered, with four and twenty
ounces of Calcined Tartar: put this mixture into a large Crucible, cover it and
place it in a wind-furnace, light a fire about it by little and little, to warm
it gently, and then increase it to the last degree. Continue it in this
condition for five hours, that the matter may all the while remain in Fusion.
Thrust a Spatule into it, and see if your matter begins to grow diaphanous like
glass. If it does so, pour it into a warm Iron mortar, and it will presently
congeal into a hard mass, which you must powder while it is hot, and put into a
mattress very dry and hot: pour upon it Spirit of Wine Alcoholized, four fingers
above the matter; stop your mattress close with another, whose neck may be
received into that which contains the matter. Lute the conjunctions well with a
wet bladder, and set it in sand, give a fire under it that is strong enough to
make the Spirit of Wine simper for two days together, it will turn of a red
color; unlute your matrasses, and separating them a-sunder, decant the
Tincture into a bottle: put new Spirit of Wine to that which remains, and
digest it as before, separate the liquor that is turned red, and mingling it
with the former, pour it all together into a glass body, and cover it with a
head, fit to it a Receiver, and lute the junctures, distill in a vaporous bath
two thirds of the Spirit of Wine, that may serve for use as before, then take
your vessel off the fire, and keep that which remains in the bottom of the
body, in a Viol well stopped.

This Tincture is said to be a good remedy to open obstructions; they use it
for the Scurvy, and in Hypochondriacal cases: the dose is from ten to thirty
drops in some proper liquor.

Remarks.
The Calx of Flints does so strictly incorporate with the Salt of Tartar by the
Calcination, that they may be said to be converted into a Salt; and this I
shall show in the following operation.

You must use the Spirit of Wine highly Alcoholized, otherwise you will not
gain the Tincture; you must likewise observe to infuse the powdered matter
while it is as hot as may be; two thirds of the Spirit of Wine are distilled
off, that what remains may be the redder and stronger.

Almost all Chemists will needs make this red color to proceed from the
Sulphur of Flints extracted by the Spirit of Wine, but it is more probable that
this color proceeds from an exaltation of the alkali salt in Spirit of Wine,
because a like Tincture is made on Salt of Tartar.

Liquor of Flints.
This operation is a solution of Flints into a liquor, by the means of Salt of
Tartar.

Take the other part of your Flints Calcined with Tartar, and set it in a
Cellar in a glass-pan, it will dissolve into as clear a liquor as water.
Filtrate and so keep it.

This liquor is said to be Diuretic, it is given from six to five and twenty
drops in some convenient liquor.

If you mix an equal part of this liquor with some acid Corrosive Spirit, you will
presently turn it into a stone.

Remarks.
The Salt of Tartar, or the gravelled Ashes, have so attenuated the Flint, that
it becomes as soluble as they; and we see the truth of this in the operation,
for the moisture of the Cellar entering into the pores of our Calcined matter
dissolves it imperceptibly, and if this dissolution should be evaporated, an
alkali Salt is found at bottom.

When this liquor is mixed with an acid Spirit, an Ebullition presently
happens, from the acid Spirits piercing the alkali, and afterward a stronger
Coagulation is made, then when an acid Spirit is poured on the Oil of Tartar,
because this same alkali contains more earth than does the Salt of Tartar.

This liquor may dissolve some Sulphurous obstructions that now and then
happen, and then it provokes Urine; but if it meets with an acid humor, it
causes a Coagulation, that may turn into a stone: wherefore I would not advise
any body to use this Remedy, no more than the former Tincture, which works only
by its Salt that is mixed with the spirit of Wine.

From the Coagulation of these liquors may be sensibly explicated, how stones
come to be formed in several parts of our bodies, seeing acid liquors and
alkalis do so aften meet within us.

The Tincture of Flints is used to extract the Sulphur of many Minerals;
Alchymists have given it no less than the name of Alkahest.

CHAP. XIII. Oil of Bricks.
THis preparation is Bricks impregnated with Oil of Olives, and afterward
distilled.

Heat red-hot among burning Coals pieces of Brick, and quench them in a pan
filled half full with Oil of Olives, but take care to cover it immediately, for
the Oil will else take fire. Leave them in Infusion ten or twelve hours, or
until the Oil has sufficiently penetrated the Bricks, after that separate
them, and when you have grossly powdered the Bricks imbibed with the Oil, put it
into an earthen Retort, or glass one luted, large enough for a third part to
remain empty; place it in a Reverberatory furnace, and fit to it a large
capacious Receiver, lute well the conjunctions, and give a little fire at first
to warm the Retort, then increase it by degrees, until you see vapors come
forth; then continue it in this condition till there comes no more: unlute the
conjunctions, and take away the Receiver, there remains in the Retort all the
Brick, which you must fling away as useless.

Mix the Oil that remains in the Receiver with a sufficient quantity of other
Brick dried and powdered, and make a paste of it, form several little pellets,
and put them into a glass Retort; set the Retort in Sand, and fitting to it a
large Receiver, and luting them together, give a fire by degrees to rectify
all the Oil, pour it into a Viol, and keep it for use; it is called the Oil of
Philosophers.

It is a good Remedy applied outwardly to discuss the Tumors of the Spleen,
for the Palsy, Phthisick, and suffocations of the mother. It may be given
inwardly from two to four drops, in wine, or some appropriate liquor. Some
drops of it are instilled into the Ear to dissipate the flatulent humors that
are there enclosed.

Remarks.
This operation serves only to exalt the Oil of Olives, that being more opened
by the fire, it may rarefie and dissolve humors more easily; for you must not
imagine that the Brick does communicate any great virtue, it is a dry body, and
wanting all active principles.

You must make a very moderate fire in this distillation, that the Oil may come
forth in vapors; for if it should come out drop by drop, it would not be so
open, nor would it produce so good effects.

Some do rectify the Oil of Bricks with Colcothar instead of Bricks, or else
with the mass that remains after the distillation of Aqua fortis.

Ancient Chemists have given the epithete Philosophic to all preparations
wherein they have used Brick. The reason that can be given for it is, that
because they call themselves the only True Philosophers, or Philosophers by way
of excellence, they thought they were obliged to confer some influences of this
mighty name upon Bricks, because they are the materials wherewith they build
their Furnaces, to work at the high and mighty operation, or the Philosophers
stone; for they pretend it is by this Operation alone that True Philosophy can
be obtained.

CHAP. XIV. Of Coral.
COral is a petrified plant, that grows under deep hollow Rocks, in many places
of the Mediterranean Sea, where the Sea is deep; or rather it is a certain
shoot from a Rock, that has received the form of a Plant. It is not true, that
it is taken out of the Sea soft, as some have said. There are of them of
several colors, as the White, the Red, and the Black; now and then there are
found some of two colors, as Red, and Black.

The Red is the most common, and most in use; it is chosen of a deep color;
the White is more rare than the Red. A certain white stone very spungy, that is
like unto Coral, is brought among us, which is mistaken for true white Coral by
those that don't know it, but the true is not at all spungy; it is rather very
compact, and as white as Ivory; Black Coral is the greatest rarity of them all.

If you put the branches of Red Coral to infuse a day or two in melted white
Wax, upon hot embers, the Coral will lose its former color, and become white,
and the wax will assume a yellow color. The Wax must be a fingers breadth
above the Coral.

If you should put other red Coral to steep in the same Wax, it would turn
brown.

If again the third time you should put red Coral to steep in the same wax, the
wax would then become red.

The wax dissolves a little of the bituminous matter that is upon the Coral,
and which did render it red: this operation is done only for curiosity.

Many persons do hang red Coral about the neck, in order to stop Haemorrhagies,
to purify the blood, and to fortify the heart. I believe that which gave
occasion to think it has such excellent virtues, was its Red color, which is
like to that of the blood, and the heart; but experience does no way confirm,
that outwardly applied, it has any such effects.

Coral is prepared by beating it on a Marble into a most fine powder, that it
may the more easily be dissolved; and this prepared Coral is given to stop
Dysenteries, Diarrheas, Flux of the Haemorrhoids, and Terms, Haemorrhagies, and
all other distempers that are caused by an acrimony of humors, this being an
alkali that destroys them; the dose is from ten grains to a dram in Knotgrass
water, or some other appropriate liquor.

Dissolution of Coral.
Take what quantity you please of Coral finely powdered on a Marble; put it
into a large matrafs, and pour upon it distilled Vinegar enough to cover the
matter four fingers high, there will happen a great effervescency, which being
over, set your matter in digestion in warm sand for two days, stirring the
mattress from time to time. Leave the Coral to settle at bottom, and decant the
clear liquor into a bottle. Pour again so much distilled Vinegar on the
remainder, as before, and leave it two days in digestion; separate the clear
liquor, and continue to add more distilled Vinegar, and to draw off the
Impregnation, until all the Coral is in a manner dissolved. Then mix your
dissolutions, and pour them into a glass Cucurbite, or else into an earthen
one, evaporate in sand two thirds of the liquor, or until there appears upon it
a very fine skin: Filtrate this Impregnation, and keep it in order to make the
Salt, and Magistery, as I shall show hereafter.

It may be given for the same purposes as the Salt, the dose is from ten to
twenty drops in some appropriate liquor.

Remarks.
Red Coral is generally used, because it is thought to have more virtue than
the rest, by reason of its Tincture.

The effervescency which happens, when Vinegar does penetrate Coral, is
reckoned among cold effervescencies, if there be any such; for my part, I
cannot say that I ever perceived any coldness in it. In truth it is very
strange, that so great an Ebullition, or motion of the parts, should not
produce any sensible heat, but you must consider, that Coral, having large
pores, may be easily dissolved, and so the acids need not jostle it very much,
which would be requisite to produce any considerable heat.

Some do use in this operation the acid Lotion of Butter of Antimony, or pure
Spirit of Vitriol, instead of Vinegar; but because these spirits do leave too
great an acidity in the Preparations of Coral, I conceive it better to use
distilled Vinegar.

Coral being an alkali, the acid points do stick in it, and suspending its
parts, do render them imperceptible; and this is the reason that the Vinegar
does lose all its acidity, because the acidity did only consist in the activity
of its points, which do now sheath themselves in the alkali.

If you would, by way of curiosity, distill this dissolution, instead of
Evaporating it, as I have said, you would gain nothing but an insipid water,
because the acid is fixed with the Coral. This water is evaporated away, because
it would serve for nothing, and would only weaken the impregnation.

The dissolution of Perle, Crab's-eyes, burnt Hartshorn, and all other alkali
matters, is performed after the same manner; their Salts and Magisteries may be
likewise made as those of Coral, which I am going to describe.

It is here remarkable, that the solution of this sort of alkalies in distilled
Vinegar, smells much like spirit of Wine, and that some quantity of it may be
drawn, with a very gentle fire; the reason of it is, that in the making of
Vinegar, the acids had in a manner fixed this sulphurous Spirit, but when they
do enter into the pores of Coral, they are forced to quit it, and so let it
recover its volatility.

Magistery of Coral.
Take what quantity you please of the impregnation of Coral, either red, or
white, made with distilled Vinegar, as I have said before; pour it it into a
Viol or mattress, and drop into it the liquor of the Salt of Tartar, made per
deliquium, a Curd will appear which will precipitate to the bottom in a very
white powder; decant the clear liquor, and washing your powder five or six
times with water, dry it, it is that which is called the Magistery of Coral.
Great virtues are attributed to it, such as, to revive and fortify the heart,
resist poison, stop the bloody Flux, and all other Haemorrhagies. The dose is
from ten to thirty grains in some liquor appropriate to the disease.

Remarks.
The name of Magistery is given only to Precipitates; and they are so called to
express something more exquisite than ordinary.

The liquor of Tartar, which is an alkali salt dissolved, encountering the acid,
makes it let go the particles of Coral that it held suspended, and so they
precipitate by their own weight; this precipitate is nothing else but a Coral
finely powdered by means of acids, which do easily divide into abundance of
parts things that otherwise would seem indivisible. But you must observe here,
that these preparations, instead of rendering Coral more effectual as is
pretended, do indeed render it almost good for nothing; which is a thing easy
enough to prove, if we consider that Coral works in our bodies by nothing else
but by absorbing acids, or sharp and salt humors which do continually occasion
diverse diseases; for example, it stops Haemorrhagies only by sweetning the keen
salts which corroded the membranes of the veins, or else raised great
effervescencies in the blood, so as to make it extravasate; it stops Diarrheas,
by destroying the acrimony of the Choler, or other humors; lastly, if it cures
the falling down of the Uvula, and does remedy many other accidents, it is done
by nothing else, but by breaking the force of the ferments which do cause them,
after the same manner as it destroys the acidity of Vinegar, or some other
liquor; this being so, as there is great reason to believe it, it were far
better to take Coral without any other preparation than that which is made on
the marble, then to dissolve it by an acid, and precipitate it into a
Magistery; for the acid or sharp humors that this Magistery is to encounter in
our bodies, finding nothing in the medicine that is able to blunt their edges,
will continue their former activity, and so no effect at all will follow.

In this Precipitation there does not appear any effervescency, because the
edges of the Vinegar being broken, it has neither strength nor motion enough
left to penetrate and to separate the parts of salt of Tartar; but if the
dissolution of Coral had been made with some stronger dissolvent than Vinegar,
such as Spirit of Vitriol, there would be an ebullition in the time of the
Precipitation, because there would remain still action enough to the broken
edges of that spirit, for to enter into the pores of the alkali salt, and to
rarefie it.

Salt of Coral.
This operation is a Coral rarefied, and opened by the Spirit of Vinegar.

Take what quantity you please of the dissolution of Coral made by distilled
Vinegar, as I said before, pour it into a glass Cucurbite, or earthen pan, and
evaporate in sand all the moisture, there will remain at bottom a Salt of
Coral; keep it in a Viol well stopped; it is given for the same reasons as the
Magistery, the dose of it is less, being from five to fifteen grains.

Remarks.
In this Evaporation there come forth only the watery parts, and the acids
adhering to the Coral do form a kind of Salt.

If you should put this Salt of Coral into a Retort, and distill it in sand, you
would obtain a liquor that is only styptick, without any considerable acidity,
which shows that the acids are destroyed, and do not come forth of the alkali,
as they entered in.

CHAP. XV. Of Common Salt.
THere are three sorts of Common Salt, the Fossile Salt, the Fountain Salt, and
the Sea Salt; the first is called Sal Gemme, by reason of its transparency and
smoothness, like to a precious stone; it is that of which whole mountains are
found full in Poland, and other places; the second is drawn by evaporation of
the waters of some Fountains, and the last from Seawater by Crystallization or
Evaporation: these three salts are of the same nature, and have almost the same
effect; they are used, not only in Aliments, but sometimes in Remedies too,
such as Clysters, when they should be made very Carminative.

It is here observable, that Sal Gemme is a little more penetrating than Sea
salt, that is drawn by Crystallization, and that the Sea salt which is drawn by
Crystallization is more penetrating than that which is made by Evaporation of
the waters.

The reason that may be given for the piercing quality of Sal Gemme is this,
that having never been dissolved in water, it never lost any of its keenness,
whereas the others do lose their more subtle edges in the waters, and this
chiefly when those waters are in strong agitation, as are those of the Sea.

It is very probable, that the violent Vomiting which does so much annoy those
who take a voyage to Sea, does proceed from these same subtle parts of salt,
which being volatilized do fill the sea-air; for this vomiting does happen only
to such who have not been used to breath a salt air, and who besides are
sufficiently shook by the motion of the Sea.

The Sea salt which is made in Normandy by evaporation of Seawater over the
fire, is not so strong as that which is made at Rochell by Crystallization,
because in the evaporation many of the subtler parts of the Salt are lost, and
a mark of that is, that if Seawater is distilled over a fire ^ever so small,
it will not fail to carry with it some volatilized salt, which will alter its
virtue, as experience has testified several times.

But it does not happen thus to Sea Salt Crystallized, for it fixes of it self,
when the Salt-waters have settled for some time in places fit for their
reception.

I have delivered my thoughts sufficiently touching the Origin of these three
sorts of Salt, in the Remarks I made on the principles, wherefore there is no
need of repeating what I then said.

Sea Salt is made at Rochell in salt marshes, which are places that must be of
a lower situation than the sea, and the ground must be Clayie, for otherwise
they would not be able to retain the salt water that has been let into them.
Thus all places near the sea are not alike proper to make salt marshes.

When the Season of the year begins to grow hot, which commonly happens in May,
all the water is emptied that was let into the marshes for the better
preserving them during the winter, then the sluices are opened to let in as much
salt water as they think fit, it is made to pass through a great many different
Channels, wherein it purifies and heats, and then is let into places that are
made flat, smooth and fit to Crystallize the salt.

The salt is made only during the great heats of Summer, the Sun does first
evaporate some part of the water, and because after the great heat, a small
wind does use to blow (as is usual near the sea) the coolness of this wind does
condense and Crystallize the salt.

But if it happens to rain but two hours during the hot weather, there can no
salt be made for a fortnight afterward, because the marshes must be again
emptied of all the water, to let in more in its place, so that if it chances to
rain but once again in the next fortnight, they can make no salt.

Salt is purified, by dissolving it in water, then filtrating the solution
through brown paper, and afterward evaporating the water in an earthen pan,
until a very white salt does remain.

But besides the purification of salt by evaporation, it may be further
purified, if instead of evaporation of the humidity, you set some of it a
Crystallizing in a cool place, for very pure salt is found at bottom of the
vessel, which salt may be separated from the water, and dried, and you may then
evaporate again some part of the salt liquor, and set it in a Celler a
Crystallizing, and so continue your evaporations and Crystallizations; but at
last you must be fain to evaporate all the liquor, because at last it will
Crystallize no longer, the reason whereof is, that the remaining salt is full
of a fat bituminous matter, which is in a manner inseparable from it, and this
it is that hinders the Crystallizing at last.

It is probable that this fat matter may come from the earth of those marshes
that were spoken of.

The first Crystallized salt being put into Oil of Tartar, or some other alkali
salt dissolved, does mix with it without making any Ebullition, because
although sea salt is acid, yet its points are too gross, and have too little
motion, to separate the parts of the alkali.

The last salt being dried over the fire, and mixed with some alkali salt
rendered liquid, such as Oil of Tartar, makes a Coagulation and precipitation of
a substance that appears saline and oily; this Coagulation does proceed from
the mixture and adhesion of some Bituminous earth with the sea salt and the
Tartar; for the salts do easily unite with oily substances, and in them lose
their activity.

Many acid Bituminous salts which are drawn by the Evaporation of certain
Mineral waters, such as those of Baleruc in Languedoc, and Digne in Provence,
do perform the same effects, when they are mixed with Oil of Tartar.

This Coagulum does not dissolve in water, as well by reason of the different
nature of the salts it is compounded of, as the oily earth that holds them
together; but it will dissolve in distilled Vinegar, and several other acid
liquors, and then happens an effervescency, because the acid does penetrate the
salt of Tartar, whose parts the sea salt had no power to separate.

Calcination of Common Salt.
Heat a pot, that is unglazed, red-hot; throw into it about an ounce of
sea salt, then cover it, and it will crackle, and so fall into powder: this
noise is called Decrepitation: when it is over, put so much more salt into the
pot, and continue to do so, till you have enough. The pot must be sure to be
red-hot all the while: when the crackling is over, take the pot out of the
fire, and when it is cold, put the salt into a bottle, and stop it well, to
hinder the air from entering in to moisten it anew. Bags full of it are applied
behind the neck warm, (to consume too great a a moisture of the Brain) by
opening of the pores. It is used likewise in several Chemical operations.

Remarks.
That which makes the Salt crackle, when it is in the fire, is an inwardly
contained moisture, which upon its being rarefied does force its way out with
impetuosity, and finding the pores too closely shut to suffer an easy escape,
does break through the parts and open a passage. Now every thing else that has
close compact pores, will make such a noise too in the Calcination, as do glass
and shells.

If you have occasion to use Salt decrepitated, it is convenient to have it
newly Calcined, because the moisture of the air does return again what the fire
had driven away. But if you would keep it any time, let it be in a glass bottle
well stopped.

For as much as this Salt is deprived of all humidity by its Calcination, it
will absorb serosities much better than common salt. It is laid hot behind the
neck, to the end that opening the pores it may facilitate transpiration. A
little Salt of Tartar may be mixed with it, to render it the more active.

Spirit of Salt.
This Spirit is a very acid liquor, drawn from Salt by distillation.

Dry Salt over a little fire, or else in the Sun, then powder finely two pounds
of it, mix it well with six pounds of Potters earth powdered, make up a hard
paste of this mixture with as much rainwater as is needful, form out of it
little pellets of the bigness of a Nut, and set them in the Sun a good while a
drying; when they are perfectly dry, put them into a large earthen Retort, or
glass one luted, whereof a third part remains empty; place this Retort in a
Reverberatory Furnace, and fit to it a large capacious Receiver, without luting
the junctures, give a very moderate heat at first to warm the Retort, and make
an insipid water come forth drop by drop; when you perceive some white clouds
succeed these drops, pour out that which is in the Receiver, and having
refitted it, lute the junctures close; increase the fire by degrees to the last
degree of all, and continue it in this condition twelve or fifteen hours; all
this while the Receiver will be hot, and full of white clouds, but when it
grows cold, and the clouds do disappear, the Operation is at an end; unlute the
junctures, and you will find the Spirit of Salt in the Receiver, pour it into an
earthen, or glass bottle, and stop it well with wax: it is an Aperitive, and is
used in Juleps to an agreeable acidity for such as are subject to the Gravel.
It is likewise used for cleansing the Teeth, being tempered with a little
water, and to consume the rottenness of bones.

To make the dulcified Spirit of Salt of Basilius Valentinus, you must mix
equal parts of Spirit of Salt and Wine, and set them in digestion two or three
days in a double Vessel, in a gentle sand-heat. It is esteemed better than
the other to be taken inwardly, because it is less Corrosive, being corrected by
the Spirit of Wine; the dose is from four to twelve drops in some liquor
appropriate to the disease.

Remarks.
The Potters earth, is mixed with the Salt, to divide it into particles, that
the fire may the more easily be able to rarefie it; for the parts which Salt
consists of are so strictly united, that the utmost force of fire is not able
to disengage them, until they are separated by some Intermedium.

The preparation that I give unto Salt, before it is put into the Retort, is
longer than the common sort; but I have observed, that the Spirit comes forth
with less difficulty, when the matter is prepared according to this form.

You must leave a vacuity in the Retort, and fit to it a large Receiver, for
giving liberty to the spirit to circulate before it dissolves, otherwise it
would break them both. Likewise the fire must be increased by little and
little, because the first Spirits do break out with a mighty violence, when
they are driven too hard.

Some ways of drawing the Spirit of Salt without addition have been much sought
after, but that is not yet well discovered. It is true indeed, Monsieur
Seignette, an Apothecary of Rochell, among other excellent discoveries that he
has made on Salts, to the knowledge of which he has particularly applied
himself, brought me hither a sea salt in the year 1672, that we distilled
without addition of any thing else, by a very moderate fire, and in two hours
time we drew three ounces and a half of very good Spirit, out of six ounces of
salt, that we put into the Retort. After this we broke the Retort, and having
powdered the Salt that remained in it to the weight of two ounces and a half,
we exposed it to the air in a pan for a fortnight, and we found it
reimpregnated with Spirits; we distilled it once more, and with the same ease
as before, we drew half its weight in Spirit, of the same force as the former.
The matter remaining in the Retort being again exposed to the air recovered new
Spirits. Monsieur Seignette did assure me, that he had thus drawn Spirit from
the same matter nine several times; which is a thing worth our admiration, and
shows us very well that the air contains a spirit which forms diverse things
according to the different disposition of the subjects that it enters into.
This salt is particular to him that showed it me, and he prepares it himself
some way that he is unwilling to discover.

Since I writ of Monsieur Seignette's particular way of drawing spirit of salt,
some have Printed, that if common salt well decrepitated, and kept a good while
over the fire, were exposed to the air for some days, and distilled without
addition of any thing to it, it would yield a spirit much like that I have
spoken of, and in full as great a quantity.

But if we examine the sharp liquor which is drawn this way, we shall find it
of so weak a nature, that it may more reasonably be called phlegm, than spirit,
and the salt remains entire in the Retort; whereas M. Seignette's spirit of
salt is full as strong as common spirit of salt, and has the very same
qualities, nay I conceive it somewhat better, as not having so great an
impression from fire as the other.

Again some say, it does not deserve the name of spirit of sea salt, nor ought
this preparation to be looked upon as any great mystery, because the same
incorporation and augmentation happens to diverse other salts exposed to the
air, after drawing off their spirit.

I grant this augmentation proceeds from the spirit of the air, and I conceive
it is the same spirit which produces all manner of things according to the
Matrixes, or different pores of the earth it uses to meet with, as I have
explicated in my Remarks upon the Principles. But because this spirit of the
air has met with pores in our matter, ready disposed to make a salt much like
unto common salt, and a spirit is drawn from it much like unto that which is
drawn from common salt, I see no reason to doubt why this spirit should not be
a true spirit of salt; all the difference is this, the salt I now speak of is
not so thoroughly united to its earthy part, as common salt is, and therefore
its spirits do separate with more ease; for they are drawn without addition of
any thing else, and with a gentle fire, whereas those of common salt are so
fixed, that they cannot be driven out, without mixing a great deal of earth in
order to separate all its parts, and without a very great fire.

As for the augmentation which happens to many other bodies exposed to the air,
after their spirits are drawn off, I don't question the matter of fact, nor
that these same substances do return into what they were before, by
impregnating again with spirits of the air in some considerable time; but it is
rarely found that any of them do yield so strong spirits, and so easily as our
salt, and herein lies the mystery.

It is observable that the acids which are drawn by so violent a fire do very
much differ from those that are made naturally, such as the Vinegars of Beer,
Wine, Cider, the acid of Citron, etc. The Spirit of salt among others has some
particular difference from the rest, because it will precipitate that which
Aqua fortis has dissolved. This acid, according as may be judged by its
effects, is compounded of stronger, and more weighty points than the rest, but
they are not so sharp and piercing. And this is the reason that it jogs so
effectually those of Aqua fortis loaded with some bodies they have dissolved,
and that shaking them about it makes them let go their hold.

Some have writ, that this precipitation must not be imputed either to the
weight, or the strength, no more than to the agitation, which spirit of salt
may have given to the Aqua fortis, or to matters dissolved, but rather to the
conjunction of the acidity of this spirit with the volatile and sulphurous
alkali of Aqua fortis, or Spirit of Niter, which does by that means constrain
this last to abandon the metal which it had dissolved.

But this is the way to explicate, as they say, one obscure thing by another
that is much more obscure; for what likelihood is there that the volatile
spirit of Aqua fortis is an alkali? and pray how comes it to remain in so great
a motion with the fixed acid spirit of this same water without destroying or
losing its nature, this is a thing that can never be conceived very easily. But
furthermore supposing this spirit were an alkali, it would be still necessary
to explicate mechanically, for what reason this alkali does quit the body of
the metal to betake itself to the Spirit of salt; for to say merely that by the
conjunction of these two spirits the Aqua fortis is compelled to abandon the
metal that it had dissolved, is nothing at all to the clearing of the question,
unless a man will needs give an intelligence to these spirits. Wherefore we
must still have recourse to the agitation and jostles, for the true reason.

It is also remarkable, that the effervescency which happens when Spirit of
Salt is cast into the solution of some bodies by Aqua fortis, is different from
that which happens when some alkali is cast into it, the former being much more
gentle than the latter.

The Spirit of Salt dissolves leaf gold, which Aqua fortis is not able to do.

When this Spirit is dulcified, it is mixed with Spirit of Wine, which being a
Sulphur does take off the edges of the acid, and in part hinders their motion;
whence it comes to pass that this Spirit is milder by this addition, than if
water had been used instead of Spirit of Wine.

The Spirit of Salt may be made with Salt Decrepitated, after the same manner.

CHAP. XVI. Of Niter or Saltpeter.
IT is probable that the Niter of the ancients was either the Egyptian Natron,
or a salt that is found in the earth in a gray compact mass, or else the
natural Borax, or the salt which is drawn from the water of the river Nilus,
and many other rivers. And it may be, that all these salts are diverse kinds of
their Niter, but the Niter of the moderns is nothing else but Saltpeter, and
this is that of which I intend to speak.

Niter is a Salt impregnated with abundance of Spirits out of the air which do
render it volatile; it is taken from among the stones and earths of old ruined
buildings. Some of it is likewise to be found in Cellars, and several other
moist places, because the air does condense it in those places, and easily
unites with the stones.

Saltpeter is also sometimes made by the Urine of Animals, falling upon stones
and earths. Nay some have thought that all Saltpeter comes from that cause,
whereas we see every day that some of it is taken out of places, where there
never came any Urine at all. This salt is half volatile, and half like unto Sal
Gemme as I shall prove hereafter.

The great and violent flame which happens so soon as Saltpeter is flung upon
the coals, and the red vapors which it uses to yield when reduced into a
spirit, have induced the Chemists generally to believe that this salt is
inflammable, and consequently fully loaded with Sulphur, because Sulphur is the
only Principle that flames; but if they had suspended their judgments herein,
until they had got more experience on this Subject, they would not only have
known that Saltpeter is not at all inflammable in its nature, but they would
even have doubted whether or no any Sulphur does enter into the natural
composition of this salt; for if Saltpeter were inflammable of it self like
Sulphur, it would burn where there is no Sulphur, for example in a Crucible
heated red-hot in the fire; but it will never flame therein, use what quantity
of it you please, and let the fire be never so great. It is true indeeed, if
you throw Saltpeter upon kindled coals, it makes a great flame, but this is
only through the sulphurous Fuliginosities of the coals, which are violently
raised and rarefied by the volatile nature of Niter, as I shall prove in the
Operation upon fixed Niter.

As for any Sulphur that is thought to be contained in Saltpeter, it cannot be
demonstrated by any Operation whatever, for the red vapors that come from it
are no more inflammable than the Niter, when they are not mixed with some
Sulphurous matter; and it is far more probable, that this salt contains no
Sulphur, if we consider its cleanness, transparency, acidity, and cooling
quality, which have no manner of affinity with the effects of Sulphur, which
are commonly to make a body opake, to take off acidity, and to heat.

Purification of Saltpeter.
To purify Saltpeter is to deprive it of part of its fixed salt, and of a
little bituminous earth, which it contains.

Dissolve ten or twelve pounds of Saltpeter in a sufficient quantity of water,
let the dissolution settle, and filtrate it, then evaporate it in a glass or
earthen vessel, to the diminution of half, or until there begins to appear a
little skin upon it; then remove your vessel into a cool place, stirring it as
little as may be, and leave it there till the morrow, you will find Crystals which
you must separate from the liquor; evaporate this liquor again to a skin, and
set the vessel in a cool place, to get new Crystals; repeat the evaporations,
and Crystallizations, until you have drawn all your Saltpeter.

Note that in the last Crystallizations, you will have a Salt altogether like unto
sea salt, or Sal Gemme, keep it apart, it may serve to season meat with.

The first Crystals are the pure Saltpeter.

You may, if you please, dissolve and purify Saltpeter several other times in
water, observing every time what I said before, for to render it more white,
and purify it from its Sea Salt.

Saltpeter purified is a great aperitive, it cools the body by fixing the
humors that are in too much motion, and drives them by Urine. It is given in
Fevers, in Gonorrheas, and many other diseases; the dose is from ten grains to
a dram in Broth, or some appropriate liquor.

Remarks.
The first Purification that is given to Saltpeter is this: the stones and
earths that contain it are grossly powdered; they are boiled in a great deal of
water, to dissolve the Saltpeter: the dissolution is filtred, and then poured
upon ashes, to make a Lixivium; after it has been poured upon the ashes
several times, it is evaporated and Crystallized.

The salt of the ashes which does mix with the Saltpeter, increases its fixed
part; but that which is made without ashes is the better to make Aqua fortis
with.

The earth from whence Saltpeter has been drawn, being set in the open air,
and stirred about from time to time, does re-impregnate with a kind of Salt.

The long Crystals that we see Saltpeter shoot into, do proceed from its
volatile part, for that which is Crystallized last, is fixed like sea salt, and
looks just like it.

Saltpeter can never be purified so well, but it will still contain a salt
like unto Sal Gemme, or sea salt, but in less quantity than before.

When Saltpeter is boiled a long time in water, and over a great fire, some
part of the Spirits do fly away, and there remains at last nothing but a salt
like unto sea salt, or Sal Gemme, which serves to prove that Saltpeter is only
a Sal Gemme fuller of Spirits than the other, as I said speaking of the
Principles.

When you would Crystallize a Salt, you must dissolve it in a convenient
proportion of water; for if there should be too much, the salt would be weakened
too much, and not able to coagulate; and if on the contrary there should be too
little, the Crystals would be confused. Therefore to make them fair, you must
take your vessel off the fire, when you perceive a little skin upon the liquor,
which is a mark to show that there remains a little less liquor than is
convenient to keep all the salt dissolved, and thus when it comes to be set in
a cool place, it will not fail to fix.

Acid salts, and among them the volatile, do Crystallize in much less time than
others.

Saltpeter cools the body, by reason that being an acid it depresses the
humors, which by their too great motion did heat the body, and so precipitates
them by Urine; for the volatile salts and sulphurs, that all bodies are full
of, are easily fixed and quieted by acids.

Crystal Mineral, called Sal Prunellae.
This operation is a Saltpeter, from which some of the volatile part has been
separated, by the means of Sulphur and fire.

Bruise two and thirty ounces of Purified Saltpeter, and put it into a
Crucible, which you must set in a furnace among burning coals. When the
Saltpeter is melted, throw into it an ounce of flower of Sulphur, a spoonful
at a time, the matter will presently flame, and the more volatile spirits of
Saltpeter fly away: when the flame is over, the matter will remain in a very
clear fusion. Take the Crucible out with a pair of tongs, and turn it upside
down into a brass basin, very clean, and a little warmed beforehand, to dry up
the moisture that might be upon it; shake about the basin to spread the matter
while it is cooling, and this is called Sal Prunellae. If you desire to have it
very pure, you must dissolve it in a sufficient quantity of water, filtrate the
dissolution, and crystallize it, as I have said in the Purification of
Saltpeter.

It is accounted better than purified Saltpeter for Physical uses, because the
Sulphur is thought to have corrected it. It is given to cool, and to work by
Urine, in burning Fevers, in Quinseys, Gonorrheas, and other diseases, that
proceed from heat, and obstruction: the dose is from ten grains to a dram in
Broth, or some other liquor appropriate to the distemper.

Remarks.
This Preparation is called Sal, or Lapis prunellae, either because the
essential salt which is drawn from prunella or Self heal has, near upon the
matter, the same virtue and figure as Crystal Mineral, or else because it is
given in hot Fevers, whose heat is compared to that of a burning coal called
Pruna. The Germans do give it the form of a Sloe, after having colored it red
with Roses.

The Ancients have thought it necessary to throw Flowers of Sulphur on melted
Saltpeter, to the end it might be made the more Aperitive; but thereby it is
deprived of the more opening spirits which the Sulphur carries away along with
it; thus instead of rendering it more open, and effectual, the better part of it
is lost.

It is easy to perceive that this abuse is one of those that has insensibly
gained upon men, and diminishes very much from the benefits that might be
received from Chemical Physic, for want of applying themselves to examine well
the constituent parts of natural things, before proposing of correctives. I
shall rather advise them to use simple purified Saltpeter, or purified from
its fixed salt three or four several times, so as I have described, and I am
confident, after the experience that I have often made of it, that it will
better satisfy the intensions of those who use it, than when it shall have
been prepared with Sulphur.

The diminution which is made of the Saltpeter, is not only of the volatile
parts which are carried off with the Sulphur, but it is likewise of the watery
part which this salt does always contain, and which does hereby evaporate.

Crystal Mineral is often counterfeited, by mixing Roche-alom with it during
the fusion, and if those men do use a Saltpeter that is not very pure, this
Alom does serve to purify it, by causing a thick scum to separate to the sides
of the Crucible, and so the Crystal Mineral becomes much the whiter.

This adulteration may be known, in that the Crystal Mineral made this way is
more glittering than the other, and it is the Alom which gives it this color.

Those who carry about this Crystal Mineral to the shops do easily enough vend
it for its outward excellency, and for the cheapness they sell it at; for Alom
costs but little, but this sort wants a great deal of having so good effects as
the other.

Sal Polychrestum.
This operation is a Saltpeter fixed by Sulphur, and by fire.

Powder and mix equal parts of Saltpeter, and common Sulphur, throw about an
ounce of this mixture into a good Crucible, which you shall have heated red-hot
beforehand, there will rise a great flame, which being over, throw into it as
much more of the matter, and continue to do so, until all your mixture is used.
Let the fire continue four or five hours, so as to keep the Crucible all the
while red-hot, then pour out the matter into a copper well dried by the fire,
and when it is cold, powder it and dissolve it in a sufficient quantity of
water; filtrate the dissolution, and evaporate it in an earthen pan or a glass
vessel, in sand until it is dry. You must fling away as insignificant that
which remains in the filter.

If the Salt be not altogether so white, as we would have it, it is because it
still retains some Sulphur; therefore you must calcine it in a strong fire in a
Crucible, stirring it about with a Spatule three or four hours, or until it
becomes very white; then repeat your dissolution in water, your filtration and
evaporation; thus you have a Sal Polychrestum exceeding pure.

Sal Polychrestum purges serous humors by stool, and sometimes by Urine: the
dose is from half a dram to six drachms in some proper liquor.

Remarks.
This Salt is properly a Saltpeter divested of its volatile part by Sulphur,
it is called Polychrestum from the Greek word (...), that is to say, good for
several uses, because it is used not only to purge by stool, but by urine too,
being taken to the weight of one or two drachms in a quart of water in the
morning like a Mineral water. It is commonly used in Infusions of Senna from
one scruple to four, as well to increase the strength of the Purgative, as to
draw out more strongly the Tincture of Senna. Some do give it to six drachms in
a pint or a quart of water, to purge strongly; but I would not advise any body
to use this Purgative all alone, by reason of the vellications that it gives in
passing through the stomach.

Sal Polychrestum must by no means be used until it is made very white, and
very pure; for when there remains any gross portion of Sulphur, it is apt to
cause Vertigoes, stupefaction of the Nerves, and nauseousness of the stomach.

If you used sixteen ounces of purified Saltpeter, and so much sulphur in this
operation, you will have at last but three ounces and a half of Sal Polychrestum
very fine; but if you use common Saltpeter instead of purified, you will have
five ounces of Polychrestum as white as the other.

This difference of weight proceeds from common Salt-peters containing more
fixed salt than purified Saltpeter.

Sal Polychrestum may be Crystallized like Saltpeter and other salts. Its
Crystals are very small, and much like those of sea salt, but only they are
keener.

Monsieur Seignette an Apothecary of Rochell whom I have spoke of before, has
put in use a certain Sal Polychrestum, which seems at first to be like unto
this, but when it comes to be examined, there is found a notable difference, as
well in the Crystallizations, (and when it is thrown into the fire) as in the
effects; for whereas six drachms of this sort taken, as I have said, do cause
gripes in pricking the membranes of the stomach, that of Monsieur Seignette in
the same quantity does purge very gently without any gripes at all, as he
proves in a little Treatise that he has made touching the uses of this
Polychrestum. And the truth of it I have found my self in several persons. The
composition of this salt is known to none but himself, who having given it a
reputation in the chiefest Towns of France, has left some quantity of it with
me to distribute, and make use of here at Paris.

Spirit of Niter.
Spirit of Niter is a liquor very acid and corrosive, drawn from Saltpeter by
distillation.

Powder and mix well together two pounds of fine Saltpeter, and six pounds of
Potters earth dried; put this mixture into a large Retort, either of earth or
glass luted, set it in a close Reverberatory Furnace, fit to it a great
capacious Balon, or Receiver, and give a very little fire to it for four or
five hours, to make all the Phlegm come forth, which will distill out drop by
drop. When you perceive there will distill no more, throw the Phlegm away that
is found in the Receiver, and having refitted it, lute the junctures, and
increase the fire by little and little to the second degree, there will come
forth Spirits, which will fill the Receiver with white clouds; then keep the
fire two hours in the same degree, after that increase it to the greatest
violence you can give it, and so the vapors will come red; continue the
greatest fire till there come no more, the operation will be ended in fourteen
hours. When the vessels are cold, unlute the junctures, and pour your Spirit of
Niter into an earthen bottle, which you must stop with Wax.

Spirit of Niter is used for the dissolution of metals, it is the best Aqua
fortis that is; and the corrosive virtue of other waters of this nature does
chiefly proceed from the Niter that enters into their composition.

Remarks.
You might, as some do, mix four parts of Potters earth with one part of Niter,
when you would draw its Spirit, but you will succeed better, and with less
difficulty, by observing my description; for whereas the earth does here serve
only as an intermedium to separate the parts of this salt, to the end that the
fire operating more easily upon it may draw its Spirits, it is a very needless
business to use more of the earth than is necessary toward this effect.
Besides this over great quantity of earth may serve to weaken the Spirits, and
by taking up too much room may hinder the drawing so much as otherwise you
would with the same Retort.

I fling away the Phlegm, because it only serves to weaken the Spirit. The
white vapors do proceed from the volatile part of Saltpeter, and are a weaker
sort of Spirit; but the red ones do come from the fixed part, and are the
strongest Spirit: for which reason the fire is made so very violent toward the
latter end. This fixed Spirit is commonly called Salamanders blood. Of all
Salts, Niter is the only one that yields red vapors.

When you use here the best Saltpeter, there remains nothing in the Retort but
only earth.

I have boiled several times in water a good while, the earth that remained
after the distillation of the Spirit of Niter, and after evaporation of the
filtrated decoction, I could find no salt at bottom.

I have likewise observed, that out of two pounds of purified Niter, a pound
and fourteen ounces of liquor, in Phlegm and Spirit may be drawn.

A third part of the Retort, wherein the operation is performed, must remain
empty, and the Receiver must be very large; for otherwise these Spirits coming
hastily forth would break all to pieces for room to move in.

Spirit of Niter Dulcified.
This oparation is a Spirit of Niter, whose more subtle edges have been
broken, or evaporated.

Put into a large Bolt-head eight ounces of good spirit of Niter, and so much
spirit of Wine well dephlegmated; set your Bolthead in the Chimney upon a round
of straw, the liquor will grow hot without coming near the fire, and half an
hour or an hour afterward, it will boil very much; have a care of the red
vapors that come out a-pace at the neck of the Bolthead, and when the
ebullition is over, you will find your liquor clear at bottom, and to have lost
half what it was; pour it into a Viol and keep it, this is the sweet spirit of
Niter.

It is good for the wind Colic and the Nephritick, for Hysterical distempers,
and for all Obstructions; its dose is from four to eight drops in broth or some
other convenient liquor.

Remarks.
You must leave the Bolthead open; for the vapors would either carry away the
stopple, if there were one, or else they would break the vessel; the Bolt-head
is so hot during the ebullition, that one cannot endure ones hand upon it.

The heat and ebullition begins sooner or later, according as the Spirits that
are used have been more or less dephlegmated; or else according as the season,
in which it is made, is either hotter or colder, for in the winter you must
warm the liquor in a gentle sand-heat, and when it grows a little hot, you must
take it off, and shake it, thus it will come to boil.

This effect is very strange, for spirit of Niter being a strong acid, and
spirit of Wine a sulphur, it cannot be said that there is here any alkali, to
cause the ebullition with acid, according to the common maxim. And this
operation shows us that every thing cannot be explicated by the sole Principles
of acid and alkali, as some do pretend.

This operation has much resemblance with that which happens when oil of
Turpentine is put into a bottle with oil of Vitriol; for the mixture of these
liquors does heat and boil much alike. I shall say something of this last
mixture hereafter. There is this difference notwithstanding, that spirit of
Niter being more volatile than oil of Vitriol, causes a greater effervescency.

In order therefore to explicate this ebullition, two things must be
considered. First, that spirit of Niter contains a great many fiery parts
locked up in its acidity, but which do still retain some evident motion, for it
is they that make the spirit of Niter to Fume as it does.

The second is, that spirit of Niter is more Inflammable than saltpeter, when
mixed with any sulphurous body, and the reason thereof is, that it is more
rarefied than saltpeter.

Thus when this acid spirit is mixed with spirit of Wine, which is a sulphur
very much exalted, and very susceptible of motion, the volatile part of the
spirit of Niter joins itself to this sulphur, and the mixture becomes very
ready to take flame; likewise after this mixture the fiery bodies that were in
spirit of Niter, do by striving to mount upwards put the liquor into so great a
motion, that it even almost flames, and would without all question quite flame,
if there were not some phlegm always mixed with these spirits, let them be
drawn never so pure, which serves to allay the activity of the fiery particles;
so that there must needs follow a very great ebullition.

This effervescency therefore proceeds from this, that spirit of wine, and
spirit of Niter, which are as it were a saltpeter, and sulphur highly exalted,
have been almost kindled into a flame by the fiery bodies that were in spirit
of Niter; and that which further proves this conception is, a noise or kind of
detonation, during the effervescency, which is much like that which happens
when sulphur and saltpeter are burnt together.

But because there may be some difficulty in conceiving what is meant by little
fiery bodies, I do understand by them a subtle matter which having been put
into a very rapid motion does still retain the aptitude of moving with
impetuosity, even when it is enclosed in grosser matters; and when it finds
some bodies which by their texture or figure are apt to be put into motion, it
drives them about so strongly that their parts rubbing violently the one
against the other, heat is thereby produced.

Now the sulphurous parts of spirit of Wine, and the volatile acids of spirit
of Niter being mixed, and being very aptly disposed for motion of themselves,
they must needs be easily put into it by these fiery bodies, insomuch that
their parts often rubbing or striking the one against the other, they must
cause a heat after the same manner, as when a stone is struck hard against a
piece of Iron, a heat and fire do follow.

The great diminution of the liquor proceeds from the evaporation of the more
volatile parts of the Spirits of Wine and Niter, through the neck of the
Bolt-head during the ebullition.

That which remains is a well sweetened spirit of Niter, for not only its edges
are very much blunted in the ebullition, but the spirit of Wine being a sulphur
does unite and imbody with those that remain, so that they have no longer any
Corrosive quality.

Aqua Fortis.
This preparation is a mixture of the Spirits of Niter and Vitriol, drawn by
fire, to dissolve metals.

Powder and mix Saltpeter purified, Vitriol Calcined white, as I shall show
hereafter, and Potters earth, or clay dried, of each two and thirty ounces: put
this mixture into an earthen Retort, or glass one luted, whose third part is to
remain empty; place your Retort in a close Reverberatory Furnace, and fitting
to it a capacious Receiver, Lute well the junctures: then begin by giving a
little fire to warm gently the Retort, and increase it by little and little;
but when you perceive the Spirits to come forth into the Receiver in red
clouds, continue it for fifteen or sixteen hours in the same degree, then drive
it to the last extremity, until there do appear white clouds instead of red.
Then let the vessels cool, and unlute them, you will find in the Receiver an Aqua
fortis, which you must keep in an earthen bottle well stopped. It serves for the
dissolution of metals.

Remarks.
I do use to Calcine the Vitriol to a whiteness, that the Aqua fortis may not
be weakened with an insipid water.

The mixture of Vitriol and Saltpeter has quickly some smell of Aqua fortis,
because Vitriol contains a great deal of Sulphur, which easily insinuates into
the volatile part of Saltpeter, and exalts some little of it, which causes the
smell; it is this Sulphur in Vitriol which by volatilizing the red spirit of
Niter, makes it come forth faster, and with a less fire, than when Saltpeter
is distilled with Clay alone.

The greatest Corrosion of Aqua fortis proceeds from the Niter, for the Vitriol
does yield but very weak Spirits in comparison with the other. I do acknowledge
indeed that the Oil of Vitriol is exceeding Corrosive, but eighteen or twenty
hours are not able to drive that out, for it does not use to come until after
three days continual distillation. The Vitriol then and the Clay do serve here
only for a matter to separate the Saltpeter, that it may by the means of fire,
the better rarefie into Spirits.

Although there does not enter into this preparation so much terrestrial
matter, as there does into that of Spirit of Niter, nevertheless it proves very
well, because the Sulphurs of Vitriol do help the Spirits to rise.

If you would keep on the fire five days and nights together, the Receiver
would be still full of clouds, because the Vitriol would yield some Spirits
during all that time.

Sometimes Alom and Arsenick are added to the composition of Aqua fortis, but
the description which I have given you is the best of all.

There remains in the Retort a red mass, which may be used like Colcothar, for
an Astringent.

This mass may be obtained without breaking the Retort.

Fixation of Saltpeter into an Alkali Salt, by the means of Coals.
This operation is a Saltpeter rendered porous by Calcination, and by the ashes
of coals, which are mixed with it.

Melt sixteen ounces of Saltpeter in a strong and large Crucible among burning
coals, throw into it a spoonful of coals grossly powdered, and there will rise a
flame and detonation, which being over, throw so much more, and continue to do
so until the matter flames no longer, but remains fixed in the bottom of the
Crucible; then pour it into a warm mortar, and when it is cold, powder it and
dissolve it in a sufficient quantity of water; filtrate the dissolution through
brown paper, and evaporate all the water in an earthen pan in sand, there will
remain a very white salt, which you must keep in a Viol well stopped.

This Salt has a taste like to that of Salt of Tartar, and they differ but
little in virtue; it opens Obstructions, and works by Urine, and sometimes by
Stool; the dose is from sixteen to thirty grains in some convenient liquor.

It may be used to assist in drawing forth the Tincture of Senna, a red
Tincture may be also drawn from it with Spirit of Wine, as from Salt of Tartar.

If this Salt is set in a Cellar, it dissolves into a liquor like the Oil of
Tartar: it is used to extract the Tincture of Vegetables and Minerals.

Remarks.
The Crucible must be but half full of saltpeter, because the detonation is so
great, that the matter would be driven out of the Crucible, if too much be put
in. When the Crucible is not very strong, it breaks in pieces about the middle
of the operation, and some part of the matter is lost thereby.

This detonation is more violent than that which is made with a mixture of
saltpeter and common sulphur, because the sulphur of Coals is more rarefied
than common sulphur.

Niter will never flame, when set over the fire alone in a Crucible, though you
make your fire never so strong, and coals though loaded with fuliginous or oily
parts, do send forth but only a small blue flame; but when these two bodies
come to be mixed together, the volatile parts of Niter joining with the coals,
which are oily, do rarefie and exalt the coals with such violence, that they
produce a very great flame. Now this operation confirms my opinion that
saltpeter does only serve here to rarefie the flame of sulphur, but cannot
send forth the least flame of itself; because that as soon as ever the coals,
you put into the Crucible, are burnt, the flame goes out, and appears no more
until you throw in more coals, with which a convenient proportion of the
volatile parts of saltpeter, that still remained, does join and rarefie them
into a flame. Thus new coals are successively thrown into the Crucible, until
it flames no longer; but toward the end of the operation, because there remain
but few volatile parts in the Niter, the detonation is much the less, and so is
the flame, until at last the coals finding nothing more in saltpeter for it to
raise, do burn only as they use to do when alone.

If you use common saltpeter for this operation, you will have occasion to use
but three ounces and a half of coals, and you will get twelve ounces of purified
salt, but if you use fine Saltpeter, you must have seven ounces of coals, and
yet will get but three ounces of purified salt.

This difference of weight proceeds from the fine salt-peters containing more
volatile parts than the other; likewise a great deal more coals is required to
raise them, and there remains the less fixed salt for the same reason.

The fixed Niter being prepared as I have described, it is a little gray
colored; now to make it white you must Calcine it in a great fire, stirring it
in the Crucible all the while with a spatule; when it shall have continued red
hot for above an hour, it will become exceeding white. You must then dissolve
it in water, filter the dissolution, and evaporate the water, and thus you have
a very pure and white salt.

This salt is an alkali, being a mixture of the salt of coals, which is an
alkali, and fixed saltpeter; these two salts are so strictly united and mixed
together in the Calcination, that they make a porous salt, and such as is much
like unto the fixed salt of Plants,

Not that there is an alkali salt in saltpeter as Chemists will have it; for
give what Calcination, or other preparation you please to this mineral salt,
without adding any thing to it, not the least alkali can be drawn from it, and
all that ever we can see in it is acid.

It is further observable, that the liquor of fixed Niter, which has been made
with common saltpeter, being kept a year, or a year and a half, loses most of
its activity as an alkali, so that it is no longer able to cause any such
ebullition with acids, as it could before.

This accident can have no other cause, than that the pores of salt contained
in the liquor do close up by little and little, and the acid salt of Niter does
absorb and destroy the alkali, which kept the pores open.

But the same thing does not happen, where the liquor of fixed Niter was made
with purified saltpeter, because whereas a great deal of coals was used in the
fixing it, and but little salt of Niter remained in it, the alkali must there
predominate so powerfully, that the acid is not able to regain its strength.

Some Chemists have thought fit to call the liquor of fixed Niter, Alkahest,
that is, an universal dissolvent, thinking it able to draw out the sulphurous
substance of all mixed bodies.

CHAP. XVII. Of Sal Armoniack.
SAl Armoniack is either Natural or Artificial. The Natural is found in very
hot Countries, such as many parts of Africa, that are near the Torrid Zone. It
is found upon the earth that has imbibed the Urine of Animals, that is to say,
where the Sun has sublimed the volatile Salt of this Urine, and made of it a
Sal Armoniack.

The Artificial Sal Armoniack is made at Venice, and diverse other places with
five parts of Urine, one part of sea salt, and half a part of Chimney soot;
these three are boiled together, and reduced into a mass, which being put into
subliming pots, over a gradual fire, it sublimes into a Salt in the form we
commonly see Sal Armoniack. Now in this sublimation the volatile alkali salts
of the Soot and Urine do raise up as much sea salt as they can, and do join so
strictly together with this acid salt, that the mixture seems to be fixed. The
reason of this close union is, that sea salt being in form of points, does
insinuate into the alkali salts; and because it has not motion enough to
separate the parts of these salts, it gets within them, and fills their pores.

If you would purify Sal Armoniack, you must dissolve it in a sufficient
quantity of water, filtrate the dissolution, and evaporate it until it is dry
in a glass vessel. You Will have a white salt, which may be given from six to four
and twenty grains in some convenient liquor. It is an excellent Sudorifick and
Diuretic; it is good in Malignant fevers, and in Quartan agues, and to bring
the menses in women. It is also used in some Collyries, or waters for the eyes.

Flowers of Sal Armoniack.
These Flowers are a part of Sal Armoniack, raised by Fire.

Powder and mix together equal parts of Sal Armoniack in powder, and sea salt
decrepitated; put this mixture into an earthen Cucurbite, and having placed it
in sand, fit to it a blind head. You must give a gentle fire at first, and
increase it by little and little, so long as you perceive the Sal Armoniack to
rise up like meal, and stick to the head, and the uppermost part of the
Cucurbite: continue the fire, until nothing more rises up, then let the vessels
cool; lift up the head gently, and gather your Flowers with a Feather; keep
them in a Viol well stopped; they have the same virtue as Sal Armoniack, but are
given in a little less dose, as from four to fifteen grains.

Remarks.
This operation is performed, to the end the Sal Armoniack may be volatilized,
by checking some part of its fixed salt by the addition of Salt decrepitated,
thus these Flowers are a little more active than the Sal Armoniack, though they
are both compounded of the same Salts.

Iron or Steel powdered may be used instead of Sea Salt, as Schroder describes
it, and then the Flowers do become of a Yellow color, because the Salts do
take the Tincture of Mars.

And these last Flowers are a little more penetrating than the others.

Aqua Regalis.
This water is a solution of Sal Armoniack in Spirit of Niter.

Powder four ounces of Sal Armoniack, and put them into a mattress, or other
glass vessel of a good bigness; pour upon it sixteen ounces of Spirit of Niter,
place the vessel in sand a little warm until the Sal Armoniack is all
dissolved, then pour the dissolution into a bottle, and stop it with wax, this
is Aqua Regalis; you will have seventeen ounces of it.

Remarks.
This water is called Regalis, or Royal, because it dissolves Gold, which is
the King of metals. It is likewise called Aqua Stygia, or Chrysulca.

The vessel in which it is made must be of a sufficient bigness, because in the
dissolution the Spirits do rarefie with so great violence, that they would
break it, if they had not room to circulate in; when a great deal of this water
is preparing at a time, you must take care to remove the vessel from the fire,
so soon as the dissolution begins.

Aqua Regalis may be likewise made, with equal quantities of Saltpeter, and
Sal Gemme, by mixing these Salts with thrice as much Potters-earth powdered,
and the distillation of it is made after the same manner as I showed, to draw
the Spirit of Niter.

It is somewhat difficult to conceive how Aqua Regalis is able to dissolve
Gold, which is a most solid Metal, and cannot dissolve Silver, which is a much
less solid body. Some Chemists endeavoring to resolve this difficulty, have
said that Gold being a Metal fuller of Sulphur than Silver, did therefore
require a sulphurous dissolvent, such as Aqua Regalis, compounded of the
volatile sulphurous salts of Sal Armoniack: but this explication destroys
itself, for if Gold did contain more Sulphurs than Silver, it would
consequently be less weighty, for Sulphur is one of the lightest Principles in
Chemistry.

I know the Alchymists will tell me, that their Sulphur is quite of a different
nature from the common sort, and that they do conceive in Gold, a Fixed, and
consequently a heavy sulphur. But besides that a fixed sulphur is a thing merely
imaginary, it can never be so heavy as the other principles which they pretend
to be in Gold, and which they are forced to think as fixed as the Sulphur.

Moreover if we examine what happens in the composition of the dissolvent of
Gold, it will be no difficult matter to contradict this opinion: for we see
that as soon as ever the Spirit of Niter begins to work upon the Sal Armoniack,
the acid salt joins with it, and quits the volatile salts, which finding
themselves disingaged from the bodies that held them in a manner fixed, do rise
up with violence; but because these salts which are alkalies, do meet in their
passage with some acids of the Spirit of Niter, the great effervescency happens
which is always wont at the meeting of alkali salts and acids. This
effervescency being over, our Aqua Regalis remains in the vessel: it is
properly nothing else but an acid sea salt dissolved in Spirit of Niter, the
volatile salts being either exalted, or destroyed by Acids, and that which
confirms this opinion is, that Aqua Regalis is as well made with sea salt, in
which there are no volatiles at all, as with Sal Armoniack, according as I have
said.

It is not then by discourses of this nature, that this Phanomenon can be
clearly explicated. I am apt to believe, with more likelihood, that if Aqua
Regalis be not able to dissolve Silver, the reason of it is because the edges
of the Spirit of Niter being magnified by the addition of Salt do slide over
the pores of Silver, not being capable to enter into them by reason of the
disproportion of their figures, whereas they easily enter into Gold, whose
pores are larger, to make their divisions. On the contrary if the Spirit of
Niter dissolves Silver, it is because its points are very subtle and fitly
proportioned to enter into the small pores of this metal, and by their motion
to divide its parts. These same points may likewise enter into the large pores
of Gold, but they are too small and pliable to act upon this body. There Is need
of stronger and keener knives, which by filling its pores more advantageously
may have force enough to divide it.

I do easily foresee, it will be objected, that Gold being heavier than Silver,
should have lesser pores and not greater, because the weight of a body does
only consist in the proximity of parts; but it is easy to solve this
difficulty, by considering each metal with a good Microscope, for the pores of
Gold are seen to be much larger than those of Silver, though indeed there are
much fewer, and that will explicate very well why Gold is heavier than Silver,
though its pores are greater; for seeing they are at a good distance the one
from the other, there is a very compact matter as it were intercepted, which
causes all the weight; but the pores of Silver being very near one another, and
of a much greater number, do intercept less solid matter, and consequently it
must be lighter. I Will use a familiar example, to make my self more plainly
understood.

If you take two vessels of the same size and bigness, and fill one with small
hail-shot, and the other with large bullets, that which holds the bullets will
be much heavier than that which is full of shot; and yet notwithstanding the
vacuities between the bullets are much larger, than those between the shot.

According to this Hypothesis, reason may be likewise given, why Gold is cut in
pieces more easily than Silver; for the greater the pores of a body are, the
easier entrance will a pair of Sheers meet with.

Gold spreads under the hammer more than Silver, because having larger pores
the hammer makes a greater impression into it, and dilates the parts the more
easily.

It is objected, that if there be any heavy matter as it were intercepted
between the pores of Gold, it must needs precipitate of itself, after the
action of Aqua Regalis upon this metal, which is a thing that does not happen.

I answer, that if the parts of Gold are heavy, the dissolvent nevertheless is
a gross body, and very well proportioned to hold up those heavy parts, and to
hinder them from precipitating.

Others have opposed this explication, and have writ, that if Aqua Regalis
dissolves Gold, and cannot dissolve Silver, the reason of it is, that the gross
points of spirit of Niter, or Aqua fortis are subtilized by the mixture of sal
Armoniack, and are rendered fit to enter into the small pores of Gold, whereas
the delicate Fabric of these same points does not leave them the necessary
strength nor motion to divide the parts of Silver, whose pores are a great deal
bigger.

But this way of arguing does not agree with experience; for what likelihood is
there that the points of spirit of Niter are so subtilized by the penetration
and division of the parts of sal Armoniack? or where shall we find any example,
that after a considerable effervescency of two salts met together in conflict,
the acidity grows sharper than it was before? this is a thing that can never be
proved. On the contrary, every body knows well enough that no effervescency
happens but the acid is in part blunted or broken thereby. Moreover the
Argument supposes that spirit of Niter does break its subtilest points in
violently contending with the Sal Armoniack, since also that in sal Armoniack
there are alkali salts whose property it is to destroy acids. I could further
add here, that the conjunction of salt with spirit of Niter should of necessity
render its points more gross than they were, and that the Crystals which are
drawn by aqua Regalis have their shape not so keen as those that are drawn by
aqua Fortis. But that which I have said is so probable in itself, and so easy
to be convinced of, if a man takes never so little pains to consider it, that I
should but amuse my Reader to little purpose, if I should offer to give any
proofs of it.

Neither do I find it convenient to make a long discourse in explicating how
Silver, which has lesser pores, is more susceptible of the impressions of Air
and Fire, than Gold which has larger, seeing I have already supposed that the
matter intercepted between the pores of Gold is more compact, and consequently
more hard to separate than that of Silver.

Volatile Spirit of Sal Armoniack.
This preparation is a volatile salt raised from sal Armoniack by the means of
Quicklime, and dissolved into a liquor.

Take eight ounces of sal Armoniack, and four and twenty ounces of Quicklime;
powder them apart, and when you haved mixed them in a mortar, pour upon them
four ounces of water, and put it quickly into a Retort, whose half must remain
empty. Set your Retort in a sand Furnace, and fitting to it a great Receiver,
and luting the junctures exactly, begin the distillation without fire, for a
quarter of an hour; afterward increasing it by little and little unto the
second degree, continue it until nothing more comes forth; take off your
Receiver, and pour out the Spirit immediately into a Viol, turning away your
head as much as may be to avoid a very subtle vapor that continually rises
from it. Stop the bottle close with wax, to keep the Spirit in; you will have
of it five ounces, and six drachms.

It is an excellent Remedy for all diseases that proceed from Obstructions, and
corruption of humors, such as Malignant fevers, the Epilepsie, Palsy,
Plague, Smallpox, etc. It drives by perspiration, or by Urine: the dose is
from six drops to twenty, in a glass of Balm, or Carduus water.

Remarks.
Quicklime, which is an alkali, destroys the strength of the acid Sea Salt,
which in a manner bound up the volatile salts in the Sal Armoniack, whence it
comes to pass, that as soon as Lime and Sal Armoniack are mixed together, there
exhales an unsufferable smell of Urine; for the volatile salts coming forth
abundantly do so fill the Nose and Mouth of the Artist, that he would never be
able to put the mixture into the Retort, if he did not take good care to turn
away his head, while his hands are at work.

Water is added to it to liquifie these volatile salts, for if there were
nothing to moisten them, they would suddenly sublime to the neck of the Retort,
and stopping it all together would break it to pieces.

You must stop the Retort with your hand, so soon as you have poured the water
into it, and shaking it one minute, you must hasten all you can to fit to it
the Receiver, and to lute well the junctures; for the Quicklime does presently
grow hot, so soon as its body is opened; and this heat, which is very
considerable would spend the more volatile of the salts, if there were no care
taken to preserve them.

The Quicklime being wetted does swell, and take up a great deal of room;
wherefore the Retort must be filled but half full, that there may remain room
enough for the Spirits to rarefie in; you must also use a large Receiver, in
which the vapors that rise in abundance may be able to circulate with ease.

This Spirit is nothing but a solution of volatile salts in water; if you would
sublime, and separate it from the water, you must put the liquor into a mattress
with its head, and proceed as I shall show when I describe the volatile salt of
Vipers; but this salt being dry, flies away more easily than when it continues
dissolved in water, so that it were better keep it as it is.

This is a stronger Spirit than that which is prepared with Salt of Tartar,
because the little fiery bodies of the Quicklime, which are mixed with it,
have quickened the motion of the volatile salts; likewise these fiery particles
are they that do hinder the coagulation of this Spirit with spirit of Wine,
when they are mixed together, for there must be a cohaesion and repose of
parts, in order to make a Coagulum.

You must also have a care when you remove the Receiver, not to hold your head
over it; for this volatile salt suffering a greater separation than before,
enters the Nose immmediately, and hinders Respiration; insomuch that several
persons have been seen to fall in a swound by that means alone. Now to avoid
this accident, you had best have ready a wet cloth, to stop the Receiver with,
so soon as it is unluted.

This Spirit is an excellent Menstruum to make precipitations with, it destroys
acids exceeding well, as do all other volatile alkalis; it is used to
precipitate Gold, after it is dissolved.

It is good in those diseases I named, because it opens the pores, and drives
the humors by perspiration, or by Urine, according to the disposition of
bodies: moreover, as it is an alkali, it destroys the acids which caused these
diseases.

Again, it sometimes causes sleep, because it dulls the keenness of acid salts,
which entering into the little conduits of the Brain, do cause perpetual
watchings.

It is better give volatile Spirits in Sudorifick waters, than broth, because
the broth being taken hot, the heat would evaporate the better part of the
volatile Spirits, before a man could reach the Porringer to his mouth.

You will find in the Retort thirty ounces of a white matter, which you must
throw away as useless; it is the fixed salt of sal Armoniack mixed with the
Quicklime.

Another Preparation of the Volatile Spirit of Sal Armoniack, together with its
Flowers, and Fixed Salt against Fevers.
Powder and mix together eight ounces of Sal Armoniack, and so much Salt of
Tartar; put this mixture quickly into a glass body, and sprinkle it with three
ounces of Rainwater, set a head upon it, and after fitting the Receiver, and
luting the junctures close with a wet bladder, place your vessel in sand, with
a gentle fire at first to warm the Retort by little and little, and distill the
Spirit drop by drop; but when you perceive there will distill no more, take away
the Receiver, and stop it close: then increase the fire to the third degree,
and continue it about two hours, there will sublime the white Flowers of Sal
Armoniack, which will stick about the bottom of the head like meal.

The Spirit has the same strength, and virtues as the former: you will have
seven ounces of it, and a half.

Gather up the Flowers with a Feather, and use them as you would those I
described before the Preparation: you will have of them ten drachms, and a half.

There remains at the bottom of the Cucurbite nine ounces, and three drachms of
a white fixed mass. You must dissolve it in sufficient water, then filter the
dissolution, and evaporate it, until it is dry, you will have a very white Salt,
that may be reckoned a good Remedy for intermittent Fevers: the dose is from
eight grains to thirty in the small Centaury water, or some other convenient
liquor.

Remarks.
The Salt of Tartar serves in this Operation, as the Quicklime did in the
other; but because it is a more powerful Alkali than Quicklime, you must not
use so great a quantity of it. The fixed Salt of Niter might be substituted in
its place, or any other Alkali that you will.

When the fire begins to heat the matter, there do rise up into the head store
of volatile Salts, in a fine delicate Crystalline form, but the moist vapors
coming upon them do dissolve them into Spirit.

The Volatile Spirit of Sal Armoniack is then a dissolution of Volatile salt in
water, and if there be not phlegm sufficient to dissolve all the Volatile salt,
there will remain some part of it at bottom of the Receiver, and that may
likewise be turned into Spirit, by only adding enough water to dissolve it.
Thus the Spirit becomes as strong as it can be made, for the pores of the water
being filled with as much salt as they can contain, it can receive no more. But
if there happens to be more water than the proportion of Volatile Salt
requires, then the Spirit proves weak, and must be given in a larger dose.

This Spirit is Sudorifick, but you may perceive more sensibly the effect of
Sal armoniack to cause Sweat, by dissolving six or eight grains of this salt,
and the same quantity of Salt of Tartar, each separately in two small doses of
some proper liquor, and giving them to a Patient one presently after the other;
for the salt of Tartar working upon the Sal Armoniack in the stomach, after the
same manner as it does when they are mixed together in a Mortar, the Spirits do
separate from the latter with the more force, and act more powerfully, than
when they were mixed, before they were given; for the little violence that the
Volatile Spirits do use in their separation from sea salt, does leave them the
more activity, and disposes them the better to pass through the pores. Again,
it is probable, that in the former effort which these Spirits made in their
separation from the fixed part, when Sal Armoniack was mixed with salt of Tartar
in a mortar, the more subtle part might fly away first, and be lost; now it is
this subtle portion that is most proper to rarefie the humors, and to drive
them forth by Transpiration.

The flowers do proceed from some part of the Sal Armoniack, which the salt of
Tartar had not sufficiently opened.

The Febrifugous salt is nothing but a mixture of salt of Tartar, and the fixed
and acid part of Sal Armoniack, it works by Urine, and but seldom by Sweat, by
reason that being fixed it precipitates more easily than it rarefies; and it is
by this means that it opens obstructions, which are often the first cause of
Fevers.

If you mix in a Viol equal quantities of Volatile Spirit of Sal Armoniack, and
Spirit of Wine, and shake them a little together, they will cause a Coagulum.

This Coagulation proceeds from hence that the Spirit of Wine, which is a
rarefied Oil, does unite with the Spirit of Sal Armoniack which is a saline
liquor; and it is but the same thing which happens from stirring Oil and some
salt liquor in a mortar, in order to make an Unguent, called Nutritum.

By this incorporation together, the salt is involved in the ramous parts of
the sulphur, and these same sulphurous parts are checked, or as it were fixed
by the salt, so that neither of them have any more freedom of motion; and from
this repose of these parts does result the Coagulum.

It may be likewise said that the conjunction of the acid that is in Spirit of
Wine with the volatile Armoniack alkali, does contribute much to this
Coagulation.

The Spirit of Sal Armoniack prepared with Quicklime does not at all coagulate
with Spirit of Wine, by reason of fiery parts that it contains The Salt of
Tartar too may have mixed some fiery bodies in the Spirit of Sal Armoniack, but
there are not enough of them in it to hinder its adunation with Spirit of Wine.

Volatile Spirit of Sal Armoniack dulcified.
This Operation is a volatile Armoniack salt mixed, and dissolved in Spirit of
Wine.

Take Sal Armoniack, and Salt of Tartar, of each four ounces, powder them
separately and mix them well in a glass, or marble mortar, put this mixture
into a glass body, pour upon it ten ounces of rectified Spirit of Wine, stir it
all together with a wooden Spatule, and fit to the body a head, and Receiver,
lute well the junctures, place the vessel in a Sand-furnace, and give it a very
little fire, to warm the body. The volatile salt will rise, and stick to the
head, and neck of the receiver. Increase the fire a little, and continue it,
until there distills nothing more, the operation is ended in four or five hours.
Let the vessels cool, and unlute them. You will find a volatile salt stuck to
the head, and a spirit in the receiver. Put quickly both the one and the other
into a Retort in sand; and after having fitted another Retort to it to serve
for a Receiver, and having luted the junctures, distill the whole with a small
fire. Cohobate it again three times, then keep what you have distilled in a
bottle well stopped, almost all the volatile salt will be dissolved in the Spirit
of Wine, and that which remains undissolved will receive a perfect dissolution
in the bottle.

It is a very good Medicin for the Lethargy, the Palsy, the Scurvy, Malignant
fevers, and Hysterical maladies; it may be given instead of Spirit of Sal
Armoniack before described. And it is not so repugnant to the taste. It works
by Sweat, or by insensible Transpiration; the dose is from twelve drops to
thirty, in some proper liquor; it is likewise good, outwardly applied, for the
Palsy, and for cold pains.

Remarks.
So soon as the Sal Armoniack is mixed with the salt of Tartar, Volatile salts
do rise from them, which would very much incommode the Artist if he should hold
his nose over it. You must lose no time in putting the mixture into the body,
and then stopping it, for these first salts are the most subtle of all.

The salts must be separately powdered, by reason of the loss which would be
made of the volatile salts, in the mixing of the Sal Armoniack with the salt of
Tartar.

In the making this mixture, you must not use any mortar made of metal, because
that in the conflict of the two salts it would be corroded, and that which were
corroded from it would be apt to spoil the operation.

The body must be filled but half way, when the whole is in. The volatile salt
is lighter than the spirit of Wine, for it rises first.

When the Spirit of Wine is well rectified; it will not dissolve any of the
volatile salt at first, but on the contrary it hinders this salt from
dissolving in a liquor, because the ramous parts of the wine do stop the
entrance of the air, but if there be any phlegm in the Spirit of Wine, it
dissolves the salt according to the proportion that there is of it.

Those who had rather use the volatile Sal Armoniack dry, then in liquor, may
keep it dry in a bottle well stopped, and use it for the same purposes as the
spirit; the dose of it must be a little less, it is very white and pure, this
keeps better than that which is drawn with water, because an impression of
Spirit of Wine which remains in it, does serve to retain the salts in some
measure.

You need not wonder, that there happens no Coagulum, when Spirit of Wine and
this volatile salt are stirred together in a bottle, as there does by the
mixture of Spirit of Wine, and Spirit of Sal Armoniack, for this salt having
all its parts entirely united, cannot so well mix with the sulphur of spirit of
wine; but if you add water enough to dissolve the salt, then there will be a
coagulum, because the parts of the salt will be disunited, and by the help of
water will enter into the pores of Spirit of wine. I have explicated this
coagulum in the Remarks of the Chapter preceding.

The volatile Sal Armoniack does dissolve well with waterish liquors, and
spirit of Sal Armoniack may be made of them together, by only mixing water
enough to dissolve the salt. But if you would mix, or dissolve it in Spirit of
wine, you will find a great deal of trouble in the doing it; if you should only
infuse it in spirit of wine, it would none of it dissolve; on the contrary,
that is a way to keep and preserve the salt; therefore you must distill it over
several times, that the saline parts may rarefie, and unite with the spirit of
wine. That which remains undissolved in the Receiver, has been very much
rarefied by repeated distillations; for which reason it also dissolves some
days afterward.

Spirit of wine in this operation has so wrought upon the volatile salts that
they are no longer so disagreeable to the taste or the smell as they were
before, and it is by that means that it sweetens them, for sulphurs do
contemperate the acrimony of salts, as I have said speaking of the Principles.

Acid Spirit of Sal Armoniack.
This Spirit is a fixed Sal Armoniack, dissolved into a liquor with a great
fire.

Take what quantity you please of the fixed Febrifugous salt, that I have spoken
of; powder it, and mix it well with thrice as much Potters-earth powdered: put
this mixture into a Retort whose third part remains empty, place it in a close
Reverberatory Furnace, and fit to it a large capacious Receiver. Lute the
junctures close, and proceed in the method I spoke of, to make the Spirit of
Salt, you will find in the Receiver an acid spirit, which is a very good
diuretic. It is esteemed to be specific for Malignant diseases: the dose is
to an agreeable acidity in Juleps and broths.

Remarks.
This acid Spirit proceeds from the fixed part of the Sal Armoniack, for the
Alkali contributes not one drop of it.

Although the Salt of Tartar has weakened the strength of Sea Salt, which was
mixed with the volatile salts in Sal Armoniack, as I have said, this same
sea salt nevertheless will yield a very acid spirit upon distillation, because
the parts of sea salt, though they have suffered a strong conflict with the
other, yet do contain a Spirit as well as they do otherwise entire; after the
same manner as when sea salt is reduced into a very fine powder, it continues
as full of Spirits, as when it was in larger pieces; for you must not imagine
that Sal Armoniack does contain the acidity of sea salt separate from its
earth, for if it could remain in it in such a state, it would quietly divide
the parts of the Alkali salt, with which it is mixed, and would be destroyed it
self, but this salt remains in it in its substance entire.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Vitriol.
VItriol is a Mineral compounded of an Acid Salt, and Sulphurous Earth; there
are four sorts of it, the Blue, the White, the Green, and the Red.

The Blue is found near the Mines of Copper, in Hungary, and the Isle of
Cyprus, from whence it is brought to us in fair Crystals, which keep the name
of the Country, and are called Vitriol of Hungary, or Cyprus; it partakes very
much of the nature of Copper, which renders it a little Caustic; it is never
used but in outward applications, such as Collyriums, or waters for the eyes,
and to consume proud flesh.

White Vitriol is found near unto Fountains, it is the most of all depurated
from a Metallic mixture: it may be taken inwardly to give a vomit; it is
likewise used in Collyriums.

There are three sorts of Green Vitriol, the German, English, and the Roman.
That of Germany draws near unto the blue, and contains a little Copper, it is
better than the rest for the preparation of Aqua fortis. That of England
partakes of Iron, and is proper to make the Spirit of Vitriol. The Roman is
much like the English Vitriol, excepting that it is not so easy to dissolve.

Red Vitriol was brought among us a few years ago out of Germany, it is called
Natural Colcothar, and is esteemed to be a Green Vitriol Calcined by some
subterranean heat. It is the least common of them all, it stops Blood, being
applied to Hemorrhagies.

If you dissolve a little white, or green Vitriol in water, and write with the
dissolution, the writing will not be seen, but if you rub the paper with a
little Cotton dipped in the decoction of Galls, it will appear legible; then if
you wet a little more Cotton in Spirit of Vitriol, and pass it gently over the
paper, the Ink will disappear again; and yet at last if you rub the place with
a little more Cotton dipped in Oil of Tartar made per Deliquium, it will again
appear legible, but of a Yellowish color.

The reason that I can give for these effects is this, the Spirit of Vitriol
dissolves a certain Coagulum which is made of Vitriol and Galls, but the Oil of
Tartar breaking the force of this acid Spirit, the Coagulum recovers it self,
and appears again, but because it now contains Oil of Tartar too, it acquires a
new color.

If you throw the dissolution of Vitriol, or Vitriol only powdered, into a
strong decoction of dried Roses, it will turn as black as common Ink; if you
pour some drops of spirit of Vitriol into it, this Ink will turn red; and if
you add to it a little volatile spirit of Sal Armoniack, it will turn gray.

These changes of color do proceed from the spirit of Vitriol's dissolving the
Coagulum which the Vitriol it self had made, and rendering it invisible; the
liquor recovers a fresher red color than it had, before the Vitriol was put
into it, because the same spirit does separate the parts of the Rose which were
dissolved in the liquor, and renders them more visible.

The volatile spirit of Sal Armoniack, which is an alkali, does partly break
the acid edges of the spirit of Vitriol, so that the parts of the Rose having
nothing more to keep them rarefied, do close together, and consequently the
liquor changes color.

By this experiment may be seen, that the dried Rose may serve to make Ink
with, as well as Galls; Indian wood, and diverse other things will do the same.

Gilla Vitrioli, or Vomitive Vitriol.
This operation is only a purification of white Vitriol.

Dissolve what quantity you please of white Vitriol, in as much Phlegm of
Vitriol, as is needful to dissolve it; filtrate the dissolution, and evaporate
two thirds of the moisture in an earthen pan. Put the rest into a cool place
for three days time, there will shoot out Crystals, which you must separate;
then evaporate a third part of the liquor that remains, and set the vessel
again in a Cellar, there will shoot new Crystals; continue thus evaporating and
crystallizing, until you have gotten all you can; dry these Crystals in the
Sun, and keep them for use; the dose is from twelve grains to a dram, in
Broth, or some other liquor.

Remarks.
This is only a Purification of Vitriol, that serves to separate a little earth
from it.

All the liquor may be evaporated without any Crystallization, the Gilla
Vitrioli will remain at bottom in a white powder.

White Vitriol is used in this operation rather than Green, because it is
milder.

The other Vitriols may be purified after the same manner.

After taking this vomit, a man sometimes voids by stool a black matter like
Ink, because it frequently happens that some part of the Vitriol descending
into the Guts, meets a saline matter that it joins with, and so causes a
blackness, as it uses to do when Vitriol is mixed with Galls.

Calcination of Vitriol.
Put what quantity you please of Green Vitriol into an earthen pot unglazed;
set the pot over the fire, and the Vitriol will dissolve into water; boil it to
the consumption of the moisture, or else until the matter turn into a grayish
mass drawing toward white; this is called Vitriol Calcined to whiteness. If
you should Calcine this gray Vitriol a good while over a strong fire, it would
turn as red as blood. It is called Colcothar, and is good to stop blood, being
applied to a wound.

Remarks.
You must not Calcine the Vitriol in a glazed pot for fear of dissolving the
Vernish, which would change the nature of the Vitriol.

It may be Calcined, or rather dried in the Sun, until it becomes white, this
Calcination deserves to be preferred before the other, but only it is longer a
doing.

The Vitriol may be likewise spread about a Furnace heated a little, and so
dried until it turns white.

If you should resolve to dry as exactly as you can, sixteen pounds of green
Vitriol, there would remain but seven pounds of white Vitriol.

But in order to do this, you must powder the white mass of Calcined Vitriol,
after you have broke the pot, and stir it a long time in an earthen pan, over a
little fire, until there rises no more fume from it, or until there remains in
it no more phlegm.

If you should Calcine this white Vitriol to a redness, you would have five pounds
and a half of Colcothar. The sulphur of Vitriol is lost during this last
Calcination, you must do it in the Chimney, for the fume would be very
injurious to the breast. This sulphur has the same smell as ordinary sulphur.

Some have writ, that the red color which appears after a long Calcination of
English Vitriol, was an undoubted proof that there was Copper in it, after the
same manner as the red color which happens to Verdigreese calcined is a
certain proof that it contains in it some particles of Copper.

But that which is here said to pass for a thing undeniable, is no proof at
all; for first of all those Vitriols which are thought most to partake of
Copper, do give no greater redness in their Calcination, than the others which
partake the least of it. Secondly let Copper be prepared which way you please,
you can never make it redder than the Colcothar of English Vitriol, whose
redness must be thought to proceed from some particles of this metal contained
in it. And thirdly, we see plainly, that Iron, Lead, Mercury, and diverse
mineral bodies do acquire a red color in their Calcining, without containing
any Copper.

The Sympathetical powder that has made so much noise is nothing but white
Vitriol opened, prepared diverse ways according to men's different conceptions
about it. The Roman Vitriol is better esteemed than the other for this
operation.

The common method of preparing this Powder is to expose it to the heat of the
Sun, whilst the Sun is in Leo, that is in July, in order to dry it, and to open
it. And men think that Sign does bestow particular influences on the
preparation. Though in truth it undergoes drying better in that season than
another, by reason of the great heat then of the Sun. And it may be the parts
of the Vitriol do become more volatile by this heat, but for what is said of
Influence it is merely imaginary.

Many do only pulverize the ordinary Vitriol, in order to make the
Sympathetical powder.

When you would use this powder, you are to take the blood of a wound upon a
linen cloth, and to sprinkle some of it upon the blood. It is pretended, that
though the bloody linen were ten miles off from the Patient, when the
Sympathetical powder is applied to it, the wound would presently heal. But the
experience of several persons who have tried it (and others may do the same)
does evince, that men have had a great faith, when they have talked of the
effects of this powder; for if it be not applied to a cloth newly blouded, and
even in the chamber of the Patient, you will certainly find no effect from it.
Nay where such precautions have been used, it performs no great matter, and
sometimes does nothing at all.

Now to explicate the action of Vitriol, called Sympathy, you must know that
there does continually exhale into the air, little bodies from this mineral
salt, and to convince you of it, you need only to put the several Vitriols of
different colors pretty near one another in the same place, you will find
after 12 or 15 days that they have all changed color a little in their
superficies. The white will become yellow, the green whitish, the blue
greenish, the red grayish. These changes of color cannot proceed but from
little bodies, which being separated from each kind of Vitriol, and mixing in
the air, some part of them do fall confusedly on the matter. And it must not be
said that these changes are caused by the air, which does open and rarefie
these salts; for if you put them into places separate, or distant from one
another, this effect will in no wise happen.

You must also observe that the blood, to which the Vitriolick powder is
applied, retaining some heat still, may thereby increase the activity and
number of the little bodies which do arise from the Vitriol.

And these Vitriolick bodies dispersing themselves in the air are they that
cause all the Sympathy, for they do mix in the wound of the patient, and
because the virtue of Vitriol is to stop the blood, and to dry it, you need not
wonder if the volatile parts which come from it, do perform the same effect.

But it may be objected, that the volatile parts of Vitriol have no more
determination naturally to go find out the wound of a person, than other parts
of the body, and other places of the chamber. Nay on the contrary, that a wound
being commonly covered with a plaster, and somewhat thick bandage, is not so
likely to receive those bodies.

I answer, that there is no need of giving any other determination to these
volatile parts of Vitriol, than is given to other volatile salts which are
dispersed in the air; but because wounds are always of a glutinous temper, it
is easy to conceive that these little bodies will adhere to them in greater
quantity than to others, as any downy substance which flies about a room,
wherein there is Glue, or Turpentine, will more easily stick in them, than in
other places.

As for the Bandage and Plaster, used to wounds, you must know that those who
do use the Sympathetical powder, do apply none of them. But when it happens,
which is very rare, that a man's wound has been cured by this Powder, although
there was a Plaster and bandage also laid upon it, this effect can never be
attributed to any thing else but the penetration of Vitriol, for there are
wounds that a very little quantity of Vitriol is capable of drying.

Thus I have given you the most rational explication that can be, of an effect
which has hitherto passed for a thing altogether inexplicable.

To conclude, I would not advise any wounded person to insist or depend too
much on a remedy of this nature; for to one who ever received considerable
good, there is a hundred, who never perceived any effect from it, and the cause
of it has been, that the volatile parts of the Vitriol have happened to be
diverted from the wound by some wind, or else because the greatest part of
people have their blood too subtle, and too active to be fixed by so little a
quantity of Vitriol.

Nevertheless those whose heads are filled with the Sympathetical Powder do
speak of it, as of a never failing medicine. And if a man offers to convince
them by an experiment to the contrary, as it is not hard to do, they presently
cry out, that the reason it fails is, because it is ill prepared; but it is
easy to convince them, if they desire a serious satisfaction in it, for the
powder of their own preparation, that they so much magnify, though it be
successful in one, will be found to fail in a great many others.

Many Authors have also written a great many falsehoods in defense of the
Sympathy, as for example, that if the urine of an Infant were cast into the
fire so soon as it is made, it would cause a heat of urine: that if the
excrements of an animal were thrown into the fire, or among Nettles, there
would be an Inflammation in the guts of the same creature, and many the like
stories, which a thousand experiments will prove not to be true.

Distillation of Vitriol.
This Spirit is an acid salt of Vitriol, dissolved into a liquor, by a great
fire.

Fill two thirds of a large earthen Retort, or glass one luted, with Vitriol
Calcined to whiteness; place it in a close Reverberatory furnace, and fitting
to it a great Balon or Receiver, give a very small fire to warm the Retort, and
make the water come forth that might still remain in the Vitriol; and when
there will distill no more, pour the water out of the Receiver into a Bottle,
this is called Phlegm of Vitriol; it is used in Inflammations of the eyes to
wash them with: refit the Receiver to the neck of the Retort, and luting the
junctures exactly, increase the fire by degrees, and when you perceive Clouds
to come forth into the Receiver, continue it in the same condition, until the
Receiver grows cold; then strengthen the fire with wood to an extreme violence,
until the flame rises through the Tunnel of the Reverberatory as big as ones
arm. The Receiver will fill again with white Clouds; continue the fire after
this manner for three days, and so many nights, then put it out: unlute the
junctures when the vessels are cold, and pour the Spirit into a glass body, set
it in sand, and fit to it quickly a Head with its Receiver; lute the junctures
close with a wet Bladder, and distill with a very gentle fire, about four ounces
of it, this is the Sulphurous spirit of Vitriol, keep it in a viol well stopped.

It is good for the Asthma, Palsy, and diseases of the Lungs, the dose is from
four drops to ten in some convenient liquor.

Change the Receiver, and augmenting the fire, distill about half the liquor
that remains in the body: this is called the Acid Spirit of Vitriol, it is
mixed in Juleps to an agreeable acidity.

That which remains in the body is the most acid part of the Vitriol, and is
improperly called Oil. It may be used like the acid Spirit, for continued
Fevers, and other distempers that are accompanied with a violent heat. This
Oil is likewise used for the dissolution of metals.

You Will find in the Retort a Colcothar which has the same virtues with that I
spoke of before.

Remarks.
To make the Spirit of Vitriol you must take green English Vitriol, such as
being rubbed upon Iron does not at all change color, which shows it does not
partake of Copper, as the German does, that looks a little blueish, and is more
acrimonious. You must Calcine it as I have said, to the end it being deprived
of the greatest part of its Phlegm, the distillation may be dispatched the
sooner. A third part of the Retort is left empty, that the Spirits may have
room to rarefie in, when they come forth.

There distills also a great deal of Phlegm into the Receiver, and all of it is
known to have come, when there drops no more. Those who don't care for the
sulphurcous spirit, do let it come forth, and mix together with the Phlegm,
before the junctures are luted; but you must be sure to govern the fire
discreetly at that time; for these Spirits come with a great deal of violence,
and use to break the Retort, when they are driven too furiously. When they are
out, you must augment the fire to the last degree of all, for the acid Spirit
will not part with its earth, until it is forced by an extraordinary heat.

If you distill eight pounds of white Vitriol, at sixteen ounces to the pound,
you will draw off seventeen ounces of Phlegm, and two and twenty ounces and a
half, both of the Sulphurous, and the Acid spirit of Vitriol. Of these two and
twenty ounces and a half, there will be five ounces of Sulphurous spirit.

You Will find in the Retort five pounds, five ounces of Colcothar.

Use all the care you can possible to preserve all the liquors which come from
Vitriol, yet it will be impossible for you to hinder it from losing some
through the junctures, during the distillation.

If you should use German instead of English Vitriol, you would draw off a little
more spirit than the quantity I have named, but it would have some smell of
Aqua fortis, and the matter which remains in the Retort would be of a brown
color drawing toward black. This color proceeds from sulphurous
Fuliginosities which rise more from this Vitriol than the other, because it
partakes of Copper; for this Sooty vapor finding no vent to get out at, falls
down again upon the matter and blackens it.

The Furnace in which this operation is performed, must be very thick, that the
heat of the fire being none of it lost through the Pores, may the better act
upon the Retort. These Spirits do rarefie into white vapors in the Receiver,
which must be provided large enough, to give them free liberty to circulate in,
before they condense into a liquor at bottom. The fire is usually continued
four or five days together, but if after that, you should change the Receiver,
and continue the fire three or four days longer, there would come forth an Oil
of Vitriol congealed, and caustic, which is nothing but the more fixed part of
the Sprit of Vitriol. And this Congelation has given this liquor the name of
Oil of Vitriol, though improperly.

Vitriol contains earth enough, wherefore none is added to it, as is
necessarily done in the distillation of Niter.

Acid Spirits are Salts become fluid by the force of fire, which has
disingaged them from their more terrestrious part, and they may be revived
again by pouring them upon some Alkali; for example, the Spirit of Vitriol
remaining some time upon Iron, does reincorporate into Vitriol, and the Spirit
of Niter, poured upon Salt of Tartar makes a Saltpeter.

There is one thing happens about the Oil of Vitriol, when it is very strong,
which is strange indeed; it is, that if you mix it with its Acid Spirit, or
with water, or else with an Ethereal Oil, such as the Oil of Turpentine, this
mixture grows hot to that degree, that sometimes it breaks the Viol it was put
into, and often it produces a considerable Ebullition.

I could quickly give an account of this heat and Ebullition, if I would
suppose an Alkali to be in the Oil of Vitriol, as those do who pretend to
explicate every thing that happens by the notions of acid and alkali; but not
comprehending how an alkali should be able to remain so long a time with so
strong an acid as is the Oil of Vitriol without being destroyed, I had rather
give a reason that seems to me abundantly more probable.

I conceive therefore that if water, or Spirit of Vitriol, or the Ethereal Oil
of Turpentine do come to heat the Oil of Vitriol, it is by setting in motion a
great many fiery particles which the Oil of Vitriol had drawn with it in the
distillation; for these little fiery bodies being environed with salts that are
exceeding heavy, and hard to rarefie, they drive about with vehemence
whatsoever stands in their way, and when they have caused an Ebullition, and
find they cannot get out at the top of the Viol, they break it to pieces with
the bussle they make at bottom, and on the sides.

Perhaps it will be said, I do here suppose gratis that the Oil of Vitriol does
contain fiery particles; but if we consider the great violence of fire, and the
time that is spent in drawing this acid, it will be no such hard matter to
grant me this supposition. Besides it will be hard to explicate the great and
burning Corrosion of Oil of Vitriol without admitting these fiery parts, for
the Vitriol contains nothing in it self of this Caustic nature; it is true
indeed that it contains Phlegm, Sulphur, and Earth, but it is a thing
impossible but this acid should discover it self more than it does, if it were
as Corrosive in the Vitriol, as it is in the Oil.

Once it happened to me, that putting into my Furnace a Retort whose two thirds
were filled with German Vitriol dried, in order to draw off its Spirits, I
distilled first of all the Phlegm, and sulphurous spirit, which I took out of
the Receiver; I then fitted it again to the Retort, and by a great fire
continued three days and three nights, I distilled off the acid Spirit as we
are used to do. When the vessels were cold, I admired to find in my Receiver
nothing but a mass of Salt, or Congealed Oil of Vitriol. This Salt was so
exceeding Caustic and burning, that if I offered to touch the smallest part of
it with my finger, I presently felt an insufferable scalding, and was fain to
put my hand immediately into water, it continued to fume still, and when a
little of it was thrown into water, it made the same hissing noise, as a
fire-coal flung into water would do. Besides it heated the water very much, and
much more than common Oil of Vitriol could.

I kept this congealed Spirit about six months, after which time it dissolved
into a liquor, which I used as Oil of Vitriol; for it was in effect the same
thing.

And in my opinion this operation does sufficiently evince, that Oil of Vitriol
contains fiery parts.

It happened to me another time, that having rectified the Spirit of Vitriol, to
separate it from its Oil by an Alembick, some part of the distilled Spirit was
turned into fair and transparent Crystals in the bolt-head, or Receiver, which
Crystals had the same acrimony, and strength with the mass I now spoke of.

If you pour some drops of Spirit, or Oil of Vitriol into a quart of hot water,
in which you shall infuse a pugil of dried red Roses, the liquor will in a
little time become as red as Claret; and this effect must not so much be
attributed to the Spirit of Vitriol's sharpning the water, and so thereby
drawing out the Tincture of Roses, as to this that the acid Spirit does rarefie
and separate the particles of the Rose (which the water had dissolved) and made
to appear better than before; for if you strain the Infusion, and separate the
Roses, before you pour to it your Spirit of Vitriol, although the liquor so
strained be yet but little raised in color, it will nevertheless turn to as
high a red, after the Spirit is dropped into it, as if the Roses remained still
in the liquor. We must say the same thing of other Tinctures that are drawn by
acids, as also of such as are made by an Alkali salt.

If you fill a glass Viol with the decoction of Nephritick wood clarified, and
look on it, turning toward the light, it will appear yellow; but if you turn
your back to the light, it will appear blue; if you mix with it some drops of
Spirit of Vitriol, it will appear yellow on every side, but if you again add
about as much more Oil of Tartar, it will return unto its first color.

If you take a Blue, or Violet tincture made in water, such as is drawn out of
the Sun-flower, or Violet flowers, and pour upon it some drops of Spirit of
Vitriol, it will presently turn red; but if you throw into it some Alkali salt,
it will recover again its former color.

On the contrary if you pour an Alkali liquor, such as volatile Spirit of Sal
Armoniack, or the Oil of Tartar, upon the blue Tincture, it will presently turn
green; and if you again pour upon it a little Spirit of Vitriol, it will change
this color into an obscure red.

The decoction of Indian wood is very red: if you drop into it a little Spirit
of Vitriol it will turn yellow; and if you still add some volatile Spirit of
Sal Armoniack it will become black.

If you infuse three or four hours a piece of Indian wood in some clear juice
of Citron, and take out your wood, the liquor will have received no alteration
of color, but if you add to it some drops of Oil of Tartar made per deliquium,
it will take a brown color, and if you add to it a little Spirit of Vitriol,
it will resume its color again.

If you pour some drops of Oil of Tartar upon Claret, it will become greenish,
and if you add to it a little Spirit of Vitriol, it will return to its former
color.

All these changes of color, which the Spirit of Vitriol, or other acids, and
Alkali's do make, proceed only from the different position of bodies dissolved
in the liquor, and from its disposition to modifie the light different ways.

Styptick Water.
This water is a solution of Vitriol and other ingredients, to stop bleedings.

Take Colcothar, or the red Vitriol that remains in the Retort after the spirit
is drawn out, Burntalom, and Sugar Candy, of each half a dram, the Urine of a
young person, and Rose Water, of each half an ounce, Plantain-water two ounces,
stir them all together a good while in a mortar, then pour the mixture into a
Viol, and when you use it, separate it by Inclination.

If you apply a Bolster dipped in this water to an opened Artery, and hold your
hand a while upon it, it stops the blood. In like manner you may wet a little
Pledget in it, and thrust it into the Nose, when an Hemorrhage continues too
long; taken inwardly, it cures spitting of blood, bloody flux, and the
immoderate flux of the Hemorrhoids, or Terms, the dose is from half a dram to
two drachms in Knot-grass water.

Remarks.
When the blood gushes forth too fast, you must redouble the first Bolster,
that was put upon the wound, and assist it a little with your fingers for half
an hour.

The Basis of this water is Colcothar.

Having used this water with good success upon several occasions, I was willing
to insert it in this Book, and I believe if any body please to experiment it,
as I have done, they will easily acknowledge it to be an excellent Remedy in
many Distempers.

Lapis Medicamentosus.
Powder and mix together Colcothar, or the red Vitriol, that remains in the
Retort after distillation, or in want of it Vitriol Calcined to a redness two
ounces, Litharge, Alom, and Bole-Armenick, of each four ounces; put this
mixture into a glazed pot, and pour upon it good Vinegar enough to cover the
matter two fingers high; cover the pot and leave it two days in digestion, then
add to it eight ounces of Niter, two ounces of Sal Armoniack; set the pot over
the fire, and evaporate all the moisture, Calcine the mass that remains, about
half an hour in a strong fire, and keep it for use. It is a good Remedy to stop
Gonorrheas, a dram of it is dissolved in eight ounces of Plantain water, or
Smith's water, to make an Injection into the Yard; it is likewise good to
cleanse the eyes in the small pox, seven or eight grains of it must be
dissolved in four ounces of Plantain or eyebright water; it is also good to
stop blood, applied outwardly to a wound. It may be dissolved in Knot-grass
water, and will go near to have the same effects as the styptick water.

Remarks.
This stone is called Medicamentosus by way of excellence, by reason of the
good effects it produces.

The Colcothar, that remains in the Retort after the distillation of Vitriol,
must be better than the others for this Operation; because being deprived of
the greatest part of its Spirits, it is the more Astringent.

Litharge, which is a Lead Calcined, Alom, and Bole-Armenick, are so many
considerable Astringents, that do no hurt in this composition.

Vinegar is put in to incorporate the ingredients together, and set them a
Fermenting, after which the Niter and Sal Armoniack do easily mix among the
rest.

The Calcination which is given to it at the end, is done to carry off some
part of the acid, and to augment the Astriction: It likewise fixes the stone
the more, and makes it fitter to keep.

It is one of the best Remedies I ever met with, for stopping Gonorrheas, when
it is a proper time to stop them by Injections.

Salt of Vitriol.
This Operation is the more fixed Salt of Vitriol, that remains after
distillation.

Take two or three pounds of the Colcothar, that remains in the Retort after
distillation of Vitriol, let it infuse in eight or ten pints of warm water for
ten or twelve hours; boil it a little while, and then let it settle; separate
the water by Inclination, and pour new water upon the matter; proceed as
before, and mixing your Impregnations, evaporate all the moisture in a
sand-heat in a glass or earthen vessel, there will remain a salt at bottom.

It is used as the Gilla Vitrioli, to give a Vomit; the dose is from ten to
thirty grains.

Remarks.
This salt is that part of the Vitriol that the fire is not able to rarefie
into Spirit. Some Authors say, that it Vomits just after the same manner, as
Gilla Vitrioli, taken in a smaller dose, but I have observed that its effect
was much less, and on the contrary there was need of giving it in a larger dose
than the Gilla, to procure a Vomit; for having given of it several times a
dram at a dose, the person had no Inclination at all to Vomit; and truly I am
apt to believe that a fixed salt of Vitriol divested of its Sulphur, does rather
tend to precipitate downwards than mount upwards; for Vomiting is caused by
Saline Sulphurs, which prick the Fibers of the Stomach, whence follows a
Convulsion to this part.

That which remains indissoluble is called Caput Mortuum, it is used for
Astringents.

If you expose it to the Air for a year, or a year and half, it returns into
Vitriol again.

CHAP. XIX. Of Roche-Alom, and of its Purification.
ROche-Alom is a very Styptick Mineral Salt, found in the veins of the earth in
many places of Europe; it is taken up in great transparent pieces, the best is
that which is reddish, for the white contains fewer Spirits.

Alom is purified after the same manner as Vitriol; it is used to cleanse the
teeth; it is a good Diuretic; a dram of it is dissolved in a quart of water,
and a glass of it is given now and then.

Many things are likewise called by the name of Alom, as the Saccharinum, which
resembles Sugar, it is nothing but a mixture of Roche-Alom, Rose Water, and the
white of an Egg. Plume-Alom, which some call Lapis Amianthus, is a kind of Talk.

Distillation of Alom.
Put five pounds of Roche-Alom into a glass or earthen body, and fitting to it
a head with its Receiver, distill in sand as much as will rise, you will have a
Phlegm of Alom that is used for distempers of the eyes, for Quinsies, and to
cleanse wounds: unlute the vessels, break the body, and powder the white mass
that remains in it, put it into an earthen Retort half empty; place your Retort
in a Reverberatory furnace, and fitting to it a large Receiver, lute the
junctures close, and light a very small fire the first three hours only to warm
the Retort, afterward increase it every hour to the utmost violence, and these
Spirits will come forth, and fill the Receiver with white Clouds; continue the
fire in this condition three days together, then let the vessels cool: you will
find in the Receiver an acid Spirit, which you may rectify by distilling it in
a glass Alembick in sand, in order to make it the clearer. This acid is more
disagreeable than that of Vitriol, it is used in Juleps for continued Fevers,
and Tertian Agues; the dose is from four to eight drops; it is likewise good to
cure the Aphtha, or little Chancres in the mouth.

Break the Retort, and you will find in it a white mass very much rarefied, and
light, it is called Burnt Alom, or Calcined Alom, it is used for to eat carnous
excrescences, or proud flesh.

Remarks.
The Distillation of Alom must be performed like that of Vitriol, that is to
say, without addition of earth, because these Salts do contain enough
themselves.

The Body into which you put your Alom must be sure to be large enough, because
it rarefies extremely.

The Phlegm is known to be all come forth, when there distills no more; for
these Spirits being very weighty do require a greater heat than that of sand to
raise them.

Some have written that Alom yields but very little acid, yet if they take the
pains to keep a strong fire under it for three days together, they will find that
this Spirit does not give place in strength, or quantity to that of Vitriol.

Nor are we at all obliged to distinguish, as they would have us, the
Acrimonious, Corrosive salt of Alom from its acid, seeing that there is nothing
either Acrimonious or Corosive in this Mineral salt, which will not turn into
an acid Spirit, when it is strongly urged by fire.

If a Dram of Alom be dissolved in six ounces of this Phlegm, you make an
excellent Alom water to cleanse wounds and ulcers with.

The mass that remains in the Cucurbite, or Dephlegmated Alom, is more
Escarotick than that which has lost its Spirits

Surgeons are wont to Calcine Alom in a Frying pan; but the Iron dulls the
greatest part of its virtue, as absorbing its Spirits wherein consists the
corrosion of Alom; the Retort must be filled but half full, because there
happen Ebullitions, which do require room.

CHAP. XX. Of Sulphur.
SVlphur is a kind of Bitumen, that is found in many places in Italy and Spain.
There is brought among us both a Natural and an Artificial; the Natural is
greyish, and called Sulphur Vivum, the other is Yellow, and is nothing but the
Natural melted, purified from its grosser earth and formed into Rowls, which we
do commonly use.

Some think that Sulphur is a Vitriol sublimed in the earth, because these
mixts are very often found near one another; that there is a great deal of
Sulphur in the mass of Mineral Vitriol, and that the acid Spirits which are
drawn from them both are wholly alike.

Flower of Sulphur.
This preparation is an exaltation of Sulphur.

Put about half a pound of Sulphur grossly powdered into a glass body, place it
in a small open fire, and cover it with a pot or another Cucurbite turned
upside down, one that is unglazed, so as that the neck of the one may enter
into the neck of the other. Change the upper Cucurbite every half hour, fitting
another in its place; add likewise new Sulphur; gather your Flowers which you
find stuck in the Cucurbite, and continue to do thus, until you have got as
much as you desire. Then put out the fire and let the vessels cool, there will
remain at bottom only a little light insignificant earth.

The Flower of Sulphur is used in Diseases of the Lungs, and Breast, the dose
is from ten to thirty grains in Lozenges, or in Electuary. It is used also in
Unguents for the Itch.

Remarks.
This Operation is intended only to rarefie the Sulphur, that being become more
open, it may work the better.

Sulphur is proper against Infirmities of the Lungs, when they proceed from a
Viscosity that sticks to them, because it deterges; but if it should be given
to such as are too much dried with a Fever, it proves very ill in that it
raises a greater motion of the humors: it cures Tettars, and the Itch, because
opening the Pores it drives out the subtler part of the humor, but yet the
grosser part remaining within, they do frequently return again.

You may use a glass head to fit upon the body.

If you mix one part of Sal Polychrestum with two pounds of Sulphur, and
sublime them together, as those I have described, you will have white flowers of
Sulphur, which are thought to be better for distempers of the Breast than those
others, they are given in the same dose. This whiteness proceeds from a very
exact attenuation which Sal Polychrestum gives to the Sulphur; the Sal
Polychrestum which remains at bottom of the Cucurbite, may be Calcined, and if
you afterward Purify it by solution, Evaporation, and Filtration, it will be
as good as before.

Magistery of Sulphur.
This Operation is a Sulphur dissolved by an Alkali salt, and precipitated by
an acid.

Take four ounces of the Flower of Sulphur, and twelve ounces of the Salt of
Tartar, or Saltpeter fixed by the coals: put them into a large glazed pot, and
pour upon them six or seven pints of water. Cover the pot, and setting it on
the fire, make the matter boil five or six hours, or until being become red,
the Sulphur is all dissolved. Then Filtrate the dissolution and pour upon it by
little and little distilled Vinegar, or some other acid, there will presently
appear a Milk, let it settle, that a white powder may precipitate to the bottom
of the vessel; pour off by Inclination that which is clear, and washing this
powder five or six times with water, dry it in the shade, this is called the
Magistery or Milk of Sulphur; it is thought good for all diseases of the Lungs,
or Breast; the dose is from six to sixteen grains in some convenient liquor.

Remarks.
Water alone is not able to dissolve such a gross body as Sulphur; wherefore an
Alkali salt is added to divide it into small imperceptible particles.

The acid liquor pierces the Alkali, and by separating its parts makes it let
go its hold, so that the Sulphur gathers it self together, and falls down to
the bottom in a white powder. This powder is washed to take away the impression
of the Salt of Tartar, and the acid that might remain among it, after which it
may be said to be a Flower of Sulphur Alcoholised.

The change of its yellow color into a white comes from this, that being more
rarefied it has a smoother surface then it had before, to reflect the light in
a direct line to our eyes.

This Operation may give us an Idea of what happens in Chylification, and in
Sanguification; for after the same manner as the Sulphur does become white,
when it has been reduced into a Magistery, or fine powder, so the aliments
having been fermented, and their substance attenuated in our stomachs, the
Chyle receives a white color; and after the manner as the Sulphur when
entirely dissolved does turn of a red color, so the parts of Chyle having been
altogether exalted, and dissolved by repeated circulations, does become red and
turn into blood.

This blood turns into a Pus, and becomes white in Imposthumes, because the
acid which is found in them having as it were fixed and gathered together its
insensible parts, does make them recover again the color of Chyle.

You must take care not to let there be any Silver vessel where this Operation
is performed, because the vapor which proceeds from Sulphur will make it black.

Fifteen grains of this powder will do as much as double the quantity of Flower
of Sulphur, for diseases of the Breast, and it does not heat so much.

Balsom of Sulphur.
This Operation is a solution of the oily parts of common Sulphur in oil of
Turpentine.

Put into a small mattress an ounce and a half of Flower of Sulphur, and pour
upon it eight ounces of Oil of Turpentine; place your mattress in sand, and give
it a digesting fire two hours; afterward increase it a little for four hours,
and the Oil will take a red color; let the vessel cool, then separate the
clear Balsom from the Sulphur that could not dissolve. This Balsom is excellent
for Ulcers of the Lungs and Breast; the dose is from one drop to six in some
proper liquor.

This Balsom may be reduced to the consistence of an Unguent, by evaporating
some part of it, and it is thus used to cleanse wounds and ulcers.

To make the Aniseed Balsom of Sulphur, you must use the Oil drawn from Aniseed
instead of the Oil of Turpentine, and proceed as I have said; it is more
agreeable than the former, and has less acrimony.

Remarks.
There is no need of a great fire for this Operation, because Sulphur being a
fat body does easily incorporate with Oils, and commonly gives them a red
color. When you would have this Balsom taken in Potion, you must dissolve it
in a little yelk of an Egg, that it may mix in waters, or broths.

That which remains undissolved in the mattress is the acid or saline part of
Sulphur, and is found crystallized.

A Balsom of Sulphur may be likewise made with Oil of Linseed, instead of the
Oil of Turpentine, for wounds.

Spirit of Sulphur.
This Spirit is the acid part of Sulphur, turned into a liquor by fire.

Provide a great earthen pan, and set in the middle of it a little earthen pan
turned upside down, and then another such pan on this filled with melted
Sulphur; cover both these Pans with a great glass tunnel made on purpose, with
a neck as long as that of a mattress, and the bigness of a thumb; fire the
Sulphur, and do not stop the hole of the tunnel, but let the air come in to
increase its burning, for it would otherwise go out. When your Sulphur is
spent, put new in its place, and continue to do so until you find under the
lower pan as much Spirit as you need, keep it in a Viol.

It is put into Juleps to give them an agreeable acidity, to qualify the heat
of continued Fevers, and is a good diuretic. Some do prescribe it for
diseases of the Breast, but because acids are apt to give a Cough, it may
therefore do more hurt than good to that part.

Remarks.
A great many Machines have been invented to draw the Spirit of Sulphur; the
ordinary one is the glass bell, under which the Brimstone is burnt, and the
Spirits coagulating against its sides distill into an earthen pan, that is set
underneath, after the same manner as I have showed in the description of my
Machine.

You must leave an empty space between the brims of the Bell, and the Pan, that
the Fire may have air enough to keep it lighted; but besides that the Fire is
apt to go out every moment, use never so much precaution, a very poor quantity
of Spirit is drawn this way.

Authors do recommend this Operation to be done when the weather's wet, and to
moisten the Bell beforehand, but I have found by experience that these
circumstances signified nothing at all.

With the Machine that I have described I can draw a good handsome quantity of
Spirit, and I am not forced to fire the Sulphur several times; because the hole
at top gives vent to the air, and hinders the fires going out: Again the more
Phlegmatic part evaporates that way, but the acid Spirit not being able to
rise so high, condenses against the sides of the tunnel, and then falls down
under the little pan that is turned upside down, to raise the other higher,
that contains the Sulphur. You may use a Crucible instead of a pan to put the
Sulphur in.

The greenish Sulphur is better than the other for this Operation, because it
has more Vitriol in it, and consequently more Spirit; for this Spirit is
nothing but a Vitriolick Salt dissolved, that differs little from the Spirit of
Vitriol, besides in the Taste, which is not so Empyreumatical, as not having
undergone so violent a Fire.

The Vitriolick salt which is in the Sulphur does not rise, until the more
volatile parts are spent; for which reason the Spirit does not distill until
toward the end, and the drops begin then to appear in the middle of the Tunnel.

Forasmuch as Sulphur is good for diseases of the Lungs and Breast, many do
think that the Spirit which is drawn from it ought to have the same virtues,
but they do not consider that this Spirit being deprived of the fat, or most
sulphurous part of Sulphur, has also lost the virtue that accompanies it, and
that it must produce effects altogether different from those of Sulphur, after
the manner as the acid Spirits which are drawn from Sugar, Vitriol, and many
other matters, have very different virtues from those of the mixts themselves.
And the reason of it is very plain, for whereas the Sulphur by its ramous parts
can sweeten the acrimonious humors which fall upon the Lungs, and so help the
Cough, the Spirit of Sulphur which is an acid does prick the Fibers of the
Larynx, and cause a Coughing, as all other acids do.

Salt of Sulphur.
The Salt of Sulphur is a Sal Polychrestum impregnated with Spirit of Sulphur.

Put four ounces of Sal Polychrestum prepared as I have said, into an earthen
pan, or a glass vessel, and pour upon it two ounces of Spirit of Sulphur; set
your vessel in sand, and evaporate all the liquor over a gentle fire: there
will remain four ounces and six drachms of an acid salt, most agreeable to the
taste, keep it in a bottle well stopped.

It is a good medicine for to open all Obstructions, and to work by Urine, and
sometimes it works also by stool; the dose is from ten grains to two scruples
in broth. It is dissolved from half a dram to two drachms in a quart of water
for a drink in Fevers.

Remarks.
This Salt is improperly called Salt of Sulphur; for it is nothing but a Sal
Polychrestum impregnated with an acid Spirit.

Many great descriptions have been given of Salt of Sulphur, which being well
examined do all come to the same thing as this; it is called by many Authors a
Febrifugous salt.

The true Salt of Sulphur (truly so called) should be a little of the fixed
Vitriol which remains in the earth of Sulphur, after that the flowers have been
drawn from it, and should be separated from the earth by a Lixivium, as other
fixed salts are made; but such a Salt would not have the same qualities as this.

Some have written, that when Spirit of Sulphur is poured upon Sal Polychrestum
dissolved in water, there is made a great effervescency, as well as when the
same Spirit is thrown upon Saltpeter: but without doubt they little examined
the matter, for there is no ebullition made, neither with the Sal Polychrestum,
nor with Saltpeter, they being both of them acid salts.

The union of acid Spirits with acid Salts is very different from that between
acids and alkalis; for the acid Spirits not being able to open the insensible
parts of acid Salts, they do lose nothing of their strength, and their keenness
remains the same, but it is not so in respect of acids mixed with alkalis, for
such a penetration is made into the alkalis that the acid loses its strength in
them.

And for the reason that I have now given, the Salt of Sulphur is very acid,
and tartarum vitriolatum is hardly at all acid, although there is employed
proportionably as much more acid Spirit for the making tartarum vitriolatum,
than there is for the making Salt of Sulphur.

The Salt of Sulphur is good in Tertians, and continued Fevers, and on all
occasions where there is need of calming the too great motion of the humors,
because the acid serves to fix the volatile Salts, or Sulphurs, which are most
commonly the principal cause of these diseases.

CHAP. XXI. Of Succinum or Ambar.
THere is found in small currents near the Baltic Sea, in the Duchy of
Prussia a certain coagulated Bitumen, which, because it seems to be a juice of
the earth is called Succinum, and Carabe, because it will attract straws; it is
likewise called Electrum, Glessum, Ambra Citrina, vulgarly Yellow Ambar.

This Bitumen being soft and viscous, several little Animals, such as Flies,
and Ants, do stick to it, and are buried in it.

Ambar is of different colors, such as White, Yellow, and Black. The White is
most esteemed, though it be no better than the Yellow. The Black has the least
virtue of all.

Ambar serves to stop spitting of blood, the Bloudy-flux, the immoderate flux
of the Hemorrhoids, Terms, and Gonorrheas: the dose is from ten grains to half
a dram. It is likewise used to stop a little the violence of Catarrhs, by
receiving the fume of it at the Nose.

Some do think that Petroleum, or Oil of Peter, is a liquor drawn from Ambar,
by the means of Subterranean fires, which make a distillation of it, and that
Jet, and coals are the remainders of this distillation.

This opinion would have probability enough in it, if the places, from whence
this sort of drogues does come, were not so far asunder the one from the other;
for Petroleum is not commonly found but in Italy, in Sicily, and Provence. This
Oil distills through the clefts of rocks, and it is very likely to be the Oil of
some Bitumen, which the subterranean fires have raised.

Tincture of Ambar.
This Operation is a solution of some oily parts of Ambar, made in Spirit of
wine.

Reduce into an impalpable powder five or six ounces of yellow Ambar, and put
it into a bolthead, pour upon it Spirit of wine to the height of four fingers,
stop this bolthead with another, to make a double vessel, and having exactly
luted the junctures with a wet bladder, place it in digestion in hot sand, and
leave it there five or six days, or until the Spirit of wine is sufficiently
tinged with the Ambar color; decant this Tincture, and put more Spirit of wine
to the matter, you must digest it as before, then having separated the
impregnation, mix it with the other: Filtrate them, and distill from them in an
Alembick with a very little fire, about half the Spirit of wine, which may
serve you as before; keep the Tincture that you will find at the bottom of the
Alembick, in a Viol well stopped.

It is good for the Apoplexy, Palsy, Epilepsie, and for Hysterical women; the
dose is from ten drops to a dram in some proper liquor.

Remarks.
You must powder the Ambar finely, that the menstruum may open its body the
better; this Tincture is nothing but the Sulphurous or oily part of Ambar,
which Spirit of wine (a Sulphur) does become impregnated with: a liquor that
were not sulphurous would perhaps dissolve the Ambar, but that which is
dissolved by it would be the more impure; wherefore you must always use such a
dissolvent as is of the same nature with the substance that you would dissolve.

Half the Spirit of wine is drawn off, to make the Tincture the stronger.

Distillation of Ambar, and the Rectification of its Oil, and Spirit.
Fill with Ambar grossly beaten two thirds of an earthen Retort, or glass one
luted; place it in a Furnace, on two iron bars; fit to it a large Receiver, and
luting the junctures close, give under it a small Fire to warm the Retort, and
drive out the Phlegm. Afterward augment it by little and little, there will
come forth a Spirit, and an Oil; continue the Fire until there comes no more;
then let the vessels cool, and unlute them. Pour about a pint of warm water
into the Receiver, and stirring it soundly about, for to dissolve some volatile
Salt that often sticks to the sides of the Receiver, pour all the liquor into a
glass Alembeck; fit to it a Receiver, and luting well the junctures, make a
small Fire to heat the vessel, then augment it a little, the water and Spirit
will rise, and carry with them a little white Oil; continue the Fire, until
there rises no more, and the thick Oil remains at bottom of the Cucurbite
without boiling: separate the white Oil that swims above the Spirit and Phlegm,
and keep it in a Viol well stopped; it is given inwardly in Hysterical
Distempers, in the Palsy, Apoplexy, and Epilepsie; the dose is from one drop
to four in some appropriate liquor: it may be mixed with a little yelk of an
Egg, to dissolve it easily in water or broth.

The water and Spirit do remain mixed confusedly together, now to separate them
you must pour this mixture into an earthen or glass dish, and evaporate over a
very gentle Fire two thirds of it; that which remains is the Spirit of Ambar,
keep it in a Viol well stopped.

It is an excellent Aperitive, and is given in the Jaundise, stoppage of Urine,
Ulcers of the neck of the bladder, and in the Scurvy; the dose is from ten to
four and twenty drops in some convenient liquor.

The Black Oil which remains in the Cucurbite may be kept apart for outward
uses, to chafe the Nose and Wrists of women in Hysterical maladies.

If you would rectify it, you must mix it with so much sand as is necessary to
make it into a Paste, and put it into a Retort, and placing it in a Furnace in
a naked Fire distill all the Oil; the first that comes forth will be red, but
exceeding clear, keep it by it self; It may serve instead of the white.

The Oil of Jet may be drawn as the Oil of Ambar, but because Jet is more
terrestrious, it requires a stronger Fire.

Remarks.
The Oils of Ambar and Jet do work in Hysterical cases, chiefly by their ill
smell; for we see that whatsoever is ungrateful to the smell does commonly
allay symptoms in diseases of the matrix, and that good smells do increase them.

The reason of these effects is not very easy to find, seeing that all that
has been hitherto said for explication of them has only come to this, that the
matrix sympathizing with the brain does rise upwards to share in the good
smells of the brain, and sinks downwards when the nose is offended with that
which is unpleasant. Nay some have thought the matrix to be a little animal, by
reason of the many motions that have been observed in it. These kinds of
discourses are indeed very proper to leave people in the same doubts they were
in before, and I don't think any body has received any satisfaction from them.
Therefore let us try whether we can say any thing more to the purpose.

When a woman receives an agreeable smell, the tickling pleasure which this
smell produces in the brain by means of the olfactive nerve, does move the
Spirits and determinate them to run into the vessels in a greater abundance,
and with more agility than they did before. Then also is perceived, if she
minds it, a certain titillation of the parts, and all the senses do seem
willing to partake of this good smell. All this is common to men as well as
women.

But because the vessels which go from the brain to the matrix do swell with
this affluence of Spirits, they must of necessity be abbreviated in their
length, as a cord is found to swell and to shorten when it is wetted, or as the
Fibers of a glove do shrink when the humidity that is within them is rarefied
by the Fire.

These vessels being thus shortened, they must needs give shocks, and receive
like returns from the matrix. And then likewise it is perceived to rise and to
move upwards. But because this viscus does commonly contain a gross blood, and
humors very easy to ferment, which are actuated by these shocks, there do rise
from it gross vapors which oppress the diaphragm, and do cause that which is
called the suffocation of the matrix. These distempers do likewise very often
happen to women who have no ways been offended with sweet smells, but that
which causes the same symptoms does work after the same manner.

As for ill smells, they must produce a quite contrary effect, for by striking
offensively the nerve of the nose, the Spirits do retire back to their places,
and consequently the vessels, and the matrix do resume their ordinary
disposition.

But you will say perhaps that a grain of Musk or Civet is often applied to the
Navil, to settle the mother, and to lay the vapors.

This has been practiced indeed by some, but without any proof that ever it did
any good, or that it gave any ease. Civet is put into the middle of Galbanum
Plasters, or the Oxycroceum, which is applied to the Navil, but there is more
reason to attribute the effects which come from this remedy rather to the
Plasters than to the Civet. And besides, it cannot be said that this Civet, or
this Musk thus applied do yield any good smell.

Many men are likewise very subject to vapors, and among others those that are
of a Melancholic temper do seem to feel the same symptoms as women, upon any
sweet smells. This comes from obstructions in the vessels, which have
communication with the brain, for these humors which do cause the obstruction
being thereby moved may produce these effects.

That which is called Spirit of Ambar is only a volatile salt dissolved in a
little Phlegm.

Some Authors pretend, that putting this Spirit into a mattress with its
blind-head, they can sublime a volatile salt from it as from Animals, but I
could never find experience answer their pretenses; for after having followed
them several times in this Operation, I could never gain one jot of that salt,
which has given me occasion to examine this Spirit, and to enquire what kind
of salt it might contain.

I found this Salt was acid, and like unto that of Plants which is called
Essential, whereof I have spoken in the Principles. This Salt being less
volatile than that of Animals, cannot rise so high, besides that it is heavier
than the Phlegm which must rise first. Wherefore to separate it, you must
evaporate about a third part of the Spirit, over a very gentle fire, and then
put the remainder into a cool place, and leave it there ten or twelve days
without stirring it, you will find little Crystals which you may take and keep in
a Viol well stopped. This Salt has the same virtues as the Spirit: the dose is
from eight grains to sixteen, in Raddish, or Pellitory water; but it is better
to keep it in the Spirit, for besides that it is more easily preserved so,
there always flies away some part of it with the Phlegm in the evaporation, let
the fire be never so moderate. But now I shall give you a preparation of the
volatile salt of Ambar, that may be easily made, and may keep dry.

The Volatile Salt of Ambar.
Put two pounds of Ambar powdered into a large glass or earthen Cucurbite, let
it be filled but the fourth part, set this Cucurbite in sand, and after you
have fitted a head to it, and a small Receiver, lute well the junctures, and
light a little fire under it for about an hour; then when the Cucurbite is
grown hot, increase the fire by little and little to the third degree; and
there will distill first of all a phlegm and Spirit, then the volatile salt will
rise, and stick to the head in little Crystals; afterward there distills an Oil
first white and then red, but clear: when you see the vapors rise no longer,
you must put out the fire, and when the vessels are cold unlute them. Gather
the volatile salt with a Feather, and because it will be but impure as yet, by
reason of a little Oil that is mixed with it, you must put it into a Viol big
enough that the salt may fill only the fourth part of it, place the Viol in
sand, after you have stopped it only with paper, and by means of a little fire,
you will sublime the pure salt in fair Crystals to the top of the Viol. When you
perceive the Oil begin to rise, you must then take your Viol off the fire, and
letting it cool, break it, to separate the salt; keep it in a Viol well stopped,
you will have half an ounce.

This salt is a very good aperitive, and may be given from eight grains to
sixteen in some opening liquor, for the Jaundies, for Ischuries, Ulcers in the
Bladder, the Scurvy, Fits of the Mother, and upon all occasions where there is
any need of removing obstructions, and opening by way of Urine.

The Spirit and Oil have the same virtues as those I have spoken of. If you
would distill in a Retort the mass which remains in the Cucurbite, until there
comes away nothing more, you will have a Black Oil, which might serve women to
smell to in fits.

Remarks.
The Cucurbite must be sure to be large enough, for otherwise it will break
while the vapors are a rising.

You will have five ounces and a half of a clear Oil, and one ounce and a half
of Spirit, two ounces and a half of a black oil, are drawn from the mass by the
Retort, and that which remains weighs two ounces; it is a black rarefied matter
which burns like coals by reason of the fuliginosities that fall upon it.

A clear Oil may be drawn from Ambar in the first distillation by mixing the
Ambar with an equal weight of sea salt, and distilling it in a Retort the usual
way; there will remain likewise some volatile salt in the neck of the Retort,
which may be rectified by subliming it in a Viol as I have said.

CHAP. XXII. Of Ambar-Grease.
AMbar-Grease is a Bitumen found in many places on the Seashore, but
especially in the Indies; it grows hard in the Sunbeams. The best is that
which is very gray, and dry, and easily softens in the heat; when it is wet, it
appears blackish.

Men have thought it is found no where else but in the Oriental seas, though
some of it has been known to be sometimes met with upon the English Coast, and
in several other places of Europe; most of it is brought from the Coast of
Melinda, and especially at the mouth of the River that is called Rio di Sena.

Ambar-grease is an excellent Corroborative, it is given in some liquor, or in
Electuary to increase Seed: the dose is from one grain to four.

Essence of Ambar-Grease.
This operation is an extract of the more oily parts of Ambar-grease, Musk, and
Civet, in Spirit of wine.

Take two drachms of good Ambar-grease, so much Sugar Candy, half a dram of
Musk, and two grains of Civet; beat them small together, and put the mixture
into a Viol: pour upon it four ounces of Spirit of Wine well Alcoholized. Stop
the Viol close, and set it in Digestion in horse-dung four days; then taking it
out, separate that which is clear, while it is warm, for it will congeal when
cold. This Essence works more strongly than Ambar-grease in substance; the dose
is from six to twelve drops in some convenient liquor.

Remarks.
Ambar-grease alone has scarce any smell at all, but when its parts are put in
motion by Fermentation, Sulphurs do rise from it which tickle the sense of
smelling with a great deal of pleasure; the addition of Musk and Civet have a
good effect; as for the Sugar Candy, it serves only to separate the rest, that
they may be the more easily powdered and dissolved: for this Tincture is only a
dissolution of these sulphurous matters in Spirit of wine.

The terrestrious part which remains at bottom may be used in sweet Powders.

THE SECOND PART. Of Vegetables.
CHAP. I. Of Jalap.
JAlap is a grayish root brought out of America, cut into slices and dried; it
grows in the Province of Mechoacan, and in several other places; the best is
that which is most compact, and filled with Resinous veins. It purges watery
humors very well, and is therefore usually given in the Dropsy and Gout: the
dose is from ten grains to a dram in broth, or White Wind.

Rosine, or Magistery of Jalap.
This Operation is a solution of the oily or resinous part of Jalap, made in
Spirit of wine, and precipitated by common water.

Put a pound of good Jalap grossly powdered into a large mattress; pour upon it
Spirit of wine Alcoholized, until it be four fingers above the matter: stop the
mattress with another whose neck enters into it, and luting the junctures with a
wet bladder, digest it three days in a sand-heat, the Spirit of wine will
receive a red Tincture: decant it, and then pour more upon the Jalap; proceed
as before, and mixing your dissolutions filtrate them through brown paper. Put
that which you have filtred into a glass Cucurbite, and distill in a vaporous
bath two thirds of the Spirit of wine, which may serve you another time for the
same Operation. Pour that which remains at the bottom of the Cucurbite into a
large earthen Pan, filled with water, and it will turn into a milk, which you
must leave a day to settle, and then separate the water by Inclination, you will
find the Rosine at bottom like unto Turpentine. Wash it several times with
water, and dry it in the Sun, it will grow hard like common Rosine; powder it
fine, and it will become white. Keep it in a Viol, it purges Serosities. It is
given in Dropsies, and for all Obstructions: the dose is from four to twelve
grains, mixed in Electuary, or else in Pills.

The Rosines of Turbith, Scammony, and Benjamin, may be drawn after the same
manner.

Remarks.
The Spirit of wine, which is a Sulphur, is likewise a very convenient
Menstruum to extract Rosines, which are gross Sulphurs; you must use enough
Spirit to dissolve all the Rosine, and give it a sufficient time to open all
the body of the Jalap, after which a good part of the Spirit of wine is drawn
off, and may serve for the same use again, provided you distill it with a very
gentle fire, for if you let it be too strong, it will carry along with it good
part of the Rosine.

A great deal of water is poured upon it, to weaken the Spirit of wine, which
held the Rosine dissolved; and then it revives again, and its parts approaching
one another, there is made a kind of milk, which clears up, according as the
Rosine precipitates.

If you have used sixteen ounces of Jalap, you will draw an ounce and six
drachms of Rosine well washed and dried.

From six ounces of good Scammony, you draw five ounces of Rosine by the like
preparation.

Some do evaporate the Spirit of wine, and without using any Precipitation,
they find their Rosine in an Extract at the bottom of the vessel, but then it
becomes black like pitch.

All the Purgative virtue of the Jalap consists in the Rosine: an Alkali salt
may be drawn from the remainder but in a very small quantity.

You must observe to give the Rosine of Jalap always mixed with something else
that may separate its parts for if it be taken alone, it will be apt to adhere
to the inward membrane of the Intestines, and so cause Ulcers by its
acrimonious quality.

Moreover Apothecaries should observe to mix it in a little yolk of an Egg,
when they would dissolve it in a Potion, for it sticks to the mortar like
Turpentine, when it is humected by any aqueous liquor. It may be likewise
incorporated with some Electuary, and then it easily dissolves.

Twelve grains of this Rosine work the same effect, as a dram of Jalap in
substance.

It is not yet sufficiently known wherein the Purgative virtue of mixts does
consist, to give it a right explication. It is easily conceived that these
effects do follow the Fermentation that the Remedy has caused, but no body can
find what it is that makes this Remedy be Purgative rather than several others,
which seem to have as great a disposition as this to cause such Fermentation;
wherefore I shall not pretend to clear the knowledge of this Phenomenon. I
shall only endeavor to give some reason for a very considerable difficulty,
which is to know how Hydragogues do work in our bodies, and why they rather
purge water than other humors.

A general reason that may be given of it is that all Hydragogue Remedies have
more acrimony than other Purgatives, and consequently they are better able to
open the Lymphatick vessels.

But it may be further said that these Remedies do so cut and attenuate the
Viscosities which are found in bodies, that they make them be like water, and
there is no difficulty in conceiving this last reason, when it is considered,
that these Remedies which do purge water, are all of them Resinous or else
salts; for after the same manner as we see Sulphurs, or Liquified salts
dissolve Sulphurous bodies, so do Rosines, which are Sulphurs and salts,
dissolve Viscosities in the body, which are compounded of a great deal of
Sulphur.

But there is this difference between the effects of Salt and of Rosines, that
the Salt passing quick, and making but little impression, does dissolve only
that which is found in what is called the first Region of the body, wherefore
it purges but mildly; whereas the Rosine by reason of its viscous, hooked
parts, remains a longer time in the body, and leasurely causes a Fermentation
not only about the parts where it immediately works, but operates on the brain,
and other remote places, from whence it forces Phlegm to discharge it self into
the Belly, and this is that which causes Rosinous Hydragogues to purge more
than Salts.

CHAP. II. Of Rhubarb.
RHubarb is a Purgative root, brought from China. It takes its name from
Barbary where it has grown in abundance; it is likewise called Rheum. The best
sort is that which being broke appears of a Nutmeg color within.

Its virtues are so many and so great, that if they were sufficiently known,
and men could generally use it without that nauseousness which too commonly
attends it, mankind would have infinitely less need, than they have, of the Art
of Physic in most cases, and men might perhaps preserve themselves from most
diseases without any other help.

Extract of Rhubarb.
This Extract is a separation of the purer parts of Rhubarb, from the
terrestrious.

Bruise six or eight ounces of good Rhubarb, and steep it twelve hours warm in
a sufficient quantity of Succory water, so as the water may be four fingers
above the Rhubarb; let it just boil, and pass the liquor through a cloth;
infuse the remainder in so much more Succory water, as before, then strain the
Infusion, and express it strongly: mix your Impregnations, or Tinctures, and
let them settle; filtrate them, and evaporate the liquor in a glass vessel,
over a very gentle fire, until there remains a matter that has the consistence
of thick honey, this is called Extract of Rhubarb, keep it in a Pot.

The dose is from ten grains to two Scruples in Pills, or dissolved in Succory
water for diseases of the Liver and Spleen, it binds after the purgeing.

The Extracts of Vegetables are made after the same manner, except the
Resinous, whereof I have spoken. Likewise waters may be used for Menstruums,
that are appropriated to the virtue of the mixed, whose Extract you intend to
draw.

When you draw the Extract of Aromaticks, such as Roses, and Cinnamon, the
liquor may be distilled rather than evaporated, whereby you gain a fragrant
water.

Remarks.
Though the name of Extract ought to be very general in Physic, it is confined
only to one sort of Preparation that is reduced to the consistence of an
Electuary, it is nothing else but a Purification that is made to cleanse a mixed
from its more Terrestrious parts, that being more open and free it may work
with the greater strength. Now this operation is good for mixts that are not
Odoriferous, but not so for those that are; for by evaporation their best part
is lost which consists in a volatile. So that I would by no means advise to
make the Extract of Aromaticks. Nature is a very good Artist to perform this
Operation within our bodies, when the Principles are easy to separate, as in
these sorts of mixts.

There has been a great contest among Chemists heretofore, in which of the
Principles it is that the Purgative virtue of many medicines does consist. Some
have maintained it to be in the Salt, others in the Sulphur, and others again
in the Mercury. But when every party had very diligently separated each their
Principle, and came to try it, they found after all, that none of them was
Purgative; which has persuaded many of them to think that this Purgative
principle was of so subtle and penetrating a nature, that glass it self was
not able to preserve it from being lost.

For my part I cannot grant any such indiscernable Purgative, and I rather am
apt to believe that the Purgative virtue of a mixed consists in nothing else but
such a different mixture of Principles as is requisite to produce certain
Fermentations in our bodies. So that when once we separate the Sulphur,
Mercury, or Salt, the position of parts, or proportion of Principles being
changed, there remains no longer any Purgative effect, because the Principles
being separated can no more produce that Fermentation which they did while they
were mixed, and united together some kind of way that Art is ignorant how to
imitate.

Perhaps some who think themselves good Critics will say this Chapter
contradicts the former; for I there maintained that the Rosine of Jalap, which
is a Sulphur, does contain all the Purgative virtue of Jalap; but though I did
call the Rosine of Jalap a Sulphur, I did not mean it was a pure Sulphur, it is
a substance out of which all the five Principles may be still drawn; but by
reason it does contain great store of Sulphur, this name may be given to it as
it often is to others of the like nature.

And thus Salt may be said to be Purgative too; but it does not follow from
thence that the Salt alone must be thought to contain all the Purgative virtue
of mixed bodies; seeing many plants, such as Guaiacum, Box, Carduus, and
Wormwood, do contain as much, or more Salt, than Senna, and Rhubarb, and yet
nevertheless do not purge at all.

CHAP. III. Of the Wood Guaiacum.
GVaiacum called Lignum Sanctum is the Wood of a large Tree that grows in a
great many places in the West Indies. It is likewise cultivated here in Europe,
in Languedoc is good store, but that which is brought out of the hot Countries
is best esteemed; this Wood is very much in use in Sudorifick Decoctions; the
Bark is also used, and the Gum that runs from it: the best Guaiacum is that
which is most compact.

Distillation of Guaiacum.
This operation is a separation of the liquid parts of Guaiacum, from its
terrestrious matter.

Take the shavings of Guaiacum, fill a large Retort with them three quarters
full, place it in a Reverberatory Furnace, and join to it a great capacious
Receiver. Begin the distillation with a fire of the first degree, to warm the
Retort gently, and to distill the water, which is called Phlegm; continue it in
this condition, until there come no more drops, which is a sign that all the
Phlegm is distilled. Throw away that which you find in the Receiver, and
fitting it again to the neck of the Retort, lute well the junctures. You must
afterward increase the fire by degrees, and the Spirits, and Oil will come
forth in white clouds; continue the fire until there comes no more, let the
vessels cool, and unlute them, pour that which is in the Receiver into a Tunnel
lined with brown paper, set upon a bottle, or some other vessel, the Spirit
will pass through, and leave the black, thick, and very fetid Oil, in the
Tunnel; pour it into a viol, and keep it for use; it is an excellent Remedy for
rottenness of bones, for the Toothache, and to cleanse old Ulcers. It may be
rectified as I said of the Oil of Ambar, and may be used inwardly in the
Epilepsie, Palsy, and to drive forth the afterbirth: the dose is from two
drops to six.

The Spirit of Guaiacum may be rectified by distilling it by an Alembeck, for
to separate a little impurity that might have passed with it; it works by
perspiration, and by Urine: the dose is from half a dram to a dram and a
half. It is likewise used mixed with the water of honey, to cleanse inveterate
Ulcers.

You Will find in the Retort the coals of Guaiacum, which you may turn into ashes
by putting fire to them, which they will sooner take than other coals: Calcine
these ashes some hours in a Potters furnace, then make a Lixivium of them with
water, which being filtred, evaporate it in a glass or earthen vessel in sand;
there will remain the Salt of Guaiacum, which you may make white by Calcining
it in a Crucible in a strong fire. This Salt is Aperitive, and Sudorifick; it
may serve as all other Alkalis to draw the Tincture of Vegetables: the dose is
from ten grains to half a dram in some convenient liquor.

The earth, called Caput Mortuum, is good for nothing.

After this manner the five substances of all Vegetables may be drawn; but
because the fire does give them a loathsome Empyreumatical smell, other ways
have been invented to draw the Oil of Aromaticks: I shall describe them in the
sequel.

Remarks.
During the distillation of Spirits, you must not make the fire too strong, for
they coming forth with a great deal of violence, would else be apt to break
either the Retort or the Receiver.

Though the Guaiacum that is used be a very dry body, yet abundance of liquor
is drawn from it; for if you put into the Retort four pounds of this Wood, at
sixteen ounces to the pound, you will draw nine and thirty ounces of Spirit and
Phlegm, and five ounces and a half of Oil; there will remain in the Retort
nineteen ounces of coals, from which you may draw half an ounce or six drachms
of an Alkali salt.

The Oil of Guaiacum is acrimonious by reason of the Salts it has carried along
with it; and it is the gravity of these salts that does precipitate it to the
bottom of the water. The Oil of Box, and most others that are drawn this same
way, do the like.

These sorts of Oil are good for the Toothache, because they stop the nerve
with their ramous parts, hindering thereby the air from entering. Moreover by
means of the acrimonious salts which they contain they do dissipate a phlegm
which uses to get within the gum, and causes the pain, but yet by reason of
their fetid smell men have much ado to take them into their mouth.

That which is called Spirit of Guaiacum is nothing but a dissolution of the
Essential salt of the Plant in a little phlegm.

The fixed salt is an Alkali that works much like others of that kind,
nevertheless it is very probable that the fixed salts of Vegetables, let them be
never so much Calcined, do always retain some particular virtue of the Plant
they were drawn from.

If one would take the pains to Calcine the earth that remains, he would obtain
a salt, though but very little of it.

CHAP. IV. Of Paper.
THE Papyrus of the Ancients, which gave the name to our PAPER, was a tree
growing in Egypt near the river Nilus. The bark of this tree was prepared, and
men did write upon it, but our Paper is made of old rags or clouts, which are
beaten exceeding fine in Paper-mills, and then put into the press in order to
make Paper with them.

This Paper has some use in Physic; pieces of it are lighted in a room, and
Hysterical women are made to receive the fume of it; they are commonly relieved
with this disagreeable smell, as by many others of the like nature.

Oil and Spirit of Paper.
Fold white paper into little pellets and fill a great earthen Retort, or glass
one luted, with them, place your Retort in a Reverberatory furnace. Fit to it a
large capacious Receiver, lute well the junctures, give it a very little fire
for two hours only to heat the Retort; increase it with two or three coals, and
continue it so for two or three hours, then quicken it to the third degree. The
Receiver will be filled with white clouds, put out the fire, when no more will
come forth, the operation will be ended in seven or eight hours. When the
vessels are cold, unlute them, pour what you find in the Receiver into a Tunnel
lined with a coffin of brown paper, the Spirit will pass through the filter,
and a thick, black, and ill-scented oil will remain within it, keep the oil for
use in a Viol.

It is a very good remedy in deafness, some drops of it are put into the ear
with a little cotton, from time to time, it quiets the noise of the ear; it is
also good for Tettars and for the Itch, the parts being anointed a little with
it; it cures the toothache, much like the Oil of Guaiacum; it is good likewise
to repress hysterical vapors, women so affected are to smell to it.

You must rectify the Spirit, by distilling it in sand. It is an Aperitive,
and may be given where there is occasion for a diuretic, the dose is from six
drops to twenty in some proper liquor.

Remarks.
The Vitriol and other drogues which are in Ink might alter the virtue of the
Oil and Spirit of paper; wherefore it is better to use clean, than written
paper. The receiver must be large, in order to give room to the vapors to
circulate in, for they come forth with that force that they would break the
vessel if they had not room enough to play in; you must manage the fire with
prudence, for if you make it too great the first hours, the Spirits will break
the Retort.

If you have used in this operation four and twenty ounces of paper, you will
draw two ounces and two drachms of Oil, and thirteen ounces and a half of
Spirit, there will remain in the Retort seven ounces and a half of coals.

The Oil does not pass with the Spirit, through the coffin in the tunnel,
because it is too thick, its black color, and its ill smell, do come from the
fire.

It is good for deafness, because that disease is often caused by a thick or
phlegmatic humor which dries and hardens in the ear so as to stop the auditory
nerve. Now this Oil dissolves and rarefies this humor, and disposes it the
better to come out. And this is the reason that it dissipates the noises in the
ears, for they were caused by winds which this humor had shut in.

The Spirit is very acid in comparison with other Spirits of Vegetables,
because it comes from an essential salt which has been put into a very
considerable motion. Again, it is probable that by the many different forms
which the flax, and canvas have received, in order to make cloth, and
afterward Paper, and by the fermentations which they may have received, their
fixed salt may be volatilized, and become of the nature of that which is called
Essential. Now in the distillation all this salt has been dissolved into a
liquor by the phlegm, and turned into that which is called Spirit; that which
confirms me in this sentiment is that there can be hardly any fixed salt at all
drawn from the coal which remains in the Retort, wherefore the coal is thrown
away as useless, it takes fire exceeding easily, by reason of a light soot that
is fallen upon it, and which gave it the black color.

CHAP. V. Of Cinnamon.
CInnamon is the Bark of a Tree as large as an Olive Tree, it grows in the
East Indies, and is much like that which the Cassia Lignea is taken from, but
it is not the very same, as some will needs think; the best Cinnamon is that
which has the strongest smell, is quick upon the taste, and of a reddish color.

The Cassia Lignea differs from Cinnamon, in that it is not so biting to the
taste, smells not so strong, and becomes mucilaginous in the mouth when it is
chewed, which Cinnamon does not do.

Both Cinnamon, and Cassia Lignea are good to fortify the stomach, to help
perspiration of gross humors, to strengthen and rejoice the heart, and in
hysterical cases.

Oil, or Essence of Cinnamon, and its Ethereal water.
Bruise four pounds of good Cinnamon, and infuse it in six quarts of hot water,
leave it in digestion in an earthen vessel well stopped two days: pour the
Infusion into a large Copper Limbeck, and fitting a Receiver to it, and luting
close the junctures with a wet bladder, distill with a pretty good fire three or
four pints of the liquor, then unlute the Limbeck, and pour into it by
Inclination the distilled water, you will find at bottom a little oil which you
must pour into a Viol, and stop it close. Distill the liquor as before, then
returning the water into the Limbeck, take the Oil you find at bottom of the
Receiver, and mix it with the first: Repeat this Cohobation until there rises
no more Oil; then take away the fire, and distill the water that remains in the
Receiver, the same way I shall show hereafter to rectify Spirit of wine, you will
have an excellent spirituous Cinnamon water.

The Oil of Cinnamon is an admirable Corroborative; it strengthens the stomach,
and assists nature in her evacuations. It is given to make women have an easy
delivery, and to bring their Terms; it likewise increases Seed; a drop of it is
commonly mixed in a little Sugar Candy to make the Eleo-saccharum, which is
easily dissolved in Cordial, or Hysterical waters.

The spirituous water of Cinnamon has the same virtues, but two or three
drachms are requisite for a dose.

After this manner almost all the Oils of Odoriferous Vegetables may be drawn,
such as those of Box, Roses, Rosemary, Lavender, Juniper, Cloves, and
Anis-seed, which do either swim above the water, or fall to the bottom,
according as they are more or less loaded with Salts.

Remarks.
You must make the fire strong enough, for if there be not a sufficient heat,
the Oil will not rise.

The Cohobation serves to open the Body the more, that the Oil may complete its
separation.

Cinnamon yields less Oil than other woods, or Barks, and it is very difficult
to draw six drachms of it out of four pounds, let it be never so good.

The Spirituous water of Cinnamon is nothing but a rarefied Oil, whose parts
are separated in the water by Fermentation, so as they become imperceptible:
they do make what is called a volatile Spirit, which easily mixes with all
sorts of liquors, as does the Eleo-saccharum; for the Eleo-saccharum is
properly an Oil, whose parts being separated in the Sugar, do easily mix in
waters.

Tincture of Cinnamon.
This operation is an exaltation of the more oily parts of Cinnamon in Spirit
of wine.

Take what quantity of bruised Cinnamon you please, put it into a Mattress, and
pour upon it Spirit of wine one finger above it; stop your mattress close, and
set it in Digestion in horse-dung four or five days, the Spirit of wine will be
impregnated with the Tincture of Cinnamon, and become red; separate it from the
Cinnamon, and after it is filtrated, keep this Tincture in a viol well stopped;
it is an admirable Cardiack, it fortifies the stomach, and rejoices all the
vital parts: it may be used like Cinnamon water, in a little smaller dose.

After this manner the Tincture of all Odoriferous Vegetables may be drawn.

CHAP. VI. Of the Bark of Peru.
THE Peruvian Bark, called Quinquina, or Kina Kina by the French, is a Bark
that has been brought into these parts, some years since, from Peru; it retains
the name of the Tree from which it is taken, the Spaniards do call it Palo de
Calenturas, or the wood against Fevers. There are two kinds of this Tree, the
one is cultivated, and the other grows wild, the cultivated is much better than
the other; you must choose it of a compact substance, bitter to the taste, and
of a reddish color.

It is the most certain remedy that ever yet was known, to hinder the fits of
Agues. The manner of using it for a great while past has been to give the
patient the powder from half a dram to two drachms, with a little white wind,
at the coming of the fit. But this method has been quite changed in our days,
for at present we do infuse an ounce of the powder in two quarts of wine, eight
and forty hours, in a Balneum; the infusion is then strained, and the patient
is made to drink every day three or four little glasses of it, at some distance
from the Paroxysm. The use of this remedy is continued a fortnight at least.

Some do frequently add to the infusion of this Bark, the lesser Centaury,
Wormwood, Chervil, Juniper Berries, the bark of the Alder-tree, Sassafras, Salt
of Tartar, and diverse other ingredients, thought to be Febrifuges. But the
basis of all is the Bark of Peru, the rest of the ingredients do no great good.
Some do likewise mix with it a little Opium, but that ought not to be done
without a great deal of precaution.

You must observe to purge your patient well before you give him the Bark,
because this remedy shuts up the humors for some time, and when they come to
ferment anew, they do sometimes cause more dangerous maladies than he had
before, such as Asthma's, dropsies, rheumatisms, dysenteries, suppression of
the menses in women, and many others which have too too often succeeded Cures
by this Bark. For which reason many diseased persons have again wished for
their Ague that were cured by this remedy.

The Bark is likewise very ill for those who have any Abscess in their body,
for it fixes and hardens the humor for some time, which afterward ferments and
causes a gangrene in the part. You must forbear the use of Milk, and aliments
of that nature, when you take this remedy, by reason of their cheesie part,
which would lie heavy upon the stomach, and be apt to corrupt in the vessels.

It is probable that the Bark does check the humor of the Fever, much after
the manner as an Alkali does stop the motion of an acid salt, that is to say,
it unites with it, and makes together a kind of Coagulum; this humor does
commonly remain quiet a fortnight, and the person cured does find himself a
little swelled and heavy, especially if he were not purged, before he took it.
Afterward the Ague returns because the feverish humor having been agitated by
the Spirits, or else being joined with other humors of the same nature, which
have been preparing in the body during the fornights respite, it gets quit from
the Bark, and ferments as it did before.

But sometimes, and that especially when the body of one in an Ague has been
well cleansed, if you should persist in continuing the use of the Bark, you
will so fix the humor that you will dispose it to precipitate and be evacuated,
either by stool, or urine, or by insensible perspiration, and the Ague returns
no more, for the Spirits in our body do by their motion push outward, as much
as they are able, whatsoever molests the economy of the parts.

Tincture of the Peruvian Bark.
This Operation is an extraction of the more oily, and separable parts of the
Bark by Spirit of wine.

Put into a Bolt-head four ounces of good Peruvian Bark grossly powdered, pour
upon it Spirit of wine four fingers height above the matter, fit to it another
mattress in order to make a double vessel, lute well the junctures, and place
your vessel to digest in horse-dung, or in a vaporous Bath, four days: stir it
from time to time, the Spirit of wine will load it self with a red color,
unlute the vessels, filtrate the Tincture through brown paper, and keep it in a
viol well stopped.

It is a Febrifuge to be given in Agues, three or four times a day, at a
distance from the fit, and to be continued for a fortnight; the dose is from
ten drops to a dram in some proper liquor, such as Centaury water, or
Juniper, or Wormwood water, or wine.

If you put new Spirit of wine to the matter which remains in the mattress, and
set it in digestion as before, you will draw more Tincture, but it will not be
so strong as the other, wherefore you must give it in a little larger dose.

Remarks.
This Tincture works like the Infusion I now spoke of; it is a more convenient
preparation than the other in this, that it can keep as long as you will,
whereas the other does sour in a little time. Again those who do not love wine
will like it better; but I should prefer the Infusion before the Tincture,
because wine is a more proper menstruum wherewith to draw the saline and
sulphurous substance of a mixed, then Spirit of wine.

You may steep a few Coriander seeds, or a little Cinnamon in the wine or
water, and after it is strained off dissolve some sugar in it, and in this you
may mix the Tincture of the Bark, and so make a kind of Febrifugous Rossoli,
which Infants may be easily made to take of.

Extract of Peruvian Bark.
This Operation is a separation of the more substantial parts of the Bark.

Put to infuse warm four and twenty hours eight ounces of Peruvian Bark in a
sufficient quantity of distilled water of Nuts; afterward boil the Infusion
gently and strain it, make a strong expression of the residence, put it to
infuse in new water of Nuts, boil and strain it as before, mix together what
you have strained, and let them settle; decant the clear liquor, and evaporate
it in a glass or earthen vessel, set in a sand-heat, unto the consistence of
thick honey.

It is a Febrifuge that has the same virtues as the former, the dose is from
twelve grains to half a dram, in Pills, or dissolved in wine.

Remarks.
The Wine and Spirit of wine are very proper to draw forth the Tincture of the
Bark, but they are by no means good to make the Extract with, because in the
evaporation the Spirit carries away with it the more subtle parts of the mixed.
The water of Nuts is much more convenient, for besides that it loses less of
the volatile substance, it is a little febrifugous itself. Instead of this
water you might use those of Juniper Berries, the lesser Centaury, or
Wormwood-water.

The Extract is convenient for those who cannot endure the taste of remedies,
for it may be given in Pills wrapped up in a wafer, without partaking of the
taste. But I should prefer the Infusion, or the Bark in substance, before this
preparation, because it is impossible to avoid the evaporation of the more
subtle parts in the ebullition of it, use what precaution you will to preserve
them.

You may draw the fixed salt from the residence that remains, after you have
drawn the Extract, or the Tincture. You must dry it, and burn and calcine the
ashes in a crucible, then steep them in hot water ten or twelve hours, boil
them an hour, and then filtrate this lixivium, and evaporate the water in an
earthen pan or glass vessel in sand, there will remain a salt at bottom, which
you must keep in a bottle well stopped. This salt is an alkali, as are all other
fixed salts drawn from plants, it is aperitive, it may be given for a quartan
Ague; the dose is from ten grains to a scruple in some proper liquor.

You must not think that this salt retains all the virtues of the Bark, they
are rather all destroyed in the calcination.

Nor may we think to separate the Febrifugous virtue of this Bark, by
distilling it dry in a Retort; for on the contrary, this would destroy it, by
breaking the natural harmony and union of its parts, and you would get only a
stinking Spirit, and a burnt oil, which would be of no great use.

CHAP. VII. Of Cloves.
CLoves are the fruit of a Tree as big as the Laurel Tree, its Bark is very
much like Cinnamon, but tastes like the fruit Cloves; it grows in many places in
the Indies; it is an admirable stomachick, held in the mouth it preserves from
the contagion of ill air.

Oil of Cloves per Descensum.
Take several large drinking glasses, cover them with a Linen Cloth, and tie
it round each of them, leaving a cavity in each Cloth to put the powdered
Cloves into; set a small earthen Cup upon each glass of these Cloves, let it
stop so fitly that it may suffer no air to enter between its brim and that of
the glass: fill these Cups with hot ashes, to warm the Cloves, and distill down
to the bottom of the glass first a little phlegm and Spirit, and after that a
clear and white oil; continue the fire until there falls no more, separate the
oil in a Tunnel lined with a cornet of brown paper, and keep it in a Viol well
stopped.

Some drops of it are with Cotton put into aching Teeth; it is likewise good in
Malignant Fevers, and the Plague: the dose is two or three drops in
Balm-water, or some appropriate liquor. You must mix it with a little
Sugar Candy, or a little yelk of an egg, before you drop it into water;
otherwise it will not dissolve in the water.

Remarks.
I have given you this Preparation to serve upon an emergence, when you want in
haste the Oil of Cloves, you must only use hot ashes to warm the Cloves, if you
desire to have a white Oil, for if you give a greater heat, the Oil turns red,
and loses a good part of it. You must also take care to lift up the Cup from
time to time, to stir about the powder of Cloves. The Oil of Cloves may be
likewise drawn, if you please, like that of Cinnamon.

If you use a pound of Cloves, to distill per descensum, according to the
description I have given, you will draw an ounce and two drachms of white Oil, and
an ounce of Spirit; there will remain thirteen ounces and two drachms of
matter, from whence might still be drawn a little red Oil.

It is likely that the Oil of Cloves works in easing the toothache much after
the same manner as I said the Oil of Guaiacum did. But this Oil having an
agreeable smell with it, there is no difficulty in admitting the application of
this, as there was in the other.

Some do dissolve Opium in Oil of Cloves, and do use this dissolution for the
toothache; they do put one drop of it into the aching tooth, and this allaies
the pain in a very little time, by reason of the Opium, but there is one thing
to be apprehended from this use of Opiates, and that is deafness, some have
thereby become deaf, though indeed that rarely happens.

You may rectify the Spirit of Cloves by distilling it in sand. And when you
have distilled two thirds of it, you must keep it in a Viol well stopped, and
fling away the phlegm which remains at bottom of the Cucurbite. The Spirit of
Cloves is a good stomachick, it is good to help concoction, to comfort the
heart, to perspire ill humors, and to provoke Seed; the dose is from six drops
to twenty in some convenient liquor.

CHAP. VIII. Of Nutmegs.
NVtmeg is the fruit of a Tree as big as a Pear Tree, which grows in the Isle
Banda in the West Indies. It is called Nucista, Nux Moschata, Myristica,
Vnguentaria, and Aromatites. While it is green, it is clothed with two Barks,
but when it comes to maturity, the uppermost chaps, and lets the second appear,
which is tender, and very fragrant. This last Bark is called Mace, and
improperly the Flower of Nutmegs.

The best Nutmeg is that which is most weighty; it is mixed in Carminative, and
Hysterical Remedies.

Sometimes a sort of Nutmegs, called Male-Nutmeg, is found at the Druggist,
which differs from the common sort, in that it is longer and weaker.

Oil of Nutmeg.
Take sixteen ounces of good Nutmegs, beat them in a Mortar, until they are
almost in a Paste, and put them upon a boulter; cover them with a piece of
strong Cloth, and an earthen pan over that; put your cloth over a kettle half
filled with water, and set the kettle upon the fire, that the vapor of the
water may gently warm the Nutmegs; when you shall find upon touching the pan,
that it is so hot you cannot endure your hand upon it, you must take off the
boulter, and putting the matter into a linen cloth, take its four corners, and
tie them quickly together; put them into a press between a couple of warm
plates, set the pan underneath, and there will come forth an Oil which congeals
as it grows cold: express the matter as strongly as you are able, to draw out
all the Oil; then keep it in a pot well stopped; this Oil is very stomachick,
being applied outwardly, or else given inwardly. The dose is from four grains
to ten in broth, or some more convenient liquor. It is commonly mixed with Oil
of Mastich, to chafe the Region of the stomach. And this way the green Oils of
Anis-seed, Fennil, Dill, and Mace, may be drawn.

Remarks.
The Nutmegs must be well beaten, or else they will yield little Oil; this way
of warming them is called the Vaporous Bath.

The ordinary method is to heat the Nutmegs in a kettle, and then express them
strongly, but because the warming them that way carries off a great deal of its
volatile parts, the Oil never proves so good, as when made with the
circumstances I have mentioned; for thus the matter heats insensibly by the
vapor of the water, and alters not its virtue in the least; and if any water
does mix with the Nutmegs, it is easily separated from the Oil. They who desire
to have it very fragrant, may set it over a vessel of wine instead of water.

If you draw the Oil from sixteen ounces of Anis-seed, the way I have
described, you may obtain from six drachms to nine drachms and a half of it,
according to the goodness of the Anis-seed you use, this Oil will be of a green
color.

The Oils of Almonds, Wall-nuts, Gold seeds, Hazle nuts, Poppy, and Behen, must
be only beaten, and so put into the press, without heating because they do
yield their Oils very easily, and because these Oils are often taken inwardly,
it is better to draw them without the help of fire, to avoid the Empyreumatical
impression it would otherwise take.

CHAP. IX. Distillation of an Odoriferous Plant, such as Balm, its Extract, and
fixed Salt.
TAke a good quantity of Balm newly gathered, when it is in its vigor: beat it
well in a Mortar, and put it into a large earthen pot, make a strong decoction
of other Balm, and pour of it into the pot enough to swet it sufficiently;
cover the pot, and leave it two days indigestion; then put the Matter into a
large Copper Vesica, and cover it with its Refrigeratory, or Head, Tin'd on the
inside: set it in a Furnace, and fitting to it a Receiver lute the junctures
with a wet bladder; make a fire of the second degree under it, and distill about
half the water you poured upon the Balm, then let the Vessels cool, and unlute
them: You Will find in the Receiver a very good Balm-water, put it into a bottle,
and expose it to the Sun five or six days open, then stop it, and keep it for
use. It is used in Hysterical Maladies, in the Palsy, Apoplexy, and Malignant
Fevers, it is given from two to six ounces.

Express through a linen cloth strongly that which remains in the body, and
let the Expression settle; filter it, and evaporate the water with a gentle
heat in an Earthen vessel, until there remains an Extract in the consistence of
thick honey. It Is a good remedy for such diseases as proceed from corrupt
Humors, it works by perspiration, or by Urine: the dose is from a Scrupule to a
Dram, dissolved in its proper water.

Dry the Residence that remains after expression, and burn it with good store
of other Balm likewise dried, you may obtain an Alkali salt from the ashes by a
Lixivium, the same way I spoke of concerning the salt of Guaiacum.

This Salt is Aperitive, and Sudorifick, the dose is from ten grains to a
Scrupule in Balm-water.

The Water, Extract, and Salt of all Odoriferous Plants, such as Sage,
Marjoram, Time, Mint, Hyssop, etc. may be drawn after the same manner.

Remarks.
Perhaps some will think it strange that I add water for the distillation of
Balm, but those who use to work on this sort of Herbs do know well enough, that
being dry substances of themselves, there is no good distilling them without
first wetting them; and besides, the water that is added does only serve to
imbibe the volatile parts, as the Fermentation operates; and when the matter is
heated, the more spirituous part as being the lighter rises first, and savours
much less of the Empyreume, than if the herb were distilled without first
wetting it.

You must observe in these distillations to give a fire from the second to the
third degree, because if it were made too little, none of the Essential or
volatile Salt of the Plant would rise; and if it were too strong, the water
would taste of the Empyreume: wherefore to make a good distillation, you must
let one drop follow another slowly.

The waters so soon as they are distilled, have commonly no great smell, but
when they have lain some time in the Sun, their spirituous parts that were
condensed in the Phlegm, do display themselves, and exert their activity; for
which reason it is that the water becomes fragrant which was not so before.

The Extract does contain almost all the Essential Salt of the Plant, wherefore
it is of greater virtue than the water; you must take care to Evaporate the
liquor with a mild heat, for fear too much should carry off this salt, which is
but too volatile of its own nature; for it is in the salt that the principal
virtue of the Plant does consist.

CHAP. X. Distillation of a Plant that is not Odoriferous, such as Carduus
Benedictus, and its Essential Salt.
TAke a good quantity of Carduus, when it is in its prime; pound it in a
Mortar, and fill with it two thirds of a Limbeck; draw by expression a
sufficient quantity of the Juice of other Carduus, and pour it into the
Limbeck, that the herbs swimming in the Juice may incur no danger of sticking
to the bottom during the distillation: distill with a fire of the second degree
about half as much water as you used juice, this water is Sudorifick. It is
used to drive out the Smallpox, and in the Plague.

Express through a cloth that which remains in the Limbeck, let the juice
settle, and after it is filtred, Evaporate with a small fire about two thirds
of the liquor, in an earthen or glass vessel: set this vessel in a cool place,
and leave it there eight or ten days, there will shoot out Crystals round about
the vessel, separate them, and keep them in a Viol well stopped. These Crystals
are called the Essential salt; it is Sudorifick, the dose is from six to
sixteen grains in its proper distilled water.

The Extract of Carduus may be likewise made the same way that I described for
Balm.

Remarks.
Succory, Fumitory, Sorrel, Scabious, Cresses, and all other Plants that are
not Odoriferous, which yield good store of Juice, must be distilled like the
Carduus Benedictus, and this method may serve to draw the Essential Salt out of
any plant whatsoever.

The hot Plants have much more of this Salt than others; Lettice contains less
than Succory, Succory less than Sorrel, and so of the rest.

Seeing it is in the Salt that the virtue of the plant consists, I would advise
rather to use the decoction of Plants than their distilled water, when the
Plants are in season, and when they are out, then to have recourse to distilled
waters, and mix with them a little of their Essential Salt, or Extract.

The fixed Alkali Salt may be drawn from the remainder of the Plant, in like
manner as I have showed to draw that of Guaiacum.

CHAP. XI. Of Sugar.
SVgar is the essential salt of a reed or cane that grows in many places, and
especially in the Western Islands. The pulp in the trunk of this plant is taken
and washed, and then steeped in hot water, this water is strained, and
evaporated, and the Sugar remains at bottom; heretofore it was called Mel
arundinaceum, or the Cane-honey, but since it has been called Zucharum, or
Saccharum.

The first elaboration that is given to Sugar, is to purify it, by dissolving
it in water, filtrating and evaporating the liquor, after which it is made up
into Loaves, or else it is sent in Casks or Chests, and is called Cassonnade,
or Castonnade. There are of it the red, the brown, and the white Sugar,
according as it has been more or less purified, it differs in color. The name
Castonnade may have been derived from the Casks in which it is brought, called
Cast by the Germans.

When the Sugar has been refined no more then abovesaid, it is a little fat;
now to refine it farther it is dissolved in Limewater, it is boiled, and the
scum taken off; when it is sufficiently boiled, it is cast into molds of a
Pyramidal form, which have a hole at bottom to let the more glutionous part run
through, and separate.

It is still farther refined by boiling it with the whites of eggs in water,
for the glutinous quality of the whites of eggs does help to receive and take
away the impurities which might remain in the Sugar, and the boiling of it
serving to drive them all to the sides of the vessel in a scum, the liquor is
passed through a cloth, and then evaporated to a due consistence.

Sugar Candy is only a Sugar crystallized; the way to make it, is to boil
refined Sugar in water to the consistence of a thick Syrop, it is then poured
into pots, wherein little sticks have been laid in order; it is left in a still
place some days without stirring, and you have the Sugar Candy sticking to
those sticks. Red Sugar Candy is made after the same manner.

Sugar is good for infirmities of the breast and lungs, because it does
attenuate and cut the phlegm which sometimes oppresses the fibers of these
parts, but you must use it as little as may be in hysterical cases, by reason
that it raises vapors. Red-Sugar is sometimes mixed with detersive Clysters.

Its sweetness does proceed from an essential acid salt mixed with some oily
parts of which it consists, as I have already explicated in the Remarks upon
Oil of Antimony prepared with Sugar.

The Cassonnade, or Cask-sugar makes a sweeter impression upon the tongue than
our finer Sugar, because it contains more viscous or fat parts, which do remain
the longer upon the nerve of the tongue, and this makes us sometimes prefer the
first, as to use, before the other. And for the same reason the finer a Sugar
is, the quicker it passes off the taste. Sugar Candy is better for Rheums than
common Sugar, because being harder it requires a longer time to melt in the
mouth, and besides it keeps the breast moister than the common Sugar.

Spirit of Sugar.
This Spirit is a mixture of the acid part of Sugar with the Flowers of Sal
Armoniack.

Powder and mix eight ounces of white Sugar Candy with four ounces of Sal
Armoniack, put this mixture into a glass, or earthen body, whose third only is
thereby filled, fit a head to the body, and place it in a sand-furnace; join a
receiver to it, and lute well the junctures with a wet bladder, give it a small
fire for an hour only to heat the vessel, then increase it to the second
degree, there will distill a liquor drop by drop, and toward the end there will
rise white vapors into the head; increase your fire still more, until nothing
more comes forth; let the vessels cool and unlute them, you will find in the
receiver seven ounces of a brown liquor, that has but an ill smell, and a
little black oil stuck to the sides, pour it all together into a glass-body,
and having fitted to it a head and receiver, and luted the joints, distill in
sand six ounces of a very acid spirit, that is clear and agreeable to the
taste, and without any smell of Empyreum.

It is a good aperitive against the gravel, and the dropsy, it is good to stop
diarrhea's, and dysenteries with, it may be dropped into the Tincture of Roses,
instead of other acid Spirits. Some do think it good for diseases of the
breast; the dose is eight or ten drops, or to an agreeable acidity in some
proper liquor.

That which remains in the body after the rectification is a foetid oil, which
may be outwardly used to cleanse old ulcers.

Remarks.
The Spirit of common Sugar is made without addition of any thing in the
preparation; it is an acid Spirit, but is not so strong, nor has so great
virtues, as that which I have now described. It is thought good for diseases of
the breast, by reason of the Sugar, which indeed is good for them, but so
strong an acid is apt to give a Cough.

The body must be big enough, in order to give room to the vapors to circulate
in, as they do rise.

A very little Oil of Sugar can be drawn in this operation; for that which
remains after the rectification is not a pure oil, but a remainder of the
Spirit tinged with some drops of oil, insomuch that it would be very hard to
get one dram of pure Oil.

CHAP. XII. Of Wine.
WIne is nothing else but the Must, or juice of ripe Grapes, whose Spirituous
parts are set at liberty in the Fermentation. This Wine is more or less gross,
according as it abounds more or less with Tartar.

In the making of White Wind, the Must of white Grapes is left to Ferment all
alone; but Claret must Ferment with the Faeces of the Grapes; whence it comes
to pass that the Red is loaded with more Tartar than the White, and remains
longer in the body after it is drunk. The wines of hot Countries do commonly
more abound with Tartar than others, by reason of the abundance of Salts which
they attract from the earth. Muscat, and Spanish Wines do not endure a
Fermentation, until good part of the Phlegm is evaporated, either by the heat
of the Sun, or by fire; and this is the reason they become so glutinous as they
do, almost like Syrup. Lastly, there may be made as many different Wines, as
there can be different Fermentations to the Must. Now let us consider what it
is that happens in these Fermentations.

Must is a sweet liquor that sends no vapors to the head to Intoxicate,
though one drinks never so much. If you distill it, there will rise first of
all, good store of Insipid water, after that a fetid Oil with a few weak
Spirits, which are nothing but an Essential Salt dissolved; and lastly there
will remain a terrestrious mass, out of which may be drawn some quantity of
fixed salt by making a Lixivium, as we draw other alkali salts; but among all
these substances we find none of those Spirits that use to make Brandy, and yet
nevertheless when Must has Fermented for some time, it turns into Wine from
whence you may draw a considerable quantity of Inflammable Spirits.

Now to explicate this effect you must know that Must does contain a great
deal of Essential Salt; this Salt like a volatile, making an effort in the
Fermentation to deliver it self from the oily parts with which it was before
encumbered, does open and divide them, until by its subtle and keen points it
has rarefied them into Spirit; this effort of the salt does cause the
Ebullition which happens to wine, and which at the same time does help to
purify it; for it separates the grosser parts of the wine in form of a scum,
of which some part does stick to, and petrifie on the sides of the vessel, and
another part precipitates to the bottom, the first is called Tartar, the last
the Lees of wine. The inflammable Spirit of Wine then is nothing but an Oil
exalted by Salts, and this is an indubitable proof of what I establish, that
there was nothing but oil in the Must, which was capable of taking fire: these
same salts also being a little freed from the cover they were wrapped in, are
they that change the wallowish sweetness of Must into an agreeable Tartness,
such as we perceive in our French Wines.

It is likewise remarkable that a sufficient quantity of Phlegm is requisite
for the better separation of the Salts in their Fermentation, and an Exaltation
of the Oil; for otherwise several changes are apt to happen: for example, when
Muscat, and Spanish wine are made, a great deal of Phlegm is separated from
them; for the Muscat Grape is left to dry in the Sun upon the Branches, before
it is gathered to put into the press, and some part of the liquor of the Must,
with which Spanish wine is made, is Evaporated before it is suffered to
Ferment; which is the cause that the Salts not having liberty to expatiate, and
to rarifie the Oil as much as they would do if they had room, do make but an
imperfect Fermentation. The Oil being thus half exalted, has still strength
enough to hinder the Tartness of the salt, and therefore only tickling the
Nerves of the tongue, makes us perceive in these liquors a sweet taste. And
this is also the reason, why fewer Spirits are drawn from Muscat and Spanish
wines, than from French wines; for whereas the Spirit of Wine does consist in a
rarefied Oil, there must needs be fewer Spirits in those, than in French wines.
But much more of a gross Oil is drawn by distillation from those half fermented
Wines.

If on the contrary the Must should be loaded with too much phlegm, as it
happens often enough, there follows another imperfect Fermentation, because the
Salts being too much weakened by it are not able sufficiently to cut and exalt
the parts of Oil, whence it comes to pass that these Wines are subject to turn
aigre, or to sour. The Wines of Languedoc and Provence being extremely loaded
with Tartar, are grosser than the Wines of Burgundy and Champaigne, because
their Spirits are encumbered with abundance of Salt and Earth. Wherefore the
goodness of Wine may be said to proceed from a convenient proportion of phlegm
and Tartar.

It is objected to this last discourse, that the Tartareous part being in a
natural way separated from the Wine, should in no wise diminish the quantity
nor the strength of the Spirituous and inflammable part.

But when I asserted that the Spirits of diverse Wines are extremely loaded with
Tartar, I did not mean that Tartar which petrifies at the sides of the vessels,
for that is at quiet, and does not hinder the Exaltation of Spirits; but I
intended a Tartar that still remains mixed in the Wine after the Fermentation,
and which according as it abounds more or less, does render the Wines more or
less thick and gross. It is easy to see this Tartar I speak of, if you
Evaporate the aqueous part of Wine, for it will remain at bottom in form of
Lees. Nevertheless there is no need of establishing two sorts of Tartar in one
kind of Wine, for the former is only the more soluble part of the other.

Diverse little Objections have likewise been made me on this subject, for want
of duly examining what I have established. Wherefore I do not desire to enlarge
in the relation of them, for I do aim as much as I can, to avoid Repetitions,
as being good for nothing but to swell a Book and tire the Reader.

Wine diminishes the appetite, as says Hippocrates, and the cause may be,
because the Sulphurous Spirits it is charged with, do dull and oppress the
Ferment of the Stomach, which by its irritation caused hunger.

Vinous liquors may be made of all Fruits, and many other things, by means of
Fermentation, as from Apples, Pears, Honey, and Hopps. In like manner Berries,
Seeds, Leaves, and Flowers, may be made to Ferment: but because several of
these things are naturally too dry to ferment easily, they must be wetted with
water, after they are beaten; and to quicken their Fermentation, a little Yest
is to be added, and by this means liquors are made, whence burning Spirits may
be drawn, as well as from Wine.

That which happens in the fermentation of Wines, may serve very well to
explicate many diseases, but especially the Small Pox, for it is very probable
that in this disease the blood does boil and ferment in the vessels much after
the manner as Wine ferments in a vessel.

The little pustules of the Small Pox are a Tartar which is separated from the
blood to the skin, after the same manner as the Tartar separates from the Wine
to the sides of the vessel, and indeed they have the same effect as salt in
corroding the skin.

Infants are more subject to this disease than elder persons, because their
blood is more like to Must, and consequently is more subject to ferment.

The Smallpox does usually happen but once in a man's life, just as Must does
ferment also but once.

Distillation of Wine into Brandy.
Fill with Wine half a large Copper body, cover it with its Moors head,
bordered with its Refrigeratory, and fit to it a Receiver; lute well the
junctures with a wet Bladder, and distill with a gentle fire, about a quarter of
the Liquor, or else until the liquor which distills does not burn; when fire is
put to it, that which is in the Receiver is called Brandy, and in French, Aqua
vitae.

Remarks.
Brandy is a Spirit of wine loaded with phlegm, that it has carried with it in
the distillation; these Spirits do always rise first, and so it is known that
there remain no more in the Cucurbite, when the liquor that distills is no
longer inflammable.

Brandy may be drawn from all sorts of Wines, but more of it may be drawn in
some Countries than others. For example, the Wines that are made about Orleans
and Paris do yield greater plenty of Brandy than many others which seem to be
stronger; and the reason is, that those Wines which appear stronger, being
loaded with a great deal of Tartar, have their Spirits as it were fixed,
whereas the others containing but a convenient portion of this Tartar, do leave
their Spirits at greater liberty.

When Wine has been drunk, there is made a separation of Spirits in the body,
much resembling that which is made by distillation: for the heat of the bowels
warming it, causes the Spirituous parts to spread on all sides through the
pores, and some part of them to mix with the blood, and rarefie it, from whence
it comes to rejoice the heart, and increase the vigor of the whole body; but
because these Spirits do always tend upwards, the greatest part flies into the
brain, where it quickens its motion, and produces a certain gaiety of mind that
is wont to furnish us with many excellent thoughts.

But now if wine moderately taken is so profitable for the Functions of the
body, it likewise causes many mischiefs, when it is excessively used; for the
Spirituous parts rising in great abundance do circulate in the brain with so
much celerity, that they soon confound the whole Economy. And then the objects
will appear double, and the walls of the place where one is, seem to have
changed their ordinary situation.

This Confusion remains until the Spirits having some good time dissolved the
phlegm, do in part condense with it, and in part spend through the pores.

It likewise then happens, that a man is prone to sleep, because the Pituita
being attenuated either by the Spirits of wine, or by the phlegm they have
drawn along with them, glides into the small passages of the brain, and retards
the Circulation of the Animal Spirits, by gluing them together; for after the
same manner as the motion of the Spirits in the Brain does beget watchfulness,
so their repose or condensation produces sleep. But I shall speak more amply of
this subject hereafter, when I come to treat of the effects of Opium.

The sleep which is caused through excess of Wine does usually remain until the
Animal Spirits have rarefied this phlegm, and opened a free passage. Those who
are intoxicated with Beer, Sider or some such like liquor, do remain in their
Drunkenness a longer time, and sleep more after it, than those who are drunk
with Wine, because the Spirit of these liquors, carrying along with it a
viscous phlegm into the brain, remains a longer time in the disengaging it
self, and passing through the pores. Again it is the viscosity of this phlegm,
which entering into the Sinus of the brain, does cause so long a sleep, because
it is so hard to rarefie.

Those Accidents that I have related to proceed from the immoderate use of
Wine, are but the first, and the less grievous, though indeed they are but
little to be desired; every body knows that a continuation of frequent
debauches does at last render a man dull and stupid, and this by reason the
Spirits of Wine do not only trouble the Natural Spirits in their functions, and
render them Phlegmatic, but likewise by rarefying them do ever carry off and
lose some store of them.

These Persons are likewise subject to a continual spitting, or else they are
molested with defluxions, Catarrhs, and Gout, because the Pituita being rendered
more liquid by the Spirits and phlegm of vinous liquors, is forced to descend
through the Lymphatick vessels; but if there happens to be the least obstacle
in these vessels, it takes its course with the Nerves, and falls upon all the
parts of the body. Lastly, when excess of wine does occasion falling into the
Apoplexy, and Palsy, it is by reason the Pituita is rendered too liquid by the
Spirits and Phlegm of wine, and causes Obstructions in the head, and hinders
the natural course of the Spirits into the Nerves. Many other sad effects of
wine-debauches might be here mentioned, but this digression is too long. Let us
return to our Operation.

After the wine has been deprived of these Sulphurous Spirits, there remains
in the body a Tartareous liquor, which being exposed a good while to the Sun in
a Cask without its stopple, turns into good Vinegar.

It may be some such thing happens in the Bodies of those who accustom to drink
too much wine; for whereas the volatile parts, which ascend to the Brain and
Heart, by an agitation of the Spirits, do beget Joy; so on the contrary the
Tartareous parts by fixing the humors about the Hypochondria, do cause by
little and little that which is called Melancholy, which proceeds from an acid;
whence it comes to pass that many men making a debauch upon wine, with design
to pass away their Melancholy, do afterward find they have increased it, when
the debauch has had its effect.

If you would by way of curiosity make an exact Analysis of wine, you must take
that which remains in the body after distillation of the Brandy, and distill off
all the phlegm, there will remain a Matter like unto Rosine, put it into a
Retort, and placing it in a Furnace, distill away more phlegm, in a small fire,
until it begins to come sharp. Then fit a large Receiver to the Retort, and
luting well the junctures, strengthen the fire by degrees, to drive forth acid
Spirits, and a little fetid Oil, continue the fire until there comes no more.

The Oil is separated from the Spirit in a Tunnel lined with brown paper; for
the Spirit will pass through, and the Oil being too thick will remain. But it
is here remarkable, that more of this Spirit and Oil is drawn from Must, than
wine; which sufficiently proves the Remark I made before, touching the origin
of the volatile Spirit of wine; for seeing good store of the Oil of Must has
contributed to the making volatile Spirit of Wine, there must needs remain but
very little Oil, in the liquor that Brandy is drawn from.

The acid Spirit of wine, and the Black Oil, are like to those of Tartar, which
I shall describe anon. And an alkali salt wholly resembling that of Tartar may
be drawn by a Lixivium from the mass that remains in the Retort.

Spirit of Wine.
Spirit of Wine is the oily part of wine rarefied by acid Salts.

Fill a large bolt-head with a long neck, half full with Brandy, and fitting a
head and Receiver, lute close the junctures; set your bolthead upon a pot half
filled with water, to distill in a vaporous Bath, the Spirit, which separates
from the phlegm, and rises pure: continue this degree of fire until nothing
more distills, thus you will have a dephlegmated Spirit of Wine in the very first
distillation.

It serves for a Menstruum to a great many things in Chemistry; half a spoonful
of it is given to Apoplectical, and Lethargical persons, to make them come to
themselves; likewise their Wrists, Breast, and Face are rubbed with it. It Is a
good Remedy for Burnings, if applied so soon as they happen; and it is good for
cold pains, for the Palsy, Contusions, and other Maladies, wherein it is
requisite to discuss, and to open the pores.

Remarks.
The usual way of making Spirit of Wine, is by distilling Brandy in a Limbeck
so many times over until it comes pure; and to do this, about half the Brandy
is drawn by distillation, and the phlegm that remains at bottom accounted of no
use. Again, half the Spirit which was distilled is anew drawn off, and the
phlegm thrown away; these Rectifications are continued, until you find by
firing a spoonful of the Spirit, that every drop burns, and there remains not
the least Phlegm; but because this Operation is very tedious, and it is a hard
matter thus to get a Spirit of Wine wholly free from Phlegm, even after nine or
ten times repeating these distillations, let the fire be never so small;
Artists have invented a long Machine, which they call the Serpent, by reason of
the circumvolutions which it makes. It is fitted to the Cucurbite containing
the Brandy, and the top made like a Tunnel receives the head, to which a
Receiver is fitted, and the junctures well luted, and the vessel placed in a
small fire, the Spirits of Wine do rise by this gentle heat, but the phlegm
being too heavy cannot ascend so high, so that thus a Spirit of Wine deprived
of its phlegm is had the very first time. But because this Machine is hard to
carry into the country, and other places where one would desire to make Spirit
of Wine, and besides that it is subject to loosen in the joints, through the
violence of the Spirits; I have thought that the way I delivered for making
Spirit of Wine was more commodious; for provided you have but a mattress and a
head, it will be an easy matter to draw as good Spirit of Wine as that by the
Serpent, and there is no need to fear the Spirits breaking any way out of the
vessel, if you do but lute well the junctures, as I have said.

The mattress must have a very long neck, that no phlegm may be able to rise
into the Receiver.

The vaporous Bath is fitter than any other to perform this Operation in,
because a most moderate heat is requisite to raise up the Spirits all alone;
now the vapor of water warms very insensibly. You must continue the same
degree of fire, until there comes nothing more.

Some persons do endeavor to reject the method that I have described for
drawing Spirit of Wine, because, say they, a long time is required to draw a
little Spirit, and by reason of the difficulty they conceive in procuring such
vessels well made, at Paris, and much more so in the Country.

But it is likely these Gentlemen do blame this method because they never tried
it; for if they had but taken the pains to make Experiment of it, they would
have found that with two or three of these vessels, they might have drawn as
much Spirit of Wine, as they could be able to do with their great Machine; and
that this Spirit is not liable to the impression which might be communicated to
it from Copper or Tin vessels. As for the difficulty that there is pretended of
getting such glass vessels, there is none at all that I know of, but only for
such as will not take the pains to visit the Glass-houses, for there they would
find enough for their turn; and though I use a great many of them in my Courses
of Chemistry, I never was to seek for any yet. But suppose there were none to
be found ready made, methinks they might as easily bespeak them, and have them
made at the Glass-houses, as well as bespeak those grand Copper or Tin
Machines, that are commonly used. I know that such as are better pleased with
making a Fair show, than with the effects of things, and who measure the
goodness of an Operation by the trouble it gives one, and by the greatness of
vessels and Furnaces, will find here but little to their satisfaction. But I am
very little concerned at such men's exceptions, I never endeavored to follow
their Track. My design is simply to facilitate the means of working in
Chemistry, and to take away, as much as lies in my power, those things which
render it mysterious and dark.

Spirit of Wine is good for Lethargical, and Apoplectical persons, because it
puts the Spirits into a greater motion than they were in before. Now because
according to all appearance these Diseases are caused by Obstructions which
hinder the course of the Spirits into the Brain, this Spirit serves to give
them a new vigor, to dissolve and rarefie these Tartareous viscosities which
shut up their passage. It likewise discusses Tumors and Defluxions, because it
not only opens the pores, and gives vent to the subtler part of the humor to
perspire, but likewise dissolves and rarefies the grosser part, so as to render
it fit to circulate with the blood.

The Spirit of Wine is excellent for Burnings, provided it be used so soon as
they happen; for then it opens a passage for the igneous particles to come out
at, and if there should remain any within the part, it unites with them as it
uses to do when mixed with an Acid.

Spirit of Wine Tartarised.
This preparation is a Spirit of Wine that has carried with it some portion of
Salt of Tartar.

Put a Pound of Salt of Tartar into a long glass-body; pour upon it four pounds
of Spirit of Wine prepared as I said before: place your vessel in Sand, and
cover it with a head to which fit a Receiver, lute well the junctures with a
wet Bladder, and give it a gradual fire, which continue until three parts of
the Spirit of Wine are risen; then remove the fire, and keep this Spirit in a
Viol well stopped; it has the same virtues as the other, but is more subtle.

The liquor that remains in the body may be evaporated, and a Salt of Tartar
got as good as before.

Remarks.
This Operation is only a Rectification of the Spirit of Wine, to render it
more subtle than it was before; because the Salt of Tartar becomes impregnated
with the Phlegmatic parts, and hinders them from rising.

The Spirit of Wine does likewise volatilize, and carry along with it some
portion of the Salt of Tartar, which gives it a very agreeable smell, and
renders it a good Remedy for Obstructions.

A sign, that the Spirit of Wine has carried along with it some of the Salt of
Tartar, is this: if you dry gently the Salt of Tartar that remains in the Body,
and weigh it, you will find it diminished an ounce and a half.

You may again put this Spirit of Wine Tartarized to half a pound of more Salt
of Tartar, and distill it as before, but I have found that it is never a-whit
the better for it.

This way of Tartarizing Spirit of Wine is the very best and shortest of all
that have been invented, whether you desire to make it pure, or to impregnate
it with Salt of Tartar; and I may venture to say, that all the many long and
tedious descriptions that have been given of this Operation, have been only
invented to cast a dust into the eyes of Novices; for it is easy for any to
observe, who give themselves a little to examine things, that after all their
long turnings and windings, and circumstances to no purpose, the Spirit of Wine
is not so well Tartarized, as by the plain method that I have described.

Queen of Hungary's Water.
This Operation is a Spirit of Wine impregnated with the more essential part of
Rosemary flowers.

Fill a glass or earthen cucurbite half full with Rosemary Flowers, gathered
when they are at their best; pour upon it Spirit of Wine sufficient to infuse
the Flowers in; set your Cucurbite in a Balneum, and joining its head, and
Receiver, lute close the junctures, and give it a digesting fire for three
days, after which unlute them, and pour into the Cucurbite that which may have
been distilled. Refit your Alembick, and increase the fire strong enough to
make the liquor distill, so as one drop may immediately follow another; and when
you shall have drawn about two thirds of it, and put out the fire, let the
vessels cool, and unlute them, you will find in the Receiver a very good Water of
the Queen of Hungary, keep it in a Viol well stopped. It is good in the Palsy,
Lethargy, Apoplexy, and Hysterical Maladies: The Dose is from one dram to
two. It is likewise used outwardly for Burnings, Tumors, Cold pains,
Contusions, Palsy, and all other occasions, wherein it is requisite to revive
the Spirits. Ladies do use to mix half an ounce of it with six ounces of
Lily-water, or Bean-flower water, and wash their Face with it, to clear their
complexion.

Remarks.
You must distill this water in a Fire that is strong enough, for otherwise the
Spirit of Wine would rise alone, or else draw along with it but very little
Essence, as I have observed in the working upon it.

The Oil or Essence of Rosemary, may be made as the Oil of Cinnamon, and some
drops of it mixed in the Spirit of Wine, and hereby you have a Queen of
Hungary's water made upon the spot.

The Water of the Queen of Hungary sometimes gives ease to the Toothache, being
snufft at the Nose, or applied to the Gums with a little Cotton.

Some thinking to Criticize a little, do say, it is altogether useless to
digest Rosemary flowers with Spirit of Wine, because their substance being of a
very Volatile nature, it easily dissolves in the Spirit without any digestion.

But this Circumstance is very necessary, if we desire to have a Water well
impregnated with the Essence of the Flowers, for although there is a Volatile
substance in Rosemary, yet good part of the Oil, in which consists principally
the Smell, is involved in the other Principles, and cannot be well rarefied,
mixed, and exalted, but only by a digestion: and thus we have a very good
effect from it.

CHAP. XIII. Of Vinegar.
WInes, like all other liquors that use to Ferment, do grow sour by the
dissolution of their Tartar in a second Fermentation: This dissolution is
commonly made, when upon the Wines going to decay, some of the more subtle
Spirits are lost; for the Tartar taking their place fixes the rest of the
Spirits which remain in the Wine, so that they can act no longer. This fixation
is the cause that when the Wine turns sour, very little quantity of it is
diminished, and very little Tartar is found in the vessels wherein Vinegar is
made.

To the end that Wine may quickly sour, you must set the Vessel that contains
it in some hot place, and mix the Lees from time to time; for this Tartar will
easily dissolve, when heat comes to act upon it.

Perhaps it will be objected that Wine deprived of Tartar and Lees does grow
sour, when kept a long time in a vessel, without any dissolution of Tartar.

But we must consider that Wine, let it be as clear and pure as may be, does
always retain the more saline and subtle part of Tartar, which exalts and
easily smells, when by Fermentation it gets the predominancy of the Sulphurous
Spirits, which held it as it were involved: and thus clear wine sowrs alone,
but it does not sour so fast, and the Vinegar is not so strong, as when it is
made upon Tartar.

Furthermore if we consider the Principles that wine consists of, we shall
find, that neither the Oil, nor Earth, nor Water, are capable of yielding any
Acidity, and that nothing but the Salt is able to give it. Now it cannot be
doubted but that the Salt of wine is in the Tartar.

It may be added here, that the Air to which wines are exposed, by leaving the
vessel open, when they would have them turn into Vinegar, does likewise
communicate a little of its Acidity to the wines, by exciting and rarifying the
Acid of Tartar.

Distillation of Vinegar.
Put six quarts of strong Vinegar into an earthen pan; evaporate in Balneum
about a quart, which is the Phlegmatic part; and pour that which remains into
a glass or earthen Cucurbite, and distill it in a strong sand-heat, until there
remains at bottom nothing but a substance like Honey; keep this Vinegar well
stopped, many do call it Spirit of Vinegar.

Its principal use is to dissolve or precipitate bodies. It is sometimes mixed
in Cordial potions, to resist putrefaction; the dose is half a spoonful: it is
mixed with water, and this Oxycrate is used to stop Hemorrhagies, taken
inwardly, and to assuage Inflammations, applied outwardly.

Remarks.
The Acidity of Vinegar consists in an Essential, or Tartareous Salt, which
being heavier than the Phlegm rises last; but you must evaporate this Phlegm
very gently, because the Acid Spirit of Vinegar will easily sublime with it.

I do use an earthen pan, rather than a Cucurbite, that the Phlegm of Vinegar
finding a large open passage may evaporate the more easily.

It would be no great fault, if you should distill the Vinegar without
dephlegmating it first; for the separating the phlegm from it is not of so much
consideration, as to make it as clear as pure water, that it may not bestow any
particular tincture to the ingredients that are to be dissolved in it.

The Spirit of Vinegar is much less fixed than many other acids, because it
partakes of the Sulphurous Spirits of wine which still remain in it.

Common Vinegar keeps its strength a longer time than the distilled, because it
contains a more Terrestrious Salt, that does not Volatilize so easily. And for
this reason, you should rather choose to use Vinegar newly distilled, than that
which has been kept a good while. All Acids do prove Cordial, and good against
malignity of humors, when it is caused by too great a commotion, because it
fixes and Coagulates them, moderating their motion. Thus in places where the
Air is corrupted, and Pestilential, Vinegar is a good Preservative; you may
every morning take half a Spoonful of it Fasting; but in diseases which proceed
from a Tartareous humor, as the Hypochondriack melancholy, it is rather hurtful
than good, because it fixes the humors the more.

Some having dried and calcined the sweet extract that remains at the bottom of
the Cucurbite, after the distillation of Vinegar, and having by Solution,
Filtration, and Coagulation, separated from it an Alkali fixed salt, much like
to that which is drawn from Tartar, they do mix it with Spirit of Vinegar, and
distill and cohobate it diverse times, until, say they, the spirit has carried
off all the salt, and then will needs have it called Spirit of Vinegar
Alkalized, or Radical Spirit of Vinegar, and they affirm that this being much
more pure, and entirely united with its proper salt, is much the more powerful
in dissolving Metals. But the distilled Vinegar is so far from becoming the
stronger through this Preparation, that I can demonstrate that it breaks and
loses the greatest part of its edges in contending with the Alkali salt, with
which it is mixed, for it is the property of this salt to sweeten Acids.

Neither is it necessary to believe that by distillations is so drawn the
Alkali salt of Vinegar, for it remains fixed at bottom of the Retort with the
acids it is impregnated with; so that this same Spirit of Vinegar to which so
many great names and uses have been appropriated, is properly the more
Phlegmatic part of distilled Vinegar.

CHAP. XIV. Of Tartar.
ANY gross or terrestrious matter, that sticks to the sides of the vessel, when
separated from its liquor by means of Fermentation is called Tartar. But the
Tartar I am going to speak of here, is that of Wine. It is found sticking to
Casks like a very hard stone, sometimes white, and sometimes red, according to
the color of the wine it comes from.

White Tartar is to be preferred before red, because it is purer, and contains
less earth; both one and the other are had in greater abundance in hot Countries,
such as Languedock and Provence, than many other Climats; but the best white
Tartar of all is brought out of Germany, it must be heavy, White, and
Crystalline.

The Lees of wine are likewise a liquified Tartar, they are burned, and the
Ashes that are made of them are called Cineres Clavellati, in English,
Gravelled Ashes.

Crystals of Tartar.
This Operation is a Tartar purified, and coagulated in form of Crystals.

Boil in a great deal of water what quantity of white Tartar you please, until
it be all dissolved; pass the liquor hot through Hippocrates his Sleeve, into
an earthen vessel, and evaporate about half of it: set the vessel in a cool
place two or three days, and you will find little Crystals on the sides, which you
are to separate; evaporate again half the liquor that remains, and remit the
vessel to the Cellar as before, there will shoot out new Crystals: continue
doing thus, until you have gotten all your Tartar, dry the Crystals in the Sun,
and keep them for use.

The Crystal of Tartar is Purgative, and Aperitive; it is good for Hydropical,
and Asthmatical persons, and for Tertian and Quartan Agues. The dose is from
half a dram to three drachms in broth, or some other proper liquor.

Remarks.
This Operation is, to speak properly, nothing but a Purification of the more
Terrestrious parts of Tartar. You must observe to boil it in an earthen vessel,
rather than any metallic one, because it would be apt to take some Tincture
from it.

A Skin that swims a-top after evaporation of some part of the liquor was
heretofore carefully taken off, and there was thought to be some difference
between it, and the Crystal of Tartar. But this Cream or Skin is only a part of
the Tartar that begins to Coagulate, and so it is the very same thing in
substance with the Crystal.

You must not imagine that the Crystals of Tartar do much differ from common
Tartar, for they differ from it only in the containing a little less earth, but
all the five Principles may be drawn from the Crystals, as from common Tartar.

When you would take the Crystals in substance you must make them into Pills,
or into a Bolus, with some liquid substance; or else you may boil them in some
liquor, but you must take the liquor very hot, otherwise the Crystals will fall
to the bottom of the cup you drink out of.

If you should boil these Crystals in common water, or in broth, and then let
it stand to be cold, they will return into the same form they were in before,
both at the bottom, and on the sides of the vessel, but the liquor will remain
a little sharp, through the solution of some part of the salt of Tartar into it.

I see no reason so much to wonder as some do, why Tartar will not dissolve in
cold water; for although it does contain a great deal of salt, this salt is
involved in Earth, and Oil, which must needs hinder the dissolution, and there
is no need of having recourse, for an explication of this, to a proportionable
Union of Volatile salts and acids.

Soluble Tartar.
Powder and mix together eight ounces of Crystals of Tartar, and four ounces of
the fixed salt of Tartar, put this mixture into a glazed earthen pot, and
pouring upon it three pints of common water, boil the matter gently for half an
hour, then letting it cool, filtrate and evaporate the liquor until it is dry,
and there will remain at bottom, eleven ounces six drachms of a white salt;
keep it in a Viol, it is both a good Aperitive, and Laxative, it is good for
Cachexies, Dropsies, and all diseases that proceed from Obstructions: the dose
is from ten grains to two scruples in broth, or some proper liquor.

Remarks.
This Operation is nothing but a dissolution that the Salt of Tartar has made
of Cream of Tartar, so that it can dissolve in cold water, which it could not
do alone; the Cream of Tartar also being an acid insinuates into the pores of
the Alkali salt, and sweetens it.

If you boil Cream of Tartar in water, and put into it some salt of Tartar,
there will happen an Effervescency between them, but if you mix these two
ingredients together in cold water, there will be no Effervescency; the reason
of which is, that the acid Spirits of Cream of Tartar being involved in other
principles, can have no active power to open the Alkali, unless they be
actuated by fire.

I use to filter the dissolution, in order to separate some terrestrious part
of the Cream of Tartar, which could not dissolve: this salt comes near in
virtue to Tartar vitriolated, some do call it a Vegetable salt.

Chalybeated, or Martial Crystals of Tartar.
This Preparation is a Crystal of Tartar impregnated with the more soluble part
of Iron.

Powder and mix a pound of good white Tartar, and three ounces of Rust of Iron,
boil this mixture in an Iron pot with five or six quarts of water, for half an
hour, or so much time as is requisite to dissolve the Tartar, pass the liquor
hot through a warm cloth, then let it settle in an Iron or earthen pot ten or
twelve hours, it will shoot into brown Crystals, at the sides and bottom of the
pot, pour off the liquor by Inclination, and gather the Crystals; then
evaporate about half the liquor in the same pot, let the remainder settle, and
take out the Crystals as before; continue these Evaporations and
Crystallizations, until you have drawn all your Tartar, dry the Crystals in the
Sun, and so keep them.

They are a good remedy for Obstructions of the Liver, Mesentery, Spleen; they
are given in Cachexies, and for Melancholy, and the Quartan Ague; the dose is
from fifteen grains to two Scruples in broth, or some other liquor proper to
the distemper.

Remarks.
This Preparation is boiled but little, that the Tartar may dissolve only the
more Saline part of Iron; the liquor is made to pass through a cloth, to free
it from the Impurities of the Tartar and Iron which could not dissolve; but you
must pass it very hot, for if it were a little cool, the Tartar would Coagulate
in the cloth, and so none of the liquor would pass.

Instead of Crystallizing the dissolved Tartar, you may evaporate all the
liquor, and so obtain a brown powder, which has the same virtues as the
Crystals.

When you would exhibit this Chalybeated Crystal of Tartar, you must make it
just boil in the liquor you give it in, for otherwise it will not dissolve, and
you must be sure to give it as hot as they can take it, for fear it should
Crystallize at the bottom of the Cup.

Soluble Tartar Chalybeated.
Put into an earthen pan, or glass vessel four ounces of Soluble Tartar, and
sixteen ounces of Tincture of Mars prepared according to the description that I
have given, set the vessel in sand, and with a small fire evaporate the liquor,
until there remains a black powder, shut it in a viol well stopped, and keep it,
you will have eight ounces.

This Martial Tartar has the same virtues as the Tincture of Tartar, it is good
to remove all Obstructions, wherefore it is very properly used in Cachexies,
Dropsies, retention of the Menses, in Nephritick Colicks, and in difficulties
of Urine: the dose is from ten grains to half a dram, in broth, or some
proper liquor, or else made into Lozenges.

Remarks.
This Preparation of Chalybeate, or Martial Tartar is not only more convenient
for use than the former, (in that it dissolves, or mixes in a cold liquor) but
has much more virtue in it, for the Tincture of Mars contains only the more
saline part of Tartar.

Soluble Emetick Tartar.
This Preparation is a soluble Tartar impregnated with some portion of Glass of
Antimony, which renders it Emetick.

Put into a glass vessel four ounces of Crystals of Tartar powdered; pour upon
it Spirit of Urine, until it be two fingers above the matter, there will happen
a small ebullition, because the Cream of Tartar will dissolve in the Spirit of
Urine; when the dissolution is finished, add to it an ounce of the glass of
Antimony finely powdered, and eight or ten ounces of water; boil it all in a
sand-heat seven or eight hours, and take care to put more hot water into the
vessel, as the liquor consumes; after that filtrate, and evaporate gently in
sand all the liquor, and there will remain three ounces of a greyish powder
drawing toward white, keep it in a Viol well stopped. It is an Emetick that
works with little violence; the dose is from four to fifteen grains in broth.

Remarks.
The Ebullition which happens in this Operation, proceeds from the Cream of
Tartars meeting with the Volatile and Alkali Salt of Urine; for the Acid of
Tartar piercing the Salt of Urine divides its parts, and gives vent to igneous
bodies which were contained in it, and which now finding themselves free do
break forth in great haste.

Volatile Spirit of Sal Armoniack may be used instead of that of Urine; but
then there will be no sensible Ebullition, the reason of which is, because the
salt of this Spirit is not an Alkali so open as the Spirit of Urine, by reason
of some impression it has of the Acid sal Armoniack, with which it was mixed;
insomuch that the Crystals of Tartar whose acid is not separated from the
Earth, has points too gross, and too unactive to insinuate, into the pores of
this salt, and separate its parts so easily as those of the salt that is
contained in Spirit of Urine, whose pores are bigger.

Some part of the Glass of Antimony dissolves in the boiling, and gives the
Emetick quality to the powder. It is a very gentle Vomit, because the Tartar
fixes, and in some measure hinders the activity of the Sulphurs of Antimony.

If instead of making the aforesaid evaporation, you should take the vessel off
the fire, when there is but two thirds of the liquor consumed, and let it
settle without stirring it, in four and twenty hours the soluble Tartar, will
crystallize at the bottom, and on the sides, but it will be never a whit the
better.

When you would make this Crystallization you must use a flat vessel, let it be
of earth, that the Crystals may display themselves the better. The liquor is to
be decanted, and the Crystals to be taken and dried. The evaporations and
crystallizations are to be continued, until you have obtained all your salt.

Another sort of Soluble Emetick Tartar may be made by boiling in water an
ounce of the Glass of Antimony powdered with four ounces of Soluble Tartar, for
seven or eight hours, then upon filtring and evaporating the liquor, there will
remain a gray powder of the same virtues as the other, and to be given in the
same dose.

Distillation of Tartar.
This Operation is a separation of the Phlegm, the Spirit, and the Oil of
Tartar.

Fill two thirds of a Retort with Tartar grossly powdered, place your Retort in
a Reverberatory Furnace, and fitting to it a large capacious Receiver, begin
the distillation with a very small fire for three hours only to warm the
Retort, and drive out the Phlegm drop by drop; throw away this insipid water,
and refitting the Receiver, Lute closely the joints, increase the fire by
little and little, and you will see Spirits fill the Receiver with Clouds;
continue it that the Oil may likewise come forth; then when there will come no
more, let the vessels cool, and unlute them; pour that which is in the receiver
into a Tunnel lined with brown paper, that the Spirit may filtrate, and
separate from the thick black Oil that remains in the filter: keep this Oil in
a Viol, it is good to smell to in Hysterical vapors: it would be good to rub
Paralytical parts with, and for cold pains, but by reason of its abominable
smell, it is not used.

Pour the Spirit into a glass Cucurbite, and rectify it by distilling it in
sand, it is good against the Palsy, Asthma, and Scurvy, it works by Urine, and
by Sweat. It is used in Hysterical maladies, and for the Epilepsie; the dose is
from one dram to three in some appropriate liquor.

You will find in the Retort a black mass, from which a Salt may be drawn, as I
shall show hereafter.

Remarks.
If you have used three pounds of Tartar of sixteen ounces to the pound in this
Operation, you will draw four ounces of Phlegm, eight ounces of Spirit, and
three ounces of Oil; the black mass which remains in the Retort after
distillation, will weigh two pounds, or two and thirty ounces, and you will
draw from that mass twelve ounces of salt.

Almost all Authors who have spoke of Tartar have asserted, that two sorts of
Spirits could be drawn from it by distillation, the one very Volatile, the
other fixed and acid; wherefore after all had mixed confusedly in the Receiver,
they separated the Oil, and added some Alkali, such as Coral, or Crab's-eyes, to
that which remained, then they poured it into a Cucurbite, and distilled about
half the liquor, which they pretended to be a Volatile Spirit; for the acid
Spirit remained absorbed by the Alkali, with the Phlegm in the bottom of the
body.

But having vowed never to be led by any Authority which is not founded upon
Experience, I have examined the nature of Tartar as strictly as possible, and
after a great many distillations of it, I could never perceive this Volatile
Spirit, which has been obtruded upon us; all that I could ever find is this,
that Tartar contains good store of Essential salt, which renders it acid, and
that this Salt coming forth by distillation, and mixing with phlegm, does make
all the Spirit that can be drawn from Tartar. So that the Spirit of Tartar
according to the description of these men is only the more Phlegmatic part of
the liquor, that is to say, the most deprived of this Essential Salt, because
almost all of it does adhere unto the Alkali body of Coral, or Crab's-eyes,
which were added to it. But according to the way I have set down, the Spirit
may be drawn as pure as may be, because I do not leave it to mix with the
phlegm, which comes out first.

If we do rectify the Spirit, it is done to purify it from some Terrestrious
parts, which it might have carried along with it in the distillation.

Some thinking to do better than those who rectify Spirit of Tartar on alkali
matters, do instead of those alkalis use biscuit powdered, but they attain
their end never the better, for the biscuit does sweeten the acid Spirit of
Tartar as much as Coral, or Crab's-eyes.

A very volatile and alkali Spirit is drawn from the Lees of wine, I shall
speak of it in the Chapter of the Volatile Salt of Tartar, and perhaps it is
this very Spirit that Paracelsus, and Van Helmont do boast so much of, and
which has occasioned many Authors to write that the Tartar does contain a most
volatile Spirit.

Fixed Salt of Tartar, and its liquor, called Oil per Deliquium.
Break the Retort which served you for distillation of Tartar, and take the
black mass you find in it; Calcine it until it becomes white, then put it into
a great deal of hot water, and make a Lixivium, filtrate it, and pour it into a
glass, or earthen vessel, evaporate in a sand-heat all the water, and there
will remain a white salt, which is called the Alkali Salt of Tartar.

This Salt is Aperitive, it is used for to draw forth the Tincture of
Vegetables, and is given for Obstructions; the dose is from ten to thirty drops
in broth, or Laxative Infusions.

If you expose for some days in a Cellar this Salt of Tartar in a wide glass
vessel, it will dissolve into a liquor that is improperly called Oil of Tartar
per Deliquium.

It is used for Tettars, and to discuss Tumors; the Ladies do mix it in
Lilly-water to clear their complexion, and hands.

Remarks.
In these two last Operations I have given you the means of obtaining all that
can be got from Tartar; but those who have no need of the Spirit or Oil, and
would only desire the Salt, may bruise the Crude Tartar, and wrapping it up in
paper may Calcine it until it turns into a white mass; after which they may
draw the salt by a Lixivium, as I said before.

I do commonly draw this way four ounces of very white, and well purified salt
of Tartar, from each pound of red Tartar; a little more may be drawn from white
Tartar, but it is no better than the other.

I have observed that when water is thrown upon the mass of Tartar newly
Calcined, it heats, much like unslack'd Lime, when wetted; the reason of which
is the same that I have given, to explicate the Ebullition of Quicklime in
water: all the difference is this, that Tartar Calcined containing a great deal
of Salt, does more easily imbibe water than Quicklime.

Some do Calcine salt of Tartar with a little sulphur, to hinder it from
dissolving so easily by the air, and to render it the whiter; but this is no
good practice because the acid Spirit of sulphur destroys some part of the
Alkali; and this does come to happen, by reason that the pores of this Salt by
being thus Calcined are not so open as they were, and the air therefore cannot
so easily melt it. If you would make Salt of Tartar, and other Alkali fixed
salts very white indeed, you must Calcine them all alone in a great fire, until
they become white, and then purify them by Dissolution, Filtration, and
Coagulation. As for their proneness to dissolve, this is natural to Alkali
salts, and cannot be taken from them, but by destroying their nature.

Nor can I approve the addition of any quantity of Niter to the Calcination of
Tartar, as some do, because the volatile parts of Niter being exalted, the fixed
do remain, and by their acidity do diminish the virtue of Salt of Tartar.

Although the Salt of Tartar be tolerably white after the first purification,
yet if you do calcine threescore and four ounces of it, and filtrate it as I
have said, you will draw still abundance of earthy matter: and if in curiosity
you should dry this earth, you would find three ounces and a half of it.

Alkali salts are Aperitive, in that they dissolve those slimy humors which
caused Obstructions; and it is for the same reason that Salt of Tartar does
correct Senna, and hinders it from griping, for the substance of Senna being
viscous, this does rarefie it, and make it work the quicker; it may also serve
to dissolve some viscous phlegm that sticks in the guts, which as it is going
off, causes griping pains.

The liquor or Oil made per Deliquium is only a Salt of Tartar dissolved by the
moisture of the Cellar, If you would make it quickly, you must dissolve the
Salt of Tartar in as much Rain water well filtrated, as is needful to turn it
into a liquor. It may be used like the former, it cures Tettars, and discusses
Tumors, because being an Alkali it sweetens the keen Salts which fomented these
distempers.

When Salt of Tartar, or its liquor is dissolved in water newly distilled from
some green plant, the water will turn green, and the greener the plant is from
which the water was distilled, this salt does make the water so much the
greener. The water of Nightshade turns greener with it than Balm-water,
Balm-water greener than Eye-bright-water, and so of the rest. The reason of
this effect proceeds from this, that the Alkali salt of Tartar does rarefie,
and make appear many little parts of the plant, which did rise with the water
in the distillation, and did not till then appear. But the water must be sure
to be distilled with a fire sufficiently great, for if it should have been
distilled in a Balneum, or such like heat, there would not appear the least
show of green, though an Alkali salt were mixed with it.

Cherry-water, Rose Water and many other distilled waters of fruits or flowers,
do give no color, by the addition of Salt of Tartar.

Tincture of Salt of Tartar.
This Operation is an exaltation of some parts of Salt of Tartar in Spirit of
wine.

Melt in a good Crucible twenty ounces of Salt of Tartar in great fire, and
when it is in Fusion, cover it with a Tile, and put coals round it; blow about
it so, as to raise a greater heat than if you were melting Gold; continue this
degree of fire about six hours, or until your Salt of Tartar is of a red marble
color, which you may know by thrusting the end of a Spatula into the Crucible,
for when it is drawn out, you may look upon a little matter that is stuck to
it; then take out the Crucible with a pair of tongs and turn it upside down
into a warm mortar, the matter will coagulate in a little time, powder it
presently, and put it into a mattress warmed beforehand; pour upon it Spirit of
wine Tartarized, until it swims four fingers above the matter: stop the mattress
with another to make a double-vessel, lute the junctures close with a wet
bladder, set your mattress in Sand, and heat it with a gradual fire, to make the
Spirit of wine boil seven or eight hours, during which time it will assume a
red color. After that let the vessels cool, and unlute them; separate by
Inclination this most fragrant Tincture, and keep it in a Viol well stopped.

You may pour more Spirit of Wine on the remaining Salt of Tartar, and proceed
as before, as long as it will draw out any Tincture.

The Tincture of the Salt of Tartar is an excellent Aperitive, it purifies the
blood, and resists malignity of humors. It is used in the Scurvy, the dose is
from ten to thirty drops in some convenient liquor.

Remarks.
You must place the Crucible in the furnace upon a Tile, for fear lest the wind
which comes through the doors of the Ash-hole, and fire-room, might be apt to
cool the bottom, and hinder the Fusion of the Salt.

The Salt of Tartar having been a good while melted in the Crucible, does flame
when thrown upon lighted coals, as easily as Saltpeter does. This effect
proceeds only from this, that the fire has attenuated and volatilized the parts
of this fixed salt, so as to render them fit to exalt with the sulphur of coals.

Many have writ that it is sufficient to Calcine the Salt of Tartar two hours
in a violent fire, or until the Salt of Tartar becomes bluish; but after
having tried several times to make the Tincture according to this description,
I could never be able to do it; it is true the Spirit of Wine will be a little
Tinctured, but it comes not near that which is necessary to call it the
Tincture of Salt of Tartar; for it should be red like wine, and to make it so,
it is requisite to Calcine it as I have said, and good store of it should be
put into the Crucible, because it diminishes exceedingly. You must likewise
take care to use Spirit of wine well rectified, for if there should be any
phlegm in it, it would not turn red.

This Tincture does not proceed from a fixed sulphur contained in the Salt of
Tartar, as many have pretended; it is only an exaltation of this salt in Spirit
of Wine; for if by way of curiosity you should distill this Tincture, you would
recover only a Spirit of Wine; and yet nevertheless there will remain at bottom
but a small quantity of Salt of Tartar with its usual whiteness; which shows
sufficiently that this color did only proceed from the exact mixture of the
Spirit of Wine with the Salt of Tartar, seeing upon their separation the color
disappears.

The Tincture of the Salt of Tartar loses its red color as it grows old, by
reason that the more subtle part of the Spirit of wine is lost through the
pores of the glass, and there remains only a Spirit which has not strength
enough to keep the Salt of Tartar in its exalted condition.

Magistery of Tartar, or Tartarum Vitriolatum.
This Operation is a Salt of Tartar impregnated with the acidity of Spirit of
Vitriol.

Put into a glass body what quantity you please of Oil of Tartar made per
Deliquium, pour upon it by little and little rectified Spirit of Vitriol, there
will be a great effervescency: continue to drop more in, till there is no
further Ebullition; then place your Cucurbite in Sand, and evaporate the Spirit
with a little fire, there will remain a very white salt, keep it in a Viol well
stopped.

It is a good Aperitive, and is also a little Purgative; it is given in
hypochondriacal cases, in Quartans, King's Evil, and all other diseases wherein
it is necessary to open Obstructions, and to work by Urine. The dose is from
ten to thirty grains in some proper liquor.

Remarks.
Tartarum Vitriolatum may be made with the Salt of Tartar as well as with the
Oil; the Ebullition proceeds from this, that the acid of Vitriol piercing the
Alkali Salt of Tartar, does violently separate its parts, and gives vent to
igneous Bodies which were there imprisoned; and this Effervescency comes to
pass as often as an Alkali meets with an acid, and remains until the acid can
find nothing more to encounter in the alkali salt. Then there follows a
Coagulum at the bottom of the vessel, because the acid and alkali clasping
together, do lose their motion, and by their united weight do precipitate to
the bottom. And this causes the liquor to be much less acrimonious than the Oil
of Tartar was before, though at least an equal quantity of Spirit of Vitriol
was mixed with it. You must evaporate it gently, and especially toward the end,
for fear the acid should rise withal.

This Salt is whiter than common Salt of Tartar, as having been subtilized by
Acids, after the same manner as we see several other white things increase in
their color, as they are beaten into a fine powder.

If you do use two ounces of Salt of Tartar in this Operation, you will draw two
ounces and a half of Tartarum Vitriolatum. This Augmentation comes from the
more heavy and strong part of the Vitriol, for that which is evaporated is very
phlegmatic.

You may here use the Rectified Oil of Vitriol instead of the Spirit, and then
the less is required, because it is a stronger acid, but the Tartarum
Vitriolatum will not be so white, as when Spirit of Vitriol is used, by reason
of some Tincture that always remains with the Oil of Vitriol, rectify it as
much as you please.

Though some have written, that if Tartarum Vitriolatum were put into a Retort,
and distilled, one might draw Spirit of Vitriol as good as it was at first,
nevertheless it is certain that it will not be so strong a Spirit; for it has
lost the most subtle part of its acidity, by encountering with the alkali,
which may be easily judged both by the taste, and the effects.

If by way of curiosity you would search a little narrowly into this Operation,
and observe what happens during the ebullition of the acid and the alkali, you
would find, that a great many little dashes of water do fly about, especially
if the vessel is not placed too low, and you hold a lighted Candle near it, for
they will be apt to put it out. This effect can have no other cause than the
violent separation of the parts of the alkali by the acid, which makes the
watery part of this liquor to sparkle upwards, being on all sides violently
driven.

If you use Oil of Vitriol, the ebullition is the greater, and the heat the
more considerable, because its acid being stronger, it separates the parts of
the alkali body more easily.

Now considering the ebullition which happens between acid and alkali, I have
the less opinion of a method that some do follow, which is to bathe a little
the bodies that are to be embalmed, with Spirit of salt, and then to put Salt
of Tartar into the embalming powder; for it is very likely, that this Spirit of
Salt, which is an acid, by mixing with the alkali salt of Tartar, may produce a
Fermentation which may stir up the remaining humidity of the Carcass, and make
it to mix with the Ingredients of the powder, and so instead of preserving the
dead body, we have reason to fear lest this Fermentation should rather hasten a
dissolution of its parts.

Acids do sometimes dissolve and rarifie, and at other times coagulate and
precipitate, as may be seen by the Operations which have been described. These
different actions do seem very strange, for it is hard to conceive how one and
the same liquor should produce contrary effects; but I Will give you an
explication of this Phenomenon, which because it is built upon experience, may
perhaps meet with some Approbation.

An Acid proves always a dissolvent, when good store of it is poured upon the
matter that is to be dissolved; but it makes a Coagulum as often, when being in
too small a quantity its points are fixed in the pores of the matter, and have
not power enough to get out; and this is plainly perceived, when Spirit of
Vitriol is poured upon the liquor of Salt of Tartar; for if you should mix but
so much as is requisite to penetrate the Salt, the acids do remain sheathed in
it, and bear it down, whence a Coagulation and Precipitation happens; but if
now so much more, or a greater quantity of Spirit of Vitriol, should be still
added to the liquor, the Coagulum will disappear, by reason that the little
bodies which being gathered together maintained their part against the acid,
and hindered its motion, will be then scattered and dissolved by the acid, that
is now grown the stronger.

The same thing may be remarked in all other bodies which can be dissolved by
acids; for if you take a little of any of those, and pour a little acid upon
it, there is made a great effervescency, and after that a Coagulum, but if you
add more acid, the matter will all dissolve.

An acid can likewise Precipitate what an alkali has dissolved, as we see in
the Operation of the Magistery of Sulphur, and this because the acid having
dissolved and separated the parts of the alkali makes it let go its hold, and
the body precipitates by its own weight.

When Milk coagulates by the means of an acid, it is because it contains a
great deal of Cheese, into which the acid enters, and losing its motion weighs
it down; whence it comes to pass that the Coagulum which is made with a weak
acid, precipitates much less than that which is made with a greater quantity of
acid; but if you should in curiosity pour a great deal of acid upon the
precipitated Coagulum, you would find it dissolve by degrees.

The fermentation of Dough, and other matters of the same nature does proceed
from this, that the natural salts having been put into motion by trituration or
some other cause do rarifie and dissolve, as much as they can, whatsoever
resists their motion; but because these acid salts do exert their activity by
little and little, and do meet with much resistance, the solution is made
slowly, and the division of some parts is with difficulty enough. And this is
that which causes the matter to swell as it does, and to take up greater room
than it had before.

Leaven does increase the fermentation in dough, because it self being a paste
whereof the salts are become free to act by means of a long fermentation, these
salts do easily join with those of the other paste, or dough, and do help them
to rarifie and dissolve the whole.

The same may be likewise said of other acid matters which cause a fermentation.

But when the acids have rarefied the matter as much as they are able, they
lose their motion in it, and then the matter coagulates, that is to say,
returns into the same extension as before.

There is still one effect of acids, which seems different from those I have
now spoken of, that they do preserve certain bodies which are put into them, as
salt keeps or preserves meat. Thus when young Cucumbers, Samphire, or Capers
are steeped in Vinegar, there is no fermentation with them, and consequently no
corruption.

The reason of which is that the parts of Cucumbers and other like things being
very viscuous and sluggish, the acids do insinuate to dissolve them, but they
have not there their motion free enough to make their jostles, and to divide
the parts minutely, so that the acids of the Vinegar do only fix in the pores
of these matters and coagulate in them.

It is this coagulation which hinders the Cucumbers from corrupting, for these
acids do shut their pores, and serve for so many little pegs, wherewith to
sustain their parts firm and quiet. Sea Salt which is an acid does preserve
meat, and many other matters, for the same reason. I have already spoken of
that in my Remarks upon the Principles.

The Coagulation then which acids do cause may justly be said to be an
imperfect dissolution of bodies, and I could here relate a great many other
Examples to prove what I have asserted. But I shall content my self with those
already said. And now let us see whether this discourse can furnish us with any
thing that illustrates the digestion of Aliments in the Stomach.

Most of our modern Philosophers have not spared the notion of acid, when they
have endeavored to explicate digestion, they have conceived the Membranes of
the Stomach to be all impregnated with it, and many of them not contented with
this liquor alone have brought some more of it from the Spleen and Pancreas:
but if all these acids were really in the Stomach, the aliments would not
escape coagulating, and consequently an Indigestion, as uses to happen, after
taking too many acids at Meals; for conceive never so great a quantity of them,
either there would not be enough to dissolve the Aliments, or else the
Membranes of the Stomach would be attenuated and concocted too, as well as that
which they contain, which nevertheless does not happen in the natural temper of
the body.

There is no need of seeking after these imaginary acids to cause digestion;
the spittle which mixes with the Aliments as they receive their first
Trituration between the Teeth, will furnish us with enough to actuate the
Fermentation in the Stomach; there is but little acid requisite to set the
parts in motion, but when once they are moved, they do contain enough Salts and
Spirits of the same nature, which being quickened by the heat of this viscus
will break all their Chains, and find a vent out, whence does infallibly follow
an attenuation of the Aliment into a Chylous substance.

It will be said, without doubt, that the irritation in the Stomach, which is
called Hunger, cannot be produced by any thing but an acid, which finding no
more Aliments to work upon, uses to act upon the Membranes themselves. But I
think I shall explicate this Irritation better, according to my own opinion,
than that of these men; for I may with reason enough say, that the spittle
finding the stomach empty of all nourishment, ferments alone, and creates this
Irritation, seeing that spittle, as every body must grant, is loaded with a
Salt; but as for them, they must make an acid to come from the membranes, which
nevertheless does not irritate them, but only when it meets with nothing else
in the Stomach to exercise upon, which is a thing hard enough to comprehend.

I know very well that some of them to avoid this difficulty will say, that the
acid is generated in the stomach from the remainder of that which is eaten,
which continuing some time in the stomach produces a Leaven after the same
manner as Dough; but then they must explain to me what the Ferment did consist
of, which served to digest the first Aliments that the Infant took.

Another Objection may be made to what I have said touching digestion; it is,
that whereas I have maintained that acids do dissolve when they abound, and
Coagulate when they are but few in a great deal of matter, it should happen
that Spittle should then be apter to Coagulate the Aliments in the stomach, and
cause indigestion, than would a greater quantity of acids, for it seems,
according to my discourse, the more acids are found in a matter, the more
liable it must be to dissolve.

To resolve this difficulty, which seems to be very considerable, we must
observe, that the natural acids of Aliments taken into the stomach, are
sufficient to rarifie and dissolve those bodies which hinder their motion, when
it has been begun by Mastication, or by some salt of the spittle, which serves
as a Leaven to them, much after the same manner as the salts of meal do rarifie
the Paste, when they have been actuated before by Trituration and Leaven
together; but now if there happens to be too much acid in the Aliments that are
taken into the stomach, they will have the same effects as Cucumbers and those
other things I mentioned, which are preserved in Vinegar. The acids will indeed
endeavor to cut in pieces what stands in their way, but having to do with
parts too viscous and heavy, they will soon lose all their activity, and fix by
their quantity, and their gravity the natural salt of these Aliments, as
Vinegar fixes that of Cucumbers; for when the acids do shut the pores of the
matter, and keep them firm and quiet, the natural salt cannot exalt so as to
cause any Fermentation or digestion.

The reason then why a small portion of acids will cause digestion in the
stomach, and a greater quantity will hinder it, is that the small quantity will
join with the natural salt of the Aliments, and have its operation without
shutting the pores of the matter, whereas a great store of acids will quite
fill the pores of this matter, and hinder the motion of the natural salt; for
it is not enough that there be a great many acids, to cause such a dissolution,
these acids must have room to move in, and to make their jostles.

Thus these effects do make nothing against what I have asserted concerning
acids, for a greater quantity of them will always have more disposition, and
tendency to a dissolution; but if this great quantity does Coagulate diverse
things, it is only by accident, and through the disposition of the matter into
which the acid points have entered.

What I have here established concerning acids may serve very much to explicate
the nature of Fevers, and their principal symptoms.

First of all every body must grant, that when there are Obstructions in our
bodies, the obstructed matter does ferment and sour, as Dough, Wine, and
several other things grow sour by being stale.

This matter by Fermenting sends saline or acid vapors into the mass of blood,
which do cause diverse alterations in it, according to their quantity, and
quality, for these acids are commonly mixed with sulphurs, which are a kind of
Vehicle to the acids, and are more or less corrupted, according as the matter
whence they are derived has sojourned more or less in the obstructed part.

Now if these acid vapors are carried into the vessels, but only in such a
quantity as is fit to make a kind of Leaven, they will then rarifie the blood
too much, and whereas they by consequence do increase its motion and heat, they
do cause that which we call a Fever; this Fever must remain as long as the
Ferment continues in the blood, and according as there comes a new supply of
matter in place of that which nature has thrown off.

But if a greater quantity of acids should rise all of a sudden from out of the
Obstructions, then there must needs happen a kind of Coagulation, for these
acids thus abounding, and fixing the grosser part of the blood, do partly lose
their motion, and quiet the Ebullition of the blood by fixing its parts.

It is this kind of Congelation which causes those cold shiverings, which are
felt, before the hot fit begins; for as the heat is derived from the motion of
the Spirits, the cold is produced from the cessation of their motion.

The cold fit continues until the Spirits have by their activity rarefied this
Congelation; for the Spirits being continually supplied with additional forces
do make violent assaults until they have made their way free.

The Coagulum being dissolved, the blood should seem to Circulate as it did
before, but because the matter of the Coagulum is converted into a Leaven, this
Leaven makes the blood to boil, and so causes a Fever; this Fever continues
until the blood is freed from all this Ferment, either by Transpiration, or by
Urine.

Now to conceive how this Coagulum may be converted into a Leaven, we must
consider that the Spirits of the blood have lost most of their acidity in
dissolving this Coagulum, and that there remains but only acidity enough to
produce a Fermentation.

Nevertheless you must not think I mean by this Congelation now spoken of, a
Coagulum altogether like to that in Milk, or to that which happens, when an
acid liquor is syringed into the Veins of an Animal, for these Congelations are
too strong, and there would then happen the same thing, or very near the same
as does to the Animal, who soon afterward falls into Convulsions, and dies,
because the course of the Spirits and blood would be entirely stopped, and they
would never be able to break through so great an obstacle: but I do understand
here that the blood is made thicker than it was, and has not so free a motion
as it had before, which is enough to cause such cold fits.

Now it remains for me to explicate how it comes to pass that Fevers have
their returns regularly by fits.

The matter that makes the Obstructions which I have laid down for the
Fundamental cause of Fevers, begins not to send forth its vapors, nor to
disperse its acid salt into the blood in order to cause a Fever, until it has
got together a certain quantity in the obstructed vessels, and then it is
probable that there is a new discharge of the matter.

This discharge or eruption of Feverish matter must happen at set times, so
long as the Obstruction lasts, because the humors which Circulate to the
obstructed parts, and there stop, are always in an equal quickness and an equal
quantity.

Now because in a Tertian, the vessels wherein the obstruction happens, do
acquire in two days a sufficient repletion of matter to produce the Eruption
and Fermentation I have spoken of, the Fits do come to operate every second day.

But because in a Quartan the humors are more tenacious and heavy, and flow
with less expedition, the Fermentation and eruption must needs be slower, and
consequently the fits more distant the one from the other.

The Quotidian Ague is caused by a Saline Pituita which is naturally fluid
enough to make the matter ferment in less time, wherefore it is that the fits
do return every day.

We may reason concerning the other kinds of Fevers upon the same principle,
and explicate all the accidents that happen, but I have no design to enlarge my
self further upon this subject, I should think it would be too great a
digression, and a book should rather be made on purpose, to express all the
circumstances which might be deduced from it.

Volatile Salt of Tartar.
This Operation is the Salt of the Lees of Wine, volatilized by fermentation.

Dry the Lees of wine with a gentle fire, and fill with them two thirds of a
large earthen or glass Retort, place this Retort in a Reverberatory Furnace,
and fitting to it a large Receiver, give a small fire to it to heat the Retort
by degrees, and to drive forth an insipid phlegm; when vapors begin to rise,
you must take out the phlegm, and luting carefully the junctures of your
vessels, quicken the fire by little and little, until you find the Receiver
filled with white clouds; continue it in this condition, and when you perceive
the Receiver to cool, raise the fire to the utmost extremity, and continue it
so, until there rise no more vapors. When the vessels are cold, unlute the
Receiver, and shaking it about to make the Volatile salt which sticks to it
fall to the bottom, pour it all into a Bolt-head; fit to it a Head with a small
Receiver; lute well the junctures, and placing it in sand, give a litttle fire
under it, and the Volatile salt will rise, and stick to the head, and the top
of the Bolt-head; take off your head, and set on another in its place: gather
your salt, and stop it up quickly, for it easily dissolves into a liquor;
continue the fire, and take care to gather the salt according as you see it
appear; but when there rises no more salt, a liquor will distill, of which you
must draw about three ounces, and then put out the fire.

This salt is in great request for to purify the blood, by sweat or urine: it
may be given in the Palsy, Apoplexy, Epilepsie, Quartan and Tertian Agues, and
to open Obstructions; the dose is from six grains to fifteen in some proper
liquor.

The distilled liquor is a Volatile salt that is risen with the phlegm; it is
called the Volatile Spirit of Tartar, and has the same virtues as the salt; its
dose is from eight to four and twenty drops.

After this same manner the Volatile salt of Beans, Soot, and diverse Fruits and
Seeds may be prepared.

Remarks.
The Lees of Wine being incomparably more Fermented than the Tartar which is
found in the sides of vessels, we need not wonder if its salt is more Volatile.

This salt is sublimed in a Bolt-head, to the end the phlegm, which is too
heavy to rise easily so high, may not mix with it; but it is extraordinary hard
to keep this salt dry, it easily humects and dissolves into a liquor, wherefore
it were much better to draw it in a Spirit, and less of the Volatile part would
be lost, being detained by the phlegm.

Nevertheless because there are several persons who are as well pleased with
the sight of things, as their effects, this liquefied salt might then be mixed
with a sufficient quantity of Calcined bones powdered, to make thereof a Paste,
which might be made into little Pellets, to be put into a Bolt-head, and
fitting to it a Blind-head, this salt may be sublimed or rectified as before,
and this pure salt must be kept in Viols well stopped,

The difficulty there is in keeping this Volatile salt dry, as well as that of
other Vegetables, does proceed from this, that only the more essencial part is
volatilized, for there remains much sixth salt with the earth in the Retort.

This volatile salt becomes alkali by the means of fire, as other volatile
salts do, whereof I have already spoken in my Remarks upon the Principles; and
there is no manner of probability that it should have been of this nature,
either in the Plant or in the Lees, for the reasons that I have shown in the
same Remarks.

I shall add here, that if the alkali salt did exist in the Lees, but is not
able to expand it self, and get the predominancy of acids but only by a long
Fermentation, as the Chemists will have it, who follow the common way of
discoursing of these things, it would then necessarily follow that the more
Lees do ferment, the more they must lose of their acidity, because the alkali
would destroy it. Nevertheless the contrary to this happens; for Lees do sour
as they grow stale, and those who make Vinegar, do know well enough how to use
the Lees, and to make them ferment with their wine, when they would make
Vinegar quickly.

It seems to me from the consideration of this effect, that there is little
reason to follow the Sentiments of some, who have writ that the Lees of wine
abounding in volatile salt, and a sulphurous spirit do contain but very little
acid; for it is as plain as may be that this volatile salt is acid in the Lees,
and is the same that makes the acid spirit of Vinegar, being more volatile than
many other acids, to volatilize with its phlegm in the distillation. It is true
that salt of Tartar drawn by the Retort, does rise more easily than Spirit of
Vinegar, but this is from its being volatilized by the violent heat of fire.

Another mark that all the salt of Lees is acid, is this, that the Tartar does
all dissolve in the wine, and turns into Vinegar; for very little or no Lees,
or other Tartar, is to be found in the vessels wherein Vinegar is made,
although there was some naturally before, or though some more were added to it
as I have said in the Chapter of Vinegar.

Perhaps it will be objected, that Lees are sometimes added to wines grown ropy
and mucilaginous, to make them good again, and yet those wines are not sowred
by the Lees.

But this effect happens, when the former Fermentation becoming imperfect,
through the too great quantity of phlegm for the little proportion of salt that
was in the wines, the salt of the Lees does rarifie, exalt, and conjoin with
the Oily parts of the liquor that the Spirit of wine is made of, as I have said
in the Chapter of Wine.

For the wine does not sour, so long as the salt finds Oil to act upon, but it
does so, when this salt finds nothing to hinder it from expanding itself.

The volatile salt of Tartar produces much the same effects, as that of Beans,
and other seeds, and though many will needs give it sublime and extraordinary
virtues in comparison with other volatile salts, I do'nt see any reason for
such high conceits, nor that effects do answer their pretenses.

Volatile salts have a good use, when they find the pores and humors disposed
for perspiration, but they are full as dangerous, when the humors are not at
all prepared; for by their volatility they do put the humors into so great a
motion, that oftentimes the Fever is increased by them, and a translation made
to the Brain: wherefore you must consider well the Temper and present state of
your Patient, before you presume to give them.

That which remains in the Bolt-head, after the volatile salt, and spirit are
drawn off, is a black and stinking Oil mixed with the more phlegmatic part of
the liquor; you must separate this Oil in a Tunnel lined with brown paper; it
is good for the Palsy, for Cold pains, and for Hysterical women to smell to.

A Lee or Tartar Calcined is found in the Retort, out of which you may draw a
fixed alkali salt, as out of common Tartar, but in a much less quantity, for
that the greatest part of the salt of Lees is volatilized.

CHAP. XV. Of Opium.
Opium is a Tear, which distills of itself, or by Incision of the heads of
Poppies, found very frequently in Greece, in the Kingdom of Cambaia, and the
territories of Grand-Cairo in Egypt: there are three sorts of it, the Black,
the White, and the Yellow.

The Inhabitants of those Countries do keep this Opium for their own use, and
do send us only the Meconium, which is nothing else but the Juice of these same
Poppy-heads, drawn by expression, and then thickened, and wrapped up in leaves to
transport the better. It is this Drug that we improperly call Opium, and always
use for want of the true; but being more impure than the true, it has not the
same activity, and strength.

A Meconium may be made after the same manner with the heads of those Poppies
that grow in Italy, Languedoc, and Provence, but it will prove much weaker than
the former.

The Opium which comes from Thebes, or else from Grand-Cairo, is accounted the
best, you must choose it Black, Inflammable, bitter to the taste, and a little
acrimonious, its smell must be disagreeable and stupefactive.

Extract of Opium, called Laudanum.
This Operation is the purer part of Opium drawn in water and Spirit of wine,
and reduced to the consistence of an extract.

Cut into slices four ounces of good Opium, and put it into a bolt-head; pour
upon it a quart of Rainwater well filtred; stop the bolt-head, and setting it
in sand, give your fire by degrees, then increase it, to make the liquor boil
for two hours, strain it warm, and pour it into a bottle.

Take the Opium which remains undissolved in the Rainwater; dry it in an
earthen pan, over a small fire, and putting it into a Mattress pour upon it
Spirit of wine to the height of four fingers; stop the Mattress, and digest the
matter twelve hours in hot Ashes; afterward strain the liquor, and there will
remain a glutinous earth which is to be flung away.

Evaporate both these dissolutions of Opium separately, in earthen or glass
vessels, in a Sand-heat, to the consistence of honey, then mix them, and finish
the drying this mixture with a very gentle heat, to give it the consistence of
Pills, or a solid Extract.

It is the most certain Soporifick that we have in Physic, it allays all pains
which proceed from too great an activity of the humors, it is good for the
Toothache, applied to the tooth, or else to the Temple-artery in a plaster, it
is used for to stop spitting of blood, the bloudy-flux, the flux of the menses
and hemorrhoids, for the colic, for hot defluxions on the eyes, and to quiet
all sorts of griping pains: the dose of it is from half a grain to three, in
some convenient Conserve, or else dissolved in a Julep.

Remarks.
Opium is compounded of a Spirituous part and a gross terrestrious Rosine; the
Spirituous part may be easily dissolved in water, but the Resinous requires a
more convenient Menstruum, such as Spirit of Wine. You must dry the Opium after
the first dissolution, least the Spirit of Wine be too much weakened by the
watery part that remains, which would hinder the solution from being done so
well as it should be.

Distilled Vinegar dissolves Opium, but the acids may diminish its virtue, by
destroying or fixing its volatile part, which serves for a vehicle to the other.

Spirit of wine alone might be used to dissolve both parts of the Opium, but it
might be feared it would carry away with it the volatile part in the
Evaporation.

All that is in the Opium is preserved by my description; for the Resinous part
dissolved in the Spirit of Wine cannot evaporate with it, because it is the
heavier; and the other part which I call Volatile in comparison with the first
is mixed with a little Rosine that keeps it back, while the water evaporates.
The truth of this I have found by experience, and any body else may try as well
as I have done, by distilling these liqours. Lastly it is hard to use any
greater precaution than this, for the preservation of all the pure parts of
Opium, and fewer Menstruums can be used that are more convenient.

If in curiosity you weigh the glutinous earth after it is dried, you will find
it to be half an ounce.

Almost all Authors have appointed to torrifie Opium before it be dissolved, to
the end a certain malignity which they say is in it may be evaporated; but that
which they call malignity is nothing but the Spirits, or Sulphurs that are most
volatile, whereof I spoke but now; so that by the Torrefaction they deprive it
of its more active part. They do further add to the Extract commonly drawn with
Spirit of Wine, Coral, Pearl, Treacle, Extract of Saffron, Cordial Confections,
Hysterical ingredients and other things which may resist a cold malignity in
the fourth degree which they pretend to be in Opium. But experience convinces
us that it is not so dangerous, when given in the foresaid dose, so that there
is no need at all of losing its volatile part by Torrefaction, nor of mixing it
with other ingredients which may hinder its operation, or retard its effect. It
belongs to the Physician, when he thinks fit to give it, to judge whether there
be any need of an Hysteric, or Cordial, which he may appoint to be mixed upon
the spot.

I shall not stay to examine here whether Opium is cold or hot; they who have
made the Anatomy of this mixed, do know very well that it is almost all of it
Sulphur. I shall endeavor to explicate its effects the most sensibly I can
according to the Rules of Chemistry.

The virtue of Opium consists in causing sleep, and that by calming the motion
of the Spirits; for since watchfulness does proceed from the motion of the
Spirits, which by rarifying the humors in the little passages of the Brain do
augment their Circulation, it may surely be said with probability enough that
sleep is caused by some condensation of the humors, which happens from a repose
of the Spirits in the Brain. According to this Principle then there must be
contained in Opium, and all other Soporificks, a certain substance that
inviscates the Spirits, and hinders them for some time from Circulating so fast
as they did before. Let us examine now, whether any such thing can probably be
found in Opium, by the Analysis I have made of it: first of all I have observed
a Spirituous part, but after that has been drawn out by means of Rainwater,
there remains a gummous and terrestrious matter, and this is the substance that
I find so proper to produce this effect. For nothing in Physic is so fit to
thicken the blood, and other humors, as things that are Mucilaginous: Milk, and
the Emulsions which are drawn from diverse seeds, the Water-Lily, Lettice, nay
and all temperate Aliments, do frequently incline to sleep, because they are
impregnated with a gummous substance, which mixing in the blood, does serve to
agglutinate the Spirits, and to moderate the quickness of their motion; this
now being supposed, it is easy to conceive how Opium makes one sleep, seeing
it is loaded with Mucilaginous parts, which may be conveyed into the vessels.

But without doubt it will be here objected, that Opium is full of subtle
parts, which on the contrary instead of condensing the Spirits must needs
rarifie them; and further, that according to my discourse all sorts of Gummous
matters should incline to sleep as well Opium, which is a thing manifestly
false.

In the first place, I answer, that the Spirits of Opium being actuated by the
heat of the Stomach do serve to raise the Gummous part, and to conduct it into
the little passages of the Brain, but having there introduced them, they either
fly away through their volatile nature, or else condense with the moisture of
the Brain. The same thing happens, after drinking any Spirituous liquor, such
as Wine, Cider, or Beer; for the Sulphurous Spirits of these liquors carrying
along with them some phlegmatic parts, do conduct them into the little vessels
of the Brain, or else do cause some Coagulation there, whence it comes to pass
that a man who is drunk commonly sleeps until the Spirits of the liquor he is
intoxicated with are in part spent, or evaporated out of his Brain.

In the second place, I say that all Gummous or viscous things are not able to
cause a sleepiness as Opium does, because they have not equally the same
proportion of volatile Spirits to convey them into the Brain. They may indeed,
by giving more consistence to the blood, moderate its motion a little, and
excite some disposition to sleeping; but it will not be done so quickly as by
the means of Opium, and they likewise do it with a great deal less force.

If you should mix volatile Spirits with the Gummous matters I now spoke of, it
would not follow that they would prove narcotick as Opium is, because the
Spirits not being capable of so strict an union with those matters, as the
Spirituous part of Opium has received with its viscous substance, they would
soon separate from one another in the stomach, and the gummous matter would
want a vehicle to convey it into the channels of the brain, as would be
requisite in order to cause sleep.

The viscous parts of Opium insinuating into the small channels of the brain,
do there produce a condensation or inspissation of the humors, until by little
and little new Spirits do draw together, which by dissolving and rarifying this
glue, do carry it along with the blood, or other humors. And then it is that
the sleeping ceases, a man finds himself awake as before.

Reason may be given why pains in many places are assuaged after the effect of
Laudanum, for these pains being caused by an agitation of the Spirits, when
these Spirits are condensed, the pain consequently ceases. And this Opium does
perform exceeding well, as I have said.

Those who fall into Deliriums in a continued Fever, do find themselves
strangely relieved by the use of Opium, by reason that the principal cause of
this accident is an acrimonious salt, which is got into the Brain, and
irritates its membranes. Now Laudanum which is a viscous substance, unites with
these salts by means of its Sulphur, and takes away their Acrimony. It likewise
stops the Dysentery, the Flux of the menses, and other Hemorrhagies by
sweetning the acrimonious Salts which fomented them.

Lastly Opium may be said to be one of the greatest Remedies that we have, when
it is properly administered, and in a reasonable dose: but when it is given in
too great a quantity, it so thickens and glues the humors in the brain by its
viscous parts, that the Spirits which come afterward to succor, not being
able to dissolve this viscosity, are forced to stop and congeal likewise by
little and little, until at last they lose all their motion, whence it comes to
pass that many do dye upon the taking of Opium.

It is remarkable, that many do so accustom themselves to the use of Opium,
that at last it is scarce able to make them sleep, except when they take three
or four times as much as is commonly given. There are some men in France, who
can venture to take to a dram, and this quantity does no more in them than
two grains in another.

It is well known that the Turks will take of it to the bigness of a hazle nut,
to fortify themselves when they are going to fight. The reason that they can
do so is, that Opium passing a great many times into the small vessels of the
Brain, has in great measure dilated them. So that finding the passages very
large, it makes little or no stop, unless taken in a greater quantity than
before; for the Turks do not only accustom themselves to the taking of Opium by
little and little, but being of a hotter Temperament than we, they supply more
Spirits to the Brain for rarefaction of the humors, which Opium might there
have condensed.

If the Turks do find themselves fortified so soon as they have taken Opium, it
is by reason of these volatile Spirits, which work in them much the same
effect, as the Spirits of Wine use to do with us.

Some have writ in opposition to what I have established on this subject, and
say, that if we have regard to the quantity of Narcotick vapors that may arise
from a small dose of Opium, it ought not to be imagined that those vapors
should be able to shut the channels of the Spirits and humors which make a
defluxion upon some part; but that we should rather conclude the mitigation of
pains, and stopping of defluxions to proceed from a just proportion of the salt
and sulphur of Opium, and from the secret ferment they contain.

But this Objection will give us little trouble to answer, when we consider
that although the vapors caused by it are but few, yet the vessels of the
Brain, in which the Animal Spirits do move, are exceeding delicate, and easy
to be obstructed; and that the too great activity of the Spirits, which often
fly into the diseased parts, being thus abated by the viscous nature of Opium,
there must needs follow thereupon some ease and comfort, without any need at
all of admitting a stoppage of the vessels which contain the humors.

As for the proportion of salt, and sulphur in Opium, and the secret Ferment
they pretend to acquaint us with, in order to explicate this matter, I know
they are high terms indeed, but illustrate the matter very little, for though
they say these salts and sulphurs do unite with Homogeneous particles that they
meet with, and destroy such as are the cause of the distemper, yet we can never
by this means obtain any clear Idea of that which makes Opium to be
soporiferous.

Besides the virtue which Opium has to cause sleep, I have observed that it is
often Sudorifick. I conceive this effect must not be attributed only to the
volatile parts of this mixed, which may be thought to operate this way, after
they are disingaged from its viscosity, but rather to this, that during sleep,
the inward vessels being as it were obstructed, or in some manner coagulated,
and the Spirits finding resistance in their passage, do reflect, or bend their
motion to the outward parts, and draw along with them some moisture through the
pores. That which confirms me in this opinion is the consideration, that diverse
persons do use always to sweat, when they are asleep, though they have not
taken any Opium at all. Now it may happen that in the operation of Opium, the
Spirits finding more resistance within than they are wont, may tend outward
with the more force, and consequently incline to sweat more than in natural
sleep.

Some prejudiced Chemist may not relish perhaps this my explication, because I
do not season it with salt enough, and Sulphur, and other principles; but
although the five principles which may be drawn from Vegetables may also be
drawn from Opium, I never use them but when they are necessary to explicate
some effect; for whenever I find they cannot satisfy my reason, nothing
shall hinder me from pursuing my thoughts farther, and searching otherwhere for
some better explication. In fine the Beauty of Chemistry does not consist in
suiting our opinions to those of ordinary Chemists, who resolving to explicate
all the Events of nature by their Principles, which they manage according to
their own fashion, do reject as ridiculous whatsoever does not agree with their
Sentiments; but it rather consists in examining and imitating what is done
Naturally, and so searching for reasons that are most probable, and such as may
be said to come nearest to truth, though a man be fain to forsake the way that
others have trod in.

CHAP. XVI. Of Aloes.
ALoes is the thickened Juice of a Plant bearing the same name, it grows in many
Countries, especially in Egypt, whence it is brought to us; the best is that
which is called Hepatick, and Succotrine, because it bears the color of a
Liver, and a great deal of it is brought from an Island of Persia, called
Soccotra; the Hepatick is drawn by Incisions made on the Plant; it is friable,
of an offensive smell, and very bitter taste.

There is another sort of Aloes, which does not differ from the former, but
only in that being drawn by expression, many Impurities are mixed with it, it
is compact, heavy, and smells not so strong as the other. It is called Aloes
Caballina, because Farriers do use it most for their horses.

Aloes is not only used inwardly, as I shall show, speaking of its Extract, but
it is also used outwardly in many Unguents and Plasters that are detersive,
and discutient.

Its Tincture is also drawn with Spirit of Wine, by the same method as I shall
describe that of Myrrh; it is discutient, detersive, good against Gangrenes,
and to Incarnate: it is used in Injections to dissolve gypsous humors, and to
cleanse wounds, and old ulcers.

Extract of Aloes.
This Operation is an Aloes depurated from some feculencies which it contained.

Dissolve eight ounces of Aloes Succotrina in a sufficient quantity of Juice of
Roses, or a strong decoction of Violet Flowers; let the dissolution settle five
or six hours, then decant it, and when you have filtred it, evaporate the
liquor gently, until the matter remains in the consistence of an Extract, keep
it in a pot.

It Is a good Remedy to purge the stomach, fortifying it withal, the dose is
from fifteen grains to a dram in Pills; it is likewise good to bring down the
menstrua.

Remarks.
This Preparation is nothing but a Purification of Aloes into an Hepatick
liquor. Pills are made of this Extract, and are called Pills of Frankfort, and
some do add to them Mastich, Rhubarb, and other Stomachick Ingredients; it is
the Basis of the Angelical Pills.

Aloetick Pills may be taken at meat, or a little before meals, they seldom
purge till the next day. Wherefore they have been called Pilulae ante cibum.
They bring the Hemorrhoids, and Terms, in that Aloes do rarefie the blood by
its Fermentative Salt, and stimulates it out of the veins with great force.

The Extract of Aloes taken alone is pungent upon the stomach. It is given
immediately before meat, that the aliments by their viscous quality may dull
the keen operation of this remedy, and so may serve as a Corrective to it.

CHAP. XVII. Elixir Proprietatis.
THIS Operation is a Tincture of Myrrh, Aloes, and Saffron, drawn in the
Spirits of wine and Sulphur.

Powder grossly, and mix together two ounces of good Myrrh, the same of Aloes
Succotrina and one ounce of good Saffron; put this mixture into a Bolt-head,
and pour upon it Spirit of wine a fingers height above it; stop well the
bolt-head, and let them digest two days, then open it, and add to it Spirit of
sulphur, until the liquor is four fingers above the matter; shake it all well
together, and having fitted another bolt-head to the former in order to make a
Circulating vessel, set it in digestion in horse dung, or such like heat the
space of four days. Then decant the liquor, and strain it, keep it in a bottle
well stopped.

It is a very good remedy to fortify the heart, it purifies the blood, and
works by sweat, it is likewise good to help digestion, to bring down the
menses, and in hysterical vapors; the dose is from seven to twelve drops in
some proper liquor.

Remarks.
The name Elixir has been given to many Infusions, or Tinctures of spirituous
bodies prepared in spirituous menstruum's. They would express by this word a
very precious liquor, or a Quintessence. Paracelsus was the first who described
this preparation. Many others since him have changed some circumstances
relating to it, but all have tended to the same end, which is to draw forth the
Tincture of those three ingredients.

I have used but one ounce of Saffron, because this little flower is very
light, and takes up a great deal of room. Though we should use more of it, the
menstruum would receive no more than it does, for there is as much in that
quantity as is sufficient to fill the pores of the menstruum.

I do leave the ingredients to infuse two days in Spirit of wine all alone,
that only their more sulphurous part may be drawn by this Spirit. The acid
Spirit which is mixed afterward, being sweetened by the ramous parts of the
Spirit of wine has only force remaining to load itself with the Tincture. This
mixture of Spirit of wine, and Spirit of sulphur do give the Tincture a very
pleasant smell, and they have some cordial quality besides. Wherefore I would
not advise the changing this menstruum, as some do, by substituting in their
place Spirit of Hartshorn.

If you would, you might draw more Tincture from that which remains in the
bolt-head, but it will not be so strong nor so good as the first, because it
has already parted with its more volatile parts.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Tabaco.
TAbaco called Nicotiana, or Petum, is a Plant with broad Leaves, that grows
abundantly in many places of America, as Brazile, and Peru, but the best that
is brought into France is from Florida, it has been transplanted among us, but
our Country not being hot enough, that which grows here, is not so strong as
the Tabaco that is brought out of America.

Tabaco, either chewed or smoked now and then, makes a great discharge of
humors from the Head; but if it be used too immoderately, it is apt to cause
several Diseases, such as the Palsy, and Apoplexy. It is beaten, and applied
to tumors to discuss them, it being full of Spirits which do rarifie them and
open the pores. It is likewise infused in common water, and Tettars and other
Itchings of the Skin are washed with this Infusion, but you must have a care
that the water be not too much charged with it, for fear of giving a vomit.

Tabaco kills Serpents, Vipers, Lizards, and such like Animals, if you open a
hole in their flesh, and thrust a little bit into it, or if you should smoke
them with it.

Distillation of Tabaco.
Put into a Glass-Cucurbite eight ounces of good Tabaco cut small; pour upon it
about an equal weight of Phlegm of Vitriol, cover the Cucurbite with its head,
and digest the matter in sand for a day, fit to it a Receiver, and distill about
five ounces of liquor in a small fire, keep it in a viol.

It is a powerful vomit, the dose is from two drachms to six in some proper
liquor, it is likewise good for Tettars, and the Itch, being rubbed lightly
with it.

Put that which remains in the Cucurbite into an earthen Retort, or Glass one
luted, place it in a Furnace, and fit to it a great Receiver, and luting close
the joints, begin with a small fire to raise all the phlegm; augment it by
little and little, and the Spirits will come forth confusedly with a black Oil;
continue the fire until there comes no more, then let the vessels cool, and
unlute them; pour that which you find in the Receiver into a Tunnel lined with
brown paper, the watery part will pass through, while the black and fetid Oil
remains in the filter, keep it in a viol: a dram of it may be mixed with two
ounces of Hog's Grease, it is a good Remedy for the itch, and for Tettars.

An Alkali salt may be drawn from the Coals that remain in the Retort, after
the same manner as the Salt of Guaiacum. This salt is a Sudorifick, the dose is
from four grains to ten in some convenient liquor.

Remarks.
Tabaco is full of such piercing sulphurs and volatile salts, that so soon as
ever it is in the stomach, it falls a pricking the Fibers, and moving to vomit.

The Oil of Tabaco is so great a vomit, that if one should but hold ones Nose a
little over the Viol, in which it is kept, it would make one vomit.

One day I made a small Incision in the skin of a dog's thigh, and thrusting in
a little tent dipped in the Oil of Tabaco, the dog immediately purged both
upwards and downwards with a great deal of violence.

The fixed salt of Tabaco may be made as I have said, but if you would have any
quantity of it, you must join a great deal of other Tabaco with it, for
receiving so little matter out of the Retort, it would be hard to get a dram
of Salt.

CHAP. XIX. Extractum Panchymagogum.
THIS Extract is a farrago of the purer substances of diverse purgative and
cordial medicines.

Take an ounce and a half of the Pulp of Coloquintida, one ounce of the Pulvis
Diarrhodon Abbatis, so much good Agarick, and two ounces of black Hellebore,
powder them all grossly, and put them into a mattress: pour upon it rainwater
distilled, four fingers above the mixture. Stop the mattress close, and set it
in digestion in hot sand, or in horse dung, three or four days, and shake the
vessel ever now and then. After this pass your infusion through a cloth: pour
upon the residence a like quantity of the same liquor; let it infuse as before,
then strain and express it strongly; mix your infusions, and let them settle,
until they become clear, decant them, and evaporate the liquor in an earthen
pan in a sand-heat with a little fire, to the consistence of a Syrop: then mix
with them half an ounce of Rosine of Scammony, and two ounces of Extract of
Aloes, evaporate the whole to the consistence of an Extract.

It purges all the humors well, the dose is from one scruple to two in Pills.

Remarks.
The flesh or pulp of Coloquintida is nothing but the apple it self cleansed
from its Seeds. It purges the Brain, the best is that which is whitest and
lightest.

The powder Diarrhodon Abbatis is Cordial, and resists the malignity of humors,
it takes its name from the Rose, which is its Basis.

The Agarick is a Rosinous Mushrom, that grows on the Larix, the best is the
whiter, lighter, and most friable; it is used for to purge the brain.

The root of black Hellebore is a very strong purger of Melancholy, wherefore
it is given to Hypochondriacal persons, and even to the Maniacal; it gives a
vomit, when taken alone, but with this mixture it fixes downwards; the white is
a poison, taken inwardly; it is never used but for sneezing powders.

Scammony is a very Purgative resinous juice, the best is most friable, and
which being powdered has a gray color drawing toward white: its Rosine is
drawn from it as that of Jalap.

Aloes is said to purge Choler, I have spoken of its virtues sufficiently
already, when I described its Extract.

Spirit of Wine is commonly used to make this Extract, and it may seem to be so
much the purer, being drawn by this dissolvent, rather than by a watery
Menstruum; for spirit of wine dissolves only the more Balsamic and purer part
of mixed bodies: but nevertheless I choose rather to prefer the use of Dew, or
else Rainwater, nay and even common water before Spirit of wine for several
reasons.

First, because in the evaporation of the liquidity of the Extract, drawn by
Spirit of wine, a great many of the more subtle parts are lost, which this
dissolvent had volatilized. And indeed it cannot be denied, but some useful
parts will evaporate, let us use what dissolvent we please; but it is plain
there is no such great loss, when watery menstruums are used, as when Spirit of
wine. Now we should always prefer such menstruums, as are best able to preserve
the virtue of the mixed, whose Extract we intend to draw.

The second is, because Spirit of wine does always leave some impression of
heat and acrimony in the Extracts it draws, which the liquors that I use do not
do.

The third is, because Spirit of wine is not so convenient a menstruum to
dissolve the salts which the Ingredients we use are full of, and it is in this
salt, that their greatest virtue does consist.

Wherefore we ought to choose such dissolvents, as can best preserve the virtue
of mixed bodies, and such as are familiar to our nature. We must use Spirit of
wine to extract Rosines, such as that of Scammony, Jalap, Turbith; but whenever
an Extract can be drawn with a watery menstruum, it is better to use that,
rather than another, for the reasons I have mentioned.

Purgative medecins have been divided into Melanagogues, Phlegmagogues, and
Cholagogues. By Melanagogues are understood those that chiefly purge
Melancholy, by Phlegmagogues such as purge Phlegm, and by Cholagogues those
that evacuate Choler; so then by mixing these three sorts of Remedies, a
composition is made that is called Panchymagogue, that is to say, purging all
the humors, as does the Extract I have described.

Now to explicate the action of Purgative Remedies upon all the several humors,
you must consider in the first place, that Melancholy is a very Tartareous
humor, and full of fixed salts; that Phlegm is very viscous, and descending from
the brain sticks like Glue to the internal Membrane of the Viscera, and that
Choler is very thin and easy to rarifie.

The Remedies which are called Melanagogue, such as Scammony, Senna, etc. are
full of Lixivious Salts, which are very good dissolvents of the Melancholic
humor contained in the lower parts, in that these sort of Remedies do always
descend, and being strong purgers, do raise a Fermentation wherever they come.

Phlegmagogues, such as Agarick, Coloquintida, etc. do purge the Phlegm chiefly
that is contained in the Brain, because these Remedies are full of volatile
parts which easily sublime thither by means of the Natural heat, and rarifying
this humor do make it come down by the ordinary ways of Purgation.

Cholagognes, such as Cassia, Rhubarb, etc. which are mild Remedies, and are
not strong enough to excite so great a fermentation as the others, do only
purge Choler, it being very soluble, and easy to ferment; but they are not
able to reach Melancholy, or Phlegm, by reason of their thickness; wherefore
there is no need of wondering, why a greater evacuation of Choler than other
humors is effected by these Remedies.

It is further observable, that the Remedies which purge Phlegm and Melancholy,
do remain, or leave their impression in the body a longer time than those that
purge Choler, because they more abound in Spirits or Salts: Moreover it is not
to be imagined, that these Phlemagogues, and Melanagogues do evacuate no Choler
at all, for they do force away all they can meet with, but because it is then
mixed with other humors, it appears not so plainly as when it is wrought upon
alone.

CHAP. XX. Of Turpentine.
THere are two sorts of Trees that the Turpentine comes from, by Incisions that
are made into them, to wit, the Turpentine Tree, and the Larix, or Larch-tree;
there are a great many of both sorts in hot Countries, such as Italy, Provence,
and even in Dauphine.

Turpentine is properly a liquid Rosine in the consistence of a Balsom; that
which is brought out of the Isle of Chios is best esteemed, and is also the
dearest; that which we commonly use, and is called Venice Turpentine, must be
clear, transparent, fragrant, and a little biting on the taste: it is used like
a Balsom for Wounds, it is very Diuretic, taken inwardly, and is therefore
given in Gonorrheas, in Bolus, or else dissolved in some liquor by means of a
little Yelk of an Egg, it gives the Urine a smell much like Violets. It is
often boiled in water, and then becomes solid like Rosine, and being so
prepared is made up into Pills, the Dose is from half a dram to a dram; if
you take too much of it, it gives the Headache.

If in curiosity you should boil a little Turpentine in water for a quarter of
an hour; and after you have removed it from the fire, if you should pour cold
water upon it, you would see a little skin spread it self upon the water, which
has many curious marble colors. And if you gather this skin into a lump, it
will become a white Turpentine.

Distillation of Turpentine.
This Operation is a separation of the Oil of Turpentine from its terrestrious
part.

Take three pounds of good Turpentine, and pour it into a Retort large enough
to remain half empty. Add to it a handful of Stupe, to prevent the thicker
parts of the Turpentine from rising when the liquor distills; you must cleanse
the inside of the neck of the Retort, and place it in a Furnace to distill in an
open fire; fit to it a Receiver, and luting the joints, begin the Distillation
with a very small fire only to warm the Retort, and drive out a volatile
spirit, after which augment the fire by degrees, there will come forth first a
clear Oil, then a yellow oil, and at last a red oil; take care to separate
these liquors as they do distill, and when you see the red oil begin to come
thick, take away the fire, and when the vessels are cold, unlute them. Keep all
these liquors separately in Viols.

The volatile Spirit is an excellent Aperitive, it is given from four to twelve
drops in some appropriate liquor, to expel Gravel out of the Reins or Ureters,
in the Nephritick Colic, or to dissolve Viscosities, it is likewise used in
Gonorrheas.

The first Oil serves for the same uses as the Spirit; the second and third do
serve as a Balsom to consolidate wounds, discuss tumors, and to fortify the
Nerves.

Break the Retort, and you will find in it a mass, melt and strain it to separate
the Stupe; it is a good Colophone, and is used in Plasters to dry and to
consolidate.

After this manner may be distilled Rosines, Mastich, Frankincense, Tacamahaca,
Gum Elemi, Varnish, Labdanum, and other Gums of this nature.

Remarks.
The Spirit of Turpentine is properly an Ethereal oil mixed with a little
phlegm, and Acid Essential salt, which renders it Aperitive, it is this Spirit
that gives the Turpentine its smell.

A great fire is requisite for to draw the last oil, and it becomes red,
through some Fuliginosities that fall upon it, before it comes forth of the
Retort.

If you should continue to raise the fire, until there comes no more liquor,
you would find in the Retort nothing but a little light, and very rarefied matter
that is good for nothing.

The Oil of Turpentine that is bought at the Druggists, is a mixture of Spirit,
and yellow oil.

The Oil of Turpentine being mixed with that of Vitriol, there grows a very
considerable heat, and if the Oil of Vitriol is strong, it makes an ebullition.
I have endeavored to give you a reason for it in the Remarks which I have made
upon Distillation of Vitriol.

CHAP. XXI. Of Benjamin.
BEnjamin called by some Assa Dulcis, is a Rosine that distills from a great
Tree in Foreign Countries, the name of it is unknown, though many have thought
fit to call it Laserpitium; this Tree is very common in Samaria, and in many
other adjacent Countries.

Benjamin is very much used by the Perfumers, and it has use also in Physic,
to resist the malignity of humors, and to fortify the Heart and Brain; you
must choose it clean, friable, and full of white spots, and that sort is called
Amygdaloides.

Flowers of Benjamin, and its Oil.
This is an exaltation of the volatile salts of Benjamin, and a separation of
its Oil, by distillation.

Take an earthen pot, high and narrow, with a little border round it, put into
it three or four ounces of clean Benjamin grossly powdered; cover the pot with a
Coffin of paper, and tie it round about under the border; set the pot into hot
ashes, and when the Benjamin is heated, the Flowers will sublime; take off the
Coffin every two hours, and fix another in its place; stop up quickly in a
glass the Flowers you find in the Coffins, and when those which afterward
sublime do begin to appear Oily, take the pot off the fire; put that which
remains into a little glass Retort, and fitting a Receiver to it, distill in a
Sand-heat a thick and fragrant Oil until nothing more comes forth, there will
remain in the Retort nothing but a very spongy earth.

The Flowers are good for Asthmatical persons, and to fortify the stomach; the
dose is from two grains to five in an Egg, or in Lozenges. The Oil is a Balsom
for wounds and ulcers.

Remarks.
Benjamin being full of a great many volatile parts, easily sublimes over the
smallest fire; the Flowers do rise in little needles that are very white; but
if you give never so little fire more than should be, they carry along with
them a small quantity of Oil, which makes them to be yellow and impure. You
must therefore perform the Operation in hot Ashes, or in Sand, to have the
Flowers fair.

The Flowers of Benjamin have a very pleasant acidity.

Tincture of Benjamin.
Take three ounces of Benjamin, and half an ounce of Storax, powder them
grossly, and put them into a bottle, or mattress half empty, pour upon them a
pint of Spirit of wine, stop your vessel close, and set it in warm horse-dung,
leave it in digestion for a Fortnight, after which filtrate the liquor, and
keep it in a Viol well stopped: some do add to it five or six drops of Balsom of
Peru, to give it a better smell: it is good to take away spots in the face, a
dram of it is put into four ounces of water, and it whitens like milk, this
water serves for a wash, and is called Virgin's Milk.

Remarks.
This Tincture is a dissolution of the Rosine of Benjamin made in Spirit of
Wine. When it is mixed in a great deal of water, it makes a Milk, because water
weakens the Spirit of Wine, and makes it quit what it held up dissolved. If you
let this Milk settle, the Rosine precipi(...) to the bottom of the vessel, and
the water becomes clear.

The Storax is added to this Tincture, to increase the goodness of the smell.

CHAP. XXII. Of Camphire.
CAmphire is a Rosine that distills drop by drop from a great Tree that is much
like to a Walnut-tree in the Island Borneo in Asia. Little Cakes of it are
likewise brought out of China, but that is not so good; it must be chosen
white, transparent, clean, friable, without spot, and such as is hard to
quench, when once lighted.

Camphire is compounded of a Sulphur and Salt so exceeding volatile, that it is
very hard to keep it any time, and it always loses something, let it be never
so closely stopped.

It is an excellent remedy for the Fits of the mother, it is not only smelt to
by women in this condition, and used in their Clysters, but also taken
inwardly; for it is lighted, and then quenched five or six times in some water
proper to the Distemper, and so the water is given to drink; it is likewise
good for intermittent Fevers, being hung about the neck, because in its
evaporating away, it insensibly enters through the pores, and causes a
rarefaction, and transpiration of the humor which caused the disease: and for
the same reason it is that several Druggs applied to the Wrists and other
places, have often cured diseases: but you must observe that this sort of
Remedies is always of a very Spirituous nature. Camphire is dissolved in Spirit
of Wine, and this dissolution is called Spirit of Wine Camphorized, it is good
in the Apoplexy, and in Hysterical maladies; it is also found to be of
excellent use in the Toothache, a little Cotton is dipped into it, and put into
the aching Tooth.

Oil of Camphire.
This Operation is a Camphire impregnated with Spirit of Niter, which converts
it into a liquor.

Powder grossly three or four ounces of good Camphire, put it into a mattress,
and pour upon it twice as much Spirit of Niter, stop your vessel close, and set
it over a pot half full of water a little heated; stir it ever now and then, to
help forward the dissolution which will be finished in two or three hours, and
then you will find the Camphire turned into a clear Oil which swims above the
Spirit, separate it and keep it in a Viol well stopped.

It is used for the Caries of bones, and to touch Nerves that are uncovered, in
wounds.

Remarks.
This Oil is nothing but a dissolution of Camphire in Spirit of Niter; for if
you pour water upon it to destroy the force of the Spirit, it returns into
Camphire as before.

Of all the Rosines this is the only one that can dissolve with Spirit of Niter.

This dissolution is made without Ebullition, or sensible heat, because the
Camphire consisting of thin disunited parts, the acids do enter among them and
make an easy separation: again acids mixing with sulphurs do never raise any
ebullition, because they find those bodies too pliant and yielding, to make
sufficient resistance.

If you have used three ounces of Camphire in this operation, you will obtain
four ounces of Oil, and the Spirit of Niter will have lost an ounce; this last
will likewise have lost much of its acrimony.

Some have censured this operation, by reason, say they, of the violent
impression which the corrosive Spirit does give to the Camphire in its
dissolution, and that therefore the acrimony of the medicine renders it of a
dangerous use.

But seeing this Oil is not wont to be given inwardly, methinks there is very
little reason for this scruple: there are medecins which are much more
acrimonious than this, which nevertheless are not esteemed dangerous to be
used. Again, there is occasion for this acrimony in the use that is made of
this Oil, for the Spirit of Niter which is mixed with it does very much help
the Camphire to deterge wounds, and to cleanse rotten bones.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Gumm Ammoniack.
GVmm Ammoniack is so called, because it distills from a sort of Ferula, or
Fennil-gyant, that grows near the place where the Oracle of Jupiter Ammon stood
heretofore; the best is in large yellowish tears, and white within.

It is given inwardly in Deoppilative Electuaries for Schirrhous Tumors of the
Liver, Spleen, and Mesentery; it is used in Emollient and Attractive Plasters.

The way to Purify it is to dissolve it in Vinegar, then passing it through a
cloth all the moisture is evaporated away over the fire; by this means it is
cleansed from some straws or other little impurities that it contained. But
some part of its Volatile Spirits are evaporated at the same time, and in them
consists its greatest virtue, while some others are fixed by the acid, which
always hinders the motion of Volatiles. Wherefore I would never advise this
Purification to be made; I would rather, after choosing it as clean as may be,
only powder it in a Mortar, to mix it with what may be thought fit; for though
there should be some little straws in it, that would never be able to alter the
nature of the Remedy, or diminish its virtue so much as does the destruction of
its Volatile salts by the Vinegar.

The same thing may be considered in the use of all other Gumms; and if some of
them, as Galbanum and Opopanax, are too moist to be powdered, you may cut them
into little slices, and dry them in the Sun.

Distillation of Gumm Ammoniack.
This is a separation of the Oil and Spirit of Gumm Ammoniack from its earthy
part.

Put a pound of Gumm Ammoniack into an earthen Retort, or glass one luted,
great enough for two thirds to remain empty; place this Retort in a
Reverberatory Furnace, and fitting to it a Receiver, begin the distillation
with a very little fire to warm gently the Retort, and drive forth drop by drop
a little Phlegmatic water. When the vapors begin to appear, throw out that
which is in the Receiver, and refitting it, and luting close the joints,
increase the fire by degrees, and continue it until all is come forth. Then let
the vessels cool, and unlute them; pour out that which is in the Receiver into
a Tunnel lined with brown paper, the Spirit will pass through, and leave the
thick black Oil in the filter, keep it in a Viol: it is good for the Palsy,
and Hysterical diseases: the diseased parts are rubbed with it, and it is given
to women to smell to.

Put the Spirit into a glass Alembeck, and Rectify it by distilling it in
Sand. It Is a good Remedy against the Plague, and all sorts of malignant
diseases; it is used in the Scurvy, and all manner of Obstructions, the dose is
from eight to sixteen drops in some proper liquor.

The Spirit of all other Gumms may be drawn after the same manner.

Remarks.
Two thirds of the Retort must remain empty, because the Gumm rarifies
exceedingly as it heats, and would be apt to come forth in substance, if it had
not room enough. There is no need of adding alkali's for the Rectification of
this Spirit, as many Authors would persuade us; this circumstance does rather
more hurt than good, because alkalies do spoil these sorts of Spirits, as I
have said when I treated of the Rectification of the Spirit of Tartar.

The phlegm is taken out of the receiver before the Spirits come forth, in
order to their being the purer. You will have six drachms of phlegm, three
ounces and seven drachms of Spirit, six ounces of a black and stinking oil, and
there remains in the retort four ounces six drachms of a black, light and very
spongious matter, which is to be flung away. It is likewise a little
inflammable by reason of fuliginosities which have fallen upon it. And this is
that which gave it the black color; a great deal of the ashes of this matter
is requisite to make a little salt, for the salt of Gumms being commonly more
volatile than fixed, it comes forth almost all of it in acid Spirit.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Myrrh.
Myrrh is a Gummy juice that distills from a thorny Tree, of a middle height,
by Incisions that are made into it; this Tree grows commonly in Ethiopia, and
Arabia, and because the Inhabitants of those countries are thought to feed on
Serpents, the Myrrh that is brought thence is called Troglodytick. The
Ancients were wont to collect from the same Tree a liquor that fell from it
without Incision, which was called Stacten; it is only a liquid Gum, but I am
apt to think it should have more virtue than common Myrrh, because it was the
more spirituous part, which filtrated through the pores of the Bark of this
Tree.

You must choose such Myrrh as is friable, light, odoriferous, clear, and such
as is in small pieces, of a yellowish color, and bitter to the taste; it is
aperitive and discutient; it is much esteemed for obstructions of the Vterus,
and to bring the menstrua, and to quicken women's Labor; it also resists
malignity of humors, it is used in Corroborative remedies, and discutient
Plasters.

Tincture of Myrrh.
This Operation is a solution of the oily parts of Myrrh in Spirit of wine.

Put what quantity you please of good Myrrh powdered, into a Bolt-head, and
pour upon it Spirit of wine four fingers high; stir the matter and set it in
digestion in warm sand, two or three days, or until the Spirit of wine is
loaded with the Tincture of Myrrh; then separate the liquor by Inclination,
and keep it in a Viol well stopped. It may be used to expedite women's Labor, to
bring down the menstrua, and in the Palsy, Apoplexy, Lethargy, and all
diseases that proceed from Corruption of humors; it is Sudorifick and
Aperitive; the dose is from six drops to fifteen in some proper liquor; it is
commonly used in outward applications, or mixed with the Tincture of Aloes to
discuss cold Tumors, and to dissolve gypsous humors by way of Injection, and in
the Gangrene.

After this manner may be made the Tinctures of Castor and Saffron, which are
much esteemed in hysterical cases; the dose of them is from four to twelve
drops in balm or mugwort water.

Remarks.
Though Tinctures of Myrrh are daily drawn in wine, yet the best that can be
prepared is with Spirit of wine, because this menstruum receives the more Oily,
or Balsamic part of the Myrrh; whereas the phlegm of wine does cause it to
dissolve, and impregnate with the more terrestrious part of the Gumm, as well
as with the Oily.

Some do use to evaporate this Tincture to the consistence of an Extract, but
because thereby they are fain to lose the more volatile part of the Myrrh with
the Spirit of wine, I do conceive it better to use the Tincture it self as I
have described it.

The Tincture of Castor makes the water white, into which you drop it by reason
of a Rosine which it contains, which is the same I have said, speaking of the
Rosine of Jalap.

Oil of Myrrh per Deliquium.
This preparation is a solution of the more separable parts of Myrrh, made
with whites of Eggs.

Boil Eggs until they are hard, then cutting them in two, separate the Yelk,
and fill the White with Myrrh powdered, set them on little sticks placed
conveniently on purpose, in a plate, or earthen pan, in a Cellar, or some such
moist place, and there will distill a liquor to the bottom of the vessel, which
you may take out, and keep for use. This is called the Oil of Myrrh: it is
good to take away spots, and blemishes in the face, applied outwardly.

Remarks.
Though this liquor, improperly called Oil, is only the more soluble part of
Myrrh humected with the moisture of whites of Eggs, and the Cellar together,
yet it is the best of any that have been invented, whether you should draw it
in Spirit of wine, or distill this Gumm in a Retort; for by Spirit of wine the
more volatile part of Myrrh is lost, either by Distillation, or Evaporation;
and it is so torrified in a Retort, that it loses its best virtues; whereas per
Deliquium what volatile this Gumm contains is preserved in its natural being,
for the wet that mixes with it is no ways capable of destroying or altering its
nature.

THE THIRD PART Of Animals.
CHAP. I. Of the Viper.
PAssing by the fabulous Stories that the Ancients have left us concerning the
Birth of the Viper, I shall say it is a sort of Serpent, that comes into the
world by eating through the belly of her Dam, and killing her; whence she is
called Vipera, quod vi pariat.

This Animal is very common in Dauphine, and Poictou, from whence it is carried
all over France. While it is in the field it feeds upon several little Animals,
but when taken and shut up in any place, it may be kept a whole Summer without
eating any thing at all, provided it has Air enough to breath in.

The reason why they can live so long without eating is doubtless that the
pores of their skin being so exceeding narrow, as they do appear to be upon
examination, very few of their Spirits do come to be lost; wherefore they have
little need of successive nourishment to beget new ones, as other animals have,
who spend abundance of Spirits.

It Is good to take Vipers in the Spring, or Autumn, because then they are
fattest, and in greatest vigor. The Cold kills 'em. They differ from other
Serpents in that they never grow so much; they have two Teeth on the sides of
their Jaws, and those very long, in comparison with a great many little ones
that are round about, and the Gum of each of those long Teeth is full of a
Yellowish Juice, in which many do think their venom consists; now Serpents have
none of those long Teeth, but only little ones.

Again, they differ in that being taken up by the Tails, they cannot wind
themselves like Serpents, to make such circumvolutions about the Arm, or thing
that holds them, and this by reason of the different connection of their
Vertebra's.

When the Viper is irritated, it shoots out a forked tongue, which looks like a
little firebrand, by reason of the vigorous motion of its Spirits; those who
never had seen the teeth of the Viper do think this is that which causes all
the mischief, but the tongue is not at all venomous. Some do save the tongue,
to wear about their neck instead of an Amulet, in order to preserve them from
the effects of ill airs. Serpents do likewise thrust out their tongues as the
Viper does. But here it may be good to advertise you by the by, that those
things which are brought to us from Maltha for the tongues of petrified
Serpents are nothing but the teeth of a fish which that Country affords.

The biting of Vipers is more dangerous than that of other Serpents, but the
most quick and assured Remedy that can be used upon it, is to crush the head of
the Animal, and lay it on the wound, because by opening of the pores it lets
out the venomous Spirits that were got in. The bit person may likewise take the
volatile salt of Vipers, as I shall show hereafter.

It is not yet sufficiently known wherein consists the venom of Vipers, nor can
any good substantial reason be given of the accidents which happen after the
biting. Most men think this malignity consists in the enraged spirits. And this
is the opinion of Van Helmont, and Poterius, according to the relation of
Zwelfer in his Remarks upon the Augustan Dispensatory, where he treats of the
Troches of Vipers: He says there have been a great many eminent men who have
confirmed this opinion with curious observations, on the bitings of enraged
Animals, particularly of Man, of the Cat, Wolf, Horse, Dog, Weasil, etc. And
among others Fabritius Hildanus in his Chirurgical Operations, to whose proofs
he thinks nothing further can be added to confirm the truth of this opinion: If
accidents, says he, do happen that are sometimes more severe, and sometimes
less, they must be attributed only to more or less provocation and anger, or
sometimes to a more profound or slighter biting of these Animals. This opinion
seems likewise to have been confirmed by some experiments, which Monsieur
Charas relates in his book of Vipers, where he shows not only that the enraged
Spirits are the sole poison of the Viper, but also pretends that the Yellow
Juice which is found in the hollow part of the Jaw, wherein the great tooth is
fastened, and was supposed to be the venom of this Animal, is no such matter;
for having poured some of this liquor on the wounds of several beasts, not one
of them died, nay further, that those persons who had ventured to taste it,
never found any inconvenience from it. Nevertheless Monsieur Ready in a
particular Treatise on the Viper will not grant the truth of these experiments.

On the contrary he maintains, that having put some of this Yellow juice into
the wounds of diverse sorts of Animals, they soon died upon it, and thence
concludes that the venom of Vipers consists in the Yellow juice, and not in the
enraged Spirits only, as the others have thought, he taking this cause alone to
be too Metaphysical.

And in truth who would believe that the Idea which this Animal forms, when he
finds himself provoked, should be able to imprint on the Spirits qualities so
malignant?

Now in so great an opposition of Opinions and Experiments, a certain great man
of these times found a way to reconcile them, by affirming that the Yellow
juice of Vipers did produce different effects, according to the several places
where these Animals lived; so that Monsieur Ready might have found the Yellow
juice to be venomous in Italy, whereas in France, where the Climate is not so
hot, this juice does not produce any poisonous quality, unless it be quickened
by the Angry Spirits of the Viper, which gives it a sufficient penetration.

Others do confidently assure us they have seen several Animals in France die,
soon after they had put some of this Yellow liquor into the wounds they had
made for that purpose, which very much favors the assertion of Monsieur Ready.

Furthermore as for what is related, that in France people have ventured to
taste this Yellow liquor without any harm, I find this not to be a convincing
proof that it is no poison; for although Spirit of Vitriol, for example, or
some other acid, does not prove mortal, when taken inwardly, nevertheless if
the same quantity should be syringed into the veins, the Animal falls presently
into Convulsions, and dies. Now as that which caused the Spirit of Vitriol
taken inwardly not to be Poison was this; the acids do become weak through the
mixture of the Saliva, and before ever they come to mix in the Mass of blood,
their parts do receive so great an alteration from the ferment of the places
they must pass through, that they are able to do nothing else at most but cool
the Body: so the same may be said of the Yellow liquor of the Viper, when it is
tasted of, that besides its mixture with the liquors of the mouth and stomach,
it receives diverse alterations from the ferments of the places it must pass
through, before it enters into the mass of blood.

Many do likewise think that the venom of Vipers has its chief seat in the
Gall, and thence is easily transported to the Gums, when they are angry;
nevertheless in the Anatomy of this Animal there is no passage found capable of
such a translation. I know very well that the pores of living bodies may be
said to be so open, that all manner of liquors may be presumed to pass through
them, but yet no mischievous effect is discovered to proceed from the Viper's
Gall when given inwardly, for it only causes sweat.

Lastly, others will have the Viper's venom to be dispersed over all its body.
And those who think thus, do advise us to whip these Animals in a warm basin to
drive their venom into the extremities of the body, before we cut (as is
usually done) their heads two fingers below, and their tails two fingers above;
after that, to flea off the skin, and take out the bowels, and then boil the
body in water, wherein are added Salt, and Dill, to correct, as they say, the
remaining malignity. When the flesh is tender, it is to be separated from the
bones, then to eight ounces of this flesh beaten into a Paste in a marble
mortar are added two ounces of bread dried and powdered, and Troches made of
it, which being dried are kept for use.

But this long preparation is seldom used, since Experience has taught us,
that no part of a dead Viper is at all poisonous. The Head and Tail dried and
powdered may be taken instead of a Cordial, as well as the rest of the body. I
can likewise assure you, upon my own experience, that the Tooth of a dead Viper
is no ways venomous, having by chance been pricked my self till the blood came,
whilst I was a handling the heads of Vipers newly killed that I had a mind to
dry, and there did not follow the least ill accident from it.

Furthermore by this Coction the Vipers flesh is deprived of its volatile
salts, which gave its greatest virtue; for they dissolve in the broth, which is
flung away, and only the Faeces remain, wherein there hardly rests so much
Cordial virtue as there does in the bread which is mixed for a Corrective.

But there is no need I should enlarge my self further on this subject, because
these Observations are sufficiently delivered in the Augustan Pharmacopoeia.

Wherefore I do conceive it to be much better to use the Powder of Vipers newly
made, than the Troches.

To make this Powder well, it is good to choose Vipers, when they are in the
prime of their strength; the Females that are full of Eggs or young ones, are
not so good as the others: their heads are to be cut off, their skins thrown
by, and their bowels taken out, and so they are set a drying in the shade, to
be afterward powdered in a mortar.

But because this Powder is hard to keep, in that worms do breed in it, it will
be good to make it into a Paste with a sufficient quantity of the mucilage of
Gum Tragacanth, so form it into Troches, to dry them, and powder them when
there is occasion to use them, and thus it keeps good a long time.

This Powder is given in the Small pox, Malignant Fevers, and all other
maladies where Alexipharmicks are required, and the humors are to be purified
by Perspiration; the dose is from eight grains to thirty in broth, or some
other convenient liquor.

The Heart and Liver are dried in the Sun, and powdered together, and this
Powder called Animal Bezoar, has the same virtues as the body of the Viper,
only it is given in a little lesser dose.

The Gall of Vipers provokes Sweat; the dose is a drop or two in Carduus water.

The fat that is found in them is melted, then strained for to separate it from
the membranes it sticks to, it is as clear as Oil. Several Countries do use it
in the Smallpox, and in Fevers: The dose is from one drop to six in broth, or
some other convenient liquor. It likewise enters into the composition of some
Plasters, and into discutient unguents.

Distillation of Vipers.
This Operation is a separation of the phlegm, the volatile salt, and the Oil
of Vipers from its earth.

Take twelve dozen of Vipers dried in the shade, as I said before, put them
into an earthen Retort, or glass one Coated, place it in a Reverberatory
furnace, fit to it a great capacious Receiver, and luting the joints close,
begin the distillation with a small fire to warm the Retort gently, and drive
out a phlegmatic water drop by drop; when you see no more drops to fall,
increase the fire a little, and Spirits will come forth, which will fill the
Receiver with white Clouds, you will see at last a black oil come, and the
volatile salt stick to the sides of the Receiver. Continue the fire until there
comes no more, after which let the vessels cool, and unlute them. Shake about
the Receiver a little, to loosen the volatile salt from the sides, and pour it
all into a Bolt-head, fit to it a head and a small Receiver, and lute the
joints with a wet bladder; you must set your vessel in Sand, and with a gentle
fire under it, the volatile salt will sublime, and stick to the head, and
uppermost part of the bolt-head, separate it and keep it in a viol well stopped.

It is one of the best medicines we have in Physic, it is good in Malignant
Fevers, and Agues, the Pox, Apoplexy, Epilepsie, Palsy, Hysterical Maladies,
and the bitings of all venomous Beasts; the dose is from six to sixteen grains
in some proper Liquor.

Pour that which remains in the bolt-head into a Tunnel lined with brown paper,
the Spirit and phlegm will pass through, and the stinking Oil remain behind;
Hysterical women may smell to this last, to allay vapors, and Paralytical
parts may be anointed therewith; but its smell is so offensive that it is hard
to endure it.

Pour the Spirit and Phlegm mixed confusedly together into an Alembeck, and
distill in a vaporous Bath about half the liquor, you will have a Spirit that must
be kept well stopped, it has the same virtues as the Salt; the dose is from ten
to thirty drops.

The Phlegm must be flung away.

If that which remains in the Retort is Calcined in an open fire, and a
Lixivium made of it, as I said concerning fixed Alkali Salts, a small quantity
of fixed Salt will remain, which nevertheless has no more virtue than other
Alkali Salts I spoke of before.

The volatile salts of Hartshorn, the blood, Skull, Nails, Hair, and other
parts of Animals may be drawn after the same manner.

Remarks.
The Receiver must be sure to be large enough, that the Spirits may circulate
with greater ease, the fire must likewise be well managed; for these Spirits
being forced out too fast do rush forth violently, and break the Receiver, or
else are lost through the joints.

The Phlegm comes before the other Principles in the first distillation, but in
the Rectification the Volatile Salt rises first, because it is at liberty, and
is lighter than the Phlegm.

The Spirit which is drawn from Animals by Chemistry is nothing but a volatile
salt dissolved in Phlegm.

Your vessel for sublimation must be very high, that the Volatile Salt may rise
without any Phlegm, for when the vessel is short, the Phlegm rises with the
Volatile salt, liquifies it, and turns it into Spirit. A bolt-head, or a long
body with its head, may serve for this Operation, because the Phlegm being too
heavy cannot mount so high, and therefore leaves the Volatile Salt to sublime
alone, which may nevertheless be Rectified to become more pure; you must mix it
with the distilled Spirit, and repeat the Sublimation according as I have said:
but because this Salt always carries along with it a small quantity of Oil, a
few days afterward it loses its whiteness, and turns Yellowish: now to avoid
that, you must pour upon it, when it is in the bottle, Spirit of Wine
Tartarised one fingers height, and so keep it well stopped. This Spirit of Wine
hinders the salt from dissolving its self and the Oil it contained, so that
after some days it turns red, and the salt grows white; when it is to be used,
the Spirit is decanted from it, and the Salt left alone: by means of this
Lotion it loses a little of its former smell; but care must be taken that the
Spirit of Wine be well Rectified, for if there remained any the least Phlegm,
the Salt would dissolve in it. You may also sublime it again as before, after
having well washed it in Spirit of Wine, it will be dry, and very fair.

There is another way of Rectifying the Volatile salt, which is by mixing it
with four or five times as much bones, or horns burnt white, and putting the
mixture into a glass, or earthen body, then fitting to it a blind-head, or such
a one whose Nose has not been opened, after that luting well the joints, then
setting the vessel in sand, and with a gentle fire the Volatile salt will rise,
and stick to the head, you must continue the fire until there rises no more.

This salt is hereby purified from a great deal of its Oil, which remains in
the powder of Bones, wherefore it becomes whiter than it was, and pleasanter to
the palate. It may again be mixed with other Calcined bones, and sublimed as
before, to render it purer still, and take away more of its loathsome smell,
that is caused partly by the Empyreumatical oil that it draws along with it in
the distillation.

The Volatile salt dissolved in a little water Crystallizes like Sugar Candy,
and then it is easier to keep than before.

There can be drawn from Animals but a very little quantity of fixed salt,
because the Spirits which abound in them do volatilize their salt: for which
reason this volatile salt keeps dry longer than that of Vegetables.

The virtue of Animals does principally consist in their Volatile salt, it is
that which gives meat its savor, that makes Broths strong, and turns them into
a Gelly, according as they do abound more or less. The Juscula Consummata which
are made with a small fire are better than those that are boiled quick, because
a strong fire carries away good part of the Volatile salts.

Volatile Salts do rarifie the humors of the body, both by reason of their
piercing nature, and also in that being Alkalis they do dull the strength of
Acids, which keep the humors condensed, after which the blood being in greater
motion than before, does the more easily purify it self, either by
perspiration or by Urine, from heterogeneous bodies which were there gathered
together.

This Operation may serve to show how the Volatile Salt of all Animals, or any
part of them, may be drawn. When the Volatile Salt of Blood is to be drawn,
that of the best color must be taken and dried in the Sun, or else with a very
little fire, and so distilled like Vipers.

If you distill two and thirty ounces of shavings of Hartshorn, you will draw
thirteen ounces of liquor, and Volatile salt, and there will remain in the
Retort nineteen ounces of matter as black as Coal.

You Will draw from the liquor an ounce and a half of Volatile salt, six ounces of
Spirit, and two ounces of Black oil.

The black matter being grinded on a Marble is good for Painters use; if you
Calcine it, the fuliginous parts which make it black, will fly away, and leave
the Hartshorn very white; you will have sixteen ounces of it, and this is called
burnt Hartshorn. It is accounted a Cordial, but indeed has no other virtue
than to destroy acids, as all other alkali matters do.

Some do stratifie Hartshorn with Bricks, and Calcining it that way, they call
it Hartshorn prepared Philosophically, they account it more Cordial than it
was before; but they are egregiously mistaken, for the Volatile salt, and oil,
which were the things that should render it Cardiacal, were carried away in the
Calcination, and there remains only a Terrestrious matter that may be called a
Caput mortuum. Notwithstanding it is an alkali, which may serve as Crab's-eyes,
Coral, and diverse other matters of the like nature, which absorb acids; the
Bricks bestow no virtue at all to it.

If you distill forty ounces of Ivory, you will draw thirteen ounces of liquor,
and volatile salt; and there will remain in the Retort six and twenty ounces of
a matter as black as Coal.

Afterward by the Rectification you will get two ounces and a dram of
Volatile salt, one ounce and five drachms of a stinking black oil, five ounces
of Spirit, and four ounces two drachms of phlegm.

If you Calcine the black pieces which remain in the Retort, in an open fire,
the soot will leave them and they will burn white; this is called burnt Ivory,
or Spodium: it has the same virtues as burnt Hartshorn, you will have at least
twenty ounces of it.

It is here remarkable that Ivory does contain much more earth than Hartshorn,
and doubtless that is the reason why it is the whiter.

If you distill twelve ounces of Hair, you will obtain eight ounces of liquor
and volatile salt. There will remain in the Retort three ounces and a half of a
black matter very spongy and earthy, from which no fixed salt can be drawn.

And by Rectification you will raise into the Head an ounce and seven drachms
of a very fine volatile salt; separate by a filter three ounces of a black and
very fetid oil, and by distillation of that which is filtrated you will have two
ounces of Spirit, and nine drachms of phlegm.

All Volatile salts have much resemblance in their figure, smell and taste, but
that of Vipers is accounted the most active, and proper against Poisons; those
of Hartshorn, and Man's Skull are thought to be better than others for the
Epilepsie, that of man's blood to purify the blood, and so of the rest.

When you Rectify the Spirit of Vipers, or man's Skull, or Hartshorn, or
hair, in order to purify them from their phlegm, if you should let the liquor
continue distilling longer than is fitting, the phlegm will rise after the
Spirit, but then it separates from the Spirit as water separates from oil, the
Spirit will be uppermost, and a little troubled, and whitish, but if you keep
these two liquors together for a month, the whole will mix together, and there
will be no longer any separation of them at all.

These effects do happen from this, that the Spirit in rising does carry with
it some small quantity of Oil, which was dissolved in the liquor by reason of
salts that it contains. This Oil is very volatile, it rises with the Spirit,
and by rendering the Spirit a little oily, it hinders at first the phlegm from
mixing with it. It is likewise this little quantity of oil which makes the
Spirit look a little troubled, and whitish; but when the Spirit and phlegm are
kept a good while together, they mix, and the whole appears like a homogeneous
liquor, because there being but little oil in the Spirit, the phlegm insensibly
enters into, and incorporates with it; wherefore you must take care to separate
the Spirit from the phlegm so soon as ever you take the Receiver from the nose
of the head, in case you have suffered the liquor to distill too long.

What I have now spoken of does not happen in the Rectification of the Spirit
of Ivory, and without doubt the reason is that the Ivory does not contain so
much Oil as the other parts of Animals.

Some do prepare a Sudorifick water with Vipers after this manner.

They do put the Vipers alive into a great earthen body, they fit to it a head
with its Receiver, they lute the joints, and distill in a Balneum all that will
rise from it; but you must take care that the head be well fastened to the body,
for when the Vipers begin to be heated, they leap and fling about with so much
violence, that they would otherwise throw it down, and get out of their stove.
And then the Artist must have a care of himself, and not be too bold, for these
creatures being irritated would fling about on every side, and a bite of theirs
at that time would be twice as dangerous as at another.

This water which rises whilst the Vipers are in their greatest fury is
Sudorifick, because some Volatile salts have risen and mixed with it. You may
give of it from a dram to half an ounce in some proper liquor.

But to avoid the forementioned danger you might cut the Vipers in pieces
before you put them into the body; and because these pieces of them do retain
life a long time, the water will be little the worse for their not being entire.

When you have drawn as much water from them as you can, by the heat of a
Balneum, you must put the remainder of the Vipers into a Retort, and distill it
as I have shown before; you will thereby have the Volatile salt, the Spirit,
and the Oil.

CHAP. II. Distillation of Urine, and its Volatile Salt.
THIS Operation is a separation of the Spirit, the Volatile Salt, and the Oil
of Urine, from the phlegm, and the earth which it contains.

Take ten or twelve quarts of Urine newly made by sound young men, evaporate it
in an earthen or glass Cucurbite in a Sand-heat, until it remains in the
consistence of Honey; then fit a head with its Receiver, and luting the
junctures close, continue a small fire to distill the rest of the phlegm, after
which increase it by little and little, and the Spirits will rise in Clouds,
carrying with them a little Oil, and after that the Volatile salt, which will
stick to the head like Butter-flies; continue the fire until there comes no
more; then unlute the Vessels, and separating the Volatile salt, put it into a
bolt-head, pour likewise into it the Spirit that is in the Receiver, and fit a
blind-head to the bolt-head; lute the junctures with a wet bladder, and setting
your bolt-head in Sand, sublime with a small fire all the Volatile salt, as I
have showed concerning that of Vipers; separate this Salt, and keep it in a
Viol well stopped. It is a good Remedy for Quartan Agues, and Malignant Fevers,
it opens all Obstructions, and works both by Urine and Sweat: the dose is from
six to sixteen grains in some convenient liquor; filtrate that which remains in
the bolt-head, the Spirit will pass through the Filter, whilst a small quantity
of black and extraordinary stinking Oil remains, which is good to discuss cold
Tumors, and to give to Hysterical women to smell to.

You may distill the Spirit in a Sand-heat to separate it from a thick matter
that remains at bottom, it has the same virtues as the Salt; it is given from
eight to twenty drops in some proper vehicle.

Two drachms of it are mixed with two ounces of Spirit of Wine to rub
Paralytical parts with; it is likewise used for cold pains, and for the
Sciatica.

If the Mass that remains in the Cucurbite should be Calcined and a Lixivium
made of it with water, a very small quantity of fixed Alkali salt might be
gotten from evaporating the water, and it has the same virtues as other Alkali
salts.

Remarks.
The Urine of young men is to be preferred before others, because it contains
more Salt. It must be newly made, and evaporated with a gentle fire, that the
Fermentation, or too much heat, may not cause the Volatile Salts to rise with
the phlegm. The Spirit is only a Volatile salt dissolved in a little phlegm;
this Volatile salt works more by Urine than any of the rest, but its smell is
more offensive.

This Remedy must never be given in Broth, for Broth being to be taken hot, the
heat evaporates some of the volatile salts, before it can well be taken.

A Volatile salt may be drawn from Urine, after setting it some months
Fermenting in a Vessel close stopped, and then a third part of the Liquor must be
distilled with a gentle fire; it is in this distilled Urine, that the Volatile
salt will be found exalted by the Fermentation. Rectify this liquor again
three or four times, throwing away each Distillation the Phlegm that remains at
the bottom of the Cucurbite; then putting your Spirit of Urine into a Mattress
with its head, sublime the Volatile Salt as I showed before. Some do add to it
Saltpeter.

This Salt is of a more penetrating nature than the other, but a great deal of
time is required to make it.

The Phosphorus.
It is a luminous matter distilled from Urine that has been fermented.

Take a good quantity of humane urine, let it ferment, or putrify in the air
in an open vessel three or four months: then pour it into earthen pans, and
evaporate it over the fire, until the remaining matter comes to the consistence
of thick honey, put this matter into an earthen body that can endure the fire,
and is big enough to be left at least half empty, place your body in a furnace,
fit to it a glass head with its receiver, and having well luted the joints,
give it a little fire for two or three hours to distill some phlegmatic Spirits
which still remained in the matter, after which you must increase the fire by
little and little to the third degree, there will rise some small quantity of
Volatile Salt, which will stick to the head, and some black oil which will fall
into the receiver, continue a good coal fire, until there comes no more Oil;
let the vessels cool, and having taken off the receiver, pour the liquor you
find in it into a Tunnel lined with brown paper, the Spirit and phlegm will
pass through, and the oil will remain in the filter, put the oil into an
earthen pan, and in a mild sand-heat dry it until it comes to be as thick as an
ointment: take off the head, and you will find in the body a black spongey mass
which you are to separate from the solid compact matter which remains at
bottom, powder your spongey matter, and mix it with the dried black oil; put it
into an earthen retort, set it in a Reverberatory furnace, fit to it a large
capacious receiver, and luting well the joints, give it a small fire to heat
insensibly the Retort, then increase it by little and little, a Volatile salt
will come forth which will stick to the sides of the receiver, and a little oil
with it, increase the fire to the last degree of violence, and you will
perceive a white Fume, which after it has circulated in the receiver will
likewise stick to the receiver, and will be of a yellow color; this is the
PHOSPHORVS, continue the fire in its greatest vigor four or five hours, or
until no more will come into the retort.

Let the vessels grow cold, then unlute them, throw water into the receiver,
and having shook it sufficiently about to loosen that which was glu'd to its
sides, pour it all into a large glass vessel, and leave it to settle, the
volatile salt will dissolve in the water, but the matter of the Phosphorus, and
the oil will precipitate to the bottom; decant the water, and having gathered
the matter together, put it into a little glass vessel, add to it a little
water, and place the vessel in sand, give it a digestive heat, and stir the
matter gently with a wooden spatule, the Phosphorus will separate from the oil,
and sink to the bottom, you may make it up into little sticks whilst it is hot,
by putting of it into the neck of a very little bolt-head, and taking it out
when it is cold, then keep it stopped in a little bottle filled with water, for
without water to preserve it, it would spend it self and be lost in fumes.

To make PHOSPHORVS liquid, you must scrape or break off a piece of it, put it
into a viol, and pour upon it the clear Essence of Cloves to the height of one
finger, stop the viol close, and set it two days in digestion in horse-dung,
stirring it from time to time, to help the solution of the matter, after that
take your viol and keep it, you have in it the liquid PHOSPHORVS. All the
matter will not have dissolved, some part of it will remain at bottom.

Remarks.
The word Phosphorus, comes from the Greek, (...), that is, Lucifer, or the
Morning Star.

Of them there are the Natural, and the Artificial, the Natural are such as
Glowworms, Rotten wood, and many others. The Artificial are made with the
Bolonian stone, with chalk, with urine, with blood, and with diverse other
sulphurous matters.

The Bolonian stone was one of the first Artificial Phosphorus that has been
known: it takes its name from the Town in Italy where it was made, he that did
prepare it is dead without leaving the knowledge of his Secret, insomuch that
no body 'till the present has been able sufficiently to imitate it, he did
calcine it for a certain time, and perhaps after such a manner as we are still
ignorant of, then exposing it to the air it yielded a great light in the dark,
which by little and little grew weaker and weaker. This Stone is bituminous,
and full of Sulphur, which is the thing that gives it this disposition to shine
in the dark, but because its sulphur is spent by little and little, it comes at
length to be opake, like another stone. When it has not been calcined enough,
it yields no light at all, because the sulphurous parts have not been put into
sufficient motion, and when it is calcined too much, these sulphurous parts
are thereby lost; therefore a medium is to be observed, which no body has yet
been able to hit.

The Germans being very curious and industrious in Chemical concerns, have
found out several kinds of Phosphorus, and I do not doubt but upon working
further upon this subject much may still be done. Among those who have
particularly applied themselves to it Balduinus a German has invented a sort of
Phosphorus, whose description I shall give anon; Kunkelius a Saxon has written
very well upon it, and workt to good effect; Daniel Kraff a German Chemist is
the first inventor of the Phosphorus which is drawn from Urine, he gives it the
consistence of a paste, or of a liquor, as he pleases; and the Honorable Mr.
Boil of London, to whom all the ingenious have so much obligation, put forth a
Treatise in English about three or four years ago, called Noctiluca Aeria, full
of abundance of Experiments, and most Curious Remarks which he has made upon
this Phosphorus; he likewise found the way to give it a solid consistence, and
a little while since he put forth the same Treatise in Latin enlarged above
half with new Experiments and Observations on the same subject.

You must provide a great quantity of Urine for this Operation, for a great
deal is necessary to draw a little luminous matter from. The vessel in which it
is put to ferment is left open, that the air entering into it may help the
fermentation; and in truth, the more volatile salts are hereby lost, but yet
there do remain sufficient to make the Phosphorus. When the Urine upon
evaporation begins to grow thick, you must take care that the matter does not
swell over the vessel, for it rarifies very much; you must evaporate as much
phlegm as possibly you can when the evaporation is made in the earthen pans to
the end that the operation be sooner ended in the body, for there is much less
time spent in the evaporation, and it is much more easy to keep down the
matter when it swells in earthen pans, than in a body which is luted, and has
its head on. The body must therefore be sure to be large enough by reason of
this rarefaction of the matter, which will be apt otherwise to rise into the
head, and to mix in the receiver with the distilled liquor, which would force
you to begin the distillation anew.

When the vessels are unluted, you may take the Volatile salt out of the head,
if there remains any in it, and rectify it as I have showed speaking of the
distillation of Urine, but you will find little of it, because the greatest
part of this salt was lost in the fermentation; you might also preserve the
liquor which is separated from the oil in the filtration, it is a Spirit of
Urine.

The compact matter which remains in the body after that the spongy part is
separated, is fixed and saline; you might calcine it, and draw from it a fixed
Salt of Urine by a Lixivium, as other fixed alkali salts are separated.

You must heat the Retort very gently, for if you should make too great a fire
at first, it would break it to pieces.

The Oil which is separated from the Phosphorus at the end of the operation is
a little luminous, but it is very foetid; there is but little of it because
some part of it has been rarefied by the fire, and turned into Phosphorus.

Mr. Boil gives a description of the Phosphorus, in which he puts to the
thickened Urine three times as much sand.

The Phosphorus contains more sulphur than any thing else, for water condenses
it, and oils dissolve it; it has an offensive smell, and it is partly to
correct the smell that it is dissolved in Oil of Cloves, when we make it liquid.

The liquid Phosphorus gives more light at first than the solid, because its
matter is more rarefied. Open but the bottle in the dark, and it appears to be
all of a fire. You might use Oil of Cinnamon instead of Oil of Cloves, and the
light would be still the greater, because the parts of Essence of Cinnamon are
more volatile than those of the Essence of Cloves, but it would endure the less
time for the same reason. Add to this, that the Oil of Cinnamon is a very dear
commodity.

If you should fire a little piece of the solid Phosphorus with a
Burning-glass, and quench it when two thirds of the quantity are consumed, that
which remains will be yellow, and a little luminous still; it will easily
dissolve in water. This Experiment shows, that the more fixed part of the
Phosphorus is saline, because it dissolves in water.

The Phosphorus is luminous in the dark at all times, but especially in hot
weather; for the cold does a little constringe the parts. If you take a little
piece of the Solid, or even the stopple of the bottle that contains the liquid,
and write with it on paper, or upon the hand of a person, the letters do seem
to be a perfect fire.

If you rub a little piece of the solid Phosphorus on paper, and press it down
with the point of a knife, the paper will be set on fire.

After some Experiments made one day at my house upon the Phosphorus, a little
piece of it being left negligently upon the Table in my Chamber, the maid
making the bed took it up in the bed-clothes she had put upon the Table, not
seeing the little piece: the person who lay afterward in the bed, waking at
night, perhaps through the more than ordinary heat he felt, perceived that the
coverlid was on fire. It seems the Phosphorus being heated with the body of him
that lay in bed had set fire to the coverlid, and had before he perceived it
burnt a great hole in it.

It is observable, that the air lighting the fire by exciting the motion of
parts in the Phosphorus, does likewise make it yield a considerable light; for
when the matter has continued shut some time in the glass, it shines no longer,
and it recovers its light no more until the glass is opened, and the air is let
into it.

Nevertheless some Experiments made a while since in Paris, at the house of
Monsieur d' Alence, by Mr. Homberg a German, do seem to evince the contrary,
that the air is not always necessary to make the Phosphorus shine in the dark.

The case was thus: a very little piece of the solid Phosphorus was put into a
little glass bottle; a brass cock was fitted to this bottle, and made so as it
could enter into another cock belonging to a large glass Receiver. Then the
bottle that contained the Phosphorus was heated, and the cock of this bottle
was made to enter into that of the great glass vessel, out of which the air had
been pumped. So soon as the cocks were opened, the air came forth of the little
bottle, and at the same time was seen to come a great train of light like a
flash; nay some did discover particles of the Phosphorus at the bottom of the
great glass.

The bottle was then taken from the receiver, and the light of the Phosphorus
was very much diminished: it sometimes seemed to be quite out, the cock was
turned to let in the air, and presently the Phosphorus recovered its light
again.

In the mean time the heat of the Phosphorus grew less and less, and it yielded
but a weak light. We began the Experiment again, the same bottle that had the
Phosphorus was applied to the great glass receiver, and when the air was drawn
out of the bottle, the Phosphorus did shine brighter; on the contrary when we
let the air again into it, the Phosphorus went out: which is quite different
from what happened whilst the bottle that held the Phosphorus was hot in the
former Experiment.

We repeated the Experiments diverse times, and saw the same thing continually
happen: that is to say, the Phosphorus being heated lost much of its light,
when the air was pumped out of the bottle wherein it was contained, and it
recovered light again when new air was let into it: on the contrary the
Phosphorus being cold did shine when the air was pumped out of the bottle, and
the light disappeared when the air was let into it.

It suffices to have related two Experiments, as contrary one to another as can
be, it is easy to judge what would happen when the Phosphorus is not so hot as
in the first Experiment, and when it is not altogether so cold as in the
second, the alteration of the least circumstance quite alters the Experiment,
but the same things always happens in proportion with those already described.

We made another Experiment thus: we put a little piece of the solid Phosphorus
into a crystal vessel, and we poured upon it a very fixed acid liquor, I think
it was Oil of Vitriol, a great fume arose from the mixture; we stopped the bottle
with paper, and stirred the matter several times after having left it some
hours in digestion. We looked upon it in the dark, and it appeared luminous,
though it were stopped, and it has still been alike luminous from about two
months ago until the present. Indeed the light of it is not so great as is that
of the Phosphorus, but it keeps a much longer time.

That which is surprising in these Experiments is, that the air does sometimes
make the Phosphorus shine, and sometimes not. Now to explicate this difficulty,
I do say, that in the first Experiment the greatest part of the luminous matter
of the Phosphorus did fly out of the bottle into the receiver, and that that
which remained in the bottle after it was separated from the receiver, being
deprived of its most subtle sulphurs, was not able to give so great a light as
before; nevertheless the matter still retaining a little warmth, there did rise
from it enough particles to give a light when the bottle was unstopt, but
because by the cold the little bodies do condense, and lose very much of their
motion, this Phosphorus likewise loses much of its strength, and gives but a
languid or weak light.

When the air was drawn out of the bottle, the matter looked very light, and
when the air was let to it again, it went out, the reason whereof is that the
light being weak, could not preserve its self but with a convenient proportion
of air, and there was some remaining still in the bottle, for though the air be
never so much pumped out of the vessel there will still remain a little behind.
The Phosphorus loses its light by the usual great quantity of air, as a little
candle will be put out by being exposed to the wide air, or a small fire will
soon go out, when too great a wind blows strongly upon it. So long as the
Phosphorus sends forth a great many vapors, a good deal of air is requisite to
make it appear luminous, and a little air will not be sufficient. Wherefore
when the Phosphorus was hot, it would not shine, until the bottle was unstopt,
but when it was cold, it sent forth only weak vapors, wherefore then a very
little air sufficed to make it shine, and when it received too much, it was
thereby suffocated.

The last Experiment made in the little Crystal bottle does further very well
prove my explication: the fixed acid liquor which was poured upon the
Phosphorus, did slacken the motion of its parts, so that from that time they
could not display their light with so much vigor as they did; wherefore a very
little sufficed to continue its light, so that the paper-stopple served to give
it sufficient air; but when the bottle was stopped closely with its Crystal
stopple, no more light was seen for some time afterward, because that stopple
did wholly hinder the entrance of air. It is likewise the fixing of the
Volatile parts of the Phosphorus, which preserves the light so long, for the
matter having now less motion than before it was fixed, its parts do come to be
dissipated with the more leisure.

But you will tell me, that the great fume which exhaled from it when the acid
liquor was poured upon the Phosphorus, is rather a sign of a greater than less
dissipation of parts.

I grant that when this acid acts upon the matter, there is at that time a
considerable exaltation of parts, but I say also that when this great motion is
once over, that which remains is in much less agitation than it was, and you
must observe that the strong acids, such as Oil of Vitriol, and Spirit of Niter
upon being mixed with Spirit of Wine do cause a much like fume as this, and yet
afterward the Spirit of Wine is much less volatile than it was.

Again the light of the Phosphorus which is in the little crystal bottle that
is stopped, may be said to be partly caused by an air which is produced by a kind
of fermentation, for doubtless there is some little action between the acid and
the matter.

I find therefore that there is a parity of reason in the explication of the
light which appeared in the viol after the air was pumped out of it, and that
which is seen in the little crystal bottle stopped.

It is further remarkable that this same Phosphorus which went quite out, when
air was let into it by means of the Pneumatick Engine, yet did not altogether
lose its light when it received the air the common way, that is to say, merely
by unstopping the bottle, whereof the reason is this, the air that is
communicated from the Air-pump comes in with a great force and violence through
the pipe, and so may very well put out the light of the Phosphorus, which the
air that has its ordinary motion is not able to do; after the same manner as a
candle lighted is much sooner put out when exposed to a blast of wind, than
when it is set in a place where the air is quiet.

From considering all the kinds of Phosphorus, both Natural and Artificial, and
the Experiments that have been made upon them, I cannot but conclude, that the
general cause of the light they give does proceed from a very great agitation
of insensible parts; and whereas it is very probable that fire is only a very
violent motion of little bodies round their center, the parts of our Phosphorus
may be said to have received the same determination by the fermentations it has
undergone; for Wood never shines in the dark until it is become rotten, that is
to say, until it has undergone a sufficient fermentation to make its most
subtle parts move nimbly round their center. The Bolonian stone is not
luminous until it has been calcined a certain time, in order to excite a motion
of its parts.

The Viper being irritated darts forth its tongue with so much quickness, that
it appears all on fire. Many little creatures, such as some kinds of
Caterpillars, and Woodlice do shine in the night, because they have a matter so
exceeding subtle toward their tail, that it produces a sort of fire; and it
is for the same reason of the motion of parts that Urine does become luminous.

That which gave occasion to the working upon Urine for the making of the
Phosphorus was, that in some little holes of the earth wherein there had been
standing-puddles of Urine, a light had been observed to be seen at nights.

But you will ask me then, why the greatest part of mixed bodies do yield no
light, although the same means are used to excite a motion of their parts.

I answer, that all mixed bodies have not their insensible parts so disposed to
a rapid motion, and after such a manner as those I have now spoken of. Wood
indeed will easily enough flame, but you cannot make a flame with stones,
because you cannot give stones the same determination to motion of parts, as
you can to wood. To give light, or to make a fire, bodies must be compounded of
sulphurous parts, for sulphurs are very susceptible of motion.

I do not at all doubt but an infinite number of things, that there is no
imagination of at present, might serve to the making of Phosphorus, when
inquisitive men shall have a mind to try it.

It has been observed in many men, that when they have been in a great rage, or
are become extreme Choleric, the very hair of their head has shone brighter
than usual; and we need not be scrupulous in believing what is said of
Alexander the Great, that when he was hotly engaged in the battle, fire was
seen to sparkle out of his eyes, because his humors were then in an
extraordinary commotion.

What I have now said may pass for a general explication on this matter, but if
we should descend into particulars nicely, it would be very hard to clear so
well as could be wished a great many doubts that have been raised: for example,
wherein consists the difference of fermentations, which of many like matters
makes this to shine, and that not to shine, although they do seem to have
undergone the same fermentations and elaborations in a like space of time. Why
some things that have fermented but little do give a light, and others of the
same nature, though they have fermented as long and longer, yet give no light.
Why one side of a matter shall be luminous, and the other shall not be; we
ought to have a very perfect knowledge of the structure and the order of the
insensible parts of the matter, to give good substantial reasons for the
resolution of these doubts.

Sometimes there have been found in the Shambles pieces of Veal, Mutton, Beef,
which do shine in the dark, though they have been but newly killed, and yet
other pieces of the same kind killed at the same time, shall not shine at all.
Nay, this very year was seen at Orleans, in a very temperate season, a great
quantity of meat of this sort, some of it would shine all over, and others of
it would shine only in some certain places, in form of Stars. It was likewise
observed that with some Butchers almost all their meat was found to be
luminous, and with other Butchers there was not a bit to be seen of that kind.
Men concluded presently that such flesh as this was altogether unwholesome to
eat of, they therefore flung away a great deal of it into the river, and
several Butchers there had like to be ruined by this accident; but at last
perceiving that there was such quantities of it, some people ventured to eat of
it, and at length it was found to be as good meat as any other.

I conceive that this Phenomenon may be imputed to two causes.

First to the Pasturage of the beasts; for it is certain that in some countries
the herbs are more spirituous than in others, and those do give such an active
impression to the humors of those beasts who feed on them, that they may have a
disposition to the making this Phosphorus.

Secondly, To these beasts having been heated more than others in their driving
upon the road, or else to their having been killed before they had sufficiently
rested after their journey; for the spirits being put into a great motion
thereby, do not every where lose it after the beast is killed, and so long as
the spirits do continue their rapid motion, so long the Phosphorus is to be
seen, but when the flesh begins to stink, there appears no more light in it,
because these vigorous spirits are then spent, or else they come to be confused
in the meat by the means of another fermentation.

But you will not fail to make me this Objection: If the Phosphorus does
consist in a violent motion of the insensible parts, then stinking meat should
be more luminous than that which was newly killed, because the smell proceeds
from the separation of the principles of a mixed body by fermentation, which as
they rise from it do strike the nerve of Smelling, wherefore there must needs
be a greater motion of parts in stinking meat than in that which is fresh.

I answer that that which makes the Phosphorus in meat newly killed is a matter
much more active and more subtle than that which gives the ill smell to
stinking meat; it is a remainder of the spirits which do run with a prodigious
swiftness through the body of a living creature in all its parts, and unless
the matter be in this degree of motion, it will never become lucid, no more
than if the insensible parts of inflammable matters be not put into a very
rapid motion, they will not take fire.

Perhaps also it may be that the meat in the corrupting might receive a
sufficient agitation of parts to produce light, as it happens sometimes in the
standing puddles of Urine.

In considering the light which appears upon the surface of standing Urines, I
have been led to think that there are oftentimes serosities that settle in the
bodies of sick persons which might be in a condition to make kinds of
Phosphorus, if they had but air enough to illuminate them; at least they do
produce the effects of fire, as in Gouts, in Rheumatisms, in the Erysipelas,
and in abundance of other Inflammations.

The Hermetick PHOSPHORUS of BALDUINUS.
It is a mixture of Chalk, and the Acid Spirits of Aqua fortis, which makes it
lucid.

Make red-hot about two pounds of Chalk, then let it cool, and powder it.

Take a quantity of Aqua fortis, for example a pound, pour it into a great
glass body, and throw into it a spoonful of your calcined Chalk powdered, it
will make a strong ebullition; when that shall be dissolved, throw into it as
much more, and continue to do so until it makes no ebullition; let the liquor
settle, and decant it into an earthen pan placed in sand, and evaporate all the
liquor with a little fire, you will have remain a kind of salt at bottom.

Put this salt into a Coppel, or into an earthen pan unglazed, set it in sand
in a gentle heat, the matter being heated will swell, continue this gentle heat
about an hour, or until it be a little sunk, cover it then with a cover or lid
that has three or four holes in it, increase the fire by little and little,
until it be strong enough to melt the matter, and when it is melted you must
expect to see a yellow vapor come forth through the holes of the lid: so soon
as that appears you must take your vessel off the fire, and having covered it
with an earthen lid without holes instead of that with holes, suffer it to cool.

You will find on the sides of your vessel a border of yellow matter, which is
sometimes to the thickness of a finger, this is the Phosphorus, take it and
keep it in a box well stopped in some dark place.

When you would have it appear lucid in the dark, you must expose it about a
quarter of an hour to the light, without which it will not shine in the dark.

Remarks.
Chalk is a bituminous earth called in Latin Creta, from the Isle of Crete,
where there is abundance of it. It likewise abounds in many other Countries.
Some Authors do recount three sorts of it, the white, the greenish, and the
black, but that which we use in this operation is the common, the white: It is
calcined in order to make its Sulphur more active than it was before; the more
volatile part of it flies away, but there is still enough remaining to make the
PHOSPHORVS.

Although Chalk be bituminous, nevertheless it is an alkali, because the
Sulphurs which it contains in small quantity are not capable to shut the pores
of it; and besides, the calcination opens them more, and disposes this earth to
receive more easily the impression of acids, which plainly shows it self by the
strong ebullition that happens when it is thrown into the Aqua fortis. The body
must be large, and the Chalk must be thrown into it by little and little, to
hinder the matter from boiling over. The Chalk does all of it dissolve
perfectly in the Aqua fortis; and more is still to be added, until there be no
further ebullition; for that is the sign that the acid spirits have rarefied
the matter as much as they were able, and that being as it were sheathed or
locked up in the matter, they could not possibly dissolve any more of it; if
therefore you should still add more in superfluity, the overplus would
precipitate to the bottom. When the Aqua fortis you use is good, it dissolves
very near its weight in Chalk; the solution of it is yellow.

That which is evaporated is the more phlegmatic part of Aqua fortis, and the
acid Spirits being incorporated with the Chalk do make a kind of austere salt;
this salt might very easily be dissolved into a liquor in the air. It is fit
that it should be very dry, when it is put into the Coppel, that the operation
may be done the sooner; the vessel is covered, that the matter may be the more
easily melted, but the cover must needs have holes in it, to give vent to the
vapors which rise from it, and that we may see when the vapors do come
yellow, that we may then immediately take the vessel off the fire, for these
yellow vapors are they that make the Phosphorus lucid.

After Calcination you find at bottom of the pan, or coppel, a terrestrious
matter which must be flung away as useless.

In order to preserve this Phosphorus the better you may leave it as it is in
the vessel wherein it was Calcined, but you must stop it close in a box with a
glass lid.

It is to be kept in a shady place, that its parts being thereby the more
condensed, they may spend the more slowly; and when you would have it to shine
in the dark, you must expose it to the air about a quarter of an hour, because
the air does put its parts into a motion. This Phosphorus is in its effects
very like to the Bolonian stone, but that takes the air much sooner than this
stone, because it contains abundantly more salt; its light does not endure so
long as that of the Phosphorus which I described before.

CHAP. III. Of Honey.
HOney is compounded of the most Balsamic substance of several Flowers, which
the Bees do separate and carry into their Hives for nourishment. They do gather
up and order this Honey most artificially, as if they took special care to make
provision against Winter, and thereby they make way for the Fermentation which
sends to the sides the grosser part which is like to a Tartar, and called Wax,
the Honey being found in the middle; the best to the taste is the White, but
for Physic the Yellow is the better, as containing more Spirits than the
other; it must be of a moderate consistence, that is to say, neither too hard,
nor too clear.

A Hydromel is prepared with it for Diseases of the Breast.

A Vinous Hydromel is made of water and clarified Honey, then the liquor is put
to Ferment in a vessel in the Sun, until it is grown as strong as Spanish wine;
a Spirit may be drawn from it; and Hydromel will grow as sour as wine.

Distillation of Honey.
This preparation is a separation of the Water, the Spirit, and the Oil of
Honey from its terrestrious part.

Put four pounds of good Honey into a large earthen body, and distill the water
in a moderate Sand-heat, until acid drops begin to come; then take away the
fire, and keep this Water in a bottle; it is good to make the hair grow, you
must either wet your Comb with it every day, or else dip a piece of Sponge into
it, and therewith soak the roots of the hair.

Take that which remains in the Body, put it into an earthen Retort, or glass
one Coated, but one that is large enough for two thirds to remain empty, and
place your Retort in a Reverberatory Furnace; then fitting a large Receiver,
and luting the joints, begin the distillation with a small fire for three hours
only to warm the Retort; then increase it by little and little, Spirits will
come forth with a little black Oil, and fill the Receiver with Clouds; continue
the fire until all is come out that will, unlute the vessels, and separate the
Spirit from the black and stinking Oil in a Tunnel lined with brown paper,
(there is but very little Oil) keep them both in Viols: you will have twelve
ounces of Spirit.

The Spirit is an excellent Aperitive, some of it may be dropped into Juleps, to
give them an agreeable acidity.

The Spirit may be Rectified by distilling it in Sand in a glass Body, and that
which rises last may be kept apart as the strongest of all; it is used for to
cleanse old Ulcers, and to eat proud flesh.

The Oil is good to be used in caries of bones.

You will have in the retort six and twenty ounces of a black very spongy
matter, which is inflammable by reason of a soot that remains in it; when it is
burnt it yields but very few ashes, out of which nothing can be drawn.

Remarks.
The Vessels must be exceeding large for the Distillation of Honey, because a
great vacuity is requisite for it to rarifie in.

The Water of Honey makes the Hair to grow, because it opens the Pores; some do
mix it with the Juice of Onion to render it the more effectual.

Sometimes a little Wax is found in the receiver, which came with the Spirit
from the Honey in the distillation.

CHAP. IV. Distillation of Wax.
THIS Operation is a separation of the Oil of Wax, from the Phlegm, and Salt.

Melt two pounds of Yellow Wax in an earthen pan, and mix with it three or four
pounds of potters earth powdered, or so much as is requisite to make a Paste of
it, form it into little pellets, and put them into an earthen Retort, or glass
one Coated, a third of which remains empty; place this Retort in a
Reverberatory Furnace; fit to it a Receiver, and luting the joints, give a
small fire at first, and there will come forth Phlegm, then a Spirit; increase
the fire a little, and a liquor will distill that congeals in the Receiver like
Butter; continue the fire till nothing more comes forth; then unlute the
joints, separate the Spirit mixed with Phlegm from the Butter, and keep it in a
Viol well stopped. It is a good opener; the dose is from ten drops to twenty in
raddish water, or some other appropriate liquor.

Some do use the Butter of Wax to discuss tumors, rather than the Oil that I am
going to describe.

Melt the Butter of Wax in an earthen pan, and make a paste of it with
sufficient quantity of potters-earth powdered; form this paste into little
pellets, put them into a glass retort, set your retort in a Sand-heat, fit to
it a Receiver, and luting the joints, begin the distillation with a small fire,
a great many Spirits will come forth mixed with Phlegm, after which increase it
a little, and a clear yellow Oil will come; having distilled about three ounces
of it, change the Receiver, for that which comes at last is as thick as Butter.
It may be Rectified with other clay, or potters-earth, and it will change into
as transparent an Oil as the other. Separate the Oil from the Spirit, and keep
it in a Viol. It is a good discutient for Tumors, and Cold pains: it is mixed
in Unguents and Oils for that purpose.

The Oil of Wax may be rectified several other times to make it still clearer
than before.

Remarks.
The solid consistence of Wax does proceed from a proportionate mixture of
Water, Volatile Salt, and Oil, united and incorporated together; wherefore its
solidity comes to be destroyed, according as the Principles do suffer a
separation; and this is easily observed in the Rectifications, for in every
distillation that is made, some considerable quantity of water is separated,
and the Oil does likewise become clearer.

The Clay serves only to separate the parts of Wax, and to rarifie it the more.

If by way of curiosity you desire to know exactly what quantity of liquor, or
Spirit, can be drawn from Wax, you must dry your Clay as much as you can, or
else use in its place, broken pots, or Bricks powdered, which are not at all
wet: out of three and twenty ounces of Wax, you will draw in the first
distillation just the same weight of liquor; to wit, twelve ounces of
Phlegmatic Spirit, and the rest is a Butter; in the second and third
distillation you will draw fourteen ounces of Spirit, and six ounces of clear Oil.

Spirit of Wax is only a small quantity of acid Volatile salt dissolved in
Phlegm; but you must not believe what some have written, that having distilled
a considerable quantity of Wax, and put that which was drawn into a Bolt-head,
they could sublime the Volatile salt like others of that nature. For this salt,
though it be indeed Volatile, yet it is not Volatile enough to rise before the
Phlegm; it is an acid salt much like unto that of Ambar, but is not of the
nature of Volatile alkali's, which are known to sublime so easily; it were
better therefore to keep this Spirit as it is, or else to evaporate about half
of it with a very mild heat, that it may be the stronger.

The Volatile salts of many sulphurous matters are drawn acid, as they are in
the mixed, because being clothed with soft and ramous parts which give way
easily to their motion, they do not break their natural keenness by
endeavoring to separate, when they are forced to it by fire, and so they do
not receive so much terrestrious and fiery matter, as is requisite to make them
porous, like Volatile alkali's.

This Operation, and that of the Distillation of Ambar which I have described,
do much confirm what I said before in my Remarks upon the Principle, that all
the salt of mixed bodies is naturally acid, and that alkali is nothing else but
an alteration of the Natural Salt, made by fire. Besides, all sorts of
Experiments do seem to me to confirm and establish this opinion; but yet I am
not so peremptory in the vindication of it, but that I would gladly give place
to another, if I could be showed that it is better than mine, for I seek after
nothing so much as to discover truth.

FINIS.
THE INDEX.
A
ACID, what, Page 24 How different Crystals are drawn with different acids, 188
That acids drawn by violent fires do much differ from the natural, 287 How they
do become able both to dissolve, and to coagulate, 453 That they will preserve
bodies from corruption, 455 That Digestion and Hunger, are not so mnch
beholding to acids, as is commonly thought, 456, 457
Acid and Alkali, not the only cause of ebullition, 302, 342 Aes ustum, 123
Alchymy, well defined, 58 Alkaest, 309 Alkali, whence so called, 22 What it is,
25 Aloes, 477 Roch-Alom, 350 Alom-water, 352 Alumen Saccharinum, 350
Burnt-Alom, 351 Amalgamation of Gold, 65 Ambar, 363 Ambargrease, 372 Antimony,
202 What renders it emetick, 203, 206 Its emetick quality drawn better in wine
than other liquors, 207 The violence of Antimonial vomits to be conquered with
Cream of Tartar, 231
Antimony Calcined in the Sun, increases in weight, 228, 229 Antimonial Cup,
205 Antimonium Diaphoreticum, whether sudorifick, 224 That it is not an alkali,
225
Cinnaber of Antimony, 234 Regulus of Antimony increased in weight by
Calcination, 208 What gives the form of a star to its Martial Regulus, 212
Glass of Antimony, why more emetick than its other preparations, 217 How it
may be corrected, ib. What gives it vitrification, 216
Sulphur of Antimony, 236 Our Golden Sulphur of Antimony, different from that
of the ancients, 210
Aqua Regalis, why it dissolves Gold, and cannot dissolve Sylver, 313, etc.
Aqua secunda, 77 Arcanum Corallinum, 193 Arsenick, 244 What to be done when
this poison happens to be taken 2inwardly, 246

B
Balm distilled, 404 Balsom of Sulphur anisated, 357 Bath-waters, their heat
explicated, 140 Benjamin, 491 Animal Bezoar, 511 Bismuth, 101 Bolonian stone,
525 Butter of Saturn, 111
C
Camphire, 494 How it comes to be an Amulet in Agues, ib.
Carduus Benedictus distilled, 406 Chylification explicated, 356 Cerusse, 106
Cineres Clavellati, 433 Cinnaber of Antimony, 234 Anatomized, 235
Cinnamon, 389 how it differs from Cassia lignea, 390
Cloves, 399 Colcothar, the Natural, 330 And the Artificial, 333, 339
Colophone, 490 Color, what it is, 194, 195, 228 Variety of colors, 199, 344,
345 and the reason of them, 201
Coppel, 77 Copper, 118 Coral, 270 The ebullition it causes with Vinegar in its
dissolution, thought to be a cold ebullition, 273 The solution of Pearl, and
other alkali matters, performed as that of Coral, 274
Coral prepared, 272 much better than the Magistery, 275
Cornachine powder, 225 Crocus Martis, its best preparation of all, 132, 133
Crocus metallorum, how often the same will serve to make the Emetick wine, 221
D
Depart, 62, 79 That Digestion owes more to the saliva, than to acids, 456
E
Earthquakes, their nature explicated, 140 Ebullition, without the encounter of
acid and alkali, 302, 342 Elosaccharum, 391 Elixir proprietatis, 479 Emetick
Syrop, 215 Emetick wine, 218, 222 Extracts of greater virtue than waters, 406
Extractum Panchymagogum, 484
F
Fevers their nature, and their principal symptoms explicated, 459, 460 The
regularity of their fits explicated, 461
A Febrifugous salt, 321 Fermentation, 26 Fire, how it alters the nature of
bodies, 20, 21, 25, 26, 251 How the substance of fire does increase the weight
of some medicines, 107, 116, 208, 228, 229 What Fire is, 303
Flints, how generated, 263 Fulminant powder, 71 Furnaces and vessels, 31
G
Gold, 48 The wicked cheats which Alchymists do use in pretending to make it,
49, etc. The improbability of making Gold fairly represented, 56, 57 Whether it
be a Cordial, 58, 59 That it can be volatilized, 60 Purified by an operation
called the Depart, 62 Purified by Cementation, 63 Its Precipitation, 68 Its
Fulmination from whence, 70 Why it spreads under the hammer better than Sylver,
315
Gravelled ashes, 256 Guaiacum, 383 its Oil why so good for the toothache, 385
Gumm Armoniack, its best Purification, 497 Other Gumms how Purified, 498

H
Hair distilled, 518 Hartshorn distilled, 516 Honey, 542 Hunger from what
cause, 457 Hydragogues, why they do work more on watery humors than the
others, 358 Hysterical vapors why allaied by ill smells, 367, 368
I
Jalap, 373 That all its Purgative virtue consists in the Rosine, 373
Inks called sympathetical, 258, 330 Iron, 130 How made Steel, 131 Preferred
before Steel for Physical uses, ib. 132, 133, etc. That it opens obstructions
by its salt, 133 When mixed with Sulphur, and wetted with water, it grows
extraordinary hot of it self; which serves to explain the nature of
Earthquakes, and hot baths, 140, 141
Ivory distilled, 517
L
Lead, 105 That it purifies Gold and Sylver, as the white of an Egg clarifies a
Syrop, ib. increased in weight by Calcination, 107 increased in weight by
Distillation, 116 how to be Revived, 115, 118
Lignum sanctum, 383 Lime water, 254 Litharge, 76 Lutes, 37
M
Mace, 425 Magnesia Opalina, 219 Marcassite, 101 Mercury, 154 Why it remains
fluid, and why it so easily volatilizes by fire, ib. its ill effects, 160 and
its good effects, 161 especially in Venereal Maladies, ib. the raising a Flux
by Mercury, ingeniously, and at large explicated, 162, 163, etc. proved to be
an alkali, 167, 168 why it requires less Spirit to dissolve it than other
metals, 172 in what form to be taken inwardly, 185
Mercurius vitae, 236 Mercurial water, 190, 191 Metals seven, 46 Milk, its
coagulation explicated, 29, 454 Virgins Milk. 493 Minerals, their formation and
growth, 45 Minium, 106 Mountebanks, their cheat in taking Poisons, 182 Myrrh,
500
N
Niter, see Saltpeter. Nutritum, or Butter of Saturn, 111 Nutmegs, 401
O
Oleum Philosophorum, or Oil of Bricks, why so called, 270 Opium and Meconium,
467 how its narcotick quality is best to be preserved in the Extract, 469 That
it ought not to be Torrified, 470 how it is that Opium causes sleep more than
other things, 471 Reason given why it allaies pains, takes off deliriums, and
cures fluxes, 473 The Turks taking such quantities of it, descanted upon, 474
Why Sudorifick, 476

P
Paper, both ancient and modern how made, 386 Perpetual Pills, 204 not good in
the Iliaca passio, but good in the Colic, 207 Whether they do lose their
virtue by frequent use, 206
Perspiration insensible, two sorts, 72 That more is Perspired in the heat and
drought of a Fever, than in the violent sweat, ib.
Petrification, how, 264 Petroleum, 363, 364 Peruvian Bark, 393 The greatest
Specific ever known in Agues, ib. The different manner of giving it
heretofore, and at present, ib. The body to be well Purged, before the Bark is
given, 394 The ill effects of taking it irregularly, ib. To be avoided by such
who have an Abscess, ib. How it comes to remove the fit, ib. and 395 Its
febrifugous virtue lost by distillation, 398
Phagedenick water, 171 Philosophers Stone, or Powder of Projection, a
miserable cheat, 51, etc. Phosphorus, the solid, 523 and the Liquid, 525 Its
Inventors, 526 Experiments made upon the Phosphorus, 528, 529, etc.
Baldwin 's Phosphorus, 538 Plumbum ustum, 106 Poison, what it is, 179 The
difference between Coagulative or cold Poisons, and the Corrosive or hot, 179
How different the Remedies proper to each of them be, 180, 181
Principles of Chemistry, 2 That they are not first Principles, 5 How much they
are indebted to fire in their production, 6, etc. The five Principles not to be
found in Minerals, 9
Pulvis Cornachinus, 225 Purgative medicines, their different operation
explicated, 487 Purgative virtue of mixed bodies, wherein it consists, 381, 382
Pus, how it becomes white, 356
Q
Quicklime how made, 251 Fiery bodies proved to cause its corrosion, and
ebullition with water, 252, 253 No salt to be drawn from it, 253 That Acids
will give it a new ebullition, after it is slak't, 254 but will make no
ebullition with Limewater, ib.

R
Rhubarb, commended as it deserves, 379 Rosines, how distilled, 490
S
Salivation explicated, 162, 163, etc. Sal Armoniack, the Natural, and the
Artificial, 310 Its Purification, ib. Its Flowers Chalybeated, 312
Sal Gemme, its origin, 13, 277 Sal Prunellae, often counterfeited, 295 Salt,
one chief, of which all the rest are compounded, 12 Three sorts of it drawn
from Vegetables, 19 That it becomes Alkali by fire, 23, 24
Alkali Salts, how made exceeding white, 446 Common Salt, 277 its origin, 13
That made by evaporation, not so strong as that by crystallization, 278 The
manner of making Salt at Rochel, 279 Its Spirit drawn without addition of
earth, 284 New Spirits drawn several times from the same matter, exposed to the
air after distillation, 285
Salt decrepitated must be newly made for use, 282 Saltpeter, or Niter of the
ancients different from ours, 289 its origin, 15, 289 That it is not
inflammable in it self, nor sulphurous, 290, 308 That it is a Sal Gemme
impregnated with greater store of Spirits, 292
Saltpeter Purified, judged better for use than Sal prunellae, 295
Sanguification explicated, 356 Sea-sickness, its cause, 278 Smallpox
ingeniously compared to the fermentation of Wines, 416 Universal Spirit, 2
Steel, how made, 131 Stones, how generated, 263 how possibly they grow in our
bodies, 268
Succinum, or Ambar, 363 Sublimate Corrosive, often counterfeited, and how to
be discovered, 177 Its Corrosion much greater than that of Arsenick, 182 How
from so great a Poison it comes to be so mild as it is in Mercurius dulcis, 185
Suffocation of the Matrix explicated, 368 Sugar, whence its sweetness is
derived, 243, 410 how made, 408 Sugar Candy, how made, 409 Sulphur, 353 Its
Flowers, how made white, 354 Its Milk. 355 That half the quantity of its Milk
or Magistery, is as effectual as double the quantity of its Flowers, 357 Its
Spirit suspected in diseases of the breast, 360 Its Salt, why so much more acid
then tartarum vitriolatum, 362
Sulphur vivum, 353 Sylver, 74 how made, or counterfeited by Alchymists, 55 The
difference between Plate-sylver, and Coppel sylver, 79 Its Crystals, how
Revived, 82 Its Calx how Revived, 86
Sympathetical powder, its preparation and use, and its operation explicated,
334, 335, 336 The authors candid judgment of it, 337
Syrop of Mars, 148
T
Tabaco, 481 An Experiment made upon its Oil, 483
Tartar, 433 Its Cream and Crystals, 434 Why its Crystals will not dissolve in
cold water, 435 No true Volatile Salt to be drawn from it, 443 A quick way of
making its Salt, 445 That water thrown upon Tartar newly Calcined gives it a
heat and ebullition like Quicklime, 445 How its Salt mixed with distilled
waters will make them look green, 447 That its Salt will cause a flame, after
the manner as does Saltpeter, when thrown upon kindled coals, 449
Chemical Terms explicated, 40 Tinctures how made, 501 Turpentine, 488 Tynn, 92
V
Venereal disease, its venom proved to be an Acid, 168, 169 Verdigrease how
made, 127 Vermilion, 157 Vinegar, how made, 429 That common Vinegar keeps its
strength longer than the distilled Spirit, 431 Good against the Plague, ib.
Vinegar of Saturn, 111 Vipers when taken, can live a whole Summer without
eating, if they have but air, 505 How the Viper differs from Serpents, 506 The
quickest remedy for the biting of a Viper, 507 Wherein her venom does consist,
507, etc. A Sudorifick water of Vipers, 519
Virgins Milk, 112 Vitriol its several sorts, 329, 330 The English how to be
distinguished from the German, 339 Its Spirit how Revived into Vitriol, 341
That its strong Oil causes heat and ebullition with diverse liquors that are not
alkali, 342 A remarkable instance of its Caustic Oil, 343
Volatile Salts, how Rectified, 514, 515 When to be used, and when not, 466 Why
they become foetid, and are alkalis 21, 22
Vomiting when excessive, through the taking Antimonial preparations, is to be
stopped with Cream of Tartar, 231, 232
W
Wax, 546 Wine, 412 analyzed, 420 Why Claret lies longer in the body, and
abounds more with Tartar than White Wind, 412 Its Must anatomised, 413 No
inflammable Spirit in the Must, ib. Its Spirit, what, ib. Why Muscat and
Spanish wines are so sweet as they are, and why they yield fewer Spirits than
French wines, 414 The Smallpox ingeniously compared with the fermentation of
Wines, 416 Its good and bad effects, 418, 419 How it causes so profound a
sleep, 419 The drawing Spirit of Wine by the Serpent rejected, and another
instrument preferred, 421, 422, etc. What causes Wine to turn egre, and what
will hinder it, 466

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishop's Head in S. Paul's
Churchyard.
THO. Sydenhami, M.D. Opera Universa, oct. Lister de fontibus medicatis
Angliae, oct. Jones de Febribus intermittentibus, oct. Mayow Tractat. quinq.e
med. de sal. nitro, etc. oct. Charletoni Inquisitio physica de Causis
catamenionum, and uteri Rheumatismo, oct. Entii Apologia pro Circuitione
sanguinis, contra Parisanum. Edit. altera, auct. and accuratior, oct. Lossii
Observationes Medicae, oct. R. Grovii Carmen de Circuitione sanguinis, quart.
Dr. Charleton's three Anatomick Lectures, 1. Of the motion of the Blood. 2. Of
the Organick structure of the Heart, 3. Of the efficient causes of the Hearts
Pulsation, quart. Dr. Webster's History of Metals, quart. -- Grew's Anatomy of
Trunks, oct. -- 's Anatomy of Plants, fol. Dr. Goodall's Royal College of
Physicians of London, founded and established by Law, as appears by Letters
Patents, Acts of Parl. etc. quart. Dr. Smith's Portraicture of Old Age, oct.
Burnetii Telluris Theoria Sacra, quart. Mr. Burnets Theory of the Earth, fol.
Dr. Hicks's Jovian, in Answer to Julian, oct. Plato's Demon, or the State
Physician unmasked, in Answer to Plato Redivivus, by T. Goddard, Esquire Dr. More's
Exposition on Daniel, quart. -- Exposition on the Apocalypse, quart. -- Answer
to several Remarks on his Exposition on Daniel, and the Revel. by S.E. quart.
Dr. More's Answer to Dr. Butler about Judicial Astrology, quart. -- 's Reply to
the Answer to his Antidote against Idolatry, with his Appendix, oct. -- 's
Remarks on Judge Hales, about fluid bodies, etc. oct. Dr. Falkner's Libertas
Ecclesiastica, oct. -- 's Christian Loyalty, oct. -- 's Vindication of
Liturgies, oct. Dr. Sherlocks Discourse of the knowledge of Jesus Christ, with
his Defense, oct. Dr. Scott's Christian Life, first and second part. Dr.
Fowler's Libertas Evangelica, in pursuance of his Design of Christianity, oct.
Mr. Kidder's Discourse of Christian fortitude, oct. Mr. Hesketh's serious
exhortation to frequent Communion, oct. -- Piety the best Rule of Orthodoxy,
oct. Dr. Worthington's great Duty of Self-Resignation, oct. Mr. Needhams six
Sermons at Cambridge, oct. Mr. Grails Sermons at Norwich, oct. Mr. Long's
History of the Donatists. oct. -- 's Character of a Separatist. oct. -- Against
Hales of Schism, with Mr. Baxter's Arguments for Conformity. oct. -- 's
Nonconformists plea for Peace impleaded against Mr. Baxter. oct. Mr. W. Allens
Works, in 4 Vol. oct. Mr. Lamb's stop to the Course of Separation. oct. -- 's
Fresh suit against Independency. oct. Dr. Charleton's Harmony of Not. and
Positive Divine Laws, oct.

