THE TRAVELS OF TRUE Godliness, FROM THE Beginning of the World to this present
Day; in an apt and Pleasant ALLEGORY. SHOWING The Troubles Oppositions,
Reproaches and Persecutions he has met with in every Age. TOGETHER WITH The
Danger he seems to be in at this present Time by Vice, Papistry, and other
Grand Enemies. Also where he makes his last and final Abode. By B. K. Author of
War with the Devil, and Sion in Distress.

The Third Edition, carefully Corrected.

London, Printed for John Dunton, at the Raven over against the Stocks-Market.
MDCLXXXIV.

London Printed for John Dunton at the Black Raven In the Poultrey over against
ye stocks market. 1683
Babylon

Apostates

Apostate

Godliness

Knowledge Faith Love ^incerity Order

discipline

Thoughtfull

Religion

Jerusalem



THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
IN this Tract is showed the many Snares and Temptation that attend both Riches
and Poverty, Youth and Old Age; together with the chief Reason why most Men of
all Ranks and Qualities, are such great strangers to True Godliness. The
Legalist, and Formal Hypocrite may also here see the danger they are in.
Moreover True Godliness is opened in his own primitive Internal, and External
Beauty and Glory; being vindicated from all those foul Calumnies and Reproaches
cast upon him in this and former Ages: With his sad Lamentation, in respect of
the prevailing power of Vice Ungodlines, and that great danger he seems now to
be in by Papistry and other Enemies. Also the usefulness and necessity of
Consideration; and the Creatures utmost care and diligence in order to their
Conversion, is clearly evinced; with the chief means, nature and excellency
thereof. Together with the cause and dismal Consequences of Apostasy, etc.

If thou art a Saint, read with delight; but if thou art an Enemy to True
Godliness, read and tremble: For the happy estate of the one, and the miserable
condition of the other, is here set out before your eyes. In this Treatise, you
may see the little cause the one has to mourn in the worst of Times, and the
other to rejoice what times soever they live in. I hope none will be offended,
because True Godliness is here presented in an Allegory, since the Holy
Scriptures abound with them, and so fully justify our practce herein: However,
it is now exposed to public view, and since it has its Birth in such a
juncture as this, I expect it will meet with different entertainment; but
whatsoever censures it passes under, yet if but one soul reaps real benefit by
it, it will requite me for my pains: I can say it has been sweet to me in
writing, God grant it may prove so to thee in reading, and I shall say no more,
but shall leave it to the Blessing of Jehovah, in whom I still remain through
infinite Grace.

Thy Souls Friend and Servant, B. Keach.

THE TRAVELS OF TRUE GODLINESS.
CHAP. I.
Showing what true Godliness is, as also his Pedigree, Original, and Antiquity,

TRUE Godliness being of late, as well as in former days) become so great a
stranger to most men, and indeed not known but by a very few in the World; I
shall in the first place, before I Treat of his Travels and of the
Entertainment he meets with where he comes, give you a description of him, and
the rather because many persons I perceive are subject to so great an error as
to take Mortality for him; and others out of ignorance (to say no worse) Rail,
and ignominiously call and abuse him, by the names of Singularity,
Stubbornness, Pride and Rebellion, as if he were not fit to live or have a
being in the World, he being rendered a makebate, a seditious and common
disturber of all Kingdoms, Cities, Towns, and Villages wheresoever he comes and
is entertained: Yea, such a factious and quarrelsome companion, that he is
indeed the only cause and stirrer up of all those unhappy differences,
divisions, troubles and miseries that are this day in the world, This being so,
I conclude nothing is more necessary, than to take off that ugly Mask or
Visard, which his implacable enemies have put upon him, and clear him of all
those soul and unjust slanders and cursed reproaches of the Sons of Belial;
that so he may appear in his own original, primitive and spotless Innocence,
that none may be afraid of him, or be unwilling to entertain him, nor ashamed
to own him, and make him their bosome-companion.

Know ye therefore in the first place, Godliness described.
That Godliness consists in the true and right knowledge of Divine Truths, or
fundamental principles of the Gospel; which all men ought to know and be
established in, that would be saved without Controversy, great is the mystery
of Godliness: God manifested in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of
Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the World, and received up
to Glory. Tim. 3.16.
These great Truths of the Christian Religion are called Godliness; many men
conclude it is no matter what faith or principle they hold and cleave to,
provided they do but live a sober and honest life, doing to all men as they
would be done unto, supposing that the whole of Religion and Godliness consists
in these things; but alas, they are greatly mistaken; Godliness is another
kind of thing than they imagine; it is impossible to receive or entertain True
Godliness, whilst we shut out of doors the Essentials of the Christian
Religion; and instead thereof embrace Superstition, Error and Heresy, there
being damning principles as well as damning practices, 2 Pet. 1.2, 3.

Now should any demand further, to hear more particularly what those principles
of divine truths, or fundamentals of Christian Faith be, which are the
Essentials of True Godliness.

1. I answer the Doctrine of the Blessed Trinity, or the three distinct
Subsistances in the Glorious Deity.

2. The Unity of the two natures in the person of Christ, viz. that he is
really God and man, in one person David's Lord, and yet David's Son; David's
Root, and yet David's Offspring.

3. The Doctrine of Atonement, or that plenary satisfaction and
reconcilliation the Lord Jesus has made by his glorious understaning on man's
behalf.

4. The Doctrine of Justification by Faith alone, or the imputation of Christ's
Righteousness to those who do believe.

5. The Doctrine of Regeneration, Resurrection, Judgment, the World to come,
etc. Now I say in the true knowledge of these and such like principles of divine
truths, and being truly established in the steadfast belief thereof, does True
Godliness in part consist. But secondly, Godliness, as to his inward and more
hidden parts and power, is a holy conformity to these sacred and divine
principles which natural men may understand Religion by; but True Godliness
consists in the light of supernatural truths and life of Grace, God manifesting
himself in the light of those glorious principles, and working the life of
supernatural grace in the soul by the Holy Ghost, it consists in the saving and
experimental knowledge of God and Jesus Christ, in having all the evil qualities
of the Soul removed, and heavenly habits infused in their room, or in a
gracious conformity, disposition and affections of the heart to God, cleaving
to all truths made known to us, to find the powerful influences of the Gospel
and Spirit of Christ upon us, whereby our Souls are brought into the Image and
likeness of his death and resurrection; this is True Godliness, it is not a bare
living up to the natural principles of morality, nor a simple knowledge of the
letter of the word, or an historical, notional, or dogmatical knowledge of the
sacred Gospel, and the precepts thereof, but in a faithful living up to the
supernatural principles of Grace and the Gospel, discharging our duties with as
much readiness and faithfulness toward God as toward man, so that our
conscience may be kept void of offense toward both. Acts 24.16.
It consists in forsaking of every sin, and not only to leave it, but to loath
it as the greatest evil, and to cleave to God in sincerity of heart, valuing
him above all who is the chiefest good, and from a principle of divine love,
willingly subjecting to all his Laws and appointments; Godliness makes a man
say with the Psalmist, whom have I in Heaven but thee? Psalm. 73.25.
etc. Non amat Christum, amat aliquid plus quam Christum, says Austin, he
loves not Christ at all, that loves him not above all: He that entertains True
Godliness, is as much for the Work of Religion, as for the wages of Religion:
Some there be who serve God, that they may serve themselves upon God, but a
true Christian desires grace, not only that God would glorify him in Heaven,
but that he may glorify God on Earth: He cries, Lord, rather let me have a
good heart than a great Estate; though he loves many things besides God, yet he
loves nothing above God. This man fears sin more than suffering, and therefore
he will suffer rather than sin: He is like a Palm Tree, he always flourishes
best when he is pressed down most. This may serve in the second place, to
discover what the inward life and power of True Godliness is.

Thirdly, That you may have a complete and perfect knowledge of him, it may not
be amiss if I describe or give you the character of his form and external
parts, together with the very fashion he continually wares or goes in.

First, Then know ye that the form or external parts of True Godliness are very
comely and beautiful, and no marvel it is so, seeing he was formed and
fashioned by the wisdom of the only wise God our Savior; the works of whose
hands being all glorious; but this ( viz.) the formation of Godliness being one
of the chiefest, highest and most admirable contrivances of his eternal wisdom,
must of necessity excel in glory, sweet odor and amiableness; his form and
external beauty therefore is such, that he needs no humane artifice to paint or
adorn him, or any ways to illustrate or set off his beauty and sweet
comeliness of his countenance; for there is nothing defective as to his
Evangelical and Apostolical form, as he came out of his great Creators hands;
and as there is nothing from head to foot that is superfluous, more than needs
or might be spared, so every line and lineament, Veins, Nerves and Sinews of
him are in such an exact and admirable order placed, that is to his beauty
there can be no addition: Every one therefore that goes about to take from, add
to, or alter any thing, touching the form of True Godliness, mars instead of
making, and defiles instead of beautifying; besides God has strictly forbid
any thing of this nature to be done, no man is to set up his Post by the Lor'ds
Post. Add thou not unto his Word, lest he reprove thee, and thou be found a
liar, Pro, 30.6.
viz. by fathering that upon God which is none of his; do not the Papists call
those superstitious and vain Ceremonies, used in their Church, by the name of
God's Worship, and what is this less than the putting a lie upon him; besides
it reflects upon the wisdom of God; to attempt to change or alter any thing of
the form of Godliness, as if he did not know best how, and in what way, or
after what manner he himself would be worshipped: But must be beholding to man
for his help, wisdom and rare contrivances, touching many things that are by
the Papists called decent and necessary; also does it not reflect upon the care
and faithfulness of God, insomuch, that he should not himself take care to lay
down in his blessed word many things, which are very necessary to be added to
the form of Godliness, which man's care and wisdom is fain to supply.

Therefore from hence all may perceive, that True Godliness never alters his
Physiognomy, nor changes his countenance, he is the very same and not altered in
the least from what he was in the Primitive Time; nay, and there is indeed
nothing in the world he hates more than those pompous Garbs, superstitious
Vestments, and other Fooleries that are used in the Popish Church; as
Crossings, Crysoms, Salt, Spittle, Oil, and Holy Water, with diverse other
ridiculuous Cereremonies, which are so numerous, they are too tedious here to
reckon up, therefore take heed you do not take the counterfeit form of
Godlineness, for the true Form; for as there is a counterfeit Godliness, so
there is a counterfeit form of Godliness which the counterfeit or false
Godliness always wares; it is also needful to note one thing more, lest you
are deceived, viz. you must be sure to receive the power of Godliness, with his
form; for his form without his inward life and power will do you no good; it is
but as the Body without the Soul, or the Shell without the Kirnel, or the
Cabinet without the Jewel; neither ought any to slight his form, for you may
remember what the Apostle speaks of the form of Doctrine, Romans 6.17.
and of the form of sound Words; for as the true faith must be held fast, so
must the profession of it also, 2 Timothy 1.13.
you may it is true meet with a Shell without the Kirnel, but it is rare to meet
with a Kirnel without the Shell.

Having thus briefly given you the description both of the inside, The Pedigree
of Godliness.
and outside power and form of True Godliness; We shall proceed to Treat of his
Pedigree, and show you whose Offspring he is, you by his name may easily read
from whence he descends, and learn what a Noble Patronage he is of, he is
indeed Highborn, the great and glorious Offspring of the Lord Jehovah, the
Almighty Prince of Heaven and Earth, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, the
universal Monarch of the World, whose Kingdom rules over all; and as this is
his Noble Extract and renowned Descent, so likewise he is always in high
esteem and favor with his glorious Prince, for there is none, no not one in
Heaven or Earth that he loves and takes more delight in, than in True
Godliness; nor is there any indeed more like him, or does more lively represent
him in all the Earth; for he bears his express, sweet and Heavenly Image; yea,
and such a venerable respect and gracious esteem has he of him, that those who
love him, he loves; those who hate him, he hates; those who receive him he
receives; and those who reject him he rejects; where he comes to dwell, there
God, Christ and the Holy Ghost dwells.

Godliness is of great Antiquity; The Antiquity of Godliness.
nay according to the description we gave you of him: In the first place, we
may well say he is without beginning of days, for Truth (for some times he
bears that name) dwelt in God from Everlasting, though in time manifest or made
known to men, and that in diverse ways and manners, according as God in wisdom
saw good. But if we speak of his Antiquity, in respect of his dwelling here
below, the first man that knew him was Adam, who whilst he stood in the state
of Innocence enjoyed some part of his sweet Company but by the malice of a
great and potent Enemy he was abused, and his Image so defaced and marred, that
he forsook his Habitation, which was the ruin and utter undoing of our first
Parents and their whole Posterity: and had not the Father of True Godliness,
the King of Heaven and Earth, found out through his infinite wisdom, a way to
recover Man from his lost Estate Godliness had made his abode no longer in this
World, for by means of Corruption of Nature there was begotten and brought
forth a cursed Monster of ugly shape, whose Name was Vice, alias Lust, who
found so much favor with Adam's Children, that Godliness was utterly
discountenanced; and though he was the Offspring of Heaven (as you heard
before) and the only delight of Jehovah (and unto man the greatest friend and
chief Benefactor in all the World, striving to enrich him, cheer his heart, and
to make him truly Noble and Renowned on Earth, and bring him back into his
former Primitive Glory, and thereby at last make him eternally happy in Heaven)
yet he was neglected and lamentably slighted, that there was but only one of
Adam's Offspring cared for him at that time, and he too for entertaining of him
with that just and good respect he deserved, was by his Brother, whose Name was
Cain, basely murdered; so that Godliness by this perceived very early what kind
of usage and entertainment amongst the Children of men he was like to meet
withal; and truly never was there any one so nobly descended, and of such an
excellent, peaceable and sweet a nature and behavior, generally so dealt with
as Godliness has been, from the beginning to this very day; (except the Prince
of Godliness himself) yet he found some friends after Abel was slain, who
entertained him kindly, and though they were reproached, hated, and persecuted
for showing favor to him, yet they never lost anything by him, but
contrariwise were infinite gainers, for he never came empty handed to any man's
house, but always brought plenty of good things along with him, yea, such
things, the worth and value whereof no mortal is able to compute; (as I Will show
hereafter, God assisting) nay, so great a friend he was to the next man, which
I find eminently embraced him, that he saved him from the Grave, he sent him to
Heaven without calling at the Gate of Death; his name as I remember, was Enoch,
and it is not to be thought what sweet and Heavenly Communion, true Joy and
Felicity this good man had with Godliness, for the space of three hundred
years, for so long they abode together on Earth, and now dwell together with
the Father of true Godliness, and his only begotten Son in Heaven. Some time
after this great Prince (for so they are all made who entetain True Godliness)
was carried to Heaven, a sad disaster besell the World (I mean the Enemies of
Godliness) for so it was, that cursed Monster and Offspring of Hell ( viz.)
Vice, finding such great your with the men of the Generation, they delighting
in nothing more than in sin and wickedness, hating God and his true and lovely
Offspring Godliness, it provoked him to take vengeance upon them, and utterly
to destroy them from off the Earth; and this was done by a fearful and amazing
Flood of Water: Now, this heavy Judgment was brought, I say, upon the men of
that Generation for their slighting, neglecting, and basely contemning of
Godliness, and sad it was to consider how generally men were at that time out
of love with him, for there was not one in ten thousand but hated him, and
loved vice and ungodliness far better than he; nay, to tell you plainly, there
was but one man in all the World who was an eminent Lover of this Noble and
High Born Prince, Godliness, whose name was Noah, though it is not to be doubted
but his Wife and Sons, especially two of them, were in some measure Favorites
of him likewise: But mark how at that time it fared with this Holy Man and his
Family, who were Friends to Godliness, never a one of them were destroyed by
that Flood; we may well say, Godliness is profitable unto all things, and
Blessed are all they who love and kindly entertain him; for had it not been for
Godliness, Noah had doubtless perished as well as others.

But to proceed in this brief History of the Antiquity of Godliness, it would
not be amiss if we speak a little of the next man after Noah who entertained
him, and how he was blessed in so doing; his Name at first was Abram, but
afterward he was called Abraham: This man lived for some time amongst a Blind,
Heathenish, and Idolotrous People, and was ignorant of True Godliness; but when
he became acquainted with him, few men ever loved him better, for he made him
his Bosom Companion, and chiefest delight (and so indeed must every one that
entertains him) and hereby he became great, and his Glory and Renown was spread
abroad; nay he was by this means so honored, that he was called the Friend of
God, and the Father of all true Lovers of Godliness; and besides the outward
Blessings, this faithful man reaped as the fruit or donation of Godliness;
(which were many, for he had much Cattle, Menservants, Camels and Asses, so
that he became very great) he was blessed with all spiritual Blessings; ( viz.)
he had sweet fellowship and communion with God, abounding in Faith, Love, and
Joy in the Holy Ghost; the Covenant of Grace was also renewed to him, with a
gracious Promise, that in his Seed all the Nations of the Earth should be
blessed; for he having received Godliness as his choicest Companion, and
chiefest Delight, Godliness brought along with him the Promises of this Life,
and that which is a thousand times better ( viz.) the Life which is to come.

But now near where this faithful man dwelt, there was a City, nay more than
one, whose Inhabitants were utter enemies to Godliness, and lovers of that ugly
and base-born Monster and Spawn of the Devil, Vice, abounding in all manner of
horrible wickedness, who for this very reason were destroyed with their Cities
by Fire and Brimstone from Heaven; yet nevertheless, before they were consumed
(so great a lover is Jehovah of Godliness) that he told Abraham, if there were
but ten righteous persons in that City, viz. such who had entertained
Godliness, and were true lovers of him, he would spare the City for their
sakes; but it appeared there was but one man who showed him countenance, and
was in love with him. And yet before the City was burned, the Angels bid him
haste and be gone; for Godliness was such a sure defense to him, the Angel
could do nothing till he was gone forth: Sodom could not take Fire whilst
righteous Lot was in it.

I might proceed further, and show you who they were that entertained Godliness
in the succeeding Ages, for the space of more than two Thousand Years, and what
great blessings he brought unto them, and what they suffered for his sake; but
I can but give a brief hint or two upon this account; it is known to all what
Joseph suffered for him by his envious Brethren, and how Godliness advanced him
for his Integrity to him at last. Moreover the Children of Israel after Joseph
was dead, were through that love they bore to him, grievously oppressed by the
mighty King of Egypt, but it proved his own utter Ruin in the end. David, for
the love he bare to him, was for many Years together greatly persecuted, but
afterward Godliness raised him to great honor, and made him very ich, and sat
a Crown upon his Head; All along I might show you in Ancient days he was very
much hated and persecuted; nay, and some of his true Friends and Favorites,
were for his sake cast into a fiery Furnace, and another into a Lions Den, yet
they never lost any thing by him, nor did they ever repent the Entertainment
they gave him. If we should come lower into the Times of the Gospel, it is well
known what usage he met with in our Lord and Savior Jesus and his Blessed
Apostles; afterward also by the Heathen Emperors, he was most abominably
hated and persecuted, and all those who entertained him were put to all manner
of cruel Deaths and Torments imaginable. Lastly, we might also show you what
hard usage he met with by counterfeit Godliness, I mean Papistry, for near 1200
Years, how many of his dear Children and Servants have for the sake of him been
burned to Death, and otherways tormented in most Nations of Europe, but let
what has been said suffice, touching the Antiquity, gray Hairs, and usage of
True Godliness in former days.

CHAP. II.
Showing who the chief Enemies of Godliness are.

HAving given you a brief Account of the Pedigree, Original, and Antiquity of
True Godliness, wherein occasionally has been hinted some of those great
Abuses he met withal in Ancient times I judge it may not be amiss (before I come
to treat of his Travels and Entertainment in these latter days, and how it
fares with him at this present juncture, to give a Description of some of his
chiefest Adversaries, to the end the true lover, of Godliness may be aware of
them, and those who have a mind to be accquainted with him, and are hindered
from receiving him into their Their Hearts.
Houses, may know the Cause and Reason of it now.

1. One of the chiefest Enemies of this great Prince and Favorite of Heaven is
the Devil; nor is there any one that hates him more.

2. Sin, alias Vice, alias Lust.

3. The Flesh.

4. The World.

But because this general and common description is not sufficient to discover
the great danger Men and Women are in, Who the Enemies of Godliness are.
by certain other secret and domestic Enemies, who are the cursed Agents and
Servants of those grand Adversaries of True Godliness, some of which many are
ready to entertain as Friends, not suspecting the fatal danger they are in
thereby; I shall upon this therefore give you an account of a few of them, and
tell you their Names. The First I shall begin with is Unbelief, a very
dangerous Fellow. 2. Pride. 3. Vainglory. 4. Formality. 5. Hypocrisy. 6.
Oppression. 7. Heresy. 8. Superstition. 9. Idolatry, alias Papistry. 10.
Prosperity. 11. Persecution. 12. Ignorance. 13. Blind Zeal. 14. Vain Hope. 15.
Sloth, alias Idleness. 16. Covetousness. 17. Old Custom. 18. Evil Example. 19.
Self-Righteousness. 20. Presumption. 21. Despair. 22. Slavish Fear. 23. A
Sensual Pleasure. And 24. Apostasy, with many other of like quality, too
tedious here to reckon up; but by mentioning the Names of these, you may easily
discern who and what the others are, who with their Attendance are all
implacable Enemies to True Godliness, and as much as lies in them endeavor to
hinder his being entertained wheresoever he comes, as you will find in the
ensuing History of his Travels: Now, the Reason why True Godliness has so many
Enemies, I had thought to have showed in this place, but because I will not
hinder you from the main scope and design of this Treatise, I shall reserve
them for a more convenient place.

CHAP. III.
Showing how Godliness having received a Commission to Travel, and vis^t the
Children of Men, comes to a certain Town on the Confines of Babylon, where one
Riches dwelt, and of his usage and evil intreatment there.

THE Great and Mighty Jehovah, the God and Father of true Grace and Godliness,
out of his great Mercy and Infinite Goodness to Mankind, graciously was pleased
to send them a Savior, yea, a great and mighty Savior, or one able to save to
the uttermost all that come to God by him, Hebrews 7.25.
and to the end that they might have the knowledge of this Blessed Savior, he
has sent the Gospel amongst them, but in his eternal Wisdom has so decreed
and ordained it, that no Man should have any saving benefit by this Glorious
Savior but he who does receive, entertain: and kindly embrace True Godliness
whenever he is sent to visit them; and to the end therefore that they might
not miss of so great a Blessing which Godliness brings along with him. I may
safely adventure to say according to my present Method, and to pursue my
Allegorical Discourse; Godliness has received Commission from the King of
Heaven and Earth, to travel to see who would embrace and entertain him.
Moreover, it appears his Commission was very large, he was not limited to the
small Confines of Jury, nor to ttravel only in the Land of Canaan, but to go
into all the World, or to travel into all Nations Countries, and Kingdoms of
the Earth, Matt. 28.19, 20.
and to visit the Rich and Poor, Mark 16.15.
the Old and Young, as well the King on the Throne as the Beggar on the
Dunghill, even all, Bond and Free, Male and Female; nor was he sent to travel
alone, but had a very rich and glorious Retinue always with him; neither did
he come o any man's House empty handed, but brought along with him most rich
and glorious Presents of the choicest things of Heaven, the worth of which is
infinite, or beyond computation. But since I perceive he is come to a certain
Town, where one Riches dwells, and is now at his Door, let us see what
Entertainment he meets with at this place,

Now Godliness knocked very hard and often before any within would give an
Answer, Godliness knocks at Riches Doors.
Riches being full of business, for either he was telling of his money, or
casting up his Accounts, to see what his Neighbors owed him, or else
consulting new Projects to increase his store, for I perceive he is a person
never satisfied; besides the Times being very perilous, his mind was filled
with perplexing and vexatious thoughts, how to save and keep what he had
already gotten; so that he had no leisure nor time to listen to the continual
knocking of True Godliness at his Door, insomuch that Godliness was forced to
stay there a long time, and that which grieved this Highborn Prince most of
all, was this ( viz.) he perceived that no sooner than some other Guests came
to his Door (who were persons much interior, as to Birth and Quality, to him,
and indeed not worthy of the least regard, and not having business of that
great weight and moment with him as Godliness had) yet he opened his Door
immediately to them, but before this Renowned Hero and Darling of Heaven could
get in, Riches had so many base and illbred Servants in his House, that they
clapped to the Door, so that he could not get so much as one foot in. Now, the
Guests he so readily opened unto, were (as I take them) these following ( viz.)
The Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eyes, and the Pride of Life. John 2.16
These be took much delight in, and kept company with continually; sometimes
they had him to the Tavern, sometimes to the Play Houses, and sometimes to
recreate him at Bowls, Cards and Dice, and with diverse other Sensual Sports and
Pleasures; but at last it so fell out, that he was taken very sick, and
Godliness still waiting at his Door, it happened at this time one was in his
House, who forced him to listen to this earnest and continual knocking, his
name was Mr. Fearful, he is one that Riches does not at all love, but when
sickness comes he is grievously troubled with him; and he made him at this
season to cry out, who is there? who is at my Door.

Godly, I am here, and have a long time waited at your Door.


Riches, What is your Name?


Godly, My name is True Godliness, one that you have a little reason to slight,
neglect and contemn as you have done, for there is none you stand more in need
of, nor can you do that good as I can, and will do you if you please but to
open your Door and let me in.


Riches, Sir I am troubled I have not minded you all this while, for I have a
great reverence and respect for Godliness, God forbid I should keep you out any
longer.

Upon this, the whole House was in an uproar, for he had (as I told you before)
diverse loose, ill-bred, or rather Hell-bred Servants, all bitter Enemies to
True Godliness, their Names were Presumption, Pride, Unbelief, Ignorance,
Malice, Vain-hope, and Covetousness, etc. These and several other base
companions of like quality (whom he had brought up, and a long time cherished
in his House (seemed mightily concerned that the least heed or attention should
be given to True Godliness; they also enquired who was the cause of it; at last
they understood it was Mr. Fearful, they then presently joined together to fall
upon Fearful, and turn him out of the House. Presumption struck the first blow,
and spoke also to this purpose.


Presump. Are not you a base Fellow, thus to disturb my Master, as to cause him
in the least to doubt of the strength of his strong and impregnable
fortification, Riches Bags of Gold and Silver.
wherein he has placed his long confidence, and now to force him to incline to
open unto True Godliness, who is our utter Eemy? Is he not an honest man? what
can you charge him with? What cause or ground is there for this disturbance?
Has he not done much good in the Parish where he lives, and given many a piece
of Bread at his Door? I warrant you it will go well with him, Fearful, what do
you say?


Fearf. Truly, Sir, I seeing him very sick, thought he might die.


Presumpt. Thou Fool, what and if he should, did not Jesus Christ die for
sinners? God is merciful, and will forgive men their sins at any time, even at
the very last hour, if they do but call upon him. Besides, Fearful, are you mad
to give way, much more to force him to incline to open to True Godliness, for
if once he is let into the House, you will be immediately turned out, and
hardly, if ever, have one Meals-meat more, nor the least countenance.


Fearf. Truly, Presumption, the fault was not principally mine: I was partly
forced to do what I did.


Presumpt. Forced by whom? who forced you?


Fearf. 'Twas the Steward of the House, who keeps the Records, or an Account of
all that is done, whose name is Conscience; he finding much guilt lying upon
him through his cruelty, hard-heartedness and debauched life, stirred me up to
what I have done; nay, Conscience told him he had been such a vile and
graceless wretch, that if he died he would go immediately to Hell; therefore
you cannot blame me for disquieting of him.


Pride, Hearken to me a little; Is it not, my Masters, below such a brave and
Heroic Spirit that always attends Riches, to be troubled about sin, or to
give way to a bawlling Conscience, and this ill-bred fellow Fearful, I hate the
thoughts of it; this is the way to bring him to reproach and shame amongst his
Neighbors, and to make great men to laugh at him and contemn him, who have
been his companions. My great Prince Lucifer sent me into his service, and I
will not betray my trust, ever to give way that this unwelcom and hateful
Traveller true Godliness should be let in, who would beguile my Prince of his
right.


Unbelief, Alas Sirs, there is no danger; I agree with my Friend and dearest
Brother Presumption, that hss condition is good enough, let Conscience say what
he will (for if there be a Hell, for I much question it) yet he will go, should
he die, I will assure you, to Heaven.


Ignorance, What a stir is here? if our Master was poor, and had not so many
Bags of Gold and Silver, there might be some ground for this base Fellow
Fearful, to disquiet him. *But I can give as good counsel as any of you: Do you
not know, if he does but send for a Romish Priest, with a good piece of Money,
he may have a full pardon for all his sins, for there are many, they say, just
now come over fresh out of the Mint from his Holiness; this being done, if he
should die, he will I will warrant you, be saved, nay and directly to Heaven
without calling in at Purgotory.


Vain-hope, I am of the mind with my Brother Unbelief; and 'twas I also you
know who have kept up his Spirits all along, and did what I could to stop
Steward Conscience's Mouth from giving way to Mr. Fearful to open the Door, let
him therefore but put his trust in me, and I warrant you he will fear nothing.


Presumpt. Come, cease this noise, all is well enough yet, Godliness is not let
in, and our Master is much better than he was, and though Conscience incline to
embrace this our Enemy, yet you will find he will not be regarded ever a little
while: Pray let us all agree at present to stir up Riches eldest Son, whose
name is Honor, the Father's Darling, and the hopes of all the Family, to see
what he can do in order to keep our Enemy Godliness out. Now, our Friend Pride
is the fittest to be employed in this Work, for he is much in favor with our
Masters eldest Son, and his own Child too -- After a short time thus it fell
out, Riches being recovered, he consulted with Worldly Honor, a great Enemy to
True Godliness, which was one reason why the Father and true Image of Godliness
said a great while ago, how can ye believe that receive honor one of another,
and seek not the honor that comes from God alone. John 5.44.
Now, Pride, Ambition and Honor, being all three the Natural Offspring of
Riches, got so much into his Affection, that Godliness was kept out (making
good that word, The Wicked through the Pride of his Countenance will not seek
after God; God is not in all his Thoughts) and Conscience being at this time
almost stitled, Fearful was forced to fly and hide himself in some Hole till
another season: But Godliness remained at his Door for a long time, even till
he waxed Old, and Conscience having recovered a little strength (by reason of
his going now and then to hear a Sermon) stirred up Mr. Fearful again to open
the Door, and had almost prevailed, had not a Cursed Servant of Riches, who, I
take, was his Purse-keeper, bestirred himself, whose Name was Covetousness, an
implacable Enemy to True Godliness, who when he perceived Godliness was like to
meet with some seeming Entertainment, spoke to Riches after this sort.


Covet. Sir, will you be so foolish now in your Old Age, as to open your Door
to this Stranger and factious Person, Godliness? It will be to your great loss
and injury, if you do, I will assure you: And besides, I who have been a true
Drudge to you all along, and by the means of whom you have got most of your
Estate, shall at the very instant you receive him into your House, be turned
out; nay, and not only so, but also be brought under a severe Sentence, and be
condemned to die for Idolatry, and then your Money will fly, for you will find
him a chargeable Gentleman, for he teaches a Doctrine that I am sure you hate,
and I cannot blame you, for it is very destructive to your Interest.


Riches. What Doctrine is that, prithee inform me, for I have a very good
esteem for thee; and intruth, for a long time have been sensible of the gainful
service thou have done me, for when I kept my old Servant Prodigality to be my
Purse-keeper, I could never thrive; but since I met with thee, I have increased
my Substance exceedingly.


Covet. Why, Sir, then I will tell you, he teaches Riches to sell all that he
has, and give it to the Poor, and to follow a new Master who had not one foot
of Land in all the World, nor a House to dwell in; no, nor one penny of Money
in his pocket, whose Disciples were generally poor, illiterate and contemptible
people, etc. Sir in a word, if you open to this Godliness, you will be undone,
for though you are not put upon the selling all you have presently, yet you will
be forced by him to give to the poor Saints (as they call them) not a little,
but according to what your Estate and their necessity is; nay, you will not
know when you have done, for he will find out for you every day new objects of
Charity; he will tell you there are so many poor Parish-Children to be put out,
and so much you must give with them; and so many aged Widows, who must be
relieved; and who should do it, he will say, but Riches; nay, it is a thousand
to one if he does not put you to Build an Hospital for them: Besides, when you
have done this, he will not let you rest, but will tell you, whenever Christ
in his Members is sick, you must visit them; and when Hungry, Feed them; when
Naked, Cloth them; and when in Prison, you must Relieve them; take notice that
he will send you to this Prison, and to that Prison, to see if Christ be not
there, I mean some of his poor Children who lie there for his sake; if there
be; though they may not in all Points of Religion agree with you, yet he will
tell you, you must not let them want whilst you have enough to supply their
Necessity, and if you do, he will tell you, Go ye Cursed will be your portion
at last. Besides all this, you do not think what a deal of Money he will tell
you is your Duty, to give to Pastors and Ministers of the Gospel, who are his
great Agents and Promoters in the World; nay, Sir, he positively affirms, you
ought not only to give to them just so much as will supply their Necessities
but that it is your Duty to give, and their Right, Jure Divino, to have a
plentiful Allowance, so that, they may be freed from all the perplexing Cares
of this Life; and not only so, but also be put themselves into a capacity to
provide for their Wives and Children, that they may not be exposed to Want and
Necessities after they themselves are dead, and to have so much out of your
Estate, as to be able to give to others also, that so they may be examples of
Charity (and indeed I cannot deny but that the Scripture does say they ought to
be Men given to Hospitality, Tit. 1.8.) and many of them are poor, and
therefore how they should do this, Godliness, says is impossible, unless they
are capacitated so to do by Riches. Moreover, I will tell you more (now I am
about it) this Godliness is so unhappy, and in truth has always been, that he
has many great and Potent Enemies, so that they who receive and entertain him
have been exposed to great Troubles and Persecutions in the World; nay, and let
me tell you between you and I, your whole Estate will be in danger of being
taken away if you entertain him, for I have heard of very severe Laws made
formerly, and of late Times too, in one Nation or another, against such who do
own and will adhere to him; yea, such Laws that will, if prosecuted* soon bring
you to Beggary; so that from the whole* you may perceive, will not be for your
Interest to open to him.


Riches. I must confess thou have said enough to make me sot ever out of Love
with True Godliness, I cannot bear the thoughts of entertaining such a Guest as
this in my House, but what shall I do with my bawling Steward, Conscience, for*
he every now and then tells me I must give away to him, and stirs up Mr.
Fearful my Lodger (one that I hate, but cannot be rid of let me do what I can)
to terrify me with the thoughts of Hell and Damnation, for without Holiness (I
must confess I have read) no man shall see the Lord; and it is said too, Whoever
will live Godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer Persecution.


Covet. Why truly, Sir, I see no Remedy but you must resolve to stitle him; for
I perceive he is the chief cause of all the disturbance and trouble that is in
your House, and not only so, but in part of all the Confusions and Divisions
which are this day in the World; but which way this shall be done, I must refer
you to that worthy Gentleman and understanding Servant of yours, Dr. Self-love,
for in this Case I am not fit to give Counsel, being not brought up in
Learning, but he and Sir Worldly Wiseman, being both able Divines, will be sure
to find out a ready way to do it, so that you shall not be troubled with him
any more; and this I will assure you, if I can be any ways helpful to them in
the business, I will be at your Command as long as you please to entertain me.

Dr. Self-love and Sir Worldly Wiseman being at hand, Riches called for them,
to whom he addressed himself after this manner.


Riches. Gentlemen, you having both great Learning and Experience in the Laws,
both Divine and Humane, I pray be pleased to give me a little of your Counsel,
my Case is this: There is one who calls himself True Godliness, at my Door, and
presses hard for Entertainment, but by means of a Description I have lately had
of his Manners and Attendance, I perceive it will be dangerous at this time for
me to receive him, or show him the least kindness. But I having a troublesome
Steward in House, whom I cannot be rid of: Now, he here of late too much
adheres to him, and is ready very often to give way to open the Door, so that
by his means and one Mr. Fearful, a Timorous Fellow, whom he stirs up, I have
of late had but very little quiet: Now, what will you advise me to do in this
sad Condition?


Dr. Self-love. You must not give way to him, for I know him well enough, his
Name is Conscience. Sir, if you follow his Dictates and embrace this Godliness,
you will be undone, and your Wife and Children soon will be brought to a piece
of Bread, notwithstanding your great Estate: But alas, he is grown Old, and is
in his Dotage, and for want of good Eyesight errs exceedingly; nay, is so
erroneous, that you do well to advise with us; come, doubt not but we shall
inform him better. Sir, your great fault have been this (I perceive it clearly)
you have read too much of late, why should you concern your self with the
Bible, I think it had been well if it had never been Translated into our Mother
Tongue, this has given him Opportunity to disturb your Mind; come, give over
this in the first place: The Cause, you know, of a Distemper must be first
removed, or no effectual Cure can be expected; it is enough for you to mind your
Secular Affairs, things of Religion belong to Religious Men; and when
Conscience for any Sin gripes you, divert your self amongst the brave Heroes
you used to keep Company with, get to the Tavern, or to some Playhouse, but be
sure at no time you read any Book besides your Books of Accounts, and Romances,
or such like: And for Religion, can any suit better with you than the Old Roman
Catholic Religion? And it may come into Fashion again too for all this. I do
not say you should not be Religious at all, no, God forbid I should give you
such Counsel, but there is no need to entertain strict Godliness, because you
may be saved without it, else Lord, what will become of the greatest part of
the World! go to Church and hear Prayers, but be sure forbear to go to such
Churches, where any bawling Preacher endeavors to reach your Conscience, but
be sure what times so ever happen, do not expose your self to suffer any thing
for Religion; you must do whatsoever your superiors require. Can any man
persuade me his soul cannot be saved, unless he venture the loss of his Estate,
and so bring distress and ruin upon his body; is not each man to provide for
his Family; and he that does it not, is worse than an Infidel, and has denied
the Faith.


Sir Worldly Wiseman. Mr. Riches, the counsel which my Brother has given is
very good, be sure you are never led by the dictates of your Steward
Conscience, to expose your self to any loss or danger for Religion, you hear
you may be, nay ought to be Religious; and what is Religion, but to live an
honest and sober life, to fear God, honor the King, say our Prayers, and pay
our Debts. But the truth is, would it be amiss if you did adhere to the good
old Religion, that Religion which, your Forefathers before Luther's time were
of, for you having store of Money may have a pardon there at any time for all
your sins. But I will leave you to your liberty, because I remember it is
dangerous to persuade any to cleave to that Religion. But I have just now
thought of a way that will do, you having a great Estate, you shall get another
Servant into' your House; pray keep a Reader in your Family this done, you will
find all will be well, and you will hear no more complaints from within nor
without, for you will be taken by all your Servants, and others too, for a
godly man.


Riches Having thanked them for their good Counsel, with a great deal of joy,
retires himself, being very well satisfied with the advice Dr. Self-love and
Sir Worldly Wiseman had given him. and indeed this is the misery of most rich
men, ( viz.) if they lie under any convictions of sin, from that little light
Conscience has at any time got, then presently (being stirred up thereto by
Covetousness) they consult with flesh and blood, and then Dr. Self-love and Sir
Worldly Wiseman are their great Counselors. But to proceed, Riches got now a
Reader, and instead of opening to True Godliness, he opens to counterfeit
Godliness, Papistry.
which was occasioned through Ignorance, and those other foolish Counselors he
hearkened to. Now, this Reader, as it appears, proved a sad Fellow, for though
he was a Scholar, being brought up in some Foreign University, yet he never
cared to read the Bible, but (as some say, would now and then curse it) loved
to read Romances and Song Books. But poor Conscience being stifled, in a little
time he gave content to the whole Family, in that he could mumble over a few
Prayers out of a Book. And that in the second place, he could Bowl, drink
Healths, be Drunk, and cry God damn him with any of them; and there was indeed
never a one in all the Family, that hated True Godliness more than he, for he
made songs of him and scoffed, jeered and derided him continually, and made
himself and others merry with his mean, low and distressed condition, and also
stirred up all the Neighborhood, to find fault, and quarrel with all those who
were friends and true lovers of him.


Godliness now perceived he was like to have but cool Entertainment at this
House, having waited at Riches Gate till his patience was almost worn out.
began to think of a removal, and to Travel to some other place; but before he
took his final farewell, he was resolved to speak his mind freely to him,
thereby to leave him without any kind of excuse whatsoever, and therefore
addressed himself to him after this manner, being at door ready to depart.


Godli. Well Riches, I see now very plainly, you did but flatter me when you
began to hearken to your poor Steward Conscience, in order to the letting me
into your House; for evident it is, you are grown far worse than before, and
have blinded his eyes by entertaining another, who calls himself by my name
instead of me, but before I do depart, I will show you the great danger you are
in; and the cause of it, the truth is, you have got such a Crew of lose, base
and deceitful Servants, that they will utterly undo you, and bring upon you the
eternal ruin of your poor soul, which I designed by my coming to you, to save
and make happy for ever; for indeed (whether you will believe it or no) there
was never any who entertained these graceless Villains and enemies of God, but
were for ever ruined by them at last; nay, and not only eternally hereafter in
the World to come, but many times externally here in this World; therefore I
advise you to do what you can to get rid of them, and I will help you to far
better Servants in their stead. For first of all, can you think it will be safe
for you to keep Presumption still in your House, since there is scarce a more
deceitful and bloody Wretch in the World; how many thousands of poor souls has
he impudently destroyed, by causing them to presume on the mercy of God, and
the death of Christ, and yet live in Sin, Pride and Covetousness, and in a vile
manner, hating and contemning me, that is to say True Godliness. Does not God
say it is harder for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; and yet
you are persuaded by him to think it is an easy thing; and does not the
Scripture say, Except your righteousness do exceed the righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no wise enter into the Kingdom of God. Mat.
5.20.
And yet he tells you that by doing a few good deeds, or by giving a little of
your great abundance to the Poor, your state is good enough; whereas many of
the Pharisees did, as to acts of Charity, exceedingly outdo you; nay does not
St. Paul say, Though he gave all his goods to feed the Poor, and his Body to be
burned, yet without Charity (that is to say, true love to God and Godliness) he
was nothing Mat. 5.20
; and yet you, 1 Cor. 13.3.
though you slight and contem God and Godliness, are taught to presume on God's
Mercy, who has notwithstanding positively said concerning you, and such as you
are; He that made them, will not save them; and he that formed them, will show
them no favor, Isa. 27.11.

And then as touching your Servant Unbelief, he is such a bloody and devouring
Monster, that he has sent Millions to Hell, by hindering them from believing
what God has said in his Word, touching his Grace and Clemency to the truly
penitent, and of his wroth and vengeance to the Impenitent and unbelieving
Soul; he will not suffer you to believe nor give credit to that word, If any
man loves the World, the love of the Father is not in him, 1 John 1.15. Nor to
that word neither, Except a man be born again he cannot see the Kingdom of God,
John 3.3. And he that believes not shall be damned, Mark 16.16. And many like
dreadful Sentences, which he will not suffer you to regard, nor give the least
credit to; and thus he teaches you to make God a Liar, for he has said, you
shall without Repentance be damned and perish in your sins, but he says, ye
shall be saved though ye live in your sins.

Thirdly, as to what Ignorance says of getting Pardon of Sins for a piece of
Money, by sending for a Popish Priest, he deserves to be cheated of his Soul
that will hearken to such a blind Sot; who can forgive Sin but God? Shall any
believe that Pardon, which is the gift of God, can be bought with Money: Sure
his Holiness never learned this Doctrine of St. Peter, whose Successor he says
he is, for St. Peter said to such a one as thou art, Thy money perish with
thee, Acts 8.20.

Fourthly, As concerning Pride, whom you entertain and hug in your bosom as a
sweet and beloved Friend, he has been the ruin of many Souls likewise; nay,
and not only Men, but Angels also, for it is thought he was the principal Agent
who wrought their eternal destruction, and from Heaven cast them down to Hell,
and of Angels of Light made them Devils. But, Sir, pray remember that word,
Pride goes before Destruction, and a haughty Spirit before a Fall. What became
of the great King of Babylon, Nebuchadnezzar, for entertaining this Fellow, was
it not Pride that brought him down with a vengeance, and turned him a grazing
to eat straw like Oxen, Dan. 3.4. Moreover, what became of Herod the Great, who
was so fond of this Companion? Did he not bring God's heavy wrath upon him in
such a fearful manner, that a blessed Angel was sent to smite him with Death
immediately, and he was eaten of Worms, Acts 12.23. Have you not read, that the
day comes which shall burn as an Oven, and all the proud, and all that do
wickedly shall be stubble, Mal. 4.1. This haughty Villain, Pride, is one of
those seven things, as Solomon shows which God hates, Prove. 6.16. If you will
not, Riches, be persuaded from hence to turn him out of your House, even take
what will follow.

Fifthly, Vain-hope I know is one that has kept up your spirits, and spoke
peace to you all along, but he is fitly so called, for he will leave you like a
deceitful, false-hearted, and treacherous Friend, when you come to fall into
distress. You hope to be saved (and so did many thousands that are now in Hell)
but alas, what ground have you to build your hope upon? The Hypocrites hope
shall perish, whose hope shall be cut off; and whose trust shall be as a
Spiders Web, Job 18.13, 14.

Ah, Sir, what will your hope avail you though you have gained the World, when
God takes away your Soul? Job 27.8.

Sixthly, and Lastly, as touching your sweet Darling Covetousness, he is made
up with Idolatry, and what can be more detestable to Jehovah? so long as you
Entertain and love him you adore an Idol; he is indeed the Ringleader to
almost all manner of Wickedness; nay, there is scarcely a viler and more
abominable Wretch breathing on Gods Earth, therefore justly called, The Root of
all Evil. 1 Timothy 6.10.
he has taught many to play the Thief, others to commit Treason, and others to
Murder Innocents for their Inheritance; he is guilty of Bribery, Vsary,
Extorttion, and Oppression: It was he as made poor Achan lose his sweet Life,
he also contrived the death of Naboth and his Sons; and more than all, he
tempted Judas to Sell, and basely to betray my dear Lord and Master, Jesus
Christ, for Thirty pieces of Silver: Do not blame me therefore if I bear so
hard against him; moreover, I can scarcely ever get one Foot, into any rich
man's House through his means; it is he and his Companions who keep me out, he
has through his hard-heartedness, almost famished to death all the Poor, both
in City and Country, and has also of late very near betrayed my whole
interest that I have in the world into the Enemies hands: he has also
grievously corrupted many who profess kindness to me by incumbring their minds
so with the Affairs of this Life, that they cannot find the way to the Church;
when they should be hearing of God's Word; he forces them to abide in their
Shops, nor will he suffer many of them to take a little time to pray in their
Families, nor in their Closets: He has also exposed many of my poor Ministers
to many great straits and necessities, by which means their heads have been so
filled with the cares of this Life, that they have been out of capacity to
preach the Gospel as they ought to preach it, nor can they get such helps that
are necessary, and all long of him: Nay, he has almost undone every Nation,
Kingdom and Commonwealth; First, by corrupting the Law, and subverting Justice,
causing Judges to judge for Reward, and Lawyers to plead more for Fees than
Equity. And then secondly, by spoiling Commerce, for he has Monopolized Trades
and Commodities so into his own hands, and inhanced the prizes of things, that
many men have been undone by him. I cannot, Sir, reckon up all his horrible
Crimes, and is this he you so dearly love, and must I be slighted and
disregarded by you through love you bear to him? Alas, Sir, he will bring your
Soul, if you follow him to destruction: Pray what became of Achan who harbored
him (mentioned before) also what became of Ananias and Sapphira, whom he forced
to tell a lie to the Holy Ghost? Acts 5.1, 2, 3, 4. Who was it that caused the
Young Man in the Gospel to fall short of Heaven, and to go away from Jesus
Christ very sorrowful, and Demas to turn Apostate, and to embrace this present
evil World; was it not Coveetousness? Ah, Sir, take heed of this abominable
Miscreant, for though some wicked ones of the Earth may bless you, yet he caused
God to hate you. See what David says, The Wicked boasts of his hearts
desire, and blesses the Covetous whom the Lord abhors, Psalm. 10.3. Consider
of these things, and be persuaded to put away all these deceitful and Hell-bred
Companions, which you have a long time nourished in your House, or it will be
worse with you, I do assure you. O that you would now at last, before I leave
you, hearken to my Counsel, and receive me into your House, and renounce that
Monster you have lately embraced, who calls himself by my Name! What do you say
Riches?


Rich. Do you think I am such a Fool to give Entertainment to you, and lose all
my great Honor and Credit amongst the brave Heroes of the Earth?


Godli. Why, Sir, is not the Honor that comes from God better than all the
vain honor poor mortals can give you; you have I am sure, a rare Example of
one to follow in this great Case: Remember Moses, and the Renowned Galeacius
the famous Marquess of Italy, he was not of your mind: Some rich and noble Men
have for my sake denied themselves of all the glory of this World, and
accounted the Reproaches of Christ greater Riches than Earthly Honors and
Pleasures of Sin which are but for a season.


Rich. If others were such Fools to disgrace and undo themselves, what is that
to me, I know what I have to do.


Godli. Sir, I perceive your condition is miserable, for you seem to be
hardened, and whilst you have had gracious means afforded you to bring you to
Repentance, you are grown worse and worse; however, let me tell you, if you die
before you have embraced and received me into your House, you will perish in
your sins, and Hell will be your Portion for ever; those who reject me, reject
God and Jesus Christ also, and to tell you the truth, all this time that I have
been at your door, the Lord Jesus has stood waiting at your door with me
likewise.


Rich. Leave your Canting, you are a bold and impudent piece; do you begin to
threaten me? Am I not my own Master? Would you Lord it over me? I perceive you
what you aim at, you would have me entertain you, that so your poor despised
Offspring might have a good fleece out of me. I could find in in my heart to
be revenged on you, and set all the Rabble of the Town upon you, Sirrah, I have
considered of the business, and have had advice what to do from two able
Counselors, Dr. Self-love, and Sir Worldly Wiseman.


Godli. Sir, St. Paul did not take advice of those two shallow, depraved,
degraded, disherited Counselors, he consulted not with flesh and blood.


Rich. Will you not leave your prating, you would undo me, you are called
Godlidess, but that is not your Name, you are, I understand, a factious Fellow,
and your Name is Stubbornness, alias Singularity, alias Sedition, one may know
what you are by the many Names you go by; know ye therefore, Friend, that I
have received the true Godliness already, and him I will keep, he is indeed an
honourale Person, one whom great men love, and is in favor with the Princes of
the Earth: But as for you, I see no encouragement for any body to respect you,
for as most People in all Nations speak against you, and hate you, so you
would, I know, soon spoil all my joys, and bring nothing but sorrow and fear
along with you, should I entertain you; I should not so much as tell a lie for
my advantage, but you would threaten me with Hell and Damnation, nor go to the
Tavern, and by chance be drunk* and let now and then an Oath fly, but you
would stir up my Steward, Conscience, to fall upon me, and beat me unmercifully
(but I praise God I am rid of him) nay, and if I should not give to the poor
according to your humor, I should soon be censured and condemned by you as a
wicked Person, yea, and every sweet, pleasant, and beloved Lust, which I value
as my Life, you say, must be mortified; no, my dearest Darling must not be
spared: I perceive what a fool you would make me, be gone from my door, or I
will call one of my servants who shall drive you out of the Town; his Name is
Malice, alias Envy, before whom you will not be able to stand; and upon this he
struck at him with all his might, which did no sooner his Chaplain, Mr. Reader,
perceive, but he came into his assistance with cruel rage, being stirred up by
Envy, and fell upon Godliness in a most base and inhumane manner, calling him
all the vilest Names he could devise, enough to make any ignorant and
unthinking man conclude True Holidess was as hateful a companion as any in the
world, and before all things to be eschewed and discountenanced. His Chaplain
also would needs challenge to dispute withhim, and confute Godliness by
Scripture, producing that Text, be not righteous overmuch, neither make thy
self overwise; why should thou destroy thy self? Eccl. 7.16. He thought with
this one Weapon to have knocked True Godliness down, and have spoiled his
Traveling for ever.

But he soon answered and said, That no man could be truly righteous overmuch,
nor have too much of that pure wisdom that is from above; but that a man might,
he told him, under pretense of Righteousness, do more than God required of him,
and so be righteous overmuch (as the Papists and others are) and thereby
destroy himself; since will worship was of such an abominable nature; and that a
man also might be overwise in his own conceit.

At this answer the Dispute ended; and Riches perceived his Chaplain was
worsted, envied True Godliness much more, and raised all the Rabble of the Town
upon him; amongst which were these following (viz.) Pride, Ignorance, Wilful,
Hate-good, Toss-pot, Outsides, Riot, Wastful, Hard-Heart, Belly-God,
Giddy-head, Pickthank, Rob-Saint, and more of such like Rustical and ill-bred
Fellows; and moreover, he swore if he would not be gone the sooner, he would
send for the two Constables, Oppression and Cruelty to lay him fast enough; at
which poor Godliness was fain to get away and hide himself, or else for certain
he had been knocked ot'h' head, or basely put to death; but he being out of
their reach, by the providence of God, escaped without any hurt to himself, but
many of his poor friends were sadly abused, who-stood up to spoke on his
behalf, and put into Prison. Godliness being thus forced to leave Riches Door,
Vice and Ungodliness took the full possession of his Heart
House; and Godliness went on his way, wandering up and down to look
entertainment, with a sad heart, being grieved to see how he had hitherto been
slighted and traitorously abused, notwithstanding his high Birth, Noble Descent
and Pedigree.


Does Godliness thus wander to and fro,
For want of Friends must he a begging go?
It Is not to seek relief, as if that he
Himself was poor, and in necessity;
But it is to make poor Mortals happy, who
By Sin are brought to Sorrow, Grief and Woe:
But Riches him rejects with hate and scorn,
Though by Christ sent, a Prince and Noble born:
Riches are good when sanctified they are,
But otherwise a Curse, a Plague, a Snare;
Rich men do much mistake; who only measure
True Happiness by having worldly Treasure.
An Angel has no Gold, nor Flocks, nor Land,
And yet is mighty rich, his wealth does stand
In better things; although the just man's store
Is small, he has enough, a rush for more;
God does Himself instead of Wealth impart
Unto that Child of his: O covetous Heart!
What would have more? or can there be
Ought else, dear Soul, than what is possessed by thee?
Happy's the poor in whom the Lord does dwell;
The Rich by craving all, get naught but Hell.
Be not in love with Gold, a Golden Purse
Without a part in God, is but a Curse.
Give me not Riches, Lord! nor make me poor;
Since Riches against thee does shut his Door.
CHAP. IV.
Showing how Godliness, in his Travels, came to a poor Cottage, where dwelt one
called Poverty, with whom he earnestly desired to make his Abode; and how he
was shamefully denied Entertainment there also.

GOdliness finding how basely he had been served by Riches, and that he could
not with all the strongest Arguments and Motives imaginable get any
Entertainment with him, traveled further, and as he wandered up and down in the
Wilderness of this World, at last he chanced to come to a small Village, at the
furthermost end of which (upon the Common) he espied a little Cottage, a poor
old ruinous thing it was, the Windows being all broke, only they had crammed
into the holes some old Rags to keep out the Cold, and by the propping it up,
it seemed as if it was ready to fall; but however, he remembering what his
blessed Lord and Master said, The Poor receive the Gospel, resolved to go
thither, and see whether he might not meet with Entertainment there; (for he is
no respector of Persons, he is as willing to be Guest to the poor, as to the
rich, and to dwell with the Peasant as with the Prince; or to make his Abode in
a Cottage as in a Palace:) And being come up to the Door, he understood the
poor man's name who dwelt there, was Poverty: Now Godliness knocked five or six
times before he could have any manner of Answer for it seems he was asleep in
Bed with his Wife; but at last being between sleeping and waking, he asked
(though very faintly) Who Is there? who is at the Door?

Godliness, I am here; pray arise, and let me in.


Godliness listened, but he could not hear what Poverty said, by reason of the
noise that was within; for he having many Children, it happened that by this
time they were waked, and fell into a fit of crying; some wanted Victuals; and
some of them cried for other things which he had not to give them; which made
him one while to weep, and another while to fret and storm at the poor
Children, so that Godliness could have no answer till he knocked again; which
he did, and that pretty hard.

Pov. Who is at my Door.


Godli. A Friend; my Name is True Godliness.


Pov. Godliness! Pray what business have you here?


Godli. I want a Lodging.


Pov. From whence come you sir? I doubt you have lost your way; Is this a
likely House to afford Entertainment to a Traveller?


Godli. I came last from a great man's House not far off, whose Name is Riches.


Pov. Well! had he no Lodging for you, that you are come to me?


Godli. No, he has utterly refused to entertain me; and not only so, but has
basely abused me, calling me at his pleasure, and also raised all the rude
Rabble of the Town upon me.


Pov. He had some reason for it, I warrant you; and truly I my self do not like
very well what you talk of; for he is a man ready enough to open his Door to
any who are worth entertaining; I mean profitable Guests: if you could get no
lodging at his House, what ground have you to think you should meet with any
here; besides, though I cannot deny but that I have heard of your Name, yet I
know you not; and moreover, I am forbid by certain Edicts of this Country, to
entertain one who goes by your Name, and it may be you as far as I know: It Is
Sir, a dangerous thing to open ones door to strangers at any time, but more
especially now, when there are so many grand Cheats and Robbers abroad: Sir,
though I have not much to lose* yet my life is as dear to me as any man's; and
should I let you in, how you would deal with me, God knows; for I have heard
that many thousands through your means have lost their sweet Lives as well as
their Estates.


Godli. I will, poor Soul? do thee no wrong, but contrariwise, if you please to
open the door, and kindly entertain me, you shall find me the best friend that
ever you met within all your life.


Pov. You speak well; but what is it you will do for me? Have you any money to
give me to buy my Family a little good Victuals (for we have had little else
besides Bread and Water a great while to live upon) and some better Clothes?
for my poor Children go almost naked.


Godli. I cannot at present assure thee of much earthly fullness, or worldly
good things; I do not use to proffer men money, or hire them to open their
doors to me; no I hate the thoughts of setting one foot in such a persons
house; If I am not freely and heartily received, I will not come in at all:
Friend, I do not trade in Gold and Silver; but this I will promise thee, if
thou will kindly let me in, whatsoever good thing the Lord sees thou do need,
thou shall upon my honest word, nay, and upon the word of Christ himself, have
it; Seek first the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, and all these things
shall be added unto you. Matthew. 6.33.
You complain of Want, come open to me; do you not remember that Word, They
that fear the Lord shall not want any good thing; Psalm. 34.10.
the Lord will give Grace and Glory, Psalm. 84.11.
and no good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprighty. What do
thou say Poverty.


Pov. I am in a very low condition; what you mean I cannot tell, but this I
know, my head and heart is filled about other things; alas, what can you think
to meet with, or expect from me; do you not see what abundance of poor hungry
and ragged Boys and Girls I have? It Is enough for me to get Bread for them, I
must leave such things which you talk of, to my Betters; I mean such who have
more time to mind them, and are better learned; God help me, I cannot tell what
to say to yo.


Godli. Come, let me in; that is to say, become a true Convert, get a right
Faith, and lead a good and holy life, and I shall teach thee to be more
diligent and industrious in thy Calling than thou have been, and nor foolishly
and idly to waste so many days work in the month: Thou will gain, thou will
find every way by True Godliness.


Pov. Truly we poor Folks in the Country, think it is Godliness enough for us to
bear an honest mind, and pay truly for what we have, and go to Church now and
then to hear some good Prayers there, and say the Creed, the Ten Commandments
and the Lord's Prayer now and then at home when we come from work, if we do not
chance to fall asleep first; for it has been so with me, God knows, many a
time, the Lord help me; but if I thought it would be for my profit, I could
find in my heart to open to you.


Godli. Poverty, I will assure thee it will be infinitely for thy advantage;
have not read? --


Pov. I cannot read, Sir.


Godli. But have you not heard then of that Word, Godliness is profitable unto
all things, having the promise of the Life that now is, 1 Timothy 4.8.
and of that which is to come; and that other Word, Godliness with contentinent
is great gain: And now because I see you are weak, I will tell you of some of
those great Blessings you will gain, if you do receive me in truth: First, I
wheresoever I come, bring along with me Reconciliation with God, pardon of Sin,
peace of Conscience and joy in the Holy Ghost; nay, I raise men to honor too;
I will make thee a Son of God, an Heir of Heaven, and at last set a Crown of
endless Glory upon thy Head? What do thou say Poverty?


Pov. I had rather have some better Clothes, and and store of good Provision,
and a better House to live in; these things suit my present necessity; but as
touching those things you talk of I do not well understand what they are, they
may be but fancies as far as I know: besides, what work will you set me about?
I cannot endure hard labor.


Godli. But stay Poverty, What kind of Fellows are those you have got in your
House?


Pov. what is that to you? why do you not answer my Question.


Godli. Why then I'ill tell you; you must very fervently read the Holy Bible,
and every Lord's Day with great reverence and seriousness hear God's Blessed
Word, and pray at least twice a day; also you must believe in Christ; nay, and
I shall teach you to be more painful and laborious in your Trade and worldly
Business; but this I know cannot be done, unless you put away that Crew of
loose and naughty Fellows in your House.


Now Poverty had it seems, diverse base and lazy Companions, who were all grand
Enemies to True Godliness; also some of them it is said, were his own Children,
or Natural Off-spri^g; their Names were these; viz. Unbelief, Ignorance, Sloth,
alias: Idleness, Wastful, Light-fingers, Faint-heart, Carping-Cares and
Fear-man, together with some others: Now when he began to open to Godliness
these hindered him.

First, Sloth and Idleness would not suffer him to rise up out of his Bed of
Security, to call upon God, nor take pains to pull up the Briars and Thorns
that grew in his heart; by which means his Field lay barren and untilled,
nothing growing therein, but what the Ground brought forth naturally. Nay,
these made him of such a sluggish Temper, and such a lover of Rest, that he
complained many times because he could not go without motion; nay he was
unwilling to be at the trouble of feeding himself; therefore would wish that
men might live as Trees and Plants do: and though there was offered him a
Cabinet of rich Jewels, yet he would not so much as stretch out his Arm to take
hold of it, and notwithstanding he had many fiery darts stuck in his Breast,
yet he would not be at the pains of pulling them forth; by which means he was
in a sad and lamentable condition. I remember a very wise man told me, that he
hides his hand in his bosom, Prove. 26.15.
and it grieveth him to bring it again to his mouth, by the means of these two
lazy Felows, Sloth and Idleness.

Ignorance told him, he had received True Godliness already, and that he had
dwelt in his house ever since he was a Child, and that Baptism brought him in;
and that the chief business which God required of him, was to get Bead and
Clothes for his Family.

Unbelief told him, that those things which Godliness talked of, were mere
Fictions; being unseen things; there was no reallity in them: But when he
questioned the truth of what Unbelief spoke upon this account, then the Wretch
told him, however, they were things far out of his reach, and that he had no
part nor lot in them, neither could they (if it was possible to obtain them)
answer his present necessities.

Light-fingers told him, he had been for a great while his best Friend; and if
it had not been for him, he had been starved to Death long before now.

Distrust fell into discourse with his thieving Brother, and positively said,
if he turned Light-fingers out of his House (as he knew he must if Godliness
came in) he would certainly go a begging from door to door.

Wastful told him that True Godliness, if entertained, would never suffer him
to buy such good pieces of Beef and Mutton, etc. as he was used to do on trust,
unless he knew he was able to pay for them; and that he would not suffer him to
go any more to merry Meetings, and carowse it amongst good Fellows at the
Alehouse, nor recreate himself at Cards, Bowls, Nine-pins, and other Sports,
for Money on Holidays; and that he must be content with such mean Clothes and
Fare he had got, and never lose a days work to gratify the lusts of the Flesh;
and that also he must change his Company; which particularly was grievous to
Poverty to hear.

Carping-Cares filled his head so full of distracting thoughts, that he had no
time to think of God, Christ, nor his own Soul, from one weeks end to another;
but his great study was, either to think where to borrow Money, and so get more
in debt or else how to pay what he owed, to get out of debt, or what he should
do for work, Trade being grown (by the badness of Times) very dead; by this
means Villain) filled with sad thoughts, not knowing how he should get more
Bread, when that he had was eaten up, and more Clothes, when they he had would
hang on no longer; besides, it could not go out of his mind, but that at one
time or other he should be Arested, and thrown into a Goal, having many times
fearfully broke his word.

Faint-heart and Fear-man presented to him the danger he would be in upon any
consideration, if True Godliness were entertained

For first, they told him how contemptible Real Godliness was grown at this
present time, being of very little credit or esteem amongst any sort and
degrees of men in the world, by reason of Vice, which which was never more
rampant; insomuch that True Godliness was like to be driven out of the world,
and forced to fly into some hole or corner of the Earth to hide himself. Mr.
Riches, who is the Lord of the Manor has beat him away from his door, and
hates him with a perfect hatred? now if you entertain him, he will soon hear
of it, and so will become your deadly Enemy, and pull down your Cottage, or
warn you out, or be sure, not let you have a farthing of the Poors Money, nor
never set you to work any more; and what will become then of thy poor Wife and
Children? Nay, said they, we will tell you more; Do you not hear what cruel
Edicts the Prince of the Ancient Gauls Country has made against True
Godliness? The French King.
and how many of the Protestant Churches he has pulled down and utterly
demolished? and how he is persecuted almost every where? Come, say they, it is
that pleasant and lovely Form of Counterfeit Godliness, Papistry.
that will in little time be generally embraced, and those who entertain True
Godliness, must expect to be reproached and basely reviled. Moreover, do you
not hear how many Thousands in France, and in other places, who have for a long
time entertained him, have turned him out of doors; they are weary of him, or
afraid to own him: and is this a time for you to think of embracing him,
Poverty? (said they) pity your self, and have more wit, you are poor enough
already, and this is the way to make you more miserable: If Riches will not
entertain him, who has many advantages to relieve and help himself in
distressing Times, and sad exigencies, over what Poverty has, or can promise
himself, there is no ground of encouragement for you to open to him.

Upon this poor Poverty resolved not to let True Godliness have a Lodging in
his House; but rather instead thereof, to put stronger Bolts and Bars on his
Door. Godliness having waited all this while, to hear what these cursed enemies
of his would say, and perceiving they had now done, he broke silence, and began
of speak after this manner;

Godli. Well Poverty, I expected but little less from you, when I perceived you
were resolved to hearken to those graceless Villains you lodge in your Heart.
House; for they (I hear would do their worst to keep me out; but I shall now
however, to undeceive you, answer them all.

First, as to these lazy Companions, Sloth and Idleness, who will not suffer
you to labor for the good neither of Body nor Soul, they have in part brought
you into this poor and miserable condition you are in. Oh how many have they
brought to beg their Bread from door to door! and stirred up others to rob,
steal and commit horrible Murders, to uphold them in their loose, lazy and
ungodly life's; by which means they have brought, and daily do bring a number of
men and women to the Gallows: but the greatest mischief they do, is to the
Souls of men; for they have cast thousands into such a deep sleep, that never
awake until they lift up their eyes in Hell; they will not suffer men to labor
to find out their great danger, till it is too late; and others, when they do
perceive their woeful condition, are hindered by them from endeavoring timely
and in a right manner to get out; they many times cry, Lord help us, and Lord
have mercy upon us; but never strive to take hold of the offers and tenders of
his Grace and Mercy, by cleaving to Christ, and leaving all their abominable
wickedness. It Is the idle Soul that suffers hunger; who shall beg at harvest,
and have nothing, though there is Bread and enough to spare for you in Gods
House, yet they will not suffer you to seek out for it, but cause you to cry,
yet a little sleep, yet a little slumber, Prove. 24.33.
yet a little foldidg of the hands to sleep: Is it not sad notwithstanding your
House is on fire, and you like to be burnt in your Bed, yet cannot through this
base Sloth and Idleness rise up; you are just ready to drop into Hell, and yet
will not endeavor to deliver your own Soul. O remember that Word, Mat. 25.30.
Take the slothful and unprofitable Servant, and bind him hand and foot, and
cast him into utter darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth.

And then secondly, as to Light-fingers, he is a Thief; and if you follow his
Dictates, he will bring you to the Gibbet, besides, 1 Cor. 6.10.
no Thief shall enter into the Kingdom of God.

Thirdly, Wasteful, his Brother, for all his Huffing, is almost as bad as he;
'twas this vain Fellow that brought the poor Prodigal to eat husks with the
swine; Luke 15.
it is he, not only causes you to waste, and foolishly spend your money (when
you have got a little) but also your precious time, which should be improved
for the good of your poor perishing Soul. Poverty, can it do you any harm to be
taught to become a better Husband, and not to consume the little you sometimes
get amongst Riotous Company, which might be a great comfort to your poor Wife
and Children; also I will appeal to my Neighbor Morality, whether there is any
ground for you to refuse to entertain me, because I teach you to be content
with mean things, hard fare, and do put you upon hard labor, and not to run
into debt, unless you knew which way to pay it.

Ignorance is a Murderer, and has destroyed millions of Souls, though there
was a time indeed when God seemed to wink at him, Acts 17. 30.
i. e. did not lay (as it were) his hands immediately upon him; but now he is
left altogether inexcusable, because God has afforded you a sufficiency of
Light to bring you to the true knowledge of Salvation, the necessity of Faith
and True Godliness, if you would escape the damnation of Hell. Unbelief, I
found the other day with Riches, and indeed I am come to no Bodies door but I
find him within; I gave a plain Character of him then, to which I refer you, if
you have a mind to know what a dangerous person he is; but however, take one
word or two in answer to what he says to you against me; he affirms, that all
my promises are fictious, being unseen things, they have no reallity in them,
or things that you can never attain unto, if you could, yet they could not
answer your present necessities. If you will give credit to such a notorious
Liar, Murderer and Blasphemer, who certainly in a sly and treacherous manner
seeks to stab you at the heart, who can help it? Are Christ's Promises of Grace
and Peace here, and Glory hereafter, because not seen with external Eyes,
fictions? He will tell you also ere long, if you will believe him there is no
God nor Devil, Heaven nor Hell, because not seen with visible eyes; he may
suggest the one to you as well as the other. Come, Poverty, thousands of my
Children, by blessed experience have found my Promises no fictions nor idle
fancies, but things full of reality, marrow and fatness: O taste and see how
good the Lord is. And why may not you obtain these glorious good things, viz.
Union and Communion with God, Pardon of Sin, Peace of Conscience, and Joy in
the Holy Ghost, as well as others? They were commonly given in the time of the
Gospel to the Poor. Come, Poverty, these things are thine (as sure as God is in
Heaven, if thou will but let me in) poor Lasarus understood them, and
experienced the sweetness of them, and shall to Eternity. And then lastly, have
you no need of these good things of mine, because they may not so directly
answer your outward necessity? Are not the necessities of your Soul more to be
minded than to get store of Meat, Drink, Clothes, Silver and Gold? What are all
these things to the love and favor of God, an Interest in Christ, and to have
a Right to the Kingdom of Heaven? How soon, alas, may your Life be gone, and
what good will those things do you; do you not see they perish in the using?
And as they are corruptible, so likewise they can never satisfy nor fill the
desires of your Soul, nor do they suit the necessities thereof. Consider, can
any of these things make thy Soul happy? Can Gold or Silver enrich it, or the
rarest worldly dainties feed it, or Wine cheer it? No, Poverty, if thou had
the things of this World in never so great abundance, yet till thou let me
in, and make me thy chief Companion, thy Soul would be miserable. What is it
to have plenty of all good things, and no God, no Christ, no Pardon, no Peace,
but contrariwise, the Curse of God, Horror of Conscience, and Hell at last?
Thou will, Poverty, become more happy if thou do open the door to me, and
thou and I dwell together, than the proudest and haughtiest Monarh in the
World; thy Comforts, inward Peace and Joy will excel theirs, and thy Riches be
more abundant in Quantity, besides the rare and excellent Quality of them; nay,
and thy Glory will be far more transcendent; and besides, 'twill abide with
thee to the days of Eternity,

As touching- Carping Care, he has almost broke thy heart already; he will not
let thee sleep a nights, he by telling thee of thy wants and necessities sadly
disturbs thy mind, but never helped thee to a Farthing in all his life, and why
should thou hearken to him any longer, he is thy utter Enemy as well as mine:
Hear what the Lord Christ says, Who by taking thought can add one Cubit unto
his Stature, Mat. 6.27.

He has even eat up thy very Spirits, and weakened thy Body, marred thy Senses,
especially the Spiritual Senses of thy Soul, so that thou can not think one
serious thought all the day for him; nay, when Sloth and Idleness will let thee
go to hear Gods Word he follows thee thither too, and so confounds thy mind
with wandering Cogitations, that all thy devotion is spoiled, you can profit
nothing: Therefore I beseech you do what you can to thrust him out.

Distrust, That faithless Fellow, sets on this base Wrerch, Carping-Care, to
perplex thy mind; and this is not all, for he tells thee if thou turnest
Lightfingers out of door, thou will certainly go a begging. Come, Poverty, they
are a pack of cursed Villains, set on by their great Master Apollyon, to bring
thee to shame, as if there was no ways to live, but by breaking of Gods
Commandment* Thou shall not steal; and is he not a Wretch, that shall call into
question the Care and Faithfulness of God, whose Promises are to Feed Isa.
40.11 Psalm. 34.9, 10
and Cloth thee, and to supply all thy necessities in the way of thy Duty, so
that thou shall want no good thing, (as I said before) though thou possibly
may think that good for thee, which God knows is not.

And now in the last place, let me speak a few words to those cowardly fellows,
Isa. 51.12.
Faint-heart, and Fear-man; these are they that would have you fear man more
than God; and yet I am ready to believe some of their words take much place
upon your heart as any thing you heard from the other.

But what reason there was or is for it, we will come now to consider.

First, they say I am grown here of late very contemptible, and am of very
little esteem or credit * amongst any sort or degrees of men; Isa. 53.3.
and that I shall ere long be forced to fly into a corner to hide my self, etc

To this I answer, first I never had much esteem amongst great men; nay, in
every Age of the World very few gave credit to me; and now being come (almost
to the end of my Travels) into the last and worst Age, I could expect no other
usage than what I meet withal. How should I have many to admire and fall in
love with me, when the Text positively says, All the World Revel. 13.3.
Wonders after the Beast. That is, they are in love with, and admire
counterfeit Godliness; and the truth is, I marvel not at it, because all along
the false Prophets were more readily embraced than the true, and their words
generally believed. If another comes in his own name (said Jesus Christ) him
you will John 5.43.
receive; the reason is easily discerned, because they John 5.43.
smooth the People up in their sins: 1 Kings 22.13 22.
Alas, don't you see how counterfeit Godliness gives liberty to men to please
their sensual and Brutish Lusts, teaching an easier way to Heaven than ever I
did or can, for I always taught, as at this day the Doctrine of Mark 8.34.
Self-denial, the necessity of Faith in Christ, John 3.5.
Regeneration and Mortification of Sin, etc.

Secondly, whereas they say, I shall ere long be forced to fly into some
corner; that is, I know the fear of these paltry Fellows; but if it should
chance so to come to pass, woe be to you, and all the World besides, if True
Godliness once finds no place nor countenance in any Nation of the Earth, and
indeed you had the more need with all speed receive me into your House, least
hereafter you find me not, and so perish in your Sins, John 8.22.

Thirdly, What though Riches has rejected me, he never had much kindness for
me, but was generally always my enemy, and whereas they say, he will be
displeased with you, and warn you out of your House if you entertain me. What
then Christ will receive you into his House, and you were better have him to be
your Friend than any Potentate of the Earth; When my Father and Mother, says
David, Psalm 27.10
forsakes me, the Lord will take me up. Have you not read of that poor man
which the Pharisees Excommunicated for cleaving to me, John 9.35.
and how the Lord Jesus graciously received him. Come, Poverty, don't fear, the
worst that men can do, God will help you, and he is above them all, and it will
be but a little while before that word shall be made good. Your Brethren that
hated you, and cast you out for my Names sake, saying, Isaiah 66.5.
Let the Lord be glorified, but he will appear to your joy, and they shall be
ashamed. And what though some great Potentates of Rome combine together to
tread me under their feet, and set up Idolatry, Popery and Superstition, should
this deter you from receiving me? Alas man, the time is at hand when all will
be undone, and be forced to cry out, Woe, woe, woe, that ever they were born;
but those only who have made me the Joy and Delight of their Hearts say to the
Righteous, Isaiah 3.10.
it shall go well with him. Woe to the wicked, it shall go ill with him. It Is
said indeed to see any leave me in my Adversity, but they were false John 6.66.
Friends, and let them go, they never loved me in truth; but do thou but kindly
embrace me, and I will keep thee from falling; nay, Psalm. 9.9.
thou shall find me a sure refuge and defense to thee in the day of distress;
yea, and I will store thee with all good things which the rich have not; I am
resolved to Isa. 25.6.
feast thy soul continually, and never leave thee unto thy dying day. Come
thee, and I shall live splendidly together, notwithstanding thou art poor, if
we can but get my dear friend 1 Timothy 6.6.
Content to dwell with us: What do thou say, Poverty, shall I come in? but
notwithstanding all that Godliness could say, Poverty would not give way to
him, but began to give him reviling words, saying, He was born a Gentleman,
though he was fallen to Decay; and that he would not suffer such Tumults at his
Door (for it seems while Godliness was praying and pressing for entertainment,
one Persecution, the Offspring of Adam's eldest son Genesis 4.8.
Cain, had raised abundance of lewd Fellows together to drive Godliness away
from Poverty's Door: so that by the opposition within Doors and without,
Godliness found no lodging there neither; yea, and escaped not without many
bitter threatenings, Execrations and Blasphemous words. Now one Reason why
Riches and Poverty did not receive True Godliness was, because Consideration
dwelt with neither of them, who being a grave Counselor, might possibly have
given them better advice than to deny entertainment to so sweet a Friend.
Godliness after this began to be at a stand which way to Travel next; but
hearing of one Youth, who lived not far off, he resolved to see whether he
might not get a dwelling with him, because he was one that his Commission
particularly directed him to visit.

Sad is the state of Woeful Man I see;
Riches slights Christ, and so does Poverty.
The Snares are great which does Riches attend,
And Poverty to Virtue proves no Friend;
But this poor Wretch I pity most, for why,
He has no Portion here, yet does deny
To Entertain True Godliness, that so
He might have Heaven above, though none below.
But by cursed Foes he is so perplexed, that he
Cannot find the way to true Felicity.
Not many Rich, nor many very Poor,
Unto True Godliness do open their Door,
But rather such who in a medium be,
Betwixt great Riches and low Poverty.
This state, with Agur, Lord, I beg of thee.

CHAP. V.
Showing how True Godliness finding Riches and Poverty had rejected him, in his
Travels came to a great City, where dwelt a brave Young Gallant, with whom he
had a mind to be Acquainted, and to take up his Lodging; showing also how
basely he was dealt withal by him.

ONE might think by this time 'twas in vain for True Godliness to Travel any
further, not being like to find Entertainment any where, since Riches and
Poverty both had refused to receive him; yet he was resolved to pursue his
Journey, not being without hopes of finding his dear Friend at last, called
Consideration, whom he sought for; and coming into a famous City, where one
Youth dwelt, could not tell but he might meet with him at his House, calling to
mind what kindness Young Joseph, Moses, Samuel, David, Obadiah, Josias, John,
and Timothy of Old, and many others had showed him, and therefore came boldly
to his Door, and desired Entertainment. Now, it appears this Youngster was a
great Gallant, but though he had been brought up to Learning, and lived in a
place where the Gospel was powerfully preached, yet was very ignorant as
touching the best things, though very complisant. And after Godliness had in a
grave and sober manner desired a Lodging with him he asked him what he was, as
also his Name.

Godli. Sir, I am a Person of Noble Descent, being nearly All^ed to a great and
mighty Prince, and my Name is True Godliness, being by him sent to Travel
hither to commend his Sovereign Grace and Clemency unto the Inhabitants of the
City; and I have also brought along with me (as Tokens of his Eternal Favor
and good Will, to such who will receive me) very rich Presents, and I shall
bestow them on you, if you will be pleased to Entertain me.


Youth, Your most Humble Servant; I must confess I have read and heard much of
you, but why do you choose to take up your lodging in my House, there being
many Grave and Ancient Gentlemen near? I know not but you seem to be one whose
Company would better suit Men of Riper Years.


Godli. Sir, my Master gave me orders to commend his Princely Grace and Favor
unto you (if your Name is Youth,) besides, he has chosen your House for my
Lodging above others; nay and he has made more Blessed Promises upon your kind
and loving Reception of me, than he has to any besides in the World. Have you
not read that Word, I love them that love me, and they that seek me early,
Prove. 8. 17.
shall find me. And that Word, Seek first the Kingdom of God and his
Righteousness, and all other things shall be added unto you, Matthew. 6. 33.


Youth. As for those other things, I need them not, I have enough of the World.


Godli. Aye, Sir, but you want my Masters Rev. 3.17.18.
Righteousness, and also a part in his Kingdom, and those are some of those
Glorious Commodities I have to bestow upon you, if you will Entertain me.


Youth. Aye, there it is, I perceive, I must Entertain you if I would have
them; but I tell you plainly, your Company does not suit with my Age, why
should you force your self upon me?


Godliness, Why would you have a part in the Righteousness of Christ, and in
his Kingdom, and not receive True Godliness? No, Sir, that will never be, you
must believe in him, and lead a Godly Life, or you will have no Lot nor Part in
this Matter: He that believes not, shall be Damned, Mark 16.16.


Youth, Pray Sir, do not trouble me, you are going to preach.


Godliness, It Is sad you should think I trouble you, because I desire you to
let me have a Lodging with you.


Yo^th. Sir, you will spoil all my pleasure and sensual delights if I entertain
you; I know your Manners well enough. You will cause me also to turn out of my
House my familiar Friends and Consorts, that rejoice my heart in these youthful
days of mine. Now those he called his Friends were these following, The chief
Vices that attend Youth.
Pride, Wanton, Vainglory, Love-lust, Ambition, Gay-clothes, Toss-pot,
Gamester Please-friend, Time-server, Scornful, Hate-good and Scoffer.


Godliness, Young man, believe me, those pleasures and delights which your
heart is so much set upon, are brutish and very hateful to God, and do also
debase your noble Soul, which is of a sublime Extraction. Nay, furthermore hear
what wise Solomon says, Eccles. 11. 9.
Rejoice, O Young Man, in the days of thy Youth, and walk in the ways of thy
heart, and in the sight of thine eyes. May be you will say, O this is brave. I,
but after the flash of Lightning, comes a clap of Thunder, enough to make you
quake: But know, that for all these things, God will bring thee to Judgment.
Your sweet Meat, young man, is like to have sour Sauce; you will pay dear at
last for all your sensual pleasures and vanities.


Youth, But for all your haste, wise Solomon made trial of all the delights of
the Children of men before he condemned them, and so will I too, as far as I
can.


Godliness, It Is true, Solomon did so; and does he not by the sad experience he
had of them tell you, all was vanity and vexation of Spirit. Come, Sir, you had
better believe the Poison in the Cup is deadly, than to taste of it.


Youth, Sir, pray speak no more, I have not sowed all my Wild Oats yet, let me
alone.


Godliness, Wild Oats indeed: Come let me persuade you to sow no more of them,
for it is but sowing to the Flesh, and he that sows to the Flesh, Gal. 6.8.
shall of the Flesh reap Corruption. Prove. 14.34.
You had better far to sow to the Spirit. And now I will tell you what a kind
of Crop you will have at Harvest by sowing that cursed Seed, which you call
Wild Oats, unless by Repentance you pluck them all up again.


Youth, Why, Sir, what a Crop shall I reap?


Godliness, You are like, in the first place, to reap here in this World, a
Crop of loathsome Diseases; for Drunkenness, Rioting, and Whoring, does
commonly produce that. Secondly, you will reap a Crop of Infamy and Reproach;
for sin is the Prove. 18.14
shame of any People or particular Soul; and it will be much if you reap not a
Crop of Want and Beggary too in the end. Thirdly, You will reap a Crop of
horrible and unsupportable Guilt, by which means your Conscience will torment
and lash you after such a sort, that you will not be able to endure it, unless
you go on in these ungodly courses so long until he is feared with a hot Iron,
and then you will reap a Crop of a hard, obdurate, and impenitent Heart.
Fourthly, You will reap a full Crop of all manner of foul and detestable Filth
and Pollution; yea, such Corruption, that will cause God to loath your Soul.
Fifthly, Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20, 21.
You will reap also a Crop of all the fearful Plagues and Curses that are in
the Book of God, pronounced against wicked and ungodly Sinners.

Sixthly and lastly, At the great and terrible day of Judgment, you will reap a
full Crop of Gods eternal Wrath and Vengeance, a Crop of brinish, though
fruitless Tears, Groans, and endless Torments in Hell Matt. 25.41.
fire. Now, if you like to gather in at Harvest such Crops as these, go on and
sow your Wild Oats plentifully.


Youth. Sir, I intend to sow other Seed hereafter; I desire only liberty for
the Flesh in these my Youthful days: If you should chance to call at my Door
when I am Old, I may then possibly see cause to Entertain you; nay, Sir, I
promise you I will then open my Doors to you.


Godli. Alas, Sir, present Promises to open hereafter to God and True
Godliness, seldom ever ends in real performance: He who promised to go and work
in his Masters Vineyard, Matthew. 21.30.
went not, Matt. 25.41.
such who put me off with promises to become Godly hereafter, it is evident do
purpose to be wicked for the present, besides do you know you shall live to be
Old? Or if you should, that God will send me then to knock at your Door? Nay,
and let me tell you, if I should then visit you, I fear it will be to no
purpose, because, Sir, you ripen apace already in Wickedness, and Sin is of an
hardening Nature, evil Habits are not easily changed, Jer. 13.23.
the * Blackamore may as soon change his skin, or the Leopard his spots, as you
may learn to do well, and open to me when you have been a long time accustomed
to do evil: Therefore open to me now.


Youth, Sir you will raise my Spirits anon, if you leave not off your Canting
the sooner; you are a Gentleman, I am sure, few or none cares for. Have any of
the John 7.48.
Rulers and Nobles of the Nations embraced you, I mean strict Godliness? Why do
you not see if they will entertain you?


Godliness, Nay, pray be not offended with me, I seek your profit* I will do
you no wrong; you shall not lose any thing by me, if you will let me have a
Lodging with you, though possibly you may lose something for my sake, but if
you do, I will repay you again an hundred Matt. 19, 29.
fold in this World, and in the World to come you shall have Life Everlasting.
And what though not many Mighty, and not many Noble 1 Cor. 1.26.
ones do love me, or will entertain me: It Is not because I do not deserve
esteem from them, but because they are incensed against me by the Devil, and
are so in love with Vice, my Mortal Enemy. Sir, I am abused, and rendered very
odious by wicked men, as if I were a Acts 24.25.
factious, restless, and sediteous Fellow, and this is one Reason why I am so
slighted and contemned.


Youth, I, (and to speak the truth) I cannot believe but you are the cause of
all the present Discord Animosities and Confusions that are amongst us, for
since you came into this Country, what Disputes, Contentions, and Distractions
has there been? when sweet Popery was generally received in this Land it was
not thus.


Godliness, I and my Isa. 8.18.
Children ever, I must confess, were thus censured and falsely accused, though
never so stigmatized as now of late. Jerusalem of Old was called a Rebellious
and John 10.20.
bad City, Ezra 4.12.15.
because I dwelt in it, and my Enemies said of Old Time, Sedition had been
there, and that it was a great Enemy to Kings and Governments. But it is no
marvel I am thus abused, considering my Lord and Master himself was loaded with
like John 10.20.
Calumnies, being accused with Sedition, and called an Enemy to Caesar
likewise. But let not this discourage you from receiving me into your House,
for all these things are utterly contrary to my Nature, and abhorred by me and
all my good Friends, and therefore pray let me come in.


Youth, It will not be for my Honor, I shall be derided and scoffed at, should
I do it, and be looked upon as a dangerous person: Therefore pray be gone from
my Door.


Godliness, What if you lose the Honor of this World, I will raise you to far
greater; For Honor and Riches are with me? yea, Prove. 8.18. John 12.26.
durable Riches and Righteousness. They that receive me, and serve Christ, God
will Honor.


Youth, Pray let me alone till another time, until I am a little older.


Godliness, Sir, my Master commands you to remember him now in the days of
your Youth; Eccles. 12.21.
and to remember him is to embrace me: And let me tell you, to John 12.48.
reject me, is Rebellion against him who is the King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords; shall not what he requires you to do, be done?


Youth, I have other business at present of greater Concern than to attend on
such a Guest, take an answer therefore, and be gone.


Godliness, Nay, do not mistake your self, for to attend upon me, and to lead a
Godly Life, is business of the greatest Concernment in the World: Were you not
made and sent hither on purpose Isa. 43.21. Acts 17.27.
to serve and honor your Creator, and not to live like a Bruit to satisfy your
Lust, and serve the Devil as heretofore you have done; and if you do persist in
these Courses, be sure you will perish in Hell at last for evermore.

Upon this, the Young Gallant was in a great Rage, and swore Damn him, he would
be revenged on him, and on all his Friends, and never endure True Godliness
more. Nay, and presently all his Companions and Attendants who were in his
House (mentioned before) stirred him up to fall upon Godliness immediately, and
force him away. Pride swelled like a Toad, Vainglory vaunted himself, and both
bid him disdain the very motion Godliness had made. Time-server and
Please-friends bid him mind what was the All-a-mode of the Times, and do as
other Young Gallants did. Scornful looked with Contempt upon True Godliness,
Toss-pot had the Young Man away to the Tavern, and Gamester, after he came
there, set him to play at Cards, Dice, etc. Love-lust enticed him to a
Whore-house, Scoffer and Scornful loll'd out their Tongues at Godliness,
jearing and deriding him shamefully: Nay, and not only so, but also made base
Songs of him, crying, Hie Boys, up go we. And Hate-good commanded them all to
fall upon him, and rid him out of the World; and had it not been for fear of
some Neighbors (who though they were but Moral People) he had doubtless been
utterly trod down under their Feet: But Blessed be God, he escaped this time
also, and got away, leaving the poor Debauched Youth to himself, to gratify
his own Sensual and Luxurious Appetite.


O how perverse is Flesh and Blood, in whom
All Vice abounds, and Blossoms from the Womb:
What God commands, Youth is adverse unto;
But what Hell bids, O that! it is that he will do.
The Rich, the Poor, with Youth I do espy
Act in their Parts in Life's short Tragedy:
But are they Men, or Beasts? See, view them well;
Souls they have, but what in them does dwell,
You may perceive if you do cast your Eyes
On what they choose and love, and what despise.
CHAP. VI.
Showing how Godliness came to knock at the Door of one Old Age; as also the
cause and Reasons why he refused to entertain him.

GOdliness being rejected both by Riches, Poverty and Youth, resolved to see
whether he might not be entertained by a cerain decripped and feeble person,
called Old Age, concluding within himself, that 'twas very probable his dear
Friend Consideration (whom he had a long time sought for) might lodge in his
House; For, said he, surely Wisdom, though he dwell not with Riches, Poverty
nor Youth, yet doubtless he does with the Job 32.7.
Aged, and therefore made up directly to his Door, where he knocked and called
a considerable time without any answer, but at last Old Age enquired who was at
his Door?

Old Age, Who are you?


Godliness, Your real Friend True Godliness, who would fain have a Lodging with
you now at last.


Old Age, Godliness, I have heard I think, of you, but I do not know you.
Besides, I am not able to rise up from my Chair to let you in, I have such a
weak and crazy Carcass, and so full of pain and Aches that I have enough to do
to sustain my own infirmities: pray come another time, don't trouble me.


Godliness, Alas Father, you may not live another day, Death may seize you
before to morrow Prove. 27.1.
morning, why should you put me off, I was formerly at your door when you was
young, and then you told me you could not open to me, because you had not sowed
all your wild Oats, and you were too young, and I was not a fit Companion for
Youth. Moreover, you then said, when you were old you would let me in; and will
you put me off now too, pray rise and open to me.

But all the ways and means Godliness could use, signified nothing he was Jer.
48.11. Zeph. 1.12.
settled so on his Lees, and had such abundance of stubborn and rebellious
Servants and Children, that they would not suffer him to show Godliness the
least favor; the Names of some of them were, besides Weary-limbs, Dim-eyes and
Peevish-hardheart, Impenitency, Self-conceit, Enmity, Unbelief and Ignorance,
with many more of like sort; the first I named were his own Natural-Off-spring,
and somewhat younger than the rest; Hard-heart Mark 6.52.
he had nourished and fed continually from his Youth, for Godlidess found him
at his House when he gave him a visit in the prime of his Days. But now he was
grown a very stout, stubborn and obdurate Piece; this Fellow made Old Age not
to regard at all, nor fear the threats of God. And he was so void of Pity, that
he stirred Old Age up to stifle poor Conscience, who kept his Accounts; and at
every turn, to tread him under foot, if he had at any time so much light and
power as to tell him of his Debts, viz. what abundance of abominable sins he
had committed against God, nay not only so, but not to regard nor pity the sad
estate of his own Soul; nor did he concern himself with the low condition of
God's Church, and the Protestant Religion in this dismal hour, but would curse
and swear, and tell many stories and filthy Lies, and now and then be Drunk,
notwithstanding he was even ready to drop into Hell, and but seldom cry, God
forgive me; and all this comes to pass through the evil nature of this cursed
Hard-heart, and his Companions Enmity and Unbelief.

These three also had bred up another graceless Villain as bad as themselves,
one Impenitency, so that all that could be said to him by Godliness and his
servant Theology, concerning the detestable nature of sin and his miserable
condition, yet he could not be brought to repent, nor to let one tear fall for
his sins, so that that word of the blessed Apostle was made good in him, But
after thy hard and impenitent heart, treasurest up unto thy self wrath against
the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous Judgments of God; Romans 2.5.6.
Who will render to every man according to his deeds.

Ignorance was in Young-mans House, and in Poverty's House, but not such a
sottish Ignorance as seemed to be with this Father Old Age, for he told him God
did not mind nor trouble himself to take notice of what men did here below, but
was taken up about high matters in Heaven; neither indeed could he believe he
saw through the thick Clouds; Is not God (said he) in the height of Heaven, and
behold the height of the Stars how high they are. And how does God know? can he
judge through the dark Clouds? Thick Clouds are a Covering to him that he sees
not; and he walks in the Circuit of Heaven, Job 22.12, 13, 14.

Moreover, He and Unbelief told him, though he was a notorious Swearer, Liar
and a very drunken Sot, that he had as good a heart as the best, and that to
read and hear some good Prayers, and to mean well, was godliness enough for
him. Besides, they would not suffer him to believe that God would ever cast any
of his Creatures, whom he had made, into a Lake of Fire and Brimstone, for such
a small frivilous thing as Sin was; nay, he was persuaded by them to believe
there was no Hell at all. And as touching Heaven they told him, there might be
some such thing, and that though he might not have so good a place there as
some men, yet he should get in amongst the Crowd, and find some corner or
other, for Heaven was a very large place.

Self-conceit caused him to think so highly of himself, that notwithstanding
all that Godliness could say to confute Ignorance and Unbelief, he did not mind
at all, for he said they were all Fools who troubled themselves about sin and
another World, and that he who had lived so many years, understood better, and
he knew what he had to do, and bid Godliness (in conclusion) hold his prating,
For, says he, every Tub must stand upon his own bottom, and sure I am, God
will not cast away an old man; I was born a Christian, and made a Child of God,
a Member of Christ, an Heir to the Kingdom of Heaven by my Baptism; (our
Minister told me so) and would you persuade me to think my condition is bad at
last; no, Sir, I understand what Religion is very well; do not mistake your
self, for I do not see I am much pressed by my ordinary to strike Godliness.
But to come now and then to hear Prayers, and receive the Sacrament, and this I
resolve to do, and though my condition is r^ndred so bad by you, I am sure
there are many in our Parish, yet good Churchmen, as bad, nay far worse than I.

Godliness by this time perceived Old Age was so hardened in his Sin, and
trained up by Ignorance so long a time, that 'twas next to an impossibility
ever to think the evil habits he has got by being accustomed so long to those
evil ways of Vice and Ungodliness, should ever be changed, considering he was
become so unteachable and Self-conceited, was resolved to leave him, not
thinking it was worth his time to wait longer at his Door, nor give any reply
to those base-bred Children, and Servants he kept in his House; for Peevish
made him so phroppish, that there was no speaking to him, remembering that word
of the Prophet, Can the Ethiopian change his Skin, or the Leopard his Spots?
Jerem. 13.23.
then may you who are accustomed to do evil, learn to do well. Yet he could not
but take pity of him, considering his Age, therefore gave him this following
general Reply, and departed.


Godliness, Father Old Age it grieves me to find you thus blind, and hardened
in your evil ways; and the rather, because I see your enemy Death, also
standing with his Sword drawn here at your Door ready to enter in, and Hell is
at his heels. Alas, Death who now shakes his Sword over your head, will soon
sheath it in your heart. What will you do who contemn True Godliness through
Ignorance, when you come to stand before God in Judgment, there is but a little
airy breathings between you and Eternal Burnings; it is better to have your eyes
open on Earth, to bewail your Sins, than to have your eyes open in Hell to
bewail your Sufferings, though you will not let me in now, who would make you
happy, yet you will not be able ever long to keep Death Psalm 89.84.
out, who will make you eternally miserable. It Is sad you will not see your
danger till you cannot escape your danger. As I now stand at your Door, saying,
Open to me, but am not let in: so you ever long will say, Lord, Lord open to
you, but you shall be kept out, for none but those who receive me into their
Hearts on Earth, shall be received by Christ hereafter into Heaven. Those who
contemn Godliness here, shall be condemned for their ungodliness hereafter.
Your poor deluded Soul, who thinks its state so good without Grace and
Regeneration, will find it bad ever long under wrath and condemnation, For
except a man be born again, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, John 3. 3.

This is the day of Gods long-suffering, but quickly will come the day of your
long-suffering; for He whose mercy you have abused while you live, will let out
His 2 These. 1.8, 9.
Vengeance against you to Eternity when you die; much to the same purpose he
spoke to him and with abundance of sorrow, left him to perish in his sins.


How sad's the case of frail and mortal man,
Whose time is short, its length is but a span.
In Youth he is proud, Ambition then so Raigns,
That he true Grace and Godliness disdains.
Virtue is then contemned, it is Vice which he
Does make his choice, but yet does hope to be,
When Old Age comes, another man, for know
He would have Heaven, but not let the Earth go;
But when he is old, sin in him's grown so strong,
He Is more adverse to Grace than are the Young.
Take heed you don't upon Old Age depend,
Least he deals by you like a Traitorous Friend.
CHAP. VII.
Showing how True Godliness, in his Travels, chanced to fall into a certain
Island, where he met with a great number of cruel Enemies, who conspired
together to take away his Life, and the Life of his Servants; but their Grand
Plot failing, they contrived many Sham-plots, to cast the whole Intreague upon
his own Friends and Servants; together with True Godliness's sad and grievous
Lamentation.

TRue Godliness having Traveled (as you have heard) up and down in the World
for many years, and suffered diverse hardships and grand Affronts and abuses, at
last came, by the gracious Providence of God, into a small Isle; neither did he
Travel alone, but like a Highborn Pirnce, though in a state of Exile; he had
some Servants to attend and wait upon him, who loved their Master as their own
Souls, yea, and above their natural lives; their Names were Heavenly, New-man,
Innocence, Humility, Sincerity, Temperance, Sobriety, Faithful, New-obedience,
Hope-well, True-love, Blessed, Experience, Excellent Knowledge, Christian
Courage, Vehement Desire, Godly Zeal, with many more. Now, after he had been
for some considerable time in the said Island, and had through his sweet and
Heavenly and peaceable carriage, got himself many Friends and Favorites,
having lived many years in good credit and esteem amongst them, and no body
thought or dreamt he had been in the least danger. But in process of time, on a
sudden, there being a little before arrived in the same Isle, a great number of
out-landish-men, called by some Mahometans; but their right name, it seems was
Babylonians, being Natives of a great City that bears that Name.

* Now diverse strange ridiculous Orders of men they had amongst them, Diverse
Orders of men amongst the Papists.
and all cruel enemies to True Godliness. But one Order of them proved more
subtle and implacable than the rest, called Loyalatites, being as it is said,
the Spurious Offspring of one Ignatius, who were men of such base Spirits,
that they were content to become mere Pimps and Panders to a great Whore,
endeavoring always to allure Kings, Princes, and mighty men to commit
Fornication with her; and if they could not effect that, then they persuade
Subjects to cast off their Allegiance to their Spiritual and Temporal
Sovereign, and to own the Usurpt Power and Jurisdiction of their Master the
King of Babylon. Now these men remembering what a great enemy True Godliness had
been to them in the same Isle in former times, and how he had forced them to
pack up their Trumpery and be gone; nay, and not only so, but also found that
he had got a great number of the Inhabitants of the said Isle, to side with him
against their beloved Mistress and great Goddess ^^ana, which they feared might
stand in the way of her mounting the Saddle once again, they maliciously and
traitorously made a devellish Conspiracy to destroy True Godliness, and all
those who favored him, and to set up false and counterfeit Godliness in his
stead; and indeed so far they had proceeded in this hellish design, that by the
help of some deluded souls, they had brought over to their party, had not the
all wise God (who always took care of his precious Darling Godliness) by his
most eminent and o^er-ruling Providence, defeated the Conspiracy and discovered
the Conspirators. Godliness with his Servants, and all his poor Friends would
doubtless have had the greatest blow that he had met with for many Ages before;
but they being betrayed by one who seemed to adhere to their Party, who was
privy to their horrible, bloody and detestable intention, having (unknown to
them) a kindness for True Godliness, and his despised Friends and Servants;
whereupon the whole Island was enraged against these cruel Babylonians, and
called a Counsel together to search into the bottom of their Hellish design;
and so it happened that diverse great Lords who had been poisoned with their
bloody and detestable principles were found in the Conspiracy, and were
Attainted for High Treason, for though their great design was to destroy True
Godliness, yet they, as it seemed, consulted also to destroy the Prince of the
Country, and all who were true Favorites of Godliness. And in the conclusion,
one of the Lords in the Conspiracy had his Head cut off, and diverse of (the
Loyalatites, or) Ignatius's Offspring, were drawn hanged and quartered. Now
one would have thought this eminent hand of God's Vengeance against them, might
have deterred them for ever attempting the ruin and utter overthrow of True
Godliness any more; but they having an implacable hatred against him, because
they know he is an utter enemy to all Treasons, Idolatries, Superstitions,
Murders, Fornications, Witch-crafts, and all other horrible Crimes, and cursed
Abominations of their unchaste, defiled and bloody Mistress, in a clandestine
way endeavored to bring True Godliness, and many of his Friends and Favorites
into Contempt, and thereby set all the Inhabitants of the Isle against him;
which Designs of theirs was managed diverse manner of ways, and (though some of
their Stratagems were happily discovered, yet some others of them too far
prevailed amongst the generality of People, who God knows Naturally are adverse
to him, having (as you have heard) grievous Enmity in their Hearts against him.

Now, True Godliness perceiving how the Inhabitants of the said Island were
Corrupted, partly by these Babylonians, and partly by other evil Impostors and
Seducers, whose Errors greatly prevailed; and how generally People of all sorts
were drawn away by the subtilty of Appollyon, and the Pollution and Treachery
of their own Hearts to all manner of Vice and Ungodliness; he being by this
means brought into great Contempt, began to be very sad, considering what a
brave Isle for Grace and Holiness it had formerly been; nay, and that which
added to his Trouble, was those great Divisions and Animosities that were
amongst those who Professed themselves to be his chiefest Friends, together
with the consideration of the great Evils and Enormities of their Lives, for it
was come to such a pass, that it was hard to discern the Professor (as they
were called) from the Profane, Pride, Covetousness, want of love and zeal to
him, abounding wonderfully amongst the generalty of them; so that he evidently
saw that he was grievously slighted, disowned, and neglected almost by all
sorts whatsoever; and that the favor and countenance which most people showed
him, was but from the teeth outward, and that they not heartily and cordially
love and delight in him: Moreover, he perceived also, that there was a grand
Conspiracy carrying on by Apollyon and his Emissaries in many Countries where
he had been formerly countenanced; and that the Babylonians were in great hopes
to get counterfeit Godliness set up in his stead, began to make a grievous
lamentation after this manner.

Godliness's Lamentation.
HOW shall I express my grief or utter my complaint? O, the sorrow that seizes
on my Soul! I that am the noble Offspring of the universal Monarch of the
whole World, the true Favorite of Heaven, the true interest of all Nations,
Kingdoms and Commonwealths; a fit companion for Princes, and all the noble
ones of the Earth; the only benefactor of all Mortals, that continually seeks
the good and eternal felicity of their Souls, who strives to deliver them from
Wrath and Judgment, and to stop the destroying Angel from executing vengeance:
Should this day be thus slighted, villified, censured, and stigmatized, and
have all manner of cursed and detestable evils and abominations laid to my
charge. For

First, I am charged with Heresy, an horrible crime indeed, but it is no other
than I was of old times accused with. But what is the Heresy? What my Doctrine
is, is showed in the first chapter of this Book, to which I refer the reader;
but I may say with St. Paul; Acts 24.14.
After that way which they call Heresy, so I teach men to worship the God of
their Fathers, and not to believe any thing but what is written in the Old and
New Testament. Counterfeit Godliness, it is true may be justly charged upon this
account, whose errors are capital, as has been evinced again and again, by
many worthy Protestants.

Secondly, I am accused to be a common Disturber, a mere Makebate, setting one
man against another, the Father against the Son, and the Son against the
Father; the Mother-in-law against the Daughter-in-law, and the Daughter-in-law
against the Mother-in-law; dividing Cities, Towns, and Villages, setting
Neighbor against Neighbor. O, how does this wound my heart! Was ever any
dealt with as I am? Shall such things as these be fathered upon me? I do this
day protest and declare before God and all the World, I am abused and unjustly
charged, for I am for Peace, Unity, and Concord, and always do teach it; I
abhor Strife and Contention, and every evil work, and have endeavored to bring
all men to live in love one with another; but if it fall out at any time where
I am received, that the Father is set against the Son, and the Son against the
Father, or one Neighbor, against another, it is not I that am the cause of it,
but that cursed enemy Pride, Unbelief and Sensuality, that is in the hearts of
the adverse party, they having espoused the interest of Apollyon, my grand
Enemy; and alas, it will be so, unless I could connive at, or bear with those
cursed evils which are in the hearts of men. But can it be supposed, that
Virtue should wink at, or side with filthy Vice, or True Godliness allow of,
and indulge men in Ungodliness, or Truth join or close in with Error? Alas,
should I do this I should lose my very being, and be no more what I am; for as
it is impossible for Light to have fellowship with Darkness, or Christ to have
concord with Belial, so it is for me to allow of or bear with any of the evil
enormities of the children of men; should my Children do it, they would at that
very instant cease to be my Children; therefore let all the World bear me
witness this day, that I clear my self of those foul crimes and calumnies that
I am charged with. And further, to vindicate my self, I call in my old friend
Saint James, pray hear what he has to say about the horrible charge brought
against me. St. James, pray speak to this great case, from whence come that
Strife, Wars and Contention that is in the World? Am I the cause of it?

James, From whence come wars and fighting among men? Come they not hence, even
of their lusts that war in their members? Jam. 4.1. Jam. 3.14, 15.
Ye lust and have not, ye kill and desire to have, and cannot obtain, etc. If
you have bitter envyings and strife in your hearts, glory not, lie not against
the truth; (mark that) this wisdom descends not from above, but is earthly,
sensual, devilish. O blessed St. James, thou have cleared me, for I True
Godliness am the Truth, whosoever receives me, receives the Truth, the Doctrine
of Truth, and the Truth of Grace. But pray, St. James go on, Where envying and
strife is, there is confusion and every evil work. But the wisdom that is from
above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of
mercy and good fruits, without wrangling, and without hypocrisy. It is enough
I always teach men and women, who embrace me, to be holy, peaceable, gentle,
and easy to be entreated, full of mercy, to hate hypocrisy, and all the deeds
of the flesh. Therefore take notice, if any who are called by my name, or
profess love to me, are unholy, quarrelsome, given to strife, debate and
contention, falling out with their Neighbors* making causeless disturbance in
the Town, Place, or House where they dwell, I do this day disown them; and
indeed I fear it is they who have in part exposed me to reproach and contempt in
these evil days.

I am accused also with Sedition and Faction, and for being the chief
ringleader of Sects, etc. But I may well say, with my old friend, St. Paul
(who was accused by Tertullus in like sort) being called a pestelent Fellow,
and a mover of Sedition, etc. Acts 24.5. I am clear from this evil Charge,
neither can they prove this Accusation against me, I have been traveling up
and down in most parts of the earth for almost six thousand years, and it is
strange, were I really guilty, that none should come forth and prove it against
me. Therefore know ye, that the Doctrine, I True Godliness, the Offspring of
Jehovah, the darling of Heaven, do, and ever did teach upon this account, is
this, viz. That Husbands ought to love their Wives, Wives to obey their
Husbands, Children to honor their Parents, and Parents to carry it wisely
toward their Children, and to bring them up in the fear and nurture of the
Lord. Servants to obey their Masters, and Masters to carry it well toward
their Servants; and Neighbors to live in love one with another, and Subjects
to obey their Prince. Did I not ever teach this Doctrine, viz. That all Men
ought to be subject to Principalities, to obey Magistrates, and to be ready to
every good work, Tit. 3.1. And if Christians at any time are by their Superiors
required to do such things, that they conceive are contrary to the Word and
Will of God, then I bid them patiently to suffer, and not to resist, but to
learn of my blessed Master, who when he was reviled, reviled not again, and
when he suffered, he threatened not. But palpable it is, if men are bound to
submit to their Superiors in all things, in Divine matters whatsoever, then the
Apostles were faulty, who in spiritual things cried out, Whether it be right in
the sight of God, Acts 4.19.
to hearken to you rather than God, judge ye. Besides, this would cause
Persecution for ever to cease, and charge all the Martyrs in every Age of the
World, not only with disobedience, but also with folly; and then also it would
follow, whatsoever Religion in any Nation, the chief Magistrate thereof does
set up, must be subjected to, which sure no wise man will say ought to be done;
therefore I am for rendering to Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and unto
God the things that are Gods, Mark 12.17.

But these things are not the whole cause of my Lamentation, but there are many
other reasons.

Alas, I am not only abused and laid under reproach and infamy by my open
enemies, but also basely slighted by many of those who pretend love and respect
to me; most indeed, now a days, do but complement me, they speak me fair to my
face, but their hearts are not with me: Was there ever more Godliness professed
and less practiced, and more without doors and less within? Did ever Pride,
Covetousness, Vainglory, Self-love, Slavish-fear, Carnality, and Luke
warmness, attend any People who called themselves Christians, Saints, and
Members of Christ, as in these days? There are some who profess love to me,
that I am ashamed of, they do me more wrong than the open profane. I may cry
alas, and call long enough upon many in these days; nay, beg as it were, upon
my bare knees to be entertained by them, and all in vain, for they will not
mind me, nor take me in; I meet indeed with nothing but feigned promises from
the most of people: I will open to you, Sir, I intend to let you in, I am
resolved to embrace you hereafter, etc. And thus I am put off and slighted from
day to day. O, How long have I waited at the doors of some of these deceived
Souls, even till they are grown old, and all to no purpose, for I have seen
death often seize and carry them away before I could get into their houses,
that so I might save them from Hell (where now it is to be feared they are) O,
with what unkind dealings do I meet withal! Is it not sad, that Vice and
Ungodliness should be by many so countenanced, and I hated, resisted, and
contemned in every place, almost by every body; for Riches contemns me, Poverty
dislikes me, Youth derides me, Old Age will not know me, Legalist miscalls me,
and Formality plays the hypocrite with me, and the Babylonians seek to take
away my life; I have a multitude of enemies, and but a few friends.

But in the midst of my Lamentation the thoughts of those glorious promises of
God concerning what he has said of me in the latter days, does revive my
heart; for though I have few to plead my cause, or to clear my innocence, and
am like to be run down by Apollyon and his spurious Offspring, Lust and
Ungodliness, yet I see my day is a coming when sin shall be ashamed and
iniquity stop her mouth, Psalm. 107.42. When the Holy of the Lord shall be
esteemed honorable, and it shall be a reproach to be wicked. Though I am now
slighted I shall then be prized; Jehovah will make my Glory to shine forth In
the midst of all Nations, and my Children shall flourish in every place; and in
that day none shall dare to open their ungodly mouths against me, nor shall I
need to travel up and down to seek for entertainment. For the knowledge of the
Glory of the Lord shall cover the Earth, as the Waters do the Sea. In that day
there shall be upon the Bells of the Horses Holiness unto the Lord; and the
Pots in the Lords House shall be like the Bowls before the Altar. Yea, every
Pot in Jerusalem and Judah shall be Holiness unto the Lord of Host, and all
they that Sacrifice shall come and take of them and sees therein; and in that
day there shall be no more a Canaanite in the House of the Lord of Hosts. Zach.
14.20.21. Nay, and this also adds to my joy in the midst of my sorrow, this
longed-for-day is near, and hastens greatly; it is but a little while, and there
will be a great alteration in the World, the Angel who enlightens the Earth
with his Glory, will suddenly cry, Babylon the Great is fallen, is fallen, Rev.
18.13, 2.

CHAP. VIII.
Showing how True Godliness, after this Traveled toward the City Jerusalem,
near to which was a small Village, called Religion, in which dwelt one Mr.
Legalist, at whose Door he knocked; showing the Cause also why he did not
entertain him.

GOdliness having hitherto happily escaped with his Life, thought it now full
time to leave those Parts where he had Traveled up and down a great while, and
suffered many hardships, being generally base^y slighted and contemned by all
wheresoever he came, and to Travel into some other Country, amongst People (if
he could find such) who were not so abominably wicked, however, not such
visible and open Enemies, to him as others were: And he thought within himself,
it might be his best way to bend his Course toward Jerusalem, for hitherto he
has wandered up and down the Confines of Assyria, Edwna, Spiritual Sodom and
Egypt, but so it fell out, before he entered into the Salem, he perceived a
Village lying near the City, and the Name of that Town he understood was
Religion, a place much frequented by all true Sioners (for so the Inhabitants
of the City Jerusalem are called*) Now, he presently made up thither, and being
informed that one Mr. Legalist lived at the Towns end, near Mount Sinai, he
resolved to give him a Visit, and immediately came to his Door, where with
great earnestness he knocked, and he being within, spoke to this purpose.

Legal. Who is at my Door?

Godli. Sir, a stranger to you, though your very good Friend, and one who would
gladly have a Lodging in your House.

Legal. What is your Name?

Godli. Sir, my Name is True Godliness.

Legal. I wonder much you should say you are a stranger to me, whereas I have
been so long time acquainted with you, and know you so well.

Godli. Sir, it is your great mistake, for I am sure you know me not, nor were
you ever yet acquainted with me.

Legal. What, do I not know True Godliness, this is strange; do not you and I
converse together every day?

Godli. Sir, I am not the person you take me for, there is one or two more who
go sometimes by my Name, and it is very probable you may be acquainted with one
of them; pray what are his manners; what Doctrine I mean, does he teach you,
for by that I shall know who it is.

Legal. Why, Sir, he teaches me to keep the Commandments of God, to lead a
Righteous Life, to do unto all men as I would they should do unto me.

Godli. O, Sir, that is my Friend and honest Neighbor Morality, one that I
love very well, and I am sure it is your great Ignorance to take him for me; he
will not say his Name is True Godliness, for though in some things we are a
little alike, I teaching the same Doctrine you mention, yet we differ
exceedingly in many things. First, we herein agree; he says, you must keep
God's Commands I say so too. 2. He says, you must be righteous, I say the
like. And 3. That you must do unto all men as you would have them do to you, I
say the very same, it being my Masters own Doctrine.

Legal. Why, wherein then, Sir, pray do you differ?


Godli. He teaches you to seek for Justification by doing, but I only by
believing; he by keeping the Law, or by living a sober and honest Life, I by
Gods Free Grace, through the Merits of Christ.


Legal. What is that Friend you say, are we not required to keep the Law of God?


Godli. No, Sir, you ought to keep it as far as you are able, though not as it
is the Law of Works, but as it is the Law of Christ; but you must not look for
Righteousness and Justification, by your keeping ths Law in any sense (it was
on this very Block the Jews of Old stumbled, and were broken in pieces) because
you have sinned, and daily do break the Law; and the least transgression
thereof, exposes you to the wrath and curse of God.


Legal. I know I cannot perfectly keep the Law? but I will do (by the help of
God) what I can; and wherein I through weakness do transgress, the Lord is
merciful, and I trust he will forgive me.


Godli. Forgive you! Why he has said, he will in no wise clear the guilty,
moreover, what the Law says, it says to them that are under the Law, that all
mouths may be stopped, and the whole world become guilty before God.


Legal. What do you say? will not God forgive me who am a penitent person? O
what a horrible Doctrine is this! I believe he will not forgive the impenitent,
and they are such guilty ones only that the Scripture speaks of.


Godli. Mistake not Sir, all are guilty, all have broke the Law, all are under
sin and wrath; it is not your Repentance will do; God will not forgive any man,
let him be who he will, except he believes in Jesus Christ, and takes hold of
the Merits of his Blood, for as by the deeds of the Law no flesh shall be
justified, so God will not pardon your sins, notwithstanding your Repentance,
as a simple act of his Mercy, unless you fly to him through Christ, who has
satisfied his Justice; for what you say renders Christ's glorious undertakings
void and unnecessary; and so does cast a great reflection upon the wisdom of
God in sending his Son into the World.


Legal. How do you make that appear?


Godli. Do you not say you will do what you can to keep the Law; and wherein you
transgress, God will through his Mercy forgive you; now if God does accept of
your obedience in keeping the Law, and forgive all your deviations, as a simple
act of his Mercy, and that hereby you are justified and accepted by him, why
then did he send Jesus Christ into the World to die the cursed death of the
Cross? For if by this way Righteousness and Salvation is attainable, it is
evident Christ is dead in vain; for could not God have done all this if Christ
had never come? Thou art a wretched creature, and therefore look to Christ, or
thou art undone.


Legal. Why do you tell me of Christ? do you take me to be a sinner like other
men? Am I as this Publican? I have all my days lived a holy and blameless
life, A great Legalist spoke thus not long since.
and therefore shall be justified.


Godli. I am ashamed of you; you have it is evident a slight esteem of Christ.


Legal. Nay Sir, do not mistake me neither; I do not think my Righteousness
justifies me any otherwise, than through the Merits of Christ.


Godli. Sir, you err exceedingly; it is not your personal Righteousness, no,
not through Christ's Merits, that does Justify, but the personal Righteousness
of Christ, received by Faith alone. Alas now you discover indeed what a great
stranger you are to me; you are one of those Just men it seems that never went
astray, or righteous ones that Christ came not to call. Alas, I always do
declare and testify that all men must perish without Faith in Christ. Mark
16.16.
Does not the text positively say, He that believes not shall be damned. John
3.33.
He that has the Son, has Life; and he that has not the Son, shall not see
Life, but the wrath of God abides upon him. Acts 4.12.
Sir, there is no other Name given under heaven whereby men can be saved. 1
Cor. 3.
Another foundation can no man lay than that which is laid, which is Jesus
Christ.

Come let me into your house, and I will expel these dark Clouds, and teach you
another kind of Doctrine; I will help you to be holy, and not to depend upon
it; to be righteous, but not to trust in it; I will lead you to say, In the
Lord have I righteousness; and that he is made unto us of God righteousness,
etc. I tell you plainly I cannot speak peace to you; but if I come into you,
you must turn out of your house those helpless and unprofitable servants you
have got.


Legal. What Servants would you have me turn out?


Godli. Why, you must turn Moses out. Do you not read, he was not to abide in
the house for ever? Mr. Missbelief, and Good Opinion, and Self-righteousness
you must turn out. Nay, in a word, you must also remove your Dwelling further
off from Mount Sinai; for look about you, be gone quickly, for I see dreadful
Flashes of Lightning, the Mountain seems to be all on fire; and hark don't you
hear it Thunder, Legalist? God is angry with you Sir, there is no seeing of his
face, but through a Mediator.


Legalist, What must I turn holy Moses out of doors?


Godli. I Sir, that you must; don't you remember, that those who said they were
Moses's Disciples, cast out the poor blind man that received my dear Master?
It Is not Moses nor Elias, but Jesus only that must dwell with you: Nay, and you
must cast out Blind Zeal, Ignorance, and Legal Heart too, for these are
dangerous Fellows! and in their room I will place; True Zeal, Right Faith,
Broken Heart and Good Understanding. Nay, Sir, and let me tell you, if you do
not, and that quickly, expel these out of your Tabernacle, you will be undone,
and perish in your sins; for notwithstanding your great hopes of Heaven, they
will soon thrust you down to Hell; for Publicans and Harlots go into Heaven
before you.

Upon this he began to be very angry, and gave True Godliness, hard words,
calling him Libertine and Antinomian, one that True Godliness does as little
love as he: Moreover, Mr. Legalist told him, that he was sure that he whom he
had already received into his house was True Godliness; and, says he, you are
but an Impostor, and in a great rage bid him be gone from his door: Upon this,
Godliness perceiving Mr. Legalist was so wedded to his own Opinion, that there
was no hopes of getting entertainment in his House, he left him, and traveled
a little further into the Town; being told one Mr. Formalist lived not far off:
whereupon he resolved to go directly to his House.


Sad case, most Noble Prince! what travel still
From place to place, and yet is there none will
Thee embrace? what, not in such a Town?
Does Legalist thus basely tread thee down?
Nay of all men I see there is cause to fear,
He never will, Blessed Prince! to thee adhear:
What slighted by Professor and Profane!
Where Is then the man who will thee entertain?
Some men are blind, and therefore perish do;
And those who think they see, these perish too.
CHAP. IX.
Showing how Godliness came to one Mr. Formalist's Door, who bid him very
welcome; but he suspecting his Integrity, and that he harbored diverse grand
Enemies of his, particularly one Hypocrisy; refused to go in: also How
Hypocrisy came to be discovered; wherein you have his Character, or a clear
and compendious Description of him; showing likewise, how Mr. Formalist at last
refused to entertain True Godliness.

GOdliness being (as I told you) informed that there was another great
Professor living in this Village or Town, of Religion, he tought it was
convenient for him to see whether he might not get a Lodging in his House,
because he was a man whom all the Neighborhood said had a great Love to True
Godliness; nay, many verily thought he had for a long time taken up his Lodging
with him, and wondered when they heard him ask for his House (for by that means
they perceived he was a stranger to him) but it was a considerable time before
he could find where he dwelt. For it appeared he was called by another Name,
viz. Devotion; but at last coming by one man's door, and by another, he heard a
man at Prayer, and he spoke so loud, that all who walked along the Street, with
much ease might hear him; he then presently concluded it was very probable he
might dwell there; and to his door he came, and knocked as he used to do, and
was soon heard.

Formal. Who Is there?


Godli. My Name Sir, is True Godliness.


Formal. True Godliness, Pray Sir, come in; there is none in all the World I
love more dearly; the best Room in all my house is at your Service; pray where
have you been, and what News do you hear? Are the Imperialists and Turks yet
come to engage? how goes things in the World? How does it fare with our poor
Protestant Brethren in France? What News from Scotland? when will the Times be
better? I hear the Penal Laws are prosecuted severely against Dissenters: Many
such Questions he asked, and professed abundance of Respect to True Godliness
(and as you heard) bid him come in, but never went about to open the door.
Godliness was grieved to find him so full of words; but more especially because
he took up his time, and troubled his head so much to enquire after News; nay
and that too, when he should open to True Godliness; and just upon ending his
Devotion; for it appears he had newly done Prayer; yet nevertheless Godliness
very coolly answered him to this purpose.


Godli. Sir, As to your first Question, I answer (being willing to inform you
where I have been) I have wandered about from place to place to seek
entertainment, I mean a fit and convenient Lodging for a little time; for it
will not be long ever I have done traveling; but I am fallen into such an evil
and perilous time, that scarcely any body will show me the favor as to take me
in, and make me welcome. Riches, Poverty, Youth and Old Age have all refused
me, and shut their doors most basely upon me; and since I came into these
parts, and particularly to your Town, where every one concluded I should be
most kindly embraced, the very first man I came to has denied me
entertainment, nay, and not only so, but also called me at his pleasure.


Formal. What man's that for God's sake?


Godli. Friend, don't take God's Name in vain, I cannot bear it; but to answer
your Question, the man is called Legalist.


Formal. O Sir, there is not a man in all this Town more haughty, proud and
conceited than he; he concludes I warrant you, that he has Godliness enough
already; he makes in truth the whole of Religion to consist in Principles of
Morality: I have heard him say, that if a man do lead or square his Life but as
near as he can, according to the Law of the Ten Commandments, not being guilty
of gross Sins, or wilfully breaks any Precepts of the Two Tables, he shall be
saved: Now he never considers all the while the necessity of Faith and
Regeneration, and although he trusts thus to his own Righteousness, yet I
could pick many holes in his Coat; for he is a very worldly, proud, and
passionate person; nay, and he himself confesses he is a Sinner, and yet would
be justified by the Law; whereas you know the least Sins, Lusts of the Heart,
and evil Thoughts, are a breach of it, and the smallest breach is Death, and
eternal Wrath, without a compensation made to offended Justice; and none was
able to do this, but Jesus Christ, and none have the blessing of his
undertaking, but such only who do believe.


Godli. You seem to have a good understanding, and can talk well, but how comes
it about you let me stand all this time at your door? is this your kindness to
me? what signifies your knowledge and parts, except you entertain True Godliness.


Legal. I have opened (you may perceive) to you already, you are in my
affections, and I will further open to you; pray come in.


Godli. Nay do not mistake your self; you have opened to me in one respect, but
not in another; you seem to like my form, but not my power; my external Rites,
but not my internal Life. I am indeed received into your Head, but not into
your Heart; I may be in your Judgment, worth embracing, but your will consents
not to receive me; you like my Garb, but love not my Person; you are (I know) a
Professor of me, but not a Possessor of me: The truth is, I Suspect you.


Formal. Suspect me Sir! for what?


Godli. That you have one or two implacable Enemies of mine hid secretly in
your House.


Formal. Who, I Sir! God forbid I should hide any cursed Enemies of True
Godliness: Who are they? pray tell me their Names.


Godli. Old Man, Carnal Affections, and Hypocrisy.


Formal. As touching the Old Man, there is no Christian (you know) can be quite
rid of him; but God forbid I should show him any countenance: And as to Carnal
Affections, in this you do mistake; for my Affections are spiritual. But why
should you think I harbor Hypocrisy in my House? I will assure you there is
none in all the world I hate more than this base Fellow; for I know God abhors
him; and shall I show countenance to him? Lord, far be it from me!


Godli. Nay Formalist, be not too confident; it is not your bare denial of it
which is sufficient to acquit you of the suspicion I have of you upon this
account; but since you deny it, I will see if I cannot find him out, for you
have a certain Officer in your House, whom I am sure can make a righteous
decision, if he be not basely corrupted and blinded by your pretending so much
Love and Zeal to seeming Holiness. I know he will not flatter any man, but
speak according to his Light and Knowledge impartially at all times. Sir, I will
appeal unto him.


Formal. What is his Name?


Godli. His Name is Conscience.

Upon this, Conscience was called, and enquired of, after this manner;


Godli. Conscience, Conscience appealed to about Hypocrisy.
I do require you in the fear of God, to answer me a question or two concerning
your Master; Does he nor secretly lodge and hide one in his house called
Hypocrisy? for I very much suspect him herein to be guilty; What do you say?


Conscience, Sir, if you please to give me his Character, or give me some
certain signs of his behavior and proprities, whereby I may know him, I will
faithfully discover all that I understand as touching this matter.


Godli. Conscience, I thank you, you speak like an honest man; and indeed I
have always found you impartial according to your Light: I will then give you
such a Description of this subtle and deceitful Enemy of mine, that you cannot
well mistake; and this I shall do by propounding a few questions to you.

Sir, was he ever thoroughly wounded in the sense of sin as it is sin, being
convinced of the ugly and abominable Nature thereof; there being nothing in all
the world more hateful to God than that; not only convinced of the evil which
does attend it, or is the fruit of it, but also of that cursed evil there is in
it, it being utterly contrary to the holy and pure Nature of God, a breach of
his Law, and that which has made a breach between God and Man, and basely
defaced the Image of God in him, and is the absolute cause of all that
abominable enmity that is in his heart against God and Me his Blessed
Offspring; and also makes man in love with the ways of the Devil, nay to be
like the Devil, conformable to him, and to do his will?

Secondly, Is there no one Sin that secretly he loves and lives in (the evil
habit never being broken) have you nor found him now and then telling Lie for
his advantage sake; or in telling of tales or stories, adding to them, to
please the company; or to excuse himself when accused of this or that, that so
he may gain credit? Is he not sometimes overtaken by Drunkenness? Is he not
proud, minding more the Honor, praise and applause of men in what he does in
Religion, than the praise of God? Is he not Covetous? Does he give according to
his Ability to the poor? Does he not rob God, to serve the World? I mean
neglect hearing of Gods Word, and other indispensable Duties, for worldly
Profit sake; and so prefer the World above the Word? Does he never in Trading
offend you in speaking better of his Commodities than they deserve? Is not the
World more in his love and affections than God and Jesus Christ? Does he
always give good and just weight and measure, and not take unlawful profit?
Does he not make gain of Godliness, and use Religion as a Cloak to cover his
secret sins? Does he concern himself for the interest of the Gospel, and by his
open-heartedness, show upon that account he loves Christ above Son or Daughter?
Is he resolved to part with all rather than to sin against God, and to offend
you his poor Conscience? Does he see more evil in the least Sin, than in the
greatest Suffering?

Thirdly, Does he desire as much to have his Sins mortified as pardoned; to be
made holy here, as well as happy hereafter? Is he as much in love with the work
of holiness, as with the wages of holiness? Does he love the word of God,
because of the purity of it? Is he willing to bear the Cross, as well as wear
the Crown, to be with Christ in his Temptations here, as well as with Christ in
his Exaltations hereafter? to live to God on earth, as well as to live with God
in heaven?

Fourthly, Is he the same in private as in public? Does he not rest satisfied
upon the bare performance of Duty, not minding whether he has met with God or
not? Does he pray in private, as if men saw him, and in public, as knowing God
sees him? Does not his satisfaction more lie in his asking of God, than in his
receiving from God? Does he not seek more for suitable words in Prayer, than
for a suitable heart? Does not he study more for acute expressions to affect
the hearts of others, than to meet with powerful impressions upon his own? Does
he not lengthen his Prayers before others, and hurry them over in private? Does
he as much endeavor after what he needs from God, as that which he seeks of
God.

Fifthly, Can he bear reproofs kindly for his faults, and take them patiently;
nay, and esteem him his greatest friend who deals most cordially with him? is
he ready to take shame to himself, and give glory to God? Can he be contented
in the ways of God, though he meets with little sensible comfort from God, nor
outward respect from Saints?

Sixthly, Does he as much desire to have his heart filled with Grace, as his
head with knowledge? Does he take as much care to make the Glory of God his end
in what he does, as the Command of God his ground in what he does.

Seventhly, Is he not more severe in pressing the lesser concerns of Religion,
than in urging the greater? Does he not require those Duties of others which he
himself is loath to practice? Is he not more curious to know other men's
conditions than his own?

Eighthly, Has he received a whole Christ with a whole heart? First, A whole
Christ comprehends all his Offices, and a whole heart comprehends all his
Faculties. Has he received Christ not only as a Priest, to die for him, but
also as a Prince to rule over him? Does he obey all God's Precepts, as well as
believe all God's Promises? 2. As to his Faculties, his understanding may be
somewhat enlightened, but his affections may be carnal, and his will oppose me,
being averse to True Godliness. Is not his Heart divided? Come Conscience, I do
now command you, in the presence of the great and dreadful God who searches all
hearts, to make a righteous decision, tell me plainly; Is my Enemy Hypocrisy
here or no? By these brief Hints you may easily know him.

Conscience, Sir, I must confess Hypocrisy is here; now I have found him out;
nay Sir, and he has hid him secretly in his House ever since he came to live
in this Town Religion; he is seemingly holy, but really wicked; he loves the
Face of Holiness, but is without the Grace of Holiness; his greatest care has
been to wash the outside of the Platter; if he can but keep his name from being
reproached by men, he cares not though his Heart be grievously defiled before
God, Should I tell you of all those Lusts which he harbors in his heart, and
what favor he shows to that Old Man (you mentioned before) I should quite
shame him; he is a Saint indeed abroad, but a Heathen (to say no worse) at
home, he prays, hears, and reads, but it is to keep up his Credit, Name, and
Esteem amongst many Christian men of this Town; for I have often found him very
weary of these Duties, God knows it as well as I: Nay Sir, he would seldom pray
at all were it not to quiet me; for he does not love my lashes; besides, he
performs them with a sad, cold, dead, carnal and lifeless spirit; he is much
for the lesser things of Religion (as you minded) he keeps a mighty stir about
Mint, Anise, and Cummin, but quite neglects the greater and more weighty
things; nay there is one thing more I will tell you, as he does not love strict
Godliness himself, so his heart is ready to rise against all such who outdo
him. Sir, he is a mere Dissembler, yet he would be thought as religious a man
as any in the Town. I find him also much abroad finding of faults in others, or
spying the more that is in his Brothers eye, but never minds the beam that is
in his own: nay, and he is ready to fall out with many good Christians, because
they will not follow him in Habit, Mode and Gesture, etc. In a word, most of
all those black Marks of this deceitful Villain Hypocrisy, you hinted at, I
find in him also.

Godli. Conscience, say no more, I see was not mistaken; and now Formalist, are
not you a wretch to pretend kindness to me, and secretly thus to entertain one
of my worst Enemies? Sir, it is you who have brought so great a reptoach upon
this poor Town*, Religion.
and on all its Inhabitants; Nay, and it is through your means I am so basely
villifi'd and condemned by that blind Fellow Ignorance; for he is ready to
conclude, that all my Friends and true Fovourites are such as your self, viz.
mere loose and Formal Hypocrites. Besides, you are like to be undone and perish
for ever, unless you do the sooner turn this vile Enemy of mine out of doors;
for I expect no other but that you will in a little time fall into Apostasy:
but should you die first, yet assure your self you will be damned; for Hell is
indeed prepared for such as you are; you are, poor Creature! in the worst
condition of all men; for the wicked hate you because you pretend so much love
to Religion and Godliness, God also and all good men hate you, because you are
not real, but only pretend love to them, being not sincere and upright in your
Profession.

Formalist, At this began to be very angry, being greatly offended at True
Godliness; for he could not endure to see his State ripped open, nor did he like
to hear of his present nor future misery; being persuaded by Mr. Vain-hope,
Unbelief, and Good-Opinion, to think his condition for all this might be safe
enough; however Vain-hope told him, though at present his state might be
doubtful, yet he should have many days on earth, and that he might repent, and
set all things at rights before he died; whose word and promise he adventured
to take, and so bid True Godliness be gone; at this, great grief seemed to
seize upon True Godliness, and and no man's state in all his Travels he did
indeed more lament, and his Soul being almost overwhelmed with sorrow, he broke
out to this purpose, and departed;

Passion o'reflows; why melt I thus with grief,
For him whose trayt'rous Heart denies relief?
But what could I expect, false wretch! from thee,
Who harbour'st in thy House Hypocrisy?
A feigned Friend's worse than an open Foe,
And unto me oft-times more wrong does do.
Of all to whom I am by Jesus sent,
Over thee O Formalist! I do lament.
I know there is cause, were things considered well;
Thou suffer'st here, and yet must go to hell.
Hated of God and man, what can be worse
Than the wrath of man, and great Jehovah's Curse?
Farewell, poor Soul! is this thy love to me;
Must I begone? adieu, adieu to thee.

CHAP. X.
Showing how Godliness traveling further into the Town (called Religion) saw
abundance of People, who had been great Professors, getting away out of the
Town as fast as they could. Showing also what Discourse he had with one of
them; wherein the Nature and Danger of Apostasy is plainly opened.

GOdliness had no sooner left Formalist's door, and gone a little further into
the Town Religion, but he espied a great number of People hasting out as fast
as they could go: nay, he observed some of them ran, though others of them went
very softly: At first he wondered what the matter was; because the Town was a
little before looked upon to be a very safe and honorable place to dwell in,
as any in all the Country, and had as great and glorious Privileges belonging
to it; but upon enquiry, he was told there was a number of Lions,
Evening-Wolves, and other evil Beasts (who had for a long time been shut up in
their Dens) a getting out, and they having a great while been kept without
prey, they were afraid they should be torn in pieces: But he observing which
way they went, was the more amazed; for he perceived plainly they all steered
their course directly toward the great City Babylon, Babylon's Fall very nigh.
which he saw likewise a falling, and was sure would suddenly in one hour be
utterly dstroy'd.

True Godliness at this seemed so mightily concerned, that he could not let
them all pass without speaking to them; and minding one of them to look like a
sober man, though he hung down his head as if he had been ashamed, resolved to
have a little Discourse with him, to whom he spoke after this manner.

Godli. Sir, What is the matter you leave this Town and haste away so fast?
When you first took up your dwelling here, did you not intend to abide in it as
long as you lived?


Apostate (for that it seems was his Name) truly, Sir, I did intend it; I had a
great love for this poor Town; but I must remove out and be gone now.


Godli. Why must you? Is there a necessity laid upon you to acquit this place,
this honorable Town Religion?


Apostate, Sir I shall be destroyed else; for the Walls of late are much gone
to decay; I do not see that safety to reside here as formerly: Besides, they
say there are a great number of Lions, Romish Wolves, and other Beasts of Prey
a breaking out upon us; and I am afraid if I should escape with my life, yet
having a few Sheep and Lambs, they will devour them: Truly Sir, I do it to save
what I have, yet I wish very well to the place.


Godli. It Is very like you speak the truth in this; but Sir, pray whither are
you going?


Apost. I am a going toward the Confines of Babylon, that great City.


Godli. I am heartily sorry for you; let me persuade you to return back, and
rest in this Town, Sir; do not fear those Lions you speak of; for God has said
he will break the teeth of the Lions, Job 4.10.
the old Lion, and the Lions whelps; Psalm, 56.6.
but what though they should destroy your substance, Matthew. 26.26.
is not your Soul worth more than all the world? Come, go back again with me,
and I will dwell with you and be a sure defense to you, so that you will not be
hurt, let Lions Woolfs, and Devils too do what they can, My name is True
Godliness, Sir I have saved many thousands from ruin in as great danger as you
can be in.


Apost. Sir there will be no safe living for me, I must acquit the place, the
Town is besieged.


Godli. What though it is besieged God is able to defend it, and will be a wall
of fire about it; but why Sir, do you choose that great City you speak of for
your Habitation? I perceive you intend to go far enough.


Apost. Sir don't mistake me I do not intend to go so far; but to return again
when the danger is over, at present I will go but a little way out of the town.


Godli. Sir, you show your self to be a naughty, and traiterous and
hypocritical person; will you leave this Town in its distress? if the danger be
great which attends it, you had the more need to abide in it, to strengthen and
encourage the poor Inhabitants. Pray Sir, do not show so base and cowardly a
Spirit: What is this less than to betray the Town to the enemies? Is not the
strength of any place the People? Besides, your flying mightily encourages the
Adversaries; for by this means they may think to frighten all out, and then
with much ease take the Town, and utterly destroy it: Also you weaken the
hands, and sadly grieve the hearts of all true Protestants, whose chief
Treasure lies in the Town, and cannot be removed out; and it being also their
Spiritual Native place, they resolve to abide in it to the last, let what will
come, You say you intend to return again when the danger is over. What dangers
you see above others, to move you to acquit the Town, I know not; but let me
tell you, few who leave this Town out of fear of humane loss or danger, do
return again.

You say, you intend to go but a little way; alas, you cannot tell where you
shall stop; when once you leave the True Religion, you desert Gods gracious
protection; you may not only cleave to Papistry, but Atheism, or any thing:
Come go back, let me save you from a fall: Why will you leave that Religion you
have been so long established in?


Apost. Sir, I retain the same Principles that I formerly held, and my love is
the same to the Town as it was.


Godli, Poor wretch, you own the Principles of the True Religion, and yet
cleave to Idolatry and Superstition. The three Worthies of old by your example
might have retained Faith and right Principles in their hearts, of the true
God, and yet have bowed down to the Golden Image, and so needed not to have
exposed themselves to a hot fiery Furnace.

Nay, by this Doctrine, who needs suffer Persecution? Besides, it renders all
the Martyrs of old to be mere fools and madmen. What do you say, will you
return? my company one would think, might allure you.


Apostate, No Sir, I have formerly had your company, and I don't find you so
pleasant a Companion; besides, the Town is sadly divided amongst themselves,
those who love you, do not agree,


Godli. Nay Sir, now you are out; for you and I never dwelt together yet; for
if I had ever took up my dwelling with you, I would have kept you from this
great Fall: you will prove your self a mere Hypocrite, one that never loved God
nor this Town Religion in your heart. Sir, Uprightness and Sincerity of heart
preserves from Apostasy; and what though the Town is divided, it is my great
grief to see it, but you had the more need to abide in it, to do what you can
to persuade them to love and Union, however to unite in Affection. Come, humble
your self before God for this great Sin, and let us dwell together now, and
thou shall abide secure, notwithstanding the Divisions within, and Troubles
without, and have most sweet peace, and inward joy; yea such as thou never
had in all thy Life. What do say?


Apost. Sir, hold your peace, and say no more; I am resolved to be gone.


Godli. Well, since I see I cannot persuade you to return, but that you are
resolved to leave Religion, and not receive True Godliness, I will tell you
what your present state is, and what your future portion is like to be for ever
hereafter.

Apost. Sir, pray be silent, I do not love to hear it.


Godli. I do not care whether you do or no, I will show it.

First, It appears (as I hinted before) that you were never truly converted,
Matthew. 13.
being no part of that good ground Christ sperks of.

Secondly, You are (it appears) forsaken of God; he has left you, or else you
would never think of cleaving to Mystery Babylon.

Thirdly, Either God will let Conscience out against you to torment you (as he
did upon Francis Spira) or else wholly give you up (as he did Israel of old) to
your own hearts Lusts, to walk in your own counsel.

Fourthly, Your Sin tends toward the Sin against the Holy Ghost, that shall
never be forgiven, neither in this world nor in that which is to come: for you
have been a person (I hear) much enlightened, Heb. 6.4.5.
and now wilfully cast off God, Heb. 10.26.28.
and Religion, pray read these Scriptues.

Fifthly, Jesus Christ will be ashamed of you at the last day, when he comes in
the glory of the Father with all his holy Angels. Mark 8.38.


Sixthly, Those who set their hands to the Plough, and look back (remember) are
not fit for the Kingdom of Heaven; Luke 9.62.
nor will Gods Soul take pleasure in them. Heb. 10.37.


Seventhly, Rev. 14.10.
without you return back, you are like to have the hottest place in Hell.

Eighthly, The place you are going to, is like suddenly to be destroyed. Do you
not read how just at the time when her judgments come upon her, she says in
her heart I sit a Queen, and shall see no sorrow, nor know Widdow-hood, nor
loss of Children any more.

Ninthly, Remember the fearful end, and what dreadful Judgments God has many
times in diverse Ages, brought upon such false and traiterous persons as you
are. Besides, who will trust you? For you that are false to your God, and to
your own Soul, will never be faithful to men. Come, that very way you think to
save all, you may loose all. Besides Sir, let me tell you, Light is sown for
the righteous (though is is a dark time now) and Joy for the upright in heart.
Nay, and this precious Seed is sown (as I could show you) in this present
dispensation; but I am in haste: What do you say to these things? Will you
return?


Apost. I dare not Sir, at present.


Godli. Well then, I see you love the world above Christ. I have but little
more to say unto you; but Sir, what man in his right mind, would to prevent a
few sparks, leap into the fire, or to save his hat, lose his head? Alas, whilst
you seek to save your Estate, you are like eternally to loose your poor Soul.


Apost. Well Sir, trouble not your self; I will talk no more with you; Farewell.


Godli. Adieu then poor deceived Soul

Away he went as fast as he could go toward the great City Babylon.

Godliness having thus parted with him, at last he met a man traveling into
the Town Religion, being not very rich nor very poor, but in a middle state,
between both; and he looked as if he had a mind to take up his dwelling in this
place; for he enquired where he might have a convenient House? Godliness was
much pleased with this person, because when others were hasting to leave the
Town, he was hasting into it; besides, he had a very serious countenance.

Now he had no sooner settled himself in a habitation, but Godliness knocked
immediately at his door, not doubting now but he should find his sweet Friend
Consideration.


Farewell, Farewell, thou Monster of Mankind,
Look East and West, see, see, if you can find
A man who may with this sad Soul compare:
Will he return? or if he does, is there
A ground to hope Repentance he may meet,
Who treads the Truth, nay Jesus under feet?
Can any man on earth ere come to be
A full, complete and just Epitome
Of Sin and wrath? O then Sirs this is he.
Who turns his back on Christ, to Babel flies.
He unto Falsehood cleaves, the Truth denies.
CHAP. XI.
Showing how Godliness coming to one Thoughtful's House, found there his Friend
Consideration, whom he had a long time sought for, also the great opposition
Consideration met withal.

GOdliness peing not without hopes of finding Serious Consideration (for so
sometimes he is called) in or near this place, chanced to knock (as you heard
before) at a man's door, who was newly come to dwell in the Town Religion. Now
this person formerly (as it appears) had been a very great Enemy to True
Godliness, having lived a grievous loose and profuse Life, and like the poor
Prodigal, wasted all his chiefest Substance. Godliness had not long knocked and
called at his door, before he listened to him, and spoke within himself to this
purpose; Who is this that is come to my door? sure, said he, this is a voice
different from any I ever heard in all my life; and he does not knock also as
others use to do; at last he cried out, Who is there? who is it that is at my
door? your Name Sir.

Godli. Soul. Christ is at the door; and I his noble and renowned Offspring
True Godliness. Rev. 3.20.
Do not remember that Word, Behold I stand at the door and knock, etc. Sir,
now I will ask you the like question, pray what is your Name? I hope I am come
to the right door.

He told him his Name might very well be called loose and ungodly Prodigal; for
(said he) I have hitherto lived a very wicked life; but some call me of late
Thoughtful, because I am (blessed be God) newly come to my self, by thinking
upon my latter end, and the evil of my former ways.


Godli. But why do thou choose to take up thy dwelling in this Village now,
when so many are going out?

Thoughtful, Sir, it is because I hear it is the best Town in all the Country to
secure a man from danger in evil times, provided I can but get a place in one
of its strong holds in the heart of the Town; for I have heard there is no safe
dwelling at the Towns-end, no nor any where in the Subburbs.

Besides, I was told lately that Babylon, where I have dwelt till now of late,
will suddenly be destroyed: I do it indeed to save my own Soul; I am Sir,
desirous to find out (if it may be) where true peace, happiness and eternal
felicity is to be had; for I see they are not to be found in those paths I
formerly walked; I mean, in the ways of Riches, Honor, and the Pleasures of
this World.


Godli. I commend thee honest Thoughtful; thou have done wisely, and like a
considerate man; prithee let me come in and dwell with thee, and thou will find
this poor Town the safest and most secure place in these dangerous times, in
all the world. Sir, I have wandered about a long time, traveling from place to
place to seek for one whom I bear much good will to but hitherto I have not
found him; his Name is Consideration; and many things more he said to make him
in love with True Godliness.

Upon this, Consideration, who, it seems was within, whispered Thoughtful in
his ear, and said, This is he that can alone make thee happy, if he be readily,
sincerely and heartily embraced and entertained. Is it not good for thee to
muse upon the worth and Excellent Nature of thy Soul; thou art made a man, and
therefore for a nobler and higher end and employment (sure) than eating and
drinking, sleeping and playing, and wholly to mind thy Trade and seculiar
Affairs, and to enjoy sensual pleasures (a happiness which Beasts arrives to as
well as thee) for this glorious Soul which lies in thy Bosom, is capable of
knowing God, and of enjoying Union and Communion with him for ever, so that all
those who suffer the Honors, Profits and pleasures of this World to take up
and engross their hearts, go astray, and err from the great end of their
Creation. Alas there is nothing doubtless can fill the desires of thy Soul, or
be its Summum Bonum, but God himself: Thou have hitherto suffered thy
affections and desires to run after whatsoever thou could think might yield
thee true Felicity; but it is evident there is nothing thou can find here
below, that can satisfy thy thirsty and ever-craving Soul. Riches, which
sometimes thy heart has been so much set upon, cannot be thy Summum Bonum, or
chief happiness; for they are uncertain, fleeting, and variable things; and let
a man have never so much of them, yet he is still craving and desiring more, so
that it is as Solomon says, He that desires Silver, shall not be satisfied
with Silver.

Secondly, Honors are of like nature; and besides their vanity, they depend on
the minds, will and humors of men, who are changeable and unconstant.

Thirdly, Pleasures and Voluptuousness, they are common (as I told thee) with
Beasts as well as men, and also have annexed their sting and discontentation
when they are past.

Besides all this, Consideration, to induce him to open to True Godliness, bid
him ask his Soul where it was, what it was a doing, and whither it was a going?

First, He endeavored to show him where his Soul now was, and made it out by
the help of Gods Word, that it was in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond
of iniquity, being under the Law, and Curse of God, both in respect of Original
and Actual Sin; he having not yet closed with Christ, nor received True
Godliness.

Secondly, Then as to what he was a doing; he bid him see if he did not neglect
that one thing needful. Have you, said Consideration, made Religion your chief
business since you come to live in this place? Have you not rather spent too
much of your time about Notions and airy Speculations?

Thirdly, Whither are you a going? said he: Are you fit (being well prepared)
to die? Are you a going the way to Heaven? Sure that cannot be, unless you
receive True Godliness; for I have heard that he consists in a right Faith, as
well as in a holy Life. Oh what Cost, Labor, Pains, Means, Motives and
Arguments has God used to make men sensible of the everlasting interest of
their Souls, and to engage them to a serious preparation for another World.

And this serious preparation must necessarily be a through Work of
Regeneration, Faith and spotless conversation; for the Nature of the Means
(says he) must ever be suitable and agreeable to the Nature of the End. And
Heaven being a holy place, nothing but perfect Holiness reigning there, so it
was impossible to enter into it hereafter, without a considerable progress was
made in Holiness here; and that it was not to be thought a man could reach to
the highest step of a Ladder without ascending the lowermost first. Who (said
he) ever hoped for a Crop of Corn without sowing any) or expected to reap
Wheat, and sowed nothing but Tares?

He laid also before him the Nature and Holiness of God, his infinite hatred of
sin, and great severity against all unbelieving and impenitent Souls, together
with the perfect knowledge he had of the hearts, thoughts and ways of the
Children of men; together with his dreadful Judgments, Commands, Threats, and
precious Promises.

He brought to his mind also the evil of Sin, showing him what an abominable
thing it was for men to seek to please, obey, and do the will of the Devil, and
offend, disobey, and cross the will of God. Nay and he began to speak of the
Excellency of True Godliness also, and what he should gain by embracing him,
and letting Christ, and the Spirit of Christ, Christ and the Grace of Christ,
Christ and True Godliness reign in his heart. Nay, he had so much to say, that
had he not been opposed and basely obstructed (with some other help) Thoughtful
had presently opened the door to True Godliness: But alas, on a sudden there
was great Disturbance in the House, and poor Consideration went to the walls,
and was almost utterly expelled his Tabernacle.

Now the Enemies he met with, were these; Difficulty, Sloth, The chiefest
Enemies of Consideration
Deficiency, Security, Danger, Worldly Cares, and Carnal Company: These and
many other Enemies appeared to obstruct and hinder Consideration about this
great and importunate business of opening to True Godliness.

First Difficulty spoke after this manner; Sir; Difficulty
Do not trouble your self to study to find out these great Mysteries of
Religion and Godliness; for it is a Work too hard and difficult for you to
understand; there is nothing in the World that is more abstruse and mysterious;
therefore to muse upon them, would be lost labor.

Sloth told him, Sloth.
it was a laborious and toilsom Work, and 'twould be great wearisomness to him,
if the Difficulty did not make it impossible.

Deficiency said, Deficiency.
he was a man of a weak understanding, and those things were matters for the
Learned and most knowing men of all to study; nay, and that many of them too,
notwithstanding all their profound Learning, Proficiency and skill in the
Tongues, could hardly attain to the right knowledge of them.

Security endeavored to make it appear his Condition was very good and safe
now, Security.
and that he had Religion and Godliness enough, without troubling himself
further, and that he exceeded in holiness many men that had lived long in that
Town. Moreover he told him that he had followed the Counsel of Consideration
too much already.

Danger spoke to several things: 1. That to give place to him, Danger.
would let in his Enemy Melancholy, which might endanger his Life. Do you not
see (says he) how uncomfortable this Fellow Consideration has made many brave
men, causing them by thinking upon their latter Ends, to hang down their heads
like a Bullrush, fold their Arms, and spend their days in Tears and Weeping;
hearken not to him, for he will certainly infuse sad thoughts into your Mind,
and give you nothing but Gall and Vinegar to drink.

2. He said moreover, Consideration had made many men go besides themselves;
and if he did adhere to him about this Affair, he would be distracted.

3. He insinuated also, that if he did seriously muse upon this Matter, or give
place to Consideration, so that Godliness came to be let in, he would be
undone, and utterly ruined, the Times were such.

Worldly Cares proved as great an Enemy to Consideration, Worldly Cares.
as any of them; for he could not seriously muse or think upon Eternity, or the
present condition his poor Soul was in; he was so hurried in his Mind about the
affairs of this Life; nay, no sooner at any season that he set himself to
ruminate or ponder them in his mind, but Worldly Cares would expel and drive
such thoughts away.

Old Companions, Evil Companions.
and Carnal Company did greatly abuse Consideration, by endeavoring to make
him out of love with a virtuous Life: These labored to fawn him into Misery,
and tickle him into an eternity of Torment; they turned Religion and Godliness
into a Jest, and made the Precepts of the Gospel matter for Railery, and told
him that those men that seemed most serious, were the most seditious, and that
their Profession savoured of nothing but of Pride Singularity and Hypocrisy.

Now after they had spoke their Pleasure, and almost silenced, nay quite routed
poor Consideration; his Mind was so filled and hurried about many things; which
Godliness, though not yet let in, overheard, and presently took them all up,
and answered them one by one.

And first, he spoke to this purpose; Honest Thoughtful, I would not have thee
to be discouraged by those ill-bred Fellows thou have within to slight poor
Consideration; for he is thy very good Friend, and as able a Counselor as most
in this Town. Moreover, very great Inconveniences also have always followed
those who have unadvisedly gone about to slight and contemn him. Nay, I must
tell thee, most of all those great Miseries and heavy Judgments that have
befallen Nations, Cities, Towns, Churches, and particular Souls, has been
occasioned through their great neglect to hearken to Consideration: This was
the cause of Isreal's ruin of old: God by his merciful Providence sent to them
by his Prophets, to advertise and warn them of their perilous estate and
condition by reason of their sins, and not only told them of their imminent
danger thereby, but also revealed the true Causes thereof, and how they might
easily provide Remedies for the prevention of it; but they refused to lay it to
heart, or give way to Consideration about it, which made Jehovah to bewail
their future misery after this manner; O that they were wise, that they
understood this, Deuteronomy. 32.29.
that they would consider their latter end! Among other Causes of their dismal
Calamities, none is more general, or often alleged than the lack of
Consideration; and it is through this means, as by a common snare and deceit of
the Adversary, most men fall into sin, and reject me, and are holden also
perpetually in Satan's Bonds, to their destruction and perdition, men go on in
their abominable Lusts, Pride, Oppression, Excess of Riot, Drunkenness, and all
manner of Debauchery, without considering what the end of these things will be:
Woe unto them (says the Lord) that rise up early in the morning, that they may
follow strong drink, and continue until night till Wine inflame them; Isa. 5.11.
and the Harp and Viol, the Tabret and Pipe, and Wine are in their Feasts; but
they regard not the work of the Lord, neither Consider the operation of his
hands. Their cursed Lusts, and beastly Sensuality brought them to neglect
Consideration, and Inconsideration brought them to the pit side or brink of
Hell. Propterea captivus ductus est populus meus, quia non habuit scientiam,
says God in the same place, by the Prophet; therefore, and for this cause is
my people led away captive, etc. for they have no knowledge, no understanding
of the time to come, no Consideration of their danger. He that will not lend an
ear to Consideration, renders himself little better than a Brute; and what
follows this folly and madness? Therefore (says the Holy Ghost) Hell has
enlarged her self, Isa. 5.13.14.
and opened her mouth without measure, and their glory, and their multitude,
and their pomp, and he that rejoices shall descend into it. A brutish man
knows not, Psalm. 92.6.7.
neither does a fool understand this, when they wicked spring as the grass, and
when all the workers of Iniquity do flourish: it is that they should be
destroyed for ever. The Ox knows his Owner, and the Ass his Masters Crib,
Isa. 1.3.
but Israel does not know, my people does not consider.

Negligence, Carelessness, Ignorance, and want of Consideration, as it brought
Jerusalem down wonderfully, Lam. 1, 9.
so it has been the bane and common perdition of unthinking and wretched man
from time to time, and will be yours, if you hearken to these evil enemies of
your Soul, and suffer Consideration to be expelled your Tabernacle: Why at this
day are there so many people who drink up iniquity as the Fish drinks Water?
that commit all manner of Sin, all outrages, all injustice, all turpitude,
treading down the poor, and contemning (me.) True Godliness, without remorse of
Conscience, or dread of God's wrath and fearful vengeance that does pursue
them; but for the lack of Consideration of that which is like to be their
reward and punishment for all their abominable doings in the end? Thus says
the Lord, Consider your ways; Consider your doings. Haggai. 1. Psalm. 50.
Consider this ye that forget God, least he tear you in pieces, and there be
none to diliver you. I but they will not consider it, nor lay it to heart, they
will not know in this their day the things that belong to their peace, but
inconsiderately put the evil day far away, and harden their hearts against God,
provoking* him to draw his Sword, and cause his hand to take hold of Judgment;
for nothing doubtless can be more intolerable in the presence of the Almighty,
than this iniquity; since he has published his Law, declared his pleasure
against ungodliness, charging all to bear it in their minds, to ponder it in
their hearts, to study and meditate upon it both day and night, at home and
abroad, when they rise up, and when they lie down, to make it their cogitation
and rumination continually, etc. And O that men should ever, notwithstanding
all this, contemn it, and make it no part of their thoughts, but rather flee
the knowledge thereof: God makes his complaint and denounces Judgment, but no
man (as the Prophet Jeremiah shows) will enter into Consideration, nor mind
why the Land mourns; none cry out, What have I done? All men, alas! are set
upon their own courses, and run on in the same with as great vehemence and
fierce obstinacy, as a fierce Armed Horse into the Battle, when he hears the
Trumpet sound.

Come Thoughtful, Consideration, if thou adhere to him, will learn thee to know
God and thy self, and to find out the miserable condition thou and all men are
in by nature: he is the Key that opens the door for me to enter the innermost
Room of thy Heart; though it is true, he cannot open it without help: Nay
furthermore, he is the Looking Glass, or rather the very eye of thy Soul,
whereby thou may veiw thy self, and see what a condition thy Soul is in;
hereby thou may epsy thy Debts, thy Danger, thy Duties, thy Defects, thy
Safety, the course thou do follow, the Company thou do keep; finally the
place and End whereunto thou drawest; nay he will give thee a view of all Gods
proceedings and dealings with men ever since the Creation of the World, the
reason why God sent his Son, his Gospel, his Spirit, his Servants, and takes so
much pains to bring men to Salvation. Nay, and thou also by his help may find
that all the means God uses, to bring thee to a true sight and sense of Sin and
Wrath, and to recover thee out of thy fallen estate, will prove vain and
ineffectual to thee; let therefore the Consideration of the danger thou may
escape through harkening to him on the one hand, and the great advantage thou
may receive on the other, together with the absolute necessity of nourishing
and cherishing of him, and standing up for him; if thou would be happy,
engage thee not to be discouraged to incline to him, nor regard what any speak
against him, for he will cause thee to hear glad tidings; nay, and be in part
an instrument to let me in; which if thou do, I will bring thee acquainted
with God and Jesus Christ, nay help thee to a room in his heart, and lead thee
into union and communion with him, and give thee much glorious Light, yea, and
help thee to pardon of Sin, peace of Conscience, and joy in the Holy Ghost, and
make thee a Son of God, give thee a place in the heavenly Family, feed thee
with the Bread of Life, cloth thee with glorious Robes, which sparkle like
Diamonds, yea, make thee rich, rich in Faith, in Knowledge, in Experiences,
truly rich, always rich, eternally rich; yea and set a Crown of Glory upon thy
head, make thee an Heir of Heaven and Earth; thy renown also hereby will be
great, thou shall have Angels to guard thee, Christ to serve thee, God to
honor thee. O love me, who would lead thee into Christ's bosom, and cause
thee to sit in heavenly places, make thee to triumph with Seraphims, and sit
down with thy glorified Redeemer upon the Throne of God for evermore. Is it
possible such a friend should fare no better than my great Master, have no
place where to lay his head? Is it possible men should deal with me and my poor
Friend Consideration as the Inhabitants of Sodom did deal with the three
heavenly Messengers that entered into Lot's house, viz. quarrel with us, abuse
us, and offer violence to us, show their spleen against us, who seek to
preserve them from being consumed, and who whilst we are with them, stay the
hand of Heaven from falling upon them, the hand of the destroying Angel, that
they perish not, and endeavor to make them for ever happy, possessing all true
felicity, and free them from all misery. Does not every man desire after that
which is good? Was ever any man in love with Torment? Is it not every ones
Interest to study how to prevent it? Why then sure, Thoughtful, Consideration
cannot but have thy affection, unless thou do contemn Rivers of Pleasure,
inconceivable Glory, even the inexhaustible Riches of both Worlds, and chusest
rather Anguish, Death, Hell, and sulphurous Smoke and Flames for thy Portion.
The Difficulty of Consideration answered.
And now to take off what Difficulty says against entertaining of
Consideration, he basely insinuates, that to muse and ponder upon the great
concerns of Godliness, and another World, is a hard and difficult Work.

Whereas to undertake great and hazardous, and dangerous Achievements, for
worldly advantages, this is notwithstanding presently undertook; men do not
care how difficult the work is if it be but profitable; and shall this be a
stumbling block in thy way? What will not men call difficult, if they have no
mind to it? How should some Houses be built, Bridges over great Rivers be made,
Fields be sowed, and dangerous Voyages to Sea be undertaken? Shall the
Carpenter say, O it is difficult; and the Husbandman say, O it is difficult; and
the Mariner say, it is difficult, and so lay it all aside? Nay, Is it not sad
that bloody Papists, and other wicked enemies of the Gospel, should not think
any thing too hard and difficult to undertake to suppress and destroy
Godliness? And yet many who profess a love to me, do not care to encounter with
small difficulties about Consideration, how to entertain and embrace me, though
it be their only business and chief interest in all the World.

Were a man's House on fire over his head, and he like to be burned, would not
he think of ways to get out, because it was a difficult work to do?

It Is not because Considerations about Heaven and Happiness are so hard and
difficult; but because men have no will nor love to these things, other things
are more in their affections. Besides, the rarest things are not obtained but
through great difficulty. What hazzards do men often run for honor and worldly
riches? Oh! what projects and contrivances do they find out? And will thou
desist this work because it is difficult.

Consideration (says one) that spotless Virgin, D. Horneck.
that joy of Angels, that envy of Devils, that Offspring of God; the Ladder
whereby men climb to Heaven, is thought hard, though nothing be more easy;
it is a thing portable, and it is always to be had; its always in season,
always at hand, always in call, no burden in a Journey, no Load in a Voyage;
men may carry it with them where ever they go, when they travel abroad, when
they stay at home, when they sit down, when they rise up, they need not go
beyond Sea to fetch, or envolve many Books to be Masters of it; they need not
sail to the Antipodes to compass it, nor dig under ground to find it; they need
not to ransack the Indies to enrich themselves with it; they need not sell
their Lands and Houses to purchase it, nor run the hazard of Sword and Fire to
secure it; they need not clamber Mountains to possess it, nor wade through
Rivers to inherit it -- Strong Stupidity! Men do not think it hard to carry
talents of Lead, or mountains of sin on their backs, and yet they think
Consideration difficult, who like a faithful friend, would tell them how to be
rid of that load that will, except they get faith in Christ, or receive True
Godliness into their hearts, sink them down into the lowest pit; they do not
think it hard to dig into Hell, yet they think Consideration hard, who would
teach them a way to quench that fire; they do not think it hard to be oppressed
by a bloody Usurper, and yet they think Consideration hard, which would help
them to shake him off. O fools and slow of heart! they that have courage to
meet an Army in the Field, and have confidence to laugh at the glittering Spear
and Shield, they that have courage to plow the Sea, to face the mouth of a
Canon, to stand a volley of Shot, to fight Duels, to endure the noise of Guns,
to hear the clashing of Swords and Spears, and lie on the cold ground many
nights together, to have an Arm or Leg cut off; have they courage to do all
this, and shall thou think Consideration about these great things too hard for
thee? Contemn the thoughts of being overcome by this deceitful and timorous
fellow Difficulty.

Secondly, As to what Deficiency says, Deficiency.
that thou art a man of a weak understanding; alas, thou can perceive that
Gold is better than Glass or Rattles, and that Pearls are better than Pebbles;
thou art able to perceive thou art mortal and must die, and do know when a
Bone is broke, it is good to have it set; and that Food is good for thee when
thou art hungry; and that it is good to get Clothes on to hide thy nakedness,
and art not able to consider the need there is of food to feed thy Soul, and
Clothes to cover the nakedness of thy Soul; and that it is good to get Grace to
enrich thy Soul. Art able to find out how grievous it is to be cast into a
furnace of fire; and can not think that it is worse to be cast into a fire
that cannot be quenched? Nay, and have not weak and simple ones in their own
eyes, and in the eyes of others too, attained to the skill of Consideration
about their eternal state, nay and have wonderfully outdone the wise and
learned ones of the World in it too; Knowledge is easy unto him that has
Understanding. Prove. 14.16. Prove. 1.4.
Wisdom gives subtilty to the simple, and young Men Knowledge and Discretion.
When Wisdom enters into thine Heart, and Knowledge is pleasant to thy Feet;
Prove. 2.10.11.
Discretion shall preserve thee, and Understanding shall keep thee.

Thirdly, As for what Sloth says, thou have cause to abhor him, for he is a
beggarly Villain, and deserves to be drove not only out of thy House, but out
of the Town and World too, for he never did any man the least good; cast him
out as a Vagabond: How now Thoughtful, would thou not take pains? Remember
the sloathful person shall beg at Harvest, and have nothing. Through his means,
and Idleness his Brother, thy House is ready to fall through, and thy Vineyard
is grown all over with Thorns and Nettles; and yet he would not have thee
consider thy danger till it is too late to escape it. Oh how many have lost
their souls by this bloody wretch? What good comes of Idleness? Besides do you
not see how the men of the World hate him? They will not hearken to him, but
will in despite of him consider of fit ways and means to get Bread to eat,
and Clothes to put on; nay, and seek out through great industry rare projects
to get store of Riches; and will thou be drawn away by him from thinking on the
ready way to be made rich, great and renowned for ever? It Is the diligent hand
that has the Promise: Prove. 2.4.
thou must seek for Wisdom as for silver, and search for her as for hid
Treasure. Nay, and do not think neither, I put too great a burden upon thee,
for thou may perceive thou need not to take greater pains about this
inestimable Jewel, than the men of the World take to get the perishing things
of this Life; nay, if men did bestow half the labor about the good of their
Souls, as they bestow about getting the World and providing for their bodies,
what happy creatures might they be?

Fourthly, As touching what that timorous faint-hearted Fellow Danger laid
before thee, in respect of letting in Melancholy; this is a mere deceit, for
there is a vast difference between serious Consideration and destructive
Melancholy, a man is not therefore sad because he will not Swear, Rant, Whore
and be Drunk. Consideration will let thee see that those men who are taken so
much with vain sports and merriment, have the least cause to rejoice of any men
in the world.

Jollities are, as one observes, much like Attila's Nuptials, whose Wedding Day
proved his Funeral. Who would hazard an Eternity of Joy for a Moments time of
vain and empty pleasure? None can rejoice so heartily as he that has God for
his portion, and has his Name written in heaven.

Consideration will let thee see that whatsoever vain men may say, prate and
boast of touching Joy and Pleasures, yet there is no delight and felicity like
that which is found in the ways of True Virtue; that Goodness is the best
security, and that the Joy of the whole Earth is Mount Sion, that in this
Garden are the sweetest Roses, the most odoriferous Flowers, the most Fragrant
Plants, Roses, which have no Prickles underneath; (not like carnal Delights)
whose Flowers fade and wither away; nor like the frotthy mirth which the
laughter of Fools affords.

Consideration would let thee see that those serious persons who look dejected
and melancholy to a carnal eye, have Joys within, which no stranger
intermeddles with, and as little as they make of cheerfulness, yet they carry
in their Breast that which can make their life a perpetual Jubilee.

2. They are Fools that account the life of a Christian Madness, and his inward
peace an aerie fiction; none is such a Phanatick as he who cherishes a Serpent
in his bosom, that will certainly sting him to death, who never sows, yet
thinks to reap a good crop at harvest; that may have glorious Robes to cloth
him, and yet values his own nasty Rags above them, or else choose to go naked;
who hates, and seeks to destroy his best friends, for the sake of whom he is
not destroyed; who thinks to go to Heaven, and yet walks the direct way to
Hell. Can there be greater Madness than to prefer a Stone before Bread, or feed
upon Husks with the Swine, when there is all good things to be had if they
would but seek out for them; Can there be greater madness than to value a base
Lust above God, Christ, and eternal Glory?

3. Whereas Danger tells thee (to obstruct Consideration from opening to me) of
the evilness of the times, and that if I am let in, thou will be undone, know
then if I am kept out, there is no way to escape, but ruined thou will be; no
danger like Soul-danger; he can never be undone that has God for his portion,
and Heaven for his inheritance; lose thy Soul, and what have thou more? and
unless thou consider the sooner, and open to me, thou can not save it; for
without holiness no man shall see the Lord.

Fifthly, Worldly Cares I know hinders my dear Friend Consideration as much as
any thing; he would persuade thee thou have no time to think on God nor
Godliness, having a Trade to follow, a Family to provide for, etc. But shall
those things hinder thee from thinking of any thing else? Is there not one
thing more needful; viz. to make much, or seriously think on me, and of the
concerns of thy Soul, when thou art at work, or about thy secular Affairs, when
thou go out, and when thou come in, when thou lie down, and when thou
risest up; thy heart may be with God, when thy hand is otherwise employed:
True, if the World is got into thy heart, there can be little room for
Consideration nor True Godliness; a continual hurry of Business puts out the
Eye whereby it should reflect upon it self: But shall the Earth keep out
Heaven, and the Prince of Darkness shut out the Prince of Light, and Briars and
Thorns choke the good Seed? Shall Worldly Cares and Business be thy chiefest
Guests, whom thou biddest welcome? and shall Christ stand at thy door as a
neglected stranger? Shall Thoughts be cherished about getting the World, and
serious Consideration be crushed, who would put thee in a way how to get
Heaven? But remember this, he that has no time to open to Christ here, Christ
will find no time to open to him hereafter. Can the World help thee to Peace
and Pardon on a Deathbed, or Riches deliver thee in the day of Wrath?

Sixthly, As to what thy Old Companions lay before thee to render me odious, if
thou mind or regard them, adieu for ever: they that hate seriousness themselves
must needs dislike it in others; These are the Devils Agents, whom he sends
abroad into the World to deflowr Virtue; these are his Factors, by whom he
draws men into eternal Chains of Darkness; these strive to put me ( True
Godliness) into a Wolves Skin; then set all the Dogs in the Town upon me. This
Age has bred more Monsters of wickedness than many Ages before it. Shun
keeping Company with these Scoffers and Contemners of True Godliness, for the
Lord's sake. As thou art come into the Town of Religion, so let the truly
Religious be thy Companions, who will instead of hindering, help serious
Consideration. What ground is there to think a man should mind the true
interest of his Soul, that keeps Company with persons who makes a Sport and
Maygame of Serious Consideration? He that would keep his Garden and precious
Flowers securely, must be sure whatever he does to keep out the Hogs. What is
he that keeps company with Sinners, but a companion of Sinners? and society in
Sin strangely takes off from the heinousness of it: Also men may judge of a
Person by the Company he keeps; as is a man's Company, such is the man, and as
is his Company here, such it is like to be hereafter. O how do sinners harden
one another in ways of Wickedness! They think there is some comfort in having
associates in Misery. They dare to sin more freely (as one observes) when they
are in company, D. Horneck.
being afraid their single Valor will never be able to duel Gods Wrath; they
hope God will not damn a multitude of his Creatures together; as if the number
of sinners could move the Almighty into compassion; and if they perish, they
think, nay sometimes speak it, they shall fare as well as their neighbors;
it is a hard thing indeed, Thoughtful, to be serious in such a lascivious Age as
this is; a wicked man as he poisons the Air in which he breaths, so he pollutes
the Age in which he lives; it is bad lodging in that house where God himself
refuses to dwell; with the froward thou will soon learn frowardness: Who can
touch Pitch and not be defiled? But it is better to be contemned for Virtue by
men on earth, than to be condemned for Vice by the God of Heaven?

What say thou now Thoughtful? Consideration overcomes all his Enemies.
shall Consideration prevail with thee to open the door to me? He stood and
paused a while, and had a great mind to embrace him; Conscience being quite
brought over to join in with him; and now Consideration was hugged by
Thoughtful with great joy, and all those other Enemies seemed quite vanquished;
but lo on a sudden new Enemies rose up in his House, and made strong
opposition, and strove to keep Godliness out, though Consideration was kindly
embraced; for he like David, thought on his ways, Psalm. 119.59.
and began to turn his feet to keep God's Testimonies, and with the Prodigal,
being come to himself, resolved to go home to his Fathers House.


CHAP. XII.
Showing how poor Thoughtful, though he had embraced Consideration, and was
resolved to receive Godliness into his House, was hindered by one Old Man,
Wilful Will, Carnal Affections and Apollyon; also showing how he met with his
good Friend Laborious, who did what he could to help him, but had not
prevailed, had it not been for another who came in to his Assistance.

THoughtful having with much joy and gladness embraced Consideration, and most
bravely overcome the Snares and Impediments, those Adversaries (we mentioned
before) laid in his way, was now resolved to receive True Godliness, and
speedily close with Jesus Christ; but lo! on a sudden, other Enemies (that
seemed to lie still in his House before) rose up and made strong opposition
against his entertaining this new Guest: But a he met with fresh opposition
from other Enemies, whose Names were Old Man, Carnal Affections, and Wilful
Will, all stirred up by the envious and black Prince Appollyon, and other
Powers of Darkness, so he had by the means of Consideration, and the light of
God's Word, some new Friends to help and assist him; their Names were
Conscience, Informed Judgment, alias enlightened Understanding. Now Apollion
being in great fear that Thoughtful, by the help of Consideration, Conscience,
and enlightened Understanding, would embrace True Godliness, rose up in great
fury, and spoke to the rest of the infernal Crew to this purpose;

Most mighty Powers, who once from Heaven fell!
To raise this Throne and Monarchy in Hell;
Bestir your selves with speed, or all is gone,
For Thoughtful has almost the Battle wone:
It Is hateful in my sight to think that we
Should by this thinking Thoughtful worsted be;
Shall Godliness, that cursed foe of ours
Prevail against all Hells infernal Powers?
I swear in spite of Heaven it shall not be --
And presently he rose from of his Seat,
Ready to burst with rage and malice great,
And cast a terrible look on Thoughtful, who
Stood musing still, but knew not what to do;
At this another Fiend stepped in and said,
Let never a Devil of us be afraid;
Lo, don't you see th'unwary Wretch does lie
Open to your Arms in great security.
What though some Ground is lost? we'll seek about
To find some way to keep this Traveller out.
We in the House have a strong party yet,
Who in our Bands keep his unwary feet:
But sad it is the Wretch such Light should see,
As to perceive his woeful Misery.
We must bestir us, and give new Directions,
And by all means keep fast his Souls Affections.
Affliction still by Old Man is directed,
And Wilful Will to us is well affected,
Let us pursue our present Enterprise
With all the power and craft we can devise.
This Consideration has the mischief done,
Whom I do wish all Plagues to light upon.
Appollyon and all the Powers of Hell having thus combined together, to find
out new ways to prevent Thoughtful from receiving True Godliness, endeavored
to stir up Old Man, and his cursed Darling Carnal Affections, to do what they
could to place his Mind and Thoughts upon the perishing things of this Life:
which being done, this put poor Thoughtful unto a stand; one while he was
resolved to open the Door, but then on a sudden his heart was captivated with
the Pleasures and Delights of this Life, which came to pass by reason his
Affections were not yet thoroughly changed, nor the evil qualities of his Soul
removed; for Old Man had grievously corrupted all the Powers and Faculties
thereof, which Godliness (who with patience waiting still at his Door)
perceiving, asked him what the matter was he did not let him come in.

Thoughtful answered, he was hindered by a base Fellow that he had got in his
House.

Upon this, Godliness and he fell into a serious Discourse again.

Godli. Who is it Thoughtful, that obstructs my being received?


Thoughtful, His Name is Old Man.


Godli. He is indeed I know my grand Enemy and has been near this 6000 Years;
(for so old this Villain is) and there is not one in all the world, that has
done me more wrong, to tell thee plainly, than he and his cursed Daughter
Carnal Affections.


Thoughtful, Ay Sir, but I find also one Wilful-will is utterly against your
coming in; Lord what will become of me, I know you are a person worthy of
entertainment; and O who am I that you should come to be Guests to such a vile
and unworthy wretch.


Godliness, Nay, Thoughtful, I do not stand alone, but here are others waiting
at thy door to come in with me also, who are persons of no mean quality.


Thoughtful, Others pray, who are they?


Godli. Why here is my Father the Eternal Jehovah, with Jesus Christ, the
Prince of the Kings of the Earth, and the Holy Spirit, Rev. 3.30.


Thoughtful, Lord, what shall I do? O infinite and admirable Grace and
Condescension! God and Jesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost at my door, and I not
let them in, O this is an amazing Consideration!


Godli. Nay Thoughtful it is so, and more I must tell thee, they have been
waiting here a long time, even ever since I came first to knock at thy door,
and I told thee so too, but I perceive thy memory proves false to thee;
likewise, he is doubtless misled by that base Old Man; but if thou do not
open to me the sooner, they will leave thee, for they never come into any man's
House who keep their doors shut against True Godliness. Why do not knock the
Old Man down, and lay him a bleeding, it is not enough to cry, What, Lord, shall
I do? but thou must shake off that lazy Fellow Sloth, and like a brave and
courageous Soul acquit thy self.


Thoughtful, Alas, what can I do, this Old Man is too strong for me, and
Wilful-will is a very stubborn Fellow too, I am no match for them.


Godliness, Why, I will tell thee, there is one in thy House that will help
thee, if thou hearken to him.


Thoughtful, What is his Name Sir?


Godli. His Name is Conscience.


Thoughtful, Sir, I know him very well, he has since his eyes were opened been
a very good Friend to me. But for a great while he lay in my House as one dead,
and I found his eyes almost quite put out by that cursed Old Man; but all that
he can do is not sufficient without further help.


Godli. Thou say right thank Enlightened Understanding for that;
Consideration, by bringing thee to read and hear God's Holy Word, opened his
eyes also, but is there never another Friend of mine in thy House, who can lend
thee a little assistance in this time of need.


Thoughtful, Alas Sir, who have I else that can do any thing for me, for my
House is full of cursed adversaries; never was a Cage fuller of unclean and
hateful Birds, than my house, I mean my heart, is full of base and filthy
Enemies to True Godliness.


Godli. Thou say right, I believe thee poor Thoughtful; But prithee see if
thou can not find a Friend that I dearly love, and have a long time sought
for.


Thoughtful, Pray Sir, who is that, tell me his Name.


Godli. His Name is Endeavor alias Laborious, you cannot Thoughtful, imagine
what great things he has done at a dead lift; O, I love him dearly, he helped
Noah to build the Ark, and Jacob to get the blessing and to wrestle with the
Angel, and to prevail too; and Solomon to build the Temple, Consideration, it is
true, caused David to think on his ways, but it was Endeavor that turned his
foot to keep God's Statutes; Consideration also brought the poor Prodigal to
his right mind, but it was my Friend Endeavor that sent him home to his
Fathers House; 'twas he that made him find his feet; nay, I could tell thee, I
have taught him to get many a blessing by Prayer. Prithee who was that got the
three Loaves in the Gospel, was it not this importunate Laborious? Was it not
he likewise that made the poor Widow to prevail with the unjust Judge, to avenge
her of her Adversary; nay, in a word, the Promise of God is made to him, If you
follow on to know the Lord, then you shall know him. It Is this diligent painful
person that makes men (with God's blessing) rich, I mean spiritually rich; and
this I must tell thee too, unless thou can get his help, I shall never come
into thy House; I do not say, Thoughtful, that he is of himself able to open
the door: but the promise of better assistance is made to this my dear Friend
sweet Endeavor, have you never read in Aesop's Fables of a man that was fallen
into a ditch, and lying there almost drowned, he called to Jupiter to help him
out; But Jupiter Answered, Endeavor to get out, and Jupiter will help thee.
Though it is but a Fable, yet the Moral is very teachable. Now what do thou
say Thoughtful, can thou find thy good Friend Endeavor.


Thoughtful, Truly Sir, now I, think of it, I hope, I have, but he has been
here but a little time, if I have found him, and God knows too much neglected
by me, for I did not understand its great worth till now. But pray wherein will
he be so useful to me: What are his Properties?


Godli. Why he commonly stirs up men to do what they can to open the door to
me, he is a great enemy to Sloth and Idleness, causing men to watch their
hearts, and keep the door of their mouths; he makes them rise betimes in the
morning to call upon God, and to read God's Word, and pry into it very
diligently, and also to do what they can to bridle all the unruly passions of
their hearts; he will cause thee to incline thy ear to what Conscience says,
and make thee tremble at his Reproofs and Accusations when you sin against God,
if you will but take his Council. He will also cause thee to go to hear
Sermons, and not to sleep when you come there, nor neglect nor slight
Convictions, nor be careless and remiss in any duty, and will put thee in a way
to kill the Old Man with all his deeds.


Thoughtful, O Sir, this is the Friend I want and blessed be God, I have found
him, I am resolved to make use of his help and assistance continually. Now
Old Man, look to your self, Laborious, I hope, will do your Business, and I
shall quickly prevail, and open the door to True Godliness.

Upon this he became very diligent in attending upon all the means of Grace.
Moreover, by the help of Endeavor he cut off some one or two of the Members of
Old Man, that cursed body of sin, and prayed Morning and Evening, eschewing all
open Profaneness and scandalous Sins, and would not speak at random with his
Tongue, nor neglect to hear one good Sermon, if possible he could get an
opportunity, and became mighty just in all his dealings and commerce with men.
But soon upon this Apollyon, by the treachery of Old Man, raised up another
Enemy which had almost insensibly undone him; his Name was Self-righteousness,
a very great Enemy to True Godliness; which Godliness soon perceived, and
called upon him, to open the door, for it appears he had not received him yet.


Godli. Thoughtful, What is the cause of this great neglect? what shall I not
yet be received? O what a long time have I stood at your Door, what is the
matter now?


Thoughtful, Truly Sir, I concluded now the door had been open, by the help of
my good Friend Laborious, for I have done what he required of me.


Godli. No, no, Thoughtful, I am still kept out, Wilful Will and Old Man have
beguiled you, and have let in another dangerous Enemy, whose name is
Self-righteousness; this was he that quite undid poor Legalist, and will ruin
you too, if you take not heed, I would not have you to slight Endeavor, but
not to make an Idol of Endeavor. If you be found in your own Righteousness;
you will be lost by your own unrighteousness; Duties can never have too much of
your diligence, nor too little of your dependence; it is not the salt Seas of
thy own Tears, but the Red Sea of Christ's Blood must wash away thy sins. You
owe the life of your Soul, to the death of your Savior.

If you have no better Righteousness than what is of your own providing, you
will meet with no higher happiness than what is of you own deserving; you must
take up duties in point of performance, but lay them all down again in point of
dependence. There is as much cause to fear you now as ever there was before*
what will you do?


Thoughtful. Lord help me, what shall I do indeed?

O how are many deceived, who think it is an easy thing to be saved; sure I
shall never obtain to a state of Grace and true Conversion.

Upon this a melancholy and very dangerous fellow (called Despond) fell upon
him, and almost knocked him down; nay, I perceive he broke some of his Bones,
wounding him so grievously, that he was left a bleeding in such a sort, that he
concluded there was no hope of life. At this he was wonderfully overwhelmed
with trouble, and that which grieved him most of all, was, to think, that all
this time, not only True Godliness, but Christ himself also waited at his door.
Godliness perceiving what a sad condition he was in, spoke to him after this
manner:


Godliness, Poor Thoughtful, do not give way to Apollyon, that cursed Prince of
Darkness, for it is he who has stirred up that cruel enemy Despond to take away
thy Life; that bloody villain has sent many thousand Souls to Hell. Come,
though thy own Righteousness is worth nothing, being but like filthy rags, yet
Christ's Righteousness is sufficient to cover thee, and his Blood to heal all
thy Wounds. Your great business is to believe, viz. Wholly to go out of your
self, and rely upon Christ's blessed Merits; and know assuredly, that that
very moment you do cast your self, by a lively act of faith, upon Jesus Christ,
I shall come into your House.


Thoughtful, Christ's Righteousness has more worth in it to save you, and
raise you up to Heaven, than your own Unrighteousness has weight to cast you
down to Hell. You say you are a great black and bloody sinner, but you can be
but a sinner, and Christ died for sinners, and never any threw themselves by an
act of true faith upon him, but were saved by him; alas, he died for the
chiefest of sinners; and do you not hear him say, Come unto me all ye that
labor, Mat. 11.28, 29.
and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Sir, He that believes not,
makes God a liar, for he has said, in his Son, There is life and Salvation for
you, and all that come to God by him.


Thoughtf. O that I could believe! my sins! my sins!

No sooner had Godliness showed him what it was to open the door, and laid
before him the necessity of Faith, in order to union with God, but Apollyon,
with the Old Man, and other cursed enemies, began to cause dreadful Combustions
in his house; for nothing does the Devil fear more than true Faith; and
Thoughtful finding it very hard to believe, Wilful-will being such a stubborn,
crooked and perverse fellow; also Apollyon tried his skill many other ways to
undo him, so that he was hard beset; but when Apollyon saw none of those ways
were like to do, he laid before him the outward danger he would be in, if True
Godliness was embraced; he told him, he was like to suffer great Persecution,
it being the portion of all who entertained True Godliness, in so much that his
very life might be in danger; but Godliness comforted him sweetly with many
precious promises; telling him also he had such a glorious Retinue to attend
him, which he would bring into his House with him, that he need not to fear any
difficulty, provided that he would but let him in; but he seeing he was not
able to open the door, his enemies being too strong for him, notwithstanding
his own strength: To his joy he told him, there was one friend of his, whom, if
he could prevail with to come into his assistance, he would soon make the way
clear, and open the door. Who is that? said Thoughtful, Godliness then
discovered immediately, the excellency of his Person, and the nature of his
Operations, by which he soon understood it was the Holy Ghost; upon this he was
not a little glad, but presently cried out as one whose life is in danger, to
God to send the Holy Spirit to assist him, O Lord, the Spirit, the holy Spirit,
now Lord! thus he cried, and presently there was strange struglings indeed,
yea, such a conflict, that he never met with in all his life, Judgment in the
combat behaved himself bravely; Consideration was not wanting; Conscience laid
on home blows, being backed with Endeavor, alias Laborious; but at last, in
the middle of the battle, in comes the Holy Spirit, and with him Faith, and
some other of Godliness's Attendants, and the door flew open, and Old Man
immediately went to the walls, crying out quarter, pleading his great Age, but
had no mercy showed him. Wilful-will straitway subjected himself (that
Scripture being made good, My people shall be willing in the day of my power)
and became Thoughtful's very good Servant, Carnal Affections changed their
minds, and were made heavenly, and so they abode, to his great joy, until his
dying day.

True Godliness being now entered into his House, with his Attendance,
Thoughtful was not a little comforted. Now Godlinsss's Retinue, who came
immediately in with him, were these following (some of which you had an account
of before) viz. Heavenly New-man, True-love, Innocence, Humility, Sobriety,
Sincerity, Temperance, Self-clearing, Faithful, Excellent Knowledge, Blessed
Experience, Godly Zeal, Filial Fear, Precious Promises, Holy Revenge, Vehement
Desire, Constant Supplication, Spiritual Indignation, Christian Courage,
Sincere Aim and Ends, Careful, Patience, Hospitality, Stability, Charity,
Liberality, Chastity, Purity, Holy Sympathy, Wake-man, Watch-well, Peaceable,
Harmless, Gentleness, Brotherly-kindness, and Love-all; besides several others
of like quality and by reason these, as I formerly told you, were all great
Nobles, or Persons highly descended, being the Offspring of Heaven; they had I
perceived also a most glorious Attendance to accompany them; and to the end you
may know what a happy man poor Thoughtful is now become, and with him every
true Christian, I shall let you know who they were. The first I saw was the
Father of true Godliness, for he always dwells where he dwells, and abides
with this his glorious and heavenly Attendance. Secondly, the Lord Jesus Christ
which brought that word to my remembrance, If any man loves me, he will keep my
Words: John 14.23.
and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode
with him. Also the other word, I will come in to him, and Sup with him, and he
with me. 3. The Holy Spirit, Romans 3.20.
for he also is said to dwell in us; 2 Timothy 1 14.
and besides these, there was, 4. Justification, 5. Reconciliation, 6.
Acceptance, 7. Union and, 8. Communion with the Father and Son, 9. Adoption,
10. Pardon of Sin, 11. The Image of God, 12. Peace of Conscience, 13. And Joy
in the Holy Ghost, 14. Free access to the Throne of Grace, 15. A place in the
heavenly Family, 16. Fellowship with Saints, 17. The earnest and sealings of
the Spirit, 18. Increase of Grace, 19. The Attendance of an innumerable company
of Angels, 20. Divine Protection or sure Refuge in God, 21. A full assurance of
Heaven, but was a great while before he could see him, he lay hid it appears,
though he came in with the rest, 22, Lastly, Final Perseverance But lo, I
looked, and beheld a good way off, I espied another glorious Train followed, In
the midst of which I plainly discerned amongst others (whose Glory was so great
I could not behold them) these following, Immortality, Incorruption,
Perfection, Glorious Victory, Heavenly Triumph, the Beatifical Vision, Rivers
of Pleasures, The Tree of Life, the King in his Beauty, a white Throne,
Mansions of Glory, the Holy City New Jerusalem, the Streets whereof were all
paved with pure Gold, a Crown of Righteousness, which so glistered, that it
dazzled mine eyes in such a sort, that could notlook downwards like some men,
ever since; moreover I saw Millions of Millions of Glorified Saints (coming
amongst the Holy Cherubims and Seraphims and all the Host of Heaven) with Palms
and Harps in their hands, singing Allelujah to God and the Lamb; they made such
Melody, that it was enough to ravish ones Soul in such a manner, as to leave no
heart nor spirit in us to the empty things of this World.

Now the two first glorious Companies who attend True Godliness here, these
entered in with him immediately, and the other Glories, Thoughtful was sure of
possessing after a few days, so that he was wonderfully fortified against all
Domestic Commotions, or foreign approaching dangers whatsoever; for he could
not but expect that new Troubles would be raised against him both from within
and without: And so indeed it suddenly came to pass; for Apollyon the cursed
Prince of Darkness first raised up all his scattered forces which still
remained within, who lurked in holes and secure corners of his house; for
particularly Old Man though he was dangerously wounded, his head broke, and
laid a bleeding, yet it appears he was not quite dead, yet was committed close
prisoner under the charge of one of Godliness his Servants, called Holy
Revenge; and though he had a strict Command to kill, him yet he saw he could
not presently do it; by which means it fell out, that in a little time he
seemed to revive again; and poor Thoughtful thereby was continually plagued
with Indwelling Sin to his dying day, which was a great grief to him, and an
hindrance also to True Godliness at all times; and the worst of all was, this
inward Corruption, alias Old Man, alias Body of sin, getting too great power by
the treachery of Mrs. Heart and Apollyon, the Prince of Darkness; for they
laying before him his manifold evils, and remisness in holy Duties, persuaded
him that he harbored in his house an Enemy of True Godliness, called
Hypocrisy, and that he was like upon that account to lose all his hopes here,
and that happiness which Godliness assured him of hereafter; and had not
Sincerety come in with Godliness, he had been utterly undone; but as God would
have it, Self-clearing, by the help of poor Conscience, made it appear to him,
that Hypocrisy was not hid in his house, nor in the least countenanced by him;
for first, they made it out he had a general hatred of all iniquity, and did
not allow of, nor connive at any sin whatsoever, by the aid of Spiritual
Indignation: And secondly, That there was no one duty which he was convinced
of, but he readily subjected to it by the help of New Obedience. Thirdly, That
he was mighty careful of, and had always (by the help of Christian Watchwel)
kept a strict eye over Mrs. Heart whom he most of all mistrusted, and had great
Jealousy of. Fourthly, That he rested not upon the external performance of any
Duty, but did all he did, to the praise and glory of God, by the help of true
love. Fifthly, that he was the same continually in private, which he was in
public, by the assistance of filial fear. Sixthly, and that also he gave
according to his ability, at all times to Theology (Christ's Minister) and to
the poor Saints; the one by the aid of New Obedience, Bounty, Liberality and
Godly Zeal, and the other by the help of Christian Charity. Seventhly, that he
did nothing to be seen of men, or for vain glory sake, by the directions of
Holy Ends and Aims. Eighthly, That there was done by the power of Heavenly New
man. Ninthly, and that he was always constant in his love to, and his esteem
of True Godliness, being as much for the work of Godliness, as for the wages by
the assistances of Faithful. Tenthly, That he did not inordinately love, nor
set his affections upon the things of this life, by the help of temperance and
sobriety. Eleventhly, that he labored to live a spotless Life, being taught so
to do by sweet Purity and harmless Innocence. Twelfthly, that he bore up
bravely in the profession of the Gospel, not being ashamed, nor afraid to own
Jesus Christ before men, by the means of stability and Christian Courage.
Thirteenthly, and that he did not faint under afflictions and trials, by the
help of blessed experience, patience, and precious promises. Fourteenthly, That
he was not corrupt in principle, nor led into error, by the means of excellent
knowledge.

Now Conscience and self-clearing having thus freed Thoughtful from the false
Charge about harboring Hypocrisy, he came to perceive what excellent
advantage he had, and should receive by Godlinesses noble and heavenly Retinue,
and hereupon he fell so in love with them, that he never would go any where,
nor do any work without their company; which Apollyon perceiving, knew it was
in vain to assault him any more in that sort, but being filled with hellish
rage and malice against him, he raised up mighty forces and powers upon him,
from without; for first, he stirred up abundance of base Fellows of the worser
sort, to abuse him, amongst which were these following, Hate-good, Time-server,
Pride, Toss-pot, Outside, Riot, Ignorance, Belly-god, Hard-heart, Scoffer,
Please-all, Love-lust, Makebate, Giddy-head, Pick-thank, Rob-Saint,
Temporizer, Idolater, Opposer, Avarice, Shameless, Rash, Highminded, Lofty,
Sear'd-Conscience, and many more of like sort, like Bees compassed him about,
miscalled and abused him in a cruel and unmerciful manner; which made him
wonder what the cause should be, but at last he perceived the ground and reason
of it was, only because he had received True Godliness.

Remembering that word of Jesus Christ, Marvel not if the World hated you. And
that word, They shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my Name
sake; with the saying of the Apostle, And all that will live Godly in Christ
Jesus, shall suffer Persecution: At this he was somewhat troubled and cast down
in his spirits, seeing nothing could be expected but that these Fellows would
utterly undo him; as touching the things of this world, and though by the help he
had by Godlinesses glorious Retinue, he was supported and established in the
ways of Grace and true Holiness, yet he was somewhat disquieted in his mind;
which Godliness soon perceiving, begun to consider what the cause of it should
be; but he quickly found out the reason of it; for upon enquiry, he understood
amongst all the good Company Thoughtful had got in his house, yet there was one
(whom Godliness dearly loved, and Thoughtful could not be without) was wanting,
whose name it seems was Christian Contentment, and also it appeared that this
noble high born Hero Content, had been a long time a wandering about in the
wilderness of this world, and to seek a fit companion to co-habit or dwell
with, but could find not one.


CHAP. XIII.
Showing how Thoughtful meeting with his dear Friend Contentment, finding now
nothing wanting in order to the making his Life sweet and comfortable here, and
eternally happy hereafter, fell a singing Allelujahs, Hymns of Praise and
Thanksgiving to God and the Lamb.

THoughtful Christian, for so now we must call him, notwithstanding all the
high and unutterable Blessings, Riches and Honor he had arrived at by his late
embracing True Godliness, remained very sad and melancholy, being attended with
many desponding Cogitations, by perceiving not only the great Distresses and
Troubles which his Wife and Children were like to meet with in this world, but
also what sad, unsettled and unhappy days he was fallen into, and of the
abounding Evils and horrible Blasphemies which star'd him in the face wherever
he came; together with the low and deplorable condition the Church of Christ
and True Religion was in, in this dismal hour, which Godliness perceiving, told
him of one Contentment, whom he saw he had not yet found; and that if he could
but obtain that favor to persuade him to dwell with him, his mind would remain
sweetly settled and composed, and that he would enjoy all calmness and serenity
of Soul imaginable, being delivered from all Anxious Thoughts about all present
and future Events of things, and undergo all Crosses and harshest Accidents
with equanimity and acquiescence of Spirit, wholly submitting unto, and being
fully satisfied with the Divine Disposal. Now this glorious, noble and Renowned
Prince Contentment had been it seems traveling from place to place like a poor
Pilgrim, as True Godliness had done, seeking a fit resting place, but could
find none; for he had been to visit Riches, but no dwelling there; and Poverty
also, but found no lodging there; with Youth he could find no abode, and Old
Age was a stranger to him; Pleasure could give him no entertainment; Honors
were forced to say, I know him not; he was not lodged in the Princes Palace,
nor in the Pesants Cottage; the unmarried sought him, but could not find him'
and the married wished for him, but there was no abiding for him neither; for
none of all these States and simple Conditions of men could yield perfect
Peace, Content and Serenity of Mind; but Thoughtful hearing Godliness speaking
of him, that he was used to dwell with him, or where he took up his Lodging,
sent presently his old Friend Consideration to seek out for him, and by the
providence of God it was not long before he found him; yet for the information
of my thinking Reader, I shall show the way how Consideration, by the
assistance of Faith, met with him, and brought him home to his dear Master,
Thoughtful Christian; and fixed Companion, viz.

First, Consideration led him forth to ponder upon the Divine Attributes,
Providence and Promises of God, he caused him to consult infinite Power,
Wisdom, Omniciency, Holiness, Mercy, Goodness, Truth and Faithfulness, etc.

Secondly, He also stirred him up to seek for Contentment by pondering upon his
present state and condition. What says he) has God done for thee? Thou wast
in the gall of bitterness, and bond of Iniquity, and God has brought thee out,
and yet not Content! Thou wast a a Child of Wrath, and now art a child of God,
yet not Content! Have thou God for thy God, Christ for thy Savior, the Holy
Spirit for thy Comforter, and yet not Content! Nay, does God Christ and the
Holy Spirit, dwell with thee, and yet not Content! Have thou received. True
Godlinesses glorious Retinue into thy house, to abide with thee, to enrich
thee, strengthen thee, to comfort thee, and make thy life sweet to thee* and
yet not Content! Are thy sins pradon'd, thy soul justified, have thou Union and
Communion with the Father and Son, and yet not Content! Is thy Name writ in the
Book of Life? shall thou dwell with God and Christ for ever? is Heaven thy
Inheritance? art thou an Heir of a Crown and Kingdom, that fades not away, and
yet not Content! Nay, let me tell thee all these things, and many more are
absolutely thine with Contentment. Come are thou willing to possess them, to
make them thy own, and to enjoy them for ever, yea or no? if thou would be
sure of them, then get Contentment to dwell with thee; for Godliness with
Contentment is great gain, 1 Timothy 6.6. It does not say Godliness without
Contentment, but with Contentment. It Is this glorious Prince it appears, who
puts thee into the sure possession of all true happiness, and yet not Content!

Thirdly, Ponder says Consideration, upon the excellency of Contentment; for a
Saint never looks like himself, acts like himself, acts like a person of such
Rank and Quality, a person who has received so many glorious and excellent
Graces and Privileges, but when in all conditions he is therewith contented

Fourthly, Ponder, says Consideration, upon the Evils of Discontent; Oh what
dishonor does it bring unto God! what reproach to True Godliness? and what
great wrong to thy own Soul!

Fifthly, It Is below thy Christian Relation, says Consideration, to be
discontent: It was the Speech of Jonadab to Amon, why art thou, being a King's
Son, lean from day to day? But that was (as one observes) for a wicked Cause;
he saw his Spirit was troubled, for otherwise he was fat enough. It Is below thy
Relation to God, who is thy Portion, thy Shield, thy Sanctuary, thy Father.
David thought it no small matter to be a Son-in-Law to an Earthly King; and art
thou the King's Son of Heaven and Earth, and yet not content? It Is be^ow thy
relation to Jesus Christ: What, art thou the Spouse of Christ, a Member of
Christ, the Brother and Friend of Christ, an Heir with Christ, and yet not
content? It Is below thy relation to the holy Ghost; Is he thy Comforter, Guide,
Witness, Strength, and art not content? it is below thy relation to the holy
Angels, who are thy Guard, thy Attendance, thy Friends, thy Watchmen; Have thou
Millions of those glorious Spirits to minister to thee, to fight for thee, keep
thee in all thy ways, and yet not content? It Is below thy relation to the
Saints and heavenly family; Art thou brought home then to sit down with them,
to partake of all the sacred privileges of God's House with them, and to have
a share in all their prayers, and yet not content? It Is below the high and
sovereign dignity thou art raised to; Art thou born from above, a Prince, a
Favorite of Heaven, an Heir of both Worlds, and yet not content?

Sixthly, It Is below those Graces, Divine helps and endowments thou have
received. Art thou in the Covenant of Grace? Has God tied and bound himself by
promises and holy Oath to help thee, uphold thee, and keep thee from falling,
and yet not Content? Is thy Eternal Estate secured, art thou made sure of
Heaven and yet discontented?

Lastly, Consider, all thy affictions, troubles and sorrows are nothing in
comparison of what other Saints have met with, nay, to those Jesus Christ met
with himself for thy sake, and art not content? besides, are they not less than
thy sins deserve; and yet not content? nay, and all those hard things thou
meetest with God will cause to work for thy good; and yet not content? all the
bitter things thou art ever like to meet with, will be in this World nothing
but sweet hereafter and yet not content? all thy troubles will be soon gone,
they are but for a moment; besides, they are intermixed with much sweet; and yet
not content? nay, and all thy sorrows will be turned into joy, and all tears
will be wiped off from thine eyes, and yet not content? No sooner had
Consideration laid all these things and many others of like nature before him,
but lo, to his eternal joy, Contentment came in, and was immediately gloriously
welcomed by Godlinesses heavenly Retinue; yea, it cannot be imagined what
rejoicing now there was in poor Thoughtful's house; it would do also ones heart
good to see how the scattered powers of the enemy were forced to fly into
holes. Apollyon himself was fain to pull in his horn. Despond was vanquished,
cursed Disquiet and Murmur could find no more place in his house, O this to him
was the day of days!

Upon this, perceiving Glorious Content with Triumph was entered into his house,
to dwell with the rest of True Godliness's heavenly Retinue, and that there was
now nothing wanting to make his life life comfortable here, and happy
hereafter, he fell a singing of sweet Hymns of Praise and Thanksgiving to God.

A sweet Hymn of Praise.
1. True Godliness is come to me
And with him also lo I see,
His glorious Train who will attend
My precious soul unto the End:
No day like this has ever bin
Content with Triumphs entered in.
2. I love thee, and admire thee too
What Work remains thou wilt help me do;
My chiefest business it is done,
Possess the house which thou have won,
The fruits of Conquest now begin,
Content with Triumphs entered in
3. What Is this! In-dweling sin moves again.
don't boast what can it be;
Remains there still an enemy!
Have I over come all deadly foes,
And shall this Old Man me oppose?
The fruits of Conquest now begin,
Content with Triumphs entered in.
4. I shall I Am sure be rid of thee,
And then how happy shall I be?
When Godliness in me does reign
Alone with his most glorious Train;
And not a foe dares once appear,
O then what Triumphs shall I hear!
5. Can man on Earth more happy be?
I Peace possess, I Glory see,
God and Christ with me do dwell;
I Am sure of Heaven, saved from Hell:
The fruits of Conquest now begin,
Content with Triumphs entered in
FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for, and are to be Sold by John Dunton at the Black Raven in the
Poultrey, over against the Stocks-Market, London.
Note, Those Books that are marked with a Hand are lately Printed.

Folio.
A General Martyrology, containing a Collection of all the greatest
Persecutions which have befaln the Church of Christ from the Creation to our
present Times; wherein is given an exact Account of the Protestants Sufferings
in Queen Mary's Reign; whereunto is added the Lives of 32 English Divines,
famous in their Generations for Learning and Piety, and most of them Sufferers
in the Cause of Christ, etc. By Samuel Clarke, late Pastor of St. Bennet Fink,
London. The Lives of sundry Eminent Persons in this latter-Age, in two Parts:
(1.) Of Divines. (2.) Of Nobility and Gentry of both Sexes, by the
abovementioned Samuel Clarke. To which is added his own Life, and the Lives of
the Countess of Suffolk, Sir Nathanael Barnardiston, Mr. Richard Blackerby, and
Mr. Samuel Fairclough, drawn up by other hands. A Large Dictionary in three
Parts; performed by the great pains and many years Study of Doctor Thomas
Holy-Oke. Mr. Wilson's Complete Christian Dictionary, wherein the several
significations and several acceptations of all the Words mentioned in the holy
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, are fully opened, expressed and
explained. Mr. Baxter's Christian Directory, or Sum of Practical Theology and
Cases of Conscience, in four Parts; Treating, (1.) Of Christian Ethics. (2.)
Christian Oeconomicks. (3.) Christian Ecclesiastics, or Church Duties. (4.)
Christian Politics, or Duties to our Rulers and Neighbors. Peter Heylin's
Cosmography, in four Books; containing the Chorography and History of the whole
World, and all the principal Kingdoms, Provinces, Seas and the Isles thereof.
Bishop Reinold's Works, containing (1.) The Vanity of the Creature. (2.) The
Sinfulness of Sin. (3.) The Life of Christ. (4.) An Explication of Psalm CX.
(5.) Meditations on the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. (6.) An Explication of
the 14 th. Chapter of Hosea. (7.) A Treatise of the Passions and Faculties of
the Soul, in a Collection of 30 Sermons, Preached on several Solemn Occasions.
Dr. Horton's 100 Select Sermons upon several Texts of Scripture, fifty upon the
Old Testament, and fifty upon the New. A Book of singular use for Divines. Mr
Charneck's Discourses upon the Existence and Attributes of God. Mr. Richard
Hookers Ecclesiastical Polity, in 8 Books; completed out of his own
Manuscripts: with several other Treatises by the same Author, and an Account of
his Life and Death. Esquire Felthams Resolves, Divine, Moral, Political, the 10
th. Impression, with new Additions both in Prose and Verse, not extant in the
former Impressions. Reinholds Triumphs of Gods Revenge against the crying and
execrable Sin of Murder, expressed in 30 several Tragical Histories; the Sixth
Edition, carefully corrected: To which is added Gods Revenge against the
abominable Sin of Adultery: Illustrated with several Sculptures. Dr. Littletons
Sermons, Preached mostly upon Public Occasions, with a Table to them. The
History of the Life, Reign and Death of Edward the Second, King of England,
Lord of Ireland, with the Rise and Fall of his great Favorites, Gaveston and
the Spencers. Sanders Physiognomy, Chiromancy, Metoposcopy, with the
Symmetrical Proportions and signal Moles of the Body. Richard Baxters Catholic
Theology, plain, pure, peaceable, for pacification of the Dogmatical Word
warriors, in three Books: containing, 1. Pacifying Principles. 2. A Pacifying
Praxis. 3. Pacifying Disputations. Opus Historicum and Chronologioum, per D.
Robertum Baillium. The History of the execrable Irish Rebellion, traced from
many preceding Acts, to the grand Eruption, October 23. 1641. and thence
pursued to the Act of Settlement, 1662. Dissert^tio de Scientia media, tribus
Libris absoluta Autore Gulielmo Twisse, S. Theolog. Doctore. Dr. Cudwor^hs True
Intellectual Systeme of the Universe, wherein all the Reason and Philosophy of
Atheism is confuted, and its impossibility demonstrated. Philip's New World of
Words, or General English Dictionary, useful for the adornment of our English
Tongue. Dr. Owens Excercitations on the Epistle to the Hebrews, concerning the
Priesthood of Christ. Dr. Ingelo's Bentivolio and Urania, in six Books; the
fourth Edition, with large Amendments. Dr. Pagit's Christianography, or a
Description of the sundry sorts of Christians that are in the whole World.
Caryls Exposition upon Job, in two Volumes, in large Folio. Bakers Chronicle of
the Kings of England, to the Reign of King Charles the Second; with a
Continuation of that Chronicle to these present Times. The Works of Isaac
Ambrose, containing his Prima, Media and Vltima; with several other useful
things, etc. Riverius his General Practice of Physic; a Book of singular Use
to all that study Physic. Clelia, A Romance, (comprehended in a thick Folio) A
Book much esteemed by the Wits of the present Age. Pools Synopsis, in five
Volumes, upon the Old and New Testament. Mr. Abraham Cowleys Works, Published
out of his Original Copies. Causins Holy Court, in four Parts complete, in a
large Folio Clarks Examples, being a Mirror or looking-Glass both for Saints
and Sinners; wherein is represented, as Gods wonderful Mercies to the one, so
his severe Judgments against the other: Collected out of Authors of good
Credit, both ancient and modern; with some late Examples. Hammonds Paraphrase
and Annotation on the New Testament, briefly explaining all the difficult
places thereof. Medes Works, in one Volume. Tailors Ductor Dubitantium, or the
Rule of Conscience in all her general Measures, serving as a great instrument
for the determination of Cases of Conscience. Brownriggs Sermons, complete, 65.
Published by Will. Martyn, M. A. sometimes Preacher at the Rolls. Sandersons 34
Sermons; 16. Ad Aulam. 4. Ad Clerum. 6. Ad Magistratum, and 8. Ad Populum; with
a large Preface by the said Author: To which is added a Sermon Preached at St.
Paul's Cross. Gurnals Christian Armor; A Treatise of the Saints War against the
Devil. Tailors Life of Christ, being an entire History of the Life and Death of
the Holy Jesus; with Figures suitable to every Story. The House of Mourning, A
Collection of Sermons, Furnished with Directions for, Preparation to,
Meditations on, Consolations at, the hour of Death; Preached at the Funerals of
several faithful Servants of Christ; By Dan. Featly, Martyn Day John Preston,
Tho. Tailor, Richard Holdsworth, Richard Sibbs, J. Pearson, Chr. Shute, Tho.
Fuller, Edmund Barker, Josias Alsop, Doctors in Divinity, and other Eminent
Divines; with some Additional Sermons. Cambridge Concordance, with the various
Readings both of Text and Margin, in a more exact Method than has hitherto
been Extant. By S. N. Owen of the Spirit; A Discourse concerning the Holy
Spirit; wherein an Account of his Name, Nature, Personality, Dispensation,
Operations, and Effects, his whole work in the Old and New Creation is
explained, the Doctrine concerning it vindicated from reproachs; the Nature
also and Necessity of Gospel-Holiness, the difference between Grace and
Morality, etc. Hutchenson on Job; the Sum of 316 Lectures Preached in the City
of Edinburgh. Bishop Pearson on the Creed. Cradocks Harmony of the Four
Evangelists, and their Text, methodized according to the Order and Series of
times; wherein the entire History of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ is
methodically set forth: By Sam. Cradeck. Ushers Body of Divinity, or the Sum
and Substance of Christian Religion, Catechistically propounded and explained.
Stillingflects Sermons, with a Discourse annexed concerning the true reason of
the Sufferings of Christ; wherein Crellius his Answer to Grotius is considered.
Scriveners Body of Divinity, or an Introduction to the knowledge of the true
Catholic Religion, especially as professed by the Church of England in two
Parts; the one containing the Doctrine of Faith, the other the form of Worship.
Quarto's.
A Continuation of Morning Exercise, Questions and Cases of Conscience
practically Resolving (by 31 Divines in the City of London) the one and thirty
following Cases of Conscience, viz. 1. How is the adherent Vanity of every
Condition most effectually abated by serious Godliness? 2. How may we
Experience it in our selves, and Evidence it to others, that serious Godliness
is more than a Fancy? 3. How is God his Peoples great Reward? 4. What may most
hopefully be attempted to allay Animosities amongst Protestants, that our
Divisions may not be our Ruin? 5. How ought we to bewail the Sins of the Place
where we live? 6. What must we do to keep our selves in the Love of God? 7.
What may Gracious Parents best do for the Conversion of those Children whose
Wickedness is occasioned by their sinful Severity, or Indulgence? 8. How may we
best cure the Love of being flattered? 9. By what means may Ministers best win
Souls? 10 How is the Practical Love of Truth the best Preservative against
Popery? 11. What are the best preservatives against Melancholy and overmuch
Sorrow? 12. How may we grow in the Knowledge, Estimation and making use of
Jesus Christ? 13. How may our Belief of Gods governing the World, support us in
all worldly Distractions? 14. What are the hindrances of, and helps to a good
Memory, in Spiritual things? 15. What are the Signs and Symptoms whereby we
know we Love the Children of God? 16. What must we do to prevent and cure
spiritual Pride? 17. Wherein is a middle worldly Condition most eligible? 18.
How may we Graciously improve those Doctrines and Providence which transcend
our Understandings? 19. How ought we to do our Duties toward others, though
they do not do theirs toward us? 20. How may the well discharge of our present
Duty give us an assurance of help from God for the well discharge of all Future
Duties? 21. What distance ought we to keep in following the strange Fashions in
Apparel which came up in the days wherein we live? 22. How may Childbearing
Women be most encouraged and supported against, in, and under the hazard of
their Travel? 23. How may we best know the worth of the Soul? 24. How may we
get experience what it is to be led by the Spirit of God? 25. What Advantage
may we expect from Christ's prayer for Union with himself, and the Blessings
relating to it? 26. How should we eye Eternity, that it may have its due
influence upon us in all we do? 27. How may we most certainly get and maintain
the most interrupted Communion with God? 28. What is the best way to prepare to
meet God in the way of his Judgments or Mercies? 29. How may a Gracious person,
from whom God hides his Face, trust in the Lord as his God? 30. How are the
Religious of a Nation the strength of it? 31. Whether it be expedient, and how
the Congregation may say Amen, in Public Worship? A Supplement to the Morn^^^
Exercise at Cripplegate, being several more Cases of Conscience, practically
resolved by sundry Ministers. Dr. Jacomb on the eight of the Romans, being
Sermons preached on the 1, 2, 3, and 4 verses of of that Chapter. Flavels
Fountain of life, or a display of Christ in his Essential and Mediatorial
Glory, wherein the interpretation of our Redemption by Jesus Christ is
unfolded, as it was begun, carried on, and finished by his mysterious
Incarnation. Dr. Bates his Harmony of the Divine Attributes in the contrivance
and Accomplishment of man's Redemption by the Lord Jesus Christ; or Discourses,
wherein is showed how the Wisdom, Mercy, Justice, Holiness, Power, and Truth of
God are glorified in that great and blessed Work. Smiths Select Discourses,
with a Sermon at the Authors Funeral: By S. Patrick, D. D. Also an Account of
his Life. Baxters Life of Faith, in three parts: The first, a Sermon on Heb.
11.1. formerly preached before His Majesty; with another added for the fuller
explication: The Second, Instructions for confirming Believers in the Christian
Faith. The third, Directions how to live by Faith. Cradocks Knowledge and
Practice* being a plain Discourse of the chief things necessary to be known,
believed and practiced in order to Salvation. Durham on the Canticles; being an
Exposition of the Song of Solomon; with a Preface by D. Owen. Cases Mount
Pisgah; or a Prospect of Heaven; being an Exposition on the Fourth Chapter of
the first Epistle to the Thessalonians, from Verse 13. to the End. A Practical
Discourse of Gods Sovereignty, with other material Points deriving thence, viz.
Election, Redemption, eff^ctual Calling, Perseverance, their inseparable
Connection and absolute dependence upon the good Pleasure of God. Swinnocks Door
of Salvation; being a Discourse about Regeneration. Buroughs his
Gospel-Remission. Dr. Littletons Dictionary, in four Parts; containing, 1. An
English-Latin. 2. A Latin Classical. 3. A Latin Proper. 4. A Latin Barbarous.
Dr. Tuckny's Praelectiones Theologicae, omnia fideliter ex Autoris Autographo
descripta. Mr. Glanvill's Discourses, Sermons and Remains, Collected into one
Volume, and Published by Dr. Horneck. Dr. Owen, Of Justification by Faith,
through the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ, Explained, Confirmed and
Vindicated. Capt. Yarranton's Englands Improvement by Sea and Land, to outdo
the Dutch without fighting, and to pay Debts without Moneys; in two Volumes.
Bishop Barlow's Brutum Fulmen, or the Bull of Pope Pius the Fifth. Mr. Jaye's
Sermon, Occasioned by the late Earl of Shaftsbury's Imprisonment, and
miraculous Deliverance. Mr. S^ower's Sermon, Preached upon the Death of a young
Gentlewoman, Mrs. Anna Barnardiston, Daughter of Nathanael Barnardiston
Esquire, late of Hackney, who departed this Life at the Age of 17; with an
Account of her Life and Death. Mr. Rogers's Sermon, Preached upon the Death of
a young Gentleman (Entitled, Early Religion, or the way for a young man to
remember his Creator; with an impartial Account of the young Gentleman's Life
and Death. Buroughs on Contentment. Destruction of Troy. Poems upon the
Ministers Sons late Splendid Feast that they made at Merchant-Taylors Hall,
Dec. 7. Dr. Manton's twenty Sermons, Preached upon several Occasions. Poems
upon the Death of that great Minister of State, Anthony, Earl of Shaftsbury.
Mr. Richard Baxter's Sai^ts Everlasting Rest, in a thick Quarto. Mr. Flavell's
Husbandry Spiritualized; with many useful Meditations. Brooks his Cabinet of
Jewels. Brooks his Londons Lamentation, being a serious Discourse upon the late
fiery Dispensation; with Advice to them that escaped those consuming Flames.
Culverwels Light of Nature. Firmins Real Christian; or a Treatise of effectual
Calling, wherein the Work of God in drawing the Soul to Christ is opened, with
a few words added concerning SOCINIANISM. Phelps his Needful Counsel; or
Considerations of some part of the Message sent to the Angel of the Church of
Laodicea. Brook his Riches of Christ, being 22 Sermons upon Ephesians. 3.8.
Scanderots Antidote against Quakerism. Fools Apology for Religion. Humphrey of
ELECTION and REDEMPTION; wherein is showed the Indifferency between the
ARMINIAN and CALVINIST. Owen on the 130 th Psalm, wherein the nature of the
forgiveness of Sin is declared, the truth and reality of it asserted, and the
case of a Soul distressed, relieved by a Discovery of Forgiveness with God.
Funeral Sermons in Quarto.
Dr. Annesley's Sermon at Mr. Whitaker's Funeral. Mr. Watson's Sermon at Mr.
Wells's Funeral. Mr. Ryther's Sermon at Mr. Janeway's Funeral. Mr. Hurst's and
Mr. Vincent's Sermons at Mr. Cawton's Funeral. Mr. Johnson's Sermon at Mr.
Charnock's Funeral. Mr. Reeve's Sermon at Mr. Brooke's Funeral. Dr.
Dillingham's Sermon at Mr. Allston's Funeral. Mr. Jenny's Sermon at the Lady
Pagets Funeral. Mr. Slater's Sermon at Mr. Gilson's Funeral. Mr. Bragg's Sermon
at Mr. Venning's Funeral. Dr. Spurslow's Sermon at the Lady Viner's Funeral.
Mr. Nathanael Vincent's Sermon at Mr. George Baker's Funeral. Mr. Smith's
Sermon at Mr. Sorrell's Funeral. Mr. Slater's Sermon at Mr. Tho Vincent's
Funeral. Mr. Baxter's Sermon at Alderman Ashhurst's Funeral. Mr. Baxter's
Sermon at Mr. Corbet's Funeral. Mr. Vincent's Sermon at Mr. Janeway's Funeral.
Large Octavo's.
Dr. Jeremy Tailors Holy Living and Dying, complete. Win^hester-Phrases, a Book
useful for Young Scholars. Mr. Allens Alarm to unconverted Sinners; in a
serious Treatise, showing what Conversion is not, what it is, with marks of the
unconverted, etc. -- His whole Works in one Volume. Mr. Tho-Brooks's Discourses
concerning a Well grounded Assurance. Mr. Janewaies Heaven upon Earth; or the
best Friend in the Worst of Times. The Earl of Rochester's Life and Death.
Written by Dr. Burnet, by his own direction on his Deathbed. Mr. Meads
Sermons, entitled The Good of Early Obed^ence, or the advantage of bearing the
Yoke of Christ betimes. Galtruchius his Poetical History, being a complete
Collection of all the Stories of the Poets. Nich. Culpeppers Pharmacopia
Londinensis, or the London Dispensatory. -- His English Physician enlarged,
with 369 Medicines made of English Herbs. Mr. Vines Treatise of the Institution
and right Administration of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. The Works of
Publius Virgilius Maro, Translated and adorned with Sculptures. Mr. Joshua
Pools English Parnassus, or help to English-Poesie. Vincent on Judgment.
Brooks Remedies. Homers Iliads and Odisses. Dr. Mantons (18) Sermons, Preached
upon the Second Epistle of St. Paul to the Thessalonians. Very necessary in
these Times. Mr. Alsops Answer to Dr. Goodman, entitled, Melius Inquirendum.
All the Works of the Author of the Whole Duty of Man, in large octavo.
Exercitationes Rhetoricae, Auctore Joanne Tesmaro.
Small Octavo's and Twelves.
Directions and Persuasions to a sound Conversion, for prevention of that
deceit and damnation of Souls, and of those Scandals, Heresies, and desperate
Apostasies, that are the Consequents of a counterfeit or superficial change. By
Richard Baxter, Minister of the Gospel. Englands Vanity, or the Voice of God
against the monstrous Sin of Pride in Dress and Apparel, discovering naked
Necks, Breasts and Shoulders, flanting and fantastic Habits, long Periwigs,
Towers, Bulls, Shades, black Patches, Painting, Crisping and Curlings, With an
hundred more Fooleries of both Sexes, to be notoriously unlawful; Written by a
compassionate Conformist, and Illustrated with a very large Copper-Plate. The
Arraignment, Trial and Condemnation of the Knavery and Cheats that are used in
most Trades in the City of London: Illustrated with about 60 Cuts. Mr. Howes
Sermon at the Funeral of that Faithful and Laborious Servant of Christ, Mr.
Richard Fairclough, who deceased July 4. 1682. in the 61 st. year of his Age.
The House of Weeping, or Man's last Progress to his long home, fully represented
in several Funeral Discourses, By John Dunton, M. A. Late Minister of Aston
Clinton near Aylesbury in the County of Bucks. Illustrated with a lively Emblem
of a Funeral Solemnity, and recommended as the best Book extant for Funeral
Occasions. The Blessed Martyrs in Flames, with their dying Expressions, applied
to the present Affairs in England: Illustrated with several Copper-Plat Mr.
Doolittle on the Sufferings of Christ from the Garden to the Grave; being a
Second Part to a former Treatise on the Lords Supper. The Devils Patriarch, or
a Full and Impartial Account of the notorious Life of this present Pope of
Rome, Innocent the 11 th. The Life of Galeatius. Corbets Self-Employment in
secret. Helvicus his Colloquies. Senecaes Tragedies, War with the Devil.
Solomon's Proverbs. Pearse of Death. Force, of Time. Mr. Doelittles First Part
on the Sacrament. Flavells Saint indeed. Assemblies Confession of Faith.
Herberts Poems. Practice of Piety. Farnabyes Martial. Farnabyes Juvenal.
Farnabyes Ovid. Salust. Supplication of Saints. Baxters Call. Duty of Man.
Twenty Fours.
A very useful Book, Entitled, A Necessary Companion for a serious Christian,
directing him aright through the whole Course of his Life. Written for Public
Good: To which is added, The Deathbed Counsel of a late Reverend Divine, to
his Son an Apprentice in the City of London (which Directions are well worth
the perusal of all London-Apprentices and other young persons) with many things
besides of daily Use and Practice. Crumbs of Comfort. Guide to Heaven. Ovids
Works complete. Gees Steps. Lucans Pharsalia. Kemps Imitation of Christ.
Buchanans Poems. Caesar's Commentaries. Clerks Companion. Crown and Glory of a
Christian. Lucius Florus, Peukethmans Accounts. Latin Testament. Kents Manual.
Mortons Prayers.
LIKEWISE,
All sorts of Bibles and Bible-Cases, and all sorts of School-Books, etc. are
there to be had.

