AN ACCOUNT OF THE GROWTH OF KNAVERY, UNDER The Pretended FEARS OF ARBITRARY
GOVERNMENT, AND POPERY. WITH A PARALLEL betwixt the Reformers of 1677, and
those of 1641, in their Methods, and Designs.

In a Letter to a Friend.

LONDON, Printed by H. H. for Henry Brom, at the Gun in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1678.

AN ACCOUNT Of the GROWTH of KNAVERY, UNDER The Pretended FEARS OF ARBITRARY
GOVERNMENT, AND POPERY
SIR,
TO give you my Opinion freely of the two Libels that you sent me, methinks the
Design of them lies too open to do much Mischief; for I never saw so barefaced
an Araignment of the Government, and all the Parts of it: King, Lords, Commons,
Judges, Ministers of State; they are all of them made Conspirators; against the
Sovereign Multitude, forsooth; and when the Libeller has done with the Body of
the Commons, he gives you a Defamatory List of betwixt two and three hundred of
their Members, provoking and abusing all Sober Interests; Insomuch, that he has
left himself nothing to trust to, but the contemplation of a General Tumult,
which is the very Point he drives at in his Appeal to the Rabble.

The Man, I confess, is a great Master of Words; but then his Talent is that
which the Lord St. Albans calls Matter of Wonder without Worthiness; being
rather the Suppleness and Address of a Tumbler, than the Force and Vigor of a
Man of Business. And you cannot but observe too, that his Excursions, many of
them, are unmannerly and Vulgar, and fitter for the Stage of a Merry-Andrew, or
a Iack-Pudding, than for a Paper of State.

You would have me guess at the Author; and you might as well bid me tell you
the right Father of a Child by a common Strumpet: But I think I may call him
Legion, for they are MANY; and there is a Club to his Pen, as well as to his
Pocket. This I dare assure you, that the Author of A Letter from a
Parliament Man to his Friend in the Country, concerning the Proceedings of the
House of Commons, etc. in 75. is very particularly acquainted with the Author
of An Account of the Growth of Popery, and Arbitrary Government, etc. and the
Seasonable Argument, etc. that followed it, in 77.

The Pretense of the former Pamphlet is exhibited in the Title of it: viz. An
Account of the Growth of Popery, and Arbitrary Government in England: And more
particularly from November 1675, to July 1677. Upon these Nineteen Months the
Composer has bestowed precisely Nineteen Sheets of Paper, and laid himself out
most wonderfully in his Politics and Conceits, for the better Grace and Relish
of the Discourse: But the Malignity of it is so rank, that there is scarce a
Page where the Poison has not eaten quite thorough the Vernish, and discovered
the Spring and Malice of the Design. View it narrowly, and you shall find the
Pique to be as well Personal as Seditious, and the Work only of some Mercenary
Pen to serve his principall's Animosity, as well as his Ambition. For a Man may
see with half an Eye, how he aggravates, or extenuates; disparages, or
commends, reflects upon, or passes over, as well Actions, as Men, according to
the various Aspects of Affections or Parties; and without any regard to the
Pulse or Truth of Public Proceedings. By his Vein of improving the Invective
Humor, it looks in some places as if he were Transprosing the First Painter;
only he has chang d his Battery, which is a Property peculiar to his Party,
constantly to hate those that are uppermost.

I was once a thinking to write a Just Reply upon the whole Relation, and to
lay open the falsehood of many Passages in it in matter of Fact; the Partiality
of it in others; how perverted, and misapplied it is throughout; and to show
what Gapps, and Maimes the Compiler of it has left in the Story, purposely to
divert the Reader from minding the Coherence of Actions, and the reasonable
Congruity of Counsels, and Affairs: What uncharitable and illogical Inferences
he has drawn from matters as remote as Tenterden Steeple from being the cause
of Goodwin Sands. This was the Method I had propounded to my self; but upon
second Thoughts I quitted it, for these Reasons. First, It would have been too
tedious; for I must in Honesty have printed the Libel as well as the Reply,
which in Proportion would have amounted to near forty Sheets of Paper.
Secondly, It would have been superfluous; for part of my Business being the
Vindication of Truth from Calumny: I find the thing already done to my Hand, in
the common Sentence is that passed upon it for a lewd and shameless Imposture.
And Thirdly, The Author himself, you see, has upon better consideration reduced
his Pamphlet of 19 Sheets, into another of Three, as a more compendious
Exposition of his Meaning: I speak of that Libel which you sent me, under the
Name of A Seasonable Argument to persuade all the Grand Iuries in England to
petition for a New Parliament; or a List of the Principal Laborers in the
great Design of Popery, and Arbitrary Power, etc. So that my Task is only to
make good in my Discourse the Parallel that I promised you in my Title, and
then to pass some Remarks upon the Scope, and Venom of the Pamphlets
themselves.

Now to the end that you may not take the Libels here in question for
Originals, let me assure you that these Notable Pieces are neither better, nor
worse, than the Old Declarations of 40, and 41 only Turned, and New trimmed;
The Contrivance, the Positions, and the Drift the very same; and upon the whole
Matter, there is so near a resemblance betwixt them, that one Egg is not liker
another. If you would have a full History of the Faction, you may read it at
large in Bancroft's Dangerous Positions, or Heylin's AERIVS REDIVIVVS. But my
Purpose is principally to compare the Project of 77. with that of 40 and 41.
and by tracing the Footsteps of that Rebellion, from the Undeniable Fact of
things passed, to gather some probable conjecture at things to come.

To begin my Parallel with the Alarm of Popery, and Arbitrary Government in
1677, take notice that it was likewise the Pretext and the very Foundation of
the Rebellion in 41. A Malignant and Pernicious Design (says the Remonstrance
of December 15. 1641.) of subverting the fundamental Laws, and Principles of
Government, upon which the Religion, and Justice of this Kingdom is firmly
established. Husband's Collections, p. 4. and in the same Page he tells us of
Such Counselors and Courtiers, as for Private Ends have engaged themselves to
further the Interest of Some Foreign Princes or States, to the Prejudice of His
Majesty and the State at home. Which Counselors, and Courtiers of those days,
are now translated into French Pensioners and Conspirators in 1677. But if you
would see the Reformers in their Colors, read the Declaration, and
Protestation of the Lords and Commons in Parliament (as they style it) to the
Kingdom, and to the Whole World: where, beside the Horrid Invocation of
Almighty God to Countenance the Juggle, the whole stress of the Quarrel is laid
upon the Kings being Popishly Inclined; and the War founded upon that Execrable
Cheat. The Kings Counsels, and Resolutions (Say they) are so engaged to the
Popish Party, for the Suppression and Extirpation of the true Religion, that
all hopes of Peace and Protection are excluded; and that it is fully intended
to give Satisfaction to the Papists, by Alteration of Religion etc. And a
little further they say that the King endeavored to keep off all Iealousies
and Suspicions, by many fearful Oaths and Imprecations of maintaining the
Protestant Religion. But what were all their Stories of Popish Plots,
Intercepted Letters, Dark, Conspiracies, but only Artifices to gull the
Credulous and Silly Vulgar? For the King was so far from being Popishly
affected, that never any Prince purged himself of an Imputation, by Two more
Credible and Dreadful Solemnities: The First, Publicly upon the Sacrament in
Christ-Church Oxon. 1643; and afterward, at his Death upon the Scaffold. Now
see the Harmony betwixt Those Remonstrants, and Our Libeller in his Growth of
Popery. There has now for Diverse Years, says he, a Design been carried on to
change the Lawful Government of England into an Absolute Tyranny, and to
convert the established Protestant Religion into downright Popery. P. 3. He
begins in the Method of the Remonstrants with a General Charge upon Ill
Ministers, and he shall Advance with them too, next step, to an Attaque upon
the King Himself. And not a Pin matter what is said on either side to the
Contrary.

It is true, (says the Growth of Popery p. 155) that by his Majesty and the
Churches Care, under God's special Providence, the Conspiracy has received
frequent Disappointments, etc. And do not the Remonstrants on the other side
say as much for the Late King? That His Majesty indeed had past more Bills to
the Advantage of the Subject, than had been in many Ages, page 16. But how
comes our Libeller to be so kind to the Church all on a sudden? From whose Pen
there never fell any thing yet but poison upon that Subject. Can any thing be
kinder than the Remonstrants were to this Late King (page 2.) where they
promised to Support His Royal Estate with Honor, and Plenty at Home; with
Power, and Reputation Abroad: and by their Loyal Affections, Obedience, and
Service, to lay a sure and lasting Foundation of the Greatness and Prosperity
of His Majesty and his Royal Posterity after him. But what do you think rather
of the pretended Loyalty of these People afterward, even in the state of an
Actual Rebellion? p. 663. We the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament
assembled, do in the presence of Almighty God, for the Satisfaction of our
Consciences, and the Discharge of that great Trust which lies upon us, make
this Protestation and Declaration to this Kingdom and Nation, and to the Whole
World, that no private Passion, or Respect, no evil Intention to his Majesty's
Person, no Design to the prejudice of his Just Honor, and Authority, engaged
us to raise Forces, and take up Arms against the Authors of this War, wherewith
the Kingdom is now enslam'd. And does not our Libeller follow the Remonstrants
in their Hypocrisy too? This Book (says he, p. 156.) though of an extraordinary
Nature, as the Case required, and however it may be calumniated by interressed
Persons, was written with no other Intent, than of mere Fidelity, and Service
to his Majesty; and God forbid that it should have any other Effect than that
the mouth of all Iniquity, and Flatterers may be stopped; and that his Majesty
having discerned the Disease, may with his healing Touch apply the Remedy: For
so far is the Relator himself from any sinister Surmize against his Majesty, or
from suggesting it to others, etc. The Pamphlet, I confess, is, as he calls it,
A Book of an Extraordinary Nature; but why does he say, As the Case required?
Where Is the Importance of it? unless he means, that it was the very Nick of
Time for him to embroyl the Nation: And for the Interessed Persons, who (he
says) may Calumniate it; they are only the King and His Ministers, who are all
of them the subject of his Scoptical and Malevolent Satyr. Of his Intent, we
shall speak hereafter.

This is not the first time that we have heard of Words smoother than Oil,
which yet are very Swords. It is the very Style that brought the Late King to
the Block; and the Savior of the World was betrayed by a Hail Master, and a
Kiss. It is the very Crown of the Parallel betwixt 77, and 41. Now to proceed:
What was the Old Remonstrance, but a Spiteful and Invidious Misrepresentation
of the State of the Kingdom, under the Notion of Declaring Common Grievances? (
For His Majesty's Healing Touch too no doubt) and is not That also the very
Aim, and Profession of these two Libels? What is the Publication of This same
Scandalous List, but the Old Trick over again, of Posting those Members for
Straffordians, that would not consent to the Death of the Earl of Strafford?
And is not their Tampering of the Grand Iuries to Petition for a New
Parliament, the Old Practice revived of drawing and soliciting Petitions
against Grievances of their own framing; and menaging Affairs of State by
Tumults? Would not our Remonstratour of 77, rather than his Life, be at the Old
Sport again, with a Kennel of Brutes at his Heels, in full Cry, with No
Bishops, No Popish Lords, No Evil Counselors, No Rotten Members, No Porters
Lodge; and at last, No King too, which was the very Fact in Consequence upon
this Method.

So soon as the Remonstrants (those Sons of Cham) had laid open their Father's
nakedness, with a Malicious Aggravation of all Errors and Misfortunes, (beside
Falsehoods innumerable) to Irritate the Multitude against their Superiors;
their next Art was to draw that Party to themselves, which they had now
detached from the Government; with an Oh! that we were made Judges in Israel!
Boasting what wonderful things they had then upon the Anvil for the Public
Good; and not forgetting to arrogate all those Acts to themselves, which his
Majesty had passed of his proper Grace and Bounty. Other things (say they,
p.15.) of main Importance for the Good of this Kingdom, are in Proposition; as
the Establishing and Ordering the King's Revenues, that so the Abuse of
Officers, and Superfluity of Expenses may be cut off, and the necessary
Disbursements for his Majesty's Honor, the Defense and Government of the
Kingdom, may be more certainly provided for: the Regulating of Courts of
Justice, and Abridging both the Delays and Charges of Lawsuits, etc. See now
if our Reformer of 77, does not fish with the very same Bait. The House of
Commons (says he, p.63.) took up again such Public Bills as they had on foot
in their former sitting, and others that might either remedy present, or
prevent future Mischief: As the Bill for Habeas Corpus; That against sending
Men prisoners beyond Seas; That against Raising of Money without the Consent of
Parliament; That against Papists sitting in either House, etc. The Libels in
fine of 77, are so exact a Counterpart of the others of 41, that two Tallies do
not strike truer: And undoubtedly such a Correspondence in Method, cannot be
without some Conformity also of Design.

There needs no other Argument to prove the Late Rebellion to have been
originally a Conspiracy against the Government, than the Proportion that
appears betwixt the Means, and the End; and the orderly Connection of Proper
Causes and Regular Effects. For it was a Perfect Train of Artifice, Hypocrisy
and Imposture, from one end of it to the other. The Confederacy was formed in a
Cabal of Scotch and English Presbyterians; as appears not only from their
Correspondent Practices in both Nations; but from his late Majesty's Charge
against the Five Members; and likewise from the Care that was taken upon his
Majesty's Restoration to date the English Act of Indemnity from the beginning
of the Scotch Tumults (Jan. 1. 1637.) which was three Years before the Meeting
of the Long Parliament in November 1640. The two Ministers that stood in the
Gap betwixt the Conspiracy, and the Government, (and who were only cut off, as
appeared by the Sequel, to clear the passage to the King himself) were the Earl
of Strafford, and Archbishop Laud: So that their First Attaque was upon the
Earl, and their next upon the Archbishop, under the Notion of Evil Counselors;
and upon the Common Charge of Popery, and Arbitrary Proceeding, their
Impeachments were carried on by Tumults, and these Brave Men were rather baited
to Death by Beasts, than Sentenced with any Color of Law, or Justice: And as
they lived, so they died, the Resolute Assertors of the English Monarchy and
Religion: The Earl of Strafford in May 41; But the Archbishop was kept
languishing in the Tower, till Ian. 44. And their Crime was not in Truth, their
being Men of Arbitrary Principles Themselves, but for being the Opposers of
those Principles in Others.

As the Remonstrants in 41, for want of Papists, in Practice, and Profession,
directed their Spleen against the Kings Ministers, only as Persons Popishly
affected, (which in time came to be most Injuriously applied to his Majesty,
and his whole Party) Just so does our Libeller in 1677. Were these Conspirators
(says he) but avowed Papists, they were the more Honest, the less Dangerous,
and their Religion were Answerable for the Errors they might commit in Order
to promote it: But these are Men (says he, in the next page.) Obliged by all the
most Sacred Ties of Malice and Ambition, to advance the ruin of the King and
Kingdom; and qualified much better than Others, under the Name of Good
Protestants, to effect it. As who should say; Popery is to be brought in by
some that pass for Good Protestants. (As Rebellion and Tyranny were brought in
by the Remonstrants, under the Prosession of Loyalty and Duty to their
Country.) A very Compendious way of making every Man, that will not be a
Traitor, a Papist. For who can say what any Man is, or what he is not, in his
Heart?

From his Majesty's Yielding in the Business of the Earl of Strafford, the
Faction took their Measures how to deal with him in Other Cases; and never
left, till by gradual Encroachments, and Approaches, they First stripped him of
his Friends; Secondly, of his Royal Authority; Thirdly, of his Revenue; and
Lastly, of his Life. Whereas, had but this Pious and Unfortunate King followed
the Advice of his Royal Father to Prince Henry, he might upon cheaper Terms
have preserved himself, and his Three Kingdoms. Take heed, (says King James) to
such Puritans; very Pests in the Church, and Commonweal, whom no Deserts can
Oblige; neither Oaths, or Promises Bind. Breathing nothing but Sedition, and
Calumnies, and making their own Imaginations (without any warrant of the Word)
the square of their Conscience. I protest before the Great God, (and since I am
here as upon my Testament, it is no place for me to ly in) that ye shall never
find with any Highlands or Border-Thieves, greater Ingratitude, and more Lies,
and vile Perjuries than with these Phanatick Spirits. K. James his Works,
p.305, and 160.

Upon the Ripping up of Public Grievances, it was but matter of Course to
follow their Complaints with Petitions for Redress; and the Good King, on the
other hand, to heap Coals of Fire upon their Heads, denied them nothing: But
the Two First Bills that his Majesty passed, were Fatal to him: That for the
Attainder of the Earl of Strafford, and the other for the Continuance of the
Parliament. They complained of the Star Chamber; High Commission Court;
Ship-Moneys; Forrest-Laws; Stannary-Courts; Tonnage, and Poundage, etc. and had
every Point for the Asking: Nay, and as an instance of his good Faith and
Meaning, his Majesty took some of their Principalls even into his very Council.
But so soon as he had parted with so much, as almost put it into their Power to
Take the Rest, they began then to think of Setting up for themselves (see his
Majesty's Declaration of August 12. 1642.) and nothing but a thorough
Reformation they said would ever do the Work. Now see the Gradation. First, The
People must be Alarmed with the Noise of Tyranny, and Popery; and the Evil
Counselors must be Removed, that are Said, not Proved, to stand that way
inclined. His Majesty must be humbly Petitioned by Both Houses to Employ such
Counselors, Ambassadors, and other Ministers, in managing his Business at
Home, and Abroad, as the Parliament may have Cause to confide in, etc. Nay, It
may often fall out, they say, that the Commons may have just Cause to take
Exceptions at some Men for being Counselors, and yet not charge those Men with
Crimes; for there be grounds of Dissidence, which lie not in Proof; there are
Others which though they may be proved, yet are not legally Criminal; to be a
Known Favourer of Papists, or to have been very Forward in defending or
Countenancing some great Offenders questioned in Parliament, etc. So that at
first Dash all the King's Officers are but Tenants at the Will of the Faction.
The next Step is, To fill the Places of those whom they cast out, with
Ministers, and Officers of their Own Choosing; as well Privy Counselors, as
Judges. As in the 19 Propositions of Ian. 2. 42. wherein they demand, The
Translation of the Power of Choosing Great Officers, and Ministers of State,
from the King to the Two Houses. Secondly, All matters of State in the Interval
of Parliaments to be debated, and concluded by a Council so chosen, and in
Number not above 25, nor under 15; and no Public Act esteemed of any validity,
as proceeding from the Royal Authority, unless it be done by the Advice and
Consent of the Major Part of that Council; attested under their Hands, and
these also sworn to the Sense of Both Houses. Thirdly, The Lords, and Commons
must be entrusted with the Militia. Fourthly, His Majesty may appoint, but the
Two Houses, or the Council (in such manner as aforesaid) must approve of all
Governors of Forts and Castles. Lastly, No Peers hereafter made, must sit, or
vote in Parliament, unless admitted thereunto by the Consent of Both Houses.

By this time the Plot is ripe for a Rebellion; they Levy War, Impose Oaths,
Seize the Revenues of the Church and Crown; Kill, Plunder, and Emprison their
Fellow Subjects; Depose and Murder their Sovereign, under a Form of Public
Justice; by these Means advancing themselves into That Arbitrary Power which
they pretended to Fear; Over-turning the Government, under the Color of a Zeal
to Support it: and instead of setting us Right in our Religious and Civil
Liberties, they left us neither Church, nor Law, nor King, nor Parliament, nor
Properties, nor Freedoms. Behold the Blessed Reformation; and Remember that the
Outcries against Tyranny, Popery, and Evil Counselors, were the Foundation of
it. What was their Covenant, but a Blind to their Designs? A Popular Sacrament
of Religious Disobedience; and only a Mark of Discrimination who were against
the King, and who for him? Nay, in the very Contemplation of their Purpose,
they knew beforehand, That there was no gaining of their Point, but by Rapine,
Sacrilege, Perjury, Treason, and Blood.

After these Notorious Violations of Faith, Honor, Humanity, and Religion; to
the Common destruction of Prince, Government, and People, and All upon the same
Bottom with our Late Libels; what can this Underminer of Parliaments, What can
our Geneva-Faux find to say for himself? Is not Mercury as good Poison in 77,
as it was in 41? Do we not strike Fire the same way Now, that we did Then? And
may not a Spark in the Gun-Room do as much Mischief This Year, as it did
Thirty, or Forty Years ago? Are not the People as much Tinder now, as they were
Formerly? and as apt to take Ill Impressions? What if the same Method should
work the same Confusion over again? or in Truth, what is there else to be
expected? For the same Cause, acting at Liberty, must eternally produce the
same Effect. There Is no Chance-medley, or Misadventure in the Case; but the
Thing is manifestly done with Prepense Malice, and on set Purpose, to embroyl
the State: As upon Examination of the Matter will undeniably appear.

You cannot but take Notice, That the Author of The Growth of Popery, does upon
the Main, principally labor these Two things. First, To insinuate that the
King is in some Cases Accomptable to his People, (of which hereafter.) And
Secondly, To provoke the People, by suggesting that their Souls, and their
Liberties are at stake, to make use of that Power. From the former Proposition
he passes into a Florid and Elaborate Declamation against Popery; and when he
has wrought up the Figure to a height, to make it Terrible and Odious, his next
Business is to tell the People, that This Gobling is coming in among them, and
to possess the Multitude with the Apprehension of a Formed Conspiracy against
our Religion and Government: And this too, under the Countenance of an
Historical Deduction of Affairs; but with the Faith of a Iesuitical Legend;
wherein all the Kings Ministers are in General Terms branded for Conspirators.

His Hand being now in, he is resolved to go thorough-stitch, and nothing
scapes him that falls in his way: He makes the House of Lords (p. 72.) to be
Felon of it self; and (p.82.) Non Compos; Arraigning their Proceedings in
several Cases with Boldness and Contempt. But he makes a great deal bolder yet
with the House of Commons; he divides them into Three Parts. It is too
notorious to be concealed (says he, p. 73.) that near a Third part of the
House, have Beneficial Offices under his Majesty in the Privy Council, the
Army, the Navy, the Law, the Household, the Revenue both in England, and
Ireland, or in Attendance upon his Majesty's Person. Upon this Exception, he
expounds himself, that It Is to be feared, their Gratitude to their Master, with
their own Interest, may tempt them beyond their Obligation to the Public. What
can be more Audacious than this Charge upon King, Lords, and Commons, in the
Face of a Sitting Parliament? He says that It is too Notorious to be concealed
etc. And where is the Crime, or the Shame, I beseech you, for an Officer of the
Kings, to be a Member of the House of Commons? As if he that has an Office, and
he that has none, had not Both of them the same Master; or that a Man might not
as well be a Knave without an Office, as with it. This was the Complaint also
of 41, against Officers, till the Complainants had gotten those Offices
themselves, and then all was quiet. This is only a flyer way of declaring the
King's Servants Enemies to the Kingdom, and Erecting an Opposition betwixt the
Common, and Inseparable Interests of his Majesty, and his Subjects. Beside
that, the same Reason would reach to the Excluding of the King's Servants from
any other Trust in the Government, as well as from That of a Member in the House
of Commons; and his Majesty's Favor should at that rate Incapacitate any Man
for Public Business. If the Libeller had opened his mouth a little wider, he
would have told us in Plain English, that there are three, or four of Oliver's
Old Servants out of Office, and that the King is strangely over-seen to bestow
his Boons upon a Company of Fellows that never had any hand in the bringing of
him to the Crown, by the Murder of his Father, as they did. But yet he is
content upon some Terms, that they may be admitted, provided that they do not
crowd into the House in numbers beyond Modesty, (page.74.) which may seem to be
some amends for the Rascals he made of them the very Page before. Suppose
(says he) that the Question concerning this Prorogation, were by the Custom of
Parliaments to be justified, (which has not been done hitherto) yet who that
desires to maintain the Reputation of an Honest Man, would not have laid hold
upon so plausible an Occasion, to break Company, when it was grown so
scandalous? And then he assigns the matter of Scandal. For it is too notorious
(says he) to be concealed, that near a Third Part of the House have Beneficial
Offices under his Majesty, etc. Here Is a great deal of Business done in one
Period. First, He pronounces this Parliament void, and consequently all their
Proceedings to be Nullities. Secondly; He will not allow any Man to be Honest,
that right or wrong would not improve the Opportunity of Breaking This
Parliament. Thirdly, He makes the House of Commons to be scandalous Company,
and scandalous for having Beneficial Offices under his Majesty. The first time
that ever I heard the King's Bounty was a Scandal to any Man. But to my Point.

And yet (says he, p. 77.) These Gentlemen being full, and already in
Employment, are more good Natured, and less dangerous to the Public, than
those that are Hungry, and out of Office, who may by probable Computation make
another Third Part of this House of Commons. And a while after, They are all of
them, he says, to be bought, and sold. And when he goes on; (p. 78.) There is a
Third Part still remaining, but as contrary in themselves, as Light and
Darkness. These are either the Worst, or the Best of Men; The first are most
prostigate Persons, etc. Concluding (p.79.) That it is less difficult to
conceive how Fire was first brought to Light in the World, than how any thing
Good could ever be produced out of a House of Commons so Constituted. And (p.
149.) he calls them this House, or BARN of Commons; treating the Members
accordingly. They list themselves (says he) into some Court Faction, and it is
as well known among them to what Lord each of them retain, as when formerly
they wore Coats and Badges.

And he has not done with them yet neither; for nothing will do his Jobb, but a
Final Dissolution; Considering (says he, p. 81.) how doubtful a Foot this long
Parliament now stood upon by this long Prorogation, there could not have been a
more Legal, or however, no more Wife, and Honest a thing done, than for Both
the Lords and Commons to have Separated Themselves, etc. I could wish that he
had not appealed from the Legality of the thing, to the Wisdom, and Honesty of
it: But however Legal, or not Legal, the thing is to be done: For he knows very
well that so long as this House of Commons continues in Being, Rebellion can
never turn up Trump again. But it was otherwise ordered, he says, and so he
betakes himself to an Experiment of Tampering all the Grand Iuries in England,
to Petition for a New Parliament, upon the Credit of his Story concerning the
Corruptions of this. Wherein by the Foul Reflections he has past upon many
Persons of Known, and Eminent Example, for Piety, Integrity, and Moderation, he
has utterly disappointed the Malice of his Scandal upon the Rest. It was well
enough said, me thought, by a Worthy Member of the House of Commons; Do not you
see, says he, how they have Libelled me in that damned List of the
Parliament Men? One told him that he was mistaken, for his Name was not in it.
Why, that is the Business, says he, for it is only a Libel upon those that are
left out. Nay, rather than fail, he does as good as Advise a downright
Insurrection, (in these Words, p. 155.) It is now come to the fourth Act (says
he) and the next Scene that opens, may be Rome, or Paris, (by the Plot, it
should be rather Geneva, or Edinburgh) yet Men sit by, like Idle Spectators,
and still give money toward their own Tragedy. And why does he blame them for
Sitting by? And like Idle SPECTATORS? unless he would have them enter into
Tumult, and Action. A very fair Encouragement to make Men bestir themselves,
and without more Ceremony, lay violent Hands upon the Public. Good God! That
ever such a Creature as This should propound to himself by the Dash of a Pen,
to move the Foundations of the English Government.

From the Parliament, he descends to the Judges. Alas! (says he) the Wisdom and
Probity of the Law went off, for the most Part, with Good Sir Matthew Hales,
and Justice is made a mere Property. And then he raves upon The Constant
Irregularities, and Injustice from Term to Term, of those that administer the
Judicature betwixt his Majesty, and his People (p. 154.) This Poisonous Arrow
(meaning the Choice of the Judges) strikes to the very Heart of Government, and
could come from no Quiver, but that of the Conspirators. What French Counsel,
what Standing Forces, what Parliamentary Bribes, what National Oaths, and all
the other Machinations of Wicked Men have not yet been able to effect, may be
more compendiously Acted by Twelve Judges in Scarlet (p. 66.) And is not this
directly 41 again? When no Judges would serve the Turn, but those that betrayed
the People to Slavery, and His Sacred Majesty to the Scaffold? He has another
Fling at the Sheriffs. If any Worthy Person (says he, p.80.) chance to carry
the Election, some Mercenary or Corrupt Sheriff makes a double Return; and so
the Cause is handed to the Committee of Elections, etc. And truly he does not
give either the King, or the Monarchy of England, much better Quarter than he
allows the rest; as you shall see by and by: So that nothing less than the
Thorough Reformation of 41 will do the Work of 77. And the whole Frame of the
Government must be unhinged, to gratify the Caprice of a Pragmatical
Mal-content.

The Passion, and Malice of the Libeller is so evident, that he does half
confess it himself, by an Anticipation of the Charge. The Relator, (says he,
page 155.) foresees that he shall on both hands be blamed for pursuing this
Method. Some on the One side will expect that the very Persons should have been
Named: whereas he only gives Evidence to the Fact, and leaves the Malefactors
to those that have the Power of Enquiry. If he can but acquit himself on the
Other hand for Writing the Libel, as well as on This for not Naming the
Persons, he will do well enough. For first; It is not his Business to Prove,
but to Defame. Secondly, The Naming of Particulars would have restrein'd the
Calumny: whereas his work is to wound All the Kings Ministers that Faithfully
adhere to their Master in the Generality of the Scandal. Thirdly; He judges it
safer, and more expedient to amuse the Multitude with Iealousies that cannot be
Disproved, than point blank to fasten upon Particulars an Accusation that
cannot be Proved. What does he mean by saying that he gives Evidence to the
Fact? It is the first Libel certainly that ever was given in Evidence. But
where is the Relator himself all this while, upon whose bare word, Parliaments
are to be Dissolved; Ministers of State Arraigned; Judges Displaced; and the
whole Government new Modeled? What if he should appear, and be found at last
to have been one of Oliver's Cabal? Would any Man desire a more Competent
Witness for Charles the Second, than the Murderer of Charles the First? But he
has been so used to call the King himself Traitor, that he may be allowed to
call his Friends Conspirators.

On the other hand (says he, page 155.) some will represent this Discourse (as
they do all Books that tend to detect their Conspiracy against his Majesty, and
Kingdom) as if It too were written against the Government. For now of late, as
soon as any Man is gotten into Public Employment by ill Acts; and by worse
continues it; he, if it please the Fates, is thenceforward the Government, and
by being Criminal, pretends to be Sacred. This is only crying Whore first, to
call those People Conspirators, who are likely to censure him for a Libeller:
which with his Learned Leave, is but a Course Figure neither; and runs much
better in the Common Billinsgate of You are a Knave yourself to say that I Am
one. Which in few words is all that is in it. For he does not offer so much as
one Syllable in his Justification, but with another Lash or two at the King's
Ministers, winds up his Period. Now of late, says he, (he means I suppose,
since Oliver went out of Play) as soon as any Man is gotten into Public
Employment by ill Acts, etc. He should do well to consider who Governs, before
he says That Villainy is the ready way to Preferment; He, if it please the
Fates, is thenceforward the Government, and by being Criminal, pretends to be
Sacred. I answer, That in the Case of a Public, and Legal Accusation, the
Minister is not the Government; for the Charge terminates in, and operates no
further than his Person; but in the Affront of a Nameless, and Indefinite
Libel, the King himself is wounded in a General Reflection upon his Ministers;
for it is his Choice, and Commission, not the Officers Misdemeanour, that is
there in Question: Nor does he pretend to be Sacred because he is Criminal; but
the Libeller (who still writes after the Remonstrance) makes every thing
Criminal that is Sacred, and gives the Construction of Rebellion to Loyalty,
and of Loyalty to Rebellion.

But if there be not Mischief in the very Project of this Libel, there is
nothing at all in it; for I cannot frame to my self the least Color, or
Possibility of any other End. He says, It was his Design indeed to give
Information, but not to turn Informer. That is to say, He would set the People
together by the Ears, and no body should know who did it. Now see the End he
propounds. That those (says the Relator) to whom he has only a Public Enmity,
no Private Animosity, might have the Privilege of Statesmen to Repent at the
last hour, and by one single Action to expiate all their former misdemeanors.
Which is even as Civil a way as a body would wish, of Recommending a Public
Minister to his last Prayer. It remains now to speak a word to the Timing of
his Enterprise, which, in a wicked Sense, is in Truth the Glory of it.

I shall not need to speculate upon the Power, and Designs of France, the
deplorable State of Flanders, or the Consequences that must inevitably reflect
upon England in the Loss of the Spanish Neitherlands: the matter being agreed
upon at all hands, that an Union of Affections, Counsels, and Interests, was
never more necessary to this Nation than at this Instant it is; and that Delay
is Death to us, This being given for granted, it is likewise as certain, that
nothing under Heaven, but the Credit of this Sitting Parliament, and the
Blessing of a Fair Understanding betwixt his Majesty, and his Two Houses can
preserve this Kingdom (Morally speaking) from Irreparable Ruin. And yet this
is the Critical Juncture that the Libeller has made choice of, for the blasting
both of the Government, and the Administration of it; for the violent
Dissolution even of this most necessary Parliament; for the sowing of
Jealousies, and alienating the Peoples Hearts from their Duty to their
Sovereign. Let the World now judge betwixt the Libeller, and the pretended
Conspiratours; who are more probably the Pensioners of France; those that are
only Calumniated in the Dark, and without any Proof, or the least Color of it,
or the Calumniatours themselves, (I mean, the Libeller and his Adherents) who
are doing all that is possible toward the Facilitating of the Work of France,
and the Putting of England out of Condition to defend it self. What is it, I
beseech you, that can now support us in this Exigent, but the Wisdom, and
Reputation of a Parliament? which they are at this very Instant, laboring to
desame and dissolve: Distracting and Dividing the Nation, at a Time when our
best Union is little enough to preserve us; and obstructing those Parliamentary
supplies, without which we must unavoidably perish: For it is to this Session,
that the Libeller directs the Mock of Still giving Money toward their own
Tragedy. But sure we are not so mad yet, as to take the Subverters of our
Church and State, for the Advocates of our Religion and Freedom. I would know
in the next place, What any Man can say to excuse his Growth of Popery, from
being a Daring, and a Spightful Libel against the King, and his Government. And
I shall begin with the Liberties he takes with his Majesty, sometime in direct
Terms, and otherwhile under the Blind, of the Conspiratours.

Speaking of the Shutting up of the Exchequer (page 31.) The Crown (says he)
made Prize of the Subject, and broke all Faith, and Contract at Home, in order
to the breaking of them Abroad with more Advantage. The Copy has in This Point
outdone the Original; for the Remonstrants were in Arms, before they presumed
to word it at this Audacious height. Take it in the Insolent Representation of
the Fact; the Malicious Construction and Presumption of the Intent; and to Both
these, add the Sordid Manner of Reflecting upon an Extraordinary thing done
upon an Extraordinary Occasion, and wherein the Subject has since received so
Ample, and Generous Satisfaction; the Clamor is so foul, as if an Egyptian
Plague were broken in upon us, and the Frogs of Geneva crept into the King's
Chambers. And it is much at the same Rate that he treats the King about his
Declaration of Indulgence, (page 33.) Hereby (says he,) all the Penal Laws
against Papists, for which former Parliaments had given so many Supplies, and
against Non-conformists, for which this Parliament had paid more largely, were
at one Instant suspended, in order to defraud the Nation of all that Religion,
which they had so dearly purchased, etc. Observe here how ungratefully he
charges the Design of this Declaration to be The defrauding the Nation of their
Religion; which, on the contrary, was a Manifest Concession, only to gratify
the restless Importunities of his own Gang. And see what Sport he makes, but
five or six Lines further, with the very Reason of that Law which he takes here
so hainously to be suspended. It appears (says he) at the first Sight, that Men
ought to enjoy the same Propriety, and Protection in their Consciences, which
they have in their Lives, Liberties, and Estates: But that to take away there
in Penalty for the other, is merely a more Legal, and Gentile way of Padding
upon the Road of Heaven; and that it is only for want of Money, and for want of
Religion, that Men take these desperate Courses. Now, by his Favor, there is a
great Disparity betwixt a Pretense to Propriety, and Protection in Consciences,
and a Pretense to them, in Lives, Liberties, and Estates; for the Latter are
liable to Violence, and may be taken away, but the Other cannot. And now he
talks of Padding upon this Road; the Remonstrants (as I remember) were very
good at it, that drove away from their Churches, 85 Ministers, of 97, within
the Walls of London. We'll agree in the Matter with him, That want of Money, and
want of Religion will put Men upon Despesperate Courses; for my Charity
persuades me, he would never have written these Libels else. He is a little
positive, me thinks, in Averring that a Great Lord lost his Place for defending
the Protestant Religion, (page 44.) But he has forgotten the Statute of his own
Citing ( page 15.) that makes it Incapacity, for saying That the King is a
Papist, or an Introducer of Popery, and that it was the King himself that
removed his Lordship. And what do you think of his Irony, (page.43.) where he
says, that The Parliament, by the Conspiratours good Leave, was admitted to sit
again at the day appointed. He tells us of another Affair too, page 51; which
being transmitted to his Majesty, was easily changed into a Court Intrigue; And
(page 63.) That the Conspiratours might so represent things to his Majesty, as
to incense him against the Parliament, and distrusting all Parliamentary.
Advice, to take Counsel from Themselves, from France, and from Necessity.

In this Disloyal and Irreverent License; he drops you a word or two now and
then, before he is aware, against the King himself; and other whiles,
Discharges his Malice to the Government, upon the Heads of Public Ministers.
The Subject Matter of his Complaint is a Tendency of Counsels, and Actions
toward Tyranny, and Popery. But the King (says he, page 4.) can do no wrong;
and so goes on, nor can he receive wrong. What is this, but a Justification of
all the Violences that were acted upon the late King; even to the very Murder
of him; under that Mortal, and Treasonous Distinction betwixt his AVTHORITY,
and his PERSON? And an Allowance, that the same Course may be taken with his
Royal Successors? The King can receive no wrong; (he says) What does he mean
by this? Is not his Majesty's Breath in his Nostrils? Is he not Flesh and
Blood? Is not his Body liable to Wounds, Distempers, Emprisonment, and Death?
He Will tell you, Yes; but This is not the KING, but the MAN, the PERSON: But the
KING, all this while, that is to say, the Authority, is Sacred, and
Invulnerable.

Now for Peace, and Brevity sake, let us suppose that this Charge of a Popish,
and Arbitrary Design, does neither Intend nor Reflect any Imputation upon his
Majesty; (his Religion, and his Tenderness of Nature being Unquestionable) It
is yet a worse Libel Another way. Worse (I say) both as to the Drift, and to
the Scandal of it, by how much Contempt is more dangerous to a Prince, than
Hatred: For he employes his Utmost Skill to represent his Majesty only Passive
in all his Administrations, and so to lessen the Indubitable Fame of his Royal
Prudence, and Courage among his People.

You see, Sir, the Freedom he takes with the King, and his Ministers; the next
Point will be to enquire how he stands affected to the Government it self. The
Subjects (says he, page.3.) retain their Proportion in the Legislature. In which
saying, he makes them Partners of the Sovereignty, and turns the Monarchy of
England into a Tripartite and Coordinate Government; which is as well
Destructive of Parliaments, on the One hand, as of Royalty, on the Other. Upon
the Admittance of this Coordination, any Two of the Three may destroy the
Third: the Two Houses may destroy the King, and the King, with Either of the
Houses, may destroy the Other. Which, if it be so, what Prince that is Imperial
in the Intervalls, would ever hazard the Dethroning of himself by a Session?
The Making of Law is a Peculiar, and Incommunicable Privilege of the Supreme
Power, and the Office of the Two Houses in this Case is only Consultive, or
Preparatory; but the Character of Power rests in the Final Sanction, which is
in the King: And Effectually, the Passing of a Bill, is but the granting of a
Request: The Two Houses make the Bill, it is true, but the King makes the Law;
and it is the Stamp, not the Matter, that makes it Current: Nor does the Subject
any otherwise make Laws, than the Petitioner makes Orders of Council.

It is a Suspicious, and Ill-looking Passage that he has, Page 14. As to Matter
of Government, says he; If to murder the King, be (as certainly it is) a Fact
so horrid, (he does not say how horrid) how much more Heinous is it to
Assassinate the Kingdom? Here is First involved in this Clause, the Deposing
Position of 41, that the King is Singulis major, Vniversis minor: For it is
clear that the Comparison was only made to draw on the Preference, and to
possess the People that they have a greater Prize at Stake in the hazard of
their Religion, than in the Tie of their Civil Obedience. (the very Translation
still of 41.) And for their further Encouragement, he tells them (page 4.) that
We have the same Right (modestly understood) in our Propriety, that the Prince
has in his Regality: which carries with it an Innuendo, that the King may as
well Forfeit his Crown, as the Subject his Freehold. It cannot be imagined
that all these Leading and Desperate Hints should fall from a Man of Brains and
Sense by Chance; and you see the whole Tract takes the same Biass.

No King of England (says he, page 58.) had ever so great a Treasure of his
Peoples Affections, except what those Ill men have (as they have done all the
rest) consumed; whom, but out of an Excess of Love to his Person, the Kingdom
would never (for it never did formerly) so long have suffered. Here Is still the
Crocodile of 41; nothing but Love and Reverence to his late Majesty too, till
his Head was off. But let us Reason the Matter in a word. These Ill men have no
Names, it seems; so that any Man that is near the King, is by this Libeller set
up for a Mark to the Outrage of the People. And then he says, The Kingdom would
never have suffered them. Who are they, I pray, that he calls the Kingdom, but
the Rabble still of 41; the Execrable Instruments of That Rebellion, and the
Hopes of Another? But if the Kingdom would not suffer it, what would he have
them do to help themselves? The Law is open, in Case of any Legal Impeachment,
and it is too Early Days yet for a Tumult.

In his Descant upon the, Test he is wonderfully free of his Figures. Never
(says he, page 59.) was so much sense contained in so few words; no Conveyancer
could ever in more Compendious, or Binding Terms have drawn a Dissettlement of
the whole Birthright of England. This Test has made a great Noise, and it will
be worth the while to examine what is said against it. The Form of it is as
follows.

I. A. B. do declare that it is not lawful upon any Pretense whatsoever to take
up Arms against the King; and that I do abhor that Traiterous Position of
taking Arms by his Authority, against his Person, or against those that are
Commissioned by him in Pursuance of such Commission. And I do swear that I will
not at any time Endeavor the Alteration of the Government, either in Church or
State. So help me God.

He says, page 57, That it was thrown out of the House in the Plague-year at
Oxford, for fear of a general Infection of the Vitals of this Kingdom; whereas
in truth, it was brought into the House as an Antidote against that Poison
which had seized the Vitals of this Kingdom already; and amounts to no more
than the Vnswearing of That on the Behalf of theGovernment, which had been
formerly sworn for the Destruction of it. The Author of A Letter from a Person
of Quality, etc. calls it, p. 1. A STATE-MASTER-PIECE, and designed to these
Ends. First, To make a Distinct Party, from the rest of the Nation, of the High
Episcopal Man, and the Old Cavalier. Now I took it rather to be a Design of
Uniting All Parties, under one Common Bond of Duty, and Obedience to the
Government: And where That could not be obtained, to distinguish who were for
the Government, and who against it; for the Late King was murdered upon this
very Distinction betwixt his Authority and his Person, Nor is there any
Government upon the Face of the Earth, without some Obligation upon the
Subject, Equivalent to This Test.

Next, says he, they design to have the Government of the Church sworn to as
Unalterable, and so Tacitly owned to be of Divine Right. This, is under
favor, is a Fallacy. The Test does not concern it self whether the Government
be Changeable, or not, but only provides that the State may be served with
Magistrates and Officers, that stand well. Affected to the Establishment. Those
that do so, will never scruple the Oath; and for those that do not, it is the
very Intent of it to discriminate, and to exclude them: And to encounter the
Covenant,by Virtue of which they dissolved the Late Government, with an Oath
never to endeavor any further Alteration in This. And certainly, a Man may
better swear the Maintaining of a Government According to the Law, than the
Alteration of it Against Law.

Thirdly, says the Author of the Letter, In Requital to the Crown, they declare
the Government Absolute, and Arbitrary, and allow Monarchy, as well as
Episcopacy, to be Jure Divino, and not to be bounded, or limited by Humane Laws.

How This Test does either Declare, or Pretend the Government to be Absolute,
and Arbitrary, I cannot imagine: But on the Contrary, every Man is tied by it
from Endeavoring to make it so, if it be not so already, in Swearing that he
will not at any time endeavor the Alteration of it. And then in his
Explication of the meaning of Church, and State in the Test, by Monarchy, and
Episcopacy in his Reflection upon it, he has done us a greater Kindness than he
was aware of; for he has wholly Disappointed the Spite, and the Intent of his
next Clause. And (as he goes on) to secure all this, they resolve to take away
the Power, and Opportunity of Parliaments, to alter any thing in Church or
State, only leave them as an Instrument to raise Money, and to pass such Laws,
as the Court, and Church shall have a mind to: The Attempt of any other, how
Necessary soever, must be no less a Crime than Perjury.

See now whether or no this be fair dealing. It is, by his own Confession, the
Form of Monarchy, and the Order of Episcopacy, the Government it self, and not
the Administration of it, that is here in Question. He would have it believed,
That by this Test, Parliaments are barred upon Pain of Perjury from Attempting
any Alteration IN Church or State: whereas they are left at Liberty to debate
what Alterations they please in the Parts of the Government provided they do
not strike at the Root of the Government it self. And the Deliberation and
Result of the whole Matter, is no more than This. Many of the People (and All
the Principles) are yet Living, that destroyed the King, and the Bishops in the
last Rebellion; Let us have a Care of the same Hands again, and trust none of
them in the Government but under an Oath, not to endeavor the Alteration of
it. That is to say, of the Monarchy into a Republique, or of Episcopacy into
Presbytery; as they did before. And this was the Clear Scope of the Test.

The Author of the Growth of Popery, discoursing upon this Subject; There is
nothing (says he, p. 57.) more Portentous, and of worse Omen, than when such an
Oath hangs over a Nation like a New Comet, foreboding the Alteration of
Religion or Government.

A word first to the Oath, which, for want of an Epithete to express the
hainousness of it, the Libeller so Emphatically calls SVCH an Oath. It is an
Oath founded upon the same Consideration with the Oath of Allegiance, and
directed to the same End; and every jot as Necessary under This King, as That
was under his Grandfather. The Iesuited Papist's had invited the Spaniard to
Invade England: The Iesuited Protestants in the late Rebellion, did, in like
manner apply themselves to the French. The Former laid on Plot for the Blowing
up of the Parliament: The Other executed the Plot of Destroying Parliaments,
Changing the Government, and murdering the King. The People were misled in the
One Case, upon the Iesuitical Principle, that a Prince being Excommunicate by
the Pope, the Subject is discharged of his Duty to him, and they were seduced
in the Other, by a Persuasion that the Sacred Character of a King rests in the
Authority, and is separable from the Person; which Authority they lodged in the
Two Houses, and so did their Business. This Practice of the Jesuits occasioned
the Oath of Allegiance in the Statute 3o Iacobi, entitled An Act for the
Discovering, and Repressing of Popish Recusants. In which Oath, you have this
Clause. And I do further swear that I do from my Heart detest and abjure, as
Impious and Heretical, this damnable Doctrine, and Position, That Princes which
be Excommunicated, or Deprived by the Pope, may be Deposed, or Murdered by
their Subjects, or any other whatsoever. Here was an Act for the Discovering
and Repressing of Popish Recusants, with an Oath, under a Penalty, and a
Declaration against, and an Abhorrence of that Impious Position, whereupon the
Treasons of those Times were founded: And why not a Provision as well against
those People that with premeditated Malice, as well as Ambition, over-turn'd
the Late Government; and against That Principle, of Dividing his Majesty's
Authority from his Person, which was the Countenance and Support of the late
Rebellion? Take it in short, and the Test is but a Supplement to the Oath of
Allegiance. The Scottish Faction Imposed upon the People that they might be
true to the King, though they Levied Arms against his Person: and the end of
this Oath is only to expound That Position to be Treasonous, and to Secure the
Government for the Future against Men of such Principles: According to Equity
and Conscience, and to the Common Practice, and according to the Prudence of
all well Ordered States.

Is this the Oath now that he calls SVCH an Oath? The Oath, than which there is
nothing more Portentous, and of worse Omen to a Nation? He has forgotten the
Fore-boding, and Portentous Omens of Forty One, and the Dire Events of those
Presages. What do you think of a deliberate Design, to spoil the Crown, the
Church, and the Subject: And all this in the Name of God, for the Honor of the
King, and the Good of the People? And then the Entitling of Providence to all
the Advantages that the Faction got by the Ruin of Three Kingdoms? Here Is the
unrepented Guilt of Sacrilege, Treason, and Blood, to the Highest Degree, and
so Transcendent an Ingratitude, that some of the very Men that were Pardoned
for One Rebellion, are now the Advocates for Another. If these Practices should
be suffered, there would be no need to consult the Stars for a Prognostic of
Change of Government.

The Oaths (says he, page 58.) in our Late King's time taught the Phanaticks,
because they could not swear, yet to Covenant. His Memory fails him, I
perceive, for the Covenant was a Foot in Scotland before any Oaths complained
of here; by the Token that the Assembly at Glasgow, in 1638, came to this
Resolution upon the Point. It is lawful for Subjects to Covenant and Combine,
without the King, and enter into a Bond of mutual Defense against him. Take
notice next that the Oath complained of, was the Oath ex Officio, which Oath
was Abolished, before any Covenanting in England: And he is so much out again,
in saying that the Phanaticks Covenanted, etc. because they could not swear,
that in Truth they Covenanted because they cared not what they swore. Witness
their Covenants, Negative Oaths, and Oath of Abjuration, in Opposition to their
Oaths of Allegiance, and Canonical Obedience: There was no Compounding, no
Living in their Quarters, without Swearing. There was an Oath, given at a
Communion at Fife, obliging People not to take the King's Covenant; And it was
one Condition upon the Treaty at the Isle of Wight, that his Majesty himself
should give Assurance by Solemn Oath under his Hand, and Seal, for settling
Religion according to the Covenant: So that they made no Conscience (you see)
either of Swearing, or Forswearing; either of taking Oaths Themselves, or of
Forcing them upon Others for the Advancement of their Design.

He takes Exception (page 59.) to the Two Declaratory Points of the Test.
First, That it is not lawful upon any Pretense whatsoever, to take up Arms
against the King. And he reasons the Matter in these Words: It were difficult
to instance a Law, either in This, or Other Country, but that a Private Man, if
any King in Christendom Assault him, may, having Retreated to the Wall, stand
upon his Guard. That is to say, A Private Man may kill his Prince in his own
Defense. For he puts This Case in Opposition to the Declaration; Only
translating the Taking up of Arms against the King, into a Man's Standing upon
his Guard. All that is Honest in it is This, That he refuses to declare That to
be Unlawful, which he holds to be Lawful.

His Second Scruple is The Abhorrence of that Traitorous Position of taking
Arms by his Authority, against his Person; or against those that are
Commissioned by him, in pursuance of such Commission. Here (says he) is neither
Tenor, or Rule of any such Commission specified, nor the Qualification of
those which shall be Armed with such Commissions, expressed, or Limited.

The Author of this Frivolous Shift, knows very well, that the Rules, and
Measures of Commissions vary according to the Circumstances of Time, Place,
Fact, Person; that the Qualification of the Commissioner does not at all
operate upon the Authority of the Commission: and that if the Bill were drawn
out to the length of the Book of Martyrs, there would not yet be room enough to
obviate all Cavills, and Objections. But in the next Page, he speaks his Mind a
little plainer.

As to the Commission, (says he) if it be to take away a Man's Estate, or his
Life, by Force, yet it is the King's Commission: Or if the Person Commissionate
be under never so many Disabilities by Acts of Parliament; yet his taking this
Oath, removes all those Incapacities, or his Commission makes it not disputable.

This Seditious Hint, (for I cannot call it an Argument) lies open so many
ways, that I am only at a Loss where to begin with it. First, Let the
Commission, and Commissioner be what they will, no Man is to be a Judge in his
own Cause; but the Law must be the Judge both of the Legality of the One, and
the Capacity of the Other. Secondly, If upon this Ground an Injured Person may
take Arms, in One Case; so may a Criminal, upon the bare Pretense of it in any
Other: For it is but saying that the Commission is Unwarrantable, or that the
Officer is a Rascal, and there is his Justification. Thirdly, Suppose a Double
Abuse in Manner, as is here suggested; That Abuse does not yet void the
Authority, to which the Law on the One side requires Obedience, or at least
Submission; and there is no Law, on the Other side, that allows Resistance.
Fourthly, The End and Prospect of all Laws is Public Convenience, and there
was never any Law invented, so Profitable to a Community, but it was in some
Respect or other, to the Detriment of some Particulars: So that the very
Admittance of his Suppositions, does not at all affect the Reason of the Test,
if the Benefit be General on the One hand, and the Mischief only Particular on
the Other. How many Men are sworn out of their Lives, and Fortunes by False
Witnesses? Shall we therefore quarrel the Method of Proceeding Secundum
Allegata, and Probata? A Man is Arrested upon a Fobb'd Action, for a sum of
Money, knowing First, that he ows not a Penny; Secondly, that the Consequence of
it will be his Ruin; Thirdly, that the Action is merely Malicious; And
Fourthly, (to make it strong enough) that the Officer that serves the Writ is
Consederate with his Adversary, and that they have Both complotted his
Destruction: All this will not yet Authorize a Resistance; but if an Officer
that has the King's Writ, or any other Lawful Warrant, though Erroneous, shall
be slain in the Execution of it, This is MVRTHER. A word now as to the Occasion
of it.

The People of 41, when they had forced his Majesty from his Palace, by
Affronts and Armed Tumults, Published this Doctrine to the Nation, That though
his Person was gone, his Authority resided in the Two Houses: under which
Color they imposed Ordinances upon the People, for Laws, and by Degrees
proceeded to an Exercise of all the Acts of Sovereignty; making War against the
Person of the King, and those that were Commissioned by him, under the Pretense
aforesaid: as Rebellious, Traitors, and Conspirators. Now to prevent the same
Mischief again, from the same Principles, it was thought fit to propose this
Declaration of Abhorrence. The Objections against it are, That the King may
grant a Commission to take away a Man's Life, or Estate, and Employ any Man at
a venture to execute it: which is First, The Supposal of an Unjust, and
Tyrannical Commission: Secondly, A Case so Rare, that it would be a hard matter
to produce a President for it, without a Reference to a Trial at Law: And
Thirdly, What would be the Fruit of such a Resistance, but the Turning of an
Oppression on the One side, into a Rebellion on the other, and the Forfeiting
of that Life, and Estate To the Law, which was otherwise invaded Contrary to
the Law? For it is a Thousand to one that the Power that Issued the Commission
will find Assistants to Execute it. So that the Resistance pleaded for in this
Case, is First, of a very remote Supposition. Secondly, of dangerous
Consequence to the Resistent: And, Thirdly, of no Avail to him at all.

If we may not Resist (says the Faction) under these Circumstances our Lives,
Liberties, and Estates are at the King's Mercy; for that which maybe. One Man's
Case, may be Any Man's And so because of This Possibility of Wrong to
Particulars, we judge it Reasonable, that every Particular Man should be
Allowed to Defend himself. See now the Inconvenience, which, upon the Allowance
of this Liberty in Favor of Particulars, will redound to the Public.

An Honest Man is charged with Treason in the King's Name, and by his Majesty's
Order to be taken into Custody, and by an Officer too, under what Disabilities
you please. Here Is the whole Case. An Innocent Person; Life, Liberty, and
Estate at stake, and an Vnqualify'd Commissioner. If One Man may Resist,
because he is Innocent, Another upon the same Pretense may Resist too, although
he be Guilty. For no Man under a Charge, is either Guilty, or Innocent in the
Eye of the Law, till he be Legally, either Convicted, or Acquitted. So that the
Innocent, and the Guilty, are to be tried indifferently by the same Law, and so
are the Pretended Errors either in the Commission, or Commissioner. Take
matters once out of the Channel of Trial by our Peers, There Is an end of Magna
Charta; and the Government it self is become Passive, and Precatious. Will you
have the true Reason now, why this Abhorrence goes so much against the hair
with some People? The Position is to be Cherished, and kept in (...) till the
time comes for us.

No Man can be so blind, as not to discern by the correspondent Motions of the
Consistorians in Scotland, and the Scottish English, that they Act already by
Concert; and it is as plain by this Bold and Adventurous way of Libels all on
the soddain, that they depend upon France for a Second: Which is no more than
was done in the Late Rebellion, by the same Faction, as appeared by a Letter of
the Lord Lowdens to the French King, for his Protection and Assistance, for
which he was committed to the Tower; and it was also confirmed by the Fourth
Article against the Five Members, Accusing them to have Traitorously invited
and encouraged a Foreign Power to invade his Majesty's Kingdom of England.
Husband's Collections, p. 35. These are the French Pensioners, and the
Betrayers of our Religion and Freedom, under Oaths, and Covenants to Preserve
them. Were not our Divines Pillaged, Sequestered, Imprisoned, either for praying
for his Majesty, or for Refusing to Abjure him? How many Reverend Divines were
poisoned in Peter-House? I could give you the History of their Spiriting away
several Persons of Honor for Slaves; their Sale of three, or four Score
Gentlemen to the Barbados. Their Sequestrations, Decimations, Exclusion from
all Offices, Plunders, Banishments, Consinements, Prohibition of Correspondence
with the King, upon Pain of Death: The Juggles of the Irish Adventures; Money,
and Plate upon the Propositions; Confiscated Estates; Twentieth Parts, Weekly
Assessments, and a Hundred other Pecuniary, and Arbitrary Stratagems, till they
finished the Ruin of the Nation, in the Dissolution of the Government, and in
the Blood of their Sovereign. It is not less certain that This is in Sum the
Design of their Second Reformation, than that it was the Effect of their
Former: and they are Fools that take Men of these Practices to be of any
Religion. To understand these People aright, a Man must read them, like the
Original Tongues, Backward. They are never so deadly, and dangerous Enemies to
the Government, as when they prosess the dearest Affection to it; and I do not
know but that the Author of the Growth of Popery may be the greatest Friend in
the World to the Church of Rome, when he Professes himself the Bitterest
Adversary. I pray, bestow a Second Thought upon his Declamation against Popery
(with which I shall Conclude) and tell me next time I see you, whether he has
not taken more Pains to Show his Skill, than Care to Deliver his Opinion.

Adieu.

Growth of Popery, page 5.
POpery is such a thing as cannot, but for want of a word to express it, be
called a Religion: nor is it to be mentioned with that Civility which is
otherwise Decent to be used, in speaking of the differences of Humane Opinion
about Divine Matters. Were it either Open Judaisme, or Plain Turkery, or Honest
Paganism, there is yet a certain Bona Fides in the most Extravagant Belief;
and the Sincerity of an Erroneous Profession may render it more Pardonable: But
This is a Compound of all the Three, an Extract of whatsoever is most
Ridiculous, and Impious in them, incorporated with more Peculiar Absurdities of
its Own, in which those were Deficient; and all this Deliberately contrived,
Knowingly carried on, by the bold Imposture of Priests, under the Name of
Christianity. The Wisdom of this Fifth Religion, this Last, and Insolentest
Attempt upon the Credulity of Mankind, seems to me (though not Ignorant otherwise
of the Times, Degrees, and Methods of its Progress,) principally to have
consisted in their owning the Scriptures to be the Word of God, and the Rule of
Faith, and Manners; but in Prohibiting, at the same time, their Common Use, or
the Reading of them in Public Churches, but in a Latin Translation, to the
Vulgar: there being no better, or more Rational way to Frustrate the very
Design of the Great Institutour of Christianity, who first planted it, by the
Extraordinary Gift of Tongues, than to forbid the Use even of the Ordinary
Languages. For having thus a Book which is Universally avowed to be of Divine
Authority, but sequestring it only into such hands as were entrusted in the
Cheat, they had the Opportunity to Vitiate, Suppress, or Enterpret to their own
Profit these Records, by which the Poor People hold their Salvation. And this
Necessary Point being once gained, there was thence forward nothing so
Monstrous to Reason, so Abhorring from Morality, or so Contrary to Scripture,
which they might not in Prudence Adventure on. The Idolatry (for Alas it is
neither better, nor worse) of Adoring, and Praying to Saints, and Angels; of
Worshipping Pictures, Images, and Relics, Incredible Miracles, and pable
Fables to promote That Veneration. The whole Liturgy, and Worship of the
Blessed Virgin; The Saying of Patter Nosters, and Creeds, to the honor of
Saints; and of Ave Maryes too, not to her Honor, but of others. The Public
Service which they can spare to God among so many Competitours in an Unknown
Tongue, and Entangled with such Vestments, Consecrations, Exorcisms,
Whisperings Sprinklings, Censings, and Fantastical Rites, Gesticulations, and
Removals, so Unbeseeming a Christian Office, that it represents rather the
Pranks, and Ceremonies of Iuglers, and Conjurers: The Refusal of the Cup to the
Laity; The Necessity of the Priests Intention to make any of their Sacraments
Effectual; Debarring their Clergy from Marriage; Interdicting of Meats;
Auricular Confession, and Absolution, as with them practiced: Penances,
Pilgrimages, Purgatory, and Prayer for the Dead. But above all their other
Devices, their Transubstantial Solecisme, whereby that glorified Body, which at
the same time they allow to be in Heaven, is sold again, and Crucified daily
upon all the Altars of their Communion. For God indeed may now and then do a
Miracle, but a Romish Priest can, it seems, work in one moment a thousand
Impossibilies. Thus by a new, and Anti-Scriptural Belief, compiled of Terrors
to the Fancy, Contradictions to sense, and Impositions on the Understanding,
their Laity have turned Tenants for their Souls, and in Consequence Tributary
for their Estates to a more than Omnipotent Priesthood.

I must indeed do them that right to avow, that out of an Equitable
Consideration, and Recompense of so Faithful a Slavery, they have discharged
the People from all other Services, and Dependence; Enfranchised them from all
Duty to God, or Man; insomuch that their Severer, and more Learned Divines,
their Governers of Conscience, have so well instructed them in all the Arts of
Circumventing their Neighbor, and of Colluding with Heaven, that, were the
Scholars as apt as their Teachers, there would have been long since an end of
all either True Piety, or Common Honesty; and nothing left among them but
Authorized Hypocrisy, and Licentiousness; had not the Natural Worth of the
Better sort, and the good Simplicity of the Meaner, in great measure preserved
them. For nothing indeed but an Extraordinary Temper, and Ingenuity of Spirit,
and That too assisted by a Diviner Influence, could possibly restrein those
within any the Terms, or Laws, or Humanity, who at the same time own the
Doctrine of their Casuists, or the Authority of the Pope, as it is by him
claimed, and exercised. He by his Indulgences delivers Souls out of the Pains
of the other World; so that who would refuse to be Vicious Here, upon so good
Security? He, by his Dispensations, Annulls Contracts betwixt man and man;
Dissolves Oaths between Princes, or betwixt Them, and their People; and gives
Allowance in Cases which God, and Nature Prohibit. He, as Clerk of the
Spiritual Market, has set a Rate upon all Crimes: the more Flagitious they
are, and Abominable, the better Commodities, and men pay only an higher Price,
as for greater Rarities. So that it seems as if the Command of God had been
invented merely to Erect an Office for the Pope. The worse Christians men are,
the better Customers; and This Rome does by the same Policy people its Church,
as the Pagan Rome did its City, by opening a Sanctuary to all Malefactors. And
why not, if his Power be indeed of such Virtue, and Extent, as is by him
challenged? That he is the Ruler over Angels, Purgatory, and Hell; That His
Tribunal, and Gods, are all One: That all that God, he can do, Clave non
Errante; and what He does, is as God, and not as Man: That he is the Universal
Head of the Church; the Sole Interpreter of Scripture, and Judge of
Controversy: That he is above General Councils: That his Power is Absolute,
and his Decrees Infallible: That he can change the very Nature of things;
making what is Just to be Unjust, and what is Vice to be Virtue: That all Laws
are in the Cabinet of his Breast: That he can Dispense with the New Testaments,
to the great Injury of the Devils: That he is Monarch of this World; and that
he can dispose of Kingdoms, and Empires as he pleases. Which things being
granted, that style of Optimum, Maximum, and Supremum Numen in Terris, or that
of Dominus Deus noster Papa, was no such extraordinary stroke of Courtship, as
we reckoned: but it was rather a great Clownishness in him that treated so
mighty a Prince under the simple Title of Vice-Deus. The Exercise of his
Dominion is in all Points suitable to this his Pretense. He Antiquates the
Precepts of Christ, as things only of Good Advice, not Commanded: but makes it
a Mortal Sin, even to Doubt of any Part of his own Religion; and demands, under
pain of Damnation, the Subjection of all Christians to his Papal Authority: the
denying of two things so Reasonable as Blind Obedience to This Power, and an
Implicit Faith to his Doctrine, being the most Unpardonable Crime, under his
Dispensation. He has indeed of late been somewhat more Retentive than formerly
as to his Faculty of Disposing of Kingdoms, the thing not having succeeded well
with him in some Instances; but he lays the same Claim still; Continues the
same Inclination; and, though velvet-Headed, has the more Itch to be Pushing.
And however in order to any Occasion he keeps himself in Breath Always, by
Cursing one Prince or another upon every Maunday Thursday. Nor is there any,
whether Prince, or Nation, that dissents from his Usurpations, but are marked
out, under the Notion of Heretics, to Ruin, and Destruction, whenever he
shall give the Signal. That word of Heresy misapplied, has served him, for so
many Ages, to Justify all the Executions, Assassinations, Wars, Massacres, and
Devastations, whereby his Faith has been Propagated; of which our times also
have not wanted Examples, and more is to be Expected for the Future. For by how
much any thing is more False, and Unreasonable, it requires more Cruelty to
Establish it: and to Introduce that which is Absurd, there must be somewhat
done that is Barbarous. But nothing of any Sect in Religion can be more
recommended by all these Qualities, than the Papacy. The Pagans are Excusable
by their Natural Darkness, without Revelation. The Jews are Tolerable who see
not beyond the Old Testament. Mahomet was so Honest as to own what he would be
at, that he himself was the greatest Prophet, and that His was a Religion of
the Sword. So that these were all, as I may say, of another Allegiance; and if
Enemies, yet not Traitors: But the Pope Avowing Christianity by Prosession,
does, in Doctrine, and Practice, Renounce it; and presuming to be the only
Catholic, does persecute those to the Death who dare Worship the Author of
their Religion, instead of his pretended Vicegerent.

And yet there is nothing more Evident, notwithstanding his most Notorious
Forgeries, and Falsification of all Writers, than that the Pope was for Several
hundreds of years an Honest Bishop as other men are, and never so much as
dreamed upon the seven Hills of that Universal Power, which he is now come to:
Nay, he was the First that Opposed any such Pretention. But some of them at
last, growing wiser, by foysting a Counterfeit Donation of Constantine, and
wresting another Donation from our Savior, advanced themselves in a Weak,
Ignorant, and Credulous Age, to that Temporal, and Spiritual Principality,
which they are now seized of. Tu es Petrus, and super hanc Petram aedificabo
Ecclesiam meam. Never was a Bishopric and a Verse of Scripture so Improved by
good Menagement. Thus, by Exercising, in Quality of Christ's Vicar, the Public
Function under an Invisible Prince, the Pope, like the Maires of the Palace,
has set his Master aside, and delivered the Government over to a New Line of
Papal Succession. But who can, unless wilfully, be Ignorant what wretched
Doings, what Bribery, what Ambibition there are; How long the Church is without
an Head upon every Vacancy, till, among the Crew of Bandying Cardinals, the
Holy Ghost has declared for a Pope of the French, or Spanish Faction. It is a
Succession like that of the Egyptian Ox (the Living Idol of that Country) who
Dying, or being made away by the Priests, there was a Solemn, and General
Mourning for want of a Deity; until in their Conclave they had found out
another Beast with the very same Marks as the Former; whom then they themselves
Adored, and with great Iubilee brought forth to the People to Worship. Nor was
That Election a grosser Reproach to Humane Reason, than This is also to
Christianity. Surely it is the greatest Miracle of the Romish Church that it
should still Continue, and that in all this time the Gates of Heaven should not
prevail against it.

It is almost Inconceivable how Princes can yet suffer a Power so pernicious,
and Doctrine so Destructive to all Government: That so great a Part of the Land
should be Alienated, and Condemned to (as they call it) Pious Uses. That such
Millions of their People, as the Clergy, should, by remaining Vnmarry'd, either
Frustrate Humane Nature, if they live Chastely; or, if otherwise, Adulterate it:
That they should be priviledg'd from all Labor, all Public Service, and
Exempt from the Power of all Secular Jurisdiction: That they, being all bound,
by strict Oaths, and Vows of Obedience, to the Pope, should evacuate the Fealty
due to the Sovereign: Nay, that not only the Clergy, but their whole People, if
of the Romish Persuasion; should be obliged to Rebel, at any time, upon the
Popes Pleasure.

FINIS.

