Memorable Accidents, AND Unheard of Transactions, CONTAINING An Account of
several Strange Events: As the Deposing of Tyrants, Lamentable Shipwrecks,
Dismal Misfortunes, Stratagems of War, Perilous Adventures, Happy Deliverances,
with other remarkable Occurrences, and Select Historical Events, which have
happened in several Countries in this last Age. Translated from the French,
Printed at Brussels in 1691. and Dedicated to His present Majesty William King
of England, etc.

Published in English by R. B.

LONDON, Printed for Nath. Crouch, at the Bell in the Poultrey near Cheapside.
1693.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY TO HIS Brittanick Majesty.
SIR,
THough Your Majesty be wholly busied in the greatest Affairs of State, in the
most Illustrious Assembly that was ever held, I presume nevertheless, to
believe that You will not be offended that I take the liberty to interrupt* You
for a moment, and offer unto Your Majesty this small Treatise, the reading of
which can only surprise those that are ignorant of Your Majesty's Life; for
since this contains the most celebrated Events of History, extracted out of
the Writings of the most famous Authors, all the World will own that the
Miracles which make Your Character, surpass the greatest and most astonishing
Exploits here related. It is for this cause, Sir, that my silence will better
express the profound Veneration that I have for the Grandeur of Your Majesty's
Actions, than all the Elogies wherewith the ardor of my Zeal were able to
Inspire me: Nevertheless, Sir, if I may be persuaded to judge of Your
Intentions by Your Proceedings, all that Glory which shines so bright in the
Eyes of Men, is not that which do most affect You; by so many Great and
Heroic Actions You aspire to something yet greater. You know, Sir, that Kings
who are truly so, esteem not Sovereign Power but as a thing ever ready to
furnish them with opportunities of meriting the Love of Nations, by being
Authors of the Public Happiness.

Your Majesty has this Great Truth Engraven upon Your Heart, and if in the
beginning of Your Reign we have admired in Your Majesty the Hero and the
Conqueror, we hope ever to Adore the Restorer of the Common Liberty of Europe.
I am, with a profound respect,

SIR, Your Majesty's Most Humble and Most Obedient Servant, T. LEONARD.

TO THE READER.
HOW great soever the Diversion and Pleasure be that we find in Reading
Romances, nevertheless true History has all the advantage over it that Truth
has over a Fable. If we search Books for Examples, whereby to regulate our
Behavior, those that we know to be false, can they ever gain any Empire over
our Minds? For Example, Can the Heroical Actions that we read in Cleopatra,
have so great Authority over us, as to engage us to imitate them? And shall we
set imaginary Persons for a Model before us? It is not so with History, and the
reading thereof produces more certain Effects: When a Man whose Inclinations
are Warlike, observes there that a private Soldier has by his Valor raised
himself to the greatest Dignities, he conceives as high an Idea of the Success
as a great Merit is capable of; he persuades himself that he may Atchieve the
like Adventures, since they have been before really performed, and this thought
authorized by the Truth of History, is able to determine him to the boldest
Exploits. This is it, Reader, which has obliged me to publish this Collection,
the Events of which I have selected out of the General and Particular
Histories, Memoirs, Voyages, and other most famous Works that have lately
appeared. I hope it will meet with a favorable acceptance, because it
contains Adventures as rare as any that are to be found in Romances; here you
are entertained with Shipwracks, overthrown Fortunes, Revolutions of Kingdoms,
and the surprising Effects of the Commotions of all the Passions. In fine, this
Collection evidenceth that Virtue is of both Sexes, of all Ages, Countries and
Conditions.

Memorable Accidents, AND Unheard of Transactions, In several Nations in this
last Age.
The Shipwreck.
THE King of Portugal had sent to the King of Siam a very splendid Embassy: To
answer the civility of this European Prince, the King deputed three great
Mandarins in Quality of his Ambassadors, with six other younger Mandarins, and
a considerable Retinue, to go to the Court of Portugal. We embarked for Goa in
the year 1684. where we abode eleven months, and departed thence for Europe in
a Portugal Vessel, Jan. 27. 1686. but on the 27th. of April we unhappily run
aground on the Cape of the Needles, and that in this manner: That very day
several Mariners were ordered to ascend the Masts, to observe the Land that we
descried a little toward the right hand; by their relations the Captain and
Pilot judged that it was the Cape of Good Hope, so without observing themselves
whether the Mariners spoke truth or not, they continued their course till two
or three hours, after Sunset, when they believed they had already past the
Land we had before discovered, then changing the course, they bore a little
more toward the North. I know not what presage of the misfortune that
threatened us had so filled me with restless thoughts, that I could not so much
as close my eyes to sleep; I then came out of my Cabin, and amused my self
with beholding the Ship that seemed to fly on the top of the waters. Casting my
eyes a little further, I perceived on a sudden a very dark shadow near our
right side; this sight struck me with terror, and immediately I said to the
Pilot, Is it not the Land that I see? As he approached to look, we heard them
crying out in the Forecastle, Land, Land before us, we are lost.

The Pilot run to the Helm to change the course, but we were so near the shore,
that the Ship in veering struck thrice with her Poop upon a Rock; which made
her stand still without any manner of motion. They run to the Poop, but not one
drop of water had yet entered. Immediately they made all efforts possible to
save themselves from Imminent ruin, by felling the Masts by the board, and
unloading the Vessel, but they had not time, for the Wind drove the Ship upon
the shore. These Mountains of Water breaking into foamy Billows upon the points
of the Rocks that jutted out into the Sea, lifted up the Vessel to the Clouds,
letting her fall on a sudden upon the Cliffs with such violence that she could
not hold out long. You might have heard her already cracking on all sides, some
parts of her falling off from the rest; and at last, this great Mass of Wood
being for a while thus dreadfully shaken and tossed from Wave to Rock, was
dashed to pieces with a horrible noise. The Poop bore the first shock, and
accordingly was the first part that bulg'd: To no purpose they cut down the
Masts, and threw overboard the Guns, and all that lay in their way; all their
precautions were in vain, for the ship struck upon the Rocks so often, and so
rudely, that at last she opened under the Gunners Room. The Water then entering
in abundance, began to gain the first Deck, and to fill the Gunners Room, it
advanced even to the great Cabin, and in a moment after it reached to their
Girdles that were upon the second Deck, and still ascending insensibly, our
ship at last sunk quite down into the Sea, till the Keel reached the bottom,
the body of the Vessel remaining for some time immovable. It would be a hard
task to represent the astonishment, terror and consternation, that seized upon
every Heart in the Ship: Nothing now was heard but cries, sighs and groans:
Some prostrate upon the Deck implored the assistance of Heaven: Others were
throwing into the Sea Barrels, empty Casks, Sail-yards, and pieces of Boards,
to aid them in making their escape. After the violence of the crying was over,
they that remained in the Vessel began to think of saving themselves. They made
several Rafts of the Boards and Masts of the Ship, because they that first
threw themselves into the Sea, not having been cautious enough were drowned,
being either swallowed up, or dashed to pieces by the violence of the Waves,
which cast them upon the ledge of Rocks that run along the shore. I was no less
astonished than the rest, but seeing that they assured me that there was
probability of escaping, I placed my self upon some boards tied together, and
by swimming gained the shore, to which already some Portugals had escaped.

When they saw that no more were to be expected than those already arrived,
they reckoned up what were saved, and were found to be near two hundred
persons; so that only seven or eight were drowned, by endeavoring to save
themselves too soon. The second day after our Shipwreck, we set forth all
together. The Captain and Pilots told us, that we were not far from the Cape of
Good Hope, where the Hollanders have a very numerous Colony, and that in a day
or two at most we might be with them. This assurance made most part of our
company leave behind them the Victuals which they had saved out of the Vessel,
that so being free of all encumbrances they might perform their Journey with
greater ease. We marched all that day without stopping but twice to repose a
little; about Four a Clock after Noon, we found a great Marsh which comforted
us not a little, the Portugals were of opinion that we should pass no further,
but rest by this Ditch the approaching Night. The next day we departed very
early, the Portugals got the start of us, because we were obliged to stay for
the first Ambassador, who being very weak and languishing, could not hold pace
with the rest: But seeing there was a necessity not to lose them, we divided
our selves into three companies, whereof the first kept always the Portugals in
sight, and the two others observing the same distance, were informed by Signals
from the first Band, when the Portugals stopped, or altered their course. In all
this days Journey we found but one Well, the Water whereof was so brackish,
that none of us could drink of it. At the same time we took notice by the
Signal, that the Portugals had stopped, we doubted not but that they had found
good Water, and this hope made us redouble our pace; nevertheless, we could not
bring the Ambassador thither till after Sunset. Our Men told us that the
Portugals would not stay for us, saying, That it would avail us nothing to dye
all together, with hunger, thirst and misery. The first Ambassador hearing
this, told us, He felt himself so feeble and fatigued, that it was impossible
for him to follow the Portugals, and therefore desired us that were in health
to make haste to fetch them up; only he ordered us, that seeing the Hollanders
Habitation was not far off, to send from thence a Horse and Victuals, to bring
him to the Cape if he were alive. This separation was very sad, but it was
necessary. There was a young man of about fifteen years, a Mandarins Son, that
would not be persuaded to leave the Ambassador, of whom he was very much
beloved, and whom he also loved in a particular manner; his Gratitude and Love
made him resolve to live and dye with the Ambassador; and one old Servant abode
also with his Master. The second Ambassador, another Man darin and I, bidding
him adieu, set forward, and made so great haste, that in the Evening we joined
the Portugals. Continuing our March for some days, we found a little Island
covered almost over with Muscles, and watered with a Spring of running Water,
we went thither with a purpose to stay one Night, but found our selves so well
accommodated, that we remained there all the next day, and the following Night;
after which we set forwards in our Journey.

Before our departure we perceived certain dry Trees of a considerable bigness,
pierced through both ends after the manner of Trumpets; the thirst that had
hitherto so cruelly tormented us, made us bethink our selves of an Invention
that was of great use to us in the rest of our Journey. Every one provided
himself of one of these long Tubes, and having closed up the lower end, filled
it with Water for a days Provision. We had lost some Siamois in our March, so
that there remained but ten of us in all, reckoning the two Ambassadors. This
loss, and the action of the Portugals who left us, put us in a great
consternation, yet we took courage, and resolved to follow them. About Noon we
arrived at the bank of a River about sixty foot broad, and seven or eight deep,
we attempted to wade over, but the current was so rapid, that we were in danger
of being carried away by it, and forced to return to the bank, therefore
concluding that the Portugals had not past over this River, but continued their
march along the banks thereof; following the same course we arrived at the foot
of a Hill, which was hollow below as if Nature had designed to provide a
Lodging for Travelers. There was room enough here to contain us all, and in it
we abode all Night, which was very cold. My feet and legs had been for some
days so swelled, that I could neither wear Stockings nor Shoes. We coasted all
the next day the banks of the River, in hopes to overtake the Portugals, whom
we judged were not very far before us. From time to time we saw marks of them;
one of our men found a Carbine, with a Box full of Powder, left without doubt
by some Portugal, unable to carry them further. This fell into our hands very
seasonably to kindle a fire withal, and seeing my swelling rendered my Shoes
useless to me, I cutted them in pieces, and being boiled we eat them very
greedily. At last, having endured all the miseries of hunger, thirst, cold and
weariness, the One and Thirtieth day after our Shipwreck, we arrived at the
Fort which the Hollanders have in the Road of the Cape of Good Hope. The
Commander received the Ambassador and Mandarins of his Train, with great
Testimonies of respect and sorrow: We conjured him to send with all diligence
some men with Provisions to the first Ambassador, whom we had left not far from
the shore on which we were Shipwrack'd, because we hoped he was yet alive. He
told us, that during the season of Rains, it was impossible to send any, but
that as soon as it was over he would not fail to take all imaginable care to
seek out the Ambassador, and furnish him with necessary accommodations for his
return.

The Portugals arrived at the Cape before us, having undergone more
difficulties than we did. A Portugal Father, of the Order of St. Augustine, made
such a relation of their sufferings, as drew tears from our eyes, but chiefly
when he informed us of the sad accident that befell the Captain of the Ship. He
was a Person of Quality, very rich and courteous; he had been long Captain of a
Vessel, and had done great service to the King his Master upon several
occasions, in which he had given proofs of his Valor and Fidelity. I cannot
call to mind the Name of his House, but I have often heard that few Families
were more illustrious in Portugal. This Gentleman had carried along with him to
the Indies his only Son, of the Age of ten or twelve years, either because he
was desirous that he should begin to learn his Trade betimes, and accustom
himself in his Youth to the Fatigues of the Sea, or that he would not entrust
to any other the Education of a Child whom he loved better than himself. And
indeed, this Lad had all the qualities necessary to make himself beloved, he
was handsome, well educated, and of an excellent Judgment for his Age; but his
respect, obedience and tenderness to his Parent, was admirable, and merited a
particular Elogy. His Father when he left the Ship, took care himself to convey
him safe ashore. During the Journey, he caused his Slaves to carry him, but all
his Negro's being either dead by the way, or so feeble that they could hardly
draw their legs after them, three days after the Portugals left us, the poor
Boy became so weak and swollen, that lying down upon a Rock to rest a little, he
was not able to rise again, his Legs being so stiff that he could not so much
as move them. This sight stabbed the Father to the Heart, he assayed several
times to set him upright; they helped him to walk a little, thereby to cure him
of his numness, but his Legs were no longer able to perform their office, they
could do no more but drag him along, and they whom the Father had entreated to
assist him in this charitable office being scarce able to sustain themselves,
told the Captain freely that they could not carry his Son any longer, unless
they resolved to perish with him. The poor man giving himself up to despair,
determined to carry his Son himself, and endeavored to take him upon his
Shoulders, but his strength failed him, and he could not advance one step
further; he fell down together with his Son, who was more afflicted with his
Fathers grief than his own pain: He often conjured him to leave him to dye
alone, and told him that though they should carry him further, he could not
hold out that Night, and that his sorrow and the tears that he shed, were
infinitely more grievous to him than all the torments that he endured. These
words far from persuading the Captain to retire, melted his heart yet more, and
made him resolve to dye with his Son: The Child surpised at his Fathers
resolution, and seeing he could not persuade him to alter it, turned to the
other Portugals, earnestly beseeching them with expressions that rent his
Fathers Heart, to take him away, since his Fathers presence was only a cruel
addition to his misery and pains, and that the sight of him would but hasten
his Death. A Franciscan began to represent to the Captain that he could not in
conscience execute his resolution, that he was obliged to preserve his own
life, and that if he died in that condition he would be eternally Damned.
Afterward the Portugals took him up by force, and carried him some paces out
of the sight of his Son, whom they had removed a little out of the way. This
separation was so sharp and afflicting to the Captain, that he was never able
to recover his strength, and his grief was so violent that he died two days
after his arrival at the Cape.

We abode near four months at the Cape of Good Hope, expecting the coming of
some Dutch Vessel to carry us to Batavia. Most part of the Portugals embarked
themselves in Ships bound for Amsterdam, from whence they might have passage to
their Native Country; the rest went with us aboard a Vessel belonging to the
Dutch Company, which carried us all to Batavia, where every one took what
course he pleased. As for us, after six months abode in Batavia, we set sail
for Siam, where we arrived in the month of September 1687. The King our Master
received us with extraordinary goodness and tenderness, he ordered new Garments
and Money to be presented to every one, giving us hopes that he would not be
unmindful of us, when any occasion of advancing our Fortunes should offer it
self. Father Tachard's Voyage to the Kingdom of Siam.

Treasons and Revolutions.
CHristian the Second King of Denmark having Levied numerous Troops to recover
the Crown of Sweden which John his Father had lost, he gained a Battle in which
Steno King of Sweden was slain; he made all the advantage he possibly could of
this Victory, and the Death of his Competitor. The Governors of the Provinces
came to meet him, and to swear Allegiance to him; Steno's best Friends did not
think themselves obliged to preserve their Fidelity after his Death, and
Stockholm, the Capital City of the Kingdom, only waited to be Invested before
it surrendered. The Conqueror to cajole the Swedes, affected a Behavior which
they ought to have suspected, because it was not natural to him. He shed no
other blood but what was lost in the Fight, he granted all the favors that
were begged of him without distinction or reserve, none were excluded out of the
Indemnity that he caused to be published, the Offices and Governments were
continued to those that were in possession of them, and the only design that
the new King seemed to have, was the re-uniting of the two Factions that
divided Sweden. After all, he made choice of the first of November 1520. for
the solemnity of his Coronation, to which all the persons of Quality were
invited. The Ceremony was performed in Stockholm, and the Swedish Nobility,
notwithstanding their natural aversion to the Danes, flocked thither in so
great numbers, that there was not one Man of Note absent.

The first day was spent in the pomp of the Coronation, the second in running
at the Ring, the third in Tilting, the fourth in Tournaments within Rails, the
fifth in Dancing, the sixth and seventh all sorts of persons were treated at
the Kings expense, and the eighth, the last day of the Feast, was destined by
His Majesty for a magnificent Entertainment to the Senators and Officers of the
Crown of Sweden. The Guests were no sooner assembled to the number of ninety
four persons, but the King marched before them to the principal Church, where
Thanksgiving was to be made for his Coronation. Mass was solemnly Sung, and at
the Communion the King swore upon the Eucharist to preserve inviolably the
Privileges of the Swedish Nation, to forget what was past, to make no
Innovations, and to Govern according to the Laws of the Country. Afterward he
called the Senators and Grandees of the Kingdom to make a Covenant with them:
The King, and after him all the Assembly, laid their hands upon the Pix and
Chalice, swearing to each other by all that is most Sacred in Religion, to
maintain a sincere and reciprocal Friendship, and devoted themselves to Hell
torments if their Words did not proceed from the sincerity of their Heart,
professing that they took the Sacrament of the Reconciliation of Men to God,
for a pledge of their particular agreement. Each of them according to his
Quality received, viz. The King first, and after him the five principal
Officers of State, which are the Drossart, Constable, Chancellor, Admiral and
Treasurer; and so proceeding in order to the youngest Senator who received
last. The Company returned to the Palace Royal in the same order that they
marched to the Temple, and were seated at a Table, where all their thoughts
were employed in contriving new Divertisements, when the King arose under
pretext of some natural Necessity, and past into a Closer. A moment after was
heard a terrible Din of Danish Soldiers, who seizing upon all the Avenues of
the Palace, entered violently into the Court, and tumultuously mounting the
Stairs, came running furiously with their Swords drawn into the Gallery
appointed for the Feast. All the Guests were made prisoners in the Kings Name,
and in the same instant the Gates of the Town were shut by his order. The
Danish Soldiers began then to pillage the Houses of the Burgesses, liberty of
plundring being granted to animate them to the executions of the next day.

In the Night a great Scaffold was erected before the Palace-Gate, and to begin
the Tragedy, the Bishops of Squargne and Stremguem were brought thither, and
there lost their Heads. The rest of the Bishops, the Grandees of the Kingdom,
and the Senators, were put to death in the same manner, all but the Grand Prior
of the Order of St. John of Jerusalem, who for having served his Prince with
greater Fidelity than the rest, was Nailed to a St. Andrews Cross; they ripped up
his Belly, plucked out his Heart, and struck him therewith on the face. After
they had ranked the headless Trunks in order, and put the Heads on Pikes
planted round about, the signal was given to the Soldiers to cut in pieces the
multitude of common people, that were flocked together to see the Execution.
The astonished crowd found themselves as it were caught in a Net, for the Danes
were Masters of the Streets that abutted upon that place, and the Kings Guards
attacked them in the Front, while at the same time those who favored the
Execution fell upon the Rear; they made a horrible and prodigious Butchery. The
slaughtered Bodies lay three days in the same places where they fell, and had
lain longer but that they feared the Air would be infected with Pestilential
Vapors. This consideration alone obliged them to burn these mangled Carcasses
in heaps, and the Body of King Steno was used with no greater respect. The
Guards posted round Stockholm, hindered the Neighboring Provinces from having
speedy Intelligence of what had past, and the King of Denmark took the
opportunity in the mean while to get into his hands five or six Bishops, by
whom he feared to be Excommunicated upon the News of the Death of their
Colleagues. He wheedled them in under pretense of advising with them concerning
an affair of great importance, yet no sooner were they entered into the place
appointed for the conference, but by the Kings order it was set on fire, and
they consumed to Ashes.

What ever precaution the Danes could use to conceal this Action, it was
quickly divulged through all Sweden; and the four Estates of the Kingdom,
consisting of the Clergy, Nobility, Citizens and Peasants, rose up together in
a manner that has no parallel in History, whether Ancient or Modern. The two
opposite Factions that had for so many Ages laid waste their Native Country,
joined together in an Union so perfect, that to this day there has appeared no
mark of their former Divisions. All run to Arms, and so vigorously pursued the
King and his Danes, that they were constrained to abandon Sweden, into which
Christian could never return again; and some years after Gustavus the First was
chosen King.

Christian continued his Barbarities and Crimes in the Kingdom of Denmark. A
Dutch Widow named Sigebrit, was forced by poverty to leave her Native Country,
and withdrawing into Norway with her Daughter Colombin* they found means to
subsist there by selling Victuals to Seamen that Landed in that place. Sigebrit
had a Wit proper for the Intrigues of the Court, though she was Born, Educated,
and had still lived among the Dregs of the people, and Colombin was a complete
Courtezan. With this last a Knight called Valquendof fell in Love, who by a
youthful Imprudence informed his Master of his good Fortune, thinking that the
Prince would be as soon cured of his passion as himself; but he was deceived in
his conjecture, and the enjoyment of Colombin inspired the King with a Love
that he had never before found for any Lady: Not but that he had Married Isabel
of Austria, Sister of the Emperor Charles the Fifth, one of the fairest and
most virtuous Princesses of her Age; but as he had Married her only for
Interest of State, so he lived with her as one Ignorant of the Treasure he
possessed. Thus Colombin finding the place void, and her Lovers Heart not yet
preingag'd, and employing to the best advantage the Charms of her Beauty, and
the Secrets of the Art that she professed, made Christian love her with an
extreme passion. After Colombins death, which was suspected to have been
hastened by Poison, the King fell in love with the Mother of her whom he had
lost. It was the cunning Sigebrit, who not content to succeed in her Daughters
room, extended her power much beyond what her Predecessor had assumed: All
State Affairs past through her hands, and her resolutions were preferred to
those of the Senate. During these Amors, which caused murmurings in all the
Orders of the Kingdom, the King erected a Scale of Trade at Copenhagen. This
contributed not a little to his Ruin, for Lubeck, and the other Hanse Towns,
finding themselves thereby prejudiced, declared War against him, and Rig'd out
a Fleet that braved him, making several descents in Denmark, and plundring
Elsenore. The King at the time of this last action was at Cronenburg, where he
raised near ten thousand men for the relief of this Capital City, that was then
threatened by his Enemies.

He formed a kind of Camp at the Burgh of Lolberg adjacent to the Town, and
often visited it to encourage his Soldiers. One day going thither accompanied
only with Sigibrit and a Waiting-Maid of hers, he met on the way a Troop of
Strangers, who not knowing him took him for a Burgher of Copenhagen, and
Sigebrit for his Mistress. They immediately resolved to take her from him, and
executed it with the less difficulty, because the King seeing himself so
unequally matched, fled toward his Army. The Waiting-Maid did not think her
self obliged to show greater courage than he, and Sigebrit found her self alone
exposed to the fury of these Brutal persons, who cast her into the Lake of
Scholars not far from thence. The King arriving at the Camp, tarried no longer
than was requisite to cause a Troop of his Cavalry to mount their Horses: He
returned to the place where he had left the object of his Love, and finding no
body there, he doubted what had befaln the Unfortunate Sigebrit; he approached
to the Lake, and as a Lovers eyes are more piercing than those of an
indifferent person, he perceived afar off Sigebrit in the Water, making her
last efforts to disingage her self from the mire which would have quickly
suffocated her, but for the timely assistance she had from the King, who
considered not a moment whether he should hazard his life to save hers. But
Sigebrit was only rescued from the Lake to fall into a more threatening danger,
and the King by too diligent a care for the alone person, for whom he was
sensible of tenderness, almost became the unwilling cause of her ruin. He
seized upon the first Coach he could find to convey Sigebrit back to
Copenhagen; this happened to be an open Coach, which no sooner approached to
one of the Gates of the City, but Sigebrit was known by the Guard there.
Unluckily for her it fell out that this Company consisted of the Burghers of
Rochild, who were particularly incensed against her for invading the principal
Privilege of their City, which exempted them from all Impositions ordinary and
extraordinary, because the Kings of Denmark had chosen it for their Burial
place.

The sad and lamentable condition in which this Object of pity appeared, and
the report of the misfortune that preceded it, was so far from moving
compassion in them, or softening their unrelenting hearts, that they redoubled
their hatred against her, mixed with Indignation, Anger, Fury and Sorrow, for
her escape, which transported them to such a height, that without deliberating
or consulting together, as if they had been inspired with the same motion, they
discharged all at once their Harquebusses against her. But in vain do men
attempt to punish the crime for which God has reserved to himself to execute
Vengeance in another life: Sigebrit received no hurt from so many persons that
levelled their pieces directly against her, and all the Bullets that were shot
at her, did either pass through her Hair, or graze upon her Clothes.

But the time was come that the King should feel the punishment of the many
crimes that he had committed, which had occasioned the Revolt of some
Provinces; and he deprived himself of two Crowns upon a false alarm, a vain
report that had no certain Author. He was informed that a Rumor was spread
through the Town, that his Rebellious Subjects had drawn in the Hanse Towns to
their party, and that having fortified themselves with so powerful a
Confederacy, they had obtained a promise of these jealous Republics to send a
Fleet before Copenhagen, to cut off the Kings retreat* This was so improbable a
piece of News, that the Kings Enemies had not the confidence to vouch it;
nevertheless it produced an effect, which in vain they might have expected from
their Arms and Plots. The King was so strongly persuaded of the truth of it,
that he determined to prevent, by a shameful flight, the danger that he
believed would otherwise inevitably overwhelm him.

One of the principal points of the Danish policy, consisted in keeping always
in the Port of Copenhagen twenty Vessels ready to Sail on all occasions; and
Reason, and the History of the Country, prove manifestly that this precaution
is very beneficial to the State, and has several times saved it from imminent
Ruin. The King ordered all the valuable things that were in his Palace to be
carried on Board these Ships, and caused the rest of the Furniture thereof,
which was not worth the while to be Transported, but might nevertheless
accommodate a Successor to be destroyed. Afterward he went to Cronenburg, and
caused the Treasury to be Ransacked in his presence, of the Money there
reserved for extraordinary Exigencies* With these he Loaded the Admiral Ship of
his Fleet, forgetting, or at least seeming not to remember that he had Sworn
upon the Day of his Coronation, That if ever he touched the Public Treasure
without the advice of the Nobility, he thereby consented to his own Deposition.

But he was not only guilty of one kind of Sacrilege, for he spoiled the
Churches of Copenhagen of their fairest Ornaments* Nevertheless, neglecting his
Honor, Oath, Interest and Conscience, he did not neglect his Infamous
Concubine, though he was but too well convinced that she was the fatal source
of all his Miseries, and it ought not to be esteemed the least of his
Misfortunes that he preserved an entire favor for that Monster of Unchastity,
for whom he had lost in all other things. He knew there was not one of his
Servants who did not mortally hate her, and that if he entrusted them with the
care of her person, they would throw her into the Sea, and pretend that she had
dyed either through fear or by chance. If he carried her along with him, he
could not always keep his eye upon her, and every moment that he lost sight of
her, he run a hazard never to see her again. Should he send her on Board before
him, she would be exposed to the undiscreet fury of the first Mariner, who
beholding this fatal cause of the Civil War, might be so brutal as to lose all
the respect that he owed to the Royal Majesty of her Lover. The King to avoid
so many inconveniences, represented to her, in a few words, the imminent danger
that threatened her, and led her into a Chamber where were several Baskets and
Trunks for carriage of Provisions: He persuaded her to enter into one which he
judged most capable to contain her; he shut her up in it so speedily, that
those who came to carry it away perceived nothing of the Stratagem. The King
himself embarked first, and ordered that Trunk to be brought into his Chamber.
In the mean time there happened a pleasant passage, for without a lie he
satisfied the curiosity of those, who seeing him expect the coming of that
Chest with so much Impatience, asked the reason of his so eager earnestness:
There is something in it, said he, that I have reserved for my own private use.

This Unhappy Prince set Sail with his Wife and Children on the 20th. of April
1523. He had no sooner lost sight of the shore of Copenhagen, but he was
assaulted by a Tempest equally extraordinary in its fury, and unparalled in
its duration: It never slackened for the space of three Weeks, and the Fleet
was quite broken and dispersed. The King was Shipwrack'd on the Coast of
Norway, and of all his Ships he had only one Skiff left, in which he was
constrained to put to Sea again, with the Queen, the Prince, and the two
Princesses of Denmark. Hunger does not respect Crowned Head, and only spared
the King of Denmark. because he was reserved to longer, and incomparably more
grievous punishments than all the industry of studied malice could have
inflicted upon him. It is not known what became of his miserable Harlot, the
silence of the Danish Historians cannot be excused in this respect, and seeing
they speak no more of her in the History of the remaining part of Christian the
Seconds Life, than if she had never been in the World, we may probably presume
that she died in the Admirals Ship before the King saved himself in the
Shallop: A savourable Gale of Wind, when he expected it least, set him ashore
at the Port de la Vere in Zeland. We believe nothing so easily as the return of
Good Fortune, and the King was persuaded of it when he saw himself in the
Dominions of the Emperor Charles the Seventh, his Brother in-Law: But all the
Troops and Vessels which that potent Monarch gave him, and all the efforts that
he made to remount his Throne, were to no purpose, and never was he able to
chase from thence Frederick Duke of Holstein, his Uncle, whom the Danes had
received for their King; he was even reduced to so forlorn a condition, that he
knew not where to find a Sanctuary, when Canut of Guldestein Bishop of Ollion,
who had ever maintained a secret correspondence with him, assured him that he
needed only to appear in Person, and that his presence alone would produce the
effect that he had in* vain hoped for from the assistance of a Foreign Power.
He added that His Majesty might lie concealed in his Episcopal Palace, till the
Faction that he managed in his Favor was strong enough to pull off their
Vizards. The Prelates advice was followed, and the King went thither Disguised
like a Merchant, but was discovered and imprisoned in the Fort of Sundeburg,
whence he came not out but to change it for another in Cronenburg* He lived
thirty five years in Exile and these two Prisons, and did not find till the Age
of seventy seven years the Death that he had so often desired. Annals of
Denmark.

The Faithful Subjects.
USanguey General of the Chinois Army which Guarded the Frontiers of that vast
Empire against the Irruptions of the Tartars, lay Encamp*d by a City upon the
Confines, to observe the Enemies motions. Licon who had Dethroned the Emperor
Zunchin in the year 1636. and Usurped the Kingdom, determined to attack this
brave Captain (who would not acknowledge him for his Lord) with an Army of two
hundred thousand men; but before he had recourse to force, he was willing to
see the event of a Straragem. Amongst the Grandees of the Empire, whom the
chance of War had constrained to submit to his Unjust Scepter, there was an Old
man Named Vz, Vsangueys Father: The Usurper going to make War upon the Son,
commanded the Father to follow him, and there was no other remedy for a man of
that Character but Obedience. Vz was forced to comply, and followed the Army,
not knowing what use his new Master designed to make of him; but he was better
informed when he came before the place whither his brave Son had retired to put
a stop to the Tyrants progress, not being strong enough to keep the Field. The
Father was the first Engine that was made use of to batter the Sons Constancy.
The Barbarous Usurper brought the Old man before the Walls of the City, and
advertised his Son that he was come thither on purpose to speak with him: They
were no sooner in sight of one another, but the General received a Message from
the Tyrant, that the only way to save his Fathers Life was to yield to the
Conqueror. Never was a Generous Soul so rudely agitated with differing
passions, or more furiously attacked with violent* tentations, then was that of
the astonished Vsanguer, finding himself distracted between his Father and
Country, and in a sad necessity to Sacrifice the one or the other, and to shed
his Fathers Blood if he would Revenge that of his Prince. His love to Glory was
powerfully resisted by Natural affection, but after a short struggling obtained
the Victory; for taking counsel only with his Virtue, he cast himself upon his
Knees, and with Eyes full of Tears, and an Air which was an undeniable proof of
the Sincerity of his Heart, that it was with an unconceiveable Sorrow that he
was forced to see him to whom he owed his life lose it, to save his Country,
but that this was his first and chief Duty; and after all, it was better that
one of them should finish his Days by an Honorable Death, than that both
should live in Infamy and Reproach. If the Sons Courage appeared great on this
occasion the Fathers was admirable, for instead of complaining of his Son, he
only lamented his own ill Fortune, and praising Vsangueys Fidelity; he yielded
himself to the Tyrants Barbarity, suffering Death with a Resolution more worthy
of a Roman Courage than of a Chinese Effeminacy. History of the two Conquerors
of China.

The Furious Tempest.
SUltan Ibrahim, Emperor of the Turks, ordered two Galleys to carry Peter
Foscarini as far as Negropont, in his return to Venice, from whence he came as
Ambassador Extraordinary, to Congratulate with the Sultan upon his Accession to
the Empire. The Ambassador embarked at the Port of Constantinople on the 10th.
day of May 1641. in a Galley commanded by an old Officer of the Grand Signiors
Naval Army, called Kara Kodgia, in which I also was with his Children and some
Gentlemen. In three days we made the Dardanels, and Anchored on the Asian side,
where next day our Captains spent some time in consulting, whether in their
intended course to Lemnos they should pass behind Tenedos, or between that
Island and the Coast of Troas. The first course is shortest, but most dangerous
for Galleys, because they are obliged to cross a Gulf which stretches out in
length a hundred miles, and is by them called the Gulf of Magaris and
Cassander. This was nevertheless, the way that they resolved to take, believing
that a little fresh Gale, which we had in our Poop, would speedily drive us to
Lemnos, with the assistance of the brawny Arms of the Galley-Slaves. Day did
not yet appear, when we hoised Sail with the most favorable Wind that Heaven
could send or we desire; but about Nine a Clock, on a sudden the Air was
darkened, and a cold shower falling at the same time, it seemed as if all the
Winds had conspired against us.

The Pilot crying out amain, commanded them to furl the Sails, but all to no
purpose, the confused noise of Voices and whistling of the Winds hindered the
Mariners from hearing and obeying him. He called upon some to help him to
Govern the Helm, and others stood to observe the motions of the Waves, and
according as they saw them coming, cried incessantly Orsa, or Podgia, which are
Sea Terms, signifying Steer to the right or to the left; which he did very
dexterously to break the force of the rolling Surges. Mean while we who had no
other employ but fear and terror, expressed the various motions that we felt
within us. The Ambassador in terms full of tenderness that would have softened
the most flinty Hearts, accused himself as the cause of our Ruin. He bemoaned
the tender Age of his Children, and the Youth of the rest of the Gentlemen, as
if he had been guilty of their Deaths. Some made Vows, others cursed the
occasion that had engaged them in this Voyage; and amongst the rest there was a
Noble Venetian of the Family of the Cornaro's, between eighteen and twenty
years of Age, who freely and seriously offered 50000 Ducats to any that would
save his life. One might make a long Litany of the Saints that were invoked;
and most certain it is, That he that would learn to pray must go to Sea.

Whilst we were thus busied the Tempest increased, and the Captain of the
Galley sent to ask us whether we would come above Deck, or stay below, because
he was obliged to close all the Port-holes, that the Water might not enter into
the Ship. There were only two that resolved to dye without going to see their
Graves. For my part, I placed my self in the Stern among the rest, agitated
with hope and fear according as I heard our Captain and the Mariners talk to
one another, who resisted the Tempest with incredible courage. But this
continued not long, and the knowledge of their Language that sometimes gave me
some comfort, did quickly quash all my hopes, and throw me into a violent
despair, when I heard the Captain say aloud, That in the space of forty years,
wherein he had commanded that Vessel, he had never seen such a Storm, and that
the fury of the Winds increased so vehemently, that all we had hitherto felt
were nothing but gentle breezes, in comparison of the horrible Gusts that were
ready to overwhelm us. It was not enough that they had struck Sail, they were
forced to take down the Sail-yards, and when he saw that one Wave had broke ten
or twelve Oars, he commanded the Rowers to forsake those that remained, and all
the Crew placed themselves on the Coursey of the Galley.

Till then the noise of the Slaves and Mariners had hindered us from being
fully sensible of the Tempest, but when it became the only object of our Eyes
and Ears, all having left off their useless labor, and ceasing to resist the
irresistible Storm, Good God! what a Spectacle did we behold! The very
remembrance of it makes me quake when I think on it. The furious whistling of
the Winds, the mountains of foamy Billows tumbling in heaps, and threatening
every moment to Bury us in the bottom of the dreadful Abyss, the noise of the
Cables and Tackling, the cracking of the Galley, the mournful shrieking, and
confused cries of so many persons, every one in his own Tongue imploring the
Aid of Heaven, when the roaring Surges advanced to overwhelm us, are things
that cause motions which are not easily expressed. We wholly abandoned our
selves to despair, all but two or three, that still kept by the Helm, and the
Captain who resisted the Tempest a great while.

He now caused the Throats of two Sheep to be cut, and cast them into the Sea,
one on each side of the Vessel, to appease the Angry Heavens, and obtain their
assistance by this Sacrifice. He not only made them throw Clothes and Baggage
overboard, but resolved also to disburthen the Galley of part of the Company,
and would have decimated the Slaves, if the Kodgia that was with him, had not
represented unto him that it was but folly to continue longer obstinate, in
resisting the Decrees of Fate, and Laws of Providence, which must necessarily
be obeyed, and that to persist in this vain opposition would offend God, and
incense him more against us. The Captain yielding to the persuasions of the
Kodgia, commanded the Pilot and his companions to leave the Helm, and abandon
the Galley to the fury of the Storm, and resigning himself to a certain
Shipwreck and Death, sat down upon his Ankles by the Kodgia. In that posture,
joining their Hands before their Eyes, and shaking their Heads over their
Knees, they mumbled out certain Prayers, in which they often, with fervent
aspirations, pronounced the Name of God. If we had been capable of feeling new
sorrows, this last resolution of these men would have certainly touched us, but
it made no impression on our Souls, for we were become altogether insensible,
and so hardened with the continuation of fear and danger, that we calmly beheld
the Death-threatning Waves approaching, and without being moved, looked upon
our foamy Grave, as if we had been already Buried in it. And it may be said,
that the continuation of a danger which is believed to be inevitable, does
often cause a sort of firmness of Mind which may be called Courage, but is at
the bottom only a pure insensibility. But whilst none of us thought either of
escaping or perishing, our Galley without Sails or Oars, driven only by the
violence of the stormy Gusts and rolling Waves, running four and twenty miles
in an hour, approached so near to Lemnos, that three men who had not abandoned
the Helm, notwithstanding of the Captains orders, began to entertain some hopes
of a possibility of an escape. Immediately they shouted out with a tone full of
terror and boldness together, Courage, Courage; but do you think that their
crying could rouse our spirits out of that Lethargick Ecstasy, in which they
lay in a manner Entranced? Not at all, for we had so far lost all our Senses,
and our Hearts were benumbed with such a stupifying dullness, that one of them
was forced to justle the Captain very rudely before he answered him, who seemed
by (...) Death to which he had resigned himself. They had great difficulty to
make him take away his Hands from before his Eyes, and much more to make him
rise up and command the Mariners to their respective Duties. All the company
began now to breathe a little, and when we saw our selves near Land, although
there was but too much Sea between us and it to swallow us up, there was not
one of us that did not stand ready to leap ashore, and think himself already
past all danger. We arrived at Lemnos, now called Stalimene, in a Bay where we
were indeed safe from the Waves of the Sea, but the Mariners fearing that the
violence of the Winds which still continued, would dash our Galleys against
the Rocks, cast the Sacred Anchor of the Ancients, which the Venetians call
Hope. The Night past over in these apprehensions, and next morning we steered
to a better Harbor, where we had no sooner cast Anchor, but we went ashore
to compose our Spirits, that were as yet disturbed and affrighted with the
Horror of this unparalled Tempest. Du Loir's Travels.

The Amors of Count Vesselini.
COunt Vesselini commanded some Troops for the Emperor Ferdinand the Third, in
Hungary, and was Governor of the Forts in the Neighborhood of Muran. That
place, the Theater of the Counts Glory and Loves Power, belonged to George
Rakoczi Prince of Transylvania, who at that time Warred with the Emperor. Some
good Genius still drew the Count toward Muran, though indeed he did not think
himself strong enough to form any design to surprise it. One time amongst the
rest, he lay all Night in an adjoining Hamlet, and found himself awakened by
the Voice of a tall great Old man, who laying his Hand on his Breast, said unto
him, General Vesselini, think seriously upon the Conquest of Muran, know that
thou may take it by the assistance of a Widow that lives at present in the
City. As soon as this Phantom disappeared, he started up astonished, and the
noise that he made awaked some Officers who lay in the Chamber; they searched
all the Room but found nothing. In the mean time the Words of that old Morpheus
stuck continually in his mind, his Imagination admitted no other Idea than that
of the Old man pointing to Muran; and this was the Subject of all his Dreams.
It was only then that the Attempt appeared easy unto him, but in the day time
he retracted all the Resolutions he had taken up during his Sleep, and
confessed that Muran ^as Impregnable; yet the remembrance of the Widow
returns to torment him with new Inquietudes, he Loves her though he has
never seen her, and knows neither her Person, Quality, or Age.

This affliction continuing to disquiet him for several days, he blocked up the
passages into Muran so carefully, that he made himself Master of a considerable
number of Prisoners; he was inspired to examine one among the rest, who told
him that he was Domestic Servant to Mary Secsxi, Widow of Stephen Bethlem,
Brother to Bethlem Gabor Prince of Transylvania. This Name astonished him as
soon as it was pronounced, and he assured himself that this was the Widow he
loved; a secret Joy inspired him with Hope: He caressed that Man, and made him
a present of one hundred Crowns, and gained him so absolutely, that he promised
to deliver his Mistress a Letter which the Count instantly wrote. The
Importance of the place obliged the Governor to extraordinary precautions, so
that it was necessary to hide this Letter very carefully lest it should be
discovered, the custom being to search all that entered the Town. For this
reason the Count bethought himself of a Stratagem, he made up the Letter into a
little Ball, which he covered over with Wax, and because it was the Season of
Fruits, he put it into a Melon, in the bottom of a Basket full of other Melons,
which this Servant carried to the Castle of Muran, as if he had brought them
from one of his Mistresses Country Houses. To take away all suspicion, he gave
some of them to the Corpse du Guard, he carried others for a present to some
Ladies Relations of Mary Secski, and then all over trembling, went to present
the rest to her self, and told her in a low Voice, That in one of these Melons
was enclosed a Letter from General Vesselini.

That Name which ought to have astonished, did not at all surprise her,
although she had never seen, nor heard of him, but as the Enemy of her Prince.
She knew not that he was a Widower, nor of what Age he was, yet as if Love had
in a moment rendered her a Complice of his Design, she was well pleased with
the Letter, she enjoined the Man silence, and entered into her Closet to
satisfy her curiosity: Scarce had read it over, when she found her Fidelity to
her Prince betrayed by favorable Inclinations to Vesselini, and a little after
dispatched one of her Gentlemen, whose Fidelity she had proved, with an Answer.
This Messenger was very welcome, the Count caressed him extremely, and as
Presents have a particular Charm in that Country, he gave him two hundred
Crowns, with a promise of as much more, if he would Negotiate an Enterview
between his Mistress and him. The Affair succeeded according to his desire,
Mary Secsxi appointed him to come with seven Followers, at most, to a Wood near
a small Brook that washes the foot of the Hill of Muran, where she would be,
under pretense of taking the Divertisement of Fishing, with an equal number of
Attendants. He was first upon the place with six Gentlemen only, and would not
prefer the Counsels of Reason to those of Love, to which he had abandoned
himself; or rather, the sorce of his Destiny drew him thither, and promised him
security in the midst of so many Dangers.

The Count left the Thicket into which he had retired, at the arrival of the
Lady, nor did they look upon each other with the ordinary astonishment of those
that have never before seen one another; he spread his Cloak on the Grass, and
they sat down, and made a sign to their Followers to retire. He related to her
how by Inspiration he was moved to demand this Enterview, without having the
Honor to know her; and told her, that after such happy success in his first
design, he presumed to flatter himself with hopes of her assistance in the
execution of that design which he had upon Muran* She answered that this would
be a Breach of her Duty to Rakoczi, and that though she were willing to become
unfaithful to him, she could only be so in her Mind, Muran being impregnable,
not only by its Situation, but also by the Diligence and Strength of the
Garrison, which was composed of six hundred chosen men, drawn out of the best
Troops of Transylvania. The Count persisted in imploring her assistance, and
his Eloquence did not fail him on this occasion, to persuade her that their
Marriage was Decreed in Heaven, which would be favorable to them both in this
Enterprise; that he aspired to no other Honor than that of being hers, and
that she would gain Immortal Glory, when Muran Conquered by her Aid should
become the pledge of their Love, and the Scene of the most famous Marriage that
ever Hungary beheld.

Not one of these words fell to the ground, Mary Secsxi could not deny to admit
into Muran that Love which had already stormed her Heart. In fine, the Count
proposing to Scale the Walls in a certain place, she promised to act so that he
should find no Sentinels in his passage, and to furnish him with a Ladder.

The Day appointed for the Scalado was the third of August 1644. both of them
swearing Fidelity, and all possible Diligence. The day being come, Vesselini
detaching five hundred men, made eighty of them swear not to abandon him. At
Night he marched at the head of these toward the Castle, and commanded the
rest to follow at a distance. His Guide led him through a longer and more
perilous way, than he expected, for he made him pass through a Village where
they kept Watch, the Sentinel stopped him, and presented his Carbine to his
Breast, crying out amain, and he as low as he could, endeavored to persuade
him that he was a Friend, and had a design upon some of the Enemies Troops; at
length he appeased him, deceived him* and escaped, but it was only to fall from
Scylla into Charybdis, for after this, descending into another Village, he was
suddenly assaulted by the Rabble. This Misfortune had near made him lose all
Hope, and had almost contented himself with Sacking that Hamlet, instead of
pursuing his intended Exploit. Nevertheless, his Courage and Anger yielded to
Prudence, he retired, and to make the sum of his Miseries complete, he wandered
so far in a Garden between the Mountains, that he remained a great while as
lost, his Guide taking another way. Might he not then have judged that he was
betrayed? And would he not have died desperate in such a conjuncture? Yet he
still sought a passage out of this Labyrinth. At length, thinking he had
discovered a Grot, he perceived the shadow of a Man, and running thither with
his Pistol in his Hand, he knew him to be one of his Soldiers that was come in
quest of him, and to inform him that his Troops were rallied in the first
Village through which he had past. Departing from this wild place, he went to
them in that Village, where the freeness of their behavior had made them be
kindly entertained by the Inhabitants, who judged them to be their Friends.
They departed all together to seek out a place where they might ascend the
Rock: They were already mounting it, when they heard the noise of the Guns of
Muran. Then it was that the boldest of them began to quake, and he was
conjured by them all to give over a discovered Attempt; he entreated them to
leave him, and suffer him rather to perish, than to constrain him to preserve a
wretched Life, and persuaded them, contrary to his own Judgment, that they
were not discovered, and that, some other reason occasioned the firing of the
Guns. Yet true it was, for this was the Signal of Retreat for the
Neighboring Villages, and it was for a Bravado that they had discharged more
than one. In the mean while the Generous Mary Secski suffered strange
inquietudes, in expectation of the Count; she had a great while before shut-up
the Sentinels, under pretext of making them Drink, and also had staid the
Sergeant who should have mounted the Guard, under color of engaging him to
play with her Women. She walked along the Walls with a great deal of
Impatience, endeavoring to discover Vesselini, that she might throw down a
Ladder to him, and fearing that he had taken the Alarm, she dispatched him whom
she had sent to him once before, to assure him of the facility that he would
find in the Execution of his Design. This Man descrying some already advanced,
made a sign to them with his Handkerchief, which two or three of them
perceiving were frightened. The Count advanced to know what made them recoil,
they told him what they had seen; he run up with his Pistol in his Hand, the
other knew him, and guided him to the place by which he was to ascend before he
could come at the Wall. It was a very high and craggy Rock, The Count scrambled
up one half of it without difficulty, but on a sudden he felt himself fatigued,
breathless, and unable to proceed; his Men relieved him, and drew him up to the
top of the Hill and foot of the Wall. It was not long before the Lady arrived:
She cast down the Ladder; twenty of the Imperial Soldiers mounted, the Count
followed, and after him the sixty others only, the rest having Orders to March
to the Gates of the Castle, and there to wait till it should be opened. Mary
Secsxi dispersed the Soldiers in the Chambers of her apartment; she went to
Bed on purpose to remove all suspicion, and sent to pray the Governor to come
to see her, pretending that she had an Advice of Importance to communicate to
him. He was no sooner entered but they seized upon him; they led him to a
remote Chamber, and set Guards about him. The other Officers* of the Garrison
were in like manner secured. Vesselini sent to surprise the Corpse du Guard; and
in fine, made himself Master of the place. After he had given necessary Orders
to secure his Conquest, and provided for all that the Service of the Emperor
his Master required, he came next to acquit himself of his Duty to his Mistress
and to Love, and Married the Heroin Mary Secsxi. The Emperor confirmed to the
Count the possession of Muran, and erected it into a free County for him and
his Heirs for ever. Le Laboureur's Voyage of Poland.

The Adventures of some Frenchmen in the Islands of Antilles.
THreescore and six of the Inhabitants of St. Christophers Island, departed
thence in the month of September 1647. to settle a Colony in the Isle of
Virgins. The Spaniards who Inhabited the Isle of St. John Portrico, near to
that of the Virgins, having Advice that the French were arrived there, Rigged
out five Men of War, which casting Anchor, Manned their five Shallops with
Soldiers, and drew toward the place where the French were, who having
perceived them, run to their Arms, and resolved to fight it out to the last
extremity. Their Boats Crew, to the number of fifteen men, joined them, and all
together they valiantly made head against the Spaniards, whose number alone was
able to overwhelm them. The Governor of Portrico's Nephew, who commanded the
Assailants, received a Mortal Wound, of which he died shortly after his return
to that Island. The French fought like desperate men, and killed so great a
number of the Spaniards, that they forced them to retire to their Shallops,
where they took counsel together, and then returned to renew their charge, and
courageously assaulted the French with Lances, Sagays and Firearms. The shock
was furious, three of the French lost their Lives, and five were Wounded, to
whom the Spaniards gave good Quarter. The rest seeing their strength so
inferior to that of the Enemies, abandoned the Field of Battle, and retired to
the Mountains, from whence they descended not till they had seen the Spaniards
under Sail, who before their departure set the Tents on fire, and rifled all
that belonged to the French, so that they remained in the Isle without Beds,
Tents or Tools to Work with, and led a very miserable Life for the space of
three or four months. Many died for want, and the rest saw themselves in danger
of perishing in the like misery, when five of the most daring of them resolved
to expose themselves to all sorts of perils, rather than remain in this Isle.

They made a Pyperi or Canoa, in which they determined to adventure to Sea, to
seek out for some Island Inhabited by Christians, of whatsoever Nation they
might be; and one of them having happily found an Axe on the Trunk of an Acamas
Tree, they made choice of the Wood of the Mahot and Trumpet Tree, which are the
lightest in that Country, and labored with so great diligence, that in three
days they joined together some pieces of Wood, and instead of Mortise and
Nails, they made use of great and strong cords, and so fitted out their Pyperi.
It was eleven foot wide and fourteen long, and that it might cut the Water more
nimbly they made it sharp pointed, and in the middle of it placed a Mast
fifteen foot high. Two of the five stripped themselves to make Sails of their
Shirts, and having unript them, they tied them together with great points of
Mahot Bark, and fastened to them two Sheets of the same Bark, to Sail near the
Wind, or put out to the Main as they should see occasion. Our five Adventurers
having bid adieu to them that remained in the Isle, rather with abundance of
Tears than Words, thrust their Pyperi into the Water, where they seated
themselves two in the Poop, two in the Prow, and one in the middle. The two
that were in the Poop held an Oar in form of a Rudder, to conduct them whither
soever Divine Providence should lead them; the three others held each of them
an Oar in form of a Battle-Door, and rowing after the manner of the Savages;
that is to say, before them. They arrived extremely fatigued at a little Isle
called Virgin Gonarda, where Landing, with their Match which they carefully
kept burning in their Pyperi, they made a Fire upon a Bank of Sand, to boil
some Periwinkles and Cray-fishes that they found there. Out afflicted
Navigators leaving this Isle by force of Rowing, gained that of St. Thomas,
where finding what refreshment they wanted, as Oranges, Citrons, Lemons,
Gouyans, Bananas, and Figs, they abode there five days. From the Isle of St.
Thomas they continued their course to the Southern Coast of Portrico, where
they went ashore upon a great Bank of Land. After they had marched about two
hours within the Isle, they knew by the great store of Beeves, Cows and Hogs,
which were Wild, that it was the Isle of St. John Portrico.

They returned to their Pyperi, which they trimmed a new, to fetch up another
little Island to the Windward of Portrico and distant from thence about two
Leagues; they Rowed three days without being able to get near the shore,
because the Tide still bore to the Main Land, but after great toil they gained
at last a little bank of white Sand, where Landing they happily found two Wells
dig'd there by Mariners; the water of which was very good. Here they also found
Ring-Doves, Hens, and other Fowls, in so great abundance, and so tame, that
they killed them upon the Trees with great Poles toward Night*

All these supplies, together with the footsteps of men that they observed,
made them believe that this place was frequented by some Fisher-Boats, and that
certainly it would not be long before some of them arrived, in which they might
obtain passage to some Christian Land. For this Reason they erected a little
Tent, in which they abode near three months, walking every day round the
Island, which is in circuit but two Leagues, without seeing any person on Land,
or Ship in the Sea, from whence they might hope for Succor. In fine, on Sunday
morning as they were saying their usual Prayers, perceiving a Bark, which
coming from the North, Coasted the Isle, they made a Sign to it with a Linen
Cloth fastened to the top of a long stick, and the Captain moved by their
reiterated cries, commanded to furl the Main-sail, and strike the Top-sail, and
bear straight to Land. Seeing but five Naked men without Arms, he sent five
Mariners toward them in his Boat, amongst whom was a Walloon, who knowing by
their Language that they were French cast by Shipwreck, or some other accident,
upon the Coast of that Isle, they charitably received them into their Boat, and
brought them to the Bark. By means of this Walloon Interpreter, they rehearsed
unto the Governor the dreadful miseries they had endured. So pitiful a recital
touched him so sensibly, that he gave them Shirts and Drawers, furnished them
with Bread, Wine, and Aqua-vitae, and promised that within fifteen days, his
Fishing being ended, he would return and take them along with him to St. John
de Portrico. He performed his promise, and to preserve the memory of so strange
an Adventure, he caused their Pyperi to be made fast to the Prow of his Bark,
that he might show it to Don Francisco Maldonado, Governor of Portrico for his
Catholic Majesty. Having left the Island four or five Leagues behind them, the
Spanish Pilot looking from the Poop toward the Isle of Virgins, descri'd a
League off somewhat in the Sea, moving upon a piece of Wood, but the too great
distance hindering him from discerning what it was, as they approached nearer
he perceived that it was Men floating upon a Pyperi, like to that which was
fastened to the Prow of the Bark. They were six men, the remainder of those
that staid in the Isle of Virgins, who had built a Pyperi to carry them thence.
These poor Frenchmen knowing their Comrades, beseech'd the Captain to save
their Lives as he had done theirs; he took them into the Ship, carried them to
Portrico, and presented them all to the Governor, who received them
courteously, and ordered a Garment to be given to each of them, making the Town
their Prison, with Liberty to earn their Bread therein. They had no difficulty
to subsist here, every one looked upon them as extraordinary persons, and at
first contended who should be most liberal to them. Those that were skilled in
any Trade plied the same; and one of them that could play exquisitely well on
the Violin, gained enough alone to assist the rest. When they had gathered a
Sum of Money sufficient to pay for their passage into Europe, they all embarked
in Spanish Vessels, save one that Married in the Isle, and returned to their
Native Country. History of the Antilles.

The Brave Hollander.
IN the month of September 1641. five Galleys and two Brigantines, commanded by
Aly Pegelin, General of the Algerine Galleys, descried a Dutch Ship that
carried twenty eight Guns and forty Men: The Weather was very calm, so that the
Hollander could make no advantage of his Sails. Pegelin caused the Galleys to
advance within Cannon-shot of the Ship, and seeing that it bore Dutch Colors,
he sent a Zelander Renegado in one of the Brigantines, who delivered the
following Message to the Captain: General Pegelin has sent me to advertise
you, that if you will yield, he will set you ashore in some Christian Land; and
this he has Sworn to perform by the Head of Mahomet. I know Pegelin, answered
the Captain, who had been a Slave formerly: The Ship belongs to the Owners,
and the Goods to the Merchants: I cannot give away that which is none of my
own, but if he does covet it so much, let him come aboard, and he shall see
whether we can satisfy him. The Renegade returned with this Answer, which
Incensed Pegelin to such a degree, that he gave Orders to the Galleys to rank
themselves in form of a Half Moon, and in that order to come up with the Poop
of the Ship, and to discharge their Guns all together, and to batter her
crosswise. Their pieces were forty eight Pounders. His Orders were Executed,
but as they were ready to Fire the Guns, the Hollander who was a skilful and
experienced Seaman, by the help of a small Gale that God sent him, without
losing time turned about his Ship. By this means he put the Enemies into
confusion, and broke all their measures: For the five Galleys coming with full
Sails, and hastened forwards by the utmost endeavors of the Rowers, instead of
surrounding the Ship in form of a Half Moon, as they designed, they found
themselves pell-mell dashing and breaking upon one another. Nevertheless,
Pegelins Galley boarded the Ship, and seventy Turks entering it with their
Scimitars in their Hands, begun to cut the Cables, and throw Fireworks to burn
the Ship; but the Dutch Captain, who had all his Men under Deck, made them Fire
both from Poop and Prow some Guns charged with Musket-Bullets, which killed
abundance of the Turks.

In the mean while the Galley that had boarded the Ship durst stay no longer in
so hot a place, because the Vessel being deep Laden, the Mouths of the Guns
lay so low, that they just flanked the Deck of the Galley; which Pegelin
seeing, he commanded the Galleys to retreat. The Turks who at the beginning of
the Fight entered the Ship, were much astonished to see the Galleys abandon
them, and leave them to the Mercy of their Enemies, and losing all Courage,
they that could swim threw themselves into the Sea, and the Wounded, and they
that could not swim, remained idle Spectators of the Fight. The Dutch Captain
caused his Men to discharge the Guns charged with Nails, Musket-Bullets, and
pieces of Iron, and in less than a Quarter of an hour more than two hundred
Turks were killed in the Galleys, who retired without seeing an Enemy. The
Hollander finding himself out of the reach of their Cannon, commanded to kill
all the Turks that were left in the Ship, who during the Fight had saved
themselves on the Ropes, for it was too hot staying on the Deck. Then did the
Captain with his Men come up above Deck, and fired upon the Turks as if they
had been so many Popingays. This was a Recreation for the Dutch, but a Tragedy
for the Turks, who had two Captains killed, and the Bassa of Tripolies
Lieutenant was mortally Wounded. These Galleys that came out a few days before,
and were a Terror to all the Mediterranean Sea, returned thus rudely handled to
the Port of Algiers. Hist. of the Captivity of Emanuel d'Aranda.

The Memorable, but Unhappy Retreat.
STanislaus Zolkierius, a Person of an eminent Extraction, dedicated himself to
Arms so soon as he was well able to wield them, making his first Campaign under
that Great Chancellor and Captain of Poland, John Zamoyski, who at the famous
Battle of Byezin, which decided the contest between Sigismund and Maximilian
concerning that Crown in favor of the former, had the Honor to command the
Right Wing of Zamoyskies Army, to the defeating of that Enemy which opposed
him; in which Encounter he received a dangerous Wound in the Knee. His conduct
in this Engagement, soon after advanced him to be Lieutenant General of Poland;
during which command, he was employed against the Rebellious Cossacks, whom
after many doubtful Fights, he reduced to his own Terms: Of delivering up their
General, a common Soldier, but of great Conduct, with three other principal
Officers, into his Hands. He defeated the Swedes at Revel, and afterward being
made General, he beat the Russians at Clusinum, entered Musko, forced Demetrius
to quit his Siege, and led away the Emperor Zuiski, and his two Brothers,
Captives into Poland.

Being seventy years of Age, he was created Great Chancellor of Poland: He
repressed the Tartars in their Invasion at Orimen, and soon after marched with
his Army into Moldavia, to the Aid of Gratian the Vayvod, against the Turks,
who so extremely oppressed him, that he came in to Zolkierius with but six
hundred Horse, and so satally negligent, that he could give no account of the
Enemies number or force, even in his own Country; so that the General had no
certainty till he saw them cover the surrounding Fields with their numerous
Hosts. He himself had Encamped upon the Plains of Cicora, determining in that
place to attend their motions.

This was in September 1620. The Tartars who had joined with the Turks upon
this occasion, having taken some Christian Prisoners, gained from them an
Account of their Strength, which did not exceed Ten Thousand effective Men;
whereupon they drew up within view of them, with an Army double their number,
led by their Commander Cantimer Mursa. A few hours after they were followed by
Skinder Bassa, General of the Turkish Army, who pitched their Tents near those
of the Confederates, and likewise in sight of the Christians.

The Poles contained themselves within their Trenches till a Squadron of
Cossacks, who had the Out guard, Encountered that of the Tartars; whom after a
smart dispute, they forced to a Retreat, but being relieved by their own Men,
they turned upon the Christians, pursuing them up to their very Trenches, where
they also being seasonably reinforced, opposed the prevailing Enemy with so
great Success, that having killed a great number, they chased them into their
main Body, but giving no Quarter, did consequently take no Prisoners, and so
made no discovery of the Enemies strength, insomuch that Zolkierius making his
computation by what appeared in view, and finding his Army cheerful upon the
Success of that days Action, resolved to put all upon the Fortune of a Battle.
That Night there came to the Turkish Camp Sultan Galga the great Chams Brother,
with a fresh Army of thirty thousand choice Soldiers, whereof Zolkierius had
no knowledge, and therefore, according to his former determination, he drew out
his whole Army early the next Morning, and ranging them in Battle, strengthened
both Wings with Forts made of his Wagons and Carriages, closed together on all
sides, and filled with Foot and Cannon, so that the Enemy could make no
advantage of their numbers to infest their Flanks. Skinder Bassa on the other
side seeing the Order of the Christians, drew his Army into a Line of Battle,
placing only the Turks, Revolted Walachians, and Transylvanians, in view, the
Auxiliary Tartars being placed out of sight, and commanded not to stir till a
Signal was given them to move, which should be when the Christians were
Engaged. The Poles had indeed ordered their Reserves, but by an over confidence
advanced upon the Enemy, without the Protection of their Forts, contrary to the
Generals Orders, which the Turks observing, the Tartars showed themselves on
the Right Wing, and extending that way, endeavored to get between the
Christians Camp and the Rear of their Army, which obliged Zolkievius to oppose
against them his Reserves. The Fight was bloody and doubtful for two hours
together, but the main Battle of the Poles having no seconds, (by reason of the
diversion of their Reserves to defend the Rear) oppressed by the often repeated
charges of the Enemies fresh Troops, though keeping themselves on the Left
Wing, within the protection of their Forts, yet were no longer able to sustain
the force of those multitudes that swarmed around them; they therefore faced
about, and breaking through those Squadrons of Tartars who had got between them
and the Camp, made their Retreat in reasonable good order, the Barbarians being
checked in their pursuit by the Forts abovementioned, which were still
defended by the Poles. That on the Right Wing was violently assaulted by the
Enemy, who killed three hundred of the Defendants, and took four of their
Fieldpieces. Neither had their success rested there but that the Christians
valiantly advanced in this extremity, with their best Troops to their relief,
obliging the Infidels, after a hot dispute, to a confused Retreat. The Fort or
Castle on the other Wing was left unattempted, and Night coming on, the Enemy
after a kind of drawn Battle, wherein there fell one thousand of theirs, and
about six hundred Christians; retreated to their Tents.

That Night and the next day passed without any Action, the Poles in the mean
time consulted what to do in this Exigency, but could not readily come to any
determination; during which, a Report was spread about the Camp that the chief
Officers designed to steal away from the Army, which caused much disturbance,
till the generous assurances of their Leaders had composed their Spirits, who
vowed to live and dye with them. Zolkierius proposed in Council that they
should next day try the Fortune of another Battle, wherein they might easily
correct the Errors of the former Day; and being now informed of their own and
the Enemies strength, they could better understand their advantages, having
hitherto failed more in Conduct than in Courage, and if the Success should
answer the Attempt, they might then think of retiring toward the Confines of
their own Country, where they would be sure to meet with new Supplies, for the
further prosecution of the War.

The very mention of another Battle surprised many of the great Persons,
especially Alexander Kalinowski, Duke Corecki, and Nicholas Struse, three of
the most Eminent Lords in the Army, who envying the Command of Zolkierius, were
the more apt to oppose his Advice, especially in this juncture, when they must
bring their Lives to an apparent hazard: They therefore absolutely declared
against it, and that there was no safety but in a sudden flight, by which
means they might avoid Death, or a Turkish Bondage, which was yet more
Terrible. And being resolved to put the Councils they had given in Execution,
that Night they took the first opportunity, after the Watch was set, to quit
the Camp, proposing to themselves, that by the favor of the darkness they
might get over the River Prut, which covered the Rear of the Camp, before the
Enemy could take the alarm of their departure; Gratian the Vayvod, for whose
preservation the War was undertaken, went away with them, and having, by the
number of their Train and Dependants, made a considerable party, they concluded
themselves of Strength able, by the advantage of the Night, to break through
all opposition.

There was a second Report spread in the Army, that the General himself was
gone likewise, which carrying Terror with it, the inferior Officers and
Soldiers were upon preparation for the flight also; whereof Zolkierius having
speedy notice mounted on Horseback, and caused many lighted Torches to be
carried before him, showed himself to his Soldiers, surrounded their Quarters,
spoke to every one he met, and encouraged all with his presence and
cheerfulness. He added, That he could not be guilty of so nefarious a Treason
as to desert fo many brave Men his fellow Soldiers; that they had served too
long under his Command, to conceive their General capable of so wicked an Act,
as to sully all his Honor by so sordid a Retreat: That for his part, he had no
other consideration for his Life, but in order to their preservation, and since
some (he must confess Eminent Persons) had preferred their own Safety above all
sense of Honor, he was glad they were gone, hoping they had carried away with
them that Contagion of Cowardice which might have infected the whole Army. He
also would wish them a good Journey, provided they would tell the King, and
such of their Friends as should inquire after them, That they had Abandoned the
Army and their General, in the Plains of Cicora, engaged against theirs and the
Common Enemy of Christendom.

Though Zolkierius had harangued his Soldiers in such Terms as these, and with
a serene Countenance, yet he could scarce compose the Minds of those who were
disturbed with Terror and Fear, and could not be obliged to return to their
Duty, till a sense of the danger of their Disobedience obliged them to it: But
they were wholly confirmed by the ill success of those Lords, and others, that
had Deserted them, who by their Ungenerous flight had hastened, and not
prevented, their own Ruin; for in passing the River, which was rather rapid
than deep, many of them missing the Ford were overwhelmed in it, Kalinowski
himself perished in the Stream, and such as got over were most of them knocked
on the Head by the Tartars, who Guarded that Post. Gratian and his Moldavians
being skilled in the passage and ways got clear off, but being pursued by his
ill Fate, had the recompense of his Infamous flight rewarded upon him by the
Treachery of his own Servants, who murdered their Lord to possess themselves of
what Treasure he had brought away with him. The rest of the party, after a vain
attempt to pass the River, not daring to Land on the other side, wet, weary,
and confounded with shame, came back to the Camp, which awhile before they had
forsaken as desperate, reposing now all their safety in that of the Army.

The Poles by these losses, and the escape of nine hundred Cossacks, (who by a
more lucky Fate than that of their Fellows, had broke through a neglected
Quarter without opposition) being much weakened, and far unequal in strength to
the Enemy, and not daring to attempt another Fight, without manifest danger of
losing all, they resolved upon a Retreat. They had lost many of their Horses,
and more died daily for want of Forage; they were harassed with Duty, and had
no hope of Relief from Poland, being Besieged by a Barbarous Enemy, ready in
their apprehensions to Storm their Camp every moment. Their Provisions were
short, and no possibility of Supplies from without, all the sides of their Camp
being Invested so, that it was impossible for them to subsist for want of Food,
in expectation of Succor from their own Country; neither had the King, by
reason of the Interruption of the Passages, received but one Letter from
Zolkievius when it was too late, wherein he gave him an account of his
condition, and how he had been unseasonably abandoned by some of the Army.

This was the State of Affairs in the Camp, while the Enemy without lay close
upon them, and computing the distresses and disorders within, by the Desertion
of those that had left them, they were much raised in their hopes, despising
all Proposals of quitting the place; so that Sept. 22. the whole Turkish Army
was drawn up before the Camp, threatening a general Assault unless they
instantly surrendered at discretion. Next day they did the like, and on the
26th. the Galga, or Prince of Tartary, approaching near the Trenches was met by
Duke Corecki upon Parole, who proposed an excessive Ransom for himself, and
some few with him, and descending to some particulars for Rendition of the
Camp, desiring only that the Soldiers might March away with their Swords, the
Tartarian left them with Scorn and Anger, and clapping his Hand to his
Scimiter, bid them expect no other conditions than what the sharpness of that
would afford them.

Zolkierius having thoroughly computed the State of his Affairs, resolved to
quit the Camp, and having ordered all things accordingly, which took up three
days time, being assisted in the Method of his Design by Martin Kasanowski, an
old Experienced Colonel, Sept. 29. that part of the Wall through which the
Camp was to pass being opened, the Army about Sunset began its March in the
following Order: On both sides a row of Wagons, as it were chained together
five hundred paces in length, drawn by their Horses, closed the Wings, the
Front consisting likewise of linked Wagons, took up three hundred paces, and
the Rear being fenced with the like Barricado, together with the outside of the
Camp, was fortified with Cannon. The Wounded, Sick, Baggage, and all the best
Horses of the Army, were placed in the midst, while the Officers and Soldiers
marched on the outside of the Camp with Colors flying, and their Arms ready
fixed to resist any Assault.

The Tartars observing this order of the Poles, at first imagined they had
drawn out to Fight, but when they discerned the whole Camp to move, and that no
Man stirred out of his Rank, they stood amazed at the Novelty, and the Night
approaching, they durst only send out small parties to observe their motion,
and so they marched two Moldavish miles that Night, without any disorder but
what they received at the passage of a Lake, which yet did not much incommode
them, since they were not eagerly pressed upon by the Enemy. Sept. 30. Skinder
Bassa assaulted the Camp on all sides with his united Forces, but being
repulsed with great loss, they marched yet two Moldavish miles more that Night,
which is about Ten English miles. Oct. 1. The Camp being Lodged near a great
Pool, continued there that whole Day and the Night following. The Infidels
galled them extremely from the other side of the Water with their Shot, and
from the open side by their Skirmishing, but were bravely repulsed with great
slaughter of their Men. About Noon that Day they prepared for a fresh Assault,
but instead thereof sent a Trumpet to the Camp to demand their Turkish
Interpreter, that they might speak with him; which being granted, they only
detained him, making no attempt that Day. Oct. 2. The Turks having viewed the
Camp, Stormed it with greater fury than ever, and being repulsed, returned
fifteen times to the Assault. The Courage of the Defendants increasing by their
being able to resist, it did not suffice them at length to make good their
Station, but they followed the flying Enemy a good distance from it, taking in
the pursuit two Colors and a piece of Cannon, having killed multitudes of
their Men. Toward Sunset they began their March* with their Shot (...) which
must needs hinder their pace, and yet they had advanced fifteen English miles
before Morning.

The next day having gained the advantage of a Rivolet, and heights of Ground,
they easily repressed the violence of the Enemy, and took a Tartars Colors;
they also eluded an Ambuscade, and continued their Journey that Night,
strengthening their Camp by the Neighborhood of a River.

Skinder Bassa considering that by these Night Marches the Prey might slip out
of his Hands, and being sensible of the disgrace that would attend him to
suffer it, resolved to make an attempt with the hazard of his whole Army, and
consequently gave order for a general Assault: But the Tartars not seeming so
forward as he expected, having already been so often rudely handled, and
pretending the great difficulty of the Design, by reason of the posture of the
Camp, seated upon the advantage of a River, whereby they would be able to bring
more hands to the defense of those parts that were Assaultable. The Enraged
Bassa, impatient of Arguments, turned hastily to his Janisaries, And are you
also affrighted with the greatness of the danger, said he? And will you suffer
this handful of Men to slip out of your hands for want of a vigorous attempt
upon them? But they cried out, He should not reproach but Command them, for
nothing was terrible to them but the Anger of their General. The rest of the
Turks swayed by his example, would be of the party, prompted by an Ambition to
do the Service with their own hands, without the Assistance of the Tartars.
Armed with these Resolutions they Assaulted the Camp from all their Quarters,
and incited by a mixture of Shame and Fury, broke in upon it in one place,
carrying Terror into the Bowels of the Christians, notwithstanding all the
resistance made against them; all their former Disputes and Conflicts seemed
but Sport to this. The Turks hurried on by their Principle of Predestination,
added to a Zeal of Gratifying their General, exposed their Lives without
Discretion, to preserve the Footing they had gained in the Camp, doing more
than Men in prosecuting the Advantage.

The Christians Armed with a Native Courage, and more Inflamed by their
Despair, exceeded their Enemies, for despising their multitudes, and resolving
to Conquer or Dye, they made a Charge upon those that had entered, with a fury
suitable to the circumstance of their Affairs, and forcing the foremost back on
their Fellows, made them contribute to their own Disorders; so that not being
able to Rally, they were repelled with a great Slaughter, and having cleared
themselves from this Storm, they continued their March that Evening along the
Banks of the River for three miles, the Enemy Coasting them on the other side
with an equal pace.

The Tartars having got before them, Oct. 5. lay directly in their way, but
they having taken up a Resolution to surmount every difficulty, and being grown
Skilful in this kind of March, broke through all the Resistance made against
them, though with some disorder in the Rear, occasioned by the Fears of the
Waggon-men which rendered them less exact and faithful i^ their Charge; but by
the Valor and Conduct of Zemberg, who commanded in that part, the Enemy was
Repulsed, and the Disorder being Regulated, they Marched two Miles that Day.
They still continued to advance, and like a Wedge of Iron, divided their
passage through the numerous Squadrons of the Turks, who clouded their very
sight with their showers of Shot and Arrows, but since they could make no
Impression upon them, they burnt up and destroyed all their Grass and Forage
in the way, whereby they were extremely incommodated, and by reason whereof,
and their often Skirmishing, they were able to March but one Moldavish Mile a
Day.

The Poles still followed the Banks of the River Tire, with a design to gain
Mokilow, a safe Retreat after their tedious March. They were constrained to
avoid the nearest way thither, as Mountainous and Boggy, besides great Woods in
it, which would obstruct them in the manner of their motion, choosing for the
sake of a more even passage, to go about by such a way as brought them within a
mile of their desired Harbor. The Camp was in perfect order, and the Enemy
tired with the repetition of their fruitless Attempts and Labors, had forborne
to press upon them, being content to wait their motion with a few Scouts only.
The Poles about the Evening of this seventh Day of their March, continued their
Journey according to their former Method, and meeting in their way some Barns
Stored with great quantities of Hay and Corn, many of them, but without Order,
run to the Bait to supply themselves with Provisions for their well nigh
starved Horses: In the mean time the Van of the Camp began to March without
calling in their Forragers, or giving notice as they ought and used, to the
Rear of their motion. The Rear, for want of the accustomed Sign, being thus
separated from the Main Body, was seized on by a sudden Horror and Pannick
Fear, which having affected some, was like Wildfire spread through all: Their
apprehensions were various, but all upon the account of fear heightened by the
darkness, and imaginary noises, concluding the Van was cut off, and that the
Sword was at their Throats. The same Plague being carried over the rest of the
Army, infected the whole in a moment with its Contagion; whereupon the Carters,
Waggonmen, Paddees and Servants; employed about the Carriages, unlosed the
Horses to save themselves by flight upon them, so that the whole Fabric and
Machine of the Camp being dissolved, they could move no further. There was yet
another cause that contributed to this Evil:

Upon the departure of Gratian, and other Fugitives, from the Camp of Cicora,
the Rascality of the Army, with a mixture of Soldiers, Robbed and Plundered
their Tents and Lodgings, but being got on the Banks of the River Tire, they
began to speak of it, and Koninkspolski the Lieutenant General, had that very
Evening very Imprudently uttered some threatening expressions about it. The
number of the Guilty being many, they began to think of their proper safety,
and the avoiding that punishment, which if they stood to it, would fall upon
them; they therefore, in great numbers, fled away from their Friends as well as
from their Foes. These Wretches having begun a Tumult upon this occasion, it
was seconded by the dividing of the Camp, as is before declared: The confusion
was so great, that Zolkievius, and the chief Officers about him, could not be
heard, the variety of noises, with the apprehension of the danger, and the
darkness of the Night, rendering the Army deaf to all his Commands and Orders.

The Tartars being advertised by their Scouts, of these Disorders and Tumults,
failed not to hasten thither, and catching hold of the advantage given them by
the Poles, prepared to it by their own fears, fell in among them with Shouts
and Terrors. Zolkievius had commanded, that for the better safety of the
Quarters, and encouraging of the Soldiers, That all Men should quit their
Horses and March on Foot, wherein himself was the first Example; which was the
Reason that so many of the chief Commanders fell, and were taken in that
Encounter, for when the Rout was become so Universal that all Resistance was to
no purpose, they perished upon the place for want of Horses to carry them off,
except such as escaped by swimming, and so got away. Zolkievius's Son, with his
Nephew, and Strusius, the two former being weak of their Wounds, and forsaken
by their Coachman, were made Prisoners, and presented to the Tartarian Galga.
Zolkievius had before taken an eternal farewell of his Son, and then having made
a short confession of his Sins, was lost in the confusion, and found dead next
morning upon the Skirts of the Camp. Some say he caused himself to be killed by
one of his Followers a Cossack choosing rather to perish with his Army than fall
into the Enemies hands, or survive his own Glory; but the Wounds in his
Sword-hand, on his Face and Breast, and a Tartarian laid Dead along by him,
seem to declare that he dyed Fighting. Skinder Bassa caused his Head to be cut
off and fixed upon a Pike, exposing it for that day to the view of the whole
Army, and afterward to be sent to the Signior his Master, as a Testimony of his
Victory. The Lieutenant General Corecki, the young Zolkievius, with the other
Prisoners of Quality, were sent to Constantinople, where after three years
Imprisonment they were Ransomed, and returned to their own Country; and thus,
like a Ship after a long Voyage sunk in the Harbor.

Zolkievius having through all the accidents of his Life proceeded regularly,
from the Quality of a private Soldier to the Supreme command of an Army, was
raised by his own Virtue to those Honors which rendered him eminent in those
parts of the World; neither was there any thing wanting to complete his Glory,
besides the success of this Unfortunate Retreat, which was reduced to that
point, that there wanted but one hour to render him eminent among the most
Illustrious Captains of Antiquity. It is held on all hands, that the most
difficult part of Military Service is a Retreat, and it may be judged hard
measure to deny Zolkievius the Honor of having acquitted himself well in that
particular, since he had brought it within view of the Harbor; but as the
Honor of the Success had been entirely his if he had prospered, so his memory
must be patient of this Cloud drawn over the luster of it, by the failing of
some mean Officer in omitting to give the Signal of his March. But here did he
fall, and was laid upon the Bed of Honor, in the extremity of his Age,
refusing to live when he could not do it gloriously.

Skinder Bassa, either grown uneasy at the accession of this Victory, or that
some great ones at Court were unworthily emulous of his Glory, had contracted
many Enemies near the Grand Signior, who upon all occasions did him ill
Offices, but finding that infection to work slowly, they corrupted some of his
nearest Servants, who by the infusion of Poison in his Drinks destroyed him
suddenly, so that he did not long survive the Unfortunate Zolkierius, being in
this more Unhappy, That he expired in the quality of a Criminal, and that no
certain account can be given of him, but that he Died in the year 1620.

The Fiery Misfortune.
IN the year 1618. Dec. 28. I George Bonlekoe went Aboard the Ship Named the
New Horn, burden eleven hundred Tun, and two hundred and six Men, and Sailed
from the Texel in Holland bound for the East Indies. In three days we lost
sight of the English Coasts, the fourth so great a Storm arose, that we were
forced to let down our Topsails, and increasing in the Night, five great Waves
rolled over our Vessel, which filling our Deck with Water, made our Men cry
out, We sink, the Port-holes are open. Hearing that, I ran to the fore part of
the Ship, but found them all close, and freed the Men from their fear. I sent a
Man into the Hold, who found no Water there. We drained our Deck with Buckets,
and threw overboard the Seamens Chests, which by rolling about much incommoded
us; the Wind and Rain were so violent, that the Sky and Sea seemed joined
together, and the Lightning made all appear like a Flame. The Storm still
continued, when we perceived great Flocks of Sea-Gulls, which made us think we
were near the Isle of Bresil, though we could not see it; at length the fury of
the Winds broke off our Mainmast about five yards above Deck, which put us in
great fear, but with much labor we made our Foremast to serve in the place.

The Tempest continued sixteen days and then the Wind ceased. When having
repaired our Tackle we pursued our Voyage, steering our course to the Canary
Islands, and perceiving a Ship behind us we stopped our course expecting her, and
found it was the New Zealand, who had suffered no damage by the Storm. Next
day we met with another, called the New Enchysen, both bound for the
East Indies, so we Sailed all three in company, making merry every day Aboard
of each other, and passing by the Canaries, came to the Isles of May and
Fonges, where the Mists and Rains were so thick, that we lost sight of each
other. We sounded at Fonges but sound no bottom, and sent our Longboat toward
the shore, but the Spaniards at Land shot at them with Muskets, and would not
suffer them to come ashore; whereupon having taken a few Fish, we weighed
Anchor and Sailed toward the Equinoctial Line. Next morning we again discovered
our two Companions, and joyfully saluted each other, who told us, That Landing
at the Isle of May to buy some Provisions, the Spaniards opposed and killed two
of their Men, which made them return empty. At length arriving under the Line,
the Weather calmed, and the Winds were so uncertain, sometimes turning all the
Compass at once, that we were obliged to stay there three Weeks. The Sea was
calm in the Day and rough at Night, and the Waves that beat against our Vessel
seemed like Flames of Fire.

We proceeded toward the Cape of Good Hope, and saw Sea-Gulls checkered with
black Spots on their Wings, of which we took several, with an Instrument
whereto a little Bell was tied. These Fowls appear always near the Cape, and
guided us thither, but the Wind blowing hard, we passed it without Landing,
since all our people were in Health, this being about the end of May, five
months after our departure from Holland.

We steered our course toward Madagascar, and parted company with the two other
Ships, who both took a different course. At this time several of our Men were
Sick, whereupon we endeavored to Land, perceiving several persons walking
along the shore; one of our Men got ashore and spoke to them, but could not
understand what they said, only by signs perceived that they informed us there
was a better Landing place a little lower. Meeting with no fresh Provisions
here, to the great grief of the Sick people (whose number daily increased, and
some of them dyed) they came to the Captains Cabin, and desired him to seek
Land, affirming they should recover as soon as they came ashore by the help of
the Air.

The Captain hereupon resolved to Sail to the Isle of Mascarius, but when he
arrived there, the Wind was so strong, that Heyn Roll our Merchant would not
consent they should venture to go ashore, yet at length, by the importunity of
the Sick men, they were put into a Shallop, having a Sail to make a Tent, with
Oil, Vinegar, Kettles, and other Utensils, along with them, and so were set
ashore, where they instantly threw themselves on the Grass, and in a short time
found much benefit from the sweetness of the Air. We discovered several
Pigeons and Ring-Doves on the Trees, who suffered us to take them with our
Hands; of which we killed and wasted two hundred in one Day. We found likewise
store of Shellfish, which we Stewed with Damask-Prunes brought from Holland.

But this place being inconvenient, I went in the Shallop, with several
others, upon discovery, and five Leagues further we found Springs of Water
near the shore, but somevvhat brackish by communication with the Sea. Here
were Ring-Doves, gray Parrots, and other Fovvl, with a great number of
Tortoises, 25 of them together sometimes shading themselves under a Tree; we
took as many as we pleased, for they did not fear us. There was likewise a
sort of Animals with small Wings but could not fly, being so fat that they
drevv their Tails after them on the ground; and were scarce able to move.

It was pleasant to observe, that when we made a Parrot or other Bird cry and
make a noise, all that heard it came to his relief, and were thereby taken. We
then put our Sick men aboard the Ship, and brought them to this place, and then
eight of our Seamen were sent to fetch in Provision and Fish in the Rivers,
where they caught store of excellent Fish, some as big as Salmons. Here was a
little River of fresh Water, on the brink whereof grew such thick Trees, and in
so exact order, as if they had been planted, yielding a very fine prospect. We
found here a Plank, wherein was cut in great Letters, That Admiral Adrian
Maerts, standing into this Road with thirteen Sail of Ships, and having sent
some Shallops to Land, they were all dashed in pieces by a furious Storm, and
all the Men drowned; but during our stay the Sea was calm enough. Our Men run
over all the Island without meeting with any Humane Creature, but found good
store of Birds, and another River full of Fish; and pulling off their Shirts,
and spreading them on the Water, caught several excellent Eeles. Every morning
we had the pleasure to see the Tortoises come out of the Sea to run upon the
shore, digging holes in the Sand wherein to lay their Eggs, the number of which
were sometimes two hundred, and then covering up the holes that lay next the
Sun, they left them to be hatched by the heat thereof, from whence we might see
young Tortoises no bigger than Wallnuts, running upon the Sand.

In this place were many Palm Trees, from whence we drew a very pleasant
Liquor. We saw several Deer, but so Wild that we took only an old one whose
Horns were Worm-eaten, and the flesh unpleasant to eat. We set up a Sun Dial to
know how the time passed. Our Sick being fully recovered, and our Vessel
trimmed and aired, we beat a Drum for our people to bring aboard all the
Provisions; one of whom by shooting at a Fowl, lost his Eye by the breaking of
the Gun. After we had Sojourned twenty one days in this small Island, we Sailed
for St. Marys near Madagascar, the Water on the shore being clear like
Crystal, so that we could discern the bottom; the Inhabitants perceiving us,
came in their Canoa's, made out of an hollow Tree, to our Ships side, bringing
with them Apples, Citurns, Rice and Fowl, but we could not understand them,
only they cried out, Bonu Be Cou, Que Cicou, signifying thereby that they had
Cows, Calves, Sheep and Fowls, and that what they brought was only a small
sample. We beheld them with much amazement, and gave them a great Bowl of Wine,
into which putting their Heads they drunk like Beasts, and the fumes of the
Wine getting into their Brains, made them show a thousand Antic Tricks. They
were Naked, only their Nuditives covered with a Skin, their complexion
yellow, inclining to brown, by rubbing themselves with a certain Oil to keep
off the heat of the Sun. We went daily on shore to exchange with them little
Bells, Spoons, Knives, and Coral for Calves, Sheep, Rice and Milk. They brought
Milk in Leaves made like a close Basket, so that we were forced to pierce a
hole to get it out.

After two or three days stay, we Sailed three or four Leagues further, where
going on shore we met with nothing but Apples and Melons, which we little
valued. The Ships Council ordered me to go ashore at Madagascar, where we,
found little Fruit. We had a Musician in the Ship, who playing before the
Inhabitants, they were so taken therewith, that they stood amazed for some time
admiring him, and then fell a Dancing round him, in several pleasant postures.
They seem ignorant of any God, setting up before their Houses the Heads of Oxen
on Spikes, to whom they kneel, and make Adoration; we endeavored to inform
them better but to no purpose, and returning aboard, directed our course to the
Straight of Sumda, and arriving to the height thereof, which was five Degrees
and an half North Latitude, November. 19. the Steward after Dinner went down into
the Hold with a Candle to fill his Runlet with Aqua Vitae, that it might be
ready next morning to distribute a Cup to every one according to Custom. He
strikes the sharp end of his Candlestick into an Hogshead above that he drew
from, and having finished his business, endeavors to pluck it out again, which
he did with such force, that a spark of the Light fell into the Hogshead of
Aqua Vitae, which instantly took Fire, and put it all into a Flame; I being on
the Deck, and hearing the Steward cry Fire, looked down through the Hatches and
saw him throwing Water into it, and running down could then perceive no Fire.
Nay, I thrust my Arm into the Hogshead, and could feel none, the Water seeming
to have extinguished it: I went away, but soon after the Fire increased so
much, that its violence caused the bottom of the Hogshead to fly out, whereby
the Flame dispersed it self on a heap of Sea-coal that lay underneath, and set
it on Fire, which so much alarmed us, that we all run to quench it, but found
it difficult, since three rows of Hogsheads lay one upon another; and by
throwing Water on the Coals, so thick and sulphurous a smoke arose as almost
stifled us. I proposed to Heyn Roll our Merchant, to throw the Gunpowder
overboard, but he absolutely refused to consent to it, alleging, It was still
possible to quench the Fire. If, says he, we throw our Powder away, how shall
we defend our selves if attacked by an Enemy? And if taken, How shall we excuse
our selves to our Owners? So the Powder remained in the Ship.

The Fire still prevailing, and none being able to stay in the Hold for the
smoke, we made, diverse holes in the Deck, through which we threw down a great
quantity of Water, but all in vain: The Shallop had been near three Weeks in
the Water drawn after the Ship. Some of the Men got into the Cock-boat to have
more room to Work, and our fear increasing, seeing nothing but the Heavens and
Water without hope of Succor, others slid along down the Ships side into the
Sea, and Swam to the Shallop to secure themselves. Heyn Roll being on the
Fore-Deck, wondered to see so many people in the two Boats; they spying him,
called out they were ready to depart, and if he would go along with them he
must hasten down. He accordingly consented, and being come down, desired them
to give the Captain notice and take him in, but they would not consent to it,
instantly cutting the Ropes and going off. I knew nothing of this, being very
earnest in quenching the Flames, when a Sailor surprised me, saying, Good
Captain what shall we do, since the Shallop and Longboat have left the Ship,
and are under Sail? If they are gone, said I, They never design to return
again; and running up the Ropes I perceived them, and thereupon caused all the
Sails to be hoisted up, and Sailed after them, but coming within three Ships
length, they rowed up against the Wind and escaped: Whereupon I encouraged the
rest of my Men afresh, saying, Sirs, next to God, all our Help is in our own
Hands, let us every one fall to Work, and try again what we can do; go first
and throw away the Powder. Which was done, but the Fire being got to the lowest
part of the Hold, we could not come near it because of the Iron and other
Goods, therefore I resolved to let in the Water five Foot deep to quench it,
and the Carpenter made several Holes to that purpose.

Nothing but Sighs and Weeping were now observed amongst us, yet continuing
vigorously to pour down Water, the Fire seemed to abate; but to check our
hopes, it soon after took hold of the Oils which we had in great quantity
aboard. After which, the more Water we threw the more the flame increased: Then
it was that our Ruin appeared to be without remedy, and our Wailings and
Lamentations grew greater, all Succor failing, and the devouring Ocean being
ready to swallow us up, and though we had thrown sixty Barrels of Powder
overboard, yet there remained at least three hundred still in the Ship which
we could not get at, so that at length the Fire reached them, and immediately
the Ship, with one hundred and nineteen persons, were blown up into the Air: I,
with sixty five more, were on the Deck, expecting this fatal blow, clinging to
the Mainmast, in hope to fall with it into the Water and save our selves, but
are all blown into the Air with the rest, and I who was their Captain, seeing
nothing but Death before my Eyes, cried out, O my God, have pity upon me,
verily believing this was the last moment of my Life, but although the blow did
much astonish me, yet I was not wholly senceless, but retained some remains of
Hope and Courage. Thus I fell into the Water, near the Wreck of the Ship which
was shivered into a thousand pieces, and taking breath a little, looking about
I perceived the Mainmast on one side of me, and the Foremast on the other,
whereupon I got astride on the Mainmast, and observing the dismal Ruins of the
Ship, I cried out, Good God! what a fine Vessel is perished and destroyed in a
moment like Sodom and Gomorah! In making these Reflections, I perceived a Young
man Swimming, who got hold of the Keel of our Ship, saying, I have caught it:
Good God! said I, is there any one yet alive? I observed a little Mast driven
by the Waves toward him, I desired him to thrust, it toward me, that whereon I
was ballancing too much, and I being unable, without great pain, to stir my
self, having two large Wounds in my Head and Back, and my Arms and Thighs
sorely bruised, O God* said I, yet but a little while and I am a lost Man. We
got both on this Mast, he before and I behind, with each of us a Board in our
Hands, when the Young Man hoisting up himself discovered the Shallop, but at so
great a distance, that he could not perceive whither the Poop or Prow were
toward us.

The Sun was now setting, which much afflicted us, who had no hope but in
Heaven, to which we continually addressed our Prayers: At length we were
comfortably surprised with the sight both of the Shallop and Cock-Boat, which
came very near us; I called out to them, Save your Captain: They answered me,
Is our Captain still alive? I told them, I am the Person. The Young Man, my
Companion, set himself courageously to Swimming, but I being disabled by my
Wounds and Bruises, cried out, If they would have me they must come and fetch
me. Then they made up toward me, and our Trumpeter threw out a Rope, which I
fastened about my middle; and thus they drew me to them. I had formerly made a
little Lodge in my Shallop for two persons, wherein I was laid, it being
thought I would soon expire. Heyn Roll, and others, visited me, whom I advised
to keep all Night near the Wreck, to see if they could find any Provisions, or
a Compass to find Land, for they left the Ship in such haste, that they took
not any Meat nor Drink with them: They told me likewise, that the Pilot had
taken away the Compass out of his Lodge, as foreseeing we must abandon the Ship.

That Night Heyn Roll made the Seamen Row hard to try if they could perceive
Land, but at Daybreak, to their great trouble, they could see none. They came
and asked my advice, I told them they had done ill in not continuing near the
Wreck last Night, where they might have found store of Provisions, since I had
seen pieces of Flesh and Cheese swim in great quantities about our Legs, so
that we could scarce make way for them when we were on the Mast. They desired
me to rise a little, which I did with much difficulty; I demanded what
Provisions they had, they brought me two little Barrels with about eight pound
of Biscuit, which was their whole Stock. Comerades, said I, this will not do,
lay by your Oars, for you do but weary your selves with Rowing, take your
Shirts and make Sails of them; which they did. I offered mine but they would
not accept it, desiring to preserve my life. We were about forty six persons in
the Shallop, and twenty six in the small Boat; in all seventy two. There was a
good Morning Gown and Cushion in the small Boat which were given me. Our
Surgeon having no Remedies left, stopped the two holes in my Head with chewed
Bread, which with Gods assistance cured them.

Our Sails being ready, we steered by the course of the Stars, though we could
scarce discern their Rising and Sitting; the Night was extreme cold, and the
day very hot, the Sun shining just over our Heads. We invented an Instrument,
by the Coopers help, to take the Suns height, and afterward with Chalk made a
little Sun-Dial. I cut on a Plank, behind the Shallop, a Chart, in the best
manner I could, and there describing the Isles of Sumatra, Java, and the
Straight of Sunda, lying between these two Islands. That day the Ship was
lost, I had taken the height, and found we were in five Degrees and half South
Latitude, and now found we were near ninety Leagues from Land. I made likewise
a Compass, and directed our course seventy Leagues side-ways to get Land, that
we might the better know where to go.

I now distributed our small store of Biscuit, giving every man his allowance,
which was not much bigger than ones Finger; this was soon gone, and we had no
Drink, so that our thirst was insupportable, but soon after it happened to
Rain, and we stretched out our Sails to receive it, and wringing the Water into
our little Barrels, filled them therewith. I made one of my Shoes serve for a
Cup, and caused every Man to take his turn in coming to the Barrel, and having
drank, to give place to his companion. They entreated me to Drink my fill,
which I would not, contenting my self with the same portion as the rest. And
thus we kept together, but the Shallop out-sailing the Cock-boat, and there
being none in it that understood Navigation, they begged of me to be received
into the Shallop, but the Seamen opposed it, saying, That though the Shallop
was large, yet it could not hold so great a number, and thereupon they cut the
Ropes and left them. Great was our calamity being without Provisions, and out
of sight of Land, yet I still encouraged them, by saying they were not far from
it; but they murmured often, crying out, Our Captain tells us more than he
knows, since we every day seem to be at a greater distance from it. But when it
seemed impossible for us to subsist any longer, it pleased God to send a great
number of Sea-Gulls, who flew about us as if they desired to to be taken; we
caught some of them, but had not patience to pluck off the Feathers, yet eat
them with as good an Appetite as if they had been dressed.

But still descrying no Land, we began to despair; those in the other Boat
coming up, again begged us to take them in, which at length we did, esteeming it
better to dye all together, since there was no sign of Relief, being then in
all seventy two Souls without either Meat or Drink, or expectation of getting
any. Looking thus woefully upon each other, by the goodness of Heaven a great
quantity of flying Fish rose from the Water, flying till their Wings were dry,
and then fell down into our Boat; we immediately seized and divided them, and
eat them raw, which comforted us and kept us from starving, so that none dyed,
which was wonderful, since many already drank Seawater, notwithstanding all my
Remonstrances; others held Musket-bullets in their Mouths; other again drunk
their own Urine so long as it was good, but at length it would not serve.

Our calamity still increasing, we began to look upon one another with a cruel
eye, plainly discovering our design to feed upon each other: At last, it came
almost to an open resolution, that the Boys should be killed and eaten first,
and then they would cast Lots amongst themselves. It is impossible to express
the Horror which I had at this proposal, perceiving their readiness to execute
it; I therefore earnestly begged of God to change their Minds, and preserve
them from this Cruelty, and going to them, said, Friends, I do assure you we
are not far from Land, for I know it by my Instruments; hope in God and he will
relieve us. They replied, I were used to entertain them with such discourses,
telling me plainly, That if they diseerned no Land in such a time, they would
certainly begin to eat the Boys. Considering their barbarous Resolution, I
reiterated my most earnest Prayers to the Almighty, not to suffer us to be
tempted beyond our power, but to guide and direct us to some place of safety.
We were grown so lean and faint that we could scarce stand, and our Merchant
Heyn Roll was not able to rise from the ground, so that my whole business was
to go from Poop to Prow to comfort them, though I wanted as much consolation my
self.

We Sailed thus at all Adventures till Dec. 2. 1619. being the thirteenth day
since we lost our Ship: We had then some Rain, which we greedily received, and
filled our two small Vessels, and every Man at Night stood back to back against
each other like Sheep against the cold. Next morning the Weather cleared up and
the Quartermaster being at the Helm, hollowed out, Land, Land, Land: All our
people extremely rejoiced at the News, and taking fresh strength and courage;
we hoisted up our Sails, and got ashore that very Day, where we praised God,
that had not suffered us to commit the crime we were about to perpetrate, for
this was the last Day prefixed for this cruel and barbarous Resolution of eating
the Boys. We forraged the Island, and found abundance of Coco-Nuts but no fresh
Water; we drew a very pleasant Liquor from them, and eat the Meat. We could
find no Man on the place, though it seemed to have been Inhabited, but saw a
Serpent as big as our largest Barrels. This Island is distant four or five
Leagues from Sumatra; we coasted Eastward as long as our Nuts lasted, which
being spent, we kept near the Isle to find a convenience to Land, because the
roughness of the Sea made it dangerous, and likewise a Bank of Sand; but at
length, we got ashore without any other damage than being wet with the dashing
of the Waves.

Here we found fresh Water, and Beans amongst the Herbs, and a little further
Tobacco and a Fire, which was very pleasing to us Since we knew the Island was
Inhabited, we kindled a Fire in six or seven places, reposing our selves about
it, and at Night placed Sentinels to prevent surprizals from the Inhabitants.
In the Night we were as sick and griped with the Beans as we had been before
with the Coco's; and at the same time the Natives, favored by the darkness,
came upon us; of which our Sentinels gave us notice, and though we were Sick,
and had no other Weapons but two Hatchets and an old rusty Sword, yet we
resolved to sell our Lives as dear as possible, and ranging our men in Battle,
with each a Fire brand stretched out at full length in his Hand, and the
sparkles flying in the Air, we approached the Barbarians, who were much
astonished, not discerning what Arms we had, and thereupon fled with* all
speed, and we returned to our Fires, and stood upon our Guard. In the morning
we saw three Men coming toward us, and some of our Company spoke to them in
the Malay Language, and they asking who we were, he told them Hollanders, that
had lost their Ship by Fire, and desired Provisions, which they soon after
brought, both of Rice and Fowl, for which we paid eight Crowns, and divided it
betwixt us, and met with a Liquor as strong as Wine, in a small Village, of
which we drunk each his share. The Natives set down by us, but spoke not a
Word, seeming amazed to see us.

After this I bought a Buffle of them for five Crowns, but he was so Wild I
could not take him, so our Men staid ashore to catch him, and I went in a
Canoa, with two Negro's, to the Shallop, who I suppose designed to do me a
mischief if there had been opportunity, but I used such rough Language toward
them, that they saw I did not fear them. Next morning we saw two men bringing a
Buffle, which I perceiving not to be the same, asked them why our Men did not
return; they said, They had not yet caught the Buffle. Well, said I, we will
make sure of this, and ordered the Sergeant to cut off his Legs, at which the
Buffle fell, and the Negro's set up an horrid cry, upon which two or three
hundred more came out of a Wood upon us, designing to surprise us by getting
betwixt us and the Shallop, but our three Sentinels gave notice of it, and came
to our assistance, they approaching us with Swords and Javelins; whereupon we
made to our Shallop, and they pursued us furiously to the side of it. The Baker
of our Ship wrought Wonders with our rusty Sword, and two others did the same
with the two Hatchets, but finding our selves overpowered, we cut our Cable
and Sailed away; some of the Negro's lay Dead, and others Wounded, on the
Water. The valiant Baker received a Wound in his Belly by an Invenomed Arrow,
of which he died. We lost twelve Men in the Fight, and four that were left
ashore, which we were very loath to depart without, but having only eight Hens,
and a little Rice for fifty persons, we Sailed along the Coasts, near the
Rocks, and found store of small Oysters.

We left the Bay, and Sailed upon the Main Sea, to find out the Island of Java,
and went ashore again in another Island, where we found some Bamboos and
Palm Trees, the tops whereof being very tender we eat. Here from the top of an
high Mountain I discovered the Straight of Sunda, and the Isles of Java and
Sumatra, which was joyful news to us all, being impatient to see some of our
own Countrymen once more, who had a Factory there. Sailing on we met with some
Holland Ships, and among others, one of those who lost company of us near the
Canary-Islands, who at first did not know us, but when we discovered our
selves, the Captain embraced us with Tears of Joy, and we went aboard his Ship,
relating to him at large our woeful Misfortunes, which he could not hear
without much emotion. He gave us a Yatch to go to Battavia, where John Peter
Koen kept his Court, where being arrived, we told the Guards we desired to
speak with the Lord-General, who having notice thereof, commanded us to be
brought into his presence: After we had paid our respects to him, we gave an
account of our selves, and of the fatal accident that had occasioned the
burning of our Ship, and all the sad Disasters attending us afterward. He
replied, It was indeed a miserable Accident, but God, said he, has miraculously
preserved you in all your Dangers. He commanded his Attendants to bring some
Canary: My Lord Drank to me in a great Cup of Gold, and said I was welcome, and
that we ought to consider our selves as Men that had once lost our Lives, and
now by Gods great Mercy had found them again; adding, I must be gone this Night
to Bantam upon urgent occasions, do you remain here and eat at my Table till my
return.

Eight days after we were ordered to attend him at Bantam, where he sent for
me, saying; Captain Bontekoe, go on Board the Shepherd Vessel till further
Order. I accepted this Commission with hearty thanks, and Heyn Roll had
likewise a Commission to exercise Merchandise: Soon after my Ship, with two
others, were sent toward the Coasts of China, and coming to a Town called
Laritoeken, whose Inhabitants named Specks and Mestis much obstructed Trade,
thereupon our Council resolved that we should Attack, and endeavor to Destroy
them; in pursuance whereof, we put some Men ashore, who set some Houses on
Fire, on purpose to divert the Inhabitants by quenching them, to give ^s the
better opportunity to Land our Forces, which having done, those in the Fort
perceiving (...), made two Sallies upon us, and killed twenty (...) on the
place, wounding, several (...) (...) and forcing us to retreat.

Having taken in fresh Water, we Sailed toward Amboina, and parting with Heyn
Roll, not without much regret, remembering the miseries we both jointly
suffered, we at length arrived at the famous City of Batavia, where the
Governor received me favorably, and made me Captain of a better Ship, newly
arrived from Holland, called the Groningen, in which I Sailed to the Road of
Jambay. Our Pilot went in a Boat up the River to visit Captain Martes, who
entertained him very kindly; departing from thence he found himself drowsy,
and reposed on an Hill near the Sea, but in the Night fell into the Water and
was Drowned.

Having passed two years in Voyaging, I was sent in company with eight Ships
more, by order from General Koen, to go to Piscadoris, to oblige the Chinois to
Trade either by fair means or foul; and April 22. we cast Anchor before Macou,
being now fifteen Sail, and next day we began to batter the City, and in the
mean time our Commander in chief took the opportunity of the great Fire we
made, to Land six hundred Men, the Enemy endeavored to hinder them, but our
men, with their Swords in their Hands, drove them out of the Trenches which
they had made, and we became Masters of the lower ground, and pursued them
vigorously, when by accident the fire took our Powder, which the Enemy
understanding, came upon us with such fury, that we were wholly disordered, and
forced to fly toward our Shallops, in great confusion, with the loss of one
hundred and thirty of our Men, and near as many Wounded, the Commander (...)
being slightly hurt in his Belly.

We Sailed from hence toward the Coast of China, and met a Jonque richly Laden,
bound for the Manilles; we took her, and made two hundred and fifty Chinois
Prisoners, and fastening the Jonque behind our Ship, we set fifteen of our Men
to Guard thirty of them, yet scarce thought our selves safe, and therefore put
them all down in the Hold, and shut the Hatches upon them, setting six men with
their Swords drawn, and Lamps burning all Night, to Watch them, making them
come up one by one to Eat. This caution caused them to have such awe of us,
that when I walked on the Deck, they ranged themselves on both sides to make
way, falling on their Knees before me. One of them told us, That a Chinois
Prophet predicted their Country should be invaded by Men with red Beards, and
because mine was so, they were persuaded I was the chief Person meant by that
Prophecy. They came every morning above Deck to Comb themselves: There was
some among them, whose Hair was so long that it come down to their Heels when
they stood upright, which they tied in knots, and fastened with a Bodkin
behind. We carried them to Piscadoris, which was the General Rendevouz of all
the Prisoners, who were set to work on the Fortifications of the Fort.

Having been so long absent from my Native Country, I was now desirous to
return home again, and hearing that the Ship called the Good Hope, was bound
for Batavia, I desired leave of the General to return to Holland, which at
length, with some difficulty, I obtained, and set Sail with the first
opportunity in company of two Ships more, and coming toward the Cape of Good
Hope, a great Tempest arose, so that I was forced to let down all my Sails, and
give way to the Wind, which drove our Ship Southward, the two other Vessels
following our Example, toward Midnight the Wind increased so violently, that we
could not see what course to hold, for the Wind turned about the Compass. Our
Mainmast was broke off and thrown into the Sea. This violent Storm or
Hurricane continued about four hours the Sea being not much moved by it, but
the Wind a little abating, it grew so rough and boisterous that we narrowly
escaped being cast away: Our Decks took in so much Water, that we found it
seven foot deep in the Hold. We had sixty pieces of Brass and Iron Cannon
aboard, which lay under the Pepper and Ginger, and rolling about ground
several Bags of Pepper to Powder, which stopped the passages of our Pump, and
much endangered us; at length we cleared it, and falling stoutly to Pumping,
were much encouraged when we found the Water abate. Our Mainmast, which was in
the Water, beat strongly against our Ship, so that we feared it would much
damnifie it, and obliged us to cut the Ropes that held it. Next Morning we
discovered the Midleburg, one of our Company, which had lost all her Masts by
the Tempest, but the other Ship we supposed was cast away, for we were carried
into a place where the Sea was of a brown color, and we drevv from thence a
quantity of Pepper, which confirmed us in our belief of her loss, to our great
grief. The Captain of the Midleburg came in his Long boat, desiring us to
furnish him with some Masts, which we concluded to do, much pitying his
miserable condition, but the Seamen mutiny'd, and said, They had need of them
themselves; but at length, with threats and fair Words, I prevailed with them,
and so we furnished them with what necessaries we had, and then left them,
Sailing toward Madagascar. In Coasting which, we savv a certain place on the
Land that burned; and soon after, finding a convenient Road, we cast Anchor,
and carried our Merchandises ashore to dry them, and to repair the Ship. And
seeing some of the Inhabitants, we made them by signs understand we vvanted a
Mast, and they very obligingly directed us where to cut one down, which we did.
Whilst we were thus employed, the people hearing of our being there, came from
all parts, bringing with them Cattle, Honey, Wax, and several Fruits, setting
up Tents the more conveniently to Trade with us, telling us, They were at War,
and desired us to assist them, for which we should have what we would desire,
telling us, Their King spoke Spanish, and kept his Court six miles from thence.
We sent four persons to Treat with the King about some Rice, who received them
kindly, but told them it was very scarce that year, the Locusts having spoiled
it: Which might very well be, for I being one day far advanced into the
Country, they rose from the ground like a Cloud, and fell upon me in such
numbers, that I had much difficulty to breathe. They have Wings to fly; but
when on the ground they leap like Grasshoppers. The King said he was forced
sometimes to send (...) three hundred men into the Fields to (...) the Rice,
but often to little purpose. Some of the Inhabitants plucked off their Wings,
and boiled and eat them, making signs to us to do the like, but we had no
Stomach to them. The King having Treated our Men, came along with them to our
Ship, and presented us with four Oxen, which we kindly received, and gave him
two Muskets, who accepted them, and took his leave of us. Our Men were so
pleased, they were loath to come away, but that I threatened them, if they staid,
to return to Batavia; so they hastened to repair the Ship, which was ready to
Sail in April. Most of the Inhabitants are black, some of them had their Hair
dangling about their Shoulders, others wore it in little curles like Wool, the
Women tie up theirs behind their Head; they rub themselves with Tar, and then
stand in the Sun to make it shine on their Bodies. They go Naked, only some
have a little cloth about their Secrets; others none.

We now resolved to depart, but two of our Seamen having deserted us, we sent
to find them but could not; we supposed some Women had inveigled them away, who
are great Lovers of Dutchmen, and we saw several Children half white: And
surely had the Country abounded as well with Wine and Beer as it did with
Women, we should not have got our Men so soon off from this Island. Therefore
leaving them in this barbarous Country, we set Sail for the Cape of Good Hope,
and so Sailing along the Coast of Africa, we at length arrived at Kinsale in
Ireland, and November 15. 1625. after so many perils, misfortunes and
deliverances, by Gods Assistance we came safe to Zealand, seven years after our
departure from thence.

The Distressed Hollanders at Nova Zembla.
SOme years since, two Ships were set forth by the Town of Amsterdam, to Sail
into the North Seas, to discover the Kingdoms of Cathay and China, in which
William Barents went as chief Pilot. The tenth of May we Sailed from Amsterdam:
On the fourth of June we saw three Suns and four Rainbows; and John Cornelison,
Master of the other Ship, with his Officers, came aboard our Ship, to persuade
us to alter our course, which we refused to do, and so parted company. The
Ninth of September our Ship was wholly enclosed with Ice, on the Coast of Nova
Zembla, so that we lay three or four Foot deep in the Ice, and seeing that we
could not free our Ship, and that Winter was coming on, we resolved to Winter
there, and cast our selves upon the Providence of God; and taking counsel
together, we determined to build a House. Immediately eight of us went ashore,
to find out the convenientest place to erect our House upon, and God in our
extremest need sent us unexpected comfort, for we found certain Trees, which
had been driven upon the shore from some Neighboring Region, for we saw none
growing in this Desert Land. And this Drift-wood served not only to erect our
House, but also to burn all the Winter long; which we laid in heaps, that it
might not be covered over with Snow. The Wind being North-East it was exceeding
cold, freezing two Fingers thick in the Salt Water. We made a Sled to draw the
Wood to the place where we had concluded to build our House.

September 25. our Carpenter died, and we Buried him next day under the Sedges,
not being able to dig up the frozen Earth. We began to Work hard on our House,
being sixteen Men in all, whereof there was still one or other Sick; we then
carried the greatest part of our Bread from the Ship to our House, and the day
following brought ashore our Wine, and other Victuals. October 19. there being
but two Men and a Boy in the Ship, a Bear endeavored by force to get into it,
and though they shot at her with pieces of Wood, yet she advanced boldly,
whereupon the two Men leapt into the Ballast, and the Boy climbed to the
Foremast top, to save their Lives; but in the mean time, some of our Men fired
a Musket at her, and then she run away. The Twentieth being calm Sunshine
Weather, we went to fetch the rest of our Beer out of the Ship, where we found
some of the Barrels, and even their Iron Hoops, frozen in pieces. The next day
it was so great a Snow, that we could not stir out of Doors; the day after
being calm, we went on Board to bring the rest of our Men home to our House;
but we found one of them sick, and perceiving that the Wind began to blow hard,
we were forced to lie still that day. The Twenty fourth, the rest of our Men
came to the House, drawing their sick Companion on a Sled, and then with great
difficulty we drew our Boat home, and turned the bottom thereof upwards, that
if God in his Mercy should preserve us, we might make use of it, when time
served us.

The Sun in its highest Altitude began now to be very low, and we used all the
diligence we could to fetch all necessaries out of the Ship, but when we had
Laded the last Sled, our Master looking about him perceived three Bears, coming
toward us from behind the Ship, whereupon he cried out aloud to fright them
away, and we put our selves in a posture of Defense, and, as good Fortune was,
there lay two Halberds on the Sled, whereof the Master took one and I the
other, and resisted them as well as we could, but the rest of our Men running
to save themselves in the Ship, one of them fell in a Clift of Ice, which put
us in great fear, lest the furious Animals should run to devour him, but they
continued to pursue the Men that fled toward the Ship. In the mean time, we
and the Man that fell in the Ice, taking our advantage, got into the Ship on
the other side, which the Beasts perceiving, came fiercely toward us, and we
doubting that the two Halberts would not be sufficient to defend us, still kept
them in play by throwing Billets at them, and they, every time we threw, ran
after them, as a Dog uses to do after a Stone that is cast at him: Mean while
we sent one down under Hatches to strike fire, and another to fetch Pikes,
but he could get no fire, and so we could not shoot. At last, as they rushed
furiously upon us, we struck one of them with a Halbert on the Snout,
wherevvith feeling her self hurt she gave back, which the other two being less
perceiving ran away, and left us at liberty to draw our Sled quietly to our
House.

Oct. 27. it Snowed so fast that we could not Work without Doors: That day we
killed a white Fox, which we Roasted and eat, it tasted like Conies flesh. We
also set up a Lamp, in which we burnt the Bears Fat. We then fetched Sedges
from the Sea side, which we laid upon the Sail that was spread upon our House,
for we could not drive the Deals close together for Ice; we had great store of
Snow, so that we durst not look out of doors all that day, nor the day
following. November 2. one of our men killed a Fox with a Hatchet; before the
Sun declined we saw no Foxes, and then the Bears began to go from us. The
fourth day was calm, and the Sun disappeared. Then, our Chyrurgeon made a Bath
for us in a Wine-pipe, into which we entered one after the other, receiving
great benefit thereby. The same day we caught a Fox. When the Sun had
forsaken us, we savv the Moon continue both Day and Night.

The seventh day was so dark, we could hardly discern the Day from the Night,
because our Clock stood still. The eighth, still Weather, we fetched another
Sled of Firewood, and took a Fox. Now we shared our Bread, allowing to each
Man four Pound and ten Ounces in eight days; our Flesh and Fish we shared not,
because we had greater store thereof, but our Drink failing, we were obliged
to divide that also: Yet our best Beer had almost lost all its strength and
became insipid, and besides there was a great deal of it spilt. The tenth day
was calm, and our Men went into the Ship and found the Ballast covered with
Water, which they could not Pump out because it was frozen. We made a round
thing like a Net of Cable-yarn to catch Foxes withal, and the same day caught
one. We shared our Wine, of which each Man had for his allowance two Glasses a
day, but our usual Drink was melted Snow.

The twentieth was fair still Weather; we Washed our Sheets, but the cold was
so violent, that no sooner had we wrung them, but they froze so stiff, that we
might have sooner torn them in pieces than opened them; so that we were forced
to put them into the Boiling Water again to thaw. We had now but seventeen
Cheeses left, whereof one we eat amongst us, and the rest were distributed to
every Man one. The same day we took Foxes in our new Springes: The twenty
sixth, we were so closed up with Snow that we could not get out, but the twenty
ninth being clear Weather, we opened one of our Doors, Shoveling away the Snow,
and making clean our Springes, and took a Fox, of whose skins we made Caps to
defend our Heads against the extremity of the cold. The thirtieth being fair
Weather, six of us went to the Ship well Armed to see how it lay, and took a
Fox alive under the Fore-Deck. Then for three days together the Snow fell in
such abundance, that we could not stir out of the House, and were so tormented
with smoke that we durst hardly make a Fire; and so we were forced to lie still
in our Cabbins, heating Stones to warm our Feet.

In the mean time the Frost was so vehement, that the Walls and Roof of our
House were covered with Ice two Inches thick, and because we could not get
out, we set up a Glass of twelve hours, still watching to turn it up when
run out, lest we should miss our time. The fourth of December it cleared up,
and then we began by turns to dig open our Doors, and made clean our Fox-Traps.
The sixth was foul again, and the cold so insupportable, that what Fire soever
we made it would not warm us; yea, our Sack was frozen so hard, that we were
forced to melt it in the Fire, of which each man had about half a Pint allowed
him every second day, at other times drinking Water. The seventh continued foul
and stormy, so that consulting together what were best for us to do, one of the
company advised us to burn Sea-coals, which would cast a great and durable
heat; at Evening we made a great Fire thereof, which casting a good and
agreeable warmth, comforted us much: And therefore being desirous to continue
the heat, we concluded to stop up all the Doors and Chimney, and lying down in
our Cabbins a while talking together, at last we were taken with a vertiginous
dizziness in our Heads, and almost all stifled with a choking Vapor. We first
perceived our danger by means of a Sick man, who was less able no bear it, and
immediately some of the company that were strongest, starting out of their
Cabbins, first opened the Chimney and the Doors, but he that opened the Door
fell down in a Swoon upon the Snow, which I hearing, for my Cabin was next the
Door, I run to him, and throwing Vinegar upon his Face, brought him to his
Senses again. No sooner were the Doors open, but we all recovered our former
Healths, and so the cold, which till now we had esteemed as our bitterest and
most dreadful Enemy, proved our best Friend, and the only Preserver of our
Lives.

After this, the Master gave to every one of us a little Wine to comfort our
Hearts, and the Weather being clear, and the Sky full of Stars, we set our Door
wide open, and made ready our Springes, and took two Foxes. The eleventh the
Air was clear, but so cold that our Shoes froze as hard as Horns on our feet,
so that we could not wear them, and therefore made things resembling great
Pattins, the upper part being of Sheeps skins, which we put on over three or
four pair of Socks. Our Clothes were all white with Frost, yet we durst not
burn more Coals, for our late misfortune had taught us, That to shun one danger
we should run into another. We had now burnt all our Firewood, but there lay
some round about the House, which with great pain we dig'd up and brought in,
Working by turns, being hardly able to endure the extremity of the Cold, though
we wore Fox-skins about our Heads, and double Apparel on our Backs. The
eighteenth being clear Weather, seven of us going to the Ship, found a Fox in
the Cabin, and observed that in eighteen days absence the Water was risen
about a Finger high, but it was all Ice. Next day there arose such a Storm,
that the House was enclosed with Snow, yet we heard the Foxes running over our
House, and one of our company saying it was an ill sign we asked the reason; he
replied, Because we could not put them into the Pot, or Roast them. The foul
Weather and the cold were now so invincible, that all the means we used to
defend our selves against it were to no purpose, and in the morning our Cabbins
were all frozen, so that as the days began to lengthen, the cold began to
strengthen, for December 27. it continued stormy and cold, so that as we sat by
a great Fire and were ready to burn on the fore-side, our Backs were frozen
white. The day after it cleared up, and we opened the Door, digging a hole
through the Snow, and went out of the House upon seven or eight steps, each of
the height of a Foot, and going to make clean our Springes, we found in one of
them a dead Fox, frozen as hard as a Stone, which we brought into the House,
and some of the company thawed and eat it. The thirtieth, next day, was stormy
again, so that all our labor was in vain, and we were still Prisoners, and so
cold, that we burnt our Hose before we could feel the heat, and if we had not
sooner smelt than felt them, we should have burnt them before we had known it.

The first day of the New-year, the Weather continued as cold, foul, and Snowy,
as before, and we shared our Wine again, dividing it into smaller portions. We
had almost burnt all our Wood, yet durst not go out to fetch more, but we found
some pieces that lay over the Door, and also clove the Blocks whereon we used
to beat our Stock Fish, but not daring yet to stir abroad to know from what
point the Wind blew, we thrust a Half-pike out at the Chimney, with a little
cloth or feather on the top, but to no purpose, for it was instantly frozen as
hard as Wood. January the sixth was calm, so we dig'd our Door open, and
carrying out the filth, made every thing handsome, and fetched in Wood. We also
dug a great hole in the Snow without the House, in which we might cast our
filth; and after all our labor, remembering that it was Twelfth-day, we prayed
the Master to let us be merry that Night, and were content to spend some of the
Wine that we had spared before, so that Night we drank to the three Kings, and
having two pound of Meal, we made Pancakes with Oil, and a white Biscuit for
every Man, which we sop'd in Wine. We also made Tickets, and our Gunner was
King of Nova Zembla. The eighth being fair Weather, we began to observe
Daylight, which comforted us not a little. The tenth, seven of us well Armed
went to the Ship, which we found in the same state we left it in, but observed
many footsteps of Bears, and perceived that the Water was risen a foot higher
in it. The eleventh being still fair, we adventured to go to a Hill, a quarter
of a Mile off, from whence we brought some Stones to keep our feet warm in our
Cabbins. The fifteenth, six of us went aboard the Ship, and found a Spring
that we had placed in a hole of the Fore-Deck to catch Foxes, lie in the middle
of the Ship, all torn in pieces by Bears, as we perceived by their footsteps.
The sixteenth was fair, and we went out now and then to exercise our Limbs, and
stretch our Joints, with going and running, lest we should become Lame. About
Noon we perceived a certain redness in the Sky, a welcome Messenger of the
approaching Sun, Aurora blushing to lie so long a Bed. The seventeenth, we had
yet more comfortable tokens of the Suns Neighborhood, for the Air was somewhat
warmer, and the Ice melted in our Cabbins, but the Night proved cold again, and
our Wood consuming, we adventured to burn some Coals, keeping open the Chimney,
and received no hurt thereby.

Now the Foxes began to fail us, which made us fear the return of the Bears,
but it being fair, we went out again to cast the Bullet. Next day four of us
went to the Ship, praising God for that the hardest part of the Winter was past
over, and comforting our selves in the hopes of seeing our Native Country once
again; when we were come thither, we found that the Water still rose higher.
Two more went to the South-shore of Nova Zembla, and contrary to expectation, I
first perceived the edge of the Sun. Immediately we returned to make the rest
of our company partakers of these joyful Tidings, but Mr. Barents would not
believe us, affirming that it was yet fourteen days too soon for the Sun to
appear in that Climate, being in the Latitude of seventy six degrees; and many
offered to lay VVagers about it. The two days following, the Air was
overspread with foggy Mists, so that we could see nothing, which made them
that contradicted us insult over us, but upon the twenty seventh, the full Orb
of the Sun appeared above the Horizon, which manifestly justified our
Assertion. This is a wonderful and surprising effect of Horizontal Refraction.

The twenty fifth was again cloudy, and our VVagerers began to doubt of what
they had seen the day before. We now perceived a Bear, having seen none all
the time of the Suns absence; we cried out to fright her, and she ran away. But
a dusky Cloud covered the Horizon, whereupon our incredulous Companions
continued to mock us. In the Evening, one of our Company that had lain long
Sick, felt himself extremely ill, and apprehended the near approach of Death;
we comforted him as well as we could, but he died that Night. Next morning we
dig'd a hole, by turns, in the Snow, hard by the House, seven foot deep, in
which we Buried our Companion; which done we went to Breakfast, and while we
were at Meat, discoursed concerning the huge quantity of Snow that fell in this
Icy Region. At last we resolved, if it fell out that we were again enclosed, we
would endeavor to get out through the Chimney; immediately our Master went to
try whether he could climb up that way, and while he was scrambling up, one
of our Men went forth to see if he were out or not, who descrying the Sun,
called us all out to behold that Glorious Light in his full roundness, a little
above the Horizon; this put an end to our Controversy, and evidently confirmed
our first Assertion, hereupon we all rejoiced, and returned humble and hearty
thanks to our Almighty Protector. January 28. we spent in various kinds of
exercise, refreshing our dull and num'd Joints, but two days after we were
again closed up with a prodigious Storm of Snow. The last day of the Month
we made the Door clean, and going out were comforted with a sight of the Sun
in its full Luster; mean while we savv a Bear coming toward us, but when
we shot at her she ran away. The first of February, a boisterous Storm made
us again Prisoners; this discouraged us again much, for hoping that the Sun
would have rid us of the foul VVeather, we had made no great Provision of
VVood. The third we dig'd our Door open, but a thick and dark Mist covered the
Sun; this day we brought in some VVood with great pain. But the very next day
we were again shut up by the Snow, and so were forced to climb out at the
Chimney to ease our selves. We were much perplexed that we could not enjoy
the comfortable heat of the Sun that we had lately felt, and yet were forced to
have patience till the eighth, before the fury of the Storm was over, and on
the tenth we were sensible of that agreeable warmth we had so much longed for.

The eleventh we saw a Bear, but she came not within the reach of our Muskets,
but the day following we shot one into the breast, as she came right before our
Door, the bullet passed quite through her Heart, and came out at her Tail as
flat as a shilling; the Beast feeling her self wounded leapt backwards, and run
some five or six paces from the House before she fell: We coming up found her
still alive, and when she saw us, she reared up her Head in a threatening
manner, and we shot her twice in the body again before we adventured to touch
her. Having drawn her home to the House we flayed her, and took at least one
hundred pound of fat out of her belly, which we melted to burn in our Lamp, and
every Man had enough to burn a Lamp in his Cabin, for Reading and other
exercises, which before we could not do. This was a great comfort to us in our
dismal Habitation. Next day five of us went to the Ship, and found that the
Water did not increase much. The fifteenth we were again closed up, and on the
morrow, being Shrove-Tuesday, we made merry in the middle of our sorrow and
anguish, and every one of us drank a draught of Wine. The twenty second being
clear VVeather, eleven of us well Armed for fear of the Bears, went to the
place where we usually had our VVood, but not being able to dig it up, by
reason that it lay so deep in the Snow, we were forced to go a little further,
where we toiled hard to get some, but returning home with the Sled, our
strength failed us, for the long and sore misery that we had suffered, had so
enfeebled us, and so much impaired our bodies, that we were quite disheartened,
and almost resolved to abandon our selves to the untimely Death that threatened
us; but unavoidable necessity at length compelled us to make another effort to
proceed, and our hopes of better VVeather redoubled our fainting strength, and
when we drew near to the House, we saw much open Water in the Sea, which
increased our hopes, and so at last, with great difficulty, we finished our
irksom labor.

Next day we were again closed up, yet were constrained to get out for more
VVood, which we brought home with no less difficulty than before, for one of
our Companions had one of his Toes frozen off. We resolved to spare our Wood,
exercising our selves, when it was day, with running, leaping, and walking. To
them that lay in their Cabbins we gave hot stones to warm them, and toward
Night made a good Fire. The fourth of March, five of us going to the Ship,
found that the Bears had opened our Cooks Cup-board, that was covered over with
Snow, and had drawn it out of the Ship, Three days after we were again shut up,
but we were now used to climb up through the Chimney. The Storm continued two
or three days, and we perceived still more open Water in the Sea. Twelve of us
went to fetch Wood, our pain and labor still increasing, because our strength
decreased. When we came home, we entreated our Master to give each of us a
Glass of Wine, which he did, and this not only comforted and revived our
drooping Spirits, but made us more willing and cheerful in performing our
Laborious Tasks: Yet would we often say to one another, That if Wood might be
had for Money, we would gladly part with all our Wages for it, for the cold was
as piercing as in the depth of Winter, and daily increased rather than
diminished, and therefore we made Shoes of Felt, for the Leather was frozen as
hard as a Horn. The twenty first we brought home another Sled full of Wood, yet
the cold was insupportable, and it froze very hard on the Roofs and Walls of
our House, and the day after a storm enclosed us, and then our Coals were very
useful to us, but we dig'd our selves out two days after, and fetched home more
Wood, the pinching extremity of cold having forced us to burn up all that we
had. The twenty eighth, six of us went aboard the Ship, and found there many
marks of the Ravenous Bears, one of them coming to our House; we attempted to
shoot at her, but the Weather being moist, and the cock foisty, the Piece would
not give Fire, mean while the Beast advanced boldly forwards, and coming down
the Stairs close to the Door, endeavored to break into the House. Our Master
run to shut the Door, but being in great haste and fear, could not make fast
the Bolt, but it pleased God that the furious Creature seeing the Door shut
retired, yet within two hours after returning, she got upon the top of the
House, and made such a hideous roaring and hellish noise, as filled us all with
a pannick Terror, so that we verily believed she would have broken it down; she
tore the Sail that covered it in pieces, but the darkness of the Night
hindering us from seeing her, we made no resistance, and so at last she left us.

April 15. being calm, seven of us went aboard the Ship, and found it to be
still in the same case, and as we returned homewards, a great Bear came toward
us; we put our selves in a posture to meet her, whereupon she gave back, and we
observing the place from whence she came went to see her Den, where we found a
great hole made in the Ice about two foot deep, the entry thereof was narrow,
but it widen'd inward, we thrust in our Pikes to feel if there was any thing in
it, but perceiving it was empty, one of our Men crept in, yet durst not proceed
too far, for it was fearful and terrible. Then going along by the Seaside, we
saw the Mountains of Ice piled upon one another, in so wonderful a manner, that
they appeared like Icy Towns and Castles fortified with Towers and Bulwarks.
The seventeenth, seven of us went again to the Ship, and from thence clamber'd
over the Icy Hills to the open Water, and when we were got thither, saw a
little Bird swimming, which as soon as it espied us dived under Water. The
thirtieth, in the Night, we saw the Sun North, just above the Horizon, and from
that time had sight of it both Night and Day.

The first of May we dressed our last Flesh, which we had long spared, and it was
still very good, and the last Morsel tasted as well as the first; we then began
to think that we had kept House long enough here, and to talk of our departure,
and the Master considering that our best Meat began to fail us, when the Labor
we were to undergo required the greatest strength, he shared the rest of the
Bacon amongst us, which was only a small Barrel of Salt Bacon and Pickle,
whereof every one had two Ounces a Day, and so in three Weeks it was all eaten
up. The seventh Day we were yet once again closed up in our House: The
fourteenth we fetched our last Sled of Firewood, still wearing our Rug-shooes.
The twenty ninth in the Morning, ten of us were to bring our Scute to the House
to clean it, and were fain, with extreme pain, to dig it out from under the
Snow wherewith it lay covered, but beginning to draw it, we soon found our
selves unable to proceed, by reason of our extraordinary feebleness. This quite
disheartened us, but our Master encouraged us, representing unto us that our
Lives lay at the Stake, and that if we did not draw away, and fit out the
Scute, we must resolve to continue Burghers of Nova Zembla, and make our Graves
there; but we were notwithstanding, constrained to give over at this time, and
return home comfortless, yet in the Afternoon taking heart again, we determined
to turn the Boat that lay by the House, and to amend it, that it might be
fitter to carry us through the infinite number of dangers that threatened us,
in the performance of so long and troublesome a Voyage. While we were busy at
Work, a huge Bear assaulted us with greater fury and boldness than ever any had
done before, but we got into the House, where we expected her coming in our
three Doors with Harquebusses, and one stood with a Musket in the Chimney; at
lest the overgrown Beast advanced as far as the lowest step that entered into
one of our Doors, and which is dreadful to relate, the Man that Watched there
was at that instant looking toward another Door, and saw not his furious
Enemy, till a sudden shout of these that perceived her from within made him
turn about: yet though the horrible sight of imminent Death struck him with
terror and astonishment, he fired his Piece to so good purpose that he shot her
quite through the Body, whereupon she run away. Thus did Divine Providence
preserve us from this terrible danger, for if his Piece had failed him, it had
cost us perhaps more Lives than one. The wounded Beast had not run far when she
fell down, then we went and killed her outright, and ripping open her belly
found a piece of a Buck therein, skin, hair and all, which she had not long
before devoured. It seems they smelt that we would soon be gone, and resolved
to taste a piece of some of us, for two days after another attacked us, and
that so fiercely, that we were forced to leave our Work and run into the House,
whither also she pursued us, but we discharged three Pieces at her, which all
hit her, but her Death did us more hurt than her Life, for we dressed and eat
her Liver, which pleased our taste very well, but made us all sick, especially
three, who were in great danger of their Lives, yet they recovered their
Healths beyond all expectation, but lost their Skins from Head to Foot.

At last we got our Boat ready, after we had wrought six days upon it; and June
4. eleven of us drew the Scute to the Ship, and now our Labor seemed lighter
to us than formerly; perhaps because our hopes were stronger, and courage
higher, and we had reckoned to meet with no greater difficulties than we found,
because the Snow now lay harder on the ground, but especially, the earnest
desire and great pleasure we had to Work at that time, augmented our decayed
Spirits. We were forced before we could draw our Boats to the Sea, to make the
way plain with Hatchets, Shovels, and other Instruments, for it was full of
Hillocks and Mountains of Ice, and while we were thus busied, a great lean Bear
assaulted us, who we judged came from Tartary, for we had seen of them twenty
or thirty miles upon the Sea, and since we had only one Musket which our
Surgeon carried, I run in great haste toward the Ship to fetch some; the cruel
Beast pursued me close, and I expected to have been torn in pieces by her
ravenous Teeth, when our company seeing my danger followed her, which made her
turn toward them and leave me, but in the mean time the Surgeon happily
discharged his Piece and shot her into the Body, whereupon she run away, but
the Ice being very uneven and full of knobs, we quickly overtook her, and
killing her outright struck her Teeth out of her Head.

As we were ready to depart, William Barents our Pilot left a Letter in a
Musket hanging in the Chimney, wherein he gave an account of our disastrous
Voyage, and how we had lain ten months in that desolate, dark and dismal
Country, and at last were forced to commit our selves to the cruel Mercy of
that Icy Sea, in two small Boats, under the protection of our Almighty Creator.
So having finished all things as we determined, we drew the Boat and Scute, and
eleven Sleds of Goods and Victuals, to the Waterside; we then divided our
selves equally into the Boats, and recommending our safety to the abundant
Mercies of our Heavenly Guide, with a West North-west Wind, and indifferent
open Water, we put to Sea on the thirteenth day of June. The twentieth of the
same month our Pilot Mr. Barents died, the loss of whom disheartened us not a
little, as being the only Guide, on whose Conduct, next under the Providence of
God, we relied. At last, after innumerable dangers, and as many miraculous
deliverances, having Sailed almost four hundred Dutch miles along the Coast, we
entered the River of Coola in Lapland, on the first of September, and when the
Flood was past, we cast our Stones that served us for Anchors aground, till the
Tide came in again, and then set Sail till Midnight, and after that Anchored
till morning: There rowing up the River, as we past along we saw some Trees,
which comforted us as much as if we had entered into a new World, for all the
time that we had been out we had seen none. At length we got to a Dutch Ship,
which we had news of some days before, little dreaming it was our Consort, that
the year before set out with us, and left us about the Bear Island. There we
began to make merry with our old Companions, and bid each other welcome; then
we rowed forward, and Landed at Coola. Here with the Governors leave, we
brought our Scute and Boat to the Merchants House, and set them up for a
Monument, of our tedious (and never before Sailed) Voyage. The seventeenth of
September we set Sail from thence, and on the twenty ninth of October arrived
in the Maese, and on the first of November got to Amsterdam, in our Nova Zembla
Clothes, and Caps furred with white Foxes Skins, and were received by our
Friends as if we had come from the Dead, they having given us over for lost a
long while before. Metallic History of the Netherlands. De Veer's Relation.

The disastrous Voyage, and miraculous Deliverance of P. Quirini a Venetian.
A Venetian Ship, in which were above seven hundred Buts of Wine, Spices and
other Merchandises of great value, with sixty eight Men, set Sail from Candia,
the Master Piero Quirini; on the sixth of November, we came by chance into the
Mouth of the Channels of Flanders, and were driven by a storm from the South
toward the North-west. The fury of the Winds was so great, that it broke five
of the Hinges off our Rudder, and the storm hourly increasing, beat upon our
feeble Rudder with such violence, that it hung on the one side; wherefore, for
the last Remedy, we fastened a great Cable to it, with which we drew it after
us three days, in which time, in our judgment, we had run above two hundred
Miles against our wills. Afterward, with many pieces of Timber, we made a
shadow of another, and fitted it to the Ship; but this also was carried away by
the breaking Surges, on the twenty sixth of this month, so that then we lost
all hopes of directing our Ship. On the fourth of December, the Winds grew so
outrageous that they carried away our third Sail, and so we wandered at
adventure, not knowing by what means to provide for our safety. Afterward the
rage and violence of the Winds increasing, the Sea began to swell so high, that
the Waves seemed Mountains, and our Terror was augmented by the darkness of the
extreme long Nights, so that we seemed to be swallowed up in the bottomless
Depths of the Abyss: It Is hard to imagine how great the anguish and trembling
of our hearts was, living in a continual expectation of Death. In the middle of
this horrible darkness, we sometimes saw the Heavens as it were opened, with
sudden flashes of dazzling Lightning: Sometimes we seemed to touch the Stars,
and at other times saw our selves buried in Hell, insomuch that we lost both
Strength

Whilst we remained useless Spectators of this woeful Tragedy, pitifully
beholding one* another, a rolling Billow came over the Ship with so great fury,
that it was filled almost half full of Water, so that she turned up her Keel,
and lay as if she had been ready to sink: But Heaven forsakes not them that
Religiously call upon him, and strengthened our sorrowful hearts. We cut down
the Mainmast, and threw it overboard, together with the Main-yard and
Tackling, which eased the Ship very much, so that we began to cast out the
Water, which at last we over-came, though not without great difficulty and
pain. The day appearing, we agreed to make ready the Boat and Skiff, and parted
equally our small remainder of Provisions; forty two persons were willing to
enter into the Skiff, and therefore we were forced to cast Lots who should go
therein, it being capable only of one and twenty. The Master and forty seven
more entered the Boat, unto whom ratably fell their proportion of Victuals. We
were, in our judgment, distant from the nearest Land or Island, above five
hundred miles, and then came to Sail in a quiet Sea for some time; but a dark
Mist arising in the Night we lost sight of the Skiff, and never saw it more.
The Morning appearing, we were much troubled that we could see no tokens of the
Skiff, which made us fear the worst, and suspect what had befaln them, for the
Storm was so furious, that an impetuous Billow rushed into the Pinnace behind
the Poop, where I was, with so great violence, that two Stays were battered and
bent by the vehemence of the Shock, which filled our hearts with consternation
and terror, for now was the Pinnace more charged with the weight of the Water
than with her own burden; but Necessity set us all a working, and fear of so
imminent a danger made the feeblest of us bestir themselves, and fall to lading
it out with their hands, and being in a dreadful hurry, we threw overboard all
that lay in our way. As soon as we had drained the Pinnace, the Storm
continuing, we agreed to cast out some Casks of Wine to lighten her, which we
did with so great haste and precipitancy, that we had soon reduced our selves
to such extremity, that if we desired to taste of that chearing Liquor, to
restore our drooping Spirits, we were forced to content our selves with one
Goblet apiece every day, which was all that could be allowed to each of us; and
if any could not satisfy his parched Throat with this, he was constrained to
have recourse to the brackish Liquor, that threatened to swallow us up every
moment.

But all this was Luxury in respect of what our cruel Destinies reserved for
us, this Measure of Wine held out only a Week with us; at the end of which, our
tormenting fears quite exhausting our small store, constrained us to diminish
our proportion to half a Goblet a day each Man. Thirst was not the only, nor
greatest Misery that attended our deplorable and forlorn Company, perpetual
Terror, and distracting Doubts, did so disturb our afflicted Minds, that we
could never compose our selves securely to sleep, and notwithstanding our
tottering Limbs were hardly able to sustain our sinking Bodies, we were forced
to tug hard Night and Day, both at Helm and Pump, being at the same time almost
frozen to Death with intolerable cold, which was incomparably more grievous
than that which, to the admiration of all Men, not many years ago covered all
the Channels at Venice with thick and impenetrable Ice. And now the
compassionate Reader may consider how lamentable our case was, we wanted
Clothes to fence us from the pinching cold, our Meat and Drink failed us, and
we remained amidst the Horrors of an unknown and stormy Ocean, destitute not
only of all comforts, but even of necessaries to sustain our fainting Bodies;
and lest any thing should be wanting to complete our Misery, the Nights were
twenty one hours long, and very dark. The growing cold now began to produce
terrible effects of its cruelty among us, we were all of a sudden seized with a
certain numness, which began at our Feet, and then gradually ascending overrun
our whole Bodies, causing in us a disordered and raging appetite, which was no
small addition to our Sorrow, for every Man endeavored to filch what he could
from his Neighbor, and Ransacking every corner greedily, devoured all he could
find. Then did Death Tyrannize among us, and you might see here one, and there
another, breathe out a broken sigh, shake his giddy Head, and fall down dead on
a sudden. In which extremity, of forty seven Men which made up our desolate
Company, twenty six gave up the Ghost, and this was so far from being a Wonder,
considering our helpless condition, that it was certainly a Miracle of Divine
Bounty, that any of us were preserved alive to Celebrate the never-failing
goodness of our Almighty Deliverer, and exalt the Glory of his power. These
twenty six died between the twenty third of December to the fifth of January,
and found their Graves in the bottom of the merciless Ocean.

And now the last day of this disastrous year presented us with a dismal
prospect of unavoidable Ruin, for our little stock of Wine was wholly
exhausted, and the sad experience of our dead and dying Companions taught us,
that the Seawater with which we were wont to delude the intolerable fury of
our Thirst, did only hasten our approaching Death; so that, not knowing what to
do, we forced our own Water down our Throats. How deplorable and heartbreaking
an object was it to see some gasping Wretches, whose parcht Entrails refused to
furnish any moisture, with dying groans and rueful looks, imploring the favor
of a small draught of the Urine of their Companions, who, either unwilling to
part with what they feared would quickly be spent, or rather unable to spare
any from themselves, refused to save the Lives of their dearest Friends, at the
expenses of a small quantity of that unsavory Liquor, which was the only means
left to preserve their own. It Is true, some of us had the prudence to temper it
with a little Sirrup of Green Ginger and Lemons, which by Providence was not
yet consumed. At last, when there was no hopes left, when Despair and Paleness
were painted on our hollow Cheeks, and the Grim-King of Terrors in the most
frightful shape star'd us in the Face, then did our pitiful Redeemer stretch
forth his helping Hand, and on the third of January 1431. we descried Land afar
off, being a ledge of ragged Rocks, covered to the top with huge Mountains of
Snow, and lying to the weather of us: But it seems Fortune still owed us a
spite, for the Winds being contrary we durst not spread our Sails, and our
feeble Arms were altogether unable to manage the Oars, so that a strong current
driving us along, we lost sight of Land and all our Hopes together. But
magnified be the wonderful Goodness of our God, we escaped safe out of a Deluge
of Dangers, in which we were almost overwhelmed, for having been long tossed
and battered by the Cruelty of outrageous Gusts, among the Death-threatning
points of lurking Rocks, which by reason of the horrible darkness of the
tedious Night we could not avoid; at last, fear of Death, and desire of Life,
inspiring us with unwonted Vigor, we entered into a Bay between two steep
Rocks. No sooner did our Pinnace touch upon the Sand, but five of our men made
desperate by tormenting Thirst, leaped into the Sea, without knowing the depth
thereof, which was considerable, and making haste toward the Snow, thrust such
great quantities down their insatiable Throats, that they seemed to delight in
glutting themselves therewith; at length they returned Laden with huge
quantities thereof, which we also gulp'd down very greedily.

Now from the time that we left the Ship, until January 6. being eighteen days,
we made account, according to our best Judgments, that we had run two thousand
five hundred miles at least, without seeing Land, for Sailing all that time
between the East and North-east points of the Compass, we never hand less Wind
than after the rate of six miles in an hour. On the forementioned day, being
the Feast of Epiphany, Nineteen of us went ashore on this desolate and barren
Island, called the Isle of Saints, which lies on the Coast of Norway, and
belongs to the King of Denmark, leaving only two men to look to the Boat: Being
Landed, we retired to a place that was covered from the fury of the piercing
Winds, and kindled a Fire by means of a Tinder-Box and an Oar, the sight of
which was very comfortable to us. But perceiving that this Island was
Uninhabited, we resolved to go to another, which we descried about five miles
distant. But alas! our Pinnace was so Leaky, that despairing to be ever able to
fit her out for the Sea again, we drew her not without great pain to Land, and
determined to make a little Hovel of her, to shelter us from the violence of
the Weather. To accomplish which, we divided her into two parts, of the first
and greater of which we made a Shed for Thirteen of us, and of the lesser
another for the rest, covering them with part of our Sails, and reserving the
remainder, with the Cordage, for Fuel, to comfort our frozen Limbs. And now
being utterly destitute of all Sustenance to preserve our wretched Lives, we
wandered along the shore to gather some small quantity of Periwinkles and
Barnackles* which by chance we found there, and removing the Snow in some
places we found certain Herbs, which we boiled with Snow in our Caldron, and
then eat them through extreme Necessity.

Thus did we live for thirteen days together, if I may call that Life which was
spent in perpetual agonies and terrors, and deserves rather the Name of a
lingering Death. In the middle of these extremities, four of our Companions of
the greater Shed, unable to hold out longer, under the insupportable weight of
misery that overwhelmed us, gave up the Ghost, notwithstanding all the pains
that our poor afflicted Master took to provide some small remedies and
comforts, both for their Souls and Bodies. Our feebleness was so extreme, that
we were not able to remove their worn and rotten Carcasses two yards, the sight
whereof was as grievous and lamentable as the stench was contagious and
noisome. Now was Nature so much decayed in us, that we could not retain the
little Food we had provided, and no sooner poured a little melted Snow, down
our Throats, but we presently cast it up again, and yet were not able to
abstain from it, which so weakened us that our Legs could hardly sustain us;
and withal, the cold was so pinching, that to preserve our selves from being
frozen, we were forced to stand so close crowded together, that we seemed to be
sewed to one another. We had covered our Cottages with our Sails round about
down to the ground, without leaving any vent-hole for the Smoke, which arose in
such abundance, and so thick, from the pitched Wood of our Pinnace, being all
the Fuel we had, that our Eyes were so swollen therewith, we could not see one
another, and yet were willing to endure any thing rather than to expose our
selves to the more intolerable cold. In the mean time we were almost eaten up
by Vermin, for we never shifted our Clothes, and the Lice swarmed upon us in
such numbers, that we cast them by whole handfuls into the Fire; yet they not
only gnawed off our Flesh, but pierced even to the Bones, and at last eat their
way to the very Bowels of a Young Man of our company, a Notary by Calling, who
expired in unexpressible Torments. All this could not humble our Pride, nor
mortify the contentious haughtiness of our Minds; our common Calamity could
not unite us together, nor make us bear with one another Infirmities. So that
Charity waxing cold, and discord arising among us, part of our Company wandering
about the Savage and Uninhabited Island, came to the knowledge of a lonely
retiring place, made by some Shepherds to shelter themselves during their abode
there; it was seated in the highest part of the Western Coast of the Island,
distant from our Hutts about a mile and a half. To this six of the eight that
remained in the greater Cottage determined to withdraw, leaving their two
Companions alone in their desolate and abandoned Habitation, they being neither
able to Travel, nor the others to conduct them to this Newfound Dwelling.

But now to confirm the Truth of that promise, That every thing shall turn to
the good of those that put their Trust in God, he sent us an exceeding great
Fish, to which I know not what Name to give, whether Whale or Sea-Porposs. When
we saw it cast upon the shore, dead, yet fresh, great and good, and at a time
when we despaired of all relief, we could not but acknowledge it to be an
amazing effect of the Divine Bounty toward us, and praise the never-failing
Mercy of God, in sending us such seasonable and comfortable Nourishment for our
enfeebled and diseased Bodies. On this Fish we feasted for nine days together,
and to heighten our grateful sense of this wonderful Providence, and make us
relish the sweetness thereof more fully, it happened that these nine days were
so Tempestuous, with Wind, Rain and Snow, that the cruel Storm would not have
permitted us to stir one foot out of our Cottage. The miraculous Fish being
spent, the fury of the Tempest was somewhat mitigated, wherefore not having
wherewithal to sustain Life, and oppressed with extreme hunger, we Ransacked
every Clift of the desert Rocks to seek for some Relief, and at last found a
few Sea Perriwinkles and Barnacles, with which necessity constrained us to be
contented; and with this slender nourishment we maintained our selves until the
last of January. While we were thus wandering about, lean, pale, afflicted and
half Dead, we found some Oxes Dung dried and baked by the Cold and Winds,
whereof we gathered every day sufficient to make a small Fire. By this we came
to know that the place was frequented by Oxen, which gave us some hopes of
finding an end of our misery, and in the strength of this comfortable
assurance, we were better enabled to endure our insupportable Sorrow and
Anguish; at length the long looked for hour came, wherein our compassionate
Lord vouchsafed to conduct his little afflicted Flock into the Haven of their
desired safety, whose Hand was evidently seen Two young Heifers had strayed the
year before from a certain Fisherman, living in Rusten, an Island five miles
distant from the Savage Isle of Saints wherein we were, and he had long ago
given over all hopes of ever finding them again: Now it happened that on the
first of February, at Night, one of the Fishermans Sons, a Youth of sixteen
years of Age, Dreamed that certainly the two Heifers were still alive, and were
got over to the Western point of the Island of Saints, whereupon he earnestly
besought his Father and elder Brother, that they would accompany him to that
place, who yielding to his importunate entreaties, they all three entered into
a Fisher-Boat, and Rowed toward the said point, where they were no sooner
Landed but they descried a Smoke arising from the Habitation which they had
formerly used, which surpised them with great astonishment, whence and by what
means so strange an accident could come to pass, so that they stood a great
while much amazed; and at last, endeavoring to guess at the cause thereof,
they began to talk to one another. But though we heard the sound of their
Voices, yet we could not imagine whence it should proceed, and thought on
nothing less than the truth, but judged it to be the crying of Crows, and not
the Voice of Humane Creatures; and we were the rather induced to entertain this
conceit, because not many days before we had beheld an infinite number of these
ravenous Birds, preying upon the miserable Carcasses of eight of our Companions
that lay exposed to Wind and Weather, and often heard them rend the Air with
their harsh Notes. At last we were sensible of our Error, and plainly
distinguished the Voices of Men, and immediately Christophoro Fiorovanti, one
of our Company, went forth, and seeing two young striplings, returned shouting
for Joy with the welcome News, saying, Be of good cheer, behold two Men come
toward us. These words put new Life in us, so that we began to try whether we
had yet forgot to run, though indeed our hearts sustained us rather than our
Legs; as we drew near to the Young Men, we perceived that they were dismayed
with the unexpected strangeness of the sight, and that a sudden paleness began
to overspread their Faces, but on the contrary we took Courage, and being
comforted with a certain hope, gave them to understand, by the humblest
Gestures which we could make, that we came not with a design to offend them.
Then did we begin to deliberate what might be the best course for us to take,
diverse uncertain and fleeting resolutions were suggested to our Minds, and we
were perplexed with a thousand doubts. Sometimes we determined to detain one or
both of them, but soon forsook that rash resolution, not knowing with whom, nor
how many we had to do. Then we advised together, whether one or more of us
should venture to go along with them, and this determination also was not
without its difficulties, for we were afraid to hazard our selves among
strangers, whose Language we were ignorant of, and they of ours. At last,
casting off all fear, and committing our selves to the gracious protection of
God, we went down to their Boat. in the most amicable manner possible, and in
friendly and humble wise saluted the Old man, who stood there expecting his
Sons, and was no less astonished to see us than they had been. In the mean time
our hunger was so pressing, that we could not forbear to search in the Boat,
whether happily we might find any thing to relieve our necessity, but to no
purpose, for we could meet with nothing.

The pitiful strangers perceiving by our actions, and the signs we made, that
we were almost starved for want of sustenance, were moved to compassion, and
cheerfully agreed to carry along with them two of our Company, Ghirardo di
Lione a Sewer, and Cola di Otrunto a Mariner, who spoke French and High Dutch,
leaving us in great hopes of speedy assistance. As they drew near to Rusten,
the amazed people came running to the Seaside, gazing upon the strange
Countenances and unusual Garb of our Companions, and questioning one another,
how and from whence they were come thither. To satisfy their curiosity, they
attempted to discourse with them in sundry Languages, but at last a German
Priest, of the Order of the Praedicators, spoke to one of them in High Dutch,
by whom they were certified who we were, from whence we came, and how we were
cast upon the Desert Island; and all this the Priest published to the people
next morning, earnestly exhorting them to have compassion on our necessitous
condition, and relieve us according to their Abilities. Which had so good
effect, and found the Spirits of the people so much disposed to pity, that the
day following, being the third of February, the kind Rusteners came to us that
were left in Courteous manner, bringing along with them plenty of Provisions to
refresh our feeble bodies, and very affectionately invited us to their
Habitations. We embraced their offered kindness with a thankful willingness,
and with glad Hearts accompanied them to their Hospitable Island, where we were
received with unaffected Sincerity, and entertained with great plenty of
Restorative Food, the exceeding abundance whereof had like to have proved fatal
to us, for we could not restrain our selves from obeying our craving Appetites,
neither could we ever satiate our selves with seeding; but neither were our
weak Stomachs able to concoct, nor decayed Nature to bear so unusual a Load of
Meat, so that what we eat to sustain Life, had almost brought us to an untimely
Death.

There were yet remaining two of our Company in the Isle of Saints, whom we had
left in the greater of our Cottages, and who were ignorant of our miraculous
Succor; wherefore we informed our kind Friends of their helpless condition,
and likewise of our eight deceased Companions, who lay rotting above ground.
Whereupon they assembled themselves together, and went with the Priest, Singing
Psalms and Hymns, as well to Bury the Dead as to rescue the Living; when they
were arrived at the desolate Island, they Interred the Bodies of the eight
deceased persons, to which number one of the two remaining was now added, whom
they likewise buried: And you may easily imagine in how sad a plight they found
the other poor Wretch, who had been thus utterly deprived both of Humane
Society and Sustenance yet he was brought to Rusten, with some little
remainders of Life, where at the end of two days, he found an end of his
miseries in Death. Eleven of all our numerous Company were saved, and came
alive into this Island, among whom was our Master Piero Quirini, a person of
consummate prudence, and discreet humility, of which he gave a notable
instance when he entered into the House of our affectionate and charitable
Host; for seeing his Wife, in testimony that he acknovvledg'd her to be
Mistress of that Life which her Husband had preserved, he cast himself down
at her Feet, but she refusing so great submission, Courteously lifted him up
from the ground, and kindly embracing him with her own Hand, gave him
somevvhat to Eat. With these loving and Hospitable people we abode three
months and eleven days, expecting to have passage into Sweden with our Host,
vvhither he intended to go with his usual Freight of Stock Fish, for every
year in the month of May, the people of this Island Travel to Sweden, with
mighty plenty of that Commodity, with which they furnish a great part of that
Kings Dominions.

At last, on the fourteenth of May 1432. came the happy Hour, in which, after
so tedious and lamentable an Exile, we set our Faces homevvards, and began our
Journey toward our beloved Native Country. So we took our leave of our
Charitable Hostess, and all our other affectionate Friends, leaving with her
for a Token of our Love, not what her kindness deserved, or what Justice and
Gratitude obliged us to have given, but what the merciless Sea had left us,
which was only a few Trifles, as Cups, Girdles, and some small Rings, and
expressed the grateful sense we had of so many, and so signal Favors, with the
best and most hearty Eloquence we were Masters of, to the Priest, our
Interpreter, by Words, and to the people by Signs. Having thus performed all
due Salutations, we Embarked in a small Vessel of the burden of twenty Tuns,
Laden with Fish, in which our Host went also Master and Pilot, and the Ships
Crew consisted of his Sons, and other Kindred. We set Sail then on the
forementioned Day, directing our course toward Bergen, which was the first
convenient Haven for Unlading and Vending our Fish, and distant from Rusten
about a thousand miles. These Fishermen conducted the Bark safely, and with
great ease, through various Channels, with which, and all the Currents in them,
they were perfectly acquainted, so that our Voyage proved very commodious to
us. When we were about two hundred miles off Rusten, we found certain Relics
of the Wreck of our Skiff, which certify'd us of the sad Fate of our Companions
that were aboard her; and we concluded, they perished the first Night we lost
sight of them. The twenty ninth of May 1432. we arrived at Tronden, a Town upon
the Coast of Norway, and the Royal Seat of the King of Denmark when he resides
in those parts, and the Burial place of the famous Saint and King Olaus. Here
we abode ten days, waiting for some convenience to continue our Voyage, but
finding none, were unwilling to lose more time, and therefore determined to
proceed on our Journey by Land; but first we took our final leave of our
bountiful and charitable Patron and Host, and his Company, instead of rewards
offering him only our sincere thanks, and hearty prayers to God for him.

The ninth of June we departed from Tronden, Traveiling on foot toward
Vastena, a Town within the limits of Sweden, but under the Dominion of the King
of Denmark, where we understood, by two of our Countrymen, whom to our great
joy and comfort we found there, that the Inhabitants (for the reverend respect
they bore to the memory of their Glorious Monarch St. Olaus, unto whom (as they
well knew) the Republic of Venice showed extraordinary Favor and Courtesy,
when he past through that City in his Voyage to, and Return from Palestine)
were affectionately disposed to assist us both with Counsel and Money. And
indeed, we were not frustrated of our Hopes, receiving very loving
Entertainment among them, and were informed that if we continued our Journey
directly forwards, we should expose our selves to infinite dangers, and the
continual assaults of Wild Beasts, and therefore they advised us to go to
Stichimborgi, although it would be no less than thirty days Journey out of our
way, where we should find a Valiant and Noble Venetian Cavalier M. Giovanni
Franco, who would not fail to receive us graciously, and assist us plentifully
with all Necessaries for our Journey. Following this Advice, we set forwards,
and on the eighteenth day arrived at the Court of that Honorable and Valorous
Baron, who being informed of us, came to receive us with a cheerful
Countenance, and showed us so great favor, that we soon perceived his Noble
Heart was full of Love to his Country. We had no sooner in an humble manner
acquainted him with all our Calamities, and present Necessitous condition, but
he bid us be of good Comfort, for he was abundantly able to relieve us; and
indeed, he could not satisfy himself with heaping honors and benefits upon
us, and entertaining us splendidly. He also filled our Purses with Money, and
furnished us with good Horses; yea, in his own proper person, together with M.
Mapheo his only Son, and one hundred and twenty Horsemen of his Domestic
Servants, he brought us on our way for several days Journeys, through his
Territories, Traveling always with all this great Company at his own Charge.
Being come to the Confines of his Land, we took our leave to depart, yielding
him our most humble and hearty thanks for his unparalled bounty to us. At his
departure he left his Son to be our Guide, with an Attendance of twenty
Horsemen, who kept us company all the way to Vastena, from whence we came about
forty days before, and where we arrived on the thirtieth of July. We abode here
till the second of August, maintained at free-cost by M. Mapheo, and then
humbly taking our leaves of him, and presenting him with our ordinary
Retribution for received benefits, Thanks, we set forwards on our Journey,
directing our Course to Ladese, where we arrived on the eleventh.

Here we found opportunity of passage in two Vessels, one bound for England,
and the other for the Low Countries, and agreed for the greater convenience, to
divide our selves into two Companies; in the latter Ship went Christophoro
Floravante one of the Council of our Unfortunate Vessel, Girardo da Lione the
Sewer, Nicolo de Michiel a Venetian Notary, (and Writer of one of the two
Relations out of which this Account is compiled) who Landing at Rostoch, after
many troublesome and dangerous Adventures, Traveling sometimes on Foot, and
sometimes on Horseback, by the merciful Providence of Almighty God, arrived at
Venice in good Health, leaving Girardo da Lione at Vasenech, from thence to
continue his Journey to his own Native Country. Among these who embarked in the
Ship bound for England, being in all eight persons, were the Sieur Quirini, Son
of Mr. Jacomo a Venetian Gentleman, Master of the unhappy Ship, who said, that
when he set foot on the English shore, it seemed unto him that he received new
Life, and that he was come out of Hell; he visited Cambridge, where a
charitable person gave him sixteen Crowns, and abode two months in London. In
the same Ship went M* Piero Gradenico, Son of M. Andrea, a young Merchant of
the Age of eighteen years, and Bernardo de Caghire our Pilot, whose Wife being
young, hearing no News of her Husband in so long time, believed certainly that
he was Dead, and without mature deliberation Married another Husband at
Treviso; but hearing of our arrival, and being informed that her former Husband
was still alive, she immediately dissolved the Bond of her second Marriage, and
retired into a Nunnery, to testify the honesty of her Intentions, where she
expected the return of her true Husband, who about three months after arrived
at Venice, and received her again for his Wife.

The Perilous Adventure.
THE News of the War that was declared between France and England in the year
1666. coming to the West Indies, the English being Masters of the Isle of
Antego, issued out Orders, forbidding, under pain of Death, some French that
lived among them, to go out of the Limits of their Habitations; notwithstanding
which prohibition, Urban de Frecide, Lord of Grand Maison, resolved to hazard
his Life to regain his Liberty. The Attempt was very bold, and he exposed
himself to a thousand dangers, for there was an absolute Necessity to find out
some resolute Companions to carry off a Boat, and make Provision of Victuals,
and all this in a place where the French were looked upon as Enemies, and as
such diligently observed; but the desire of Liberty made this daring person
overlook all those difficulties, which in themselves appeared unsurmountable.
He pitched upon two of his own Nation to be his Companions, of whom one was a
Carpenter, and with joint-consent they determined to carry off a small Shallop,
which was Chained to a Stake within sight of an English Corpse du Guard. And
because they used to Lock up the Oars every Night, the Carpenter undertook to
make new ones, and Grand-Maison took upon himself the care of making necessary
Provisions. The Night appointed for the Execution of the Enterprise being come,
out three Fugitives, and two Negro's, whom they had gained, carried their
Provisions to the Sea side, to the place whither they had resolved to bring the
Shallop. About Midnight the bold Surgeon, accompanied with the Carpenter
and a Negro, who carried the Oars, came to the place where the Boat lay, and
the Carpenter having sawed asunder the Post to which it was fastened, they
carried it off with so little noise, that they were not heard by the Centry,
and without any molestation brought it to the place of Rendevouz. Most part of
the Night was employed in this Work, and in carrying on Board the slender
Provision of Victuals, that Grand-Maison was able to furnish, so that having
Embarked themselves, and endeavoring by force of Rowing to get clear of the
hated shore, they were surpised, when by the glimmering light of the Morning
they discovered that Land, which they endeavored to shun, but half a League
distant. This obliged them to retire into the Island of Birds, a Desert place,
and of difficult access. At Sunset our dismayed Company put to Sea again,
endeavoring to double the East point of the Isle of Antego, that they might
afterward gain that of Guadeloup; but they were astonished to find next
morning, that all their Efforts had been in vain against the strength of the
Current, and that they were not advanced above a League. Their weariness and
fear of being discovered by those that were upon the Watch on the rising
Grounds of Antego, which was in possession of the English oblig' them to Land
in a place that was overgrown with Trees, amongst which having hid their Boat,
they searched all around for fresh Water and Herbs, though with little success,
for the Sea swelling mightily in the Night, had dashed against their Boat, and
so wet their Cassave Bread, that it was altogether unfit to be eaten; so that
they had nothing left to feed upon but a little Salt Pork, and only one Pot of
Water to Drink, with a little Aqua-vitae, made of Sugar Canes.

At Night they put to Sea again, steering the same course that they held the
foregoing Night, but had not got above a League from the shore, when they found
themselves in the middle of several Rocks lurking under Water, upon which they
struck so dangerously, that it was a Miracle they were not buried in the Waves.
Want of Water and Victuals, and the breaking of their Rudder, constrained them
to go ashore on an Uninhabited Isolet, where they found some Fruits of the
Country, and enough fresh Water to fill one of their Barrels. They found also
the Wrecks of a Boat that had been cast away there, of which they made a new
Rudder, or else they could not have possibly gained any of the French Isles. In
the beginning of the Night they left this Green Rock, and steered toward
Guadeloup, hoping to touch there in the Morning, but the day surpised them
again on the Coast of Antego; but the Tide was so strong, that the Boat had
like to have been driven forcibly upon the North-we^t side of the Island, where
were the principal Fortresses of their Enemies, and therefore they labored
with all their might to save themselves from falling into their dreaded hands.
When they saw themselves at a reasonable distance from the shore, they began to
consult about their Affairs; Water and Victuals failed them, their Strength was
also much lessened, and their Spirits almost Exhausted by the Fatigues which
they had undergone.

Therefore Grand-Maison was of opinion, that it would be their best course to
endeavor to gain the Island of St. Christopher, which lay to the Lee-ward,
whither they might easily go with full Sails. This Advice was unanimously
followed, but having no Sails, they were at a stand what to do, when Necessity,
the Mother of Invention, taught them to make use of a Hammock, or Cotton-Bed,
which they had in the Shallop, and the Carpenter made a little Mast, to which
they fastened it. In this condition they coasted the Isle of Antego, two
Leagues from the shore, and toward Night they began to lose sight of it,
directing their course toward St. Christophers. By break of day they found
themselves so near the shore of the Isle of Nevis, which also belongs to the
English, that they were constrained to labor hard to pass to the Wind-wards of
that Island, thereby to gain the Salt Pits of St. Christophers. Their Efforts
were not altogether vain, for they doubled Nevis; but withal, were forced to
run so near the shore, that they looked every moment for the appearing of some
Barks from thence, to seize their Vessel and Persons.

In the mean time they passed the Straight between Nevis and St. Christophers,
and finding themselves over against the Salt Pits of this last Island, they
endeavored in vain to get to Land, for when they were come within half a
League of the shore, they were suddenly engaged among hidden Rocks and breaking
Waves, where they were tossed with such violence, that the Boat dashing against
one of the Rocks, they had much ado to bring her off, being much weakened by
hard Labor and want of Sustenance; nevertheless, they were so happy as to get
clear of all these dangers, and held out one Night more with Hunger, Thirst and
Toil. Finding themselves at the dawning of the day, over against the Head land
of St. Christophers Island, and knowing that they might easily aad safely Land
there, they took Courage, Fear and Sadness being banished out of their Hearts,
and Joy succeeding in their Room; so that forthwith one of them tore his Shirt,
of which he made two Flags, and another tied his Cravat to the top of the Mast,
to serve for a Streamer. In this manner they drew near to shore, which was
covered with French, who came running from all parts of the Island to behold
the wonderful Boat. The Sieur Sannois, Captain of that Quarter, being there
also, gave them notice by a Signal of the right Landing place; at length they
came ashore with glad Hearts, and were received by their Countrymen with a
great deal of Humanity.

The Generous Relations.
FRancis, Lord of Noue, Sir-named Iron-Hand, had a Sister called Margaret,
Married to the Lord de Vezins, of an illustrious House in Anjou. Of this
Marriage were Born a Son and two Daughters. Vezins being a Widower, Married his
Ladies Waiting-maid; she desiring that her Children might be the only Heirs of
that rich Man, caused the three Infants of the last Marriage to be secretly
carried to Pardic in low Bretagne, a House seated upon the Seashore, and
pertaining to the Lord de Vezins. There they were put into the Hands of an
English Pilot, who had agreed to throw them into the Sea, but touched with
compassion, he contented himself to leave them with a Peasant on the Coast of
England, to be by him Educated as Children of mean Birth, and without giving
them the least knowledge of their Extraction, for they were as yet so young,
that he did not think they could remember it. Then were they carried to the
Isle of Guernsey, and with a little Money committed to certain Persons in that
Isle, to be there brought up. In the mean time Reports were spread abroad from
time to time, that the Children died one after the other in their Fathers
House, and counterfeit Funerals were Solemnized. The Daughters did not entirely
lose the memory of their Birth, and being somewhat grown up, they heard of the
Lord de la Noue, and remembered that he was their Uncle, and that they had
heard him so called in their Fathers House; they wrote unto him, and he did all
that he could to hasten their Return into France, and to discover the Truth.
The Father, who was suspected to have been privy to the Mother in-Laws Plot, at
first resisted his endeavors, but at length he consented, and professed he
would have been glad that his Children had been Educated near the Lady de la
Noue, who was a Virtuous Woman; but there fell out several things that
obstructed their proceedings, and the Girls remained in Guernsey till they
died. As for the Son, he was carried from thence to London, and because he was
younger than his Sisters, and had no correspondence with them, he almost
entirely lost the memory of his Extraction, and was bound Prentice to a
Shoemaker; nevertheless, when he was grown up, having still some confused
Idea's that he was descended of an Honorable Family in France, and hearing of
the interest that La Noue seemed to have in these young Girls, he suspected
that he might be their Brother, and being informed that La Noue was in
Flanders, he went thither to present himself to him. He did so, but he produced
so few marks of his Birth, and La Noue saw so little light in this Affair, that
he contented himself with Writing to Vezins, that a Young Man had presented
himself to him, who called himself his Son. La Noue being made a Prisoner in
the Wars of Flanders, six or seven years past over before he heard any more of
this business, and in the mean time the Young Man plying his Shoomakers Trade,
went at last to Geneva, to Work there; he had not been there long when La Noue
arrived, one of them not Dreaming of the other. La Noue, by chance* sent to his
Masters Shop for something belonging to that Trade which he wanted. That
Young Man carried it to him, and knew La Noue by his Iron-Hand, but durst not
discover himself, because he had not a very favorable reception the former
time, and was afraid to offend him.

La Noue did not mind him, and six or seven years producing a great alteration
in the face and stature of Young Men of that Age, he thought upon nothing less
than his Nephew; nevertheless, having observed some Gestures and Words that did
not savor of a Shoemaker, he eyed him more attentively, and fancied that he
beheld in him the Air not only of him whom he had seen in the Low Countries,
but also of his Brother de Vezins, which obliged him to ask him, who and whence
he was: The Young Man modestly answered, that he was unable to give him a clear
answer, but that he was the Man that had the Honor to see him in Flanders, and
who there told him that he believed himself to be his Nephew, the Son of the
Lord de Vezins. La Noue began to think that the Boy was truly what he called
himself: Afterward asking him several questions concerning the manner of his
being exposed, and of his Education.

The Young Man who had acquired more Judgment and Knowledge than when he saw
him in Flanders, and perhaps was better able to explain himself distinctly,
gave him so great satisfaction, that he remained convinced that this was the
true Heir of the House of Vezins. He might have abandoned him, and thereby
taken the advantage of his Sisters Succession, which was considerable, but he
had too Noble a Soul to prefer profit to his Duty; he took the Young Man along
with him, and Educated him in a manner suitable to his Birth, and his Father,
to whom he writ an account of the affair, refusing to acknowledge him, La Noue
seized him at Law, but the difficulty of the Times not permitting him to
compass his design during his Life, he left the Suit to Oder de la Nove his
Son, who carried it on, and finished it with the same Generosity wherewith it
was begun. So the Father and the Son equally Generous, established the Fortune
of this near Relation, whose Posterity yet enjoy the Estate of the Family of De
Vezins. The Life of the Lord de la Noue, by L'Amirault.

The Raging Duke.
THE Duke of Biron was a great Favorite to Henry the Fourth, Grandfather to
the present French King, but his Pride and Ambition prompting him to imagine
that his Services to his Master were not rewarded according to his Merit, he,
with several others of his Partisans, entered into dangerous correspondences
with the Duke of Savoy, and the King of Spain, to the prejudice of the Kings
Affairs, and likewise conspired to seize and destroy his Person. King Henry had
Intelligence of the whole Intrigue, yet had such an entire love and favor for
him, that he sent for him and acquainted him with what discoveries he had made;
but added, That if he would be so ingenuous to give him a full account of all
the Transactions, he should certainly find Mercy and Pardon from him. The Duke
being ignorant that one La Fin, to whom he had declared his Resentments, and
made privy to the Designs he was managing, had acquainted the King with the
whole matter, obstinately refused to confess any thing, and denied he was any
way concerned in any Conspiracy against him or his Government, making many
Pretestations of his Innocence, beseeching the King to do him Justice against
those who designed his Ruin by Slanders and false Reports, which were
insupportable to so clear a Soul as he had, desiring leave to take his Revenge
by the Sword. The King led him to the Tennis-Court, where the Duke proposed the
Match, saying, That the Duke of Espernon and he would play against His Majesty
and the Count of Soissons. The Duke of Espernon suddenly replied, My Lord, you
play well, but you make your Matches ill. At Supper he seemed discontented,
eating nothing, nor any Man speaking to him, esteeming him a Man abandoned to
Misfortune; yet he thought he had so much Courage, that no Man durst lay hands
on him.

The King in the mean time walked in his Chamber, much disturbed how to come to
a Resolution, and speaking of him and the Count of Auvergne, with the other
Conspirators, being full of Mercy and Clemency, he said, If they will yet
return to their Duties, and give me the opportunity to prevent the ill Designs
of my Enemies, I will still pardon them: If they weep I will weep with them; if
they will remember the Duty that they owe me, I will not forget to be kind and
gracious to them; they shall find me as full of Clemency as they are of
Disloyalty and Ingratitude. I would not make the Duke of Biron the first
Example of the Severity of my Justice, or that he should cause my Reign, which
has hitherto been like a calm and serene Sky, to be over-cast with Clouds,
Thunder, and Lightning; but yet I am resolved he shall either bend or break.

Next morning the King commanded the Count of Soissons to go to him, and
endeavor to mollify his Mind, and draw the Truth out of him: He goes to him,
he persuades, conjures, beseeches him to submit himself to the King, and to
fear the Indignation of a Prince as he would do the paw of a Lion. The Duke of
Biron answered roughly, That the King had no reason to complain of him, unless
it were for his good Services, and that he himself had the greatest cause to
complain that his Loyalty should be suspected, who had given so many and so
great proofs thereof.

The Count of Soissons finding all his endeavors were fruitless against his
obstinate temper, left him, and the next morning early the King sent for him
into the little Garden, and discoursed with him a long time, he making still
great protestations of his Innocence, beating his Breast, and casting up his
Eyes to Heaven in confirmation thereof. At their parting there appeared Anger
in the Kings Countenance, and by the Dukes carriage there seemed Fire in his
Words. From thence the Duke went to Dinner, and had a Letter delivered him with
Advice to retire himself; but he laughed at all warnings, and despised any
Advertisement of his fall. The King had an account of his Bravado's, but took
little notice of them; at length, upon consultation with some of the Lords of
the Council, it was resolved that he should be apprehended, and likewise the
Count of Auvergne; the King would not have them taken in the Court but in their
own Lodgings, which the Duke of Biron was somewhat apprehensive of, and
therefore thought he need fear nothing in the Presence Chamber, but that his
danger would be most in going forth, to prevent which he had provided a short
Sword, wherewith to make his way by the Death of any Opposer. The King was
informed, that if he were not seized in the Presence Chamber it would occasion
Bloodshed, to prevent which it was convenient to pass by some unnecessary
respects; the King sent for Vitry and Pralin, Captains of his Guards, and
ordered them in what manner to execute his commands.

The Duke of Biron supped at Montignys Lodgings, where he discoursed more
proudly and vainly than ever of his own Merits, and his many Friends in
Switzerland, and proceeded highly to commend the Piety, Justice and Liberality,
of the late King of Spain. Montigny sudenly interrupted him, saying, The
greatest commendation due to that Princes memory, was, That he put his own Son
to Death, for attempting to promote troubles and disturbances in the State.
This put an end to the Dukes Harangue, who by his Eyes seemed to hear this
sharp reply with much amazement and surprise.

After Supper, the Duke of Biron and the Count of Auvergne waited on the King
in the Garden, with a greater Train of Guards than they expected. The King
invited the Duke to play in the Queens Lodgings; they played at Chess, and the
King being perplexed, went often to and again to his Closet. As they entered the
Door of the Chamber, the Count of Auvergne whispered the Duke in the Ear, We
are undone: The King was much unresolved, but at length he prayed God to assist
him with his Holy Spirit, and to infuse such Resolutions into him as might be
for his Glory, and the good of his people, over whom he Ruled only by his
Grace. His Prayer ended his doubts were satisfied, and he concluded absolutely
to deliver the Duke into the hands of Justice. The Count of Auvergne was
retired, the King sent for him, and walked about the Room while the Duke minded
nothing but his Game; Varennes, Lieutenant of his Company, pretending to take
up his Cloak, told him in his Ear, He was undone. This last word astonished him
so that he neglected his Game, which the Queen observing, told him, That he had
misreckon'd himself to his own loss. The King answered, That they had played
enough, commanding every man to retire. He took the Duke of Biron into his
Cabinet, and charged him, once for all, freely to declare what Transactions he
had managed with the Duke of Savoy, and the Count of Fuentes, Governor for the
King of Spain, assuring him that his Clemency should surmount his Crimes. The
Duke, though he was conscious to himself that he deserved Death, yet had not
the humility to desire his Life, nor a Tongue to beg pardon, but answered the
King more resolutely than ever: That they had contrived the overthrow of an
honest Man, and that he had no other design than what he had already
discovered* I wish to God it were so, said the King, but I find you will not
acquaint me with it. Adieu, Good Night.

As the Duke was going out of the Cabinet, and had passed the Chamber Door, he
met Vitry, who laid his Hand upon Birons Sword, and demands the delivery of it
by the Kings Order: From me! said the Duke, What to take away my Sword, who
have so faithfully served the King? My Sword! Who have ended the War, and have
settled Peace in France? That my Sword which my Enemies could never wrest from
me, should be now taken away by my Friends. He entreated the Duke of Montbazon
to beseech the King to give him leave to deliver it into his own hands; the
King ordered Vitry to do as he had commanded him. The Duke was forced to suffer
it to be taken from him, and in delivering in cast his Eyes about to seize upon
another, but they prevented him. When he saw all the Guard placed in the
Gallery, he thought they would have killed him, and desired to have something
in his Hand that he might have the Honor to dye in defending himself, and some
little time to pray to God. They answered, That no Man should hurt him, they
having Order from the King only to conduct him to his Lodgings. You see (said
he in passing by) how good Catholics are Treated. He was carried to the Closet
of Arms, but neither slept nor lay down. Praliu was sent to the Count Auvergne
to demand his Sword in the Kings Name: I take it (said the Count) it has never
killed any but Wild Boars, if thou had informed me of this I had been a Bed
and asleep two hours ago. These two Noblemen were like Torches in a Field of
Corn, able to inflame the Kingdom. The Duke of Biron grew extremely impatient,
scarce speaking a Word but it was either against God or the King, and
discovered all the rage and fury of a Madman; but suddenly recollecting
himself, Well, said he, I find this is but Folly, for all my passion and raving
will do me no Service.

The King returned from Fountainbleau, where the Conspiracy was discovered, to
Paris, and was received with the Shouts and Acclamations of the people for his
safe return, and their Deliverance from Slavery. The Prisoners were led to the
Bastile, the Duke of Biron was melancholy and dejected, the Count of Auvergne
merry and pleasant; the first entered the Bastile as into his Grave, the second
as into a Palace, imagining that no place could be a Prison to him. They had
the liberty of the House, but fearing the Dukes desperation might make him
destroy himself, they suffered none that came near him to wear Arms; and seeing
himself served with a Knife without a point, he said, That this was to the
Greve, which is a place in Paris where great persons are Executed, and speaking
of Death with disdain, said, That it could never come unlooked for to a Man
well resolved, nor strange to him that does foresee it, nor shameful to a
Generous Mind. He continued some time, after his Imprisonment, without eating
or sleeping, and the violent motions of his Heart cast him into a Fever, yet
would take no Physic but what his Physicians tasted first, for fear he should
be Poisoned; yet the fire of his Courage was not smothered with his Distemper,
what did he say, or what did he not say, Fury and Choler made him utter
senceless Speeches. If they will put me to Death, says he, Why do they not
dispatch me, that they may not boast they have made me afraid of Death? And
then let them drink themselves Drunk with the Blood which remains of five and
thirty Wounds that I have received in the Service of France. To pacify his
furious discontent, the Archbishop of Bourges was sent to him to rectify his
conscience, and to remove some Atheistical Opinions that he had embraced, and
to assure him that if he did heartily repent and confess his Crimes, he might
yet expect forgiveness both from God and the King. As soon as he was a
Prisoner, every one said he was a Dead man, and seeing himself so strictly
Guarded, he said, They did not put Birds of his kind into a Cage to suffer them
to escape; for when once a Man of Courage and Faction comes to be Imprisoned,
it is more dangerous to absolve than to condemn him.

The King sent to the Parliament of Paris to proceed against him, and
Commissioners were appointed, who took Informations in the Bastile. The
Prisoner at first was a little ceremonious in his answers, but being entered
into discourse, he gave the Commissioners matter enough to work upon,
confessing in a manner all he was accused of, so that from his own Mouth they
might have justly condemned him, to lose as many Lives as he had Years. He had
so ill governed his Judgment in Prosperity, that it was prejudicial to him in
his Adversity, yielding sometimes to Grief, then to Rage, and always to
Indiscretion, speaking as much to Ruin as Discharge himself; he was confronted
with the Witnesses face to face, but when he saw La Fin he fell into an extreme
trembling. The President asked him if he would except against La Fin; he
replied, That he judged him a Gentleman of Honor, and his Friend and Kinsman.
But when he had heard his Deposition, he cried out against him as the most
execrable Villain in the World, appealing to all the Powers of Heaven and Earth
to justify his Innocence. La Fin being disturbed to hear himself thus accused,
told him, That he was sorry they were in a place where one was allowed to speak
all, and the other to hear all; he justified all he had said against the Duke,
and made a more full discovery of the conspiracy than before. The Prisoner
said, That if Renaze were there he would aver the contrary. This was another of
the Conspirators, who was instantly brought before him, at which he was
extremely surprised, believing that he had been dead in Savoy long before. He
then alleged, that the Duke of Savoy had set him at Liberty to Ruin him, and
seemed confounded to find all things conspire to his destruction, for Renaze
was made a Prisoner in Piedmont, to prevent him from discovering this Treason,
but making his escape, he came just now, by an admirable Providence, to fortify
the Testimony of his Master La Fin, who else had been but a single Witness.

He had many friends, but the King represented his crime to be so detestable
and odious to the Princes and Nobility, that none of them had the courage to
intercede for him; his Process being finished, he is called to make his
defense. He is Charged to have Treated with the Duke of Savoy, about the
Betraying of Bourg and other places, and advising him to attempt against the
Kings Army and his own Person, discovering to him many things of Importance,
and offering him his Service and Assistance against all Men, in hope of
Marrying his Daughter: That he would have persuaded the King to appear before
St. Katherines Fort, on purpose that he might be Slain, and had writ to the
Governor how he should distinguish His Majesty from others. These and several
Articles more were alleged against him, but the Duke denied all, and renounced
the Confession he had made at his first Examination, alleging, That La Fin had
bewitched him, that he bit him by the Ear, and made him drink Enchanted Waters,
calling him his King, his Prince, his Lord; that he showed him an Image of Wax
which spoke these Words, Thou shall dye Witched King, and if he had such power
over a senseless Image, what might he not do upon him whom he had wholly
bewitched to do what he pleased? He made a bold and resolute Defense, and
concluded it in these words: My fault is great, but it was only in thought and
conception, and not Executed, in desire, but not in effect; great Offenses must
have great Pardons. I am he alone in France who feel the Rigor of Justice, and
cannot hope for the Merit of Mercy; whatever happens, I rely more upon you,
Gentlemen, then on the King, who having formerly regarded me with an Eye of
Love, looks no more on me now but with Indignation, and holds it a Virtue to be
cruel to me, and a Vice to show any act of Clemency toward me, it had been
better for me if he had not pardoned me at first, then to give me Life and now
to make me lose it with Shame and Dishonor. His discourse was so long, that
the Judges had not time to give their Opinions, so he was remanded to the
Bastile full of hopes of being discharged, boasting to the Captains of the
Guard, that he had defended himself so bravely and discreetly, as doubtless he
had fully satisfied them all; adding, That if he were Dead, no Man was able to
supply his place; and saying, Is it possible that the King should be so vain as
to think to frighten me with the apprehension of Death, or that he is able to
terrify me with it?

Three days after the Judges met, and upon Consultation concluded him to be
Guilty of High Treason, and the Chancellor with the first President of
Parliament, with some others, went into the Bastile to acquaint him with the
Sentence of the Court: The Duke looking out of a Window at that time, he heard
a Woman's cries and lamentations, which he instantly apprehended were made upon
his account, and somewhat disturbed him, but espying the Chancellor coming
toward him cross the Court, he cried out that he was Dead. You come, said he,
to pronounce my Sentence, I am unjustly Condemned, tell my Relations that I dye
innocent; and coming near, he said, O my Lord Chancellor, is there no Pardon?
Is there no Mercy? The Chancellor Saluted him, and put on his Hat; the Duke
continued bare, and having abandoned all the Powers of his Soul to Grief and
Passion, he spoke all that a Mind overwhelmed with Sorrow could utter,
reproaching the Chancellor that he was more desirous to condemn than save him,
and raved against the King in the most horrid expressions imaginable; then
shaking the Chancellor by the Arm, You have Judged me, said he, but God will
Absolve me, he will lay open the Iniquities of those who have shut their Eyes,
because they would not see mine Innocence. You, my Lord, shall answer for this
Injustice before him, whither I do Summon you within a year and a day; I go
before by the Judgment of Men, but those that are the cause of my Death, shall
come after by the Judgment of God. All which was spoke with the utmost fury and
rage, with other terrible Words, both against the King and Parliament; but his
appeal was not answered, for the Chancellor lived many years after, And then
proceeding in his discourse, I see very well that I am not the most Wicked, but
the most Unfortunate, those that have done worse than I ever thought are
favored, the Kings Clemency is dead toward me, he does not imitate the
example of Caesar nor Augustus, or of other great Princes, who not only
pardoned those that intended ill, but that acted it too; they were over-sparing
of Blood, yea, of the meanest. Wherein can the King show himself greater than
in Pardoning? Mercy is a Princely Virtue, every one can give Death, but it
belongs only to Sovereigns to give Life; and Cruel that he is, Does he not
remember that he has already pardoned me, I had a bad Design and he graciously
forgave me, I demand it again, and so you may inform him. The Queen of England
told me, that if the Earl of Essex would have humbled himself and asked her
Pardon, she would have forgiven him, but he grew obdurate and would never
implore her Mercy, and thereby deprived her of all means to show the effects of
her Goodness; she like a Generous Princess, desired to pardon him as she hoped
that God would pardon her. He was Guilty, I am Innocent, he Sued for no Pardon
for his Offense, I desire it for mine Innocence. Is it possible he should
forget the Services I have done him? Does he not remember the Conspiracy at
Mantes, and his great danger if I had not prevented it? There is no vein in my
Body that has not bled for his Service; he shows that he never loved me any
longer than he thought himself to have need of me. Has he forgotten the Siege
of Amiens, where I was often seen covered with Fire and Bullets, ready to give
or receive Death? My Father exposed himself to a thousand Dangers, and lost his
Life to set the Crown upon his Head; I have received thirty five Wounds in my
Body to secure the Crown to him, and for my Reward he takes my Head from my
Shoulders. Let him beware, lest the Justice of God fall upon him, he will find
what profit my Death will bring him, it will but impair the Reputation of his
Justice. He will lose this day a good Servant, and the King of Spain a great
Enemy; I am not put to Death because I Treated with him; my Courage raised me
up, and my Courage ruins me.

The Chancellor desired him not to torment himself any more about his Sentence,
since they had done him that Justice which a Father is bound to pronounce
against his Son in such a case as his. At which word his rage increased; What
Justice, (says he) I was never heard but once, I could not deliver the fiftieth
part of my Justification? What Justice upon the Evidence of La Fin, the most
wretched and execrable Villain in the World? The Chancellor to divert his
discourse, told him that he had brought two Divines, to comfort and prepare him
for Death; he replied, That he was already prepared, and had his Soul in that
Tranquillity, as the Night before he had spoken with God, and that his Guards
had heard him laugh in his Sleep. He desired the Chancellor that he might have
the last consolation of dying men, that is, Liberty to make his Will, which was
granted, and he gave away several things to his Servants, and the Guards
attending him. They then desired him to kneel and hear the Sentence read; Read
it, says he, and I will be as supple as a Glove, but when mention was made that
he had attempted against the Kings person, he fell again into a Rage, so that
it was concluded he should be bound and delivered instantly into the hands of
the Executioner. He swore he would be drawn to pieces with four Horses, before
he would be carried to dye at the Greve, but was told, That the King had done
him the favor to be Executed in the Bastile. By the persuasion of the Divines,
he began to examine his Conscience, continuing therein about an hour, which
ought to have been done with an humble, penitent, and contrite Mind, but he
seemed more careful of the affairs of his Family than of his Soul, praying to
God not as a devout Christian but like a Soldier. His Confession being ended
he walked about, often crying out of his Innocence, and cursing La Fin, and
asking if it were not lawful for his Brethren to cause him to be Burnt. He
desired to see some of his Relations and Friends whom he Named, but was told,
That there were none of them in the City, whereupon he mournfully said, All the
World has forsaken me, in these Crimes Friendship is dangerous, Friends fail,
and the Disease is counted Infectious to Acquaintance; he is Wisest that knows
no Man, nor any Man him.

Going out of the Chapel the Executioner presented himself to him; he asked
Voison who he was, It is, said he, the Executioner of the Sentence. Be gone,
said the Duke, touch me not till it be time; and doubting he should be bound,
he added, I will go freely to Death, I have no hands to defend my self against
it, but it shall never be said that I dye bound like a Thief or a Slave, and
turning toward the Hangman, he swore if he came near him he would pull out
his Throat. He at length came to the Scaffold, and kneeling upon the first
step, made a short Prayer, with his eyes lift up to Heaven; when he came up, he
cast a furious look upon the Executioner, Voison persuaded him it was not he,
Nay, says he, You think to deceive me, but I know him well enough. The
Executioner offered him a Cloth to put before his Eyes, but he refused it,
saying, That if he touched him, except only to give him the stroke of Death, he
would strangle him. He opened his Breast to the Guards, and said he should be
much obliged to them if they would shoot him with a Musket. What pity is it,
said he, to dye so miserably, and of so infamous a stroke. He asked then, Is
there no pardon? Well, I have made my Soul ready to present it before Almighty
God, but I pity the Kings Soul, who has put me to Death unjustly, for I dye
absolutely innocent, and my Death is the Recompense he gives me for all my
Services. These Words drew tears as well from the Soldiers as the rest of the
Spectators; the Judges told him his Sentence must be read once more, which he
heard with great impatience. After which, the Preachers persuaded him to call
upon God, and abandon the thoughts of all earthly things; he asks what he must
do, then takes his Handkerchief and covers his Eyes, asking the Executioner
where he should Seat himself, There, my Lord, quoth the Hangman: And where is
that, thou see I am blindfold, and yet speak as if I saw? And then
furiously pulls his Handkerchief from his Eyes, then blinds himself again,
commanding the Executioner to dispatch him quickly. He desired to dye standing,
but the Hangman told him he must kneel, for he durst not do any thing but
according to Order; at length he kneeled down, and bid the Executioner make an
end, but starting up suddenly again, What is there no Mercy then? says he,
looking severely upon the Spectators and the Hangman, and it was supposed, he
designed either to have taken his Sword from him, and hewed his way through the
people, or that he did believe the King would only affright him with the
Terrors of Death, and then send his Pardon. The Executioner desired leave to
cut his Hair; at this he grew into a rage, and swore if he touched him he would
Strangle him. Voison reproved him; says he, He shall not meddle with me while I
am living, and if you put me into a passion, I will Strangle half the company
that is here, and force the rest to kill me. I will leap off the Scaffold if
you throw me into despair. The Preachers came again upon the Stage, and
endeavored to allay his fury; at length he grew calm, crying out. My God, my
God, take pity upon me. The Preachers assure him that his Soul is ready to see
God, I, said he, Heaven is open for my Soul; he then bowed his Head, saying to
the Executioner, Strike, strike, O strike. The Hangman seeing he had rose
thrice before, and fearing he would seize his Sword, resolved to surprise him,
telling him he must say his last Prayer to recommend his Soul to God, which by
the Preachers entreaty he did, when the Hangman gave a sign to his Man to
reach his Sword, wherewith he cut off his Head while he was speaking. The blow
was so sudden that few perceived it, and the Head leaped from the Scaffold to
the ground, and even then his Countenance seemed furious. This was the end of
the passionate Duke of Biron, whose Courage was Invincible in War, and was
never tired with Labor, being often fifteen days together on Horseback, but
his Pride and Ambition clouded all his Virtues, which with his boiling Rage,
and intemperate Fury, were the great occasion of his Ruin. He was advanced from
the meanest to the highest degree of Honor, of a private Soldier he became a
Captain, then Colonel, afterward Admiral, great Marshal of France, and
Lieutenant of the Kings Armies, and in his Heart aspired to be Duke of
Burgundy, Son-in-Law to the Duke of Savoy, and Nephew to the King of Spain. He
was bred a Protestant, then turned Papist, but was a Scoffer at all Religion.
It is reported, that being formerly in trouble for the Murder of a Gentleman in
a Duel, and for which he afterward had a Pardon from the King, he went
disguised like a Carrier to one La Brosse, a great Mathematician, to whom he
showed his Nativity as one skilled therein, which he had got to be taken by
another, pretending it was a Gentleman's whom he served, that desired to know
what end he should have; La Brosse having considered it, told him, That the
Person was of a good House, and no older than himself, and he supposed it his
own: It Is no matter for that, said he, but pray tell me what his Life, Estate,
and end shall be. The Old man replied, My Son, I find that he whose Nativity
this is, shall arrive to great Honor by his Industry and great Valor, and may
be a King, but that there is a Caput Argol will hinder it. And what is that,
said Biron? Do not ask me, quoth the Old man: Nay, but I will know, says Biron.
At length he told him, That the Person would act those things which should
cause him to lose his Head; whereupon Biron beat him severely, and leaving him
half Dead in the little Garret where they were, he Locked it, and carried the
Key with him, whereof he boasted afterward to his Companions. It is likewise
said, that he had some discourse with a Magician in Paris, who told him, That
only one back blow of a Burgundian would hinder him from being King. Which
Prediction he remembered in Prison, and sent one to inquire what Countryman the
Hangman was, and hearing he was a Burgundian, he said, Then am I a Dead Man.
It is also said, that his Father observing his Ambitious temper, said thus to
him: Biron, I would advise thee when a Peace shall be made, to go and live
privately at thy own House, or else thou must leave thy Head upon a Scaffold;
which happened accordingly, as we have already Related. De Serres* History of
France.

Blood for Blood, or the Double Revenge.
FLoris, the first of that Name, the Nineteenth Earl of Holland, Zealand and
Friezeland, was a Valiant Prince, but gave himself up to Incontinency, which
was the occasion of his lamentable fall. His Father, William the Second, was
Elected King of the Romans, and after the Death of Conrade, Emperor of Germany,
was declared to be his Successor; and Pope Innocent, by Letters, gave him
advice thereof, desiring him to come to Rome and receive the Crown, and all the
other Ensigns of the Imperial Dignity. King William having no great confidence
in some of the Princes of Germany and Italy, Traveled to Rome in the Habit of
a Pilgrim, accompanied with twelve of his Loyal Nobility, and arriving in
Italy, met with the Pope at Genoa, by whom he was Honorably received, and
having conferred with him, he went from thence, in the same Habit, through
Lombardy and Germany, being owned and acknowledged for their lawful Sovereign
in all places where he would discover himself, and consulted with the Nobility
about the Affairs of the Empire.

Whilst he was thus employed, he had Intelligence that the West Frizons were
Revolted, and as they formerly had done; Invaded the Frontiers of Holland, from
whence they daily carried away great Booties, without opposition or restraint,
he being so far distant from them. The King was just ready to go from Germany
into Italy with a Royal Train and Army, to be Crowned at Rome, but yet thought
it better to defer his Journey for some time, and to preserve his own
Inheritance, and settle peace and quietness in his own Country, and among his
own Subjects, than to go so far off to purchase a Title of Honor without
Profit; he therefore declined his Voyage to Italy, and led his Army to Vtrecht,
where being at a Feast with the Noblemen and Prelates, some treacherous Villain
wounded him very dangerously on the Head with a Stone, while he sat at Table,
and yet none could perceive from whence it came. This accident did extremely
disturb the Prelates and Lords who had invited him to the Feast: The King
taking up the Stone, said, Do but observe what malice and despite the people
of Utrecht show toward me, to knock me on the Head with Stones, though I never
deserved any evil at their Hands, but have always assisted them, and subdued
their Enemies at my own Charge; but by the living God, this affront shall not
go unpunished, if I live but one year longer. Having said thus, he instantly
took Horse, and rid away in great Indignation, threatening the whole City with
utter Ruin and Devastation. The Magistrates and Burgesses of Vtrecht were
extremely concerned at this wicked and unfortunate accident, and having
obtained a Pasport, they send their Burgomasters to his Court at the Hague, to
endeavor to pacify his Wrath and Indignation against them. The King answered
them in few words, That what he had Sworn he would certainly perform, and was
resolved utterly to destroy their Town, unless they delivered into his Hands
him that had thrown the Stone. With this answer they returned, and having
assembled their Council, they made diligent search for the Delinquent but could
not find him.

In the mean time the King hastened into Friezland, whereby those of Vtrecht
escaped the terrible Vengeance he had designed to take upon them, for marching
with his Army to West Friezland, he vanquished those that opposed his passage,
and erected a Castle near Alkmer, which he called Tornenburg, or, The Castle of
his Wrath. He then proceeded with all speed in hope to surprise the Rebels, for
it being Winter, the Lord of Brederode, who led one of the Battalions, had
incountred and vanquished the Drechters, and the King mounted upon a very great
Horse, leading the other Battalion, endeavored to find the shortest way to
Hoockwind, which he designed to burn, and marched alone a great way before his
Troops over the Ice, as if it had been firm ground, but the Ice happening to
break his Horse fell in, and he was almost drowned, he having none near to
assist him. The Frizons, who lay in Ambush in the Reeds and Osiers, seeing a
Horseman thus mired, they ran thither and knocked him on the Head with Clubs
and Staves, not knowing him to be the King, but observing his Target they
thought him to be some Nobleman. Some Hollanders in those parts who were
banished thither for their crimes, coming hastily thither, discovered by his
Arms who he was, and told the Frizons that they had done very ill to Murder the
King their Natural Lord and Prince, which when they understood, both Man, Woman
and Child, were extremely grieved and concerned, and consulting together,
resolved to Bury him secretly in the Village of Hoockwind. His Army hearing
their King was dead, were so astonished that they Disbanded and returned home;
and this was the miserable end of this great Prince, after he had Governed his
Inheritance twenty years, and the Empire of Germany seven.

Floris the Fifth, his Son, succeeded him at seventeen years of Age, and Levied
a powerful Army to Revenge his Fathers Death, and reduce the West Frizons to
his Obedience, and to bring away his Fathers Bones and Bury them in Zealand.
The Frizons hearing of his approach, met and incountred him at Verone near
Alkmar, in which skirmish five hundred Hollanders, and some of Quality, were
slain, who thereupon retired and Encamped in the open Field, and having
received a Reinforcement went to attack the Frizons, who being proud of their
former Success came on boldly, but the Hollanders routed them, and killed eight
hundred upon the place. Soon after Floris again defeated them in another
Battle, and at length wholly subdued them, building several Castles to secure
them in their Obedience for the future, and thereby settled all his Dominions
in Peace.

There was in the Court of Floris a Valiant Nobleman, called Gerard Van Velson,
whom the Prince had kept Prisoner a whole year, after having Beheaded his
Brother unjustly for several crimes charged upon him by those that hated him;
Floris, after his Death, being informed of the Truth, set his Brother Gerard at
Liberty, and endeavored by all means to repair the wrong he had done, by
honoring and advancing his Brother, and to make him the more affectionate to
his Service, the Earl thinking very much to oblige him, offered Gerard his
Mistress, or Concubine, in Marriage; Gerard scorned and declined the motion,
but being still importuned by Floris, told him plainly, Sir, I am not of so
mean and base a Spirit as to put my Feet in your old Shoes; which is a Dutch
Proverb, intimating, That he would not Marry his leavings, or his cast Wench.
The Earl displeased, replied, Yes, I am resolved thou shall have my leavings.

Gerard goes from the Court in discontent, not regarding the Counts words, and
a while after Marries the Daughter of Herman Lord of Woerden, and Niece to
Gisbert of Amstel. Count Floris having notice that Gerard was Married, and that
he came no more to Court, by the persuasion of his Mistress he sent for him,
being come he gave him Commission to dispatch some Affairs a great way in the
Country, that were of much importance, which Gerard thought to be a great
favor from his Prince; during his absence, the Earl, with a few Attendants,
went to the Castle of Cronenburg, where Gerard usually resided, pretending to
refresh himself there; Gerards Lady received him with great Respect and Honor,
as being her Lord and Sovereign. The Count pretended he had some matters to
tell her which required secrecy, and desired her to show him some private Room,
the innocent Lady suspecting nothing, carried him into her own Bedchamber, the
Earl having fastened the Door, began to Court her very earnestly to yield to his
unlawful desires, which she refusing with abhorrence, he took his opportunity
in that secret place, where her cries could not be heard, to offer violence to
her, and a length, being stronger than she, he Ravished her* and then in all
haste departed. The abused Lady gave her self up to Sorrow and Dsepair, for the
wrong that had been offered her by her* Natural Prince, who above all things
ought to have protected and defended the Chastity and Honor of Ladies,
especially persons of her Quality, and throwing off her rich Attire and Jewels,
she put her self in deep Mourning till her Lords return, who coming back from
performing his Commission, gave an account thereof to the Earl, and then going
to his own House, was much surprised to find his Lady in that disconsolate
posture, and understanding the occasion of it, he comforted her in the best
manner he could, and appeared to the World as one wholly ignorant of the
matter, sending his Wife to the House of the Lord of Woerden her Father, with a
command to give him an account of the whole Fact, which she did accordingly,
adding, That she hoped her Father would not be angry with her for the dishonor
that had happened to his Family, since it was acted forcibly and violently,
under the pretense of Kindness and Hospitality.

Gerard consulted with his Father-in-Law what should be done, and how he were
best to govern himself in this affair, swearing and protesting upon his Honor,
that he would never suffer so horrid an abuse to pass unrevenged; after which
he never came to Court, but studied continually how to execute his intended
Vengeance. The Lord of Woerden was likewise very sensibly touched for the
dishonor of his Daughter and Family, and from that time became a Mortal Enemy
to Count Floris: These two drew Gisbert of Amstel, their Kinsman, into a
Conspiracy against the Earl, and by the Advice of these two Lords, Gerard
secretly sent for the Bishop of Duras, for the King of England, the Earl of
Cuyck, in the Name of the Duke of Brabant, and two Counselors for the Earl of
Flanders, who being met at Cambray, Gerard declared the detestable Treachery of
Floris with all the rage and aggravations that could be invented, which so
incensed them, that, after mature deliberation, they concluded to attempt all
means to seize upon the Earls Person, and to send him to the King of England,
there to end his days in Prison; and in the mean time, to send for John of
Holland, Son-in-Law to Floris, out of England, where he then resided, to come
and take possession of the Earldoms of Holland and Zealand, as Heir, by
Marrying his Daughter Elizabeth* and now descended to him by the Civil Death of
his Father, which he had justly deserved for expiation of so foul and
Villainous a Fact.

Count Floris wholly ignorant of this Conspiracy and Resolution, went to
Vtrecht to compose a difference between the Lord of Zulyn and some of his
Counselors, two of whom were the Lords Amstel and Woerden; the Earl going to
Church with his Guards and Household Servants, a Woman delivered him a small
Paper, containing these Verses of the Psalm: My dearest Friend, whom I did
trust,
With me did use Deceit,
And those who daily eat my Bread,
Did for my Soul lay wait.


My Lord, said she, consider well, and remember this complaint of King David.
The Earl contemned this advertisement, and went to Dine with the Noblemen and
Prelates of Vtrecht, where he was very merry; after Dinner he laid himself down
to sleep awhile, designing the remainder of the day for Sport and Pleasure,
when the Lord of Amstel waking him, invited him to ride abroad with his Hawks,
saying, They had found a brave flight of Herns, and other Wild Fowl. The Count,
who much delighted in Hawking, instantly mounted his Horse, with a Hawk on his
Fist, and a very small Attendance: When he had rid about half a mile from
Vtrecht, he was led into the midst of the Ambush of the Conspirators, who
issuing out upon him, encompassed him on all sides; Gerard Van Volsen, who
thought himself most wronged, was the first that offered to lay hold on him,
but the Courageous Prince, casting his Hawk from his Fist, drew his Sword to
defend himself, choosing rather to dye than to be taken, but being over-powred
by number, and unable to make any further resistance, they seized him, and
designed to have conveyed him privately that Night to the Castle of Muyden, and
from thence to send him into England, down the River of Fly. The principal
Conspirators was the Lords of Woerden, Amstel, Velson, Beuschop, Cragenhorst,
Thelingen, Van Zanthen, and diverse others.

The News of the surprizal of the Prince, soon alarmed the whole Country, so
that the Kennemers, Waterlanders, and West Frizons, instantly Armed themselves,
going aboard their Boats and Shallops to deliver their Lord; the Conspirators
having notice of their coming fled away, carrying the Earl through Marshes and
Bypath, to prevent his being discovered, but the people of Naerden, who first
went in search of them, happened to meet them just in their passage, who being
much perplexed knew not which way to make their escape. The Counts Horse, to
which he was bound, being little and weak, and unable to accompany them, fell
into a Ditch with him, they labored to get him out, but not daring to stay,
because they found themselves closely pursued, Gerard Van Velson, full of Rage
and Revenge, fearing to lose the Prize, seeing there was a necessity to abandon
him, the rest of his Companions being already fled, he resolved not to part
with him without satisfaction for his wrongs, and therefore desperately fell
upon his Natural Sovereign, giving him one and twenty Wounds with his Sword,
most of which were Mortal, and then mounting upon a swift Horse, he made his
escape to his Castle of Cronenburg. The Kennemers arrive soon after, and find
the Earl almost Dead and Speechless in the Ditch, being scarce able to draw his
breath; some of the Servants of the Murderers were taken, and cut in pieces
before the Earls face, and having drawn him out of the Ditch they carried him
to Mount Muyden, where he in a short time expired, after having Governed
Holland, Zealand, and Friezland, forty two years. He was a Generous Prince, of
a comely Stature and Presence, Courteous and Elegant in discourse, a good
Musician, and very Charitable; in short, he had all that could be wished for in
a Prince, had not his Virtues been sullied with the Vice of Incontinency, and
this last Treacherous Adultery. Count Floris had two Greyhounds, which always
followed him when he went abroad, these were found lying in the Ditch by him
where he was Wounded, and when his Body was put into a Boat to be conveyed to
Alkmer they leaped into it, and would neither eat nor drink though it was
offered them, and would certainly have starved themselves, if they had not by
force been drawn away from the Earls dead Body.

Thus have we seen Revenge acted to the height on one side, let us now observe
how it pursued the Actors of this Bloody Tragedy; several of the Assistants to
this Murder fled out of the Country, the Lord of Woerden wandered about like a
Vagabond, and at length died miserably in a Foreign Land. The Lord of Amstel,
who was a good Man, but drawn in by the rest, had all his Estate seized, and
fled into Germany. The common people were so enraged at this horrid Fact, that
they vowed Revenge against the chief Actors, and went to besiege the Castle of
Cronenburg, those within it continued quiet, pretending that neither Gerard nor
his Accomplices were there, though indeed they were. An account of this Murder
was sent to all the Friends of Count Floris, particularly to the Earl of
Heynault, and to Count John his Son, who came before the Castle and planted
their Engines of Battery against it: The Earl of Cuick (who was present at the
consultation at Cambray, in the Name of the Duke of Brabant) hearing that
Gerard was besieged in his Castle, writ to the Earl of Cleves, who was at the
Siege, entreating him to endeavor that the Besieged might have leave to depart
with their Lives saved, which the Earl consented to, and got his Guards about
him to secure them in their going away.

The Hollanders hearing of this agreement were much discontented, and gave
notice thereof to the Lord of Loef, Brother to the Earl of Cleves, who coming
thither, assured the Earl that notwithstanding his agreement to save their
Lives, yet the Hollanders and Zealanders would certainly fall upon them and
dispatch them, which would bring much Scandal and Reproach upon him and his
Family, that he endeavored to save such Bloody Murderers, and therefore it
were better to let them alone to reduce the Castle, and retire with his Forces.
The Earl doubting it might reflect upon his Honor, resolved to join with the
Hollanders in reducing it, and by Scaling Ladders, and other Instruments of
War, they at length took it by Assault, and kept the Prisoners in safe custody.

The Kennemers having notice that the Earl of Cleves would save the Lives of
Gerard Van Velsen, and the rest, they presently run to Arms, and cried out,
That if there were any who should endeavor to save the Lives of the Murderers
of their Prince, they should first dye themselves by their hands; whereupon the
Earl was forced to deliver them the Prisoners. The people of Dort had Hugh of
Baverland, the Kennemers had the Lord Thelingen, those of Haerlem Van Zanthem,
those of Dort the Lord Beuschop, the Earl of Cleves had Gerard of Craenhorst,
and four others, who were all broken upon the Wheel with cruel Tortures, and
afterward Beheaded, and those of Leyden had Gerard Van Velson, the Author of
this conspiracy, and the immediate Murderer of Count Floris, whom they resolved
to punish with the most exquisite Torments; so they put him stark Naked into a
Barrel full of sharp Nails, and then rolled him up and down through all the
Streets of Leyden. After which cruel usage they took him out, broke him upon a
Wheel, and then Beheaded him; and all his Kindred, even to the ninth degree,
that could be taken, were broken upon Wheels. Many upon suspicion only of being
willing to serve their Masters upon this occasion, were banished for ever out
of Holland; some designing to fly into Denmark mistaking their course, were
driven beyond the Straight of Weygate, not knowing whither they went, and
coasted along Tartary till they entered the River of Oby, from whence they
Sailed into Persia, and by leave from that King, Inhabited a Marshy part of
that Country, and cultivated it after the manner of Holland, where they have
continued their ancient Language, Labor, and course of Life, to this time. The
Hollanders rased the Castle of Cronenburg to the ground; after which, the
Nobility, Towns, and Commons of Holland, agreed jointly together, to root out
and destroy the Houses and Families of Amstel, Woerden, Velson, and all their
Kindred and Allies, which they confirmed by solemn Oaths and Writings, drawn
between them upon Record, whereby many Innocents were made Beggars and
Vagabonds, so that not one person of any of these Families durst appear
publicly in Holland, but concealed themselves, or led Country Lives; neither
did any Man presume ever since to bear the Coats of Arms of any of these three
Houses. And thus was one Revenge followed by another, to the Ruin and
destruction of so many people. History of the Netherlands.

The Scalado of Geneva.
THE Wars which had continued some time between the French King and the Duke of
Savoy, being composed by a Treaty of Peace in 1602. wherein though the
Genevoises were not named, yet the King declared they were intended and
included, and ought to enjoy the benefit of the Peace. They rested so securely
upon the faith thereof, that though they had many intimations and warnings
given them that the Duke had a secret design to be Master of the City* and
though his Invasion of several Villages and Impropriations belonging to that
State, were sufficient indications of his designs, yet the Magistrates were
lulled asleep with the protestations of the Lord Albigny, Lt. General to the D.
of Savoy on this side the Mountains, who declared that it was both his own and
his Masters desire that they should live quietly, and offered his assistance to
promote a lasting agreement between them; these assurances made them distrust
nothing, so that they neglected the Guarding of the City, though the Dukes
Subjects themselves were so kind to discover the Intrigue to them, for the day
before the execution of this subtle enterprise there came a Savoyard from
Chesne, who drawing near the Gate, told them positively, That the Enemy was
approaching, and that they should stand upon their Guard, yet this
advertisement was slighted like the rest.

The Duke had caused several Troops to advance undiscovered into the Duke of
N^mours Country, and among others a Regiment consisting of eight hundred French
Fugitives, who would undertake any thing for Money; Bruneleiu the Lord
Albigny's Lieutenant, had already, with some others, taken an exact view of the
City, with the height of the Walls, and the depth of the Ditches, in the Night,
and had assured his Master of the facility of the Enterprise, and having
likewise intelligence with the Syndick, or Commander of the City Guard, who was
to remove the Sentinel from the place they intended to Scale it, made them so
confident of success, that on Saturday, December 11. the day appointed for the
execution of their design, several persons came into the City to buy Horses,
and spoke suspiciously, That the next day they would come and conclude the
Bargain. It was confidently affirmed that Bruneleiu, before he undertook this
affair, had, by a special Dispensation, received the Extreme Unction from a
Priest, Swearing he would live no longer if he did not effect his design, and
that the rest had Confessed themselves, and taken the Sacrament upon it. The
Jesuits and Capuchins failed not to exhort both great and small to observe the
Oath, lately made at the Jubilee in Thonon, for the Extirpation of Heretics.

In the mean time Albigny, about Six a Clock at Night, began to draw up his
Men, it being the shortest day in the year, they consisted in his Company of
Guards, the French Regiment, and some Gentlemen of Savoy; some Spaniards and
Neapolitans were Quartered at Anecy, and ordered to March up when Commanded.
Out of the first Troops were drawn three hundred choice Men, Armed at all
points, with Breast-plates* Helmets on their Heads, Pistols at their Girdles,
and broad Swords in their Hands, and another party with Half-pikes and Muskets;
as they marched along, they seized the Peasants in their way to prevent them
from alarming the City, yet some made their escape and came to the Gates of
Geneva, giving notice to the Sentinels to stand on their Guard for the Enemy
was at hand, but their Words were disregarded as if they had jested. The Watch
who ought to have lain out of the City, to discover any that should approach,
had dispersed themselves, and perceived not the Troops who advanced
undiscovered along the Arve.

The Duke, who doubted not of the Success, came Post Incognito from beyond the
Mountains, and Personated an Ambassador; he arrived that Night at Tremblieres,
a Village a League distant from Geneva, to animate the Fearful with his
presence: For first, a Hare starting up amongst them, at the place of
Rendevouz, struck them with Terror; then they spied several Stakes, about six
hundred paces from the Town-Ditch, used to dry Serges on, which they judged to
be an Ambuscade from the City, ranged there to surprise them; yet they took
Courage, and leaving the Main Body of their Army at Plein Palais, the most
resolute of them, who had undertaken to Scale the Walls, alighted from their
Horses, and went toward the Counterscarp in the Ditch of Coraterie, and were no
sooner there when a flight of Wild Ducks arose and made them start, fearing
they should wake the Sentinels, and discover the Enterprise. At length,
recovering themselves, they passed softly over the Ditch upon Hurdles, to
prevent sinking in the mud, and raised up three Ladders against the Walls near
the Watch Tower, toward Monnoye, and as they after confessed, threw several
Stones against the Wall to try if any one heard them; the Ladders were black,
not to be seen in the dark, jointed together to be shortened and lengthned at
pleasure, and to be carried on Horseback, the Feet had sharp Iron Spikes to
fasten them in the Ground, the top of these Ladders, which were to touch the
Wall, had a Pulley, and were covered with thick Cloth to slide the easier, and
with less noise. They had also Steel Hammers to cut the Chains of the
Drawbridge, with the Locks and Bolts, and Pinchers to pluck out Nails and
Hinges from Gates, and several Petards to burst them open; and being thus
furnished they began to climb.

Sonos, one of the forwardest, who resolved to Revenge the Death of his Father,
who was killed by the Genevoises, began, by an ill Omen, to bleed at Nose,
before he ascended the Ladder, and being got half way up, received such a blow
by the fall of a Stone from the Wall, as almost took away his senses, and was
forced to come down. Albigny, who was most concerned in the Success of the
business, stood at the Foot of the Ladder, encouraging the Soldiers with the
Honor and Booty they might expect if they prevailed. Father Alexander, a
Scotch Jesuit, besides the Exhortation he made them in Plein Palais, Confessed
them at the foot of the Ladder, assuring them, That if they should dye in this
Service, the rounds of the Ladder would be as so many (...) to carry them
directly up into Heaven; but the poor Priest did not foresee that they would
leave the World from off another kind of Ladder than this. He likewise gave
them little Bills, with some passages of Scripture writ in them, and other
Papers, like Charms or Conjuration, which he said would preserve those that
carried them from sudden Death. December 12. about One in the Morning they
began to mount, all things were quiet and still, so that Sonos, Attignae, and
six others, entered the City through a Gate that is within, and is always left
open, and walked about the Streets in couples, to observe whether the people
were fast asleep, or that this great Silence were not a Trick to entrap them;
but all were quiet, and the rest climbed up in great numbers.

The Duke hearing that his most resolute men were entered without resistance,
sent for the Spaniards and Neapolitans, to march thither with all speed; he
likewise dispatched Curriers to all parts with Tidings of this happy beginning,
and ca^sed it to be confidently reported in Piedmont, Savoy, and Dauphine, that
Geneva was taken, and indeed he had cause to think so, since two hundred of the
stoutest men in his Army were already got in. Some lay flat on the ground under
the Trees of the Parapet, others stood up against the Houses in Corraterie,
till they should be stronger, for Brunalciu, and the other chief Managers, did
not intend to appear till four a Clock in the Morning, that their men might
have the more time to climb up, and that the Rere-Guard might approach nearer,
and likewise that they might have more light to carry on this weighty affair;
but about Three in the morning, a Soldier who stood Sertinel in the Tower of
Monnoye, hearing a noise in the Ditch, called his Corporal to know what it
might be, the Corporal sends a Soldier, with a Lanthorn, who takes his Musket
with him, and gets upon the Parapet, where he perceives some Armed Men coming
toward him, to whom he cried, Who comes there? and having no answer, fired his
Musket at them; they instantly fell upon him, and he crying out Arm, Arm, they
knocked him down, which the Sentinel perceiving, discharged his Piece to give
notice to the Main Guard, who were only six Men.

Bruneleiu, and the most resolute among them, perceiving they were discovered,
and that it was impossible to conceal themselves any longer, and supposing they
were strong enough to surprise the City, resolved to stand to it, and disposed
their Men to the best advantage to attack their Enemies in four several places,
till they could bring the Petards to force the New Gate, and let in their
Troops that lay at Plein Pallais, reserving a considerable party to assist
those who were still climbing up.

They then fiercely assaulted the New Gate, the Guard being only thirteen men,
some of them belonging to the neighboring Sentries. Most of the Guard when
they fired run away, and alarmed those that watched at the Townhouse, and
other places; they were pursued as far as the Treille Gate, which was speedily
clapped to; the Enemy finding it shut, they made themselves Masters of the New
Gate. In the mean time, of the three that remained of the Guard, two hid
themselves, and the third got to the top of the Gate, and very prudently let
down the Port-cullice, so that they were amazed to see themselves prevented
when they came to apply the Petard to the Gate. A Citizen, who was one of the
first awakened at the noise, came out of his House with his Halbert half
undressed, and discovering four or five Soldiers, asked aloud where the Enemy
was, who coming up to him, cried out. Peace, Slave, come hither and be on our
side: God bless the Duke of Savoy. Upon which, perceiving they were Enemies, he
flies back and alarmed the neighboring Streets; but the Enemy won the Gate of
Tartass, and keeping their ground, endeavored to make good the passage. The
Citizens run thither to Barricado the way to the Gate, some being perceived by
their Torches were killed by the Enemy, others wounded; Canal, an Ancient
Captain of great Courage, going beyond the Chain, and not thinking the Enemy so
near, was slain, but perceiving the Citizens to increase, they retired to their
Fellows at the New Gate.

In the mean time the City being thoroughly alarmed, some went to their usual
Rendevouz, others ran directly upon the Enemy, who believing they had effected
the business, shouted out along the Streets, God bless the King of Spain, God
bless the Duke of Savoy, the City is our own, kill, kill, kill'um; down with
'um, down with 'um. The Watchword whereby they knew each other, was, when they
met, to croak like a Frog. When the Citizens demanded Who goes there, they
answered Friends; others to divide them cried out, Arm, Arm, the Enemy is at
the Gate of Rive. The Enemy broke twice through the Guards at Monnoye* and
forcing open the Doors, behind which the Soldiers had Barricado'd themselves,
were rushing into the City, but the Grand Rounds opposed them with so much
courage, that they left many Dead upon the place. The Citizens likewise coming
in, briskly charged them, and killed one on the Bridge of Rhosne, and another
between the Gate and the Port-cullice which was let down. Being repulsed from
thence, they endeavored to break through the Houses into the chief Street of
the City, killing one Man, and applying the Petard to a Stable Door.

Whilst this was doing, a Gunner having fired a Cannon from the Bulwark of Oye,
which lay level with the Walls, he had the good hap to shatter the Ladders, and
threw them all down; the report of which being heard by the French Regiment
without the Gate, they joyfully cried out, March up, march up, the City is our
own, thinking the Petard had broken open the Gate with so great a noise, and
the Drums without further notice began to beat, which set them all on running
to the New Gate to divide the Spoil, but were much amazed to find it still
shut, so that going into the Ditch near the Scaling Ladders, the Gunner having
fired his Cannon a second time charged with Small Shot, made a dreadful
slaughter among them. At the same time a party of courageous Citizens,
resolving to Sacrifice their Lives in defense of their Country, and recover the
New Gate, fell bravely upon the Enemies Guards, killing two of them, with Picot
the Engineer, as he was managing the Petard, and being assisted by others, they
drove them from the Gate, and made them retreat to their Fellows.

The Savoyards astonished to find themselves enclosed between the Walls and the
Houses, and not knowing how to escape, began to lose their courage; they
offered to let Bruneleiu down from the Wall with a Rope, but he chose rather to
dye than to live with shame: The Shot flew about their Ears like Hail from the
Windows and tops of the Houses. One of the City Captains, half dressed,
Signalized himself eminently. A Tailor with a two handed Sword did Wonders. A
Woman throwing out on purpose an Iron Pot on the head of the forwardest, broke
his Skull. The courage of the Citizens increasing, and the Savoyards seeing
fifty of their Men lying on the ground, they fled to the place where the
Ladders stood, but finding none, threw themselves down the Wall, and one of
them falling upon Father Alexander, almost killed this false Prophet. The
Chevalier Dandelot sliding down broke his Nose. Fifty four were killed, most
Officers and men of Quality, and thirteen taken prisoners. The Cannon was
brought on the platform of Treille, and levelled against Plein Palais, which
instantly put the Horse and Foot that lay there to the Rout.

Albigny amazed at the unsuccesfulness of the undertaking, so well contrived
and so ill performed, and finding the Shopkeepers, (as he called them in Scorn)
had courage to defend themselves, he sounded a Retreat, which was very welcome
to his dispersed Troops, who were benumbed with fear and cold. They marched
away in haste, and brought the Duke of Savoy the News of the unfortunate
success which the Lord of Albigny's rashness had produced. The Duke said
little, only used his common expression to him, You have made a very fair
flourish.

The same day the thirteen prisoners were condemned to be hanged, the
Magistrates alleging for their severity, That they did not consider them as
Generous Enemies, but as Thieves that broke in in the Night, and who had
violated contrary to all Right, a Peace so solemnly Sworn to. It is said that
Sonas offered to redeem his Life with his weight in Silver, but yet was hanged,
together with Chaffardon, Attignac, and other persons of Quality, being
accompanied by the Ministers to the place of Execution. The Council of Sixty
ordered that their Heads, with those that were killed between the Walls, should
be cut off and ranged on the Wall of the Bulwark, near the place where they
Scaled, and their Bodies to be thrown into the River. They were found to be
sixty seven in all, and so many years had the City thrown off the Romish Yoke;
but with those in the Ditch, and that died by the way, they were two hundred in
the whole.

On the Genevoises side, only thirty were wounded and seventeen killed, who
were Buried in the chief Church, with an honorable Epitaph. It is said that
the famous Theodore Beza, who was then alive in the City, and heard not the
least noise of all this uproar and disturbance, and was amazed when he was led
forth to see the slain who lay in the Streets, though he had left off
preaching, being very Ancient, yet he got up into the Pulpit, and caused the
124 Psalm to be Sung, Now may Israel say, If the Lord had not been on our side
when men rose up against us, etc. Which Psalm has been ever since Sung on that
day, which is kept as a public Thanksgiving every year, and a Latin
Inscription of the whole matter erected in the Townhouse, for a perpetual
remembrance of this great Deliverance from Popery and Slavery, for the Duke of
Savoy declaring, That the principal Motive to this attempt was the Establishing
the Catholic Religion among them, and for the promoting so good a Work, he
neither valued his Soldiers, his Treasure, nor his Person. To which the
Genevoises replied, That he did not demonstrate himself Zealous for Religion,
when it appeared so plainly how little he valued his Oath, and that doubtless
God would not suffer him to escape unpunished, who had taken his Name in Vain.
Hist. of Geneva.

Wars Masterpiece.
OF all the Warlike Inventions that have ever been contrived, Antiquity can
produce none more dreadful than what were used by the people of the Netherlands
against the King of Spain, and particularly at the Siege of Antwerp, which
having been Besieged some time without Success, by Alexander Farnese Prince of
Parma, he at length resolved to lay a Bridge over the River Scheld, that runs
by the side of this City; it was 2400 foot broad, and above 60 foot deep when
the Tide is out: Yet the Prince, by indefatigable labor, and driving Piles
into the bottom* at length performed this wonderful Enterprise, only in the
midst where the stream was rapid and very deep, he was forced to make a
floating Bridge of Boats which joined the whole together. He likewise built
Forts or Castles at each end, and Planked the Bridge on each side 5 foot high,
to secure it from the Enemies Cannon, and from thence much annoyed the Town.

The Antwerpians finding how prejudicial this would be to them, and that it
might endanger the loss of the City, they consulted many ways how to destroy
it, but none took effect. At length they met with one Frederick Jambel an
excellent Engineer, who coming out of Italy into Spain, desired to have access
to the King, to off^r him his service in the Low Countries, but being slighted
and neglected, he left the Court in a Rage, threatening, That in a short time
the K. of Spain should hear of the Name of this despised person not without
tears; and coming to Antwerp, he had now a fit opportunity of expressing the
malice and fury of his mind. He was entertained by the Besieged, and assured
them that he would ruin this dangerous Bridge; to which purpose he built four
Ships, with flat bottoms and high sides, much thicker and stronger than
ordinary.

And thus he contrived to make Mines in the Waters: First, In the Keel of the
Ship he made a strong Brick Wall like a Floor, or Groundwork, a foot high and
5 broad, through the whole length of the Ship, then he built Walls on each side
about the Foundation, 3 foot high and as many broad, and having filled the
vacancy with Gunpowder tempered with exquisite Art, unknown to any but
himself, he covered it over with Grave-stones, Millstones, and other huge
Stones: Upon this covering he made another Story, Vault-wise, of Millstones,
and other vast Stones, which leaning on each other, made a ridge like that of
an House, that so the slaughter might not be only strait forward, but on either
side. In this upper Vault he put Iron and Marble Balls, Chains, Blocks, Nails,
Knives, and whatever else his mischievous Wit could suggest to him to destroy
Mankind. Lastly, All the space that lay open between the sides of the Ship, and
the Wall and Roof of the Mine, he filled up with Stones close joined together,
and bound down with Beams fastened with Iron: He covered and secured all these
things with strong Planks and a brick Floor, in the middle whereof he set fire
to a pile of Wood, that the Ships might seem to be set out in that order to
burn the Bridge, putting under the Wood Pitch and Brimstone, that could not be
extinguished before the Mine should be fired with the prepared Timber: He
framed two ways to fire the Mine, in some of the Ships he placed Matches
besmeared with Gunpowder, which being laid through the Keel reached to the
Mine, of that length as he had experimented, they would continue light till the
Ships should come to the Bridge. In other Ships he used Clocks to continue with
a gentle motion, till they arrived at the Bridge* and then with a violent
meeting of the Wheels against a Flint, should strike some Sparks into the
bruised Gunpowder there scattered, and inflame the Train, and thence convey
the fire into the mouth of the Mine. Jambel having finished these four dreadful
Engines, added 13 Jess, which had nothing hurtful but the Hatches covered with
huge Fires. These preparations were observed by the Spaniards, though ignorant
of the Stratagem, imagining they were providing a Fleet ready in the City to
attack the Bridge on one side, while the Zealand and Holland Squadrons did the
like on the other; therefore the Prince kept strict Guard to prevent mischief,
which was nearer to him than he imagined, when behold from the City there
appeared three Ships first, and after them several others, brightly shining
with Fire in the darkness of the Night, at which the Camp was alarmed, and
cried, Arm, Arm, and the Bridge was filled with Soldiers. The Ships came down
the River in good order, two and three together, as if intended only for show,
having the Mariners aboard them, and the flames were so clear, that they seemed
not to carry Fire but to be burning themselves, and that fire could Sail and be
preserved in the Waters; the whole made a glorious show, if the Hearts of the
Spectators had not been filled with terror, for the banks of the River, and the
Castles placed thereon, shone with continual Fires, which with the Armed Troops
along the shore, and on the Bridge, in bright Armor, with their Swords drawn,
and Colors displayed, with the Gallautry of their Commanders, made a very
agreeable sight, and was heightened by those Fiery Ships in the midst of the
Scheld, which hitherto without hurt spit their flames as if in Sport.

When these Ships were within two miles of the Bridge, the Seamen turned those
four that had the Mines with their Helms directly down the midst of the Channel
against the Bridge, not valuing the small Vessels, and setting fire to the
Match, presently leapt into the Boats to observe the success at a distance, but
wanting their Pilots they did not keep one course, most of the small ones
dashed themselves against the Machines fenced with sharp Pikes, or run aground
on the Banks, and of the four that carried Destruction in their Bowels, one
Leaking was swallowed up in the midst of the River, vomiting out only Smoke and
Thunder; two others by the force of the Wind were driven ashore on Flanders
side, and the last had almost run the same fate, being violently driven near
the shore, which, with the sight of the loss of the rest, made the Spaniard's
Triumph and Scoff at the folly of their Enemies, but this last Ship being
stronger than the others, broke through all opposition, destroying all the
Engines and Contrivances made to hinder its progress and came on furiously
against the Bridge At this sight the Soldiers shouted with terror and fear.
The Prince of Parma when he heard those shouts came thither, and endeavored to
prevent the danger from this Fireship by commanding some Mariners aboard it, to
disperse the Wood and quench the Fire, and others to keep it off with large
Poles and Pikes. He himself stood in the wooden Castle on the Bridge, and with
him several of the chief Commanders, and the Guard of the place, and amongst
them a Spanish Ensign, who either had some knowledge of such Engines or knew
that Jambel was excellent in this Art, who came to the Prince and earnestly
desired him, That since he had now done all that was necessary, he would please
to withdraw himself, and not venture his Life, whereon every Soldiers Life,
yea, the War it self depended, in so dangerous a place, but being rejected he
still insisted, and throwing himself on his Knees before the Prince, said, I
most humbly beseech and entreat you, most illustrious Prince, as you value your
Life, which I now see exposed to the utmost hazard, that you would please but
this once to take Advice from your Servant; and saying this, he modestly
plucked him by the Garment, and with a kind of commanding Authority, entreated
him to follow him, who Interpreting this unusual freedom of the Man to proceed
from an higher Power, at last consented, and with some others went away.

The Prince had hardly entered St. Mary's Fort, when the limited Hour for the
Match to fire the Mine was come, and all on a sudden this fatal Ship burst
asunder, with such a horrid noise as if the very Skies, had rent asunder, and
Heaven and Earth had come together, or the whole Body of the World had
trembled, for the Storm of Stones, Chains, and Bullets, being thrown out with
Thunder and Lightning, there followed such a slaughter as cannot be imagined.
The Castle on which this Infernal Ship fell, the Bridge next to it, with the
Soldiers, Mariners, Commanders, and a great number of Cannon, Armor and Arms,
all these this furious Whirlwind swept away together, tossed in the Air, and
dispersed as the Wind does Leaves of Trees; the River Scheld prodigiously
gaping was then first seen to discover its bottom, and then swelling above the
Banks, over-flowed the adjacent Shores, the motion of the Earth was felt nine
miles off, and great Grave-stones were thrown a mile from the River sunk two
foot into the ground: But the destruction of men was very deplorable, some the
Hellish violence of the fires consumed, or carried into the Air, whence they
fell bruised on the Earth, or into the River, others were stifled with the
poisonous Smoke* others boiled to death with the Scalding Waters, many slain
with the shower of Stones, and some the Grave stones both killed and Intombed.
The Viscount of Brussels was darted out of his own Ship and fell overthwart
another Ship at a great distance without hurt. A Captain, by this Infernal
Whirlwind, was carried heavy Armed out of St. Mary's Fort like Chaff in the
Air, and thrown into the midst of the River, from whence by Swimming, with the
loss of his Armor, he escaped. A young man of the Princes Guard was carried
over a great part of the River into Brabant, a very great way, only hurting his
Shoulder a little when he fell on the ground, and said he seemed like a Bullet
shot out of a Cannon, he felt such a violence forcing him forward. To conclude,
there were ^oo slain, and the Prince of Parma in great danger, though a good
distance off, by a great Stake which struck him down, where he lay for some
time in a Trance: And indeed, the desolation occasioned by this Execrable
Engine, made people say, That the Author of it fetched this terrible fire which
made the River boil with heat and those pestiferous mortal vapors, from the
Infernal Pit, and that the Thunder and Lightning was procured by Magic Art.
Wars of the Low Countries.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books Printed for Nath. Crouch, at the Bell in the Poultrey,
near Cheapside.
History.
1. ENglands Monarchs: Or, A compendious Relation of the most remarkable
Transactions, from Julius Caesar to this present; adorned with poems, and the
picture of every Monarch from K. William the Conqueror, to the third year of K.
William and Q. Mary. With a List of the Nobility, the Knights of the Garter,
the number of the Lords and Commons, who have Votes in both Houses of
Parliament; and many other useful particulars. Price one Shilling.

2. THE Wars in England, Scotland and Ireland, containing a particular and
Impartial Account of all the Battles, Sieges, and other remarkable
Transactions, Revolutions and Accidents, which happened from the beginning of
the Reign of King Charles I. 1625. to His Majesty's happy Restoration: The
illegal Trial of K. Charles I at large, with his last speech at his suffering;
and the most considerable matters till 1660. with pictures of several
accidents. Price One Shilling.

3. THE History of Oliver Cromwell, being an Impartial Account of all the
Battles, Sieges, and other Military Achievements, wherein he was engaged in
England, Scotland and Ireland; and particularly all the Sea Fights with the
Dutch and French; and likewise of his Civil Administrations, while he had the
Supreme Government of these three Kingdoms, till his Death. Relating only
matters of Fact, without Reflection or Observation* By R. B. Price One Shilling.

4. HIstorical Remarks and Observations of the Ancient and Present State of
London and Westminster, showing the Foundations, Walls, Gates, Towers, Bridges,
Churches Rivers, Wards, Halls, Companies, Government, Courts, Hospitals,
Schools, Inns of Courts, Charters, Franchises, and Privileges thereof; with an
account of the most remarkable accidents, as to Wars, Fires, Plagues, and other
occurrences, for above 903 years past, in and about these Cities, to the year
1681. Illustrated with pictures, and the Arms of 65 Companies of London, and
the time of their Incorporating. Price One Shilling.

5. ADmirable Curiosities, Rarities and Wonders in England, Scotland and
Ireland, or an account of many remarkable persons and places; and likewise of
the Battles, Sieges, prodigious Earthquakes, Tempests, Inundations, Thunders,
Lightnings, Fires, Murders, and other considerable occurrences and accidents
for many hundred years past: Together with the natural and artificial Rarities
in every County in England, with several curious Sculptures. Price One shilling.

6. THE History of the Kingdoms of Scotland and Ireland, containing, 1. An
account of the most remarkable Transactions and Revolutions in Scotland for
above 1200 years past, during the Reigns of 68 Kings, from 424. to K. James I.
in 1602. 2. The History of Ireland, from the Conquest thereof to this time,
with the miraculous persons and places, strange accidents, etc. And a List of
the Nobility and great Officers of State in both Kingdoms. Illustrated with
several pictures of some extraordinary observables. Price One shilling.

7. THE English Empire in America, or a prospect of His Majesty's Dominions in
the West Indies, namely, New Foundland, New England, New York, New Jersey,
Pensylvania, Maryland, Virginia, Carolina, Bermudas, Barbuda, Anguilla,
Monserrat, Dominica, St. Vincent, Antego, Mevis or Nevis, St. Christophers,
Barbados and Jamaica; with an account of their Discovery, Situation and
Product: The Religion and manners of the Indians, and other excellencies of
these Countries: To which is prefixed a relation of the first discovery of this
New World, and of the remarkable Voyages and Adventures of Sebastian Cabot, Sir
Martin Frobisher, Captain Davies, Capt. Waymouth, Capt. Hall, Capt. Hudson,
Sir Tho. Cavendish, the E. of Cumberland, Sir Walter Rawleigh and other
English Worthies, to diverse places therein. Illustrated with Maps and pictures
of the strange Fruits, Birds, Beasts, Fishes, Insects, Serpents, and Monsters
found in those parts of the World. Price One shilling.

8. A View of the English Acquisitions in Guinea and the East Indies: With an
Account of the Religion, Government, Wars strange Customs, Beasts, Serpents,
Monsters, and other observables in those Countries. And among others, the Life
and Death of Mahomet the Grand Impostor, with the principal Doctrines of the
Turkish Religion as they are displayed in the Alcoran. Two Letters, one written
by the Great Mogul, and the other by the King of Sumatra in the East Indies, to
our K. James I. of an unusual and extravagant style. The cruel Executions in
those parts, with the manner of the Women's burning themselves with their dead
Husbands. Together with a description of the Isle of St. Helena, and the Bay of
Souldania, where the English usually refresh in their Voyages to the Indies;
intermixed with pleasant Relations, and enlivened with pictures. Price One
shilling.

9. THE English Hero: Or, Sir Francis Drake Revived. Being a full account of
the dangerous Voyages, admirable Adventures, notable Discoveries, and
Magnanimous Achievements of that Valiant and Renowned Commander. As, 1. His
Voyage in 1572. to Nombre de Dios in the West Indies, where they saw a pile of
Bars of silver near seventy foot long, ten foot broad, and twelve foot high. 2.
His incompassing the whole World in 1577. which he performed in two years and
ten months, gaining a vast quantity of Gold and Silver. 3. His Voyage into
America in 1585. and taking the Towns of St. Jago, St. Domingo, Carthagena, and
St. Augustine. 4. His last Voyage into those Countries in 1595. with the manner
of his Death and Burial* Revised, Corrected, very much enlarged reduced into
Chapters with Contents, and beautified with pictures. By R. B. Price One
shilling.

10. TWO Journies to Jerusalem; containing first, An account of the Travels of
two English Pilgrims some years since, and what admirable accidents befell them
in their Journey to Jerusalem, Grand Cairo, Alexandria, etc. 2. The Travels of
14 English Merchants in 1659. from Scanderoon to Tripoly, Joppa, Kamah,
Jerusalem, Bethlehem, Jericho, the River of Jordan, the Lake of Sodom and
Gomorrah, and back again to Aleppo. To which is added, a Relation of the great
Council of the Jews, assembled in the plains of Ajayday in Hungary, 1650. to
examine the Scriptures concerning Christ. By S. B. an Englishman there
present: With the notorious delusion of the Jews, by a counterfeit Messiah, or
false Christ at Smyrna, in 1666. and the event thereof. Lastly, The Extirprtion
of the Jews throughout Persia in 1666. Epistle of King Agbarus to our Savior,
with our Saviors answer; beautified with pictures. Price One shilling.

11. EXtraordinary Adventures of several famous men, with the strange Events,
and signal mutations and changes in the Fortunes of diverse Illustrious places
and persons in all Ages, being an account of a multitude of stupendous
revolutions, accidents, and observable matters in diverse States and Provinces
throughout the whole World; with Pictures. Price one shilling.

12. THE History of the Nine Worthies of the World: Three whereof were
Gentiles; 1. Hector Son of Priamus King of Troy. 2. Alexander the great King of
Macedon, and Conqueror of the World. 3. Julius Caesar first Emperor of Rome.
Three Jews. 4. Joshua Captain General and Leader of Israel into Canaan. 5.
David King of Israel. 6. Judas Maccabeus a valiant Jewish commander, against
the Tyranny of Antiochus. Three Christians. 7. Arthur King of Britain, who
courageously defended his country against the Saxons. 8. Charles the Great, K.
of France, and Emperor of Germany. 9. Godfrey of Bullen King of Jerusalem.
Being an account of their Glorious Lives, worthy Actions, renowned Victories
and Deaths. Illustrated with poems, and the picture of each Worthy. By R. B.
Price One shilling.

13. FEmale Excellency, or the Ladies Glory, Illustrated in the worthy Lives,
and memorable Actions of Nine Famous Women, who have been renowned either for
Virtue or Valor, in several Ages of the World: As 1. Deborah the Prophetess.
2. The valiant Judith. 3. Queen Esther* 4. The virtuous Susanna. 5. The chaste
Lucretia. 6. Voadicia Queen of Britain, in the reign of Nero Emperor of Rome.
Containing an account of the original Inhabitants of Britain. The History of
Danaus and his fifty Daughters, who murdered their Husbands in one Night: Of
the arrival of Brute. Of the two Giants Corineus and Gogmagog: Of K. Lear and
his three Daughters: Of Belin and Brennus who took the City of Rome: Of the
manner of Julius Caesar's invading Britain; and of the Valor of Voadicia,
under whose conduct the Britains slew 70 thousand Romans, with many other
remarkable particulars. 7. Mariamne Wife to K. Herod. 8. Clotilda Q. of France.
9. Andegona Princess of Spain. The whole adorned with poems and pictures to
each History. By R. B. Price One shilling.

14. WOnderful Prodigies of Judgment and Mercy, discovered in above 300
memorable Histories; containing, 1. Dreadful Judgments upon Atheists,
Blasphemers, and perjured Villains. 2. The miserable ends of many Magicians,
etc. 3. Remarkable predictions and presages of approaching Death, and how the
event has been answerable. 4. Fearful Judgments upon bloody Tyrants, Murderers,
etc. 5. Admirable Deliverances from imminent dangers and deplorable distresses
at Sea and Land. Lastly, Divine goodness to penitents, with the dying thoughts
of several famous Men, concerning a future state after this life. Imbellished
with diverse pictures. Price One shilling.

15. Unparalled Varieties, or the matchless actions and passions of Mankind;
displayed in near 400 notable instances and examples, discovering the
transcendent effects: 1. Of Love, Friendship and Gratitude. 2. Of Magnanimity,
Courage and Fidelity. 3. Of Chastity, Temperance, and Humility: And on the
contrary, the Tremendous consequences. 4. Of Hatred, Revenge and Ingratitude.
5. Of Cowardice, Barbarity, and Treachery. 6. Of Unchastity, Intemperance and
Ambition* Imbelished with proper Figures. Price 1s.

16. THE Kingdom of Darkness. Or the History of Demons, Specters, Witches,
Apparitions, Possessions, Disturbances, and other wonderful and supernatural
delusions, mischievous feats, and malicious Impostures of the Devil. Containing
near fourscore memorable relations, Foreign and Domestic, both ancient and
modern. Collected from Authentic Records, Real Attestations, Credible
Evidences, and asserted by Authors of undoubted Verity. Together with a preface
obviating the common objections and allegations of the Sadduces and Atheists of
the Age, who deny the Being of Spirits, Witches, etc. With pictures of several
memorable Accidents. Price One shilling.

17. Surprising Miracles of Nature and Art, in 2 parts containing, 1. The
Miracles of Nature, or the wonderful Signs, and prodigious Aspects and
Appearances in the Heavens, Earth and Sea, with an account of the most famous
Comets* and other prodigies, from the Birth of Christ to this time. 2. The
Miracles of Art, describing the most Magnificent Buildings, and other curious
Inventions in all Ages, as, the seven Wonders of the World, and many other
excellent Structures and Rarities throughout the Earth. Beautified with
pictures. Price One shilling.

18. MEmorable Accidents and Unheard of Transactions, containing an account of
several strange Events and Historical Passages which have happened in several
Countries in this last Age: As 1. The Shipwreck of the Ambassador of the King
of Siam to Portugal. 2. Treasons and Revolutions of the deposing of Christian
second King of Denmark. 3. The Faithful Subjects of the Emperor of China. 4.
The furious Tempest, or the dangers of the Venetian Ambassador. 5. The Amors
of Count Vesselini, with the surprizal of the strong Fort of Muran in
Transylvania. 6. The Adventures of some Frenchmen in the Islands of Antilles in
America. 7. The brave Hollanders Engagement with an Algerine. 8. The Memorable,
but Unhappy Retreat, of the Polish Army out of Tartary. 9. The Fiery
Misfortune, or the burning a great Dutch Ship going to the East Indies. 10. The
Distressed Dutchmen who Wintered in Nova Zembla. 11. The Disastrous Voyage, and
Miraculous Deliverance of Peter Quirini a Venetian. 12. The Raging Duke, or the
furious Death of the Duke of Biron, who was Beheaded at Paris. 13. Blood for
Blood, or the Murder of Floris Earl of Holland and Zealand, fully Revenged. 14.
The Scalado of Geneva by the Duke of Savoy 15. Wars Masterpiece, or the
Infernal Engines at the Siege of Antwerp. Printed at Brussels in 1691. and
dedicated to His present Majesty William King of England, etc. Published in
English by R. B. Price one Shilling.

19. MArtyrs in Flames, or popery in its true Colors, being a brief relation
of the horrid cruelties and persecutions of the Pope and Church of Rome, for
many hundred of years past, to this present time, in Piedmont, Bohemia,
Germany, Poland, Lithuania, France, Italy, Spain, Portugal, Scotland, Ireland,
and England, with an abstract of the cruel persecutions lately exercised upon
the Protestants in France and Savoy, in the year 1686. and 1687. Together with
a short account of Gods Judgments upon Popish Persecutors. Price* One shilling.

Miscellanies.
20. DElights for the Ingenious, in above fifty select and choice Emblems,
Divine and Moral, Ancient and Modern, curiously Engraven upon copper plates,
with 50 delightful poems and lots, for the more lively illustration of each
Emblem, whereby instruction and good counsel may be promoted and furthered, by
an honest and pleasant recreation; to which is prefixed, An incomparable poem,
entitled, Majesty in misery, or an imploration to the King of Kings, written
by His late Majesty K. Charles I. with his own hand, during his captivity in
Carisbrook castle in the Isle of Wight, 1648. with a curious Emblem. Collected
by R. B. Price 2s 69.

21. EXcellent contemplations Divine and Moral, written by the magnanimous and
truly loyal A. L. Capel Baron of Hadham; together with some account of his
life, and his affectionate Letters to his Lady the day before his death, with
his Heroic behavior and last speech at his suffering. Also the speeches and
carriages of D. Ham. and the E. of Holl. who suffered with him; with his pious
advice to his Son, Price One shilling.

22. WInter Evenings entertainments in two parts, containing, 1. Ten pleasant
Relations of many rare and notable accidents and occurrences, with brief
remarks upon every one. 2. Fifty Ingenious Riddles, with their explanations,
and useful observations, and morals upon each. Enlivened with above 60
pictures, for illustrating every story and riddle. Excellently accommodated to
the fancies of Old or Young, and useful to cheerful society and conversation.
Price One shilling.

23* DElightful Fables in Prose and Verse, none of them to be found in Aesop,
but collected from diverse ancient and modern Authors, with pictures and proper
morals to every Fable. Several of them very pertinent and applicable to the
present times: published as a means which in all ages has been found for
pleasure, and likewise for instruction in the prudent conduct of our lives and
actions. By R. B. Price bound One shilling.

Divinity.
24. THE Divine Banquet, or Sacramental Devotions, consisting of morning and
evening prayers, contemplations and Hymns, for every day in the week, in order
to a more solemn preparation for the worthy receiving of the Holy Communion,
representing the several steps and degrees of the sorrow and sufferings of our
blessed Savior, till he gave up the Ghost: As, 1. His agony in the Garden. 2.
His being betrayed by Judas. 3. His being falsely accused, smitten, buffetted
and spit upon before Caiaphas the High priest. 4. His condemnation, scourging,
crowning with Thorns, and being delivered to be crucified by Pontius Pilate. 5.
His bearing his cross to Golgotha. 6. His crucifixion and bitter passion. 7.
Our Saviors Institution of the blessed Sacrament. Together with brief
resolutions to all those scruples and objections usually alleged for the
omission of this important duty. With eight curious sculptures proper to the
several parts; with Graces. Imprimatur, Z ^sham, R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a
sacris. Price One shilling.

25. A Guide to eternal Glory: Or, brief directions to all Christians how to
attain everlasting salvation: To which are added several other small Tracts: As
1. Saving Faith discovered in three heavenly conferences between our blessed
Savior and 1. A publican. 2. A pharisee. 3. A doubting Christian. 2. The
threefold state of a Christian, 1. By Nature: 2. By Grace: 3. In Glory. 3. The
scriptures concord, compiled out of the words of scripture, by way of question
and answer, wherein there is the sum of the way to salvation, and spiritual
things compared with spiritual. 4. The character of a true Christian. 5. A
brief Directory for the great, necessary, and advantageous duty of
self-examination, whereby a serious Christian may every day examine himself. 6.
A short Dialogue between a Learned Divine and a Beggar. 7. Beams of the spirit,
or cordial meditations, enlivening, enlightening, and gladding the soul. 8. The
seraphick souls triumph in the love of God; with short remembrances and pious
thoughts. 9. History improved, or Christian applications and improvements of
diverse remarkable passages in history. 10. Holy breathings in several Divine
poems, upon diverse subjects and scriptures. Price One shilling.

26. YOuths Divine pastime, containing forty remarkable scripture histories,
turned into common English Verse; with forty pictures proper to each story,
very delightful for the virtuous, employing the vacant hours of young persons,
and preventing vain and vicious divertisements. Together with several scripture
hymns upon diverse occasions. Price 8 d.

27. THE young man's calling, or the whole duty of youth, in a serious and
compassiona^^ address to all young persons to remember their Creator in the
days of their youth. Together with remarks upon the lives of several excellent
young persons of both sexes, as well ancient as modern, who have been famous
for virtue and piety in their Generations, namely, on the lives of Isaac and
Joseph in their youth. On the martyrdom of seven Sons and their mother. Of
Romanus a young noble man, and of diverse holy Virgins and martyrs. On the lives
of King Edw. VI. Queen Jane, Queen Elizabeth in her youth, Prince Henry eldest
Son of King James, and the young Lord Harrington, etc. with twelve curious
pictures, illustrating the several histories. Price 1s 6d.

28. THE vanity of the life of man represented in the seven several stages
thereof, with pictures and poems exposing the follies of every age; to which is
added, verses upon several subjects and occasions. Containing, the history of
the cruel death of Cassianus, Bishop and Schoolmaster of Brescia in Italy, who
suffered martyrdom for the profession of the Christian Faith, by the hands of
his own Scholars, in the bloody Reign of Dioclesian an heathen Emperor of Rome;
with diverse other poems compiled by Mrs. Ann Askew, and Mr. John Rogers, whilst
they were prisoners in Newgate, and afterward burnt in Smithfield, in the
bloody reign of Queen Mary. By R. B. Licensed and Entered. Price Eight pence.

29. MOunt Sion, or a draught of that Church that shall stand for ever;
together with a view of that world which shall be broken in pieces and
consumed. By William Dyer, Author of Christ's famous Titles* and a Believers
Golden chain. Price 1 shilling.

30. DIstressed Sion relieved, or, the Garment of praise for the spirit of
heaviness* A poem* Wherein are discovered the grand causes of the Churches
trouble and misery under the late dismal dispensation; with a complete history
of, and lamentation for those renowned Worthies that fell in England, by popish
rage and cruelty, from the year 1680. Humbly dedicated to Their present
Majesty's. By Benj. Reach, Author of a book called, Sion in distress, or the
groans of the true Protestant Church. Price One Shilling.

31. ANtichrist stormed, or the Church of Rome proved to be mystery* Babylon
the Great Whore, Revel. 17. by many and undeniable arguments answering all the
objections of the papists, and all others. Together with the Judgment of many
ancient and modern Divines, and most eminent writers concerning the rise and
final ruin of the Beast and Babylon, proving it will be in this present Age.
With an account of many strange predictions relating to these present Times. By
Benjamin Keach. Price One shilling.

32. THE devout souls daily Exercise in prayers, contemplations and praises,
containing Devotions for Morning, Noon, and Night, for every day in the week,
with prayers before and after the holy Communion: And likewise for persons of
all conditions, and upon all occasions: with Graces and Thanksgivings before
and after meat. By R. P. D. D. Price bound six pence.

33. SAcramental Meditations upon diverse select places of Scripture, wherein
Believers are assisted in preparing their hearts, and exciting their affections
and graces when they draw nigh to God in that most awful and solemn Ordinance
of the Lords Supper. By Jo. Flavel Minister of Christ in Devon. Price One
shilling.

34. JACOB wrestling with GOD, and prevailing: Or, a Treatise concerning the
Necessity and Efficacy of Faith in prayer: Wherein diverse weighty Questions and
Cases of Conscience about praying in Faith, are stated and resolved: For the
comforting and satisfying of weak and scrupulous consciences: The conviction of
formal Hypocrites, awakening of all Saints, both weak and strong, great and
small, to this great duty of prayer. By Thomas Tailor, formerly at Edmunds
Bury, now Pastor to a Congregation in Cambridge. Price One shilling.

All Printed for Nath. Crouch, at the Bell in the Poultrey near Cheapside.

FINIS.

