A DISCOURSE; SHOWING, Who they are that are now Qualified to Administer
Baptism and the Lord's Supper.

Wherein the Cause of EPISCOPACY Is briefly Treated.

By the Author OF A DISCOURSE Proving the Divine Institution of Water Baptism.

No Man takes this Honor unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was
Aaron,

Heb. 5.4. LONDON, Printed for C. Brom at the Gun, at West End of St. Paul's;
W. Keble white at the Swan in St. Paul's Churchyard; and H. Hindmarsh at the
Golden-Ball over against the Royal Exchange, Cornhill, School.

THE PREFACE.
THIS Discourse was Promised in that which I formerly Published, proving the
Divine Institution of Water Baptism; And was intended to have been Annexed to
that, but some Delays prevented it.

I can give no good Reason why it has stayed thus long, having made but little
Addition to what was then done: But other things Intervened, and, as it is
usual in Delays, the first in Design proves the last in Fact.

The Subject of this has led me directly upon the larger Theme of Episcopacy;
which having been so Elaboratly and so Often treated of, I intend not in this
to Branch out into so wide a Field; but in a short compendious Method, to lay
before the Quakers, and others of our Dissenters from Episcopacy, the Heart of
the Cause, so far particularly as it concerns our present Subject, the Right of
Admimistring the Sacraments of Christ.

And to avoid the length of Quotations, when brought into the Discourse, and
Dilated upon, I have, at the end, Annexed a small Index of Quotations out of
the Primitive Fathers and Councils of the first 450 Years after Christ, to
which the Reader may Recur, as there is occasion. And having them all in one
view, may consider them more Entirely, and Remember them the better.

I have Translated them for the sake of the English Reader, but have put the
Originals in another Column, to justify the Translation; and for their sakes
who may not have the Books at hand.

The CONTENTS.
SECT. I. The Necessity of an Outward Commission to the Ministers of the Gospel.
The Case is Stated, as to those Quakers, for whose satisfaction this is
Intended. Page 1 I. Of Personal Qualifications requisite in the Administrators
of the Sacraments. Page 2 II. Of the Sacerdotal Qualification of an Outward
Commission, as was given to Christ by God. III. By Christ to the Apostles, etc.
IV. By the Apostles to others. V. Those others Empowered to give it to others
after them.
SECT. II. The Deduction of this Commission is continued in the Succession of
Bishops, and not of Presbyters.
I. Either way it operates against the Quakers. Page 3 II. The Continuance of
every Society is Deduced in the Succession of the Chief Governors of the
Society, not of the Inferior Officers. Page 4 III. This shown, in Matter of
Fact, as to the Church and the Succession of Bishops from the Apostles times to
our Days; particularly here in England. IV. The Presbyterian Plea considered,
that Bishoprics were but single Parishes; and consequently, that every
Presbyter was a Bishop; and their vain Logo-machy upon the words (...) and
(...). Page 5 V. Argued from the Type of the Levitical Priesthood, which shown
to be the Method of Christ, the Apostles, and Primitive Fathers. Page 7 VI.
Whence the Case of Korah and the Presbyterians shown to be the same. And the
Episcopal Supremacy as Plainly and Fully Established, as was that of Aaron and
his Successors. Page 8 VII. No Succession of Presbyters can be shown from the
Apostles. Page 9 VIII. The Pretense of Extraordinary Gifts, no Ground or Excuse
for making of a Schism. Page 11
SECT. III. Objection from the Times of Popery in this Kingdom; as if that did
Un-church, and consequently break the Succession of our Bishops.
I. This shown to be a Popish Argument. Page 17 II. That Idolatry does not
Un-church. Proved 1. Because a Christian may be an Idolater. Page 18 2. From
the Type of the Church under the Law. Page 19
III. Episcopacy the most opposite to Popery. ibid. IV. Maladministration
does Forfeit, but not Vacate a Commission, till it be Re-call'd. Page 21 V.
Defects in Succession, no Bar to the Possessors, where there are none who Claim
a Better Right. Page 23
SECT. IV. The Assurance and Consent in the Episcopal Communion, beyond that of
any other.
I. The Episcopal Communion of much greater Extent, and more Universal than all
those who oppose it. Page 24 II. And than the Church of Rome, if joined with
them. ib. III. The Dissenters from Episcopacy, do all Deny the Ordination or
Call of each other. Page 25 IV. If the Quakers receive Baptism from any of
these Dissenters, they have no Reason to expect the same Allowances as may be
given to those of their own Communions. V. The Episcopal Ordinations, and
consequently their Right to Baptize, is owned by both Papists and
Prerbyterians.
SECT. V. The Personal Sanctity of the Administrator of the Sacraments, though
highly Requisite on his Part, yet not of Necessity, as to the Receivers, to
convey to them the Benefits of the Sacraments: Because
I. The Virtue comes not from the Minister, but from God alone. Page 26 II. For
this Cause (among others) Christ chose Judas to be an Apostle. Page 27 III.
God's Power is Magnified in the Meaness of His Instruments. IV. St. Paul
Rejoiced at the Preaching of Evil Men Page 28 V. This confirmed by daily
Experience. VI. The Argument stronger as to the Sacraments. Page 29 VII. The
Fatal Consequences of making the Personal Holiness of the Administrator
Necessary toward the Efficacy of the Sacraments. 1. It takes away all
Assurance in our Receiving of the Sacraments. 2. It renders the Commands of
Christ, of none Effect. Page 30 3. It is contrary to the tenure of God's former
Institutions; and puts us in a more uncertain Condition than they were under
the Law. 4. It was the Ancient Error of the Donatists; and Borders upon Popery.
VIII. As great Sanctity to be found in the Clergy of the Church of England, as
among any of our Dissenters. Page 32 IX. There is, at least, a Doubt, in
Receiving Baptism from any of our Dissenters. Which, in this case, is a Sin:
Therefore security is only to be had in the Episcopal Communion. X. The
Advantage of the Church of England, by Her being the Established Constitution,
ever since, the Reformation. XI. That therefore nothing can excuse Schism from
Her, but Her Enjoining something, as a Condition of Communion, that is contrary
to the Holy Scriptures; which cannot be shown. Page 33 XII. Therefore to
Receive Baptlsm from the Church of England, is the greatest security which the
Quakers can have of Receiving it from Proper Hands. XIII. An Answer to the
Objection, That Baptism has not such Visible Effects amongst us, as the Quakers
would desire. Page 34
The Supplement.
I. Some Authorities for Episcopacy, as Distinct from, and Superior to
Presbytery, taken out of the Fathers and Councils in the first 450 Years after
Christ. Page 35 II. That the whole Reformation; even Calvin, Beza, and those of
their Communion, were zealous Asserters of Episcopacy. Page 58
A DISCOURSE Showing, who they are that are now qualified to Administer
BAPTISM, and the LORD's SUPPER.
SECT. I. The Necessity of an Outward Commission to the Ministers of the Gospel.
SOme Quakers having perused my Discourse of Baptism, think the Quaker
Arguments against it sufficiently Answered: And they have but one Difficulty
remaining, that is, who they are (among the various Pretenders) that are duly
Qualified to Administer it.

And if satisfaction can be given to them herein, they promise a perfect
Compliance to that Holy Institution.

The Chief thing they seem to stand upon is the Personal Holiness of the
Administrator; thinking that the spiritual Effects of Baptism cannot be
conveyed by the means of an Unsanctify'd Instrument.

But yet they Confess, that there is something else Necessary, besides the
Personal Holiness of the Administrator: Otherwise, they would think themselves
as much Qualified to Administer it as any others; because, I presume, they
suppose themselves to have as great a Measure of the Spirit as other Men.

This Requisite which they want, is that of Lawful Ordination.

But the Presbyterians, Independents, and Baptists do pretend to this.
Therefore their Title to it is to be Examined.

And, that we may proceed the more clearly in this Matter, with Respect still
to that Difficulty upon which the Quakers lay the stress; we will Inquire
concerning those Qualifications which are Requisite in any Person that shall
take upon him to Administer the Sacraments of Christ's Institution. And,

These Qualifications are of two sorts, Personal or Sacerdotal.

I. Personal. The Holiness of the Administrator. And, though this is a great
Qualification to Fit and Prepare a Man for such an Holy Administration, yet
this Alone does not sufficiently Qualify any Man to take upon him such an
Administration.

II. But there is moreover required, 2ly. A Sacerdotal Qualification, that is,
an Outward Commission, to Authorize a Man to execute any Sacerdotal or
Ministerial Act of Religion. For, This Honor no Man takes unto himself, but
he that is called of God, Heb. v. 4.
as was Aaron; so also Christ glorified not himself to be made an High Priest;
But he that said unto him, thou art my Son -- Thou art a Priest, etc.

Accordingly we find that Christ did not take upon Him the Office of a
Preacher, till after that Outward Commission given to Him by a Voice from
Heaven, at His Baptism; for it is written, Matthew. iv. 17. From that time Jesus
began to Preach: Then He Began; and He was then about Thirty Years of Age, Luke
iii. 23. Now no Man can doubt of Christ's Qualifications, before that time, as
to Holiness, Sufficiency, and all Personal Endowments. And if all these were
not sufficient to Christ Himself, without an Outward Commission, what other Man
can pretend to it upon the Account of any Personal Excellencies in Himself,
without an outward Commission?

III. And as Christ was outwardly Commissionated by His Father, so did not He
leave it to His Disciples, every ones Opinion of his own sufficiency, to thrust
himself into the Vineyard, but Chose Twelve Apostles by Name; and after them,
Seventy others of an Inferior Order, whom He sent to Preach.

IV. And as Christ gave outward Commissions, while He was upon the Earth, Act.
xiv. 23.
so we find that His Apostles did Proceed in the same Method, after His
Ascension. They ordained them Elders in every Church.

V. But had they, who were thus Ordained by the Apostles, Power to Ordain
others? Yes, Tit. 1.5 1 Timothy v 22.
For this cause left I thee in Crete, that thou should -- Ordain Elders in
every City. Lay hands suddenly on no Man, etc. St. Clement, in his first
Epistle to the Corinthians, writing concerning the Schism which was then risen
up amongst them, says, Parag. 44. (...).
That the Apostles fore-knowing there would be Contests concerning the
Episcopal Name (or Office) did themselves appoint the Persons: And not only so,
lest that might be said to be of force, only during their time. But that they
afterward established an Order how, when those whom they had Ordained should
Die; others, fit and approved Men, should succeed them in their Ministry. Par.
43. that they who were entrusted with this Work, by God, in Christ, did
Constitute these Officers.

But this Matter depends not upon the Testimony of him, or many more that might
be produced. It is such a Public Matter of Fact; That I might as well go about
to quote particular Authors, to prove that there were Emperors in Rome, as that
the Ministers of the Church of Christ were Ordained to succeed one another; and
that they did so succeed.

SECT. II. The Deduction of this Commission is continued in the Succession of
Bishops and not of Presbyters.
BUT here is a Dispute, whether this Succession was preserved in the Order of
Bishops or Presbyters? or whether both are not the same?

I. Answ. 1. This is the Contest betwixt the Presbyterians and us: But either
way it operates against the Quakers, who allow of no Succession derived by
outward Ordination.

II. Answ. 2. But because the Design of this Discourse is to show the
Succession from the Apostles, I answer that this Succession is preserved and
derived only in the Bishops: As the continuance of any Society, is deduced in
the Succession of the Chief Governors of the Society, not of the Inferior
Officers. Thus in Kingdoms, we reckon by the Succession of the Kings, not of
Sheriffs or Constables; and in Corporations by the Succession of the Mayors or
other Chief Officers; not of the Inferior Bailiffs or Sergeants: So the
Succession of the Churches is Computed in the Succession of the Bishops, who
are the Chief Governors of the Churches; and not of Presbyters, who are but
Inferior Officers under the Bishops.

III. And, in this, the Matter of Fact is as Clear and Evident as the
Succession of any Kings or Corporations in the World.

To begin with the Apostles, we find not only that they Constituted Timothy
Bishop of Ephesus, and Titus of Crete, as in the Subscriptions of St. Paul's
Epistles to them: But, in Eusebius and other Ecclesiastical Historians, you
have the Bishops Named who were Constituted by the Apostles themselves, over
the then famous Churches of Jerusalem, Antioch, Rome, and Alexandria, and many
other Churches; and the Succession of them down all along.

St. Polycarp, Bishop of Smyrna, was Disciple to St. John the Apostle; and St.
Irenaeus, who was Disciple to St. Polycarp, was Constituted Bishop of Lions in
France.

I mention this, because it is so near us; for, in all other Churches,
throughout the whole World, where ever Christianity was Planted, Episcopacy was
every where Established, without one Exception, as is Evident from all their
Records.

And so it was with us in England, whither it is generally supposed, and with
very good Grounds, that St. Paul first brought the Christian Faith. Clemens
Romanus, in his First Epist. to the Corinthians, Paragr. 5. Says, that St. Paul
went Preaching the Gospel to the farthest bounds of the West; (...). by which
Term Britain was then Understood. And Theodoret expressly Names the Britains
among the Nations Converted by the Apostles. (To. 4. sermon. 9. p. 610.) And
Eusebius in his Evangelical Demonstration, (l. 3. c. 7. p. 113.) Names likewise
the Britains, as then Converted.

But whether St. Paul, or, as some Conjecture, Joseph of Arimathea, or any
other Apostolical Person was the first who Preached Christ in England, it
matters not, as to our Present Purpose; who Enquire only concerning Episcopacy;
And it is Certain by all our Histories; that as far up as they give us any
Account of Christianity in this Island, they tell us likewise of Bishops; and
the Succession of this Church of England has been Deduced in the Succession of
Bishops, and not of Presbyters. And particularly in the Diocese of London,
which was the first Archi-Episcopal See, before Augustine the Monk came hither,
after which it was Established in Canterbury. And the Saxon Writers have
Transmitted the Succession of their Bishops in Canterbury, Rochester, London,
etc.

And in Countries so Remote and Barbarous as Island it self we find the same
care taken; Ara or Aras an Islandish Priest Surnamed Hinfrode the Leurned, who
flourished in the Eleventh Century, and was 25 Years Old when Christianity was
brought thither, in his Book of that Country written in Islandish, has
Transmitted to Posterity, not only the Succession but the Genealogies of the
Bishops of Skalholt and Hola (the two Episcopal Sees of Island) as they
Succeeded one another in his Time. I mention this of Island, to show that
Episcopacy has Extended it self Equally with Christianity, which was carried by
it, into the Remotest Corners of the Earth; upon which account the Bishops of
Skalholt and Hola, and their Succession, are as Remarkable Proofs of
Episcopacy, though not so Famous as the Bishops of Canterbury and London.

IV. If the Presbyterians will say (because they have nothing left to say) that
all London (for Example) was but one Parish* and that the Presbyter of every
other Parish was as much a Bishop as the Bishop of London; because the words
(...) and (...) Bishop and Presbyter are sometimes used in the same ^e^ They
may as well prove that Christ was but a Deacon, because He is so called, Romans
xv. 8. (...), which we rightly ^ra^^ are a Minister: And Bishop signifies an
Overseer, and Presbyter an Ancient Man, or Elder Man; whence our Term of
Alderm^n And this is as good a Foundation to Prove that the Apostles were
Aldermen, in the City acceptance of the Word; or that our Aldermen are all
Bishops and Apostles, as to Prove that Presbyters and Bishops are all one, from
the Childish Gingle of the Words.

It would be the same thing, if one should undertake to Confront all Antiquity,
and Prove against all the Histories, that the Emperors of Rome were no more
than Generals of Armies, and that every Roman General was Emperor of Rome;
because he could find the word Imperator sometimes applied to the General of an
Army.

Or as if a Common-wealth-man should get up, and say, that our former Kings
were no more than our Dukes are now; because the Style of Grace, which is now
given to Dukes, was then given to Kings.

And suppose that any one were put under the Penance of Answering to such
Ridiculous Arguments; what Method would he take, but to show that the Emperors
of Rome, and former Kings of England, had Generals of Armies and Dukes under
them, and Exercised Authority over them?

Therefore when we find it given in Charge to Timothy, the first Bishop of
Ephesus, how he was to Proceed against his Presbyters, when they Transgressed*
to Sit in Judgment upon them, Examine Witnesses against them, and pass Censures
upon them, it is a most Impertinent Logo^chy to argue from the Etymology of the
Words, that notwithstanding of all this, a Bishop and a Presbyter are the same
thing. Therefore that one Text, 1 Timothy v. 19. is sufficient to silence this
Pitiful Clamor of the Presbyterians; our English reads it, against an Elder,
which is the Literal Translation of the word Presbyter, (...), against a
Presbyter receive not an Accusation, but before two or three Witnesses, and,
them that sin Rebuke before all, that others also may fear. Now, upon the
Presbyterian Hypothesis, we must say that Timothy had no Authority or
Jurisdiction over that Presbyter, against whom he had Power to Receive
Accusations, Examine Witnesses, and pass Censures upon him: And that such a
Presbyter had the same Authority over Timothy -- which is so Extravagant and
against Common Sense, that I will not stay longer to Confute it; and think this
enough to have said concerning the Presbyterian Argument from the Etymology of
the words Bishop and Presbyter.

And this likewise Confutes their other Pretense, which I have mentioned, that
the Ancient Bishoprics were only Single and Independent Congregations, or
Parishes. This is a Topic they have taken up but of late (being Beaten from
all their other Holds) and Launched by Mr. David Clarkson, in a Book which he
Entitules Primitive Episcopacy; which has given occasion to an Excellent
Answer, by Dr. Hen. Maurice, called A Defense of Diocesan Episcopacy, Printed
1691. which, I suppose, has ended that Controversy, and hindered the World from
being more troubled upon that Head. And their other little Shift, and as
Groundless, that the Primitive Bishops were no other than their Moderators,
advanced more lately by Gilb. Rule late Moderator of the General Assembly in
Scotland, has been as Learnedly, and with great Clearness of Reason, Confuted
by the Worthy J. S. in his Principles of the Cyprianick Age, Printed 1695.

But, as I said, that Text, 1 Timothy v. 19. has made all these Pretenses wholly
useless to the Presbyterians: For supposing their most Notorious false
supposition, as if the Bishoprics of Jerusalem, Rome, Alexandria, or London,
consisted but of one single Congregation, and that such Bishops had no
Presbyters under them; but that all Presbyters were Equally Bishops; I say,
supposing this, then it must follow from what we Read of Timothy, that one
Bishop or Presbyter had Jurisdicton over other Bishops or Presbyters, which
will Destroy the Presbyterian Claim of Parity, as much as their Confession to
the Truth, and plain Matter of Fact, that Bishops had Presbyters under their
Jurisdiction; and that they were Distinct Orders: Notwithstanding that a Bishop
may be called (...) a Deacon, or Minister of Christ; and likewise (...), an
Elder or Grave Man, which is a Term of Magistracy and Dignity, and not tied to
Age. And a Presbyter may likewise, in a sound Sense, be called a Bishop, that
is, an Overseer or Shepherd, which he truly is over his Particular Flock;
without denying at all his Dependence upon his Bishop and Overseer:

V. As under the Term of Priest, the High Priest was Included, without
Destroying his Supremacy, over the other Priests. Against which Korah and his
Presbyters, or Inferior Priests arose. And if the Presbyterians will take his
word, whom, of all the Fathers, they most Admire, and Quote often on their
side, that is, St. Jerome, he will tell them, in that very Epistle (ad Evagr.)
which they Boast favors them so much, That what Aaron, and his Sons, and the
Levites were in the Temple, that same are Bishop, Presbyter, and Deacon in the
Church.

And long before him, Clemens Romanus in his 1 Epist. to the Corinthians, makes
frequent Allusion to the Episcopacy of the Levitical Priesthood, and argues
from thence to that of the Christian Church. Thus Paragraph 40. (...).
To the High Priest (says he) were allotted his proper Offices; to the Priests,
their proper place was assigned; and to the Levites their services were
appointed; and the Laymen were Restrained within the precepts to Laymen. And
Paragraph 42. he applies that Scripture, Isa. LX. 17. to the Officers of the
Christian Church, and renders it thus; I will Constitute their Bishops in
Righteousness, and their Deacons in Faith. The Greek Translation of the LXX has
it thus. I will give thee Rulers (or Princes) in Peace; (...).
and thy Bishops in Righteousness.

It was the frequent Method of these Primitive Fathers to Reason thus from the
Parallel 'twixt the Law and the Gospel, the one being an Exact Type of the
other, and therefore being fulfilled in the other. And in this they followed
the Example of Christ, and the Apostles, who argued in the same manner, as you
may see Matthew. v. 1 Cor. x. the whole Epistle to the Hebrews, and many other
Places of the New Testament.

VI. Now the Presbyterians are desired to show any one Disparity betwixt their
Case and that of Korah; who was a Priest of the second Order, that is, a
Presbyter; and withdrew his Obedience from the High Priest with other Mutinous
Levites: For, there was no matter of Doctrine or Worship betwixt them and Aaron;
nor any other Dispute but that of Church Government. And, by the Parallel
betwixt the Old Testament and the New, Korah was a Presbyterian, who Rose up
against the Episcopacy of Aaron. But this Case is brought yet nearer home; for,
we are told ( Jude xi.) of those under the Gospel, who perish in the
gainsaying of Korah: And in the Epist. of Clem. Romans to the Corinthians before
Quoted, Paragraph 43. He plainly applys this Case of Korah, to the state of the
Christian Church; showing at large, that as Moses, by the Command of God,
Determined the Pretensions of the Twelve Tribes to the Glory of the Priesthood,
by the Miraculous Budding of Aaron's Rod, which was after the Schism and
Punishment of Korah and his Company. So likewise, he says, the Apostles
soreknowing, by Christ, that Dissentions would arise also in the Christian
Church, by various Pretenders to the Evangelical Priesthood, did Settle and
Establish, not only the Persons themselves; But gave Rules and Orders for
continuing the Succession after their Deaths, as I have before Quoted his
Words. So that it is plain from hence, That the Evangelical Priesthood, is as
Positively, and Certainly Established, and Determined, in the Succession of
Ecclesiastical Ordination, as the Levitical was, in the Succession of Aaron.
And consequently, that the Rebellion of Presbyters from under the Government of
their Bishops, is the same Case as the Rebellion (for so it is called, Numb.
xvii. 10.) of Korah and his Levites, against Aaron; who had as good a Pretense
against him from the word Levite, which was Common to the whole Tribe; as the
Presbyterians have against Bishops, from the Name Bishop and Presbyter, being
used sometimes promiscuously, and applied to the Clergy in General; which is a
Term that Includes all the Orders of the Church, as Levite did among the Jews.

VII. But, to leave the fruitless Contest about Words, let this Matter be
Determined, as other Matters of Fact are.

If I pretend to succeed any Man in an Honor or Estate, I must name him who
had such an Estate or Honor before me; and the Man who had it before him; and
who had it before him; and so up all the way to him who first had it; and from
whom all the rest do derive; and how it was lawfully deduced from one to
another.

This the Bishops have done, as I have shown; and can name all the way
backward, as far as History goes, from the Present Bishop of London, (for
example) to the first Plantation of Christianity in this Kingdom: So, from the
present Bishop of Lions up to Irenaeus the Disciple of St. Polycarp, as before
is told. The Records are yet more certain in the Great Bishoprics of Rome,
Antioch, Alexandria, and others, while they lasted in the World. And though the
Records may not be Extant of every small Bishopric, which was less taken
notice of; as the Names of many Kings are lost, in obscure Nations; of many
Mayors or Sheriffs, who, notwithstanding have as certainly Succeeded one
another, as where the Records are Preserved. I say, though every Bishop in the
World cannot tell the Names of all his Predecessors up to the Apostles, yet
their Succession is certain: And in most Christian Nations there are Bishops
who can do it; which is a sufficient Proof for the rest, all standing upon the
same Bottom, and being Derived in the same Manner.

Now, to Balance this, it is Desired, that the Presbyterians would show the
Succession of any one Presbyter in the World, who was not likewise a Bishop, in
our acceptance of the Word, in the like manner, from the Apostles.

Till when, their small Criticisms upon the Etymology of the Words, Bishop or
Presbyter, is as poor a Plea, as if I should pretend to be Heir to an Estate,
from the likeness of my Name to somebody who once had it.

And here I cannot choose but apply the Complaint of our Savior, John v. 43.
If any come, in the Name of Christ, that is, by a Commission from Him, derived
down all the way, by Regular Ordination, him ye will not Receive: Nay, though he
be otherwise a Man without Exception, either as to his Life and Conversation,
or as to his Gifts and Sufficiency for the Ministry; you make this his
Commission an Objection against him: For that Reason alone, you will not accept
him. But, if another come in his own Name, that is, with no Commission, but
what he has from himself; his own Opinion of his own Worthiness; giving out
that himself is some Great One, (Act. viii. 9.) him ye will Receive, and Follow
and Admire him; Heaping to your selves Teachers, having Itching Ears, as it was
Prophesied of these most degenerate Times, 2 Timothy iv. 3.

But as to those well-dispos'd Quakers, for whose Information Chiefly I have
wrote this Discourse, I must suppose that their Inquiry is wholly concerning
the several Titles of Bishops, Presbyterians, Independents, etc. to the true
Succession from the Apostles: That it may thereby be known, to which of all
these they ought to go for Baptism.

This I have shown, in behalf of Episcopacy; and put the Presbyterians to prove
their Succession, in the Form of Presbytery, which they can never do: Because,
as I have said before, the Chronology of the Church does not Compute from the
Succession of the Presbyters, but only of the Bishops, as being the Chief
Governors of the Church. And therefore, though in many Bishoprics, the Roll of
their Bishops is preserved from the Apostles to this Day; yet there is not one
bare Presbyter, that is, the Minister of a Parish, and no more, no not in all
the World, who can give a Roll of his Predecessors, in that Parish, half way to
the Apostles, or near it: For, from the first Plantation of Christianity, the
Church was Divided into Bishoprics; this was necessary for the Government of
the Church: But it was not so early Sub-divided into Parishes. The Presbyters,
at first, attending upon the Bishop, were sent out by him, to such Places, and
for such Time as he thought fit; and Returning, gave Account of their
Stewardships, or were Visited, and Changed by him, as he saw Cause: And
therefore, though one might come after another, in the Place where he had
Ministered before; yet they could not Properly be said to Succeed one another;
as (to speak Intelligibly to the Quakers) many of them do Preach after G. Fox,
yet none of them are said to Succeed him.

I have been thus long upon the Presbyterians, because they only, of all our
Dissenters, have any Pretense to Succession. And what I have said, as to them,
must Operate more strongly against the later Independent, Baptist, etc. who
have not the Face to Pretend to Succession, but set up merely upon their own
pretended Gifts.

VIII. But what are these Gifts, which they so Highly Boast?

1. An Inward, and more than Ordinary Participation of the Graces of the Holy
Spirit. 2. A Fluency and Powerfulness in Preaching and Praying.
I know of no other Gifts that any of our Dissenters pretend to, unless they
will set up for Miracles, as G. Fox, etc. And other Dissenters did likewise
pretend to the same, at their first setting out, to amuse the People; but (as
the Quakers) have let it drop afterward, to stop any further Examination of
it; having already served their Turn by it.

But, as to these pretended Gifts, if we may trust to our Savior's Rule, of
knowing the Tree by its Fruits, we cannot think it the Holy Spirit of which
these Men did partake, who filled these three Nations with Blood and Slaughter;
and whose Religion was never otherwise Introduced, than by Rebellion, in any
Country whither-soever it has yet come.

And as to that Volubility of Tongue, which they Boast, as the main Proof of
their Mission, we have found it by Experience, that a little Confidence and
Custom, will Improve very slender Judgments, to great Readiness in that sort of
Talent.

And the Powerfulness which is found in it by some, who are affected with a
Dismal Tone, Wray Faces, and Antic Gestures, is not more but less, if there be
either Method or Sense in the Discourse: Which shows their Passion to proceed
not from Reason, but Imagination.

The Scots Presbyterian-Eloquence affords us Monstrous Proofs of this; but not
so many, as you may have from Eye and Ear-Witnesses.

Such Course, Rude, and Nasty Treatment of God, as they call Devotion; as in it
self, it is the highest Affront to The Divine Majesty; so has it Contributed,
in a very great Measure, to that wild Atheism, which has always attended these
sort of Inspirations: It seeming to many, more Reasonable to Worship no God at
all, than to set up one, on purpose to Ridicule Him.

But this sort of Enthusiasm presumes upon a Familiarity with God, which breeds
Contempt, and Despises the Sobriety of Religion, as a low Dispensation. I
Recommend to the Reader that Excellent Sermon, upon this Subject, of Dr. Hicks,
called The Spirit of Enthusiasm Exorcis'd. And I desire those to consider, who
are most taken with these seeming Extraordinary Gifts of Volubility and
Nimbleness in Prayer, that the most Wicked Men are capable of this Perfection;
none more than Oliver Cromwell, especially when he was about some Nefarious
Wickedness: He continued most Fluently in this Exercise, all the time that his
Cutthroats were Murdering of his Royal Master. And his Gift of Prayer was
greatly Admired. Major weir of Edinborough, was another great Instance, who was
strangely Adored for his Gifts, especially of Prayer, by the Presbyterians in
Scotland; while, at the same time, he was wallowing in the most Unnatural and
Monstrous Sins. See his Stupendous Story in Ravillac Redivivus.

There are many Examples of this Nature, which show that this Gift is
attainable by Art. Dr. wilkins (the Father of the Latitudinarians) has given us
the Receipt, in his Gift of Prayer.

Yet none of the Performances of these Gifted-men are any ways Comparable (as
to the wonderful Readiness in which they Boast) to the Extempore Verses of
Westminster School, which Isaac Vossius could not believe to be Extempore, till
he gave the Boys a Theme, which was senes bis Pueri, and he had no sooner spoke
the Words, but he was immediately Pelted with Ingenious Epigrams from four or
five Boys.

So that this Volubility in Prayer, which is the Gift our Dissenters do most
Glory in, may be deduced from an Original far short of Divine Inspiration.

But suppose that they had really those wonderful Gifts which they pretend to,
yet were this no ground at all to Countenance or Warrant their making a
Schism, upon that Account.

This Case has been Ruled in a Famous and most Remarkable Instance of it, which
God was pleased to permit, (for the future Instruction of His Church) at the
first setting out of the Gospel, in the very Days of the Apostles.

Then it was that Christ, having Ascended up on High, gave many and miraculous
Gists unto Men; which was necessary toward the first Propagation of His
Gospel, in Opposition to all the Established Religions and Governments then in
the World, and under their Persecution.

But these Gifts of Miracles did not always secure the Possessors from Vanity,
and an high Opinion of themselves, to the disparagement of others; and even to
break the Order and Peace of the Church, by advancing themselves above their
Superiors; or thinking none Superior to themselves.

The Great Apostle of the Gentiles was not freed from the Tentation of this;
whom the Messenger of Satan was sent to buffet, least he should be Exalted
above measure, through the Abundance of the Revelations which were given to him,
2 Cor. xii. 7. Nay more, our Blessed Savior tells of those who had miraculous
Gifts bestowed upon them, and yet should be finally Rejected, Matthew. vii. 22,
23. Therefore He Instructs His Disciples not to Rejoice in those Miraculous
Gifts which he bestowed upon them, but rather that their Names were written in
Heaven, Luke x. 20. which supposes, that they might have such Gifts, and yet
their Names not be written in Heaven.

And when He taught them how to Pray, He added no Petition for such Gifts, but
only for the Remission of their Sins, and the Sanctifying Graces of the Holy
Spirit; which are, as most Pre^itable to Us, so most Precious in the sight of
God.

Now some who had these Miraculous Gifts made ill use of them, and occasioned a
great Schism (the first in the Christian Church) at Corinth. They were Exalted
above Measure, in their own Gifts; and therefore Refused to submit themselves
to those who were their Superiors in the Church (who, perhaps, had not such
Gifts as they had) but set up for themselves, and drew Parties after them, who
were Charmed with their Extraordinary Gifts; thinking that the Participation of
the saving Graces of the Holy Spirit must there Chiefly be Communicated, where
God had bestowed such wonderful Gifts. And they laid more stress upon the
Personal Qualifications of these Ministers of God, than upon the observance of
that Order and Constitution which He had Commanded; which was, in Effect,
preferring Men to God, and trusting to the Instruments rather than to the
Author of their Religion; as if through the Power and Holiness of the
Administrators of God's Institutions, and not from Him alone, the Graces which
were Promised to the due Observance of them, were conveyed. Act. iii. 12.

And this, as it turned Men from God, to Trust in Man, so, as a necessary
Consequence of it, it begot great Emulations among the People for one Teacher
against another, even (sometimes) when it was not the Fault of the Teachers.
For People being once let loose from Government and Order, to follow the
Imaginations of their own Brain, will run farther than their first Seducers did
Intend; and will Carve for themselves.

Thus, in the Schism of the Church at Corinth, one was for Paul, another for
Apollos, another for Cephas, etc. much against the Minds of these good
Apostles; but having been once unsettl'd by the Pride and Ambition of Seducers,
they Heaped to themselves Teachers, having itching Ears; and made Divisions
among themselves, Pretendingly in behalf of Christ and His Apostles, but in
Effect, tending to Divide Christ and His Apostles, as all Schisms do.

Against these St. Paul Disputes with wonderful force of Reason and Eloquence;
particularly in the xii Chap. of his first Epistle to these same Corinthians;
wherein, from the Parallel of the Unity of Members in the same Body, he
admirably Illustrates, That the many Different and Miraculous Gifts which were
then Dispensed all from the same Spirit, could be no more an Argumeut for any
to Advance himself beyond his own Station in the Church, than for one Member of
the Body, though an Eye or a Hand, the most Useful or Beautiful, to Glory it self
against the Inferior Members (who are all Actuated by the same Soul) or not to
be Content with its Office and Station in the Body, and due Subordination to
the Head. Thence the Apostle goes on, and makes the Application in the xiiith.
Chap. That the most Exalted Spiritual or even Miraculous Gifts could not only
not Excuse any Schism to be made in the Body, that is, the Church; But that if
any who had such Gifts, did not employ them for the Preservation of the Unity
of the Church, which is very properly Expressed by Charity, i.e. Love for the
whole Body, such Gifts would Profit him Nothing, loose all their Virtue and
Efficacy, as to the Possessor, and be rather an Aggravation against him, than
any Excuse for him, to withdraw his Obedience from his lawful Superiors, and
Usurp the Office of the Head; and so make a Schism in the Body, upon the
account of his Gifts; which though they were as great as to speak with the
Tongues of Men and Angels; to understand all Mysteries, and all Knowledge; to
have all Faith, even to Remove Mountains; and such a Zeal as to give all his
Goods to the Poor, and his very Body to be Burned, yet, if it be done in
Schism, out of that Love and Charity which is due to the Body, and to its
Unity, all is Nothing, will profit him nothing at all.

And no wonder, when all that Heavenly Glory in which Lucifer was Created,
could avail him nothing, Jude 6.
when he kept not his first Principality, but Aspired Higher, and made a Schism
in the Hierarchy of Heaven.

How then shall they who have (as St. Jude expresses it) left their own
Habitation, or Station in the Church, and advanced themselves above their
Bishops, their lawful Superiors, the Heads and Principles of Unity, next and
immediately under Christ, in their Respective Churches, upon pretense of their
own Personal Gifts and Qualifications, and thereby make a Schism in the
Terrestrial Hierarchy of the Church; which is the Body of Christ, Ephesians. 1.23.
the Fullness of him who Fills all in all: How shall they be Excused for this,
whose pretended Gifts are in nothing Extraordinary, except in a Furious Zeal
without Knowledge, and a Volubility of Tongue, which proceeds from a Habit of
Speaking without Thinking; and an Assurance that is never out of Countenance
for Ten Thousand Blunders, which would Dash and Confound any Man of Sense or
Modesty, or that considered the Presence of God, in which he spoke?

If those truly Miraculous Gifts, which were made a Pretense for the Schism at
Corinth, were not sufficient to justify that Schism: How Ridiculous and much
more wicked is the Pretense of our Modern Gifted-men, who have pleaded their
Delicate Gifts as a sufficient Ground for all that Schism and Rebellion which
they have Raised up amongst us?

If the real Gifts and Inspirations of the Holy Spirit were Stinted and Limited
by the Governors of the Church, to avaid Schism and Confusion in the Church: If
the Prophets were Confined as to their Number, 1 Cor. xiv. from v. 26.
to Two, or at the most Three at a time; some ordered to hold their Peace, to
give place to others; others to keep silence for want of an Interpreter; and
the Women (though Gifted or Inspired as many then were) totally silenced in the
Church, 1 Timothy 11.12.
or Public Assemblies: What Spirit has Possessed our Modern Pretenders to
Gifts, that will not be subject to the Prophets, nor to the Church, nor to any
Institutions whether Divine or Humane! But if their Superiors pretend to Direct
them in any thing, they cry out, what! will you stint the Spirit! And think
this a sufficient Cause to break quite loose from their Authority, and set up
an open Schism against them, upon Pretense of their wonderful Gifts forsooth!

That first Schism in the Church of these Corinthians was vigorously opposed by
the Apostles and Bishops of the Church, at that time. They, like good
Watchmen, would not give way to it, knowing the fatal Consequences of it.

This produced Two Epistles from St. Paul to the Corinthians, and Two to them
from St. Clement, then Bishop of Rome, which are preserved, and handed down to
us. It was this same occasion of Schism, which so early began to Corrupt the
Church, that led the Holy Ignatius (who flourished in that same Age) to press
so Earnestly in all his Epistles to the several Churches to whom he wrote, the
Indispensable obligation of a strict Obedience to their Respective Bishops.
That the Laity should submit themselves to the Presbyters and Deacons, as to
the Apostolical College under Christ; and that the Presbyters and Deacons; as
well as the Laity, should Obey their Bishop, as Christ Himself; whose Person he
did Represent: That therefore whoever kept not Outward Communion with his
Bishop, did forfeit his Inward Communion with Christ: That no Sacraments were
Valid, or Acceptable to God, which were not celebrated in Communion with the
Bishop. That nothing in the Church should be done, nor any Marriage Contracted
without the Bishop's Consent, etc. As you will see hereafter.

These clear Testimonies fore'd the Presbyterians (because they were not in a
Temper to be Convinced) to deny these Epistles of St. Ignatius to be Genuine.
But they have been so fully Vindicated, particularly by the most Learned Bishop
of Chester, Dr. Pearson, as to silence that Cavil, and leave no Pretense
remaining against Episcopacy in that Primitive and Apostolical Age.

SECT. III. Objection from the Times of Popery in this Kingdom; as if that did
Un-Church, and consequently break the Succession of our Bishops.
I must now Account for an Objection, which with some, seems a mighty one, even
enough to overthrow all that I have said concerning the Succession of our
Bishops: And that is, the long Midnight of Popery, which has, in old Time,
Darkened these Nations.

Well. The Succession, of which I have been speaking, was no Part of that
Darkness; and we have, by God's Blessing, recovered our selves, in a great
Measure, from that Darkness. But that Darkness was such, as, with some, to
Destroy the Episcopal Succession; because, as they say, such great Errors,
especially that of Idolatry, does quite Un-church a People; and consequently
must break their Succession.

I. This, by the way, is a Popish Argument, though they that now make it, are not
a ware of it. For the Church of Rome argues thus, That Idolatry does Un-church;
and therefore, if she was Idolatrous, for so long a time as we charge upon her,
it will follow that, for so many Ages, there was no Visible Church, at least,
in these Western Parts of the World. And Arianism (which is Idolatry) having
broke in several times upon the Church; if Idolatry did quite Un-church; and
Break the Succession, there would not be a Christian Church hardly left in the
World. The Consequence of which would be as fatal to the Church of Rome, as to
us: Therefore let her look to that Position, which she has advanced against us,
that Idolatry does Un-church.

II. But that it does not Un-church, I have this to offer against those
Papists, Quakers, and Others who make the Objection.

I. If it does quite Un-church, then could no Christian be an Idolater;
because, by that, he would, ipso facto, cease to be a Member of the Christian
Church: But the Scripture does suppose that a Christian may be an Idolater:
Therefore Idolatry does not Un-church. The Minor is proved, 1 Cor. v. 11. If
any Man that is called a Brother (that is, a Christian) be a Fornicator, or
Covetous, or an Idolater -- Nay, Ephesians. v. 5. a covetous man is called an
Idolater; and Col. iii. 5. Covetousness is Idolatry. So that, by this Argument,
Covetousness does Un-church. If it be said, that Covetousness is called
Idolatry, only by Allusion, but that it is not Formal Idolatry: I know no
Ground for that Distinction. The Scripture calls it Idolatry, and makes no
Distinction. But,

2dly, In the first Text quoted, 1 Cor. v. 11. both Covetousness and Idolatry
are Named; so that, you have both Material and Formal, or what other sort of
Idolatry you please to fancy.

I grant, that, in one sense, Idolatry does Un-church; that is, while we
continue in it, it renders us Obnoxious to the Wrath of God; and forfeits our
Title to the Promises which are made to the Church in the Gospel: But, so does
Fornication, Covetousness, and every other Sin, till we Repent, and Return from
it. But none of these Sins do so Un-church us, as to Exclude our Returning to
the Fold, by sincere Repentance; or to need a second Baptism, or Admission into
the Church: Neither does Idolatry. Do I then put Idolatry upon the level with
other common Sins? No, far from it. Every Scab is not a Leprosy; yet a Leper
is a Man, and may Recover his Health. Idolatry is a fearful Leprosy; but it
does not therefore quite Un-church, nor throw us out of the Covenant. For, if
it did, then would not Repentance heal it; because Repentance is a great Part
of the Covenant. And therefore, since none deny Repentance to an Idolater; it
follows that he is not yet quite out of the Covenant. Some of the Ancients have
denied Repentance to Apostasy, yet granted it to Idolatry; which shows that
they did not look upon Idolatry to be an absolute Apostasy; for every Sin is an
Apostasy, in a Limited sense.

2. Let us, in this Disquisition, follow the Example before mentioned, of the
Apostles and most Primitive Fathers, to measure the Christian Church with its
exact Type, the Church under the Law; which are not Two Churches, but Two
States of the same Church, for it is the same Christian Church, from the first
Promise of Christ, Genesis iii. 15. to the End of the World. And therefore it is
said, Heb. iv. 2. That the Gospel was Preached unto Them, as well as unto Us.
And these two States of the Church, before and after Christ, do Answer, like a
pair of Indentures to one another; the one being, to an Iota fulfilled in the
other. Matthew. v. 18.


Now we find frequent Lapses to Idolatry in the Church of the Jews: Yet did not
this Un-church them; no, nor deprive them of a competent measure of God's Holy
Spirit; as it is written, Neh. ix. 18, 20. Yea, when they had made them a
molten calf, and said, this is thy God -- yet thou, in thy manifold Mercies,
forsookest them not -- Thou gave thy good spirit to instruct them, etc.

And let it be here observed, That though God sent many Prophets to Reprove the
great Wickedness and Idolatry, as well of their Priests as People; yet none of
these Holy Prophets did separate Communion from the Wicked Priests: They would
not join in their Idolatrous Worship; but in all other Parts, they joined with
them; and set up no opposite Priesthood to them. So little did the Prophets
think that their Idolatry had either Un-church'd them, or broke the Succession
of their Priests; or that it was Lawful for any, how Holy soever, to usurp upon
their Priesthood, and supply the Deficiencies of it to the People. And apply to
this, what I have before shown, in the words of St. Clement, whose Name is
written in the Book of Life, That the Evangelical Priesthood, is as surely
fixed; in the Bishops of the Church, and its Succession continued in those
Ordained by them, as the Levitical Priesthood was confirmed by the Budding of
Aaron's Rod, and to be continued in that Tribe.

III. And here let our Korahites, of several sizes, take a view of the
Heinousness of their Schism; and let them not think their Crime to be nothing,
because they have been taught, with their Nurses Milk, to have the utmost
abhorrence to the very Name of a Bishop; though they could not tell why. Let them
rather consider seriously the misfortune of their Education, which should make
them Strangers, to all the rest of the Christian World but themselves in a
Corner; and to all the former Ages of Christianity.

They have been told that Episcopacy is Popery; because the Papists have
Bishops.

So have they Presbyters too, that is, Parish Priests: They have the Creed
likewise, and the Holy Scriptures; and all these must be Popish, if this be a
good Argument.

But, are they willing to be undeceived? Then they must know that Episcopacy
has none so great an Enemy as the Papacy; which would Engross the whole
Episcopal Power, into the single See of Rome; by making all other Bishops
absolutely dependent upon that, which only they call the Apostolical Chair. And
no longer since than the Council of Trent, the Pope endeavored, with all his
Interest, to have Episcopacy, except only that of the Bishop of Rome, to be
declared not to be Jure Divino. By which no other Bishops could claim any other
Power, but what they had from Him. But that Council was not so quite
Degenerated as to suffer this to pass.

And the Jesuits, and Others, who Disputed there on the Pope's part, used those
same Arguments against the Divine Right of Episcopacy, which from them, and the
Popish Canonists and Schoolmen have been licked up by the Presbyterians and
others of our Dissenters. They are the same Arguments which are used by Pope
and Presbyter against Episcopacy.

When the Pope could not carry his Cause against Episcopacy in the Council of
Trent, he took another Method, and that was, to set up a vast Number of
Presbyterian Priests, that is, the Regulars, whom he Exempted from the
Jurisdiction of their respective Bishops, and framed them into a Method and
Discipline of their own, accountable only to Superiors of his, and their own
contriving; which is exactly the Presbyterian Model.

These Usurpations upon the Episcopal Authority, made the Famous Archbishop of
Spalato, quit his great Preferments in the Church of Rome, and Travel into
England, in the Reign of King James I. to seek for a more Primitive and
Independent Episcopacy. Himself, in his Consilium Profectionis, gives these
same Reasons for it: And that this shameful Depression and Prostitution of
Episcopacy, in the Church of Rome, was the cause of his leaving her.

He observed truly, that the further we search upward in Antiquity, there is
still more to be found of the Episcopal, and less of the Papal Eminency.

St. Ignatius is full, in every line almost, of the high Authority of the
Bishop, next and immediately under Christ; as all the other Writers in those
Primitive Times: But there is a profound silence in them all of that Supremacy
in the Bishop of Rome, which is now claimed over all the other Bishops of the
Catholic Church: Which could not be, if it had been then known in the World.
This had been a short and effectual Method, whereby St. Paul, or St. Clement
might have quieted the great Schism of the Corinthians, against which they both
wrote, in their Epistles to them; to bid them refer their Differences to the
Infallible Judge of Contreversy, the Supreme Pastor at Rome. But not a word
like this. Especially considering that St. Peter was one, for whom some of
these Corinthians strove (1 Cor. i. 12.) against those who preferred others
before Him.

The Usurped Supremacy of the later Bishops of Rome over their Fellow-Bishops,
has been as Fatal to Episcopacy, as the Rebellion of our yet later Presbyters
against their Respective Bishops.

And indeed, whoever would write the true History of Presbyterianism, must
begin at Rome, and not at Geneva.

So very Groundless, as well as Malicious, is that popular Clamor of
Episcopacy having any Relation to Popery. They are so utterly Irreconcilable,
that it is impossible they can stand together: For that moment that Episcopacy
were Restored to its Primitive Independency, the Papacy, that is, that
Supremacy, which does now distinguish it, must ipso facto cease. But enough of
this, for I must not digress into various Subjects.

I have shown, in Answer to the Objection of the Ages of Popery in this
Kingdom, that all those Errors, even Idolatry it self, does not Un-church, nor
break Succession. And 2dly, I have Exemplifi'd this from the Parallel of the
Jewish Church, under the Law. Then applying of this to our Case, I have
vindicared Episcopacy from the Imputation of Popery. I will now go on to
further Reasons, why the Succession of our present Bishops is not hurt by that
Deluge of Popery, which once covered the face of this Land.

IV. The end of all Government, as well in the Church as State, is to preserve
Peace, Unity, and Order; and this cannot be done, if the Maladministration of
the Officers in the Government, did Vacat. their Commission, without its being
Re-call'd by those who gave such Commission to them. For then, 1st. Every Man
must be Judge, when such a Commission is Vacated; and then no Man is bound to
obey longer then he pleases. 2dly, One may say it is Vacated, another not;
whence perpetual Contention must arise.

A Man may Forfeit his Commission, that is, do those things, which give just
Cause to his Superiors to take it from him: But it is not actually Vacated,
till it be actually Recalled by those who have lawful Power to take it from
him: Otherwise their could be no Peace nor Certainty in the World, either in
Public or in Private affairs. No Family could subsist. No Man enjoy an Estate.
No Society whatever could keep together: And the Church being an Outward
Society (as shown in the Discourse of Water Baptism) must consequently subsist
by those Laws which are indispensible to every Society. Sect. iii.^. 1.
And though Idolatry does justly Forfeit the Commission of any Church, in this
sense, that God's Promises to Her being Conditional, He may justly take her
Commission from her, and Remove her Candlestick: Now though her Commission be
thus Forfeitable, yet it still Continues, and is not actually Pacated, till God
shall please actually to Recall it, or take it away: For no Commission is Void,
till it be so Declared. Thus, though the Jews did often fall into Idolatry, yet
(as before has been said) God did bear long with them; and did not Un-church
them, though they had justly Forfeited. And these wicked Husband men, who slew
those whom the Lord sent for the Fruits of His Vineyard, yet continued still to
be the Husbandmen of the Vineyard, till their Lord did Dispossess them, and
gave their Vineyard unto others.

And natural Reason does enforce this: If a Steward abuse his Trust, and
oppresses the Tenants, yet are they still obliged to pay their Rent to him, and
his Discharges are sufficient to them against their Landlord, till he shall
Supersede such a Steward.

If a Captain wrong and cheat his Soldiers, yet are they obliged to remain
under his Command, till the King, who gave him his Commission, or those to whom
he has Committed such an Authority, shall Cashier him.

And thus it is in the Sacerdotal Commission, Abuses in it, do not take it
away, till God, or those to whom He has Committed such an Authority, shall
Suspend, Deprive, or Degrade (as the Fact Requires) such a Bishop or a Priest.

And there is this higher Consideration in the Sacerdotal Commission, than in
those of Civil Societies; That it being immediately from God, as none
(therefore) can take this Honor to himself, but he that is called of God, as
was Aaron; so can none take it -- way, but he that is as Expressly and Outwardly
called thereunto, as Aaron was to be a Priest. For this would be to Usurp upon
God's immediate Prerogative, which is to Constitute His own Priests. Upon this
Foundation I argue.

V. As the necessity of Government, and the general Commands in Scripture, of
Obedience to Government do require our Submission to the Government in being,
where there is no Competition concerning the Titles, or any that Claims a
better Right than the Possessor: So where a Church, once Established by God,
though suffering many Interruptions, does continue, Her Governors ought to be
acknowledged, where there is no better Claim set up against them.

This was the Reason why our Savior and His Apostles did, without scruple,
acknowledge the High Priest and Sanbedrin of the Jews in their time; though from
the days of the Maccabees, there had been great Irruptions, and Breaches in the
due Succession of their Priests: and before Christ came, and all His time, the
Romans, as Conquerors, disposed of the Priesthood as they pleased; and made it
Annual and Arbitrary, which God had appointed Hereditary and Unmovable.

But there was then no Competition: The Jews did submit to it, because they were
under the subjection of the Romans, and could have no other. No High Priest
claimed against him in Possession, but all submitted to him.

And our Savior did confirm His Authority, and of the Sanhedrin, or Inferior
Priests with him, ( Matthew. xxiii. 2.) saying, the Scribes and Pharisees sit in
Moses's seat. All therefore, whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and
de. And St. Paul owned the Authority of the High Priest, Act. xxiii. 5.

Many Objections might have been raised against the Deduction of their
Succession from Moses: But there being none who claimed any better Right than
they had; therefore their Right was Uncontroverted; and by our Savior's
Authority was Confirmed.

Now suppose some Interruptions had been in the Succession, or Corruptions in
the Doctrine and Worship of our English Bishops, in former Ages, yet (as in the
Case of the Scribes and Pharisees) that could have no Effect to Invalidate
their Commission and Authority at the present.

SECT. IV. The Assurance and Consent in the Episcopal Communion, beyond that of
any other.
I. THE whole Christian World, as it always has been, so at this Present, it is
Episcopal, except a few Dissenters, who, in less than Two Hundred years last
past, have arisen, like a Wart upon the Face of the Western Church. For little
more Proportion do our Dissenters here, the Hugonots in France, the
Presbyterians in Holland, Geneva, and thereabouts, bear to the whole Body of
the Latin Church, which is all Episcopal. But, if you compare them with the
Catholic Church all over the World, which is all Episcopal, they will not
appear so big as a Mole.

II. If our Dissenters think it much, that the Church of Rome should be
reckoned in the List against them; we will be content to leave them out: Nay
more, if we should give them all those Churches, which own the Supremacy of
Rome to be joined with them (as they are the nearest to them) it will be so far
from casting the Balance on their side, that the other Episcopal Churches
will, by far, out-number them both.

Let us then, to these Dissenters against Episcopacy, add the Churches of
Italy, and Spain entire, with the Popish Part of Germany, France, Poland and
Hungary (I think they have no more to reckon upon,) against these we produce
the vast Empire of Russia (which is greater in Extent than all these Popish
Countries before named) England, Scotland, Denmark, Sweden, and all the
Lutheran Churches in Germany, which will out-number both the Papists and
Presbyterians beforementioned. And this comparison is only made as to the
Latin Church. But then, we have all the rest of the Christian World, wholly on
the Episcopal side, against both the Supremacy of Rome, and Parity of the
Presbyterians. The whole Greek Church, the Armenians, Georgians, Mingrelians,
Jacobites, the Christians of St. Thomas, and St. John in the East Indies, and
other Oriental Churches. Then in Africa, the Cophties in Egypt, and great
Empire of the Abyssins in Aethiopia. These all are Episcopal, and never owned
the Supremacy of Rome: And over reckon, out of sight, all that disown
Episcopacy, and all that own the Supremacy of Rome with them.

III. Let me add, that among our Dissenters, every Class of them does Condemn
all the rest; the Presbyterian Damns the Quaker, the Quaker Damns him,
Independent, Baptist, etc. All Damn one another, and Each denis the others
Ordination or Call.

So that, the Ordination of every one of them, is disowned by all the rest; and
all of them together by the whole Christian World. And if their Ordinations are
not Valid, then they have no more Authority to administer the Sacraments, than
any other Laymen; and consequently, there can be no security in Receiving
Baptism from any of them.

IV. What allowances God will make to those who think their Ordination to be
good enough, and that they are true Ministers of the Gospel; and, as such, do
receive the Sacraments from them, I will not determine.

But they have no reason to expect the like allowances who are warned of it
beforehand, and will notwithstanding venture upon it; before these Dissenters
have fully and clearly acquit themselves of so Great and Universal a Charge
laid against them; such an one, as must make the whole Christian World wrong,
if they be in the Right! Not only the present Christian Churches, but all the
Ages of Christianity since Christ. Of which the Dissenters are desired to
produce any one, in any Part of the World, that were not Episcopal -- any one
Constituted Church upon the Face of the Earth, that was not Governed by
Bishops, distinct from, and Superior to Presbyters, before the Vaudois in
Piedmont, the Hugonots in France, the Calvinists in Geneva, and the
Presbyterians thence Transplanted, in this last Age, into Holland, Scotland and
England.

V. If it should be retorted, that neither is the Church of England without
Opposers; for, that the Church of Rome opposes Her, as do likewise our
Dissenters.

Ans. None of them do oppose Her, in the Point we are now upon, that is, the
Validity of Episcopal Ordination, which the Church of Rome does own; and the
Presbyterians dare not deny it, because they would (thereby) overthrow all
their own Ordinations; for the Presbyters who Reformed (as they call it) from
Bishops, received their Ordination from Bishops.

And therefore, though the Episcopal Principles do Invalidate the Ordination by
Presbyters, yet the Presbyterian Principles do not Invalidate the Ordination by
Bishops: So that the Validity of Episcopal Ordination stands safe, on all
sides, even by the Confession of those who are Enemies to the Episcopal Order:
and, in this, the Bishops have no opposers.

Whereas, on the other hand, the Validity of the Presbyterian Ordinations, is
owned by none but themselves; and they have all the rest of the World as
opposite to them.

Therefore, to state the Case the most Impartially; to receive Baptism from
these Dissenters, is, at least, a hazard of many Thousands to One; as many as
all the rest of Christianity are more than they: But to receive it from the
Bishops, or Episcopal Clergy, has no hazard at all, as to its Validity, even as
owned by the Presbyterians themselves.

SECT. V. The Personal Sanctity of the Administrator of the Sacraments, though
highly Requisite on his Part, yet not of Necessity as to the Receivers, to
Convey to them the Benefits of the Sacraments.
I. THE only Objection of those Quakers, who are otherwise convinced of the
Obligation of the Sacraments, is the Necessity they think there is of great
Personal Holiness in the Administrators; without which, they cannot see how the
Spiritual Effects of the Sacraments can be conveyed. But I would beseech them
to consider, how, by this, instead of referring the Glory to God, and lessening
the Performance of Man, which I charitably presume (and I am confident as to
some of whom I speak) that it is their true and sincere Intention; but instead
of that, I do, in great Good will, invite them to reflect whither their
well-intended Zeal has turned the Point of this Question -- even to
over-magnifie Man, and transfer the Glory of God unto His weak Instrument; as
if any (the least Part) of the Divine Virtue which God has annexed to His
Sacraments did proceed from His Minister. If this be not the meaning (as sure
it is not) why so much stress laid upon the Sanctity of the Ministers? Act.
iii. 12.
as if through their power or holiness the Holy Ghost was given!

II. To obviate this pretense, our Savior Christ chose a Devil ( John vi. 70.)
to be one of His Apostles; and he was sent to Baptize and work Miracles as well
as the rest: And those whom Judas did Baptize, were, no doubt, as well
Baptized, and did partake of the Communication of the Spirit (according to
their Preparation for it) as much as any who were Baptized by the other
Apostles; unless you will say that Christ sent him to Baptize, who had no
Authority to Baptize, and that none should receive Benefit by his Baptism,
which would be to Cheat and Delude the People; and is a great Blasphemy against
Christ, and a distrust of His Power; as if it were Limited by the poor
Instrument He pleases to make use off; whereas,

III. His Greatness is often most Magnified in the meaness of the Instruments,
by which He works. Thus He destroyed Egypt by Frogs and Lice; and the
Philistines by Emerods and Mice; and sent His Armies of Flies and Hornets to
dispossess the Canaanites. Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings have thou
ordained strength, because of thine enemies, Psalm. viii. 2.
that thou might still the enemy, and the avenger; i.e. That the Enemies of
God might be confounded, when they saw His great Power Exerted by such weak and
contemptible Instruments. The Walls of Jericho (the Type of Spiritual
wickedness) were thrown down by the blast of seven Rams Horns, when blown by
the Priests whom He had commanded: And He rebuked the Iniquity of Balaam by the
mouth of an Ass, to show that no Instruments are Ineffectual in His Hands; and
made use of the mouth of Balaam to Prophecy of Christ. For this cause, says
St. Barnabas, in his Catholic Epistle, c. 5. (...).
did Christ choose Men who were Exceeding great Sinners to be His Apostles; to
show the Greatness of His Power and Grace; and put the Inestimable Treasure of
His Gospel into Earthen Vessels, that the Praise might be to God, and not to
Men.

IV. St. Paul rejoiced in Christ being Preached, Ihil. i. 16.
though not sincerely by those who did it; because God can bring Good out of
Evil; and by wicked Instruments, Propagate His Gospel; turning their malice
(even of the Devil himself) to the furtherance of the Faith: Otherwise the
Apostle could have no cause to Rejoice in the Preaching of wicked Men, if none
could receive benefit by it. And he plainly supposes, 1 Cor. ix. 27. That a Man
may save others by his Preaching, and yet himself be a castaway.

V. And so far as we can know or judge any thing, we see daily Experience of
this; That God has touched Men's Hearts upon hearing the Truth spoken, though by
Men who were great Hypocrites, and very Wicked. And what reason can be given to
the contrary? Truth is Truth whoever speaks it: And if my Heart be prepared,
the good Seed receives no evil Tincture of the Hand that sowed it: And who can
Limit God, that His Grace may not go along with me in this?

I have heard some of the now separate Quakers confess, that they have formerly
felt very sensible Operations of the Spirit, upon the Preaching of some of
those whom they have since Detected of gross Errors and Hypocrisies; and they
now think it strange. But this were enough to convince them, that the wind
blows where it lists: otherwise they must condemn themselves, and confess
that, in all that time, they had no true Participation of the Spirit of God,
but that what they mistook for it, was a mere Delusion: Or else confess that by
the Truths which were spoken by these Ministers of Satan (for they speak some
Truths) God might work a good Effect upon the Hearts of some Well-dispos'd,
though then Ignorant, and much Deluded People. If not so, we must judge very
severely of all those who live in Idolatrous or Schismatical Countries; there
were great Prophets and good Men among the Ten Tribes. And if the Words, nay
Miracles, of Christ, did render the Hearts of many yet more obdurate, Matthew.
xii. from v. 22. to v. 32.
even to sin against the Holy Ghost; which was the reason why He sometimes
refused to work Miracles among them, because thereby they grew worse and worse;
and if the Preaching of the Gospel, by the mouths of Apostles, became the
savor of Death to wicked and unprepared Hearts; why may not the words of Truth
have a good Effect upon honest and good Minds, though spoken from the mouth of an
Hypocrite, or of Persons, who, in other things, are greatly Deluded?

I have before mentioned the Wizard Major Weir, who Bewitched the Presbyterians
in Scotland, since the Restoration, 1660, as much as Simon Mag^^s did the
Samaritans: And yet I suppose the more moderate of the Quakers will not rashly
give all over to Destruction, who blindly followed him, and admired his Gifts;
or will say but that some words of Truth he might drop, might have a real good
Effect upon some Well meaning, though grossly Deluded People, who followed him.
Two of Winder's Witches (see The Snake in the Grass, p. 300. 2d. Edit.) were
Preachers among the Quakers for Twenty years together; and thought to be as
Powerful and Affecting as any others.

VI. But, the Argument will hold stronger against them, as to the Sacraments,
than in the Office of Preaching; because in Preaching much depends upon the
Qualifications of the Person, as to Invention, Memory, Judgment, etc. But in
the Administration of an Outward Sacrament, nothing is required, as of
Necessity, but the lawfulness of the Commission, by which such a Person does
Administer; and a small measure of natural or acquired Parts is sufficient to
the Administration.

Therefore let us lay no stress upon the Instrument (more than was upon the
Waters of Jordan to heal Naaman) but trust wholly upon the Commission, which
conveys the Virtue from God, and not from His Ministers: That all the Glory may
be to God, and not to Man.

It Is true, the Personal Qualifications of the Instrument are Lovely and
Desirable; but they become a Snare, where we expect any part of the Success
from them. This was the ground of the Corinthian Schism (1 Cor. i. 11.) and,
though unseen, of ours at this Day.

VII. And the consequences of it, are of manifold and fatal Destruction.

1. This unsettles all the Assurance we in have in God's Promise to assist His
own Institution; for, if the Virtue, or any part of it, lies in the Holiness of
the Instrument, we can never be sure of the Effect, as to us; because, we have
no certain knowledge of the Holiness of another. Hypocrites deceive even good
Men.

2. This would quite disappoint the Promise Christ has made, Matthew. xxviii. 20.
To be with His Ministers, in the Execution of His Commission; to Baptize, etc.
always, even unto the end of the world. For, if the Holiness of the Instrument
be a necessary Qualification, this may fail, nay always must fail, so far as we
can be sure of it; and consequently Christ has commanded Baptism and His Supper
to continue, to the end of the world, till his coming again; and yet has not
afforded means whereby they may be continued; which He has not done, if the
Holiness of the Administrator be a necessary Qualification; and that He has not
left us a certain Rule, whereby to judge of the Holiness of another: And thus
have you rendered the Command of Christ of none Effect, through your Tradition.

3. This is contrary to all God's former Institutions. The wickedness of the
Priests, under the Law, did not excuse any of the People from bringing of their
Sacrifices to the Priests: The Priests were to Answer for their own Sin, but
the People were not answerable for it, or their Offerings the less accepted.

But we were in a much worse condition, under the Gospel Administration, if the
Effect of Christ's Institutions, did depend either wholly, or in part upon the
Personal Holiness of His Priests. This would put us much more in their Power,
than it is the Intention of those who make this objection to allow to them:
This magnifies Men, more than is due to them; therefore I will apply the
Apostle's wolds to this Case; 1 Cor. iii. 21.
Let no man glory in men; who is Paul? and who is Apollo? but ministers -- so
then, neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he that waters; but God
who gives the increase.

4. This was (with others) the Error of the Ancient Donatists; those Proud and
Turbulent Schismatics, the great Disturbers of the Peace of the Church, upon
an opinion of their own Sanctity, above that of other Men: For which reason,
they rejected all Baptisms, except what was performed by themselves; and
Re-baptiz'd those who came over to them, from the Church; for, they said that
the Holiness of the Administrator was necessary toward conveying the Spiritual
Graces of Baptism: Thus they argued; Qui non habet quod Det, quomodo Dat? i.e.
How shall a Man give that to another, which he has not himself? Adv. Parmen. l.
5. de schismat. Donatist Ed. Paris 1631. p 87
But Optatus Answers them, that God was the Giver, and not Man, Videte Deumesse
Datorem. And he argues that it was preferring Themselves before God, to think
that the Virtue of Baptism did come from Them; that they were nothing but
Ministers or Workmen; and that, as when a Cloth was Dyed, the change of the
Cloth came from the Colors infused, not from the virtue of the Dyer. So that
in Baptism the Change of the Baptized, came from the Virtue of the Sacrament;
not from the Administrator: That it was the Water of Baptism, which did wash,
not the Person who applied the Water. That the Personal Sanctity of the
Administrator signified nothing to the Efficacy of the Sacrament; Therefore,
says he, Nos operemur ut Ille det, p. 88.
qui se daturum esse promisit, i.e. Let us work, that God, who has promised it,
may bestow the Effect: And that when we work, Humana sunt opera, sed Dei sunt
Munera, i. e. The Work is Man's, but the Gift is God's. And thence he exposes
that Ridiculous Principle of the Donatists, Jam illud quam Ridiculum est, quod,
quasi ad Gloriam vestram, a vobis semper auditur, hoc munus Baptismatis, est
Dantis, non Accipient is? p. 89.
which they advanced to gain Glory to Themselves; that the Gift in Baptism was
of the Administrator, and not of the Receiver: But he shows, that the Gift was
conferred by God, proportionably to the Faith of the Receiver, and not
according to the Holiness of the Administrator.

The Discourse is large, to which I refer the Reader. I have given this Taste of
it, to let these see to whom I now write, that they have (though unaware)
stumbled upon the very Notion of the Donatists, which divided them from the
Catholic Church, and which, with them, has been, long since, Exploded by the
whole Christian World; and I hope this may bring them to a more sober mind; to
consider from whence, and with whom they have fallen; and to return again to
the Peace of the Church, and the Participation of the Blessed Sacraments of
Christ, and the Inestimable Benefits which He has promised to the Worthy
Receivers of them.

Lastly, Let me observe that this Error of the Donatists and Quakers, borders
near upon Popery; nay rather seems to exceed it. For the Church of Modern Rome
makes the Validity of the Sacraments to depend upon the Intention of the
Priest; but his Intention is much more in his own Power; and there are more
evident S^^^s of it than of his Holiness.

VIII. I would not have the Quakers imagine that any thing I have said was
meant in excuse for the ill Lives of the Clergy of the Church of England; as if
the Dissenters were unblamable, but our Clergy wholly Prostitute to all
wickedness; and that for this cause, we plead against the Sanctity of the
Administrator, as Essential to the Sacrament.

No, That is far from the Reason: I do not love to make comparisons, or
Personal Reflections. If all Men be not as they should be, pray God make them
so. But I think there is no modest Dissenter will be offended, if I say, that
there are of our Bishops and Clergy, Men, not only of Learning, and moral
Honesty, but of Devotion, and spiritual illumination; and as much of the
Sobriety of Religion; and can give as many Signs of it, Equally at least (to
speak modestly) as any of our Dissenters, of what Denomination soever.

IX. And I hope, that what I have said will, at least, hinder the Succession of
the Bishops from the Apostles, to be any Objection against them: And they being
possessed moreover of all the other Pretenses of our Dissenters, the Balance
must needs lie on their side, and security can only be with them; because there
is doubt in all the other Schemes of the Dissenters, if what I have said can
amount but to a Doubt. If the want of Succession and outward Commission, upon
which Christ and His Apostles, and the whole Christian Church, in all Ages,
till the last Century; and in all Places, even at this Day, except some Corners
in the west; and the Mosaical Institution before them, did, by the Express
Command of God, lay so great a stress; if all this make but a Doubt (it is
strange that it should, at least, that it should not) in the mind of any
considering Persons; then can they not, with Security, Communicate with any of
our Dissenters; because, if he that Eats and Doubts is Damned, Romans xiv. 23.
much more he that shall do so in Religious matters; wherein chiefly this Rule
must stand, that whatsoever is not of Faith is sin.

X. But now, to argue a little, ad hominem, suppose that the Succession of our
Bishops were lost; and suppose, what the Quakers and some others would have,
that the Thread being broke, we must cast a new knot, and begin again, and make
an Establishment amongst our selves, the best we can. Well, When this is done,
ought not that Establishment to be preserved? Ought every one to break in upon
it, without just cause? Should every one take upon him (or her) to Preach, or
Baptize, contrary to the Rules Established? This, I think, no Society of Men
will allow; For, the Members of a Society must be subject to the Rules of the
Society, otherwise it is no Society: And the Quakers of Grace Church Street
Communion have contended as Zealously for this compliance as any.

Now then, suppose that the conscientious Quakers to whom I speak, should lay
no stress at all upon the Succession of our Bishops; and consider our
Constitution no otherwise than of an Establishment by agreement amongst our
selves; yet even so, by their own Confession, while they can find no fault with
our Doctrine or Worship, they ought not to make a Schism in this Constitution,
which they found Established; and they ought to return to it; and if a new Knot
was cast upon the broken Thread of Succession, at the Reformation from Popery,
that Knot ought not to be un-losed, without apparent and absolute Necessity;
lest if we cast new Knots every Day, we shall have no Thread left un-knotted;
and expose our selves to the Derision of the common Adversary.

XI. Consider the grievous Sin of Schism and Division; it is no less than the
Rending of Christ's Body; and therefore great Things ought to be born, rather
than run into it; even all things, except only that which is apparently sinful;
and that by the Express words of Scripture; and not from our own Imaginations,
though never so strong. And though there are some Impersections in our Reformation,
as to Discipline, and all the High Places are not yet taken away (the Lord, of
His Mercy, quickly remove them) yet I will be bold to say, that in our
Doctrine, Worship, and Hierarchy, nothing can be objected that is contrary to
the Rule of Holy Scripture, or any thing Enjoined, which is There Forbid to be
done: And nothing less can warrant any Schism against our Church.

XII. Now, to come to a Conclusion, upon the whole matter. If you cannot get
Baptism as you would have it, take it as you can get it. If you cannot find Men
of such Personal Excellencies as the Apostles, take those who have the same
Commission which they had, derived down to them by regular Ordination; who
Reformed from Popery, and have been the Established Church of this Nation, ever
since: And moreover are as un-exceptionable, in their Lives and Conversations,
as any others. These are all the securities you can have (without new Miracles)
for Receiving the Sacraments from Proper hands. And therefore there is no doubt
but God will accept of your Obedience in Receiving them from such hands; much
rather than your Disobedience of His Command to be Baptized, because you are
not pleased with those whom His Providence has, at this Day, left in the
Execution of His Commission to Baptize; as if the weakness of His Minister
could obstruct the Operations of His Spirit, in making good His part of the
Covenant, which He has promised.

XIII. There is an Objection against Baptism, which is not worth an Answer; but
that I would condescend to the meanest, and leave nothing behind which might be
a stumbling block to any.

I have heard it urged, that there is no visible Effects seen by our Baptisms;
that Men remain wicked and loose notwithstanding; and therefore some do
conclude that there is no virtue in Baptism.

Answ. To make this Argument of any force, it must be proved that none do
receive any Benefit by it. For, if some do receive Benefit by it, and others do
not, this must be charged upon the Disposition of the Recipient; according to
the known Rule, that whatsoever is received, is received according to the
disposition of the Receiver. Thus the same Meat is turned into good Nourishment
in an healthy, and into noxious Humors in a vitiated Stomach. Simon Magus
received no Benefit by his Baptism; and after the Sop the Devil entered into
Judas; yet the other Apostles received great Benefit by it: 1 Cor. x. 16. c.
xi. 29.
To some it is the savor of Life, even the Communion of Christ's Body and
Blood; to others of Condemnation, who discern not the Lord's Body in it, but
receive it as a common thing: Therefore we are commanded to examine our selves,
v. 28.
to prepare our Hearts for the worthy Receiving of it.

But some say, as the Jews to Christ, show us a sign: They would have some
Miraculous Effects, immediately to appear. These are Ignorant of the Operations
of the Spirit; and to these I say, in the words of Christ, Joh. iii. 8. The
wind blows where it lists, and thou hear the sound thereof, but can
not tell whence it comes or whither it goes; so is every one that is born of
the Spirit. It works silently, but powerfully; and its Progress, like the
growing of our Bodies, is not all at once, but by Degrees; whose motion is
Imperceptible to humane Eyes.

The true use that is to be made of this Objection, that so few (and yet they
are not few who) receive the Inestimable Benefits which are conveyed in the
Sacraments of Christ's Institution, is this, To take the greater Care, and the
more Earnestly to beg the Assistance of God's Grace, to fit and prepare us, for
the worthy Receiving of them; but by no means to neglect them: For those who
refused to come to the Supper were Rejected, as well as he who came without a
Wedding Garment.

A SUPPLEMENT.
THE stress of this Discourse being Founded upon Episcopacy; and long
Quotations being improper in so short a method of Argument as I have taken; to
supply that Defect, and, at the same time, to make it easier to the Reader, I
have added, by way of Supplement, a short Index or Collection of Authorities,
in the first 450 Years after Christ, for Episcopacy, with respect to the
Presbyterian Pretenses, of making a Bishop all one with a Presbyter, at least
with one of their Moderators: And, in the next place, I have shown the sense of
the Reformation, as to Episcopacy. Take them as follows.

Some Authorities for Episcopacy, as distinct from and Superior to Presbytery,
taken out of the Fathers and Councils, in the first Four Hundred and Fifty
Years after Christ.

Anno Domini 70. St. Clement Bishop of Rome, and Martyr, of whom mention is
made Phil. iv. 3. in his 1st. Epist. to the Corinthians, N. 42. p. 89. of the
Edition at Oxford, 1677.
The Apostles having Preached the Gospel, through Regions and Cities, did
Constitute the first Fruits of them, having proved them by the Spirit, to be
Bishops and Deacons of those who should believe; and this, not as a new thing,
for many Ages before it was written concerning Bishops and Deacons; for, thus
says the Scripture, Isa. Lx 17.
in a certain place, I will constitute their Bishops in Righteousness, and
their Deacons in Faith.

What wonder is it then, that those who were Entrusted by God, in Christ, with
this Commission, should Constitute those before spoke of?

ibid. n. 44. And the Apostles knew by the Lord Jesus Christ, that Contests
would arise concerning the Episcopal Name (or Order) and for this Cause, having
perfect fore knowledge (of these things) they did Ordain those whom we have
mentioned before; and moreover, did Establish, the Constitution, that other
approved Men should succeed those who Died, in their Office and Ministry.

Therefore those that were Constituted by Them, or afterward by other approved
Men, with the Consent of all the Church, and have Administered to the Block of
Christ unblamably, with Humility and Quietness, without all stain of filth or
naughtiness; and have carried a good Report, of a long time, from all Men, I
think cannot, without great Injustice, be turned out of their Office: For, it
will be no small sin to us, if we thrust those from their Bishoprics who haves
Holily and without Blame offered our Gists (and Prayers to God.) Blessed are
those Priests who are happily Dead, for they are not afraid of being Ejected
out of the Places in which they are Constituted. For, I understand that you
have Deprived some, from their Ministry, who behaved themselves un-re-provable
amongst you.

Par. 40. To the High Priest his proper Offices were appeinted; the Priests had
their proper Order, and the Levites their peculiar Services, or Deaconships;
and the Laymen, what was proper ser Laymen.

This, as before shown, St. Clement applied to the Distribution of Orders in
the Christian Church; Bishops, Priests, and Deacons. And the Office of the
Levites, is here cali'd by the Word (...) i. e. the Office of Deacons.

A.D. 71. St. Ignatius, a Glorious Martyr of Christ, was Constituted, by the
Apostles, Bishop of Antioch, and did there by think that he succeeded them (as
all other Bishops do) in their full Apostolical Office. Thence he salutes the
Church of the Trall^ans, in the Fullness of the Apostolical Character; and in
his Epistle he says to them,

Be subject to your Bishop as to the Lord --

And to the Presbyters, as to the Apostles of Christ -- Likewise the Deacons
also, being Ministers of the Mysteries of Christ, ought to please in all things
--. Without these there is no Church of the Elect-He is without, who does any
thing without the Bishop, and Preslyters, and Deacons; and such an one is
Desiled in his Conscience.

In his Ep^st. to the Magnesians, he tells them, That they ought not to despise
their Bishop for his youth, but to pay him all manner of Reverence, according
to the Commandment of God the Father. And as I know that your Holy Presbyters
do --

Therefore as Christ did nothing without the Father, so neither do ye, whether
Presbyter, Deacon, or Laick, any thing without the Bishop.

Some indeed call him Bishop; yet do all things without him; but these seem not
to me to have a good Conscience, but rather to be Hypocrites and Scorners.

I Exhort you to do all things in the same mind of God, the Bishop Presiding in
the Place of God; and the Presbyters in room of the College of the Apostles;
and the Deacons, most beloved to me, who are entrusted with the Ministry of
Jesus Christ.

He directs his Epistle to the Church at Philadelphia, to those who were in
Unity with their Bishop and Presbyters and Deacons.

And says to them, in his Epistle, That as many as are of Christ, these are
with the Bishop; and those who shall Repent, and Return to the Unity of the
Church, being made worthy of Jesus Christ, shall partake of Eternal Salvation
in the Kingdom of Christ.

My Brethren, be not deceived, if any shall follow himthat makes a Schism, he
shall not Inherit the Kingdom of God.

I Exhort you to partake of the one Eucharist; for there is one Body of the Lord
Jesus, and one Blood of His, which was shed for us; and one Cup -- and one
Altar, so there is one Bishop, with his Presbytery, and the Deacons, my Fellow
Servants.

Give heed to the Bishop, and to the Presbytery, and to the Deacons -- Without
the Bishop do nothing.

In his Epistle to the Smyrneans, he says, Flee Divisions as the beginning of
Evils. All of them follow their Bishops, as Jesus Christ the Father; and the
Presbyters, as the Apostles, and Reverence the Deacons as the Institution of
God. Let no man do any thing of what appertains to the Church, without the
Bishop, Let that Sacrament be judged Effectual and Firm, which is Dispensed by
the Bishop, or him to whom the Bishop has Committed it. Wherever the Bishop is,
there let the People be; as where Christ is, there the Heavenly Host is
gathered together. It is not lawful, without the Bishop, either to Baptize, or
celebrate the Offices: But what He approves of, according to the good Pleasure
of God, that is firm and safe, and so we do every thing securely.

I salute your most worthy Bishop, your venerable Presbytery, and the Deacons
my Fellow Servants.

Anno Domini 70. St. Clement Bishop of Rome, and Martyr, of whom mention is
made Phil. iv. 3. in his 1st. Epist. to the Corinthians, N. 42. p. 89. of the
Edition at Oxford, 1677.
(...) (...)

(...)

(...)

(...) (...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...) (...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...) (...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

In his Epistle to St. Policarp, Bishop of Smyrna, and Martyr, who, together
with himself, was Disciple to St. John the Apostle, and Evangelist. He gives
these Directions.
If any can remain in Chastity, to the glory of the Body of the Lord, let him
remain without Boasting, if he Boast, he Perishes; and if he pretends to know
more than the Bishop he is corrupted. It is theduty both of Men and Women that
Marry, to be joined together by the Approbation of the Bish. that the Muriage
may be in the Lord, and not according to our own Lusts. Let all things be done
to the Glory of God.

Give heed to your Bishop, that God may Harken unto you: My Soul for theirs,
who subject themselves under the Obedience of their Bishop, Presbyters, and
Deacons, and let me take my Lot with them in the Lord.

And he says to Bishop Policarp, Let nothing be done without thy sentence and
approbation.

In his Epistle to St. Policarp, Bishop of Smyrna, and Martyr, who, together
with himself, was Disciple to St. John the Apostle, and Evangelist. He gives
these Directions.
(...) (...)

(...)

(...)

A.D. 180. St. Irenaeus, Bishop of Lions, in France, who was Disciple of St.
Polycarp; he flourished about the year of Christ 180.
We can reckon those Bishops, who have been Constituted by the Apostles, and
their Successors all the way to our times. And if the Apostles knew hidden
Mysteries, they would certainly deliver them chiefly to those, to whom they
committed the Churches themselves; and whom they left their own Successors, and
in the same Place of Government as themselves. -- We have the Successions of
the Bishops, to whom the Apostolic Church in every place was committed. All
these (Heretics) are much later than the Bishops, to whom the Apostles did
deliver the Churches.

The true Knowledge is the Doctrine of the Apostles, and the Ancient State of
the Church, through the whole World, and the Character of the Body of Christ,
according to the Succession of the Bishops, to whom they committed the Church
that is in every Place; and which has Descended even unto us.

A.D. 180. St. Irenaeus, Bishop of Lions, in France, who was Disciple of St.
Polycarp; he flourished about the year of Christ 180.
Advers. Haereses. l. 3. c. 3.

Habemus muncrare qui ab Aposolis Instituti sunt Episcopi in Ecclesiis, and
successores little usque ad nos. Et si Recondita mysteria Scissent Apostoli, vel
his maxim traderent ea, quibus etiam ipsas Ecclesias committebant; quos and
successores relinquebant, suum ipsorum locum Magisterii tradentes. lib. 4. c.
63. Habemus successiones Episcoporum quibus Apostolicam quae in unoquoque loco
est Ecclesiam tradiderunt. l. 5. c. 20. Omnes enim ii (Haeretici) valde
Posteriores sunt, quam Episcopi, quibus Apostoli tradiderunt Ecclesias.

L. 4. c. 6. Agnitio vera est, Apastolorum Doctrina, and Antiquus Ecclesia
status, in universo Mundo, and Character Corporis Christi secundam successiones
Episcoporum, quibus illi eam quae in unoquoque lico est Ecclesiam tradiderunt,
quae pervenit usque ad nos.

Tertullian, A.D. 203. of the Prescription of Heretics.
A.D. 203.
c. 32. Let them produce the Original of their Churches; let them show the
Order of their Bishops, that by their Succession, deduced from the beginning,
we may see whether their first Bishop had any of the Apostles or Apostolical
Men, who did likewise persevere with the Apostles, for his Founder and
Predecessor. For, thus the Apostolical Churches do derive their Succession: As
the Church of Smyrna from Polycarp, whom John (the Apostle) placed there: The
Church of Rome from Clement, who was, in like manner, ordained by Peter: And so
the other Churches can produce those Constituted in their Bishoprics by the
Aposiles.

c. 36. Reckon over the Apostolical Churches, where the very Chairs of the
Apostles do yet Preside in their own Places. At Corinth, Philippi, Ephesus,
Thessalonica, etc.

Of Baptism, c. 17.

The High Priest, who is the Bishop, has the Power of conferring Baptism; and
under him the Presbyters and Deacons; but not without the Authority of the
Bishop.

Origin, Names the distinct Orders of Bishop, Presbyter, and Deacon. Such a
Bishop ( says he, speaking of one who sought vain Glory, etc.) does not desire
a good Work -- and the same is to be said of Presbyters and Deacons -- The
Bishops and Presbyters who have the Chief Place among the People. -- The Bishop
is called Prince in the Churches: And speaking of the Irreligious Clergy, he
directs it to them, whether Bishops, Presbyters, or Deacons.

Tertullian, A.D. 203. of the Prescription of Heretics.
Edant ergo Origines Ecclesiarum suarum; evolvant ordinem Episcoporum su^rum,
ita ut per successiones ab initio decurrentem, ut primus ille Episcopus aliquem
ex Apostolis, vel Apostolicis viris, qui tamen cum Apostolis perseveraverit,
habuerit Auctorem and Antecessorem. Hoc emm modo Ecclesiae Aposlolicae census
suos deferunt: sicut Smyrneorum Ecclesia Polycarpum ab Johanne conlocatum
refert; sicut Romanorum, Clementem, a Petro ordinatum itidem, Perinde utique
and Ceterae exhibent quos ab Apostolis in Episcopatum Conslitutes Apostolici
seminis traduces habeant.

Percurre Ecclesias Apostolicas, apud quas ipsae adhuc Cathedrae Apostolorum
suis locis Prasident. Corinthi, Philippi, Ephesiis, Thessalonica, etc.

Dandi (Baptismum) jus habet summus sacerdos, qui est Episcopus; dehinc
Presbyteri and Deaconi, non tamen sine Episcopi Authoritate.

A. D. 220. Origenis Comment. A.D. 220.
in Matt. Rothomagi 1668. Gr. Lat. p. 255 (...) -- (...) -- (...). Ibid. p.
443. (...). -- p. 420 (...). -- p. 442. (...)

St. Cyprian Archbishop of Carthage, A. D. 240. A.D. 240.

Our Lord, whose Commands we ought to Reverence and Obey, being about to
Constitute the Episcopal Honor, and the Frame of His Church, said to Peter,
Thou art Peter, etc. From thence the Order of Bishops and Constitution of the
Church does descend, by the line of Succession, through all Times and Ages; that
the Church should be built upon the Bishops -- It is Established by the Divine
Law, that every Act of the Church should be Governed by the Bishop. To
Cornelius, then Bishop of Rome.

We ought chiefly (my Brother) to Endeavor to keep that Unity which was
Enjoined by our Lord and His Apostles to us their Successors, to be carefully
observed by us.

The Deacons ought to remember that it was the Lord who chose the Apostles,
that is, the Bishops.

Christ said to the Apostles, and by that, to all Bishops or Governors of His
Church, who succeed the Apostles, by vicarious Ordination, and are in their
stead, He that hears you, hears me.

For from hence do Schisms and Heresies arise, and have arisen, while the
Bishop, who is One, and Governor of the Church, by a proud Presumption is
Despised; and that Man who is Honored as Worthy by God, is accounted unworthy
by Man.

Nor are Heresies sprung up, or Schisms arisen from any other Fountain than
from hence, that Obedience is not paid to the Priest of God; and that there is
not one Priest at a time in the Church, and one Judge for the time in the Place
of Christ. To whom if the whole Fraternity did obey, according to the Divine
Economy, none would dare to move any thing against the Sacerdotal College --
It is necessary that the Bishops should exert their Authority with full Vigor
-- But if it is so, that we are afraid of the Boldness of the most Profligat;
and that which these wicked Men cannot compass by the Methods of Truth and
Equity, if they can accomplish by their Rashness and Despair, then is there an
end of the Episcopal Authority, and of their Sublime and Divine Power in
Governing of the Church. Nor can we remain Christians any longer, if it is come
to this, that we should be afraid of the Threats, and Snares of the Wicked --

-- The Adversary of Christ, and Enemy of His Church, for this end strikes at
the Bishop or Ruler of the Church, with all his Malice, that the Governor being
taken away, he might Ravage the more Violently and Cruelly upon the Ship-wreck
of the Church --

Is Honor then given to God, when the Divine Majesty and Censure is so
Despised, that these Sacrilegious Persons say; do not think of the Wrath of
God, be not afraid of His Judgment, do not knock at the Door of the Church; but
without any Repentance, or Confession of the^r Crime, Despising the Authority
of their Bishops, and trampling it under their feet, a False Peace is Preached
to be had from the Presbyters (Scilicet) in their taking upon them to Admit
those that were Fallen into Communion, or the Peace of the Church, without the
Allowance of the Bishop.

They imitate the coming of Antichrist now approaching.

Valerian (the Emperor wrote to the Senate, that the Bishops, and the
Presbyters, and the Deacons should be prosecuted.

The Power of Remitting Sins, was given to the Apostles, and to the Bishops,
who have succeeded them by a vicarious Ordination.

What Danger ought we to fear from the Displeasure of God, when some
Presbyters, neither mindful of the Gospel, nor of their own Station in the
Church, neither regarding the future Judgment of God, nor the Bishop who is set
over them, which was never done under our Predecessors, with the Contempt and
Neglect of their Bishop, do arrogate all unto themselves? I could bear with the
Contempt of our Episcopal Authority, but there is now no room left for
Dissembling, etc.

St. Cyprian Archbishop of Carthage, A. D. 240.
Edit. Oxon. Epist. XXXIII. Lapsis.

Dominus noster, cujus Praecepta metuere and observare debemus, Episcopi
honorem and Ecclesiae suae Ratio nem disponens, in Evangelio loquitur and dicit
Petro, Ego dico tibi quia tues Petrus, etc. Inde per temporum and successionum
vices Episcoprum Ordinatio and Ecclaesiae Ratio decurrit, ut Ecclaesia super
Episcopos Constituatur -- Divina Lege fundatum est, ut omnis actus Ecclaesiae
per Episcopum Gubernetur.

Ep. XLV. Cornelio.

Hoc enim vel maxim, Frater, and laboramus and laborare debemus, ut Unitatem a
Domino, and per Apostolos nobis Successoribi^ traditam, quantum possumus
obtinere curemus.

Ep. III. Rogatiano.

Meminisse autem Diaconi debent quoniam Apostolos, id est Episcopos Dominus
Elegit.

Ep. LXVI. Florentio.

Dixit Christus ad Apostolos, ac per hoc, ad omnes Praepositos, qui Apostolis
vicaria ordinatione succedunt, Qui vos audit, me audit. --

Ibid.

Inde enim Schismata and Haereses ortae and oriuntur, dum Episcopus qui units
est, and Ecclesiae Prae-est, superba Praesumptione contemnitur, and homo
dignatione Dei honoratus, Indignus hominibus judicatur.

Ep. LIX. Cornelio.

Neque enim aliunde Haereses obortae sunt, aut nata sunt schismata, quam inde
quod Sacerdoti Dei non obtemperatur; nec unus in Ecclesia ad tempus Sacerdos,
and ad tempus Judex vice Christi cogitatur: Cui si secundum Magisteria Divina
obtemperaret Fraternitas universa, nemo adversus sacerdotum Collegium quicquam
moveret -- vigore pleno Episcopos agere oportet -- quod si ita res est ut
Nequissimorum timeatur Audacia, and quod Maelt vere atque aequitate non
possunt, Temeritate and Desperatione perficiant; actum est de Episcopatus
vigore, and de Ecclesie gubernandae sublimi ac Divina Potestate. Nec Christiani
ultra aut durare aut esse jam possumus, si ad hoc ventum est, ut Perditorum
Minas atque Infidias pertimescamus --

-- Christi Adversarius and Ecclesiae ejus Inimicus, ad hoc Ecclesiae
Praepositum sua Infestatione persequitur, ut Gubernatore sublato, atrocius
atque violentius circa Ecclesiae Naufragia grassetur. --

Honor ergo datur Deo, quando sic Dei Majestas and Censura Contemnitur -- ut
proponatur a Sacrilegis atque dicatur; ne Ita cogitetur Dei, ne timeatur
Judicium Domini, ne pulsetur ad Ecclesiam Christi, sed sublata Poenitentia, nec
ulla Exomologesi Criminis facta, Despectis Episcopis atque Calcatis, Pax a
Presbyteris verbis fallacibus Prodicetur?

ibid.

Antichristi jam propinquantis adventum Imitantur.

Ep. LXXX. Successo.

Rescripsisse valerianum ad Senatum, ut Episcopi, and Presbyteri, and Diacones
in continenti animadvertantur.

Firmillanus Cypriano. Ep. LXXV. p. 225.

Potestas ergo Peccatorum remittendorum Apostolis data est -- and Episcopis qui
eis Ordinatione vicaria successerunt.

Ep. XVI. p. 36. Cyprianus Presbyteris and Diaconibus.

Quod enim periculum metuere non debemus de offensa Domini; quando aliqui de
Presbyteris, nec Evangelu, nec Deci sue memores, sed ne que futurum Domini
Judicium; neque sibi praepositum Episcopum cogitantes, quod nunquam omnino sub
Antecessorthus factum est, cum Contumelia and Contemptu Praepositi totum sibi
vendicent? Contumeliam Episcopatus nostri dissimulare and far possum -- sed
dissimulandi nunc locus non est.

Optatus Milevitanus, Bishop of Mileve, or Mela in Numidia in Africa. A. D. 365.
A.D. 365
In his 2d. Book against Parmenian. The Church has her several Members,
Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons, and the Company of the Faithful.

You found in the Church, Deacons, Presbyters, Bishops, you have made them
Laymen; acknowledge that you have Subverted Souls.

St. Ambrose Bishop of Milan. A. D. 370. upon Ephesians. iv. 11. Speaking of the
several Orders of the Church. And he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and
Evangelists, etc. Says, that by the Apostles there were meant the Bishops; by
Prophets, the Expounders of the Scriptures; and by the Evangelists, the
Deacons. But says that they all met in the Bishop; for that he was the Chief
Priest, that is, (says he) the Prince of the Priests, and both Prophet and
Evangelist, to supply all the Offices of the Church for the Ministry of the
Faithful.

And upon 1 Cor. xii. 28. says that Christ Constituted the Apostles Head in the
Church; and that these are the Bishops.

And upon v. 29. are all Apostles? i.e. all are not Apostles. This is true
(says he,) because in the Church there is but one Bishop.

And because all things are from one God the Father, therefore has He
appointed that one Bishop should Preside over Each Church.

In his Book of the Dignity of the Priesthood, c. 3. he says, That there is
nothing in this World to be found more Excellent than the Priests, nothing more
Sublime than the Bishops.

And speaking of what was Incumbent upon the several Orders of the Church, he
does plainly distinguish them: For, says he, in the same place;

God does require one thing from a Bishop, another from a Presbyter, another
from a Deacon, and another from a Layman.

Optatus Milevitanus, Bishop of Mileve, or Mela in Numidia in Africa. A. D. 365.
l. 2. Contra Parmenianum.

Certa Membra sua habet Ecclesia, Episcopos, Presbyteros, Diaconos, and turbam
Fidelium.

Invenistis Diaconos, Presbyteros, Episcopos. fecisiis La^cos; agnoscite vos
animas evertisse.

Quosdam dedit Apostolos, A.D. 37^
quosdam Prophetas, etc. Apostoli, Episcopi sunt: Prophetae Explanatores sunt
Scripturum sicut Agabus -- Evangelist. Diaconi sunt, sicut fuit Philippus --
Nam in Episcopo omnes ordines sunt, quia Princeps Sacerdos est, hoc est,
Princeps est Sacerdotum, and Propheta, and Evangelista, and Caetera adimplenda
offic^^ Ecclesiae in Ministerio Eidelium.

Caput in Ecclesia Apostolos posuit -- Ipsi sunt Episcopi.

Verum est, quia in Ecclesia unus Episcopus est.

Quia ab uno Deo Patre sunt omnia, singulos Episcopos, singulis Ecclesiis
Prae-esse Decrevit.

De Dignat. Sacerdot. c. 3. ut ostenderemus nihil esse in hoc seculo
Excellentius Sacerdotibus, nihil Sublimius Episcopis reperiri.

Aliud est enim quod ab Episcopo requirit Deus and aliud quod a Presbytero, and
aliud quod a Deacono, and aliud quod a Laico.

St. Jerome, A. D. 380. A. D. 380.
In his Comment upon the Ep. to Titus.
When it began to be said, I am of Paul, I of Apollos, etc. and every one
thought that those whom he Baptized, belonged to himself, and not to Christ; it
was Decreed through The whole Earth, that one Chosen from among the Presbyters
should be set over the rest, that the Seeds of Schism might be taken away.

In his Epist. to Evagrius.

From Mark the Evangelist to Heraclas, and Dionysius the Bishops, the
Presbyters of Egypt have always chosen out one from among themselves, whom
having placed in an higher Degree than the rest, they called their Bishop.

He that is Advanced, is Advanced from less to greater.

The Greatness of Riches, or the Humility of Poverty does not make a Bishop
greater or less, seeing all of them are the Successors of the Apostles.

That we may know the Apostolical Economy to be taken from the Pattern of the
Old Testament, the same that Aaron, and his Sons, and the Levites were in the
Temple, the Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons are in the Church of Christ.

To Nepotianus.

Be subject to your Bishop or Chief-Priest; and receive him as the Father of
your Soul.

Against the Luciferians.

The safety of the Chapter depends upon the Dignity of the High Priest, to whom
unless a sort of absolute and eminent Power be given above all, there will be as
many Schisms in the Church as there are Priests. Thence it is, that without the
Command of the Bishop, neither a Presbyter, nor a Deacon, have Power to Baptize
-- And the Bishop is to impose his Hands upon those who are Baptized by
Presbyters or Deacons, for the Invocation of the Holy Spirit.

And Comforting Heliodorus, a Bishop, upon the Death of Nepotian his Presbyter
and his Nephew, he Commends Nepotian in that he Reverenced his Bishop. He
Honored Heliodorus, in public as his Bishop, at home as his Father. But among
his Presbyters and Co-equals, he was the first in his Vocation, etc.

Upon the 60th. of Isa. He calls the future Bishops, Princes of the Church.

Of the Ecclesiastical Writers. Concerning James.

James, after the Passion of our Lord, was immediately, by the Apostles,
ordained Bishop of Jerusalem. The like he tells of the first Bishops of other
Places.

Epist. 54. against Montanus.

With us the Bishops hold the Place of the Apostles.

St. Jerome, A. D. 380. A. D. 380.
In his Comment upon the Ep. to Titus.
Postquam unusquisque eos quos Baptizabat suos putabat esse non Christi, IN
TOTO ORB Decretum est, ut unus de Presbyteris Electus superponeretur Caeteris,
ut Schismatum semina tollerentur.

A Marco Evangelista ad Heraclum usq^ad Dionysium Episcopos, Presbyrari Aegypti
semper unum ex se Electum, in Clesiori Gradu collocatum Episcopum Nominabant.

Qui provehitur, a Minori ad Majus provehitur.

Potentia Divitiarum and Paupertatis Humilitas, sublimiorum vel inferiorem
Episcopum non facit, Ceterum Omnes Apostolorum Successores sunt.

Ut sciamus Traditiones Apostolicas sumptas de veteri Testamento: Quod Aaron,
and Filii ejus atque Levitae in Templo fuerunt, hoc sibi Episcopi, Presbyteri,
and Deaconi, vendicent in Ecclesia.

Ad Nepotianum.

Esto sujectus Pontisici tuo; and quasi animi Parentem suscipe.

Advers. Luciferianos.

Ecclaesiae salus in summi Sacerdotis Dignitate pendet, cui nisi exors quaedam
and ab emnibus Eminens detur Potestas, tot in Ecclaesia efficientur Schismata
quot Sacerdotes. Inde venit, ut sine Episcopi jussione neque Presbyter neque
Diaconus jus haebeant Baptizandi -- Ad eos qui per Presbyteros and Diaconos
Baptizati sunt, Episcopus ad Invocationem sancti Spiritus manum Impositurus
excurrat.

Epitaphium Nepotiani a Heliodorum, Episcopum venerebatur -- In publico
Episcopum, domi Patrem noverat -- Inter Presbyteros and Co-aequales, primus in
opere, etc.

Principes futuros Ecclesiae Episcopos Nominavit.

In script. Ecclesiast. De Jacobo.

Jacobus post Passionem Domini statim ab Apostolis Hierosolimorum Episcopus est
ordinatus.

Ep. 54, contra Montanum.

Apud nos Apostolorum locum Episcopi tenent.

St. Augustine Bishop of Hippo in Africa, A. D. 420. Epistle 42.
A. D. 420.
The Root of the Christian Society is diffused throughout the World, in a sure
Propagation, by the Seats of the Apostles, and the Succession of the Bishops.

Quest. veter. and novi Test. N. 97.

There is none but knows that our Savior did Constitute Bishops in the
Churches; for before He Ascended into Heaven, He laid His Hands upon the
Apostles and Ordained them Bishops.

l. 7. c. 43. The Sentence of our Lord Jesus Christ is clear, who sent His
Apostles, and gave to Them alone that Power which He had Received from His
Father; to whom we have Succeeded, Governing the Church of God by the same
Power.

Ep. 162. speaking of the Bishops being called Angels. Rev. 2. he says,

By the voice of God, the Governor of the Church is Praised, under the Name of
an Angel. Of the words of our Lord, Sermon. 24.

If He said to the Apostles alone, he that despises you, despises me, then
despise us: But if those words of His come down even unto us, and that He has
Called us, and Constituted us in their Place, see that you do not despise us.

Against Faustus.

We embrace the Holy Scripture, which from the Times of the Presence of Christ
himself, by the Disposition of the Apostles, and the Successions of other
Bishops from their Seats, even to these Times, has come down to us, safely
kept, commended and honored through the whole Earth.

Against Petilian.

What has the Chair of the Church of Rome done to thee, in which Peter sat, and
in which, at this day, Anastasius sits; or of the Church of Jerusalem, in which
James did sit, and in which John does now sit.

Against Julian.

Irenaeus, Cyprian, Reticius, Olympius, Hilary, Gregory, Basil, John, Ambrose
-- these were Bishops, Grave, Learned, etc.

Questions upon the Old Testament. Quest. 35.

The King bears the Image of God, as the Bishop of Christ. Therefore while he
is in that Station, he is to be Honored, if not for himself, yet for his Order.

St. Augustine Bishop of Hippo in Africa, A. D. 420. Epistle 42.
Radix Christianae Societatis per seeds Apostolorum and Successiones
Episcoporum certa per orbem Propagatione diffunditur.

Nemo ignorant Salvatorem Episcopos Ecclesiis Instituisse; Ipse enim priusquam
Coelos Ascenderet, Imponens Manus Apostolis ordinavit eos Episcopos, Quod dixit
Clarus a Muscula in Concilio Carthag. Repetit August. de Baptismo contra
Donatist.

Manifesta est sententia Domini nostri Jesu Christi Apostolos suos mittentis,
and ipsis solis Potestatem a Patre sibi traditam permittentis; quibus nos nos
Successimus, eadem Potestate Ecclesiam Domini Gubernantes.

Divina voce sub nomine Angeli Laudatur Praepositus Ecclesiae.

De verbis Domini, Sermon. 24.

Si solis Apostolis dixit, Qui vos spernit, me spernit, spernite nos: Si autem
Sermo Ejus pervenit ad nos, and vocavit nos, and in eorum loco Constituit nos,
videte ne spernatis nos.

Contra Faust. Lib. 33. cap. ult.

Scripturam amplectimur quae ab Ipsius Presentiae Christi temporibus, per
Dispensationes Apostolorum, and caeteras ab eorum sedibus Successiones
Episcoporum, usque ad haec tempora toto Orb terrarum custodita, commendata,
clarificata pervenit.

Lib. 2. contra Literas Petiliani C. 51.

Cathedra quid tibi fecit Ecclesiae Romanae in qua Petrus sedit, and in qua
hodie Anastasius sedet; aut Ecclesiae Hierosolimitanae in qua Jacobus sedit,
and in qua hodie Joannes sedet. [ Vid. contra Crescon. l. 2. c. 37.]

Contra Julianum, l. 2, cap. ult.

Irenaeus, Cyprianus, Reticius, Olympius, Hilarious, Gregorius, Basilius,
Joannes, Ambrosius, isti erant Episcopi, Docti, Graves, etc. in Ecclesiae
Regimine Clari.

Quest. ex vet. Test. qu. 35.

Dei enim Imaginem habet Rex, sicut and Episcopus Christi. Quamdiu ergo in ea
traditione est, Honorandus est, si non propter se, vel propter Ordinem.

Let this suffice as to the Testimonies of particular Fathers of the Church,
though many more may be produced, in that compass of time, to which I have
confined our present Inquiry. And now (that no Conviction might be wanting) I
will set down some of the Canons of the Councils in those times, to the same
purpose; whereby it will appear, that Episcopacy, as distinct from, and
superior to Presbytery, was not only the Judgment of the first Glorious Saints
and Martyrs of Christ; but the current Doctrine, and Government of the Church,
both Greek and Latin, in those early Ages of Christianity.

In the Canons of the Apostles, the distinction of Bishop, Presbyter, and
Deacon is so frequent, that it is almost in vain to give Citations. The 1st.
and 2d. Can. show the difference to be observed in the Ordaining of them.

Let a Bishop be Consecrated by two or three Bishops.

Let a Presbyter and Deacon be Ordained by one Bishop.

See the same Distinction of these Orders. Can. 3.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. 17, 18, 25.
27, 28, 29. 32 33. 36. 42. 44, 45. 51, 52, 53. 63. 68, 69, 70, 83. Can. 15.
shows the Jurisdiction of the Bishops over the Presbyters and Deacons.

If any Presbyter or Deacon, or any of the Clerical Order, shall leave his own
Parish, and go to another, without the Bishop's leave, he shall officiate no
longer; especially if he obey not the Bishop, when he exhorts him to Return,
persisting in his Insolence and disorderly Behavior, but he shall be reduced
there to Communicate only as a Layman.

And Can. 31. If any Presbyter, despising his own Bishop, shall gather
Congregations apart, and erect another Altar, his Bishop not being Convict of
Wickedness or Irreligion, let him be Deposed as an Ambitious Person; for, he is
a Tyrant: And likewise such other Clergy or Laity, who shall join themselves to
him shall be Excommunicated. But, let this be after the first, second, and
third Admonition of the Bishop.

Can. 39. Let the Presbyters and Deacons do nothing without the Consent of the
Bishop; for it is He to whom the People of the Lord are committed, and from
whom an account of their Souls will be Required.

Can. 41. We Ordain the Bishop to have power of the Goods of the Church -- And
to Administer to those who want, by the hands of the Presbyters and Deacons.

Can. 55. If any Clergy man shall Reproach his Bishop, let him be Deposed: For,
Thou shall not speak Evil of the Ruler of the People.

(...)

(...)

(...) (...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

After the Canons of the Apostles, I produce next a Great Council of 87 Bishops
held at Carthage, in the Year of Christ, 256, under St. Cyprian, Archbishop of
that Place, which is Published in St. Cyprian's Works before quoted, p. 229.
where he tells us,

That besides the Bishops, there met there both Presbyters and Deacons, and
great Numbers of the Laity.

Episcopi plurimi cum Presbyteris and Diaconibus, etc.

The Council of Eliberis in Spain, about the Year of Christ 305. Cap. 18. and
19.
Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons are Named distinct. And c. 32. Presbyters and
Deacons are forbid to give the Communion to those who had grievously offended,
without the Command of the Bishop.

c. 75. Of those who shall falsely accuse a Bishop, Presbyter, or Deacon.

c. 77. It is ordained that those who are Baptized by a Deacon, without the
Rishop or Presbyter, shall afterward be Confirmed by the Bishop.

The Council of Eliberis in Spain, about the Year of Christ 305. Cap. 18. and
19.
Episcopi, Presbyteri, and Diaconi, etc. Non est Presbyterorum, aut Diaconorum
Communionem talibus praestare debere, nisi eis jusserit Episcopus.

Si quis Episcopum, Presbyterum, vel Diaconum falsis Criminibus appetierit, etc.

Si quis Diaconus, sine Episcopo vel Presbytero aliquos Baptizaverit; Episcopus
eos per Benedictionem perficere debebit.

The Council of Arles in France, about the Year of Christ 309. c. 18. It is
ordained that the Deacons should be subject to the Presbyters: And c. 19.
That the Presbyters should be subject to their Bishop, and do nothing without
his consent.

The Council of Arles in France, about the Year of Christ 309. c. 18. It is
ordained that the Deacons should be subject to the Presbyters: And c. 19.
Presbyteri sine Conscientia Episcopi nihil faciant.

The Council of Ancyra, A. D 315.
A. D. 315.
c. 1. and 2. Having Prohibited those Presbyters and Deacons who had, in times
of Persecution, Offered to Idols, from the Execution of their Office, says,
that notwithstanding the Bishop may Dispense with them if he sees their
Repentance sincere; for that this Power is lodged in the Bishop.

The Council of Ancyra, A. D 315.
A. D. 315.
(...)

The Council of Laodicea, A. D. 321.
A. D. 321.
Can. 41. That no Clergyman ought to Travel, without the consent of his Bishop.

Can. 56. That the Presbyters ought not to go into the Church, and sit in their
Stales, till the Bishop come, and to go in with the Bishop.

The Council of Laodicea, A. D. 321.
A. D. 321.
(...)

(...)

The First and Great Council of Nice, A. D. 325.
Can. 16. That if any Presbyters or Deacons leave their own Churches, they
ought not to be received into another Church: And that if any shall ordain such
in his Chapter as belong to another, without the consent of his proper Bishop, let
such Ordination be void.

The First and Great Council of Nice, A. D. 325.
(...)

The Council of Gangra, 326. A. D. 326.

Can. 6. If any have private Meetings out of the Church, without their
Preshyter, let 'em be Anathematized by the Sentence of the Bishop.

Can. 7. If any will take or give of the Fruits offered to the Church, out of
the Church, without leave of the Bishop, let him be Anathema.

The Council of Gangra, 326. A. D. 326.

(...)

(...)

The Council of Antioch, A. D. 341. A. D. 341.

Can. 3. If any Presbyter or Deacon, leaving his own Parish, shall go to
others; and refuse to return, when his own Bishop shall summon him, let him be
Deposed.

Can. 4. If any Bishop being Deposed by a Synod, or a Presbyter or Deacon being
Deposed by his own proper Bishop, shall presume to exercise his Function, let
no room be left them, either for Restoration or Apology.

Can. 5. If any Presbyter or Deacon, despising his own Bishop, shall separate
himself from the Church, and gather a Congregation of his own, and set up a
different Altar; and shall refuse to submit himself to his Bishop, calling him
the first and second time, let him be absolutely Deposed.

Can. 12. If any Presbyter or Deacon, being Deposed by his own proper Bishop,
or a Bishop by the Synod, dare Appeal to the King, seeing his Appeal lies to a
greater Synod of more Bishops, where he is to expect the Examination of his
Cause, and to teserr the Decision to them; But if, making light of these, he
trouble the King with it, such an one is worthy of no Pardon, nor ought to be
admitted to make any sort of Apology, or to have hopes of his being ever
Restored any more.

Can. 22. That a Bishop ought not to Ordain Presbyters or Deacons in another
Bishop's Diocese, without his leave.

The Council of Antioch, A. D. 341. A. D. 341.

(...)

(...)

(...) (...)

(...)

(...)

In the Council of Carthage, A. D. 348.
C. xi. The Case is put where a Deacon being accused, shall be Tried by three
Neighboring Bishops, a Presbyter by six, and a Bishop by twelve.

In the Council of Carthage, A. D. 348.
A tribus vicinis Episcopis, si Diaconus est arguatur; si Presbyter, a sex, si
Episcopus a duedecim Consacerdotibus audiatur.

The second Ecumenical Council of Constantineple, A. D. 381.
Can. 6. Ranks those with Heretics, who, though they prosess the true Faith, yet
run into Schism, and gather Congregations apart from, and in opposition to our
Canonied Bishops.

The second Ecumenical Council of Constantineple, A. D. 381.
(...)

The Council of Carthage, A. D. 419.
Can. 3. Mentions the three distinct Orders of Bishop, Presbyter, and Deacon;
and compares them to the High Priest, Priests, and Levites.

In the same manner they are as distinctly mentioned,

Can. 4. Bishop, Presbyter and Deacon; and their Powers distinct. For,

Can. 6. It is declared not to be lawful for Presbyters to Consecrate Churches,
or Reconcile Penitents; but if any be in great Danger, and desirous to be
Reconciled in the absence of the Bishop,

The Presbyter ought to consult the Bishop, and receive his Orders in it, as is
declared in the 7. Can.

Can. 10. If any Presbyter, being puffed up with Pride, shall make a Schism
against his own proper Bishop, let him be Anathema.

Can. 11. Gives leave to a Presbyter, who is Condemned by his Bishop, to Appeal
to the Neighboring Bishops; but if, without this, he flies off, and makes a
Schism from his Bishop, it confirms the Anathema upon him.

Can. 12. Orders what is before Recited out of Can. xi. of the Council of
Carthage.

That a Bishop who is Accused shall be tried by twelve Bishops, if more may not
be had; a Presbyter by six Bishops, with his own Bishop; and a Deacon by three.

Can. 14. Orders that in Tripeli, because of the smaller number of Bishops in
those Parts, a Presbyter shall be judged by Five Bishops, and a Deacon by
Three, his own proper Bishop Presiding.

Can. 46. That a Presbyter shall not Reconcile a Penitent, without the
knowledge of the Bishop; unless upon necessity, in the absence of the Bishop.

Can. 59. That one Bishop may ordain many Presbyters; but that it was hard to
find a Presbyter who was fit to be made a Bishop.

Can. 65. That a Clergy man, being Condemned by the Bishops, cannot be
delivered by that Church to which he did belong, or by any Man whatsoever.

Can. 126. That Presbyters and Deacons may Appeal from their own Bishop to the
Neighboring Bishops, chosen by consent of their own Bishop, and from them to
the Primate or Provincial Synod; but not to any Trans-marine or Foreign
Jurisdiction, under pain of Excommunication.

The Council of Carthage, A. D. 419.
(...) (...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...) (...)

(...)

(...)

The Council of Chalcedon, being the Fourth General Council A. D. 451.
Can. 9. If any Clergyman have a Cause of complaint against another
Clergyman, let him not leave his own proper Bishop, and have Recourse to the
Secular Courts-Whoever does otherwise shall be put under the Canonical Censures.

Can. 13. That a Foreign Clergyman, and not known, shall not officiate in
another City, without Commendatory Letters from his own Bishop.

Can. 18. If any of the Clergy shall be found Conspiring, or Joining in
Fraternities, or Contriving any thing against the Bishops, they shall fall from
their own Degree.

Can. 29. To reduce a Bishop to the Degree of a Presbyter, is Sacrilege.

The Council of Chalcedon, being the Fourth General Council A. D. 451.
(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

These Authorities are so plain and full as to prevent any Application, or
Multiplying of further Quotations, which might easily be done: For, if these
can be answered, so may all that can possibly be produced, or framed in words.

And there is no Remedy left to the Presbyterians, and other Dissenters from
Episcopacy, but to deny all these by wholesale, to throw off all Antiquity, as
well the first Ages of Christianity, even that wherein the Apostles themselves
Lived and Taught, as all since; and to stand upon a New Foundation of their own
Invention.

But this only shows the Desperatness of their Cause; and the Impregnable
Bulwork of Episcopacy; which (I must say it) stands upon so Many, Clear, and
Authentic Evidences, as can never be overthrown, but by such Topics as must
render Christianity it self Precarious.

And if from the Etymology of the Words Bishop and Presbyter, any Argument can
be drawn (against all the Authorities Produced) to prove them the same, we may,
by this way of Reasoning, prove Cyrus to be Christ, for so he is called, Isa.
XLV. 1.

Or if the Presbyterians will have their Moderator to be a Bishop, we will not
Quarrel with them about a word. Let us then have a Moderator, such as the
Bishops before described, viz. A Moderator, as a standing Officer, during Life,
to whom all the Presbyters are to be obedient as to Christ, i. e. to the
Moderator, as Representing the Person of Christ: That nothing be done in the
Church without Him: That He be understood as the Principle of Unity in His
Church; so that, they who unjustly break off from his Communion, are thereby in
a Schism: That he show his Succession, by Regular Ordination, conveyed down
from the Apostles. In short, that He have all that Character and Authority,
which we see to have been Recognized in the Bishops, in the very Age of the
Apostles, and all the succeeding Ages of Christianity; and then call Him
Moderator, Superintendent, or Bishop: For, the Contest is not about the Name,
but the Thing.

And if we go only upon the Etymology of the Word, how shall we prove
Presbyters to be an Order in the Church, more than Bishops? as Athanasius said
to Dracontius of those who persuaded him not to accept of a Bishopric.

Why do they persuade you not to be a Bishop, when they themselves will have
Presbyters? (...)

I will end this Head, with the Advice of that great Father to this same
Drasontius.

If the Government of the Churches do not please you; and that you think the
Office of a Bishop has no Reward, thereby making your self a Despiser of our
Savior, who did Institute it; I beseech you surmise not any such things as
these, nor do you Entertain any who advise such things; for that is not worthy
of Dracontius: For what things the Lord did Institute by His Apostles, those
things remain both good and sure. (...)

Athanas. Epist. ad Dracont. II. Having thus Explained those Texts of Scripture
which speak of Episcopacy, by the Concurrent sense of those who lived with the
Apostles, and were taught the Faith from their Mouths; who lived zealous
Confessors, and died glorious Martyrs of Christ; and who Succeeded the Apostles
in those very Churches where themselves had sat Bishops: And having deduced
their Testimonies, and of those who Succeeded them down for Four Hundred and
Fifty Years after Christ (from which time, there is no doubt raised against the
Universal Reception of Episcopacy) and this not only from their Writings apact,
but by their Canons and Laws, when Assembled together in Council; which one
would think sufficient Evidence, against none at all on the other side, that
is, for the Succession of Churches in the Presbyterian Form, of which no one
Instance can be given, so much as of any one Church in the World so Deduced,
not only from the days of the Apostles (as is shown for Episcopacy) but before
Calvin, and those who Reformed with him, about 160 Years last past: I say, though
what is done is sufficient to satisfy any Indifferent and Un-byass'd Judgment,
yet there is one Topic yet behind, which, with our Dissenters, weighs more than
all Fathers and Councils; and that is, the late Resormation, from whence some
Date their very Christianity. And if even by this too Episcopacy should be
Witnessed and Approved, then is there nothing at all in the World left to the
Opposers of Episcopacy, nothing of Antiquity, Precedent, or any Authority but
their own Wilful Will against all Ages of the whole Catholic Church, even that
of the Reformation as well as all the Rest.

Let us then Examine. First, for the Church of England, that is thrown off
clearly by our Dissenters, for that was Reformed under Episcopacy, and
continues so to this day.

And as to our Neighbor Nation of Scotland, where the Presbyterians do boast
that the Reformation was made by Presbyters; that is most Clearly and
Authentically Confuted by a Late Learned and worthy Author (already mentioned)
in his Fundamental Charter of Presbytery, Printed 1695. so as to stop the
Mouths of the most Perverse, who will not be Persuaded though they are Persuaded.

Go we then abroad, and see the state of the Reformed Churches there.

The Lutherans are all cut off, as the Church of England; for they still Retain
Episcopacy, as in Denmark, Sweden, etc.

There remains now only the Calvinists. Here it is the Presbyterians set up
their Rest! This is their strong Foundation!

And this will fail them as much as all the other: For, be it known unto them
(however they will receive it) that Calvin himself, and Beza, and the rest of
the Learned Reformers of their Part, did give their Testimony for Episcopacy as
much as any. They counted it a most unjust Reproach upon them, to think that
they condemned Episcopacy; which they say they did not throw off, but could not
have it there, in Geneva, without coming under the Papal Hierarchy: They highly
Applanded and Congratulated the Episcopal Hierarchy of the Church of England,
as in their several Letters to Q. Elizabeth, to the Archbishop of Canterbury,
and others of our Eaglish Biships: They Prayed heartily to God for the
Continuance and Preservation of it: Bemoaned their own unhappy Circumstances,
that they could not have the like, because they had no Magistrate to Protect
them; and wished for Episcopacy in their Churches, the want of which they owned
as a great Defec t; but called it their Misfortune rather than their Fault. As
the Learned of the French Hagonots have likewise pleaded on their Behalf.

As for their Excuse. I do not now meddle with it, for I think it was not a
good one. They might have had Bishops from other Places, though there were none
among themselves, but those who were Popish: And they might as well have had
Bishops as Presbyters, without the Countenance of the Civil-Magistrate. It
might have raised a greater Persecution against them; but that is nothing as to
the Truth of the thing. And if they thought it a Truth, they ought to have
suffered for it.

But whatever becomes of their Excuse, here it is plain, that they gave their
Suffrage for Episcopacy; which who so pleases may see at large in Dr. Durel's
View of the Government and Worship in the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas,
(who was himself one of them) Printed. 1662.

So that our Modern Presbyterians have departed from Clavin as well as from
Luther, in their Abhorrence of Episcopacy, from all the Christian World, in all
Ages; and particularly from all our late Reformers, both of one sort and other.

Calvin would have Anathematized all of them, had he lived in our times. He
says there were none such to be found in his time, who opposed the Episcopal
Hierarchy, but only the Papal, which Aspired to an Universal Supremacy in the Sea of Rome over the whole Catholic Church, which is the Prerogative of Christ
alone. But, says he,

If they would give us such a Hierarchy, in which the Bishops should so Excel,
as that they did not refuse to be subject to Christ, and to depend upon Him, as
their only Head, and refer all to Him; then I will confess that they are worthy
of all Anathemas, if any such shall be found, who will not Reverence it, and
submit themselves to it, with the utmost Obedience. Talem si nobis Hierarchiam
exhibeant, in qua sic Emineant Episcopi, ut Christo subesse non Recusent, and
ab Illo ranquam unico Capite pendeant, and ad Ipsum referantur, etc. Tum vero
nullo non Anathemate dignos fatear si qui erunt qui non Eam Revereantur,
summaque Obedientia observent. Calvin. De necessitat. Ecclaes. Reformand. See,
he says, si qui erunt, if there shall be any such, which supposes that he knew
none such; and that he owned none such amongst his Reformers: And that if ever
any such should arise, he thought there were no Anathemas which they did not
deserve, who should refuse to submit to the Episcopal Hierarchy, without such
an Universal Head, as Excludes Christ from being the only Universal Head; for
if there be another, (tho substitute) He is not only. Thus He is called the
Chief Bishop, but never the only Bishop, because there are others deputed under
Him. But He calls no Bishop the Universal Bishop, or Head of the Catholic
Church, because He has appointed no Substitute in that supreme Office; as not
of Universal King, so neither of Universal Bishop.

And Beza supposes as Positively as Calvin had done, that there were none who
did oppose the Episcopal Hierarchy without such an Universal Head now upon
Earth; or that opposed the Order of Episcopacy; and condemns them as Madmen,
if any such could be found. For thus says he,

If there be any (which you shall hardly peswade me to believe) who reject the
whole Order of Episcopacy, God forbid that any Man, in his wits, should assent
to the Madness of such Men. Si qui sunt autem (quod sane mihi non facile
persuaseris) qui omnem Episcoporum ordinem Rejiciant, absit ut quisquam satis
sanae mentis furoribus illorum assentiatur. Beza. ad Tractat. de Ministr. Ev.
Grad. ab Hadrian. Sarav. Belga Editam. c. 1. And particularly as to the Church
of England, and her Hierarchy of Archbishops and Bishops, he says, that he
never meant to oppugn any thing of that; but calls it a singular Blessing of
God; and wishes that she may ever enjoy it. Fruatur sane ^^la singulari Dei
beneficentia, quae utinam sit illi Perpetua. Ibid. c. 18.

So that our Modern Presbyterians are disarmed of the Precedent of Calvin,
Beza, and all the Reformers abroad; by whose Sentence they are Anathematized,
and counted as Madmen.

Here then, let us consider and beware of the Fatal Progress of Error! Calvin
and the Reformers with him, set up Presbyterian Government, as they pretended,
by Necessity; but still kept up and Professed the highest Regard to the
Episcopal Character and Authority: But those who pretend to follow their
Example, have utterly Abdicated the whole Order of Episcopacy, as
Antichristian and an Insupportable Grievance! While, at the same time, they
would seem to pay the greatest Reverence to these Reformers; and much more to
the Authority of the First and Purest Ages of Christianity; whose Fathers and
Councils spoke all the High things, before Quoted, in behalf of Episcopacy; far
beyond the Language of our later Apologists for that Hierarchy; or what durst
now be Repeated, except from such unquestionable Authority.

In this they imitate the hardness of the Jews, who Built the Sepulchers of
those Prophets, whom their Fathers slew; while, at the same time, they Adhered
to, and out did the Wickedness of their Fathers, in Persecuting the Successors
of those Prophets.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 3. col. 2. l. 11. r. (...). p. 39. col. 1. l. 10, 11. r. All of you
follow your Bishops. col. 2. penult. r. (...). p. 40. l. 16. A. D. 180. should
be on the Margent; p. 42. col. 2. l. 3. dele -- after (...). and r. (...). p.
44. col. 2. l. 14. r. Ira. p. 45. col. 2. l. 28. r. scripturarum. p. 47. col.
2. penult. r. ad Heliodorum. p. 51. col. 1. l. 11, 12, 13, 14. r. As likewise
such other Clergy, and as many as shall join with him: but the Laymen shall be
Excommunicated.

ADVERTISEMENT.
WHereas I have placed the Apostolical Canons in the Front of the Councils
before Quoted, I thought fit (to prevent needless Cavil) to give this
Advertisement, that I do not contend, they were made by the Apostles
themselves; but by the Holy Fathers of the Church, about the end of the Second
and beginning of the Third Century, as a Summary of that Discipline, which had
been transmitted to them, by Un-interrupted Tradition, from the Apostles;
whence they have justly obtained the Name of The Apostolical Canons; and, as
such, have been Received and Reverenced in the succeeding Ages of Christianity.

The Councils Quoted after these Canons, bear their Proper Dates; and there can
be no Contest about them.

And what is Quoted of St. Ignatius and the other Fathers, is from the most
Uncontroverted Parts of their Works, to obviate the Objection of
Interpolations, and Additions, by the Noise of which our Adversaries endeavor
to throw off, or enervate their whole Authority; and quite to dis-arm us of all
that Light which we have from the Primitive Ages of the Church; because it
makes all against them. Though they fail not to Quote the Fathers on their
side, whenever they can Screw them to give the least seeming Countenance to
their Novelties and Errors: Yet Boldly Reject them All, when brought in
Evidence against them, and that they can no otherwise struggle from under the
weight of their Authority.

A Catalogue of Books Printed for Charles Brom at the Gun at the West End, of
St. Paul' s Churchyard.
THE Snake in the Grass: Or, Satan transformed into an Angel of Light.
Discovering the Deep and Unsuspected Subtilty which is couched under the
Pretended Simplicity of many of the Principal Leaders of those People called
Quakers. The Second Edition, with Additions.

Some Seasonable Reflections upon the Quakers Solemn Protestation against
George Keith's Proceedings at Turner's-Hall, 29. April 1697. Which was by them
Printed, and sent thither, as the Reasons of their not Appearing to defend
themselves. Herein annexed Verbatim By an Impartial Hand.

Satan Dis-rob'd from his Disguise of Light: Or, the Quakers Last Shift to
Cover their Monstrous Heresies, laid fully open. In a Reply to Thomas Ellwood's
Answer (Published the End of last Mouth) to George Keith's Narrative of the
Proceedings at Turner's-Hall, June 11. 1696. Which also may serve for a Reply
(as to the main Points of Doctrine) to Geo. Whitehead's Answer to The Snake in
the Grass; to be Published the End of next Month, if this prevent it not.

A Discourse proving the Divine Institution of Water Baptism: Wherein the
Quaker-Arguments against it, are Collected and Confuted. With as much as is
needful concerning the Lord's Supper. These Four Books are Written by the
Author of The Snake in the Grass.

The Quakers set in their True Light, in order to give the Nation a clear sight
of what they hold concerning Jesus of Nazareth, the Scriptures, Water Baptism,
the Lord's Supper, Magistracy, Ministry, Laws, and Government: Historically
collected out of their most approved Authors, which are their best
Construing-Books, from the year of their Rise 1650, to the year of their
Progress 1696. By Francis Bugg, Sen.

An Essay concerning Preaching: Written for the Direction of a Young Divine;
and useful also for the People, in order to Profitable Hearing.

Crumbs of Comfort, and Godly Prayers; With Thankful Remembrances of God's
wonderful Deliverances of this Land.


