Gallienus Redivivus, OR, Murder Will Out. etc. Being a True Account of the
DE-WITTING OF Glencoe, Gaffney, etc.

They gave out that the design of their Coming was to introduce Liberty, and
depose Tyrants: But having gained the Power, They did so Tyrannize Themselves,
That the Reign of Former Oppressors seemed a Golden Age, if compared with the
Arbitrariness and Ex^ction of these pretended DELIVERERS; which made the
Sicilians think them much more happy, who Expired in Servitude, than those who
lived to see such a DISMAL FREEDOM.

Plutarch. Life of Timoleon. Printed at EDINBVRGH, in the Year 1695.

A LETTER from a Gentleman in SCOTLAND to his Friend at LONDON, who desired a
Particular Account of the Business of GLENCO.
Edinburgh, April. 20th 1692. SIR,
THE Account you desired of that strange and surprising Massacre of Glenco,
take as follows.

Mac-jan Mac-donald, Lord of Glenco, a Branch of the Mack-donalds, one of the
greatest Clans (or Tribes) in the North of Scotland, came with the most
Considerable Men of his Clan to Coll. Hill, Governor of Fort William at
Inverlochy, some few days before the Expiring of the time for receiving the
Indemnity appointed by Proclamation, which as I take it, was the First of
January last, entreating he would administer unto him the Oaths which the
foresaid Proclamation required to be taken; that so submitting himself to the
Government, he might have its Protection. The Colonel received him with all
Expressions of Kindness; nevertheless shifted the administering the Oaths to
him, alleging that by the Proclamation it did not belong to him, but to the
Sheriffs, Bailyffs of Regalities, and Magistrates of Burghs, to administer
them. Mac-jan Complaining that by this Disappointment he might be wronged, the
Time being now near the Expiring, and the Weather so extreme, and the Ways so
very bad, that it was not possible for him so soon to reach any Sheriff, etc.
got from Coll. Hill, under his Hand, his Protection; and withal he was assured,
that no Orders from the Government against him should be put in Execution,
until he were first advertised, and had time allowed him to apply himself to
King or Council for his own Safety. But the better to make all sure, (though this
might have seemed Security enough for that time) with all dispatch imaginable
he posted to Inverary, the Chief Town of Argylashire, there he found Sir Collin
Camphel of Ardkinlis, Sherriff of that Shire, and craved of him the Benefit of
the Indemnity, according to the Proclamation, he being willing to perform all
the Conditions required. Sir Collin at first scrupled to admit him to the
Oaths, the Time which the Proclamation did appoint being elapsed by one day,
alleging it would be of no use to him then to take them: But Mac-jan
represented that it was not his Fault, he having come in time enough to
Colonel Hill, not doubting but he could have administered the Oaths to him, and
that upon his refusal he had made such have to Inverary, that he might have
come in time enough, had not the extremity of the Weather hindered him; and
even as it was, he was but one day after the Time appointed; and that would be
very unbecoming the Government to take Advantage of a Man's coming late by one
Day, especially when he had done his utmost to have come in time. Upon this,
and his threatening to protest against the Sheriff for the Severity of this
Usage, he administered to him and his Attendants the Oaths, Mac-jan depending
upon the Indemnity granted to those who should take them; and having so done,
he went home, and lived quietly and peaceably under the Government, till the
day of his Death.

In January last, a Party of the Earl of Argile's Regiment came to that
Country, the Design of their coming was then suspected to be to take course
with those who should stand out, and not submit, and take the Oaths. The
Garrison of Inverlochy being thronged, and Glenco being Commodious for
Quartering, as being near that Garrison, those Soldiers were sent thither to
Quarter; they pretended they came to exact Arrears of Cess and Hearth-Money, (a
Tax never known in Scotland, until laid on by the Parliament, 1690, after the
Parliament of England had eased themselves of it;) e er they entered Glenco,
that Lord, or his Sons, came out to meet them, and asked them if they came as
Friends, or as Enemies? The Officers answered, as Friends; and gave their
Paroll of Honor, that they would do neither him nor his Concerns any harm;
upon which he welcomed them, promising them the best Entertainment the Place
could afford. This he really performed, as all the Soldiers confess. He and
they lived together in mutual Kindness and Friendship fifteen days, or
thereabouts; so far was he from fearing any Hurt from them. And the very last
Day of his Life he spent in keeping Company with the Commander of that Party,
Capt. Campbell of Glenlyon, playing at Cards with him till 6 or 7 at Night, and
at their parting mutual Protestations of Kindness were renewed. Some time that
very day, but whether before or after their parting, I know not, Capt. Campbell
had these Orders sent him from Major Duncanson, a Copy whereof I here send you.


Ballacholis, Feb. 12. 1692. SIR,
YOU are hereby ordered to fall upon the Rebels the Mac-Donalds of Glenco, and
put all to the Sword under 70. You are to have especial Care, that the Old Fox
and his Sons do upon no account escape your Hands; You are to secure all the
Avenues, that no Man escape: This you are to put in Execution at five a Clock
in the Morning precisely, and by that time, or very shortly after it, I Will
strive to be at you with a stronger Party. If I do not come to you at five, you
are not to tarry for me, but to fall on. This is by the King's SPECIAL COMMAND,
for the Good and Safety of the Country, that these Miscreants may be cut off,
Root and Branch. See that this be put in Execution without Feud or Favor, else
you may expect to be Treated as not true to the King or Government, nor a Man
fit to carry Commission in the King's Service. Expecting you will not fail in
the fulfilling hereof, as you love your self. I subscribe these with my Hand,

Robert Duncanson.
For Their Majesty's Service, to Capt. Robert Campbell of Glenlyon.




Duncanson had received Orders from Lieutenant Colonel Hamilton, which were as
follows.

Ballacholis, Feb. 12. 1692. SIR,
PER Second to the Commander in Chief, and my Collonel's Orders to me, for
putting in Execution the Service commanded against the Rebels in Glenco,
wherein you, with the Party of the Earl of Argyle's Regiment under your Command
are to be concerned: You are therefore forthwith to order your Affairs so, as
that the several Posts already assigned you, be by you and your several
Detachments fallen in Action with, precisely by five a Clock to morrow Morning,
being Saturday; at which time I will endeavor the same with those appointed
from this Regiment for the other Places. It will be most necessary you secure
those Avenues on the South side, that the Old Fox, nor none of his Cubs get
away. The Orders are that none be spared, from 70, of the Sword, nor the
Government troubled with Prisoners. This is all, until I see you. From

Your humble Servant. James Hamilton.
Please to order a Guard to secure the Ferry, and the Boats there; and the
Boats must be all on this side the Ferry, after your Men are over.




For their Majesty's Service, for Major Robert Duncanson, of the Earl of
Arg^le's Regiment.

THE Soldiers being disposed five or three in a House, according to the Number
of the Family they were to Assassinate, had their Orders given them secretly.
They had been all received as Friends by those poor People, who intending no
Evil themselves, little suspected that their Guests were designed to be their
Murderers. At 5 a Clock in the Morning they began their bloody Work, Surprised
and Butchered 38 Persons, who had kindly received them under their Roofs.
Mac-jan himself was Murdered, and is much bemo^n'd; He was a stately
well-favour'd Man, and of good Courage and Sense: As also the Lord
Archintrikin, a Gentleman of more than ordinary Judgment and Understanding, who
had submitted to the Government, and had Coll. Hill's Protection in his Pocket,
which he had got three Months before. I cannot without Horror represent how
that a Boy about Eight Years of Age was murdered; he seeing what was done to
others in the House with him, in a terrible Fright run out of the House, and
espying Capt. Campbell, grasped him about the Legs, crying for Mercy, and
offering to be his Servant all his Life. I am informed Capt. Campbell inclined
to spare him; but one Drummond, an Officer, barbarously run his Dagger through
him, whereof he died immediately. The rehearsal of several Particulars and
Circumstances of this Tragical Story, makes it appear most doleful; as that
Mac-jan was killed as he was drawing on his Breeches, standing before his Bed,
and giving Orders to his Servants for the good Entertainment of those who
murdered him; While he was speaking the Words, he was shot through the Head,
and fell dead in his Ladies Arms, who through the Grief of this and other bad
Usages she met with, died the next day. It is not to be omitted, that most of
those poor People were killed when they were asleep, and none was allowed to
pray to God for Mercy. Providence ordered it so, that that Night was most
boisterous; so as a Party of 400 Men, who should have come to the other End of
the Glen, and begun the like Work there at the same Hour, (intending that the
poor Inhabitants should be enclosed, and none of them escape) could not march
at length, until it was 9 a Clock, and this afforded to many an Opportunity of
escaping, and none were killed but those in whose Houses Campbell and
Glenlyon's Men were Quartered, otherwise all the Male under 70 Years of Age, to
the Number of 200, had been cut off, for that was the Order; and it might have
been easily executed, especially considering that the Inhabitants had no Arms
at that time; for upon the first hearing that the Soldiers were coming to the
Glen, they had conveyed them all out of the way; For though they relied on the
promises which were made them for their Safety; yet they thought it not
imp^obable that they might be disarmed. I know not whether to impute it to
difficulty of distinguishing the Difference of a few Years, or to the Fury of
the Soldiers, who being once glutted with Blood, stand at nothing, that even
some above Seventy Years of Age were destroyed. They set all the Houses on
Fire, drove off all the Cattle to the Garrison of Inverlochy, viz. 900 Cows, 200
Horses, and a great many Sheep and Goats, and there they were divided amongst
the Officers And how dismal may you imagine the Case of the poor Women and
Children was then! It was lamentable, past expression; their Husbands and
Fathers, and near Relations were forced to flee for their Live^; they
themselves almost stripped, and nothing left them, and their Houses being burnt,
and not one House nearer than six Miles; and to get thither they were to pass
over Mountains, and Wreaths of Snow, in a vehement Storm, wherein the greatest
part of them perished through Hunger and Cold. It fills me with horror to think
of poor stripped Children and Women, some with Child, and some giving Suck,
wrestling against a Storm in Mountains, and heaps of Snow, and at length to be
overcome, and give over, and fall down, and die miserably.

You see in Hamilton's Order to Duncanson, there is a special Caution, That the
Old Fox nor none of his Cubs should escape; and in Duncanson's Order to Capt.
Campbell of Glenlyon, That the old Fox nor none of his Sons escape; but
notwithstanding all this wicked Caution, it pleased God that the two young
Gentlemen, Mac-jan's Sons escaped. For it happened that the younger of these
Gentlemen trusted little to the fair Promises of Campbell, and had a more
watchful Eye over him than his Father or Brother, who suffered themselves by
his reiterated Oaths to be deluded into a belief of his Integrity: He having a
strong Impression on his Spirit, that some mischievous Design was hidden under
Campbell's specious Pretenses, it made him, after the rest were in Bed, remain
in a retired Corner, where he had an advantageous Prospect into their Guard.
About midnight perceiving several Soldiers to enter it, this increased his
Jealousy; so he went and communicated his Fears to his Brother, who could not
for a long time be persuaded there was any bad Design against them, and
Asserted, That what he had seen, was not a doubling their Guards in order to
any ill design, but that being in a strange place, and at a distance from the
Garrison, they were to send our Sentinels far from the Guard, and because of the
Extremity of the Weather relieved them often, and that the Men he saw could be
no more but these. Yet he presisting to say, That they were not so secure, but
that it was fit to acquaint their Father with what he had seen, he prevailed
with his Brother to rise, and go with him to his Father, who lay in a Room
contiguous to that they were in. Though what the younger Son alleged made no
great Impression on his Father, yet he allowed his Sons to try what they could
discover. They well knowing all Skulking places there, went and hid themselves
near to a Centinel's Post, where instead of one they discovered eight or ten
Men; this made them more inquisitive, so they crept as near as they could
without being discovered, so near that they could hear one say to his Fellows,
That he liked not this Work, and that had he known of it he would have been
very unwilling to have come there; but that none, except their Commanders, knew
of it till within a quarter of an hour. The Soldier added, That he was willing
to fight against the Men of the Glen, but it was base to murder them. But to
all this was answered, All the blame be on such as gave the Orders; we are
free, being bound to obey our Officers. Upon hearing of these words, the young
Gentlemen retired as quickly and quietly as they could toward the House, to
inform their Father of what they had heard; but as they came nigh to it they
perceived it surrounded, and heard Guns discharged, and the People shrieking;
whereupon, being unarmed, and totally unable to rescue their Father, they
preserved their own Lives in hopes yet to serve their King and Country, and see
Justice done upon those Hell Hounds, treacherous Murderers, the Shame of their
Country, and Disgrace of Mankind.

I must not forget to tell you, That there were two of these Officers who had
given their Paroll of Honor to Mac-jan, who refused to be concerned in that
Brutal Tragedy, for which they were sent Prisoners to Glasco, where if they
remain not still, I am sure they were some Weeks ago.

Thus, Sir, in obedience to your Commands, I have sent you such Account as I
could get of that monstrous and most inhuman Massacre of the Lord of Glenco,
and others of his Clan. You desire some Proofs of the truth of the Story; for
you say there are many in England who cannot believe such a thing could be
done, and public Justice not executed upon the Ruffians: For they take it for
granted, that no such Order could be given by the Government; and you say they
will never believe it without a downright Demonstration. Sir, As to the
Government, I will not meddle with it; or whether these Officers who murdered
Glenco, had such Orders as they pretended from the Government; the Government
knows that best, and how to vindicate their own Honor, and punish the
Murderers who pretended their Authority, and still stand upon it. But as to
the Matter of Fact of the Murder of Glenco, you may depend upon it, as certain
and undeniable: It would be thought as strange a thing in Scotland for any Man
to doubt of it, as of the death of my Lord Dundee, or with you that the Duke of
Monmouth lost his Head. But to put you out of all doubt, you will ever long
have my Lord Argyle's Regiment with you in London, and there you may speak with
Glenlyon himself, with Drummond and the rest of the Actors in that dismal
Tragedy; and on my Life, there is never a one of them will deny it to you; for
they know that it is notoriously known all over Scotland, and it is an
Admiration to us that there should be any one in England who makes the least
doubt of it. Nay, Glenlyon is so far from denying it, that he brags of it, and
justifies the Action publicly: He said in the Royal Coffee-House in Edinburgh,
that he would do it again; nay, That he would stab any Man in Scotland or in
England, without asking the Cause, if the King gave him Orders, and that it was
every good Subject's duty so to do; and I am credibly informed, that Glenlyon
and the rest of them have addressed themselves to the Council for a Reward for
their good Service, in destroying Glenco, pursuant to their Orders.

There is enough of this mournful Subject: If what I have said satisfy you not,
you may have what farther Proof, and in what manner you please to ask it.

Sir, Your humble Servant, etc.


N. B. That the Gentleman to whom this Letter was sent, did on Thursday, June
30. 1692. when the Lord Argyle 's Regiment was quartered as Brentford, go
thither, and had this Story of the Massacre of Glenco from the very Men who
were the Actors in it: Glenlyon and Drummond were both there. The Highlander
who told him the Story, expressing Guilt which was visible in Glenlyon, said,
Glenco hangs about Glenlyon Night and Day, and you may see him in his Face. I
am told likewise that Sir John Lowther refused to accept of the Place of Lord
Advocate of Scotland, unless he might have liberty to prosecute Glenlyon, and
the rest of the Murderers of Glenco, which not being granted, James Stuart (
who was ferfeited for Treason by K. C. 2. and since Knighted by K. W.) has now
the Place.

Gallienus Redivivus: OR, Murder Will Out, etc.
THE foregoing Account of the Barbarous Massacre of Glenco, was Printed in the
year 1692. in the Answer to Dr. King's Book of the State of the Protestants in
Ireland: And all the Reception it met with among many here in England, was,
That it was a Jacobite Story, on purpose to Reflect upon the Government, and
that there was no such thing: But this is now Confuted by the Proceedings of
the Parliament in Scotland, this Summer Session, 1695. Wherein they have Voted
the Killing of the Glenco-men to be a Murthrr; and yet have Acquitted Sir
Thomas Levingston, and Colonel Hill, who gave the Orders for Killing of them.
Why? Because their Orders were but pursuant to the Instructions they had from
Court. Where will this Lodge the Murder? The Design, it is well enough known,
is to put it upon Sir John Dalrymple, commonly called Master of Stair, one of
the Secretaries for Scotland, because he is not so Fiery a Presbyterian as the
other Secretary, James Johnston, who has it by Inheritance to love Crown and
Mitre alike; and to have a just Reward for it. But Dalrymple is only a
Libertine, or Latitudinarian, One of the Modern No-Religion, who are
indifferent to All, so they be troubled with none. Therefore he cares not
whether Episcopacy or Presbytery, or what else is set up, provided the People
be easy with it.

NOW it being known to all the World, That the Pretense of the Inclinations of
the People in Scotland, which was made the Groundwork for abolishing
Episcopacy, and setting up Presbytery there, was a mere Sham, contrived by this
Johnston, and the BIGOT Presbyterian Party in Scotland; who were all put in
Power, in the beginning of this Revolution; and set on the Barbarous Rabbling
of the Episcopal Clergy in the West of Scotland, that they might Cry out, The
Inclinations of the People were against Episcopacy: And having, by these and
other Arts (which are fully related in Print) Packed, and then surpised the
first Convention, or meeting of Estates, to Abolish Episcopacy: They dare not
have a New Parliament See Quercla Temporum. p. 8 and 9.
(as in England) but keep on the same Convention (only Changing the Name into
that of a Parliament) to this day: Because no Free Parliament can be had in
Scotland, which would not the first day, spue out Presbytery, and Re-Establish
their much more beloved Episcopacy. And the People showing great Un-easiness
under their present Establishment (which has been tricked and forced upon
them.) All the Craft and Violence of the Regnant Presbytery, assisted by Acts
of Parliament, and all the Countenance of the Government, having not yet been
able to Oust the Episcopal Clergy in the North, and other parts of Scotland, or
prevail with the People to admit of, or almost give Civil Treatment to the
Presbyterian Ministers sent to them, though Established by Law. The Presbyterian
Interest standing there upon so slender a bottom, their Juncto think it not
safe to have a Man of Dalrymple's Latitude in Religion, in so eminent a Post,
and near their King; lest he should follow the Inclinations of the People, in
GOOD EARNEST, and Call a New Parliament there, which would ruin all their
Measures: Therefore ways and means must be used to Remove him; and leave
Johnston and the Presbyterian Faction in the sole Possession of the Court. At
length, this of Glenco was pitched upon; which was so Odious, They knew their
King durst not own it: And therefore they would throw it upon Dalrymple, who
was Secretary, and attended when the Instructions were sent for that Bloody
Murder. And thereby too, They would seem to take off the Odium from their
King; This was their pretense; and they had proof enough against Dalrymple: But
how that Cleared his Master will be seen.

THEY produced Nine Letters of Dalrymple's (of which I have Copies) concerning
the Massacre of Glenco. And I shall have occasion to mention them hereafter; I
will now set down their several Dates, and Directions; and quote them to save
Repetition, only by their Number, Letter i. ii. iii. etc. The two first are
directed to Lieutenant Colonel Hamilton, and bear Date, on the 1st. and the
other the 3d. December. 1691. the 4 next are to Sir Thomas Levingston, of these
several Dates, 7, 9, 11 and 16 of January 1691/2;. Then follow two more to
Colonel Hill, of the 16th and 30th of the same Month; And lastly one of the
30th Ditto, to Sir Thomas Levingston. It seems very strange that K. W. would
suffer these Letters to be exposed to the Parliament in Scotland, being most of
them wrote by his Order, enlarging upon, and enforcing the Execution of
Instructions, sent with them for the Massacre of Glenco, etc. and the Regard
which his Dear Presbyterians, and his Favorite Johnston, in particular, had to
his Honor, was very slender, when, to compass their Ends, they load him so
foully, that they might load Dalrymple too. Johnston says, No, But that he
foreseeing (because some say of his own Contriving) that the Parliament (who
are most of them his Creatures, to their Honor be it spoken) would fall upon
the business of Glenco; and that they must be, at least seemingly Gratified in
it, otherwise that it might obstruct the Money-Bills, did therefore, advise his
Master to send down a Commission to men of his own choosing, to enquire into
the Affair of Glenco; but withal, to give secret Instructions to his
Commissioner, to keep up the said Commission, unless the Parliament should
enter upon that business. And if they did, then to produce the said Commission,
to show his Majesty's Innocence, by his Care to have it Examined; and withal,
it would take the Examination of it out of the hands of Parliament Committees,
who might not manage so dexterously, as those of his own naming.

THINGS being thus stated, and the necessary Orders given it is vilely
suspected, that Johnston procured the Matter to be (...) in Parliament,
whereby, at once, to get rid of his Rival Secretary, and Root up the interest
of any, who had but an indifferency toward Episcopacy at Court; though to the
utter Shipwreck of his Master's Honor, to be Recorded for all Posterities (as
if it were inseparable from some Constitutions to betray those they serve, even
though they wish them well, and must stand and fall with them.) For considering
the inflence Johnston had in that Parliament, and that they have never yet
opposed his Will in any thing; and that he has been able to suppress the least
Murmur, or Hint, that looked, toward Glenco, when the Fact was New Committed;
and the Horror of it fresh and Bleeding; and now for three years after. I say,
It is not supposed by men who understand that Parliament, that it could have
been brought upon the Stage, when it was almost dead and forgotten, if the hand
of Joab had not been in it: but let him look to that -- I have only to add, as
a Completion of the foregoing Narative, that I can from unquestionable
Vouchers, give the Reader an Account of the Orders from Court to Sir Thomas
Levingston, and Colonel Hill, which are not in the Letter that goes before;
and when the Reader is told that Hamilton (whose Order to Duncanson is
inserted) had his Order from Levingston, and Colonel Hill; Then he has the
whole thread, viz. W. R's Order to Levinston, and Hill; Levingston and Hill to
Hamilton; Hamilton to Duncanson; and Dunson to Glenlyon, who was the Butcher:

(...) and subscribed by Himself. -- And to show how pleasing a thing Mercy was
to them, and with what reluctance they Prosecuted those who had not taken the
Oaths, he says in the same Letter; Just now Argyle tells me, That Glenco has
not taken the Oaths, at which I Rejoice. It Is a great work of Charity to be
exact in Rooting out that Damnable Sect. And to show how great this Charity
was, and whence it proceeded, The Wise Secretary Blurts out these words; I have
no great kindness for Keppoch, nor Glenco, and it is well these People are in
mercy. Well indeed! They were in merciful hands! Who can say they ought not to
Die, for whom such a Secretary has no CREAT Kindness! But who are they must
die? ALL! ALL! Man, Woman, and Child! Massacre the Men, and Drive the Women and
Children to Perish more cruelly in the Mountains. To which purpose, that
extreme Cold Season was chosen for the Execution. Letter i.
The Winter is the only Season (says the Secretary) in which we are sure the
High-Landers cannot escape us, nor carry their Wives, Bairns, and Cattle to the
Mountains. Letter ii.
It Is the only time that they cannot Escape you; for Human Constitution cannot
endure to be long out of Houses -- This is the proper Season to maul them in
the cold long Nights. This was expressed with the Gusto of a Vulture, in
expectation of a Glorious Massacre! And then how easy it would be! Letter iv.
I expect (says he) you will find little Resistance but from the season. And
then what thorough work they would make! Letter iii.
To destroy entirely the Country of Lochaber, Lochells, Lauds, Keppoch's,
Glengaries, Appin, and Glenco. Here was a plentiful Feast provided! It was a
Ravishing Prospect!

BUT O how these Lions were Enraged when any of their desired Prey was
delivered out of their Jaws. It was in a mournful strain the Secretary tells
the sad News. Letter iv.
We have an Account (says he) that Lochart, and Mac-naghton, Appin and Glenco
took the benefit of the Indemnity at Inverary; and Keppoch, and others at
Inverness: But after this, when Argyle told him that Glenco had not taken the
Oaths; How did he Rejoice! as above Quoted. Letter ix.
I am glad (says he) that Glenco did not come in within the time prescribed.
Letter i
I am content that CLAN except it self. Letter iv.
For my part, I could have wished the Mac-donalds had not divided, (that is,
That they had all excluded themselves from mercy) and I am sorry that Keppoch,
and Mac-jan of Glenco are safe. But it seems they were not safe. Some must be
made a Sacrifice; And Glenco was pitched upon for the Victim. And the
implacable Fury, which was shown against that Clan, expressed the Rage they
felt, that so many had escaped them. And therefore that Clan was to be
destroyed entirely. Letter iii.
I assure you (says the Secretary to his Officers) your Power shall be full
enough, and I hope the Soldiers will not trouble the Government with Prisoners.
Letter ^ii.
For a just Example of Vengeance, I entreat that the Thieving Tribe in Glenco
may may be Rooted out in earnest. Letter vii.
I shall entreat you that for a just Vengeance, and public Example, the
Thieving Tribe of Glenco may be Rooted out to purpose. The Earl of Argyle and
Broadalban have promised they shall have no Retreat in their Bounds; the Passes
to Rannach would be secured, and the Hazard certified to the Lord of -- to
Retreat: Then in that Case Argyle's Detachment, with a Party that may be Posted
in Island Stalker, must cut them off. Letter viii.
Pray when any thing concerning Glenco is resolved, let it be secret and
sudden, otherwise the Men will shift you, and better not meddle with them than
not to do it to puropose, to cut off that Nest of Robbers, who are fallen in
the mercy of Law. Letter ix.
I am glad Glenco did not come in within the time Prescribed. I hope what is
done there may be in earnest, since the rest are not in a Condition to draw
together to help. I think to herry their Cattle, or burn their Houses, is but
to render them Desperate Lawless Men, to Rob their Neighbors: But I believe
you will be satisfied it were a great Advantage to the Nation, That that
Thieving Tribe were Rooted out, and Cut off. It must be Quietly done, otherwise
they will make shift for both the Men and their Cattle. Argyle's Detachment
lies in Keppoch well, to assist the Garrison to do all ON A SUDDEN. Was ever so
greedy a Hunt after the Lives of a Company of Secure and Un armed People, who
slept fearless, and suspecting no danger; under the Protection of those who
were thus Contriving to Massacre them, in the most Savage and Treacherous
manner!

The Secretary tells Colonel Hill, that Letter viii.
The Oaths are Indispensable. This was a fearful Method of Imposing the Oaths
upon these High Landers, that none must live who would not take them! But were
All admitted to take them? One would think so; when they were made
Indispensable. Yet notwithstanding, in that same Letter, He gives these
Directions to Coll Hill. Till we see what is done by the CHIEFS, it is not time
to Receive their Tenants, or Admitting them to take the Oaths, or hoping for
Pardon, 'till they give Evidence that they are willing to pay their Rents to
you, and to take Tacks for their former Duties; who will not do so, and were in
the Rebellion, must feel the dismal Consequences of it.

THUS Naboth's Vineyard made him a Blasphemer! If the Tenants would betray the
Rights of their Landlords to Atturn and Pay their Rents to the Secretary, or
his Governor, then, and not otherwise, They should be Admitted to take the
Oaths: And yet they must not live, if they did not take the Oaths; But Glenco
took the Oaths; yet that saved not his Life, nor his Clan.

IT were reasonable here to presume that K. W. did not know that they had taken
the Oaths. First, If it had been so, This manner of Massacre, in Cold Blood had
been a Cruelty without Precedent Secondly, It was taking Advantage of the Time,
with the Greatest Rigor. For the Time limited by the Indemnity expired but the
1st of January 1691/2. And the Instructions for a General Massacre were dated
the 11th of the same Month, at London, which was hardly time enough to know
whether they had taken the Oaths or not. But Thirdly, Here is no room left to
surmise, that K. W. did not know it; because Secretary Dalrymple (in his Letter
to Sir Thomas Levingston, before Quoted, which is dated at London the 9th of
January, 1691/2) tells him Letter iv.
That they had an Account that Glenco had taken the Oaths, at Inverary; which
was the Place where he did take them, as is told in the foregoing Narrative.
And he tells Sir Thomas, in the same Letter; I have been with the King. He says
your Instructions shall be dispatched on Monday. And they were so For that
Monday was the 11th of January, 1691/2. which day the Instructions do bear
Date. And this Letter of the Secretary's was Dated the 9th of January, 1691/2.
which was the Saturday before. And then he tells Sir Thomas, That he had the
Account of Glenco's having taken the Oaths with several others; and that he had
been with the King concerning it, and Instructions should be sent, etc. It Is
true, his Letter of the 11th, which went with the Instructions, says. Letter v.
That Argyle told him Glenco had not taken the Oaths. But this was no more than
Hearsay; and it was not true. For Glenco had taken the Oaths before that time;
according to to the Account which the Secretary owned was sent to him: And
Argyle was an Enemy to Glenco, as appears by what is above quoted out of Letter
7. But this saying of Argyle's to the Secretary in London, could not be of
Argyle's own Knowledge. And one would think that the Secretary of State should
have as good Intelligence as he.

BUT, to make the most of it, this could amount to no more than a Doubt. And to
Suspend his further Resolution, till he might have the Certainty from Scotland.
But they did not stay for this. For the particular Instructions to Massacre
Glencoe, bore Date the 16th of January 1691/2 Betwixt which time and the 11th.
when Argyle told the Secretary, as above, They could not send to Scotland, and
have any Answer back. Now these Instructions of the 16th were no way
Conditional. To cut off Glencoe, if he had not taken the Oaths. But Positive,
and without more ado. When it is certain that K. W. Must, at least, Doubt
whether he had taken the Oaths, or not. But it is apparent that Colonel Hill,
who had Given Glencoe his Protection, and to whom Glencoe came to take the
Oaths, I say it is certain that he, and the other Officers there upon the
Place, knew very well that Glenco had taken the Oaths, and submitted to the
Government. Those Officers whom he received into his House, and quartered their
Soldiers among his Tenants, upon his laying down his Arms; These must know that
he had Submitted. But if notwithstanding they must Obey their Orders (as they
did) if it be not Permitted to Officers, so much as Rescribere, to acquaint the
King with any mistake may be in his Orders; but to Execute them blindfold, and
without Asking Questions, then let me lie out of the Reach of a Soldier.

THE Reader must likewise know, that none of these Foresaid Instructions were
Communicated to the Privy Council of Scotland; to whom by the Constitution of
that Kingdom, and Continual Custom, all the King's Orders are directed. They
knew nothing of this Matter, It was contrived to be Carried in such a Manner,
as not to be prevented. And when Gallienus his Thirst of Blood is once
Satisfied, then let Slaves Grumble, and make Inquiry! We know how to Manage
them. Johnston has undertaken it. Nay he has done it. Done it! More
effectually than ever was heard, or I believe, Imagined, in these Nations,
before this Happy Revolution: For here is a Precedent made, and that by P -- t,
That the King may send his Guards, and Cut any Man's Throat in the Nation in
Cold Blood; Nay, he may Massacre the whole P -- t, as they are there Sitting,
by the Rule that they have given; That is, To acquit Levingston and Hill; and
to justify them for pursuing the King's Orders to Massacre a whole Clan, which
is no more Just, or Law, than to Massacre a P -- t.

LET us Banter the World, or our selves no more with Liberty and Laws! And when
P -- ts can be brought to Approve, and Justify All this -- Well! Johnston! Thou
have Managed Nobly. Thou art fit to Serve a Monarch! But not unless you bring
your Monarch cleverly off in this Business; For what if you can place it upon
Dalrymple; And if Dalrymple should be Hanged for Daring to send such an Order,
though he refused to Counter-sign it, What will become of Him, who both Signed
it, and Counter-Sign'd it, and Commanded it to be Sent?

If the Man such Praises have,
What must He Employs the K --?
WHY! did his Master never Inquire into this Matter before? Never before the
Parliament Clamoured! And what was the Meaning of a Commission to Examine into
what himself had Ordered -- But Mes James! -- And have you even brought your
Master into this Noose! What can you expect from him, but to be Glen-Co'd for
your pains? Qui Glencoat, Glencoabitur -- You have brought all his Sins to
Remembrance. The Dewitting in Holland was almost forgot. -- You have pretty
good Experience of his Temper, or you may have. But if he suffer you to live to
see another Revolution, you may plead Merit: For all his Enemies have not
rendered him so Black; so effectually Proved, and Demonstrated it to the World,
as your Management has done. He is happy in his Ministers! at least very Justly
served by them!

HE wants but a good Historian, that he may not lose his Character to after
Ages. And Secretary, you cannot do better than to recommend your Uncle to that
Office. He Will do it Deliciously; he will either find or make Parallels to him out
of Ancient Histories (for he will find none among the Modern, especially in these
Countries.) And make him (I Will warrant you) Excel them all. And among the rest,
I would recommend one to him, that fits the present Case so exactly, that you
would think one was Copied out of the other, and it is as follows.

Gallienus, ut erat Nequam and Perditus; ita etiam, ubi necessitas coegisset,
velox, furibundus, ferus, vehemens, Crudelis. -- In omnes Mesiacos tam Milites
quam Cives asperime Ceviit: Nec quemquam suae Crudelitatis exortem reliquit:
Usque adeo Asper and Truculentus ut plerasque Civitates vacuas a virili sexu
relinqueret. Extat sane Epistola Galieni quam ad Celerem Verianum Scripsit, qua
ejus Nimietas crudelitatis ostenditur: quam Ego idcirco interposui, ut omnes
intelligerent, hominem Luxuriosum crudelissimum esse, si necessitas Postulet.
GALLIENUS VERIANO. Non mihi satisfacies, si tantum Armatos occideris, quos and
sors Belli interimere potuisset. Perimendus est omnis sexus Virilis, si and
senes atque Impuberes sine Reprehensione nostra occidi possent. Occidendus est
quicunque malevoluit. Occidendus est quicumque male dixit contra me, contra
Valeriani filium, contra tot Principum Patrem and Fratrem. Ingenuus factus est
Imperator. Lacera Occide, concide: Animum meum intelligere potes, mea Mente
irascere qui haec Manu mea scripsi. Trebell. Pollion. Trigint. Tyran. de
Ingenuo.

THIS is the Descrip^ion of Gallienus, a Cruel, and a Bloody Tyrant: And here
is the Copy of some Instructions he sent to Verianus, an Officer of his, about
just such another Massacre as Glenco, which he Wrote, or Signed with his own
Hand: Wherein he Commands him, to put all to the Sword, All that durst Speak or
Think against him, as well Old as Young; He bid him Plunder, Kill, Tear; and
that it would not please him if he Killed only those in Arms against him, but
All of the Masculine Sex.

HERE was a Great deal of Do, and many Words about it! But our Milder Order,
bid only EXTIRPATE, and that not this or that Body, or making Distinctions of
Old or Young, Men or Women -- What need all that Cookery! But only The Whole
TRIBE. That was all! He Scorned to Except the pitiful Women, as Gallienus did.
What need They be Excepted? Why! He Excepted no Body! Short Work's best -- and
Few Words -- And as the Answer to Great Britains Just Complaint, Published by
Authority, 1692. Says, p. 37. in Vindication of W. R. as to this of Glenco. A
milder Order was never given. And he says that his Majesty has Expressed a High
Displeasure at it. It was High indeed: For we never heard of it before. Nor are
we like to hear of it, that I can see: For all the Officers who Commanded, or
who Executed it, are still in their Respective Posts, unless Advanced. Nor have
we heard that so much as an ill Word has been said by Him to any one of them.

BUT this we know, by that Answer to Great Britains Just Complaint, that W. R.
cannot plead Ignorance, that there was a great Clamor about the Massacre of
Glenco, Three Years ago: And that He has taken no Notice of it all this time;
nor Now, tiil it was first Started in Parliament; And that then, what he did,
was, as much as he could, to take it out of the hands of the Parliament, and by
all his Might and Main, to Stifle, or at least to Baffle it. And that it has
been Baffled. And this horrible Addition is thereby made to the Guilt of that
Murder; That whereas none were answerable for it before, except only Gallienus
and his Verianus's, with their Accomplices, it is now become a National Guilt
(so far as the Parliament are the Representatives of the People) by the
Parliament's making GALLIENVS's Instructions sufficient to Justify Verianus in
his Execution of them: Whereby they justify the whole Murder and bring it upon
their own Heads, and upon the Heads of their Children. For if Gallienus had no
Power by Law, to send such Instructions, they could be no Justification to
Verianus: But now That Parliament has Voted that such Instructions are a
Justification of Verianus; and therefore they have yielded that Gallienus has,
by Law, a Power to send such Instructions. And that they ought to be Obeyed.
And then, Lord have mercy upon us!

NOR has our Parliament in England been behind that of Scotland in Sacrificing
our Laws, Lives, and Liberties to an Arbitrary and Despotick Power; and that
not only to Orders Signed by Gallienus himself, but by Verianus, of his own
head. Making us Double Distilled Vassals; Slaves of Slaves!

AND the instance which (among many others) I have to give of this, Exceeds
even that of Glenco, in its having less Pretense, and acted with the greater
face of Authority, and Solemnity. I mean the Prodigious unprecedented Manner of
the Murder of Gaffney in Ireland by the Command of the Lord Coningsby; For
which he was impeached before the House of Commons in England, by Protestants
of Ireland, Gentlemen of Quality and Estates; and of Public and generous
Spirits; whose noble Resentment to see their Laws so vilely trampled under foot
by those whom they had Invited thither to protect them, brought them hither in
Person, to demand Justice from our House of Commons, against Coningsby, who was
one of their Members. And that there could be nothing of Revenge in the Case,
in behalf of the Person who was Murdered, it is notorious; that Gaffney being a
poor Fellow, a Servant to Sweetman (hereafter mentioned) and wholly unknown, I
believe, to every one of the Gentlemen who prosecuted Coningsby; Besides, He
was a Roman Catholic, and one of the Native Irish, upon both of which Accounts
he could have the less share of Interest with the British, and Irish
Protestants, who were then not wholly come out of a most bloody War against
them; for Limerick as yet held out. And therefore these worthy Patriots, who
came over from Ireland hither to prosecute Coningsby, could have no other
Incitement, but Love of their Country, and the Preservation of the Laws: But
the Return they had, after a long and Expensive Attendance as it was,
Mortifying to themselves, and sadly Instructive to others will remain an
Instance of Arbitrary Government not to be equaled in former Ages, nor easily
credible to the future. The Story, one would think should not need being told
in England, because it was brought upon the Stage, before the House of Commons,
and is in their Printed Votes.

YET, all that, is not, it seems, sufficient to Publish it, at this time; not
one in twenty of some sort of People that I meet with, having ever heard of it,
or have forgot it: And (as I have told of the Story of Glenco) they call it a
Jacobite Invention; and will hear no more of it.

I will therefore present the Reader with the very Words of the Article
concerning Gaffney, which (with several others of other Instances of High
Arbitrary Government) was exhibited by the Earl of Ballimont, and other
Protestants of Ireland, against the Lords Justices of Ireland ( viz. The said
Lord Coningsby, and Sir Charles Porter, both Members of the House of Commons in
England) before the House of Commons in the Winter Session 1693. The Article
concerning Gaffney is the 4th, and follows in these Words.

That the Lords Jussices did, in Council, by word of mouth, Order one Gaffney
to be Hanged, without Trial, the Courts of Justice being then open, and who was
at that time an Evidence against one Sweetman for the murder of Colonel
Foulk's soldiers: But the said Sweetman ( giving all his real Estate to the
value of about 200 l. per Annum, to Mr. Culliford, besides the sum of about 500
l. to Mr. Fielding, the said Lords Justices Secretary, for being his Bayl) was
never prosecuted for the said murthe^; and the said Gaffney was immediately
Executed, according to the said verbal Order.

NOW the Reader must know that every Tittle of the said Charge was proved
fully, and past all Contradiction. Captain Fitzgerald, who is a Member of the
Privy Council in Ireland, Declared that he was then sitting at the Board; and
that the Council were not advised with at all in it. That Sweetman's Estate,
valued at 3000 l. was offered to him [Captain Fitz Gerald] on Condition that he
would make interest to save Sweetmas's Life. That Lord Coningsby, who gave the
Orders for Executing of Gaffney, was in so great have to have him dispatched
out of the way (for he was an Evidence against Sweetman) That he ordered a
Provo, instead of any Legal Officer, to be Called into the Council Chamger
where Gaffney was Examined; And after having asked Gaffney three or four
Questions, and that he positively denied his having any Accession to the said
Murder; Commanded the Provo to take him out and hang him up IMMEDIATELY: And
the Provo making Answer, That it would take some time to make a Gallows;
Coningsby answered sharply, Hang him upon the Carriage of a Gun; which was done
IMMEDIATELY.

OF all this Coningsby could not deny One Word before the House of Commons: And
all he said in his own Vindication was, That if he had not hanged Gaffney so,
he could not have hanged him at all. Which was true: For there was no Evidence
against him, and therefore they would give him no Trial. But why must Gaffney
then be Hanged? Because forsooth! Some Officers in the Army would have some
body Hanged for the Murder of Foulk's Soldiers: And Sweetman (in whose
Backside the Soldiers were buried, and their Coats found in his House) had
given 500 l. to the Lords Justices Secretary, and his Estate to another man in
Power; but Gaffney was a Poor Rogue, and had nothing to give, and therefore it
was fit he should be hanged. And Hanged as he was, or not at all. As CONINGSBY
honestly, but Impudently Confessed.

BUT now comes the Astonishing Wonder. After all these things so plainly Proved
and Confessed, that the House of Commons could not frame any manner of excuse
for Coningsby; but were forced to Vote the Execution of Gaffney without Trial,
to be Arbitrary and Illegal; Yet that considering the state of Affairs, They
did not think fit to ground an Impeachment against the Lord Coningsby for the
same. This is in the Printed Votes of the 29th of January, 1693. And it is an
Original. What! Vote a Man guilty, and yet that he shall not be prosecuted! Why
pray? Because of the state of Affairs. This is very general: And such a
pretense will never be wanting. But what was this State of Affairs, at that
time? It was in the Winter 1690, When all Ireland, except only Limerick, was in
the Obedience of K. W. when the Courts of Justice were open (as in the bovesaid
Article against Coningsby is expressed) and the Lords Justices and Council
sitting in Peace and Grandeur in Dublin. And what was it then could or ought to
have hindered giving that Poor Fellow a fair Trial? Other Criminals were then
Tried, in the usual form, and why not Gaffney? How came the State of Affairs to
reach him, more than any other? Unless you will say, that it did reach to many
others: For it is expess'd in the Printed Address of the Lords, Presented to K.
W. 9 March 1692. That not only Gaffney, but several others were Executed,
without any Trial whatsoever; And that there were Exorbitant Abuses, great
Mismanagement, and many Arbitrary and Illegal Proceedings there, within these
four Years last past, as well since the determination of the War as before,
which includes the whole Government since the Revolution, as well dureing the
Administration of Gallienus in Person, while he was there, as of his several
Verianus's in his Absence. One of whom did, in Almanzor strain, set up the High
Prerogative, and Hector their Parliament in a manner unknown to former Ages:
And without Precedent from any Lawful King that ever sat upon the English
Throne in that Kingdom. Which they have given us an Account of in Print; to try
whether there was so much of the Spirit of English Liberty left in an English
Parliament as to Vindicate their own Privileges, in that Breach which was made
upon them, through the sides of the Parliament in Ireland, a Province of their
own, and may be reckoned a branch of the English Empire. But all in Vain! They
had drunk so deep in the Cup of Slavery at Home, that they could take no notice
of it Abroad. They have stopped their Ears close against all Charmers upon that
Subject, Charm they never so wisely. They Call their Slavery, Liberty! And
where then is the Remedy!

Thus poor Ireland was left without all hopes of Redress, to feed upon the
Melancholy Reflection; that their Liberties have been much more notoriously
violated by their Deliverers, than by all the instances which were so much as
alleged against their Lawful King; And thence to learn for the future, how
much Rebellion is a worse Remedy, than the Disease of Tyranny (even when it is
not made a pretense) and that it always Ends in a Heavier Tyranny: Because
there must go more Force to keep under New Acquisitions, than Old Hereditary
Rights. And if all the Sacred Bonds of Natural Allegiance, Fortified with the
Religious Sanction of Oaths, and Taught and Inculcated upon Us, from our
Infancy, as a Condition indispensable to our Salvation; if all this, and all
the Honor and Reputation which the World has justly affixed to Loyalty, with
the Horror, and eternal Stain, upon the Name and Memory of Traitors and Rebels,
and all the Terrors of the Laws against Treason. If none (I say) Nor all of
these Considerations, have weight enough to keep us in our Obedience to those
whom God, and the Constitution of our Country, have placed over Us, by a Divine
as well as a Legal Right: How should an Usurper secure our Duty, who has none
of these Ties, on his side; but All, and every One of them against Him? How
should, How can He do it, but by Corrupting our Representatives in Parliament,
so as to pass all his Arbitrary Designs upon Us, in their Names; and when that
fails him, by open Force? How otherwise as any one of them ever yet secured
himself? Have we forgot our late Deliverers in Forty One? Will no Experience
serve to make us Wise! No. Not when the time of our Destruction is come! We
shall then, as the Jews did before their Final Destruction by the Romans, we do
now as they did then, Obstinately Refuse all Offers of Mercy, for our
Rebellion? and continue to provoke a Power, which we know too strong for Us;
and which we Confess, must, without a Miracle, be our Ruin: Yet we run on,
trusting only to our Despair! And we have not only Delivered up our Money and
our Lives, without Account; but what used to be Dearer to English Men, The
Honor of England! Of which take this short Instance instead of many more.

THE House of Lords made (and printed) an Address, dated the 18th of February
1692. Wherein They mind their King of the Capitulation made in the Year 1678,
by which it was agreed, That the English Commander and Officer, in every Degree
is to Command any other Confederate Officer of the same Rank (except those of
Crowned Heads) without any regard to the Date of their respective Commissions.
And that the contrary Practice in this last War was, to the Diminution of the
Honor that belongs to the Crown of England, and to the general
Dissatisfaction of his Majesty's Subjects. And desire, That the Chief Commander
of the English Forces under his Majesty, should be a Subject born in his
Majesty's Dominions: That no Foreigner should be of the Board of Ordnance, or
Keeper of the Stores in the Tower of London: That, for the Encouragement, of
the English, there should not be so many strangers Employed in the Office of
the Ordnance. That there has been many Abuses under Pretense of Pressing Men
for the Fleet; And therefore They humbly Advice, That the Offenders should be
immediately Cashiered, and Prosecuted with the utmost Rigor of the Law.

HIS Gracious Answer was, That He would consider of it. And we may suppose,
That he is considering of it still: For he has not performed one word of it;
But on the Contrary, to show the regard he has for all the Peers of England;
and for the Honor of England; He has acted quite contrary to this Address,
more since, than before: For not only Abroad, in Flanders, and in Savoy, are
the English every where under Foreign Commanders in Chief: But, to use them as
they deserve, He has now this last time, made a Foreigner [Scomberge] Commander
in Chief of all the Forces left in England Let the Lords Address again! They
would if they were English Men! Or if he were an Hereditary King! But some will
bear more Insults from a Mistress than a Wife. And a King of our own making,
Costs us more than Twenty of God's sending, We think our selves bound to
Acquiesce in our own Act and Deed!

If any of the Cursed and Rebel Parliaments could have found a Gaffney or
Glenco against King Charles the 1st, or any of his Sons, what a Noise would
they have made! How had all the World been filled with Apologies and
Remonstrances! What a Dismal Idea would have been Raised of Tyranny and
Arbitrary Government! In the former Reigns, how was the Nation Alarmed with
what was Whispered; and not Whispered, or ever so much as thought of, in the
King's Bedchamber; in his Closet! Of Secret Leagues, and Private
Assassinations of Men that Murdered themselves; where there was not the least
Umbrage or Color of Pretense! How Industrious was it spread and imbibed by the
Mob of this Nation, That King Charles the 2d. and the Earl of Essex were both,
Murdered by the Procurement of one they had a mind to Blacken! And Forty
Protestant Witnesses of the Greatest Quality and Reputation, were not
sufficient to make them believe a P. of Wales; Though not one Man, or Woman in
the Nation ever Deposed any thing to the Contrary: Nor was there any other
Argument against it, besides a few Drunken Songs. But that was enough, because
it was against a Lawful King! And on the other hand, though they see their Fellow
Subjects Gaffney'd and Glenco'd before their Faces; Though it be Printed in the
Gazetts, and Public Votes of the House of Commons, and that the House of Lords
Print their Addresses, contrary to their usual Custom, on purpose to let the
Nation see -- Yet they will not see. No. All this is not NOW sufficient to
imprint it one half hour in their Memories, after Reading of the Public
Papers; They neglect it, They forget it, as not concerning them! Non
Persuadebis, etiamsi Persuaseris, is their Resolution. And Quos Perdere vult
Jupiter, Dementat, I wish may not be their Fate.

BUT to bring our Story to an End: There is One Noble Stroke of of Secretary
Johnston's behind, Whereby he thinks he has wiped his Master clean, from all
Imputation of the Massacre of Glenco; And that is, He has persuaded Lieutenant
Colonel Hamilton (whose Order to Duncanson is in the foresaid Natrative) to
Abscond for some time; and then to slip over to K. W. in Flanders; which he has
done. This shows as if he were more Guilty than the rest. He is made the
Scape-goal, and all this Sin laid upon his Head. But if Hill gave his Orders to
his Lieutenant Colonel Hamilton (which he Avers in his Order to Duncanson) Why
was it more Criminal in Hamilton to hand down his Collonel's Orders to the next
Subaltern?

AND why must Glen-Lyon, and the others who actually Committed that Horrid
Massacre, and are now in their Respective Commands in Flanders, Why should
these be Excused?

O! No! They are not excused, for as in the Gazette 18th July 1695. The
Parliament in Scotland has made a fierce Vote against them, viz. That his
Majesty be Addressed to send them home to be prosecuted for the same, Or Not?
As his Majesty shall think fit. -- OR NOT! This is as Civil as Heart could
wish! And whether this Address was sent, or Not; whether it was trusted to
Secretary Johnston to send it, or Not, is all One: For instead of sending them
Home to be Tried, Hamilton is sent to them; And in Justice we are to suppose
that Due Care will be taken, That in this Campaign, They shall either be
Killed, Taken, or Desert. And then if we had them again, How we would Hang the
Rogues.

BUT our English Parliament was much more Complaysant to their Verianus's; they
did not put them to the trouble so much as of a Sham Absconding for a little
time; No, nor of suffering the least Disgrace for their more Solemn and
Judicial Murder: But Commanded them to take their Places again in their
Senate House; Thus doing them Honor, for their Noble Breach of our Laws; And
signifying to the Nation what Qualifications are Expected in those whom they
Choose to Represent them; and in whose hands they have Deposited the Absolute
and Vn-Accountable Disposal of their Estates, Lives, and Liberties! At least,
it is so understood. And the Silence of the People, in this Case, is taken for
Consent.

FINIS.

