THE ALLIANCE OF DIVINE OFFICES Exhibiting all the LITURGIES OF THE Church of
England Since the REFORMATION, AS ALSO The late Scotch SERVICE BOOK, with all
their respective variations And upon them all ANNOTATIONS, Vindicating the Book
of COMMON PRAYER from the main objections of its Adversaries Explicating many
parcels thereof hitherto not clearly understood, showing the conformity it
bears with the Primitive practice and giving a fair prospect into the usages
of the Ancient Church.

To these is added at the end, The ORDER of the COMMUNION set forth 2. Edward 6.

By HAMON L'ESTRANGE Esquire

Quod apud multos unum invenitur, non est erratum, sed traditum. Tertullian.
LONDON, Printed for Henry Broom at the sign of the Gun, in Ivie-Lane 1659.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Christopher Lord Hatton Controller of of the
Household to the late KING CHARLES, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council.
My Lord,
IT is not long since you gave an honorable reception, to the History of St.
Paul's Cathedral. Behold here the History (for so it is in truth) of that
Cathedrals Liturgy humbly presents it self to you. That address, indeed,
created This. For Gods House, and his worship being twinns of so indissoluble
relation, why should their Histories be separated in their Dedication; and
where could they find a fitter Patron then your self, who inherit, as an
Heir-loom of your noble family for many descents, so high a value for any thing
whose concernment is Religion. Such is the subject of both these Histories, if
I speak not improperly to call them two, which are of so similary argument,
that this may rather be said, The Second part of that.

It Is true, this work had not, (as that of my learned Friend) the honor to
result Originally from your Honors immediate command; yet this I can say, that
long before I had finished it I understood you had many years since recommended
the same design to the endeavor of a learned pen; but understanding withal
that, for reasons unknown to me, the work was laid aside, I proceeded with no
small alacrity, being glad I had made choice of an undertaking which your
Lordship honored with such approbation. More glad shall I be, if in the
performance thereof I have administered any thing available to the Public good,
or which may be a valuable consideration for you to own me, as you do, in the
quality of

My Lord Your honors most humbly devoted servant Hamon L'estrange.

An Address Proemial.
THE fatal pique between parties oppositly persuaded, concerning the Liturgy
and Ceremonies of our Church, drawing nigh to its (...) and highest pitch,
about twenty years since, the noise of those clashings roused me up seriously
to consider, that this was not a controversy, like many others, about trifling
niceties, admiting a safe neutrality: but a controversy about a Practical
fundamental, wherein to err was to hazard the main. For if as the
(Non-conformists urged) the Liturgy and Ceremonies of our Church were
absolutely and simply unlawful; First, as being of man's device, and Secondly,
because extracted out of the Masse-Book, Breviary, and other Rituals of the
Church of Rome; then did the ordinances of our Church betray me all the while
to an abominable compliance, no longer to be endured. But if, on the contrary,
her religious Rites and appointments had no such impious quality, if they were
elemented of materials, not only lawful, but highly decent: then to withdraw
my obedience to her sanctions would prove as dangerous on the otherside. Being
then necessitated to an Election of one of these two (for they admit no medium)
Conformity, or Separation, resolved I was to do it as it should be, that, is by
examining what was said pro and con, for and against it, on both sides, and
then to follow the dictates of an impartial judgment. That I migh stand the
more erect, and behold both Opponents with equal angles, resolved I was also to
amove some prejudice I had conceived against some persons disaffected to our
Ceremonies, in regard by former Subscriptions they had allowed what was since
of so hard concoction to them; this I considered was argumentative only ad
homines, not ad rem; for if any did comply in order to their temporal interest,
their failings must not be urged to the disadvantage of the cause. Personal
reflections thereforeset aside, I fixed my mind only upon a disquisition of
the truth. All in effect that at that time, had been, or since has been, said
on the complainants behalf, was drawn up into one body by Mr. Cartwright, the
Magazin that stores all that party with a Panoply, comple at armor for these
Polemicks: and all that Mr. Cartwright did urge was faithfully summed up by Dr.
Whitgift and Mr. Hooker, who replied upon him. So that my study was reduced to
a narrow sca^tling, viz. a perusal only of those learned Authors: this I did,
from point to point, with all possible diligence, and that more then once;
having seriously weighed the arguments on both sides, I sincerely profess, my
judgment did clearly aquiesce in this, That our Liturgy and Ceremonies were no
way guilty of that foul charge, of unlawful: and if so, I had enough whereon to
establish my obedience.

Necessity and consideration of my eternal state having brought me thus far,
curiosity had a further journey: for whereas one part cried down our Service
and Ceremonies as a Popish, and the other cried them up as a Primitive model,
and both with equal confidence, I had a mind to bestow some labor in the
research of this truth also, and to consult the very fountains themselves, I
mean those precious records of the first six centuries. With Clemens Romanus,
Ignatius. Polycarpus, Apostolical men, I began; then descended to Justin Martyr
Clemens Alexandrinus, Ireneus, Tertullian, Cyprian etc. so gradually, downward
unto the age of Gregory the Great. Whatsoever in passage occurred to my
observation as evidence of the practice primitive I noted, at first confusedly,
and after disposed into more serviceable order, assigning every note its proper
station as it did parallelly relate to any respective part of our Liturgy. By
the help of these notes able was I to discern that our Liturgy in the most, and
those the most noble parts (those of sacred extraction excepted) was extant in
the usage of the Primitive Church long before the Popish Mass was ever dream^
of. Nay more then so, able was I to discern an admirable harmony, even in
external Rites between the Church of England and those ancient Fathers. These
notes having had so potent an influence upon my self that, whereas I at first
conformed only as education and custom had prepossessed me; under the conduct
of that light they afforded me, I became a true son of the Church of England
both in judgment and affection: I inclined to think that meeting with minds
of the same complexion with mine, that is studious of truth, not biassed by
passion, nor adicted to any faction, they would have the same operation. Upon
this supposition I began to fit them for the public: and I can only say I
began; for, in my entrance upon that work, the torrent of our civil
discentions, plunder, and eight years sequestration^ overtake me, as an
adherent to the worsted, I say not to the worst side. Reduced to this
condition, how to live became my only study, these useless collections I laid
to rest, where probably they had slept their last, had not an unexpected
occasion awakened them. That occasion, this

In July 1656. came forth a Book entiled Extraneus vapulans, in English,
L'estrange is beaten, the Author Dr. Heilen, by Ordination a Presbyter, who of
all men, should be no striker, so the Apostles Canon, 1 Timothy 3. 3. and so the
Canon of the Apostles (...). Can. 27.
That Presbyter who smites Believers when they offend, we decree that he be
deposed. It is not my desire, were I able, to lay this law upon him. No, that
he may see that he has wronght a reformation upon me, that I am the better for
the beating, I solemnly profess all the injuries he has done me have with me
had long since Christian burial, burial by the Book of Common Prayer, in that
excellent form if any of you be in malice, come not to this holy Table. I thank
God I have not the lest swelling thought against him, yet I ingenuously
confess, that when I first read in the Preface of that Book, my self, amongst
others not very lovely attributes, blazond for a Nonconformist; I beheld it as
a provocation most piquant and pungent to turn again, had I not seriously
resolved never more to enter the lists of unchristian strife with him or any
other. But though I resolved totally to acquiesce from such contests, yet did I
as firmly from that very moment resolve, if God blessed be with a few days, not
to suffer that great blot of Ink to dry upon mine honor, and the rather
because I was persuaded I could take it out, not with juce of Limon, sharp
recriminations, but with milk and milder lenitives. In order to it, I presently
reassumed my long neglected papers. Having re-viewed them, my second thoughts
suggested to me a design of a new-model: For wereas I at first intended only
a confinement of my Notes to the established Liturgy of our Church, my last
meditations resolved to apply them to all our Liturgies since the Reformation,
to re-commend the Common Prayer by all the arguments I could, to a more
passible entertainment, and to take off all the considerable objections against
it. In the progress of which enterprise so many new speculations offered
themselves to my consideration, that I cannot but profess my self a great (I
hope not the only) Proficient by mine own labors, so true is that (...).
Clem. Alexa. strom. l. 1.
he who teaches others, instructs himself.

In the persuite of these Annotations, where I refer to Antiquity I rarely
descend beneath 600. years after Christ, and as rarely do I cite any but
Authentic Records, or such as, under false ascriptions, are the undoubted
issues of those times: therefore the supposed Liturgies of Peter, James, etc. I
urge no further, then I find them consonant with the genuine Tracts of others.
I bear no implicit faith to the dictates of any whatsoever, whence it is that
I assume a liberty inoffensively to dissent from persons eminent, and whom I
mention always with terms of respect. As little do I expect, or desire to
enthral any man to my private fancy; in matters of so minute consideration, I
hold it as absurd to quarrel with any man for not being of my opinion, as for
not being of my diet. If in any thing I have erred, as it is an even lay I
have, more then once, he who shall friendly remonstrate it to me, will
exceedingly oblige me. As for such Keno-Criticks, or rather Cyno-Criticks, as
snarl and bite where no offense is given, free liberty have they to say their
pleasure, (...), whither they praise Nazianz. (...). II.
or dispraise me, to me it signifies the same thing, that is nothing.

Having thus presented to the world an account why I published these
Annotations, it will be proper to premise somewhat, by way of illustration, in
reference to the Text it self. Know then, that whatsoever is exhibited in the
English letter, (where the Printer has not erred) is the established
Common Prayer, distinct from its Rubric (which is in a Roman Character.)
Parrallel to this, sometimes in a Roman, sometimes in an Italick letter, stand
the several variations between it and former Liturgies, and where such leteral
ascriptions occur not, and no Marginal directions to the contrary, you may
there be confident the Liturgies agree to a syllable. The Litturgies I here
refer to are, the first and second of Edward the 6. and that of Q. Elizaheth,
which does as much differ from our present Common Prayer, as the second of
Edward the 6. does from hers. Over and besides these, you have also the
variations of the Scotch Liturgy, and, in the margin, such places noted wherein
Bucers Latin Translations disagreeth with the Original English; you have also
in the Annotations the diversity observed between the Latin Translation 2o.
Eliz. and her own Liturgy, and at the end of all The order of the Communion, in
priority of time before them all. By this means you are furnished with all our
Liturgies since the Reformation, some whereof are rare, very rare to be had,
(and which does double the rarity) these complete; and this so frugally
contrived, that the utmost price of all, with my inconsiderable Annotations
into the bargin, will scarce amount to the moiety of what I was lately demanded
for one, and that imperfect too. Nor have you only the Books themselves, but
those also disposed into such order, that without turning over leaves, or
making a tedious hunt from one to another, you may view them in one scheam, and
compare them together at once, as they stand impaled.

Before I end, I desire all Readers may know, what many sufficiently do, viz.
that my Country employment in relation to mine own and diverse others affairs
has been so very great, as I could not attend the Press, which considered, it
will be no wonder if the impression be not very exact. It will therefore be
pains well bestowed to consult the Table of the Errata at the end of this
Book, which will give an account of the most considerable saults.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I.
(A) The necessity of Common Prayer. And of a Book of Common Prayer; ib.
Arguments for set forms. Proved to have been used in the three first centuries
after Christ. And approved by Reformed Churches. (B) Set forms of Administering
the Sacraments. Proved by primitive practice. (C) Rites and Ceremonies fit to
be prescribed. (D) Every particular Church has authority to prescribe set
forms and Rites. The main ground of uniformity. (E) A necessity for an Act for
uniformity. (F) The present Act a revivor of a former. (G) The Parliament did
only ratify, not make the Alterations. (H) Anciently Bishops visited in
person. An uniformity of Articles commended. (I) The Canons 1603. not repugnant
to the Act for uniformity. The power of the civil Magistrate in Ecclesiastical
matters. (K) The occasion of the conference at Hampton Court. (L) The
Proclamation of King James obligatory to Obedience. (M) Our service not taken
out of the Masse-book. (N) The Pie. Several acceptations of the word. (O)
Apocryphal Lessons lawful to be read. The Minister has Liberty to exchange
them for Canonical Scripture. They are more edifying then many Chapters of the
Canon appointed by the Directory. (P) The Bishops to interpret in doubtful
cases. (Q) The several degrees of the first Reformation. (R) What meant by the
Minister saying daily prayer either privately or openly. (S) Ceremonies of
humane Institution lawful. Proved by the several confessions of Reformed
Churches. (T) Order in the Church of Divine institution. Orders to be obeyed,
not disputed where they are not simply unlawful. (V) The Churches prudence and
moderation in her first Reformation. (W) Significant Ceremonies lawful. (X)
Superstition defined. (Y) Our Ceremonies elder then the Masse-Book. Directory,
a Popish word. (Z) Scandal no just exception against our Liturgy by the
confession of Geneva herself. More scandalized, and more justly by the
Directory then our Common Prayer. page 17.

CHAP. II.
(A) The division of the Psalms very discreet. The ancient manner of singing
them various in Antiquity. The 15. Cannon of the Council of Laodicea Expounded.
(B) Books and Chapters of Canonical Scripture least edifying omitted. (C) The
Rubric for proper Lessons cleared. (D) A necessary Caveat to Ministers. (E)
Differences between the former Kalendars and ours. Why several Saints are added
now more then formerly. (F) Feasts instrumental to piety. The Jews fasted on
high festivals till noon. Whence our Fasts before some Holy Days. Why not
before All. (G) Holy Days why fit to be established by Parliament. Why
instituted. The Churches power to ordain them. The judgment of foreign Churches
and Divines. Zanchy cleared, a demur upon the best Reformed Churches. Our
Holy Days not derived from the Pagans, yet warrantable if they were. page 55.

CHAP. III.
(A) Morning and Evening Prayer agreeable to the Jewish and Christian practice.
The three hours of Prayer in the Temple. The 6. of private devotion. (B) Where
Morning and Evening Prayer are to be said. Why the place left arbitrary to the
Bishop. (C) What meant by Chancels shall stand as they have done. (D) Ornaments
in Cathedrals. (E) The Surplice defended, and primitive practice set down. (F)
A discourse concerning the Translations of the Bible, where the obstacle was,
that our Liturgy was not reformed in this particular. (G) To begin with
confession ancient. (H) What meant by the word alone in the Rubric of
absolution. (I) The Lords Prayer why pronounced in a loud voice. (K) The
primitive practice concerning Amen. (L) The Versicles and Responds, Canonical
Scripture, approved by Bucer. (M) The original of the Doxology, its antiquity.
(N) Hallelujah at what time to be used. (O) The Invitatory what and why
devised. (P) The Number of Lessons in the Romish Church. Our manner of reading
them most conformable to antiquity. The Contents of the Chapters of what use.
(Q) The primitive custom before every Lesson. (R) The benefit of mixing
Psalms or Hymns with Lessons. (S) Te Deum how ancient. (T) Benedicite
ancient. (V) Benedictus and other Hymns vindicated, used by the Dutch Church.
(W) The Creed anciently, no part of the Liturgy, how employed, why called the
Apostles; the Catholic Church a phrase as ancient as Ignatius. Reason why so
called. The variety of Symbols whence derived, why the Creed pronounced
standing. (X) The Lord be with you, whence derived. Difference betwixt it, and
Peace be to you. (Y) Let us pray, an ancient formula. (Z) Lord have mercy upon
us, etc. called the lesser Litany. (A A) O Lord show thy mercy upon us, etc.
are canonical Scripture. (B B) Collects why so called. p. 71.

CHAP. IIII.
(A) Catechizing part of the Evening Office, The want thereof the cause of
heresy. Judgment of the Synod of Dort. Sermons where, in the Primitive Church
part of the Evening Office. (B) Evening Prayer why so called. An ancient
Evening Hymn. (C) The Doxology of the Pater Noster, why omitted in our service.
(D) A necessary Rubric added by the Scotch Liturgy. (E) Athanasius his Creed
falsely so called, yet ancient, and extant in Anno 600. after Christ. (F)
Litanies Ancient, in the Western Church long before Mamercus. Reformed by
Gregory the Great; ours whence derived: the Gesture proper for it. (G)
Wednesdaies and Fridaies why days of fastings. Stations, what, and why so
called. Tertullian cleared. (H) Forgiving our Enemies a peculiar of
Christianity. The Jewish and Romish practice contrary to it. (I) Repeated
Prayers most powerful. (K) The Thanksgiving for Rain, etc. a necessary
Reformation. p. 97

CHAP. V.
(A) The Introit, what. (B) Epistles and Gospels very necessary, why Epistles
when all are not so. The reason, and defense of that denomination. (C) Advent,
what, and why observed. (D) Christmas day. Its antiquity, variously observed in
the primitive times. The precise day dubious, and unnecessary to be known.
Calvin passionately for it. Observed by the Synod of Dort and the Belgic
Church. A main argument for it. (E) Two Communions anciently in one fore-m^n.
(F) Why the Feasts of St. Stephen, St. John, and Innocents are celebrated near
Christmas day. (G) Antiquity of the Circumcision feast. (H) Epiphany what,
Ancient. (I) Ashwednesday and Lent, the original and various observation of
them. (K) Palm Su^day how observed. (L) The holy week why so called. (M)
Maunday Thursday, a day of great note. (N) Good Friday anciently a very high
day, a day of general Absolution. (O) Easter-Eve the great day of Baptising
competents. Watching the Sepulcher whence derived. (P) Easter Day of
Apostolical institution. (Q) Easter-Mnoday, and Easter-Tuesday very anciently
observed. (R) Dominica in Albis. (S) Rogation days why instituted. (T)
Ascension day why rarely mentioned in Antiquity. Pentecost, what. Synods
anciently summoned about this time. (V) Whitsunday why so called, a private
conjecture. (W) St. Andrews day why the first festival. (X) Conversion of St.
Paul why not observed. Paul and Peter one entire festival anciently and of late
years. (Y) The Purification of Mary anciently how called, why Candlemass-day.
(Z) The Annuntiation of the Virgin Mary how Ancient. (A) St. Philip and Jacob,
and All Saints. (B) St. Peter has no single day. (C) The Festival of Mary
Magdalen, why discontinued. p. 133.

CHAP. VI.
(A) Immediately after, what meant by it; a Bell usually rang betwixt morning
Prayer, and the Sermon; so also in Scotland. (B) Notorium what; who notorious
Offenders in the sense of our Church: the 109 Canon, the Committee, 1641. the
Ordinance of Parliament, October. 20. 1645. the Imperial Law, Primitive practice,
our Saviors president in admitting Judas: The main reason for free admission.
(C) Charity how necessary to a Communicant. One loaf in the primitive Church.
Agapae, the holy Kiss. (D) The Table where to stand in Communion time. (E) The
Lords Prayer always part of the Communion Office. (F) The ten Commandments,
with their Responces, a laudable part of our Service. (G) Epistles their
ground. (H) Glory be to thee, O Lord, is ancient use. (I) standing up at the
Gospel very ancient, why appointed, what posture anciently used at the Lessons
read, and Word preached. Africa differed from other Churches. (K) The Nicene
Creed. Creeds enlarged in Articles as Heresies sprung up. The Ancients observed
no strict formula's. The Hierosolymitan Creed compared with other parcels of
Antiquity. No Creed in the ancient Service of the Eastern Church, till Anno
511. nor till after that in the Service of the Western. (L) Postils, why so
called: Bidding of Prayers before the Sermon. The original ground of them. An
ancient form thereof. Preachers varied therein. Bidding and Praying, all one in
effect. Prayer before the Sermon in the Primitive Church. St. Ambrose his form.
The people also prayed for the Preacher. In the first times many preached one
after another in one Forenoon. The ancient Homilies, avoid thorny subtilties
and nice questions. King James his Order recommended to present practice. (M) A
discourse upon the 18 Canon of the Council of Laodicea. The order of Divine
Service then. The Prayer for the Ca^echumens begun the Service. Its formula out
of Chrysostom. The Communion did not begin in the Eastern Church upon the
dismission of the Catechumens. The several dismissions of that Church. All
comprehended in the Missa Catachumenon, of the Western Church, (...) what,
(...). (N) Four offerings at the Communion, (...), Alms, a constant
concomitant, not accepted from all. Differences in the Offertory, Sentences
betwixt the Scotch Service and ours, whence derived. (O) Two offerings intended
by our Church. Oblations how distributed in the Primitive Church. Sportulantes
fratres, who. Mr. Seldens mistake. Oblations ceased not upon the payment of
Tithes. (P) Oblations anciently brought to the Altar. The Chest for Alms where
placed in the beginning of the Reformation. (Q) Offering-dayes, what.
Collar-dayes at Court. Hermanus. (R) Prayer for the whole state of Christ's
Church. Many ancient Formula's thereof. (S) Dypticks, Rolls, not Tables. (T)
Commemoration of the Dead. Innocent at first, but after abused. (V) Two sorts
of Dead commemorated. The commemoration anciently used after the Elements were
consecrated. Why the Order transposed by our Reformers. page 171, 172.

CHAP. VII.
(A) The Eucharist whence derived, (...) and (...) different things, and had
different forms. (B) Men and women, sat separate one from another. (C) Mixing
of water with wine. Ancient. The reasons for it. (Die Draw near, when to be
said. Chancels anciently peculiar to the Clergy. The Emperor only privileged.
Laique Communion, what. Why Chancels allotted to the Clergy only. The people
usually received at the Chancel door. (E) Confession why necessary before the
Communion. The Priests posture at the Altar, standing, and why. (F) Sursum
corda, Ancient. (G) So also the Responces. (H) Proper Prefaces. (I) Trisagium
Ancient. Two Hymns so called. (K) Consecration not performed by the words of
Primitive Institution. The sense of the Fathers. The Ancient custom of saying
Amen to the consecration. (...) what in Justin Martyr. (L) Remembrance of
Christ's Passion at the Eucharist. Ought to be as well by verbal commemoration,
as by mental meditation. The ancient forms. (M) The bread anciently delivered
into the Communicants hands. (N) Kneeling in the act of receiving commended,
sometime used in Antiquity, where practiced since the Reformation. (O) The
various forms of delivering the Elements. That of our Church justly preferred
before the rest. (P) The Scotch order for saying Amen by the party ^^^^^ing
commended. Singing of Psalms during the Communicating ancient. (Q) The Roman
order defective in the most proper Sacrifice. (R) The Angelical Hymn.
Difference betwixt an Hymn and a Psalm. The Hymn mis-placed in the Masse-book.
Our order more consonant to Antiquity. The Council of Carthage cleared. (S) The
Benediction by whom to be given. The custom of bowing at it. (T) The second
service when to be read. (V) A Rubric unhappily omitted. (W) The remains of
the Consecrated Elements, how anciently disposed. (X) To receive thrice in the
year an ancient practice.

CHAP. VIII.
(A) Baptism how called in Antiquity, why (...), or Illumination, Barnabas his
Epistle corrected. Why the Laver of Regeneration, a dissent from Mr. Seldom and
Dr. Hamond about its derivation. (B) Sacrament: what, whence derived;
Sacramentum and Jusjurandum differ. Baptism most properly a Sacrament; why the
office in order of place after the Communion. (C) Easter and Whitsuntide, why
anciently times allotted for Baptism. (D) Rivers the first Fo^ts. Baptisteries
when erected, the Directory felo de se. (E) Sanctifying of water, what it
means. (F) Two signings with the Cross anciently relating to Baptism, one
before, and the other after; why the Cross used in our Church after Baptism.
(G) The form of ancient Exorcism. (H) Interr^gatories moved to Infants
vindicated by the Primitive practice, and parallel with the civil usages of
others. (I) Abrenunciation ancient, several modes observed therein. (K)
Imposition of names, why used at Baptism. (L) Dipping not necessary, England
noted of singularity in that particular, inconveniences thereof. Many baptized
in the same Baptisteries. Women and men had several rooms in one Baptistery.
Diaconisses their office at the Baptising of women. (M) Triple mersion ancient;
why ordained; single mersion or aspersion the rule of our Church. (N) White
vestments ancient. (O) Two Unctions anciently distinguished four several ways.
(P) The Rubrique explained concerning the Cross. The first original ground of
that Ceremony, Miracles wrought with it. Why miracles ceased, why Timotheus and
Epaphroditus cured without them. Dr. Reinolds a friend to the Cross after the
explanation of it. The Cross not operative, demonstrated by K. James, his
^n^itting it in the Charismal office. (Q) Private Baptism proved lawful by
several Authorities. (R) The former Rubrique allowed of women's Baptising. (S)
Necessity dispenceth with accidental formalities. (T) Water a necessary
element. Beza his error. (V) What are the essential words of Baptism. (W)
Children to be baptized where the testimony is doubtful. p. 237.

CHAP. IX.
(A) Confirmation in what sense a Sacrament. The closing ceremony of Baptism.
Why very expedient at this time. The Directory defective toward her own
Principles. (B) Confirmation by what names anciently called. (C) The necessity
of Catechizing. What Catechists were, a dissent from Learned men, Catechists,
not Presbyters. Usually laymen. Women Catechized by women, and why, an
especial reason for it in the Greek Church. Sanctimonial Catechumens what, not
the same with Audientes as is commonly supposed, in what sense sometimes called
Audientes. Lent set apart for Catechizing. Competents what. The excellency of
our Catechism. K. James his most judicious direction. (D) The language of the
hand: what Imposition of hands denotes. (E) Confirmation peculiar to the
Apostles, and their Successors, Bishops, Why so. Never performed by
Presbyters. What meant by Presbyteri consignant in the counterfeit Ambrose.
(F) Unction or Chrism an ancient ceremony belonging to Confirmation, why
separated at length from it, and indulged to Presbyters. The Arausican Council
diversity of readings. Sirmundus his Edition defended. Whence two Chrismations
in the Church of Rome. (G) Signing with the Cross a companion of unctson. (H)
Children when anciently confirmed. (I) Communication of the Eucharist to
succeed presently upon Confirmation. p. 261.

CHAP. X.
(A.) The Matrimonial Office very necessary. Marriage ought to be blessed by a
Minister. Our Savior and the Primitive Fathers did it. Set forms anciently
used. (B.) Times prohibited for Marriage upon what Law founded. The Directory
as guilty of Popery therein as our Church. (C.) Marriage anciently celebrated
ad ostium Ecclesiae. (D) Mutual consent of both Parties necessary. Espousals
what. (E) The giving of the Woman ancient. (F.) The excellence of the English
mode in receiving the Wife from the Priest. (G.) The right hand a Symbol of
fidelity. (H.) A Ring why given by the man. The ancient use of Rings. (I.) Why
the Ring is laid upon the Book. (K.) Why the Ring is put upon the 4th. singer,
the usual reason rejected. (L) With my Body, I thee worship, what meant by it.
(M.) The blessing ought to be by imposition of hands. (N.) Why the married
couple to communicate. (O.) The visitation of the sick a necessary Office. (P.)
A sound faith how necessary. (Q.) Charity very necessary to a dying man. (R.)
So also Almes-giving. (S.) Absolution how commendable and comfortable. The
several kinds of absolution. (T.) Extreme unction why laid aside. (V.)
Communion of the sick vindicated. Calvin for it. (W.) Reservation of the
consecrated Elements anciently very laudable. (X.) The various customs of
bearing the Corpse to Church, Copiatae what. Why Hymns sung all along as the
corpse was born. (Y.) The Resurrection of our bodies ought to be the chief of
our Meditations upon funeral occasions. (Z) In sure and certain hopes, etc.
What meant by it. (AA.) Prayer for the Dead in the Romish Church implies not
Purgatory. The mind of the Breviary opened. Trentals what. (BB.) Communion at
Burials ancient, why now laid aside. The Original of Oblations, Doles at
Funerals, and Mortuaries. p. 291

CHAP. XI.
(A) The grounds of Thanksgiving after Childbirth, why rather for this than
other deliverances. (B) Our Church does not Judaize. Difference betwixt our
practice and Jewish Purification. (C) What meant by the word Church, into which
the woman is to come. (D) The woman not enjoined a veil. (F) The 121 Psalm not
abused. (E) But deliver us from evil, why returned by way of response. (F)
Commination, how often used in the year. (G) Why read in the Pulpit. A
discourse of reading-Desks, none settled by Rule before the Canons 1603. upon
what occasion devised. (H) A Discourse of public Penance. By whom it was
imposed, and how long to continue. The several motions of it in the Greek
Church. What meant by (...) what, and what (...). Errors noted in the Editions
of Zonaras and Balsamon. (...) what. Penitential customs in the Western Church.
Africa, most severe, and why. The ancient mode of Excommunicating of notorious
offenders, out of Gratian: Discourse upon it, Adgeniculari charis Dei in
Tertullian, Penitents, when reconciled in the Latin Church. The Ancient
Discipline commended, and Vote for its restoration. (I) What meant by the word
Curate in our Liturgy. (K) Homilies, whether part of our Churches Service. And
whether the Doctrine of our Church. (L) Calvin's Epistle to the Protector
mis-dated in all Editions. p. 315

FINIS.
THE BOOK ENGLAND.
CHAP. I.
An Act for the uniformity of Common Prayer, and service in the Church, and
administration of the Sacraments.
WHere at the death of our late sovereign Lord King Edward the sixth, there
remained one uniform order of common service and prayer, and of the
administration of Sacraments, Rites, and Ceremonies in the Church of England,
which was set forth in one book, entitled, the book of Common Prayer, and
administration of the sacraments, and other rights and ceremonies in the Church
of England, authorized by act of Parliament, holden in the lift and sixth years
of our said late sovereign Lord king Edward the sixth, entitled, an Act for the
uniformity of Common Prayer, and administration of the Sacraments: the which
was repealed and taken away by act of Parliament, in the first year of the
reign of our late sovereign Lady Queen Marie, to the great decay of the due
honor of God, and discomfort to the professors of the truth of Christ's
religion.

Be it therefore enacted by the authority of this present Parliament, that the
said statute of repeal, and every thing therein contained, only concerning the
said book, and the service, administration of Sacraments, rites and ceremonies,
contained or appointed, in, or by the said book, shall be void and of none
effect, from, and after the feast of the Nativity of Saint John Baptist next
coming. And that the said book, with the order of service, and of the
administration of Sacraments,

And further be it enacted by the Queens highness, with the assent of the
Lords and Commons of this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of
the same, that all and singular ministers, in any Cathedral or parish Church,
or other place within this realm of England, Wal^s, and the marches of the
same, or other the Queens dominions, shall from and after the feast of the
Nativity of saint John Baptist next coming, be bounden to say and use the
Mattins, Even-song, celebration of the Lords Supper, and administration of each
of the sacraments, and all other common and open prayer, in such order and form
as is mentioned in the said book, so authorized by Parliament in the said fifth
and sixth year of the reign of king Edward the sixth, with one alteration or
addition of certain Lessons to

And if the person that shall offend and be convict in form aforesaid,
concerning any of the premises, shall not be beneficed, nor have any spiritual
promotion: that then the same person so offending and convict, shall for the
first offense suffer imprisonment during one whole year next after his said
conviction, without hail or mainprise. And if any such person not having any
spiritual promotion, after his first conviction, shall eftsoons offend in any
thing concerning the premises, and shall in form aforesaid be therefore
lawfully convicted: that then the same person shall for his second offense
suffer imprisonment during his life.

And it is ordained and enacted by the authority abovesaid, that if any person
or persons whatsoever, after the said feast of the Nativity of Saint John
Baptist next coming, shall in any Enterludes, Plays, Songs, Rimes, or by other
open words, declare or speak any thing in the derogation, depraving, or
despising of the same book, or of any thing therein contained, or any part
thereof, or shall by open fact, deed, or by open threatenings, compel, or cause,
or otherwise procure, or maintain any Parson, Uicar, o^ other Minister, in any
Cathedral or Parish Church, or in Chapel, or in any other place, to sing or
say any common and open prayer, or to minister any Sacrament, otherwise, or in
any other manner and form then is mentioned in the said book, or that by any of
the said means, shall unlawfully interrupt or let any Parson, Uicar, or other
Minister, in any Cathedral or Parish Church, Chapel, or any other place, to
sing or say common and open prayer, or to minister the Sacraments, or any of
them, in such manner and form as is mentioned in the said book: that then every
such person being thereof lawfully convicted in form abovesaid, shall forfeit
to the Queen our Sovereign Lady, her heirs, and successors, for the first
offense an hundred marks. And if any person or persons, being once convict of
any such offense, eftsoons offend against any of the last recited offenses, and
shall in form aforesaid be thereof lawfully convict: that then the same person
so offending and convict, shall for the second offense forfeit to the Queen our
sovereign Lady, her heirs and successors, four hundred marks. And if any
person, after he in form aforesaid, shall have been twice convict of any such
offense concerning any of the last recited offenses, shall offend the third
time, and be thereof in form abovesaid lawfully convict: that then every person
so offending and convict, shall for his third offense, forfeit to our Sovereign
Lady the Queen, all his goods and chattels, and shall suffer imprisonment
during his life. And if any person or persons, that for his first offense
concerning the premises, shall be convict in form aforesaid, do not pay the
sum to be paid by virtue of his conviction, in such manner and form as the
same ought to be paid, within six weeks next after his conviction: that then
every person so convict, and so not paying the same, shall for the same first
offense, instead of the said sum, suffer imprisonment by the space of six
months, without veil or mainprise. And if any person or persons that for his
second offense concerning the primises, shall be convict in form aforesaid, do
not pay the said sum to be paid by virtue of his conviciton and this estatute,
in such manner and form as the same ought to be paid. within six weeks next
after his said second conviction* that then every person so convicted and not
so paying the same, shall for the same second offense, in the stead of the said
sum, suffer imprisonment during twelve months, without bail or mainprise. And
that from and after the said feast of the Nativity of saint John Baptist next
coming, all and every person and persons, inhabiting within this Realm, or any
other the Queens Majesty's dominions, shall diligently and faithfully, having
no lawful or reasonable excuse to be absent, endeavor themselves to resort to
their Parish Church or Chapel accustomed, or upon reasonable let thereof, to
some usual place where common prayer and such service of God shall be used in
such time of let, upon every Sunday, and other days ordained and used to be
kept as Holy-dayer: and then and there to abide orderly and soberly during the
time of Common praye^, preachings, or other service of God, there to be used
and ministered, upon pain and punishment by the censures of the Church: and also
upon pain that every person so offending, shall forfeit for every such offense,
xii. d. to be levied by the Church Wardens of the Parish, where such offense
shall be done, to the use of the poor of the same Parish, of the goods, lands,
and tenements, of such offender, by way of distress. And for due execution
hereof, the Queens most excellent Majesty, the Lords Temporal, and all the
Commons in this present Parliament assembled, does in Gods name earnestly
require and charge all the Archbishops, Bishops, and other Ordinaries, that
they shall end about themselves to the uttermost of their knowledges, that the
due and true execution hereof, may be had throughout their Diocese and
charges, as they will answer before God, for such evils and plagues, wherewith
Almighty God, may justly punish his people for neglecting his good and wholesome
Law. And for their authority in this behalf, be it further enacted by the
authority aforesaid, that all and singular the same Archbishops, Bishops, and
all other their officers, exercising Ecclestastical jurisdiction, as well in
place exepmt, as not exempt within their Diocese, shall have full power and
authority by this act, to reform, correct, and punish by Censures of the
Church, all and singular persons, which shall offend within any their
jurisdictions or Diocese, after the said feast of the Nativity of saint John
Baptist next coming, against this act and statute: Any other law, statute,
privilege, liberty or provision heretofore made, had, or suffered to the
contrary, notwithstanding.

And it is ordained and enacted by the authority aforsaid, that all and every
Justices of Oyer and Determiner, or Justices of Assise, shall have full power
and authority in every of their open and general Sessions, to enquire, hear,
and determine all, and all manner of offenses that shall be committed or done
contrary to any article contained in this present act, within the limits of the
Commission to them directed, and to make process for the execution of the same
as they may do against any person being indicted before them of trespass, or
lawfully convicted thereof.

Provided always, and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all and
every Archbishop and Bishop, shall or may at all time and times, at his
liberty and pleasure, join and associate himself, by virtue of this act, to the
said Justices of Oyer and Determiner, or to the said Justices of Assise, at
every of the said open and said general Sessions to be holden in any place
within his Diocese, for and to the inquiry, hearing, and determining of the
offenses aforsaid.

Provided also, and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the books
concerning the said services, shall at the costs and charges of the
Parishioners of every Parish and Cathedral Church, be attained and gotten
before the said feast of the Nativty of saint John Baptist next following, and
that all such Parishes and Cathedral Churches, or other places where the said
books shall be attained and gotten before the said feast of the Nativity of
saint John Baptist, shall within three weeks next after the said books so
atteined and gotten, use the said service, and put the same in ure according to
this act.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that no person or
persons shall be at any time hereafter impeached, or otherwise molested, of, or
for any of the offenses abovementioned, hereafter to be committed or done
contrary to this Act, unless he or they so offending, be thereof indicted at
the next general Sessions to be holden before any such Justices of Oyer and
Determiner or Justices of assise, next after any offense committed or done
contrary to the tenor of this act.

Provided always, and be it ordained and enacted by the authority aforesaid,
that all and singular Lords of the Parliament, for the third offense
abovementioned, shall be tried by their Peers.

Provided also that, and be it ordained and enacted by the authority aforesaid,
that the Major of London, and all other Majors, Bayliffes, and other head
officers of all and singular cities, boroughs, and towns corporate within this
Relam, Wales, and the Matches of the same, to the which Justices of Assise do
not commonly repair, shall have full power and authority by virtue of this
act, to enquire, hear, and determine the offenses bobe-said, and every of
them, yearly within xv. days ofter the feasts of Easter and saint Michael the
archangel, in like manuer and form as Justices of Assise, and Dyer and
Determiner may do.

Provided always, and be it ordained and enacted by the authority aforesaid,
that all and singular Archbishops and Bishops, and every of their
Chancellours, Commissaries, Archdeacons, and other Ordinaries, having any
peculiar Ecclesiastical jurisoiction, shall have full power and authority by
virtue of this act, as well to enquire in their visitation, synods, and else
where within their jurisoiction, at

Provided always, and be it enacted, that whatsoever person offending in the
premises, shall for the offense first receive punishment of the Ordinary,
having a testimonial thereof under the said Ordinaries seal, shall not for the
same offense eftsoons be condicted before the Justices. And likewise receiving
the said first offense punishment by the Justices; be shall not for the same
offense estsoones ceive punishment of the Ordinary: any thing contained in this
act to the contrary, notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it enacted, that such ornaments of the Church, and of
the Ministers thereof, shall be retained, and be in use, as was in this Church
of England, by the authority of Parliament in the second year of the reign of
King Edward the sixth, until other order shall be therein taken by authority of
the Queens Majesty, with the advice of her Commissioners, appointed and
authorized under the great seal of England, for causes Ecclesiastical, or of
the Metropolitans of this realnt. And also that if there shall happen any
contempt or irreverence; to be used in the Ceremonies or Rites of the Church.
by the misusing of the orders appointed in this book: the Queens majesty may by
the like advice of the said Commissioners, or Metropolitans, ordein and publish
such farther Ceremonies or Rites, as may

And ve it further enacted by the authority aforsaid, that all laws, statutes,
and ordinances, wherein or whereby any other service, administration of
Sacraments, or Common prayer is limited, established, or set forth to be used
within this Realm, or any other the Queens domiuions and contreyes: shall from
henceforth be utterly void, and of noue effect.

By the King, A proclamation for the authorizing an uniformity of the Book of
Common Prayer to be used throughout the Realm.
ALthough it cannot be unknown to our Subjects by the former Declarations we
have published, what Our purposes and proceedings have been in matters of
Religion since our coming to this Crown: Yet the same being now by us reduced
to a settled form, We have occasion to repeat somewhat of that which has
passed: And how at our very first entry into the Realm, being entertained and
importuned with Informations of sundry Ministers, complaining Council were
assembled many of the gravest Bishops and Prelates of the Realm, and many other
learned men, as well of those that are conformable to the state of the Church
established, as of those that dissented. Among whom what o^r pains were, what
our patience in hearing and replying, and what the indifferency and
uprightness of Our judgment in determining, We leave to the report of those
who heard the same, contenting our Self with the sincerity of our own heart
therein. But We cannot conceal, that the success of that Conference was such,
as happens to many other things, which moving great expectation before they
be entered into, in their issue produce small effects. For We found mighty and
vehement Informations supported with so weak and slender proofs, as it
appears unto Us and Our Council, that there was no cause why any change
should have been at all in that which was most impugned, the book of Common
Prayer, containing the form of the Public Service of God here established,
neither in the doctrine which appeared to be sincere, nor in the Forms and
Rites which were justified out of the practice of the Primitive Church.
Notwithstanding, we thought meet, with consent of the Bishops and other learned
men there present, That some small things might rather be explained then
changed, not that the same might not very well have been born with by men, who
would have made a reasonable construction of them: but for that in a matter
concerning the Service of God We were nice, or rather jealous, that the public
Form there of should be free not only from blame, but from suspicion, so as
neither the common Adversary should have advantage to wrest ought therein
contained, to other sense then the Church of England intends, nor any
troublesome or ignorant person of this Church be able to take the least
occasion of cavil aginst it: And for that purpose gave forth Our Commission
under our great Seal of England, to the Archbishop of Canterbury and others,
according to the form which the Laws of this Realm in like case prescribed to
be used, to make the said explanation, as others, promised their conformity in
the practice of it, only making suit to Us, that some few might be born with
for a time.

Wherefore We require all Archbishops, Bishops and all other public Ministers,
as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, to do their duties in causing the same to be
obeyed, and in punishing the offenders according to the Laws of the Realm
heretofore established, for the authorizing of the said Book of Common prayer.
And We think it also necessary, that the said Archbishops, and Bishops, do
each of them in his Province and Diocese take order, that every parish do
procure to themselves within such time as they shall think good to limit, one
of the said books so explained. And last of all, We do admonish all men, that
hereafter they shall not expect nor attempt any further alteration in the
Common and public form of Gods Service, from this which is now established,
for that neither will we give way to any to presume, that our own judgment
having determi^ed in a matter of this weight, shall be swaid to alteration by
the frivolous suggestions of any light spirit: neither are We ignorant of the
inconveniences that do arise in Government, by admitting innovation in things
once settled by mature deliberation: And how necessary it is to use constancy in
the upholding of the public determinations of States, for that such is the
unquietness and unstedfastnesse of some dispositions, affecting every year new
forms of things, as if they should be followed in their unconstancy, would
make all actions of States ridiculous and contemptible: whereas the steadfast
maintaining of things by good advice established, is the weal of all
Commonwealths.

Given at our Palace of Westminster, the 5. day of March, in the first year of
Our reign of England, France and Ireland, and of Scotland the seven and
thirtieth. God save the KING.
The Preface.
THere was never any thingby the wit of man so well devised, or so sure
established, which in continuance of time has not been corrupted: as (among
other things) it may plainly appear by the common prayers in the Church,
commonly called divine service. The first original and ground whereof, Pie, and
the manifold changings of the service, was the cause, that to turn the book

These inconveniences therefore considered, here is set forth such an order,
whereby the same shall be redressed. And for a readiness in this matter, here
is drawn out a Calendar for that purpose, which is plain and easy to be
understanded, wherein (so much as may be) the reading of holy scriptures is so
set forth, that all things shall be done in order, without breaking one piece
from another. For this cause be cut off Anthems, Respondes, Invitatories, and
such like things, as did break the continual course of the reading of the
scripture. Yet because there is no remedy, but that of necessity there must be
some rules: therefore certain rules are here set forth, which as they be few in
number, so they be plain and easy to be understanded. So that here you have an
order for prayer (as touching the reading of holy Scripture, much agreeable to
the mind and purpose of the old fathers, and a great deal more profitable and
commodious then that which of late was used. It is more profitable because here
are left out many things, whereof some be untrue, some uncertain, some vain and
superstitious, and is ordained nothing to be read but the very pure word of
God, the holy scriptures, or that which is evidently grounded upon the same,
and that in such a language and order, as is most easy and plain for the
understanding both of the readers and hearers. It is also more commodious, both
for the shortness thereof, and for the plainness of the order, and for that
the rules be few and easy. Furthermore, by this order, the Curates shall need
none other book for their public service, but this book and the Bible. By the
means whereof, the people shall not be at so great charges for books, as in
times past they have been.

And where heretofore there has been great diversity in saying and singing in
Churches within this Realm, some following Salisbury use, some Hereford use,
some the use of Bangor, some of York, and some of Lincoln: Now from hence
forth, all the whole Realm shall have but one use. And if any would judge this
way more painful, because that all things must be read upon the book, whereas
before by the reason of so often repetition, they could say many things by
heart: if those men will weigh their labor, with the profit and knowledge
which daily they shall obtain by reading upon the book, they will not refuse
the pain, in consideration of the great profit that shall ensue thereof.

And for as much as nothing can almost be so plainly set forth, but doubts may

Though it be appointed in the forewritten Preface, that all things shall be
read and song in the Church in the English tongue, to the end that the
Congregation of Edw. 6. neither that any man shall be bound to the saying of
them, but such as from time to time in Cathedral and Collegiat Churches, Parish
Churches, and Chapels to the same annexed shall serve the Congregation.]

And all Priests and Deacons shall be bound to say daily the Morning and
Evening prayer, either privately or openly, except they be let by preaching,
studying These two Paragraphs omited in 1. B. of Edw.
divinity, or by some other urgent cause, [Scotch liturgy, of which cause, if
it be frequently pretended, they are to make the Bishop of the Diocese, or the
Archbishop of the Province, the Judge and allower.]

And the Curate that ministers in every Parish Church or Chapel, being at
home, and not being otherwise reasonably let, shall say the same in the
Parish Church or Chapel where he ministers, and shall toll a Bell thereto, a
convenient time before we begin, that such as be disposed, may come to hear
Gods word, and to pray with him.

THE PREFACE.
THE Church of Christ has in all ages had a prescript form of Common prayer,
or Divine service, as appears by the ancient Liturgies of the Greek, and
Latin Churches. This was done, as for other great causes, so likewise for
retaining an uniformity in Gods worship: a thing most beseeming them that are
of one and the same profession. For by the form that is kept in the outward
worship of God, men commonly judge of Religion. If in that there be a
diversity, strait they are apt to conceive the Religion to be diverse.
Wherefore it were to be wished, that the whole Church of Christ were one as
well in form of public worship, as in doctrine: And that as it has but one
Lord, and one Faith, so it had but one heart, and one mouth. This would prevent
many schisms and divisions, and serve much to the preserving of unity. But
since that cannot be hoped for in the whole Catholic Christian Church, yet at
least in the Churches that are under the protection of one Sovereign Prince
the same ought to be endeavored.

It was not the least part of our late Sovereign King JAMES of blessed memory
his care, to work this uniformity in all his Dominions: but while he was about
to do it, it pleased God to translate him to a better kingdom. His Majesty
that now reigns, (and long may he reign over us in all happiness) not
suffering his Fathers good purpose to fall to the ground, but treading the same
path, with the like zeal and pious affection,) gave order soon after his coming
to the Crown, for the framing of a Book of Common prayer, like unto that which
is received in the Churches of England and Ireland, for the use of this Church.
After many lets and hindrances, the same comes now to be published, to the
good, we trust, of all Gods people, and the increase of true piety, and sincere
devotion amongst them.

But as there is nothing, how good and warrantable soever in it self, against
which some will not except: so it may be that exceptions will be taken against
this good and most pious work, and perhaps none more pressed, then that we have
followed the Service book of England. But we should desire them that shall take
this exception, to consider, that being as we are by Gods mercy of one true
profession, and otherwise united by many bonds, it had not been fitting to vary
much from theirs, our especially coming forth after theirs, seeing the
disturbers of the Church both here and there, should by our differences, if
they had been great, taken occasion to work more trouble. Therefore did we
think meet to adhere to their form, even in the festivals, and some other
rites, not as yet received, nor observed in our Church, rather then by omitting
them, to give the Adversary to think, that we disliked any part of their
service.

Our first Reformers were of the same mind with us, as appears by the
ordinance they made, that in all the Parishes of this Realm, the Commonprayer
should be read weekly on Su^daies, and other Festival days, with the Lessons
of the old and new Testament, conform to the order of the book of Common prayer
(meaning that of England, for it is known that diverse years after we had no
other order for common prayer.) This is recorded to have been the first head
concluded in a frequent Council of the Lords and Barons professing Christ
Jesus. We keep the words of the history; Religion was not then placed in rites
and gestures, nor men taken with the fancy of extemporary prayers. Sure, the
public worship of God in his Church, being the most solemn The history of the
Church of Scotland, page 218.
action of us his poor creatures here below, ought to be performed by a
Liturgy advisedly set and framed, and not according to the sudden and various
fancies of men. This shall suffice for the present to have said; The God of
mercy confirm our hearts in his truth, and preserve us alike from profaneness
and superstition.

Amen.
Of Ceremonies why some be abolished, and some retained.
OF such Ceremonies as be used in the Church,

Let all things be done among you (says Saint Paul) in a seemly

And whereas in this our time, the minds of men are so diverse,

Some are put away, because the great excess and multitude of them, has so
increased in these latter days, that the burden of them was intolerable,
whereof Saint Augustine in his time complained, that they were grown to such a
number, that the state of a Christian people was in worse case (concerning the
matter) then were the Jews. And he counseled, that such yoke and burden should
be taken away, as time would serve quietly to do it.

But what would saint Augustine have said, if he had seen the ceremonies of
late days used among us? whereunto the multitude used in his time was not to
be compared. This our excessive multitude of ceremonies was so great, and many
of them so dark, that they did more confound and darken, then declare and set
forth Christ's benefits unto us.

And besides this, Christ's Gospel is not a ceremonial law (as much of Moses law
was) but it is a religion to serve God, not in bondage of the figure or shadow,
but in the freedom of the spirit, being content only with those ceremonies,
which do serve to a decent order and godly discipline, and such as be apt to
stir up the dull mind of man to the remembrance of his duty to God, by some
notable and special signification,

Furthermore, the most weighty cause of the abolishment of certain ceremonies
was, that they were so far abused, partly by the superstitious blindness of
the rude and unlearned, and partly by the unsaciable avarice of such as sought
more their with Gods law. And moreover, they be neither dark nor dumb
ceremonies, but are so set forth, that every man may understand what they do
mean, and to what use they do serve. So that it is not like, that they in time
to come, should be abused as the other have been. And in these our doings, we
condemn no other nations, nor prescribe any thing but to our own people only.
For we think it convenient, that every country should use such ceremonies, as
they shall think best, to the setting forth of Gods honor and glory, and to
the reducing of the people to a most perfect and Godly living, without error
or superstition. And that they should put away other things, which from time to
time they perceave to be most abused, as in men's ordinances it often chances
diversely, in diverse countries.

Annotations upon CHAP. I.
(A) The necessity of Common Prayer. And of a Book of Common Prayer; ^b.
Arguments for set forms. Proved to have been used in the three first centuries
after Christ. And approved by Reformed Churches. (B.) Set forms of Administering
the Sacraments. Proved by Primitive practice. (C.) Rites and Ceremonies fit to
be prescribed. (D.) Every Particular Church has authority to prescribe set
forms and Rites. The main ground of uniformity. (E.) A necessity of an Act for
uniformity (F.) The present Act a revivor of a former. (G.) The Parliament did
only ratify, not make the Alterations. (H.) Anciently Bishops visited in
person. An uniformity of Articles commended. (I.) The Canons 1603. not
repugnant to the Act for uniformity. The power of the civil Magistrate in
Ecclesiastical matters. (K.) The occasion of the conference at Hampton Court.
(L.) The Proclamation Of King James obligatory to Obedience (M.) Our service
not taken out of the Masse-Book. (N.) The Pie. several acceptations of the
word. (O.) Apocryphal Lessons lawful to be read. The Minister has Liberty to
exchange them for Canonical Scripture. They are more edifying then many
Chapters of the Canon appointed by the Directory. (P.) The Bishops to interpret
in doubtful cases. (Q.) The several degrees of the first Reformation. (R.) What
meant by the Minister saying daily prayer either privately or openly. (S.)
Ceremonies of humane Institution lawful. Proved by the several confessions of
Reformed. Churches (T.) Order in the Church of Divine institution. Orders to be
obeyed, not disputed where they are not simply unlawful (V.) The Churches
prudence and moderation in her first Reformation. (W.) significant Ceremonies
lawful. (X.) Superstition defined (Y) Our Ceremonies elder then the Masse-Book.
Directory, a Popish word. (Z.) Scandal no just exception against our Li^urgy by
the confession of Geneva her self. More scandalized, and more justly by the
Directory then our Common Prayer.

THE Book of Common Prayer,] As God is the first principle and Honor we
possibly can. That which has the ordering and disposal of this Honor to him
is Religion: the most noble, the most proper act of Religion is Prayer: an act
by which we turn Tenants to God, and own him as the Donor of every good and
perfect gift. A duty enforced by our Saviors express command, Pray always,
so he, Luke 18. 1. Continually, so his blessed Apostle, 1 These. 5. 17. that is,
Levant and couchant, morning and evening, suitable to the Diurnal sacrifices in
the Temple, that at least. A duty dignified with the gift of miracles;
exemplified in Elias, Joshua, and many more. Chrysostom.
Now (...) i e. if the solitary prayer of one single supplicant be so
operative, what would it do in a full Assembly? who combining together, besiege
and beset God with their prayers, such a storming of, and forceable entry into
heaven, being most acceptable to him, as Tertullian, elegantly. Such an
advantage has the Public above the Private, the Church above the Closet; and
hence a necessity of Common Prayer.

But there may be a necessity of Common Prayer, yet no necessity of a Book
Object.
of Common Prayer, that is, of a set form. The prayers of the Minister, in the
Congregation, for the Congregation, are Common Prayers; which are Prayers
conceived, and without book.

Answer. Confessed, such Prayers may in some sort be called Common Prayers,
Answer.
but not so properly as set forms; because the Minister who officiateth
Publicly, is but the Agent, the representative of the people in their resort
to God. Now in arbitrary Prayer he cannot so well be called the mouth of the
Assembly, or said to send up his prayers on their errand, when they are not
privy to one syllable he will deliver, when he speaks always his own, not
always their sense* in which case the peoples Amen should be as Arbitrary as
is his Prayer: and if upon some dislike at the either matter or form, the
people think fit to suspend their Amen, what then becomes of the Common prayer?
Again, in conceived prayer the spirit of the Congregation is more stinted then
imposed; our concernments, whether temporal, or whether spiritual, are very
numerous and require in terminis, to the best of our power, a clear enumeration
of them all by the Congregation in their addresses to God. Commit these
particulars to a prescribed form, it will faithfully dictate them again, commit
them to memory, impossible it is for her precisely to refund them upon a
minutes warning, and where any are omitted, the people's spirits as to those
particulars must needs be restrained. Again, Arbitrary prayer is not so
edifying as a prescript form. When the people are preacquainted with, and
wonted to a set form, better can they accompany the Minister all along that
sacred exercise with intention of spirit, then when he prays ex tempore many
words, perhaps sentences, being like to escape audience, either through vocal
impediment, or local distance. Again, by set forms many mischiefs are prevented
to which conceived prayer stands obnoxious, be the abilities of him who
officiateth in an extemporary way, never so eminent, yet are they not always
the same. As man, subject he is to those familiar incidents, languor of either
body, or mind, and when either of these possess him, the vigor of his spirit
must needs abate, his conceptions become disordered; and it were a sad case,
that when a Congregation assemble to solicit God by public prayer, there
should prove a fail in that great duty, upon any such common emergency, which
mischief is prevented by a prayer always the same. Care also is taken thereby,
as the Can. 15.
Council of Milevis decreed. Ne forte aliquod contra fidem, vel per ignoratiam,
vel per minus studium sit compositum. Lest by chance either through ignorance,
or incuriosity, heterodox and unsound tenets be vented: and the necessity of
such a provision these woeful times have sufficiently taught us. Care is taken
in all those three particulars, for whose sake Mr. Epist. Protection.
Calvin advises it with his valde probo, I do exceedingly approve of it.
First, ut consulatur quorundum simplicitati and imperitiae; that there may be a
provision to help the simplicity and unskilfulnesse of some, that there be
praying not toying in the Church, that those holy addresses, which should
breath all possible reverence, be not conceited as well as conceived, that all
levity, and fantastical wantonness be avoided. Secondly, ut certius constet
Ecclesiarum omnium inter se consensus, that the consent and of harmony
Parochial Churches may the better appear. Thirdly, ut obviam eatur desultoriae
quorundam levitati, qui novationes quasdam affectant. That the Capricious
giddiness of such who like nothing but changes and innovations be encountered.
Upon which, and other considerations, set forms have ever been esteemed so
expedient, as the casting all our public applications to God totally upon
occasional and indigested suggestions, cannot but signify a strange humor of
singularity, and a practical schism from all holy men in all ages. What the
practice of the people of God has been unto the days of our Savior, what of
the Christians from Constantine to this day; has been so often proved by very
learned Champions of our Church, as our adversaries begin to yield this
controversy to us. But we are slender gainers by it, for now we are told that
after Constantines time the Church began to gather soil; and that unless we
can produce evidence for set forms within the first 300. years, we shall not
be heard. Well then, let that be our present task, which if we be not able to
make good, we profess we have much missed our aim. And first we will make our
inquisition as early as may be. Acts 1. 14. we find the Apostles all with one
accord in Prayer and supplications: upon which words (d) Chamier (a man far
enough from Panstrat Cathol.
Superstition) Si orabant una, ergo communis erat omnibus formula: if they
prayed together, then they used one set form, whether such a conclusion be Tom.
3. l. 5. c. 12. S. 10.
absolutely inferrible from the premises of their Praying together. I will not
here determine; that it will easily flow in upon another account, viz. with
consideration had to the circumstance of time, I am prone to believe. Our
Savior was but new ascended, and the holy Ghost being not yet sent down upon
the Apostles, they were not qualified above the rate of other men, and having
not yet those extraordinary dispensations of gifts, which were conferred upon
them at Pentecost, it is very probable they durst not repose themselves upon
unpremeditated suggestions, but used some known form amongst them, most likely
such as they had been acquainted with in the Temple and Synagogues, to which
they so often resorted. Pentecost once past, and they with others endowed with
miraculous graces (b (...). ^ Chrysoft.
i. e. together with all those graces was the gift of prayer dispensed, and he
who had it, prayed for all the people. No marvel then, if whilst this grace
lasted, there was no form stated. But this with all its confraternity, either
expiring, or languishing, about the end of the Apostolical age, cause there was
administered of devising set forms to supply the default of those gifts, and
upon that moment of time prescribed forms most probably be fixed. That Epist. ad
Magnes.
St. Ignatius his (...), one prayer had reference to such a form, or Apol. ^.
Justin Martyrs (...), Common prayer, as learned men conceive, I shall not
urge, having testimony elsewhere sufficient. Clemens Alexandrinus Stromat. 7^
giving us the practice of his time, mention (...), i. e. the Congregation
addicted to their prayers, having as it were one mind, and one voice common to
all. Now a Congregation cannot have one voice in their prayers, without a set
form for them to join in. de Coron milit.
Tertullian sub antistitis manu contestamur nos renunciare Diabolo and Pompa
and Angelis ejus; speaking of Baptism, whilst we are under the Priests hand,
we profess that we forsake the Devil, his pomps and his Angels. Origin. in
Jeremiam. Him 11.
Origin, Frequenter in oratione dicimus, da omnipotens, da partem cum
Prophetis, da cum Apostolis Christi tui, tribue ut inveniamur ad vestigia
unigeniti tui. Grant Almighty God, grant us a lot with thy Prophets, with the
Apostles of thy Christ, give us that we may follow the steps of thy only Son.
Cypr. Epist. 75.
Cyprian, speaking of an imposture acted by a cheating woman, Baptisabat quoque
multos, usitata and legitima verba interrogationis usurpans: she baptized many
using the accustomed words of interrogation; so also, Praefatione praemissa
parat fratrum mentes dicendo sursum corda. The priest after in Orat. Domin.
the Preface prepares the hearts of his brethren, saying, Lift up your hearts.
What clearer evidence can there possibly be of set forms, and all these before
300. years after Christ! and if in times of such persecution, when Christianity
was in her morning-dresse, when colebantun Religiones pie magis quam magnifice,
Religion was more devout then splendid, such expedience Live. Hist.
there was found of set forms, how much more requisite are they in times of
peace and rest. A matter so clear, so convincing, as no Christian society, that
ever pretended to the name of a Church, did ever think of their abolition
before the late compilers of the Directory. Men who, with hands lifted up to
the most high God, did swear to endeavor the reformation of Religion in this
Kingdom in worship etc. according to the word of God, and the example of the
best reformed Churches, a pretense fair and specious. But acting as they did,
it had been much to our satisfaction had they pleased to produce one example of
any Church best reformed which has not a set form of Common prayer: their
darling Geneva has hers, approved by Mr. Calvin, their beloved Belgia has
hers, established by the late Synod at Dort, yea, their dear confederate
Scotland Sessio 178. post decessum exterorum.
has hers, and are any Churches in their reputation better reformed then these?

And administration of the Sacraments.] In the time of the old Testament
nothing relating to their Sacraments, either that of Circumcision or the
Passover Abraham.] So for the Passover, over the pascal Lamb they sung certain
hymns, Lucas Burgensis and Gro^ius persuade they were the Psalms of David
from 112. to the 119. In the first times of Christianity, so far as Apostolic
evidences teach, Common Prayer never went alone without the celebration of the
Eucharist, then notified by breaking of Bread. Act. 2. 42. 20, 7. And though
the form of consecrating these Elements be not there delivered, yet Jerome,
Augustine and Gregory affirm it was by the dominical prayer, and that our Lord
gave order to his Apostles so to do, and indeed no prayer was more apt for the
service of that Sacrament especially if by (...) bread spiritually mystical,
and supersubstantial, be intended; as many of the Fathers understood it. As for
the other Sacrament of Baptism, the Practice of those times being immersion
and dipping, and that of persons of full growth: a River or pond was
necessarily required, and by consequence the place of holy meetings not capable
of it. And yet for all this, even before Fonts or (...), diving Cisterns were
brought to the Church, set forms were ordained for the celebration thereof, as
appears manifestly enough by Tertullian. Aquam aditurs, ibidem, sed and
aliquanto pri^s in Ecclesia sub Antistitis manu contestamur nos renunciare
di^^olo etc. i. e. being to step into the water, there also, what we formerly
did in the Church the Priest laying his hand of Benediction upon us, we declare
that we forsake the Devil, his pomps and Angels. A thing so fit in the opinion
of men not miscarried by byas, as Calvin himself enforces the use thereof with
an Oportet. Statam esse oportet Sacraementorum celebrationem, Publicam item
Precum formulam. There is no other Epist. Protectori.
remedy, an established form in celebrating the Sacraments there must be, and
so also of Common prayers.

And other rights and Ceremonies.] Besides Common prayer, and Administration

Of the Church of England.] Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. c. 1 Hem. 1.
. (...). The word Church is not a name of separation and division, but of unity
and concord: good reason therefore had the Apostle to decree that in it all
things should be done decently and in order: and order there cannot be, where
there is no unanimity. And because it is impossible to devise one uniform order
for the Catholic Church in point of ceremonies, men's minds being as various,
as is the difference of climates, therefore it has been the Catholic
practice, for every national Church, as it is cantonised from others, to frame
such models of services, with rites and ceremonies appendant to them, as best
suit the temper and disposition of such as are to render obedience to them:
upon this account, in the first and purest times, the Churches of the East and
West, differed much in their Ecclesiastical customs, and not only so, but
even under the same Patriarchate, many subordinate Churches took liberty to
vary each from other, and some time from the mother Church, so the Church of
Millain under St. Ambrose, had offices differing from that of Rome, and so had
the Gallican Churches also in the days of Gregory the great, who took so
little offense thereat, as he said, Gregor. Epist. Leandro,
In una fide nil officit Ecclesiae sanctae consuetudo diversa i. e. [Provided
the unity of faith be preserved, customary differences do not put the holy
Church to any detriment.] So then if the Church of England has her set forms
of sacred offices peculiar to herself, she assumeth no greater privilege then
others have done before her. And as she is in this particular vindicated from
singularity, so has she proceeded with semblable prudence in enjoying one
common form to all such as call her mother, that she may appear to be all of a
peace; For the worship publicly performed and ni Parochial Assemblies, is not
to be reputed the worship peculiar of those Congregations, but common to the
whole National Church whereof they are limbs, in which service the spirit of
that mystical body, being in her subordinate members (as the soul in the
natural tota in qualibet part) is exercised. This service being then the
service of the whole National Church, why should she not strictly enjoin to her
several members the frame and model thereof, lest any should in her name
present to God a service she would not own, and that the uniformity of her
worship in her distinct members (as more prevalent with the divine Majesty,
when all conspire in the same supplications so) may argue and demonstrate the
mutual and joint communion all members have one with another.

An act for uniformity etc.] To what end a book of Common prayer if it Augustine.
meliores sunt quos dirigit amor, i. e. they are the best natured whom love
persuades, so plures sunt quos corrigit timor, they are more numerous whom awe
constrains, upon which very score, necessary it was to call in aid of the civil
power, which was done here by act of Parliament* So that no one order had
reason to except against this established form: the Clergy were employed as
contrivers of the model, The laity from the highest to the lowest, all, Kings,
Lords and Commons, were interested in the ratification whereby a coercive power
in order to conformity was constituted.

And that the said book with the order of service etc.] This act is not
introductory Edward the 6* the remains of which structure are so considerable
(notwithstanding it has gone twice to the mending) as may worthily give it the
denomination of Edward the 6* his Liturgy.

With one alteration etc.] It must not be imagined that either the Queen or the
Parliament made those alterations, for the review of the Liturgy was committed
by the Queen to certain Commissioners viz, to Mr. Whitehead, Doctor Parker,
after Arch-Byshop of Canterbury; Doctor Grindal, after Bishop of London; Doctor
Cox, after Bishop of Ely; Doctor Pilkinton, after Bishop of Durham: Doctor May,
Dean of St. Paul's; Doctor Bill, Provost of Eaton; and Sr. Thomas Smith. These
adding and expunging where they thought meet, presented it to the Parliament
who only established what they had concluded upon. As for the several changes,
Alterations, and differences betwixt this Liturgy of ours, and that of the 2 of
Edward 6. this statute takes not notice of them all, but what is defective
herein Smectymnu^s has supplied, as shall be observed at their several
occurrences.

To inquire in their visitation etc.] Diocesan visitations were always of very
eminent use in the Ecclesiastical Polity, and peculiar of the Episcopal August.
Epst. 237.
St. Augustine plead it in bar to Celer's action of unkindnesse against him for
not writing sooner, Qu^niam visitandarum Ecclesiarum ad meam Curam pertinentium
necessitate profectus sum. i. e. [Because (says he) I was gone a broad upon
abusinesse of necessity, the visiting of such Churches as were within my cure]
So the Mareotick Clergy in the defense of Athanas. Apolog. Secun.
Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria against a calumny of his adversaries, make
mention of his visitation in person, and not only so, but also that they
themselves were of his train when he went upon that service. In after times
their work increasing, so as they could not well attend it themselves, they had
their Periodeutae and Itinerary Vicars to go the circuit for them, these acting
still agreeable to a series of Articles enjoined by their Bishops. In the
beginning of the Reformation when it much concerned the Civil power to act (as
we say of natural agents) ad extremum Potentiae, to the utmost of its politic
hability, King Henry the eighth, and Edward the sixth, and Queen Elizabeth,
though (I presume, upon consultation had with the Clergy) assumed and exercised
the Authority of framing and imposing a body of Articles for Episcopal
visitations, which had certainly this very commendable property, that they
preserved uniformity, whereas the leaving them to every arbitrary fancy, and
the exercise of that liberty by some Bishops of later memoray, was (in my
opinion) a probable way of erecting Altar against Altar, and creating Schism
in the Church.

The Queens Majesty may by the like advice etc.] There was in the Act premised,
a prohibition, with a penalty annexed to it, that no [Parson, Vicar, or Queen
may by the advice of her Commissioners or metropolitan ordain and publish such
farther Ceremonies or Rites, as may be most for the advancement of Gods glory
etc. So that upon the entertainment of this exception, the rule is
corroborated, as to all particulars not so exempted, and consequently that none
might innovate any Rite not expressly enjoined in the book of Common Prayer
then established, or Book of Canons legally to be framed afterward. Which
clause of reserve was no impowring, nor enabling the Queen with any new and
upstart authority, but only a declaration of what was resident in her before,
as inseparably incident to the supreme Dominion vested in the Crown. Agreeable
to which, She Anno. 1597. authorized the Clergy, then met in Convocation, to
make and publish certain Canons which she after confirmed under the great Seal
of England. Other Canons there were made Anno 1571. But being not ratified with
royal Authority, I suppose, they were not obligatory enough to constrain
obedience, and as concerning these of 1597. the formal words of her heirs and
successors being omitted in those Ratifications, they were supposed only
obligatory during her Reign, and that they together with her self breathed
their last. Whereupon King James in the first year of his reign issued forth a
new Commission by his letters Patents to the Convocation then assembled,
therein giving them [full power and Authority to consult and agree upon such
Canons etc. as they should think necessary] which being concluded upon by the
Clergy and presented to his Majesty. He did [for himself, his heirs and lawful
successors] confirm them with his royal assent, as may be seen more at large in
that Ratification. Indeed the supremacy of the Civil Magistrate, as to
confirmation and a cogency of external obedience in Religious and
Ecclesiastical affairs, is no usurpation upon the Churches right, as the
Romish party contend against us; but has been approved of in the purest times;
and therefore whereas they seem to press us with the objection, That our
Religion is Parliamentary, because some concernments thereof have been Ratified
by Act of Parliament. Our answer is, that Parliaments Enact not without the
Royal assent; This is, and only this, that vital spirit which regularly
animates those establishments, and from such assent the two first general
Councels (not to insist upon Nationals,) received their confirmation. Eminent
is that of Socrates, (...). a Prolog. ad Hist. Eccles. l. 5.
i. e. I therefore so often mention the Emperors in the series of my History,
though Ecclesiastical, because that from the very first of their becoming
Christians, all Church matters depended upon their pleasure, so as the greatest
and Ecumenical Councels, were then, and are still, convented by their order
and summons. As concerning these Canons of our Church, Regal assent it was
alone which firmed them; the Parliament (though then sitting) not being
resorted to, nor interposing their Authority; an unhappy disjunctive, for
through default of their concurrent Ratification, many of their Canons became
insignificant ciphers, and where custom and Canon chanced to justle and
enterfere, the people (if their either inclination, or interest might be
gainers by it) always fled to prescription. And prescription was sure to carry
the cause, where no Act of Parliament interposed to the contrary.

Now at our first entry into the Realm etc.] The complaint employed in this
Proclamation, is a Libel miscalled, The humble petition of the Ministers of the
Church of England desiring Reformation of certain Ceremones and abuses in the
Church, that they might the better fore-speak impunity for so strange boldness
they exhibit their muster-roll thus formidable, To the number of more then a
thousand. This Petition they presented in April 1603. Formed it was into four
heads, comprehending a summary of all their pitiful grievances, concerning
first the Church service, Secondly, Church ministers, Thirdly, Church livings,
Fourthly, concerning Church discipline. To encounter these schismatics both
the Universities presently endeavor what they can, Oxford models out a very
brief, but solid answer to all their objections, not suffering one to escape.
Cambridge passes a grace in their public Congregation June 9. in the same
year. That whosoever shall openly oppose the Doctrine or Discipline of the
Church of England or any part thereof, either in words or writing, shall be
forthwith suspended of all degrees already taken, and made incapable of taking
any hereafter. This notwithstanding, they held private conventicles the usual
forerunners of sedition, so as the King was compelled in October next to
restrain them by Proclamation, but promising withal, that he intended a
conference should shortly be had for the sopiting and quieting of those
disputes. This was the great occasion of that Conference of Hampton Court.

According to the form which the Laws of this Realm etc.] The Kings of this
justly and rightfully to be the supreme Governors of the Church of England, to
have full power and Authority from time to time to visit, repress, redress,
reform, order correct, restrain and amend all such errors etc. which by any
manner spiritual Authority or jurisdiction, ought or may lawfully be reformed,
repressed, ordered, redressed, corrected, restrained, or amended. Agreeable to
this power Henry the 8. Edw. the 6. Queen Mary her self, Queen Elizabeth
severally in their respective reigns did act. But the laws referred to by this
Proclamation is, first that Act of Parliament 1. Eliz. wherein it is ordained,
that the Kings and Queens of this Realm shall have have full power and
authority by letters Patents under the great Seal of England to assign, name,
and Authorize, when and as often as their Heirs and Successors shall think
meet and convenient, such person or persons as they shall think meet etc. to
visit, reform, redress etc. Secondly, the latter end of the Act for
uniformity, where the Queen (and consequently her Successors) are authorized by
the Advice of their Commissioners, or the metropolitan to ordain and publish
further Rites and Ceremonies. And this helps us with an answer to an objection
of Smecttymnuus who from the several Alterations made in our Liturgy both by
Queen Elizabeth, and King James from that of the second establishment by Edw.
6. infer, that the Liturgy now in use, is not the Liturgy that was
established by Act of Parliament, and therefore that Act binds not to the use
of this Liturgy. To this we reply, that those Alterations can excuse from that
act only in part, and for what is altered, as to what remains the same, it
binds undoubtedly still in tanto though not in ^oto. And for the Alterations
themselves, the first being made by Act of Parliament express that of 1 Elis.
and the second by Act of Parliament reductive, and implied (those
aforementioned) what gain Smecttymnuus by their illation that those
alterations are not established by the first Act? And whereas it may be
supposed that that Proclamation may lose its vigor by that Kings death, and
consequently the Service book may be conceived to be thereby in statu quo
prius; yet considering his late Majesty did not null it by any express edict,
that several Parliaments sitting after did not disallow it, that all
subscriptions have been unanimous in reference to those changes, that the
Emendations were made to satisfy the Litigant party. I conceive the
Proclamation valid notwithstanding the death of that King.

The first original and ground whereof etc.] Here our Church is explicit,
express enough, to confute the vulgar error of her seduced children, who fill
the

The Pie,] Pica, or in English the Pie, I observe used by three several sorts
of men. First by the quondam Popish Clergy here in England before the
Reformation, ad usum Sarum (devised for the more speedy finding out the order
of Reading their several services, appointed for several occasions, at several
times, the Pie. Secondly by Printers, which call the letters wherewith they
Print books and treatises in party colors, the Pica letters. Thirdly, by
Officers of civil Courts, who call their Kalendars or Alphabetical Catalogues,
directing to the names and things contained in the Rolls and Records of their
Courts, the Pyes. Whence it gained this denomination is difficult to determine,
whether from the Bird Pica variegated with diverse colors, or whether from the
word (...) (contracted into (...).) which denotes a Table, the Pie in the
Directory being nothing else but a Table of rules directing to the proper
service for every day, I cannot say, from one of these probably derived it was,
and no great matter which.

Wherein the reading of the Scriptures is so set forth etc.] The Lessons
appointed in the Calendar are only ordered for the week days, or such
festivals, as happen upon them; not for the Sundays, for which resort must be
had to a future order.

Nothing but the pure word of God, or that which is evidently grounded upon the
same.] Here the Church declares that over and besides the Canonical Scripture,
what is evidently grounded upon the same, vi^. Some part of the Apocrypha, she
approves and appoints to be read in Churches, to which end some Lessons in
the Calendar are selected thence, but neither considered by her in a party of
honor with the Canon, nor so strictly enjoined, but that she in some cases
tolerateth, yea, commends a swerving from her prescriptions. Admonition to
Ministers Eccles. prefixed to the 2. B. of Homil.
For [where it may so chance, some one or other Chapter of the Old Testament to
fall in order to be read upon the Sundays or holy days, which were better to
be changed with some other of the New Testament of more edification, it shall
be well done of Ministers Ecclesiastical, to spend their time to consider of
such Chapters before hand] which mutation being restrained to the Old Testament
alone, administers probable occasion of conjecture, that our Church thereby
intended an allowance of declining Apocryphal Lessons on holy days, that the
history of the Saints might be the better complcated by some express Chapters
of the New Testament, which will be the less controverted, if it be withal
observed, that in the sense of our Church, the ancient model of both the
Canonical, and Apocryphal books, pass under the complexed notion of the Act. 6.
Old Testament. That they are at all permitted by our Church is accounted by
her adversaries grande nefas, and yet they are not ignorant, that as Canonical
Scripture they are not read, that in the Primitive Church Hieron. praefat: in
Lib* Solun:
they, as also Epiphan. c. Ebien.
Clemens his Epistles to the Corinthians were read, that the Confess. Belg.
Act. 6.
Belgic Church in her confession grants they may lawfully be read. That their
own Sermons have as little of the spirit either of infallibility, or
Sanctification as those books. That exclusive Parenthesis of the Directory (But
none of those which are commonly called Apocrypha) had been, I must confess, a
prudent, I say not, a necessary Order: had the edification of the people been
better provided for by certain Lessons of the Canon succenturiated (according
to the Order of the Scottish Liturgy) in their stead; but when I perceive, not
only a liberty given, but a requisitenesse commended by the same Directory in
the reading of very many Chapters, not only less, but not at all edifying to
a popular Auditory, such are some Chapters in Genesis, in Leviticus very many,
some in the Chronicles etc. which are required to be read in their order, then
will they have just cause to wish either those Apocryphals postliminiated
again, or others of the Canon to succeed them, whereby the Congregation might
receive better instruction.

Nothing can almost be so plainly set forth but doubts may rise.] It is a rule
in the Law. Lex positiva non omnia cogitat; plura enim sunt negotia, quam
vocabula. Positive Law cannot forecast and prevent all questions, there being
more matters then words to declare them: upon which consideration, fit it is
there should be a power in reserve for the stating of emergent doubts; in whom
can this power more prud ently be lodged then in Bishops, the spiritual
Governors of our Church, whose experience and discretion must be valued above
the rate of ordinary Pastors. Hieron. adv. Luciferianos.
Ecclesiae salus in summi sacer dotis dignitate pendet cui si non exors quaedam
and ab omnibus eminens detur potestas tot in Ecclesiis efficientur schismata
quot sacerdotes. [The safety of the Church depends upon the dignity of the
Chief Priest, to whom unless a power be given, matchless, and supereminent
above all others, there will be soon as many Schisms, as Priests.] But though
the Power decretory and deciding be reposed in the Bishop, yet it is not
indefinite, but limited to a non-repugnancy to any thing contained in this Book.

In the English tongue.] The work of reformation was not more glorious, then
difficult; being to enterprise upon such habits, as many hundred of years
continuance seemed to render insuperable so: that if it went slowly on at
first, and got ground but by inches, the grand opposition it found is
sufficient to excuse it. A work it was not for artificers to undertake, not for
a giddy multitude to order, not for any beneath the very Supreme Magistrate to
meddle with; a work it was fit only for a King, and therefore could not be
begun until it found a King fit for the work. Such a King at length appeared
Henry the eight, a King of great courage, and withal of prudence. The first
onset he gave, in order to this work, was the bringing God Almighty and his
people acquainted, by causing them to understand each other; for whilst the
people spoke to God, and he to them: they knew not what, they did not
understand each other; nor he them because he only understands the language of
the heart, not the babbling of the lips; for Clem. Alex.
(...), [what vocal words are to us, the same is the cogitation of our hearts
to God:] not they him, because they understood the Romish Religion, better then
the Romish tongue: therefore to redress this very great mischief to their
souls, this Kings first care is, to render Divine offices a in tongue, their
native English, familiar to them. But this he effected not all at once, but by
degrees: and first he begins with the great essentials of Religion, the Pater
Noster, Creed and Decalogue, these were imparted to them in the English tongue
by his injunctions, Anno 1536. then he proceeded to the communication of the
sacred Scripture to them by a Translation of his own authorizing, Anno 1540.
But as yet the public Service was kept locked up from them: to indulge them
therefore his Royal favor in this particular also, he caused an extract to be
drawn out of the Latin Service, containing many of the best and most edifying
Prayers, which (with the Litany, all translated into the vulgar tongue, under
the title of his Primer) by injunction bearing date the sixth of May 37. of his
Reign, he published for the good of his Subjects: But King Henry dying not long
after, he left what he had begun to be completed by his Son Edward; This
Prince zealously devoted to the service of Gods Church, plied him as fast as
the perplexity of the work, and little time he lived would well permit. The
Bible which I told you before, King Henry had commended to the use of his
people, not long after, upon reason of State he was enforced to withdraw from
them again, and the restoration of it was King Edwards first endeavor, by
1542.
injunctions dated July the last 1547. confirming also the use of the other
things, as Pater Noster, Creed, Decalogue, Primer, and Litany. But nothing was
done yet in reference to the Sacrament of the Altar, as they called it then,
whereof the Clergy had extended and extorted the moity, the Cup, from the
people; therefore full restitution was made, in the next and first Parliament,
to such as did in both kinds desire it. And because slender benefit this Act
of Grace was like to prove, as long as in the service proper to it they
understood not a syllable, (for the Reformation formerly made had not proceeded
to the Communion office) this consideration drew on another piece of
Reformation, viz. the forming and collecting of an office in the vulgar tongue
suitable to that great ordinance; and this was done by the Bishops and others
convened by the Kings command at Windsor, passing under the Title of The order
of the Communion, which was a breviate and summary of near resemblance to that
we now have, and was published March the 8. 1548. But this was only an interim
order, made to stay the stomachs of earnest longers for the present, that very
Proclamation which enjoynd it, promising somewhat of an higher import, which
was effected accordingly in the first Liturgy of that King, being compiled by
the most judicious Bishops and others of that time, ratified by Act of
Parliament, and set forth March 17. 1549. But this Liturgy being as some
conceived, not thoroughly racked from the lees of superstition, The King and
meant, desirous to give all reasonable satisfaction to malcontents, gave order
(probably to the same persons or so many of them as were then living) that the
Book should be faithfully and godly perused, explained, and made fully perfect,
and being so reviewed and explained, they confirmed it again, Anno 5. and 6. of
Edward 6. as in the statute appears. Thus have I drawn the line of our
Reformation, so far as concerns Public worship in a known tongue, that the
Reader may observe all its motions, stages, and processions, from its first
rise unto the second Book of Edward 6. wherein our Church (some few particulars
excepted) does acquiesce.

Either privately or openly] The act preceding telling us so expressly, that open
Prayer is such as is made in a Cathedral, Church, Chapel, or Oratory, in a
consecrated Place, we need no Oedipus to unriddle the import of Private, or to
doubt that it signifies any thing other then such as is performed at home. But
why is the Minister bound to say it daily, either in public or at home? Some
think our Church had under consideration how ignorant and illiterate many
Vicars were, and ordered thus, that they might con in private, the better to
enable them for the Public. But I am of another persuasion: for, first the
Church, I conceive, would not, as she does, enjoin them to officiat in public,
did she not suppose them already in some tolerable degree fitted for the
service. Again, the words are general, not definitively such and such of those
mean abilities, but all Ministers without exception. Now though very many were,
yet it is no charitable judgment to believe them all Dunces. And it is
apparent that where such ignorance fell under the consideration of authority,
the phrase does vary, with a particular application to them alone who were
guilty of it; so it is in the Elis. Injunc. 35.
Queens injunctions such: (such only, not all) as are but mean readers, shall
peruse over before once or twice the Chapters and Homilies, to the intent they
may read to the better understanding of the people, and the more encouragement
to Godliness. So that I rather think the Churches policy was the better to
inure and habituate the Clergy to Religious duties. But be this so, or not so,
sure of this we are, that the Church does hereby warrant the use of her Liturgy
sometimes in places not consecrated. This daily service especially, which in
its original designation, was not only indulged to private places, but private
persons in those places, I mean for Masters of families, and others in the
private exercises of Religion. This is evident by the ancient Primers which
containing the daily service, were set forth to be frequented and used as well
of the elder People, as also of the youth for their common and ordinary
prayers, as is in the injunction of Henry the 8. prefixed to that of his, in the
year 1546.

Of such ceremonies as have had their beginning by the institution of man.]
Amongst Ceremonies of humane institution; for told we are, that the Manuduction
to the fresh suit Against Ceremonies p. 12.
Common Protestant tenent was always, that it is reprovable to add unto
Christ's intention, newfound rites and fantasies of men, which being so
positively delivered by such a man of abilities, as Dr. Amesius, were enough to
stagger any one whose curiosity leads him not to further search, but when the
stream of those tenants, and practice elicited from them, shall appear upon
strict examination to be carried with a tide clean contrary, certainly nothing
but shame can justly attend so bold, so confident, and withal so groundless
and false an Assertion. Nothing assuredly can be more demonstrative of the
Protestant tenants, then the confession of their several Churches. That of Cap.
27.
Helvetia first, [Churches have always used their liberty in rites, as being
things indifferent which we also do at this day.] That of Cha. 15.
Bohemia, [Humane traditions, and ceremonies brought in by a good custom, are
with an uniform consent to be retained in the Ecclesiastical assemblies of
Christian people, at the common Service of God.] The Act. 32.
Gallican, [Every place may have their peculiar constitutions, as it shall seem
convenient for them.] The Act. 32,
Belgic, [we receive those Laws as are fit, either to cherish* or maintain
concord, or to keep us in the obedience of God]. That of Act. 15.
Ausburg, [Ecclesiastical rites which are ordained by man's authority, and tend
to q^ietnesse and good order in the Church, are to be observed.] That of Act. 20
Saxony, [For ordersake, there must be some decent and seemly ceremonies. That
of Chap. 14.
Sweveland, [Such traditions of men as agree with the Scriptures, and were
ordained for good manners, and the profit of men, are worthily to be accounted,
rather of God then of man.] These were the tenants they publicly owned, nor
did they act different from what they thought, ordeining Churches, Pulpits,
prayers before and after Sermon, administering the Sacraments in Churches,
delivering the Communion in the forenoons, to women. Baptising infants, and
several other things, not one whereof were directly commanded by either Christ
of his Apostles.

Let all things be done among you (says St. Paul) in a seemly and due order.]
The Apostles having their full stock of employment, and a great task set them,
viz. Paul prescribed; all within the provision of one Chapter, that of 1 Cor.
14 whereof these here mentioned are the close, (...). Let all things be done
decently, and according to appointment. First, (...), that is, observing the
due and proper scheam and figure, that the action requires, as kneeling at
prayer, and confession of sins, standing when we glorify God, or profess our
Christian faith etc. Secondly, (...), i e according to the orders and
injunctions of the Superiors, or Governors of the Church, for they err which
think the appointment of this order appertains to private men, herein the
Doctrine of our Church in this paragraph is highly commendable, interdicting
all persons not lawfully called, that is, not publicly authorized from
attempting any thing by way of appointing, or altering the orders of the
Church. True it is, subjects not only may, but must question the orders of
their Superiors in foro conscientiae, in the courts of their own consciences,
but then withal they must state the question aright, not whether they be
inconvenient, scandalous, over-numerous, in edifying, or so: but whether they
be elemented of things in their own nature indifferent; if they be directly
evil, away with them, they must not be obeyed: if but collaterally evil,
Augustine.
Reum regem facit iniquitas imperandi, innocentem subditum ordo serviendi i. e.
the sinfulness of the command finds the King guilty, whilst the order of
obeying acquits the subject. Unless this rule of uniform order be punctually
observed, we must never expect any thing of decency in Gods Church, and
therefore the Apostle has very well sent abroad his (...) cum custode, with
his keeper, (...), according to appointment: Something must be appointed,
before decency can be looked for. Should one enter the Church at the
Celebrating of the blessed Eucharist, and behold, here some prostrate on their
knees, there others sitting with their hats on, here some lolling all at
length, there others standing up, were it possible for him, if well in his
wits, to imagine this is decency, in an action of such import? even common sense
is able to inform him otherwise, and that one umform establishment is
absolutely necessary to preserve due decorum.

But it may be objected, that my Superior may enjoin me such a law, as my
conscience tells me is scandalous to my brother, not convenient, not edifying,
etc. what shall I do in this condition? if I conform I sin against my
conscience, Romans 14. 23. If I do not, I sin against his Authority. Answer, that
Text of Romans 14. 23. has only reference to things not only indifferent in
their own nature, but left free from any superior command interposing, and
therefore the text is not ad idem: for though such laws may be of things
indifferent, yet being commanded by just Authority, the indifference by that
command determines, and they become necessary.

And whereas in this our time etc.] In this Paragraph our Church does not
suppose, but state the case as it really was. In the beginning of the
Reformation, Rome, no, not in those things whose use was harmless and
innocent, would not endure to hear of any thing less then a total rout given
to the whole Public worship of that Church. Our Godly Reformers standing erect
in a discreet neutrality, not siding with eithers passions, fixed themselves
upon a serious view of such things as the Church of Rome had of most ancient
extraction, and which were tractable to more pious uses: of these, severed from
the dross they had contracted, they compiled this excellent model of our
Liturgy, in so moderate and well tempered a mode, as neither part had just
cause to think themselves agrieved.

By some notable and special signification.] They who are by the force of
reason beaten from their first fort, viz. that man has no power to institute
external that humane significant Ceremonies in Gods worship are disagreable to
Christian liberty, and unlawful: and upon the stresse of this position, the
Cross in Baptism, and Surplice go to wrack. Before I undertake to answer this
Objection, and the authority upon which it is grounded, I must crave leave to
lay open the Partiality of the objecters. The Ancient Authors of the admonition
to the Parliament, defend their sitting posture at the Communion by the very
same doctrine of signification, saying, it b^t^k^neth rest, and full
accomplishment of legal ceremonies in Christ, and the Author of Psalm. 750.
altar Damascenum, approves the same opinion cited out of Johannes Alasco,
Sessio commendatur per significationem mysterii nempe requiei nostrae in
Christo: i. e. Session or sitting is commended for the mysterious signification
it has, that is, of our rest in Christ. It is not very credible, that this
Doctrine of the adversaries of our Liturgy, should pass unobserved to the
former of this objection, and if it did not, we must be bold to tell him, he
should have done well to have begun his reformation at home with those of his
own persuasion. But let us examine the foundation of this Objection, and this
is derived from those words of Isa. urged by our Savior against the Pharisees,
In vain ye worship me, teaching for Doctrines the traditions of men, Matthew. 15.
9. where first it will be difficult to prove, that this was a significant
ceremony; the Pharisees standing upon the outward custom, without the least
hint of signification. Again, if it were a significant rite, here is a non
constat of any reproof relating to it as significant, but that they stood more
upon it, then upon the precepts of God, that being of a civil relation, they
urged it as out of an opinion of holiness, and as an essential part of
Religion, in which respects those Ceremonies of the Cross and Surplice, were
never by us entertained or defended. And if all significant ceremonies are
unlawful, what shall we think of that holy kiss mentioned in the holy
Scripture, used at the Eucharist in the Primitive Church, which 1 These. 5. 26.
Zanchy tells us was, ad significandam veram and Christianam amicitiam ac
fraternitatem, i. e. to signify true and Christian friendship, and
brotherhood. Yet Zanchy passes not the least note of reproof upon it.

By the Superstitious blindness, etc.] Superstition is usually defined to be,
a will worship more then God commanded; with submission to others, I conceive
the word defines the thing by Grammatical analysis, and resolving of the
composition: and that it is a standing too much upon a thing, and more then the
nature of it requires: to describe it larger, it is the doing or omitting of
any thing out of a supposition of some holiness, or pollution resident in it
more then is. So that superstition is both positive, and negative; Positive, ye
observe days, and months, and times, and years. Gal. 4. 10. Negative, touch
not, taste not, handle not Colos. 2. 21. And so I may say of those expressions,
be not signed with the Cross, kneel not at the Sacament; for the placing of
Religion, abstaining from such things of their own nature indifferent, is
situated under the same parallel of superstition with the Papists, who observe
them as meritorious.

Some of the old Ceremonies be retained still.] Some, not all; some of the old
late innovations of the Church of Rome; but of those Ceremonies which antidate
the Popish Mass hundreds of years. It is a very pitiful one, that trite and
false Objection; That our Liturgy has its rise and Original from the
Masse-Book; ask why, because say they, all that is in our Liturgy is in the
Masse-Book: directly false. The beginning of morning Prayer Sentences,
Exhortation, Confession, Absolution, all to the Lords Prayer, several Collects
in the Litany, the rehearsal of the Decalogue, and diverse Collects belonging to
the Communion service, are no where to be found, either in the Masse-Book, or
any other Popish service. So the All is false. But admit all our Liturgy were
to be found in the Mass Book, that is no evidence it has its Original from
thence, not only the Lords prayer, and Book of Psalms, but the greatest and
most edifying part of Canonical Scripture, is there to be found, as well as our
Liturgy, why do we not therefore ascribe its Original to the Masse-Book, and
upon that very score renounce it? Nay, if our Book was a compliance with the
Papists, as the late Assembly have urged against it, assuredly it ill sorted
with the Prudence of such Divines, to present the world with their own
establishment, under a title borrowed expressly from the Papists, their
Directory being the same, both name and thing, with the Directorium Sacerdotum,
For it is but a kind of Rubric.
in the Romish Church.

Such shall have no just cause with the Ceremonies received to be offended.]
Another Calvin. Epist. p. 341
Quamvis quod obtruditur scandalum asserat, quia tamen verbo dei per se non
repugnat, concedi po^est, says the great Legislator of the other side:
Although that which is enjoined does bring some scandal with it, yet if it be
not of it self against the word of God, it may be yielded to. Agreeable to
Calvin's Doctrine, Geneva acts. Nous scavons quelle occasion de Scandal
plusieurs ont prins du changement que nous avous fait en cest vne droit, [we
know well enough, that many have taken occasion of scandal at the changes we
have made in this subject,] so she in her Rubric before the Communion. And
fully persuaded I am, the abolishers of the Liturgy of this Church cannot but
have the same sense of many scandalized by the change of the Liturgy into a
Directory. I must profess my self of those many to be one, upon a solemn day
summoned we are by a bell to Church, thither we come, what to do? to offer up
our prayers and praises in the Congregation? it may be, and it may not be so:
for such prayers may scarce be reputed ours, whereof as we know not a syllable
beforehand what they are, so when they are uttered we often hear but little,
understand less, and in our judgments consent to least of all: told we are by
considerable persons engaged in this change, that the imposition of set forms
was introduced into the Primitive Church, as a defensive (b) against the Arrian
and Pelagian Heretics, which did convey their poison in their set forms of
Prayers Smectimnuus.
and hymns: if so, never times required the practice of set Prayers upon that
consideration more then these, never was the poison of hetorodox opinions more
ingredient into the public prayers of the Church then now, where one decryes
the Deity of Christ and his mediatorship, by making no applications to him, nor
to God by him. Another sets him up too high by omitting of confession of sins
as impertinent in those who are planted into Christ, and being so, as he
conceives sin not at all; if nothing of unsound belief be uttered, yet how
frequent is the venting of several passions upon the private interest of men's
factious engagement, even so far, as many have preferred their Petitions to God
for the destruction of the very Presbyterial Government, a Gangren. 1 Part. p.
40.
whereof Mr. Edwards gives several instances. Who can not justly be offended
at such mis-carriages in so holy a duty?

Far be it from me to charge the generality of our new ministry with these
blemishes: confess I must, and will; many, very many of them, are excellently
qualified and endowed with gifts proper for this sacred duty, and do exercise
those gifts to the great edification of their congregations; but in the mean
time, if such miscarriages have actually happened already, or may so hereafter,
through the violent passions of other men mis-principled, may it not justly be
judged a matter of scandal and offense, to such as have a due value for that
holy ordinance, and consequently may not those worthier men be conceived guilty
of the crime, through whose misprovidence these errors have come to pass. How
much better were an amicable compliance on both sides, by prescribing set forms
for the desk, and allowing conceived prayer for the Pulpit, so that neither may
profess and engrosse the whole service to it self, but share and divide it by
a friendly agreement, until such an award shall be made by those who assume
the power of Arbitration in this affair, slender hopes have I to see much of
either order or edification, in the service of our Church.

The Table and Calendar Expressing the Psalms and and Lessons to be said at
Morning and evening prayer, throughout the year, except certain proper feasts,
as the rules following more plainly declare, The order how the Psalter is
appointed to be read. CHAP. II.
Common Prayer. Scotch Liturgy. The Psalter shall be read through once every
month. And because that some months be longer then some other be, it is
thought good to make them even by this means. The Psalter shall be read through
once every month save February, and in that month so far as the Psalms are
appointed for 28 or 29 days in tht leap year.

TO every month shall be appointed (as concerning this purpose) just xxx.
days.

And because January and March has one day above the said number, and
February which is placed between them both, has only xxviii. days: February
shall borow of either of the months (of January and March) one day: And so the
Psalter which shall be read in February, must begin at the last day of January,
and end the first day of March.

And whereas [Scotch Littur: many months have etc.] May, July, August,
October, and December have xxxi. days a piece: it is ordered that the same
Psalms shall be read the last day of the said months, which were read the day
before, so that the Psalter may begin again the first day of the next months
ensuing.

Now to know what Psalms shall be read every day: Look in the calendar the
Omitted in the Scotch Service B.
number that is appointed for the Psalms, and then find the same number in
this table, and upon that number shall you see what Psalms shall be said at
Morning and Evening prayer.

And where the Cxix. Psalm is divided into xxii. portions, and is overlong to be
read at one time: it is so ordered, that at one time shall not be read above
four or five of the said portions, as you shall perceive to be noted in this
table following.

And here is also to be noted, that in this table, and in all other parts of
the service, where any psalms are appointed, the number is expressed after the
great english Bible, which from the ix. psalm, unto the Cxlviij. psalm
(following the division of the Hebrews) does vary in numbers from the common
Latin translation.

The Table for the order of the Psalms to be said at Morning and Evening Prayer.

Days of the month Psalms for Morning prayer Psalms for Evening prayer. i
i. ii iii iiii. v. vi. vii. viii. ii ix. x. xi. xii. xiii. xiiii. iii xv xvi.
xvii. xviii. iiii xix. xx. xxi. xxii. xxiii. v xxiiii. xxv. xxvi. xxvii.
xxviii. xxix. vi xxx. xxxi. xxxii. xxxiii. xxxi i. vii xxxv. xxxvi. xxxvii.
viii xxxviii. xxxix. xl. xli. xlii. xliii. ix xliiii. xlv. xlvi. xlvii. xlviii.
xlix x l. li. lii. liii. liiii. lv. xi lvi. lvii. lviii. lix. lx. lxi. xii.
lxil. lxiii. lxiiii. lxv. lxvi. lxvii. xiii lxviii. lxix. lxx. xiiii lxxi.
lxxii. lxxiii. lxxiiii. xv. xxv. lxxvi. lxxvii. lxxviii. xvi lxxix. lxxx.
lxxxi. lxxxii. lxxxiii. lxxxiiii. lxxxv. xvii lxxxvi. lxxxvii. lxxxviii.
lxxxix. xviii xc. xci. xcii. xciii. xciiii. xix xcv. xcvi. xcvii. xcviii. xcix
C. ci. xx cii. ciii. ciiii. xxi cv. cvi. xxii cvii. cviii. cix. xxiii cx. cxi.
cxii. cxiii. cxi. ^c. cxv. xxiiii cxvi. cxvii. cxviii. cxix. Jude. iiii. xxv
Jude. v. Jude. iiii. xxvi Jude. v. Jude. iiii. xxvii cxx. cxxi. cxxii. cxxiii
cxxiiii. cxxv. cxxiv. cxxvii. cxxviii. cxxix. cxxx. cxxxi. xxviii cxxxii.
cxxxiii. cxxxiiii. cxxxv. cxxxvi. cxxxvii. cxxxviii. xxix cxxxix. cxl. cxli.
cxxli cxliii. xxx cxliii. cxlv. cxlvi. cxlvii. cxlviii. cxlix. xl.

The order how the rest of holy Scripture, beside the Psalter is appointed to
be read.
THE old Testament is appointed for the first Lessons at Morning and Evening
prayer and shall be read through every year once, except certain Books and
Chapters which be least edifying, and

The New Testament is appointed for the sesecond Lessons at Morning and Evening
prayer, and shall be read over orderly every year thrice, beside the Epistles
and Gospels: Except the Apocalips, out of the which there be only certain
Lessons appointed upon diverse proper feasts.

And to know what Lessons shall be read every day: Find the day of the Month
in the Calendar following, and there ye shall perceive the Books and Chapters
that shall be read for the Lessons both at Morning and Evening Prayer.

And here is to be noted, that whenever there be any proper Psalms or
Lessons The word Sundays omitted in the 2. Liturgies of Edw. 6.
appointd for the Sundays, or for any feast moveable or unmovable: Then The
Psalms end Lessons appointed in the Calendar, shall be omitted for that time.

Ye must note also that the Collect, Epistle, and Gospel appointed for the
Sunday, shall serve all the week after, except there fall some feast that has
his proper.

Common Prayer. 1. and 2. B. of Edw. 6. When the years of our Lord may be be
divided into four even parts, which is every fourth year: then the Sundayletter
leapeth, and that year the Psalms and Lessons which serve for the xxiii. day
of February, shall be read again the day following, except it be Sunday, which
has proper Lessons of the old Testament appointed in the table serving for
that purpose. This is also to be noted concerning the leap year, that the 25.
day of February, which in leap year is counted for two days, alter neither
Psalm nor Lesson, but the same Psalms and Lessons which be said the first day
shall also serve for the second.

Also, wheresoever the beginning of any Lesson, Epistle, or Gospel, is not
expressed: there ye must begin at the beginning of the Chapter.

And wheresoever is not expressed how far shall be read there shall you read
These two Paragraphs omitted in the 1. B. of Edw. and the last omitted in the 2
Book.
to the end of the Chapter.

Item, so often as the first Chapter of Saint Matthew is read either for Lesson
or Gospel, ye shall begin the same at: The birth of Jesus Christ was on this
wise. etc. And the third Chapter of Saint Lukes Gospel shall be read unto: So
that he was supposed to be the son of Joseph.

Proper Lessons to be read for the

Mattens. Evensong. Lent. Mattens. Evensong. Sundays of Advent. i. Sunday.
Genesis xix. Genesis xxii. ii. xxvii. xxxiiii. The first. Esai. i. Esai. ii. iii.
xxxix. xlii. ii. v. xxiiii. iiii. xliii. xlv. iii. xxv. xxvi. v. Exodus iii.
Exodus v. iiii. xxx. xxxii. vi. ix. x. Easter day. Sundays after Christmas. i.
Leasson. Exodus xii. Exodus xiiii. ii. Lesson. Romans vi. Acts. ii. Sundays after
Easter. The first xxxvii. xxxviii. ii. xli. xliii. The first. Number. xvi. Number.
xxii. ii. xxiii, xxv. iii. Diut. iiii. Deuteronomy. v. iiii. vi. vii. Sundays after
the Epiphanie; v. viii. ix. The first. xliii. xlvi. Sunday after Assention day.
Deuteronomy. xii: Deuteronomy. xiii. ii. li. liii. iii. lv. lvi. iiii. lvii. iviii.
Whitsunday. v. lix. lxiiii. i. Lesson. Deuteronomy. xvi. Wisd. i. Septuagesi. Genesis i.
Genesis ii. ii. Lesson Acts. x. Acts xix. Then Peter opened his mouth etc. It
fortuned when Apollo went to Corinth etc. unto After these things. Sexagesima.
iii. vi. Quinquage. ix. xii.

Trinity Sunday Mattens. Evensong. Sundays after Trinity. Mattens Evensong i.
Lesson. Genesis xviii. Josue. i. xii x xvii ii Lesson. Matthew. iii. xiii xix xxiii.
Sundays after Trinity. xiiii Jere. v. Jere. xxii. xv xxxv xxxvi. The first.
Josue. x. Josu. xxiii. xvi Ezech. ii Ezech. xiiii. ii. Judic. iiii. Judic. v.
xvii xvi xviii iii. i King. ii. i King iii. xviii xx. xxiiii iiii. xii. xiii.
xix Dan. iii. Dan. vi. v. xv xvi. xx Joel. ii. Miche. vi. vi. ii King. xii. ii
King xxi. xxi Abacuc. ii. Proverb. i. vii. xxii. xxiiii xxii Proverb. ii. iii
viii. 3 King. xiii. 3 King. xvii. xxiii xi xii ix. xviii xix xxiiii xiii. xiiii
x. xxi xxii xxv xv xvi xi 4 King. v. 4 King. ix. xxvi. xvii. xix

Lessons Proper for Holy days 2. of Edw. 6. Proper Lessons for diverse feasts
and days at morning and Evening grayer. Scotch Lit. Lessons Proper for some
holy days.

For morning For Evening St. Andrew. Proverb. xx. Omited in the 1. and 2. B. of
Edw. 6. and in the Scotch Lit. Prover. xxi. Omitted in the 1. and 2. B. of Edw.
6. and Scoth Lit. St Thomas Apost. xxiii Omitted in the 1. and 2. B. of Edw. 6.
xxiiii Omited in the 1. and 2. B. of Edw. 6. Nativity of Christ. 1 Lesson.
Isai. ix. Isai. vii. God spoke etc. 2 Lesson. Luke it unto And unto men good
will. Titus iii. The kindness and love etc.

For morning For Evening St. Stevens day. 1 Lesson. Prove. xxviii. Omitted in
the 1. and 2. B. of Edw. 6. Eccles. iiii. Omitted in the 1. and 2. B of Edw. 6.
2. Lesson. Acts vi. and vii. Stephen full of faith; and power etc. unto. And
when xl. years etc. Acts vii. And when xl. years were exp^red, there appeared
unto Moses etc. unto. Stephen full of the holy ghost etc. St. John. 1. Lesson.
Eccle. v Omitted in the 1. and 2. B. of Edw. 6. Eccles. vi. Omitted in the 1.
and 2. B. of Edw. 6. 2. Lesson. Revelati. i. Revela. xxii. Innocents. Jere.
xxxi. unto. Moreover I heard Ephraim. Scotch Lit. Exodus 1. Wisdom. 1. Scotch
Lit. Jer. 31. unto verse 18. 1. Lesson. Circ^mcision. 1. Lesson. Genesis xvii.
Deuteronomy. x. unto now Israel etc 2 Lesson. Romans ii. Coloss. ii. Epiphanie. 1.
Lesson. Esai. xl. Esai. 49. 2. Lesson. Luke iii. unto So that he was supposed
to be the son of Joseph. John ii. unto. After this he went to Capernaum.
Convertion of St. Paul. 1. Lesson. Wisdom. v. Omitted in the 1. and 2. B. of
Edw. 6. Wisd. vi. Omitted in the 1. B. of Ed. 6. Scotch Lit. Wis. 2. 2. Lesson.
Art. xxii. unto they heard him Scotch Lit. Wis. 1. Acts xxvi. Purification of
the Uirgin Mary. Wisd. ix. Omitted in the 1. and 2. B. of Edw. 6. Scotch Lit.
Wis. 4. Wisd. xii. Omitted in the 1. and 2. B. of Edw. 6. Scot. Lit Wisd. 6. S.
Mathias. Wisd. xix. Omitted in the 1. and 2. B. of Edw. 6. And in the Schotch
Lit. Ecclesi. i Omitted in the 1. and 2. B. of Edw. 6. and Scotch Lit.
Anuntiation of our Lady. Eccles. ii. Omitted in the 1. and 2. B. of Edw. 6.
Ecles. iii. Omitted in the 1. and 2. B. of Edw. 6. 1. B. of Edw. 6. Lam. 1.
omitted in the 2. B. of Edw. 6 1. B. of Edw. 6. Lam. 3. Wednesday before Easter.
Osee xiii. Omitted in the 1. B. of Edw. 6. 2. B. of Edw. 6. Osee. 13. 14. 1. B.
of Edw. 6. Lam. 2. Osee xiiii. Thursday before Easter. Dan. ix. Jer. xxxi.

For morning. For Evening Good Friday Genesis 22. Esai. liii Easter even. Zach.
ix. 1 B. of Edw. 6. Lamen. 4. and 5. Exodus xiii. Omitted in the 1. and 2. B of
Edw. 6. Monday in Easter week. i. Lesson. Exodus xvi. Omited in the 1. and 2. B.
of Edw. 6. Exodus xvii. Acts iii. Omitted in the 1. and 2. B. of Edw. 6. ii.
Lesson. Matthew. xxviii. Tuesday in Easter week i Lesson. Exodus xx. Omitted in
the 1. and 2. B. of Edw. 6. Exodus xxxii. Omitted in the 1. and 2. B. of Edw. 6.
ii Lesson. Lu. xxiiii. unto. And behold two of them. i Cor. xv. St. Mark.
Eccle. iiii. Omitted in the 1. and 2. B. of Edw. 6. Eccles. v. Omitted in the
1. and 2. B. of Edw. 6. Philip and Jacob. Eccles. vii. Omitted in the 1. and 2.
B. of Edw. 6. Ecclesi. ix. Omitted in the 1. and 2. B. of Edw. 6. ii Lesson. 1.
B. of Edw. 6. Act. 8. unto when the Apostles. Omitted in the 1. and 2. B. of
Edw. 6. 1. and 2. of Ed. 6. Joh. 6. 4 Kings ii. Omitted in the 1. and 2. B. of
Edw. 6. 1. and 2. B. of Ed. 6. Ephesians. 4. Assention day Deuteronomy x. ii Lesson.
Monday in Whitsun week. i. Lesson. Genesis xi. unto These are the generations of
Sem. Omitted in the 1. and 2. B. of Edw. 6. Nilm. xi. Gather unto me. unto.
Moses and the Elders returned. Omitted in the 1. and 2. B. of Edw. 6. ii
Lesson. i Cor. xii. Omitted in the 1. and 2. B. of Edw. 6. Tuesday in
Whitsunweek i Kin. xix. from verse xviii to the end. Omitted in the 1. and 2.
B. of Edw. 6. Deuteronomy xiii. Omitted in the 1. and 2. B. of Edw. 6. S. Barnabe. i
Lesson. Eccles. x. Omitted in the 1. B. of Edw. 6. Eccles. xii. Omitted in the
1. and 2. B. of Edw. 6. ii Lesson. Acts xiiii. Acts. xv. unto. After certain
days.

For morning For Evening S. John Baptist. i Lesson. Mallachy iii. Mallachy
iiii. ii Lesson. Matthew. iii (D) Mat. xiv. unto When Jesus heard. S. Peter. i
Lesson. Eccles. xv. Omitted in the 1 and 2. B. of Edw. 6. and in the Scotch
Lit. Eccles. xix. Omitted in the 1. and 2. B. of Edw. 6. and Scoth Lit. ii
Lesson. Acts iii. Acts 4. St. James. Eccle. xxi. Omitted in the 1. and 2. B. of
Edw. 6. and in the Scotch Lit. Eccle. xxii. Omitted in the 1. 2. B. of Edw. 6.
and in the Scotch Lit. St. Batthelomew. Eccle. xxv. Omitted in the 1. and. 2.
B. of Edw. 6. Eccles. xxix. Omited in the 1. and 2. B. of Ed. 6. St. Matthew.
Eccle. xxxv. Omitted in the 1. and. 2. B. of Edw. 6. Eccles. xxxviii Omitted in
the 1 and 2. B. of Edw. 6. St. Michael. Eccle. xxxix. Omitted in the 1. and 2.
B. of Edw. 6. and in the Scotch Lit. Eccle. xiiii. Omitted in the 1. and 2. B.
of Edw. 6. and Scotch Lit. St. Luke. Eccle. li. Omitted in the 1. and 2. B. of
Edw. 6. and in the Scotch Lit. Job i. Omitted in the 1. and 2. B. of Edw. 6.
and Scotch Lit. Simon and Jude. Job xxiiii. xxv. Omitted in the 1. and. 2. B.
of Edw. 6. and in the Schotch Lit. Job. xlii. Omitted in the 1. and 2. B. of
Edw. 6 and Scotch Lit. All Saints 1 Lesson. Wis. 3. unto. Blessed is rather the
Barren. Wis. v. unto. His Jelousy. 2. Lesson. Hev. xi. xii. Saints by faith.
unto. If ye endure. Apoc. xix. unto and I saw an Angel stand.

Proper Psalms on certain days

days.

Mattens. Evensong. Mattens. Exensong. Psalm. xix. lxxxix. viii. xxiii.
Christmas day. xlv. Cx. Assention. day. xv. lxviii. lxxxv. Cxxxii. xxi. Cviii.
ii. Cxiii. Whitsunday. xlv. Ciiii. Easter day. lvii. Cxiiii. lxvii. Cxlv. Cxi.
Cxviii.

Golden number.

To find Easter for ever.

A B C D E F G i April. ix x xi xii vi. vii viii ii March xxvi. xxvii xxviii
xxix xxx xxxi April i. iii. April. xvi. xvii xviii xix xx. xiiii xv iiii.
April. ix. iii iiii v vi. vii viii v. March. xxvi. xxvii xx^iii xxix xxiiii
xxiiii xxv vi. April. xvi. xvii xi xii xiii xiiii xv vii. April. ii. iii iiii v
vi March 31. April. i viii. April. xxiii xxiiii. xxv xix xx xxi xxii ix. April.
ix. x xi xii xiii xiiii viii x April. ii. iii March 28. xxix xxx xxxi April. i.
xi April. xvi xvii xviii xix xx xxi xxii xii April. xi. x xi v vi vii viii xiii
March. xxvi xxvii xxviii xxix xxx xxxi xxv xiiii April. xvi xvii xviii xix xiii
xiiii xv xv April. ii. iii iiii v vi vii viii xvi March. xxvi. xxvii xxviii
xxii xxiii. xxiiii xxv xvii April. xvi. x xi xii xiii xiiii xv xviii April. ii.
iii. iiii v March xxx. xxxi April. i. xix April. xxiii xviii xxiiii xix xx. xxi
xxii

When ye have found the Sunday letter in the uppermost line, guide your eye
downward from the same, till ye come right over against the prime, and there is
showed both what month, and what day of the month Easter falls that year.

Januarie has xxxi. days.

Sun rises. hour vii. min. 34 Psalms. falls iiii. min. 26 Morning prayer.
Evening prayer. i. Lesson ii Lesson. i. Lesson. ii Lesson. iii A Kalend.
Circumcision. i Genesis xvii. Romans ii. Deuteronomy 10. Coloss. ii. b iiii No. ii Genesis i.
Matthew. i Genesis 2. Romans i xi c iii No. iii. iii ii. iiii ii d pride. No. iiii. v
iii vi iii xix e Nonas. v. vii iiii viii iiii viii f viii. Id. Epiphanie. vi.
Esai. lx. Luke iii. Esai. 49. John ii. g vii. Id. vii. Genesis ix Matthew. v. Genesis
12. Romans 5. xvi A vi. Id. Lutian. viii. xiii vi xiiii vi v. v v Id. ix. xv vii
xvi vii c iiii Id Sol in Aquario. x xvii viii xviii viii xiii d iii Id xi xix
ix xx xi ii e pride. Id. xii xxi x xxii x f Idus Hyllarii. xiii xxiii xi xxiiii
xi x g xix kl. Februarii. xiiii xxv xii xxvi xii A xviii kl. xv xxvii xiii
xxviii xiii xviii b xvii kl. xvi xxix xiiii xxx xiiii vii c xvi kl. xvii xxxi
xv xxxii xv d xv. kl. Prisca xviii xxxiii xvi xxxiiii xvi xv e xiiii kl. xix
xxxv xvii xxxvii. i Cor. i. iiii f xiii kl. Fabian xx xxxviii xviii. xxxix ii g
xii kl. Agnes xxi xl xix xli iii xii A xii kl. Uincent. xxii xlii xx lxiii iiii
i b x kl. xxiii xliiii xxi xlv v c ix kl. xxiiii xlvi. xxii xlvii. vi ix d viii
kl. Convert. Paul. xxv. Wisd. v. Act. 22. Wisdom 6. Act. 26. e vii kl. xxvi
Genesis 48. Matthew. 23. Genesis 49. i Cor. vii. xvii f vi kl. xxvii ^ xxiiii Exodus i.
viii vi. g v kl. xxviii Exodus ii. xxv iii ix A iiii kl. xxix iiii xxvi v x
xiiii b iii kl. xxx vii. xxvii viii. xi iii c pride. kl. i ix xxviii x xii

February has xxviii. days.

Sun rises. hour vii. min. 14 Psalms. falls iiii. min. 46 Morning prayer.
Evening prayer. i. Lesson ii Lesson. i. Lesson. ii Lesson. d Kalend. (F) Fast.
ii Exodus xi Mark. i. Exodus xii. i Cor. xiii. xi e iiii No. Purific. of Mar.
iii. Wisd. ix. ii. Wisd. xii. xiiii f iii No. Ba sii. iiii. Exodus xiii. iii
Exodus xiiii. xv xix g pride. No. v. xv iiii xvi xvi viii A Nonas. Agathe. vi.
xvii v. xviii ii Cor. i. xvi b viii. Id. vii. xix vi xx ii v. c vii. Id. viii.
xxi vii xxii iii d vi. Id. Sol in Piscibus. ix. xxiii viii xxiiii iiii xiii e v
Id. x xxxii ix xxxiii v ii f iiii Id. xi xxxiiii. x Levit. xviii. vi g iii Id
xii Lev. xix. xi xx vii x A pride. Id. xiii xxvi xii Number. xi viii b Idus xiiii
Number. xii. xiii xiii. ix xviii c xvi kl. Naleutine. xv xiiii xiiii xvi x vii d
xv. kl. March. xvi xvii xv xx xi e xiiii kl. xvii xxi xvi xxii xii xv f xiii
kl. xviii xxiii Luke di. i. xxiiii xiii iiii g xii kl. xix xxv di. i. xxvii
Gala. i. A xi kl. xx xxx. ii xxxi ii xii b x kl. xxi xxxii. iii xxxv iii i c ix
kl. xxii xxxvi iiii Deuteronomy. i. iiii d viii kl xxiii Deuteronomy. ii. v iii v ix e vii
kl. Fast. xxiiii iiii vi v vi f vi kl. S. Matthias xxv. Wisd. 19. vii Eccles.
i. Ephesians. i. xvii g v kl. xxvi Deuteronomy. vi. viii Deuteronomy. vii. ii vi. A iiii kl.
xxvii viii. ix ix iii b iii kl. xxviii x x. xi iiii xiiii c pride. kl. xxix xii
xi xv. v

March has xxxi. days.

Sun rises. hour vi. min. 18. Psalms. falls v. min. 42. Morning Prayer.
Evening Prayer. i Lesson. ii. Lesson. i Lesson. ii Lesson. iii d Kalend. David.
xxx Deuteronomy. xvi. Luke xii. Deuteronomy. xvii. Ephe. vi. e vi No. Cedde. i xviii xiii.
xix Phil. i. xi f v No. ii xx xiiii xxi ii g iiii No. iii xxii xv xxiiii iii
xix A iii No. iiii xxv xvi xxvi iiii viii b pride. No v xxvii xvii xxviii Colos.
i. c Nonas. Perpetue. vi xxix xviii xxx ii xvi d viii Id. vii xxxi xix xxxii
iii v e vii Id. viii xxxiii xx xxxiiii iiii f vi Id. ix Josue. i. xxi Josue ii.
i These. i. xiii g v Id. x iii xxii iiii ii ii A iiii Id. Gregory. xi v xxiii vi
iii v iii Id. Sol in Ari^te. xii vii xxiiii viii iiii x c pride. Id. xiii ix
Johji. i. x v d Id^s. xiiii xxiii ii xxiiii ii These. i. xviii e xvii kl.
Aprilis. xv Judge. i. iii Judge. ii. ii vii f xvi kl. xvi iii iiii iiii iii g xv
kl. Edward. xvii v v vi i Tim. i. xv. A xiiii kl. xvii vii vi viii ii. iii.
iiii b xiii kl. xix ix vii x iiii c xii kl. Benedict. xx xi viii xii v xii d xi
kl. xxi xiii ix xiiii vi i e x kl. xxii xv x xvi ii Tim. i. f ix kl. xxiii xvii
xi xviii ii ix g viii kl. Fast. xxiiii Eccle. ii. xii Eccle. iii iii A vii kl.
Annun. of Ma. xxv Judge. xix. xiii Judge. xx. iiii xvii b vi kl. xxvi xxi xiiii
Ruth i. Titus. i. vi c v kl. xxvii Ruth ii. xv iii ii. iii. d iiii kl. xxviii
iiii xvi i King. i. Phil. i. xiiii e iii kl. xix i King. ii. xvii iii Hebr. iii
f pride. kl. xxx iiii xviii v ii.

April has xxx. days.

Sun rises. hour vi. min. 17. Psalms. Morning prayer. Evening prayer. falls
vi. min. 4. ii. Lesson ii Lesson. i. Lesson. ii Lesson. g Kalend. i i. king.
vi. John xix. i King. vii. Hebr. iii. xi A iiii No. ii viii. xx ix iiii b iii
No. Richard. iii. x. xxi xi v xix c pride. No. Ambrose. iiii. xii Acts. i. xiii.
vi viii d Nonas. v. xiiii ii. xv. vii xvi e viii. Id. vi. xvi iii xvii viii v.
f vii. Id. vii. xviii iiii xix. ix g vi. Id. viii. xx v. xxi x xiii A v Id. ix.
xxii vi xxiii xi ii b iiii Id. Sol in Taur. x xxiiii vii xxv xii c iii Id xi
xxvi viii xxvii xiii x d pride. Id. xii xxviii ix xxix Jacob. i. e Idus xiii xxx
x xxxi ii xviii f xviii. kl. Maii. xiiii ii King. i. xi ii King. ii. iii vii g
xvii kl. xv iii. xii iiii iiii A xvi kl. xvi v. xiii vi v xv b xv. kl. xvii vii
xiiii viii i. Pet. i. iiii c xiiii kl. xviii ix xv x ii d xiii kl. Alphege xix
xi. xvi xii iii xii e xii kl. xx xiii xvii xiiii iiii i f x kl. xxi xv xviii
xvi v g xi kl. xxii xvii xix xviii ii. Pet. i. ix A ix kl. S. George xxiii xix
xx xx ii b viii kl xxiiii xxi. xxi xxii iii xvii c vii kl. Mark Chang. xxv.
Eccl. iiii. xxii Eccle. v. i. John i. vi. d vi kl. xxvi ii Kin. xxiii. xxiii ii
King. 24. ii e v kl. xxvii iii King. i. xxiiii iii King. ii. iii xiiii f i^^i
kl. xxviii iii. xxv iiii iiii iii g iii kl. xxix v. xxvi vi v A pride. kl. xxx
vii. xvii viii. 2. 3. John.

May has xxxi. days.

Sun rises. hour v. min. 18. Psalms. falls vii. min. 24. Morning Prayer.
Evening Prayer. i Lesson. ii. Lesson. i Lesson. ii Lesson. xi b Kalend. Philip
and Jacob. i Eccles. vii. Acts viii. Eccle ix. Judas. i. c vi No. ii 3 King.
ix. xxviii 3 Ring. x Kom. i. xix d v No. Inu. of the crose iii xi Matthew. i. xii
ii viii e iiii No. iiii xiii iii xiiii iii f iii No. v xv iii xvi iiii xvi g
pride. No John Evan. vi xvii iiii xviii v A Nonas. vii xix v xx vi b viii Id.
viii xxi vi xxii. vii xiii c vii Id. ix iiii King. i. vii 4 King. ii. viii. ii
d vi Id. Sol in Gemini. x iii viii iiii ix e v Id. xi v ix vi x x f iiii Id.
xii vii x viii xi g iii Id. xiii ix xi x xii xviii A pride. Id. xiiii xi xii
xii. xiii vii v Idus. xv xiii xiii xiiii xiiii c xvii kl. Junii. xvi xv. xiiii
xvi xv xv. d xvi kl. xvii xvii xv xviii xvi iiii e xv kl. xviii xix. xvi xx i
Cor. i f xiiii kl. D^nstane. xix xxi xvii xxii ii xii g xiii kl. xx xxiii xviii
xxiiii iii i A xii kl. xxi xxv xix i. Esd. i. iiii b xi kl. xxii i Esd. iii. xx
iiii v ix c x kl. xxiii v xxi vi vi. d ix kl. xxiiii vii xxii ix vii xvii e
viii kl. xxv ii Esd. i. xxiii ii Esd. ii. viii vi f vii kl. Augustine. xxvi
iiii xxiiii v ix g vi kl. xxvii vi xv viii x xiiii A v kl. xxviii ix xvi x xi
iii b iiii kl. xxix xiii xvii Esther i xii c iii kl. xxx Esther. ii. xviii iii
xiii xi d pride. kl. xxxi iiii Mark i. v xiiii

June has xxx. days.

Sun rises. hour ^iii. min. 34. Psalms. Morning Prayer. Evening Prayer.
falls viii. min. 26. i Lesson. ii. Lesson. i Lesson. ii Lesson. e Kalend. i
Esther 6. Mark. ii Esth. vii. i Cor. xv. xix f iiii No. ii viii iii ix xvi viii
g iii No. Nichomede. iii Job. i. iiii Job ii. ii Cor. i. xvi A pride. No iiii
iii v iiii ii v b Nonas. Boniface v v vi vi iii c viii Id. vi vii vii viii iiii
d vii Id. vii ix viii x v xiii e vi Id. viii xi ix xii. vi ii f v Id. ix xiii x
xiiii vii g iiii Id. x xv. xi xvi viii. x A iii Id. S. Barnabe Apo. xi Eccles.
10. Acts xiiii Eccle xii. Acts xv. b pride. Id. Sol in Cancro* xii Job. 17. 18.
Mark xii. Job xix. ii Cor. ix* xviii c Idus. Solstitium estinum xiii xx xiii
xxi x vii d xviii kl Julii. xiiii xxii xiiii xxiii xi e xvii kl. xv xxiiii.
xxv. xv xvi. xvii. xii xv. f xvi kl. xvi xxviii xvi xxix xiii iiii g xv kl.
xvii xxx Luke i. xxxi Gala. i. A xiiii kl. xvi i xxxii ii xxxiii ii xii b xiii
kl. xix xxxiiii iii xxxv iii i c xii kl. Edward. xx xxxvi iiii xxxvii iiii d xi
kl. xxi xxxviii v xxxix v ix e x kl. xxii xl vi xli vi. f ix kl. Fast. xxiii
xlii vii Prove i. Ephesians. i. xvii g viii kl. John Baptist. xxiiii Mala. iii.
Matthew. iii. Mal. iiii. Matthew. 14. vi A vii kl. xxv Prove. ii. Luke viii. Prove.
iii. Ephesians. ii. b vi kl. xxvi iiii ix v iii xiiii c v kl. xxvii vi x vii iiii
iii d iiii kl. Fast. xxviii viii xi ix. v e iii kl. S. Pet. Apost. xxix Eccles.
15. Acts iii. Eccles. xix. Acts iiii. xi f pride. kl. xxx Prove. x. Luke xii.
Prove. xi. Ephesians. vi.

July has xxxi* days.

Sun rises. hour iiii. min. 18. Psalms. falls viii. min. 24. Morning
Prayer. Evening Prayer. i Lesson. ii. Lesson. i Lesson. ii Lesson. xiv g
Kalend. Uisita. of Mar. i Prove. xii. Luke xiii. Prove. xiii. Phil. i. viii A vi
No. ii xiiii xiiii xv ii xvi b v No. Martin. iii xvi xv xvii. iii c iiii No.
iiii xviii xvi xix iiii v d iii No. v xx xvii xxi Coloss. i. e pride. No Dog
days vi xxii. xviii xxiii ii xiii f Nonas. vii xxiiii xix xxv iii ii g viii Id
viii xxvi. xx xxvii iiii A vii Id. ix xxviii xxi xxix i These. i. x b vi Id. x
xxxi xxii Eccles. i. ii c v Id. xi Eccles. ii. xxiii iii. iii xviii d iiii Id.
Sol in Leone. xii iiii xxiiii v iiii vii e iii Id. xiii vi John. i. vii v f
pride. Id. xiiii viii ii ix ii These. i. xv. g Idus. Swithune xv x iii xi ii iiii
A xvii kl. Augustine. xvi xii iiii Jer. i. iii b xvi kl. xvii Jer. ii. v iii i
Tim. i. xii c xv kl. xvi i iiii vi v ii. iii i d xiiii kl. xix vi vii vii iiii
e xiii kl. Margaret. xx viii viii ix. v ix f xii kl. xxi x ix xi vi g xi kl.
Magdalen. xxii xii x xiii ii Tim. i. xvii A x kl. xxiii xiiii xi xv. ii vi b ix
kl. Fast. xxiiii xvi xii xvii iii c viii kl. James, Apost. xxv Eccles. 21. xiii
Eccles. 23. iiii xiiii d vii kl. A^me. xxvi Jer. 18. xiiii Jer. 19. Titus. i.
iii e vi kl. xxvii xx xv. xxi ii. iii. f v kl. xxviii xxii xvi xxiii Phil. i.
xi g iiii kl. xxix xxiiii xvii xxv Hebr. i. A iii kl. xxx xxvi. xviii xxvii ii
xix b pride. kl. xxx xxviii. xix xxix. iii.

August has xxxi. days.

Sun rises. hour vii. min. 34 Psalms. falls iiii. min. 26 Morning prayer.
Evening prayer. i. Lesson. ii Lesson. i. Lesson ii. Lesson. c Kalend. Lammas. i
Jer. xxx. John 20. Jer 31. Hebr. iiii viii d iiii No. ii xxxii xxi xxxiii v xvi
e iii No. iii xxxiiii. Acts i. xxxv vi v. f pride. No. iiii xxxvi ii xxxvii vii
g Nonas. v xxxviii iii xxxix viii xiii A viii. Id. Transfiguration vi xl iiii
xli ix ii b vii. Id. Name of Jesus. vii xlii v xliii x c vi. Id. viii xliiii vi
xlv. xlvi xi x d v Id. ix xlvii vii xlviii xii e iiii Id. Laurence, x xlix viii
l. xiii xviii f iii Id xi li ix lii Jacob. i. vii g pride. Id. xii Lamen. i. x
Lamen. ii. ii A Idus xiii iii xi iiii iii xv b xix kl. Septembris. xiiii v xii
Ezech. ii. iiii iiii c xviii kl. Sol in Virgin xv Ezech. iii xiii vi v d xvii
kl. xvi vii xiiii xiii i Pet. i xii e xvi kl. xvii xiiii xv. xviii ii i f xv.
kl. xviii xxxiii xvi xxxiiii iii g xiiii kl. xix Dan. i. xvii Dan. ii. iiii ix
A xiii kl. xx iii xviii iiii v b xii kl. xxi v xix vi ii Pet. i. xvii c xi kl.
xxii vii xx viii ii vi. d x kl. Fast. xxiii ix xxi x iii e ix kl. Barthol.
Apost. xxiiii Eccles. 25. xxii Eccles. 29. i John i* xiiii f viii kl. xxv Dan.
11. xxiii Dan. 12. ii iii g vii kl. xxvi xiii Note that the 13. of Daniel
touching the History of Susanna is to be read unto these words. And King
Astyages etc.
xxiiii xiiii iii A vi kl. xxvii Osee i. xxv Osee. ii. iii. iiii xi b v kl.
Augustine xxviii iiii xxvi. v. vi. v c iiii kl. Behead. of John xxix vii xxvi.
viii ii. iii. Id. xix d iii kl. xxx ix xxviii. x Jude i. viii e pride. kl. xxx
xi Matthew. i. xii Romans i.

Added by King James and not extant in former Kalenders.

September has xxx. days.

Sun rises. hour v. min. 36. Psalms. Morning Prayer. Evening Prayer. falls
vi. min. 24. i Lesson. ii Lesson. i Lesson. ii Lesson. xvi f Kalend. Gyles i
Osee. xiii. Matthew. ii Osee. xiiii. Romans ii. v g iiii No. ii Joel. i. iii Joel
ii. iii. A iii No. iii iii iiii Amos i. iiii xiii b pride. No. iiii Amos ii. v
iii. v ii c Nonas. Dog days end. v iiii vi. v vi d viii Id. vi vi vii vii vii
x e vii Id. vii viii viii ix viii f vi Id. Nati. of Mary. viii Abdias i. ix.
Jouas i. ix xviii g v Id. ix Jo. ii. iii. x iiii x vii A iiii Id. x Mich. i. xi
Mich. ii. xi v iii Id. xi iii. xii iiii xii xv. c pride. Id. xii v xiii vi xiii
iiii d Idus. Sol in Libra. xiii vii xiiii Naum. i xiiii e xviii. kl. Holy
cross. xiiii Naum. ii xv iii xv xii f xvii kl. Aequinoctium. Autumnale. xv
Abacuc. i. xvi Abac. ii. xvi i g xvi kl. xvi iii xvii. Soph. i. i Cor. i. A xv
kl. Lambert xvii Soph. ii. xviii iii ii ix b xiiii kl. xvii Agge. i. xix Agge.
ii iii c xiii kl. xix Zacha. i. xx Zach. ii. iii. iiii xvii d xii kl. Fast. xx
iiii. v. xxi vi v vi e xi kl. S. Matthew xxi Eccles. 35. xxii Eccles. 38. vi f
x kl. xxii Zacha. vii xxiii Zach. viii. vii xiiii g ix kl. xxiii ix xxiiii x
viii iii A viii kl. xxiiii xi xxv xii ix b vii kl. xxv xiii xxvi xiiii x xi c
vi kl. Ciprian. xxvi Mala. i. xxvii Mala. ii. xi d v kl. xxvii iii xxviii. iiii
xii xix e iiii kl. xxviii Tobi. i. Mark i. Tobi. ii. xiii viii f iii kl. St.
Michael xxix Eccles. 39. ii Eccles. 44. xiiii g pride. kl. Hierome. xxx Tobi.
iii. iii. Tobi. iiii xv

October has xxxi. days.

Sun rises. hour vi. min. 35 Psalms. falls v. min. 25 Morning prayer.
Evening prayer. i. Lesson. ii Lesson. i. Lesson ii. Lesson. xvi A Kalend.
Remige. i Exodus 6. Note that the 6. Chapter of Exodus is to be read the first of
October at morning Prayer unto these words, These be the heads etc.
Mark iiii. Tobi. 6. i Cor. xvi. v b vi No. ii Tobi. vii v viii ii Cor. i. xiii
c v. No. iii ix vi x ii ii d iiii No. iiii xi vii xii iii e iii No. v xiii viii
xiiii iiii x f pride. No. Faith vi Judic. i ix Judic. ii. v g Nonas. vii iii. x
iiii vi xviii A viii. Id. viii v xi vi. vii vii b vii. Id. Dennis ix vii xii
viii viii c vi. Id. x ix xiii x ix xv d v Id. xi xi xiiii xii x iiii e iiii Id.
xii xiii xv. xiiii xi f iii Id. Edward. xiii xv xvi xvi xii xii g pride. Id.
Solin Scorpio. xiiii Wisd. i. Luke vi. i. Wisd. ii. xiii i A Idus xv iii vi. i.
iiii Galat. i. b xvii kl. Novembris. xvi v ii vi ii ix c xvi kl. Etheldrede
xvii vii iii viii iii d xv. kl. Luke Evang. xviii Eccl. li. iiii Job i. iiii
xvii e xiiii kl. xix Wisd ix v Wisd. x v vi. f xiii kl. xx xi vi xii vi g xii
kl. xxi xiii vii. xiiii Ephesians. i. xiiii A xi kl. xxii xv viii xvi ii iii b x
kl. xxiii xvii ix xviii iii c ix kl. xxiiii xix x Eccles. i. iiii xi d viii kl
Crispine. xxv Eccles. ii. xi iii v e vii kl. xxvi iiii xii v vi xix f vi kl.
Fast. xxvii vi xiii vii Phil. i. viii g v kl. Simon and Jude. xxviii Job 24. 25
xiiii Job xlii ii A i^ii kl. xxix Eccle. viii. xv Eccle. ix. iii xvi b iii kl.
xxx x xvi xi iiii v. c pride. kl. Fast. xxx xii xvii xiii Colos. i.

Added by King James instead of Tobi the 5. ni former Kalenders.

November has xxx. days.

Sun rises. hour vii. min. 34 Psalms. Morning prayer. Evening prayer. falls
iiii. min. 26 i. Lesson. ii Lesson. i. Lesson ii. Lesson. d Kalend. All Saints
i Wisd 3. He. xi. xii. Wisd. v. Apoc. xix xiii e iiii No. ii Eccl. xiiii Luke
18. Eccles. xv Colos ii ii f iii No. iii xvi xix xvii iii g pride. No. iiii
xviii xx xix iiii x A Nonas. v xx xxi xxi i These. i. b viii. Id. Leonarde vi
xxii xxii xxiii ii xviii c vii. Id. vii xxiiii xxiii xxv Note that the
beginning of the 26 Chapter Eccles. unto (1. and. 2. B. Edw. 6 and Lit. of Q.
Elis. But when one is etc.) But a grief of etc. must be read with 25. Chapter.
Added by King James
iii vii d vi. Id. viii xxvii xxiiii xxviii. iiii e v Id. ix xxix John i. xxx v
xv f iiii Id x xxxi ii xxxii ii These. i iiii g iii Id Saint Martin xi xxxiii
iii xxxiiii ii A pride. Id. Solin Sagittario xii xxxv iiii xxxvi iii xii b Idus
Brice. xiii xxxvii v xxxviii i Tim. i. i c xviii kl. Decembris xiiii xxxix. vi
xl ii. iii. d xvii kl. Machute. xv xli vii xlii iiii ix e xvi kl. xvi xliii
viii xliiii v f xv. kl. xvii xlv ix xlvi Note that the 46 Chapter of Eccles. is
to be read unto these words, And after his death etc.
vi xvii g xiiii kl. xvi^i xlvii x xlviii ii Tim. i. xvi. A xiii kl. xix xlix
xi l. ii b xii kl. Edmund King xx li xii Bar^c. i. iii xiiii c xi kl. xxi
Barnc. ii. xiii iii iiii iii d x kl. Cicelie xxii iiii xiiii v Titus i. e ix
kl. Clement xxiii vi xv. Esai. i. ii. iii. xi f viii kl xxiiii Esai. ii. xvi
iii Phil. i. g vii kl. Kattharine xxv iiii xvii v Hebre. i. xix A vi kl. xxvi
vi xviii vii ii viii b v kl. xxvii viii xix ix iii c iiii kl. xxviii x xx xi
iiii xvi d iii kl. Fast. xxix xii xxi xiii v v. e pride. kl. Andrew Apostle xxx
Prove. xx. Acts. i. Prove. xxi vi

December has xxxi. days.

Sun rises. hour viii. min. 12. Psalms. falls iii. min. 48. Morning Prayer.
Evening Prayer. i Lesson. ii Lesson. i Lesson. ii Lesson. f Kalend. i Esa.
xiiii Acts ii. Esai. xv. Hebre. vii xiii g iiii No. ii xvi iii xvii viii ii A
iii No. iii xviii iiii xix ix b pride. No. iiii xx. xxi. v xxii x x c Nonas. v
xxiii vi. xxiiii xi d viii Id. Nicholas vi xxv vi. vii xxvi xii xvi e vii Id.
vii xxvii vi. vii xxviii xiii vii f vi Id. Concep of Ma. viii xxix viii xxx
James i. g v Id. ix xxxi ix. xxxii ii xv. A iiii Id. x xxxiii x xxxiiii iii.
iiii b iii Id. xi xxxv xi xxxvi iiii c pride. Id. Sol in Capri. xii xxxvii. xii
xxxviii v xii d Idus. Lucie, xiii xxxix xiii xl i Pet. i. i e xix kl. Tanuarii
xiiii xli xiiii xlii ii f xviii. kl. xv xliii xv xliiii iii ix g xvii kl.
Osapientia xvi xlv xvi xlvi iiii A xvi kl. xvii xlvii xvii. xlviii v xvii b xv
kl. xviii xlix xviii l ii Pet. i. vi c xiiii kl. xix li xix lii ii d xiii kl.
Fast. xx liii xx liiii iii xiiii e xii kl. Thomas Apost. xxi Prove. 33. xxi
Prove. 24. i John i. iii f xi kl. xxii Esai. lv. xxii Esai. lvi. ii. g x kl.
xxiii lvii xxiii lviii iii xi A ix kl. Fast. xxiiii lix xxiiii lx iiii b viii
kl. Christmas xxv Esai. ix. Luke 22. Esai. vii Tit. iii. xix c vii kl. S.
Steven xxvi Prove. 28. Acts 6. 7. Eccles. iiii. Acts vii viii d vi kl. S. John.
xxvii Eccles. 5. Apoca. i. Eccles. vi Apo. xxii. e v kl. Innocents xxviii Jer.
xxxi. Act. 25. Wisd. i. i John. v. xvi f iiii kl. xxix Esai. lxi. xxvi Esai.
lxii. ii John. v g iii kl. xxx lxiii. xxvii lxiiii iii John. xiii A pride. kl.
Silvester. xxx lxv xxviii. lxvi Jude i.

Septuagesima. before Easter. ix weeks. Sexagesima viii Quinquagesim. xii
Quadragesima. vi Rogations. after Easter. v weeks. Whitsunday. vii Trinity
sunday. viii

These to be observed for holy
THat is to say: All Sundays in the year. The days of the feasts of the
Circumcision of our Lord Jesus Christ. Of the Epiphanie. [Scotch Lit. of the
Conversion of S. Paul.] Of the Purification of the blessed virgin. Of Saint
Mathie the Apostle. Of the Innuntiation of the blessed Uirgin Of Saint Mark the
Evangelist. Of Saint Philip and Jacob the Apostles. Of the Assention of our
Lord Jesus Christ. [ Scotch Lit. of Saint Barnabas.

Of S Peter the Apostle

Of S. Bartholomew apostle.

Of S Michael the Archangel

Of S. Simon and Jude Apostles

Of Saint Andrew the apostle.

Of the Nativitie of our Lord.

Of S. John the Evangelist.

Mun. and Tuesday in East. week

Of the Nativity of S. John Baptist.

Of Saint James the Apostle.

Of S. Matthew the apostle.

Of S. Luke Evangelist.

Of all Saints.

Of S. Thomas the apostle.

Of S. Steven the Martyr,

Of the holy Innocents.

Monday and Tuesday in whitsun week

Annotations upon CHAP. II.
(A) The division of the Psalms very discreet. The ancient manner of singing
them various in Antiquity. The 15. Cannon of the Council of Laodicea Expounded.
(B) Books and Chapters of Canonical Scripture least edifying omitted (C) The
Rubric for proper Lessons cleared. (D) A necessary Cave at to ministers. (E)
Differences between the former Kalendars and ours. Why several saints are added
now more then formerly (F) Feasts instrumental to piety. The Jews fasted on
high festivalls till noon. Whence our Fasts before some Holy Days. Why not
before All. (G) Holy days why fit to be established by Parliament. Why
instituted. The Churches power to ordain them. The Judgment of foreign Church
and Divines. Zanchy cleared a demur upon the best reformed Churches. Our
Holy Days not derived from the Pagans, yet warrantable if they were.

THE Psalter shall be read through once every moneth] In the Preface we are
told that the Psalter was anciently divided Nocturnes, so as it was read over
every week, as may be collected out of Hierom. But this custom was only
peculiar to the Latin Church, as for the Syriak and Greek Churches, which as
Mr Brerewood assures us, conformed much in their rites, they divided it so, as
it was not read over but every twenty days. Our Church being loath that her
service should seem over-prolix, allottteth to it one month or thirty days,
the very Term the Bedwel Arab. Trudgeman.
Turks assign for their Alcoran, a wonder she has not forthat very reason been
suspected as inclining to Mahumetism.

Though the Psalter be here appointed to be read, yet must it be interpreted
according to the ancient practice, that is, by way of responce, the Priest one
verse, and the people another, as Moses and Miriam sang their triumphant hymn.
Exodus 15. 1, 21. The people always bare a part in these psalms, else the
Venite were to little purpose, though the mode did sometimes vary Philo. Jud.
(...).
(...) one while ecchoing all together, with the Priest; (...), another while
returning by way of Antiphones, as Philo of his Essenes. Sometimes answering,
(...). as the same Philo calls them, or (...), as Clemens, the Acrosticks,
extremities or feet of the verses: oe else repeating the same again, as it is
supposed by Musculus and Calvin the Apostles did to our Savior at his last
hymn; if so, then we have an earlier president upon whom to fix it then either
Platina's Damasus, or Theodoret's Flavian and Dioscorus, or Socrates 'his
Ignatius. But not to enqure into its first original which is uncertain; let us
rest and acquiesce in what is and must be granted, that it was of Catholic
practice in the primitive times. St. Basil speaks for the East, and St. Ambrose
for the West. In duas parts c Epist. 36.
divisi alternatim sibi invicem canunt, says the first of the Christians of
his age, Disposed into two divisions they sing by course one to another Exam.
l. 2. c. 25.
Ecclesia stridet responsoriis Psalmorum says the second, The Temple roares
and rings again with the responsories of the Psalms. Now whereas counter to
this the 15. Canon of a great Council. Leod.
Council may be opposed which ordains (...). That none but the Canons or
singing men of the Church, which ascend up into the Pulpit, and sing out of the
Parchment should presume to sing in the Church, Balsamon, the great Canonist
interprets the mind of the Fathers to be only this, that none of the
people, (as it seems some had done before) should undertake to begin, or set
the Psalms, but that it should be left to singers alone. (...), for to sing in
consort with the rest of the Quire, the people are not interdicted by the
Church. This is Balsamons sense of this Canon. I am rather prone to conceive
that the Council did intend a restreint upon the people from singing in
consort, that none should sing the body of the Psalm, but the Canonical
singers, and that the people should only return (...), the extremities, and
ends of the verses, as is said before: for so does Balsamons own Hom. 36. in 1
Cor.
Chrysostom represent the practice of his times, (...) i. e. he who sings,
sings alone, and though all the Congregation Echo out the close of the
verse, the voice and sound seems to proceed as from one mouth. Somewhat
correspondent hereunto was that which Antiquity called (...) which answered the
Hebrew Selah. For where in the Psalmist there occurreth Selah in the original,
there the Septuagint, Theodotion, and Symmachus constantly render it (...): the
word importing as St. Hierom conceives a connection of antecedent and
subsequent matter together, the mode whereof Tract. 22. in Johan.
St. Augustine tells us was for the Reader to bear his part, and the people
theirs. Aliquando (says the Father) in Psalmo 142. versus ipse in Diapsalmate
ponitur qui praeeatur a lectore, and respondeatur a populo. Sometimes in the
142. Psa. the verse it self is set after the fashion of a Dia-Psalm, so that it
may be begun by the Reader, and returned by the people. By the way take notice,
that here instead of Praeeatur, the Froben edition, that of Paris, and others
also, as I conceive, read Praebeatur, which signifies nothing, and destroys
St. Augustines sense. Praeeatur it must certainly be according to that usual
form so often mentioned in Livy, Agedum Pontifex publicus praei verba solemnia.
But to return to my former matter; The truth is, no uniform usage can be
concluded out of the Primitive Fathers, in this particular Epi. Marcel.
St. Hierom observing that there were Tot pene psallentium chori, quot gentium
diversitates. As many different modes of singing as there were variety of
Nations.

Except the Books and Chapters which be least edifying.] The Books omitted
Chronicles, Canticles, Revelation, and almost all Leviticus, whereof two
Chapters only are retained. The Chapters are too numerous to set down, if any
please to examine them they will appear such as are as little edifying as the
Books omitted; and to omit what is in edifying our Church has good warrant
from that rule of the Apostle, Let all things be done to edification.

Proper Lessons to be read on Sundays.] This table was added by the Reformers
under Queen Elizabeth, the former books having no Lessons appointed for (for
the Sundays or) were added, and to these Lessons the Act for uniformity has
relation. But at the same time there were also added many proper Lessons for
certain holy days, which had Epistles and Gospels assigned them, but no proper
Lessons until then; why then was not the addition of these Lessons expressed
in the Act, as well as those for Sundays? The answer is, because they were
already comprehended in the provision of the Paragraph before cited under these
words, And here is to be noted that whenever there be any proper Lessons
appointed for any feast, moveable or inmoevable etc. where the word whenever
is not to be limited to the then present order of the Church, but extended to
any further constitution appointed by the same Authority at another time, so
that be the appointment in the present, or in the future tense, the Paragraph
is comprehensive of both.

Matthew. 3.] I find in the Scotch Liturgy, in all the Cambridge impressions of
Edw: the 6. the 1. and 2. and from that of Q. Elizabeth, all which give us the
third of Matthew. and conformable is the Calendar of the very impressions
formerly cited as erroneous. This slip is taken, in truth, ex traduce from the
first Church-Book printed in King James his time, which ought to be the
standard for ensuing times, and which has it the 13. of Matthew. That it ought
to be the third, is without dispute, upon comparing the two Chapters together,
and therefore Ministers should do well to observe it henceforward, taking their
directions from the Calendar, not from this Table. The like mistake is also
current through all the same Impressions, in the proper Psalms appointed for
Whitsunday, where the xlvii is evidently put for the lxvii, and the x mislaid.

In the Calendar there is little observable, yet because some perhaps will de
novo, Proper Lessons assigned them, as I said before, our Calendar differs
from the former. Smectymnuus has taken the pains to tell us the diversity is
an Omission of 32. and an Addition of 47. Chapters of the Old Testament besides
many out of the Apocrypha: if so, as so it is, then I hope forty seven for
thirty two is a fair amends, and might have passed without a Cavil. Secondly;
in the first Calendar St. Paul, Barnabas, and Mary Magdalene are in their
Scarlet, in the two latter in their Sables. Thirdly, in the first there are no
Saints days mentioned but such as are in the Rubric. In the second only
(besides Paul's and Barnabas) St. George St. Laurence, and St. Clement. In the
last very many more, not that we repute them all for Saints, or holy men, so
are the very words of the Printed by Authority Anno 1573.
Admonition to the Reader in Praeces privatae, But that they may be as notes of
some certain things, and fixed seasons, the knowledge of which is very
beneficial. That is in civil relations, most great faires being kept, and many
ancient rents and services being payable upon those days. Lastly, in the first
and second no fasts on the vigils of any Saint, in the last many are added. But
whereas Smectymnuus woul persuade the world, that what were fish-dayes before,
were in the latter Calendar called Fasting-dayes, and do strongly endeavor to
charge it as an innovation upon our Church; I hope by this time they have seen
their error, for certainly Fasting-dayes were never styled fish-dayes by any
former Liturgy since the Reformation, nor by any Injunctions of Henry the
eight, nor of Edw. the 6. nor of Queen Elizabeth, but constantly Fasting-dayes.

Between the Scotch Liturgy and ours, there is in the Calendar a greater
change, and more to the gust of our opponents. All Apocryphal Chapters being
proscribed out of the Sunday and week days service by that Liturgy, and but a
few admitted as proper Lessons for some festivals. Again, whereas ours begins
the Prophet Esaias at Advent, the Scotch begins it the 28. of July.

Fast] Too daily experience teaches us, that nothing blunts the edge of Jews,
such Feasts as were celebrated with the most solemn service, were most strictly
fasted in the fore-noon until midday, or their sixth hour, that is, until
after their morning service. This is the reason that the Pharisees cavill'd at
our Savior in relation to his disciples, saying, Thy disciples do that which
is not lawful to do upon the Sabbath day. Matthew. 12. 2. what was that? not
because they plucked the ears of corn, but because they eat them, breaking
thereby the fore-noone fast of the sabbath as they pretended. So also when some
mocked at the Apostles. Acts 2. 13. as drunk when they were miraculously filled
with the holy Ghost on the day of Pentecost. Peter refuteth the calumny from
the cool of the day, For these are not drunk as ye suppose, seeing it is but
the third hour of the day, and they were interdicted both meat and drink until
the sixth.

As for the fasts intended in the Calendar by our Church as antecedent to their
respective holidays, I find no direct nor express example of them in the
Primitive Church. But very obvious, nothing more, is the devout practice of
those early Christians, employing the nights preceding their great festivals in
humiliations, lying on the floor, watchings, tears and such outward acts of
inward humiliation. But in tract of time abuses stealing in, and defiling those
sacred exercises, the Church, say learned men, changed those night-vigils and
watchings into Diurnall fasts.

But it will be here demanded, why are fasts prefixed to some holy days and not
to all? My answer is, Proceeding in due order. The first of Jan. being the
Circumcision is but of late known by that name, and anciently called the Octave
of Christ's nativity, and Octaves never were assigned their vigils in the
Primitive Church. The Epiphany is no saints day. Again, if Theophilus
Alexandrinus, as he is cited by Riccardus upon Proclus deceive me not, it was a
fast day it self, (...), in which we were wont to fast till night. Now a
fast day could not have a fasted vigil. As for St. Mark, and Philip and Jacob
they fall within the fifty days after Easter, which privileged them from
having fasts. Amongst all the rest only St. Michael and St. Luke have no
fasts, Not St. Michael because, as ritualists observe, the Angels did not enter
into their joys through sufferings. Not St. Luke, because another day formerly
of great esteem in our Church falls upon the Eve thereof.

These to be observed for Holy days and none other] In the Catalogue of the
Additional alterations of our Liturgy, this Catalogue of Holy Days stands
charged Smectymnuus. Truth it is in King Edwards Liturgy, no such Catalogue
expressly occurrs, but they have in the Calendar an establishment tant a mount:
this Catalogue is extracted from a statute 5. and 6. Edw. 6. repealed by Queen
Mary, and revived by King James. 1. Jacob 1 c. 25. And by Act of Parliament
requisite it is Holy Days should be confirmed; the property Parents claim in
their children, masters in their Servants directs it: neither of which being
sui juris, but subordinate to others their Superiors, it would be injurious to
them who have the Paramount disposal of them, to deprive them of their work
without their free consent; which being done by Parliament, where every man
either personally, or by representation virtually voteth, all men are alike
concluded, and none has reason to complain. For which very reason perhaps the
Apostles were sparing in instituting holy days, especially with a strict
cessation from bodily labor, wherein masters and Parents challenging an
interest, their consent was necessarily required. And perhaps this may be in
part the reason why the Council of Laodicea can. 29. decreeing the observation
of the Lord's Day in stead of the Sabbath, in these words (...). That it is fit
Christians preferring the Lords day before the Sabbath, should rest like
Christians on that day, adds (...), if they can, that is, if their Masters,
Parents, or Superiors, will permit them; grant I do, Zondras interprets this
additional, as referring to the affairs of husbandry, and village making its
import to be this, if they can with safety to the fruits of the earth, but I
see no necessity but the other may be included also. As concerning feastivals
of the Church they have rational grounds for their original, for Holy Days are
the sacred records and entries of the most eminent mercies of God conferred
upon the Church, the Memorials of his most remarkable works (for his greatest
work-dayes, ought to be our capital Holy Days) tending to man's temporal, or
eternal benefit: which works the prophet David says, ought to be had in ever
lasting remembrance: and not only so, they are also the annual rent of that
public honor we owe, and return to him for those gracious dispensations,
sometimes reserved by Divine limitation, sometimes left to the Churches
liberty: for Gods Institution puts no absolute restraint upon the Churches
freedom, nor does the enjoying of the Lords day to be observed holy, exclude
all power in the Church to constitute any other. The Jews had of humane
ordination their feast of Lots. Ester 9. 21. their feast of Dedication. 1
Maccab. 4. 59. This last honored with: our Saviors presence, without the
least hint of reproof, which certainly we should have heard of, had Judas
Macchabeus done more then he had warrant for, as some suppose. Now if the
people of God before Christ were dispensed with to superadd, as occasions did
emerge, peculiar days of thanksgiving, over and besides those of Divine
establishment, it is not to be presumed that the Church of Christ, which
pretends to a greater, should be abridged of the same liberty indulged to her
predecessor: sure I am, her Catholic, both doctrine, and practice has been
always a challenge of that immunity. What the opinion and usage of the
primitive Church in this particular was, I shall leave copious occasion to
declare in the future considerations of the Festivities in several; here I
shall only take notice of a passage of Saint Augustine misapplied by some of
another persuasion, and then descend to show the judgment of Protestant
Divines in defense of this liberty. St. Augustine Epist. 118. ad Januar.
speaking of the diversity of customs, relating to the festivals and time of
celebration of the Eucharist, sums up all with an excellent Corollary. Totum
hoc genus rerum liberas habet observationes. All these kinds of things have
their free observations, which free observations, some enlarge to every Private
Person, as if he were at liberty to observe or omit them, directly cross to
that fathers scope, who speaks not of particular persons, but Churches
national, as is most infallibly evident by the whole context, especially where
he extolleth it as the chief point of Christian prudence for every man to
comply with that mode, quo agere videt Ecclesiam ad quamcunque forte
pervenerit, which is embraced by that Church whereto it shall be his fortune to
resort. As for the sense of Reformed Churches and Doctors, the Confess. Aug.
Art. 14.
confession of Auspurge thus. Ritus illi servandi sunt qui ad tranquillitatem
and bonum ordinem in Ecclesia conducunt: ut certae feriae, certae cantiones
piae. [those customs, which advance peace and good order in the Church, are to
be continued, such are set holidays, and sacred hymns, etc.] The Cap. 24.
confession of Helvetia thus [if the Church do religiously celebrate the memory
of the Lords Nativity, Circumcision, Passion etc. according to Christian
Liberty, we do very well allow of it.] The confession of Cap. 15.
Bohemia thus, [Feasts consecrated to the celebrating of the works of Christ,
as to his Nativity, his Passion etc. and such as be dedicated to the
remembrance of those Saints, of whom there is mention in the holy Scriptures,
are by us retained at this day.] The confession of Wirtenberg thus, [It is
lawful for the Bishops, with the consent of their Church, to appoint
holy days, Lessons etc. As for the Protestant Doctors, not to trouble my
reader with over-many questions, I shall only fix upon two. First Buceri
Censura in opusc. Anglic. p. 49.
Bucer, [I wish (says he) the people could be brought to it, to celebrate with
the Lords day, only such Feasts wherein the Lords incarnation is solemnized,
as his Nativity, Circumcision etc. as also wherein the visitation of the Virgin
Mary, St. John, St. Peter, and St. Paul, the Martyrs, and Angels, are
commemorated.] Secondly Zanchy, Quanquam liberum est Ecclesiae Christi, quos
velit, praeter Dominicum, dies sibi sanctificandos deligere; honestius tamen
est, laudabitius atque utilius eos sanctificare, quos etiam vetus atque
Apostolica, puriorque Ecclesia sanctificare solita fuit i. e. [Though the
Church has liberty to make choice of what days, besides the Lords day, she
will celebrate, yet is it more decent, laudable, and profitable, to sanctify
those which the elder Apostolic and purer Church was wont to solemnize.] Now
what those days were in Zanchys judgment he soon after deciphers, by the
Festivals of Easter, Pentecost, Ascension, Good Friday, Christ's Nativity. But
to turn the keen edge of this great man's testimony, two places are cited from
him, which some would persuade are of a contrary import: and fit it is we
should, before we leave him, see the peace kept betwixt Zanchy and himself. [It
is more agreeable with the first institution and Apostolical writings, that
only one day in a week be kept holy,] so says Zanchy, and so I; for what does
these words exhibit, but barely this, that in the Apostles times, there is no
constat of any other Christian Festival observed then the weekly only, which I
conceive few will deny. Again, [They have not done ill, who have abolished all
but the Lords day] This is granted too: for Festivals, being of an adiaphorous,
and indifferent quality, far be it from me to impute sin to them who abrogate
them, I speak of Magistrates empowered with the supreme Authority, but though I
allow they have not done ill in the abolishing, yet do I conceive they had done
better in retaining them. So that I cannot discern any material interfearing
betwixt Zanchy quoted pro and con, but that he is reconcilable enough, both to
himself, and to the Doctrine of the forecited Confessions, and all speaking
home as to the advantage of our Churches liberty in appointing days, and of
her prudential piety in selecting these; But the best reformed Churches have
laid these Holy days aside, and it is fit we conform to them. Answer, If the
Churches here intended be, as the contrivers of it administer cause of
conjecture, those of Geneva, France, Scotland, Belgia, it will raise a new
question whether they may properly be called the best reformed Churches, a
question fit to be stated before they be propounded as exemplary to us. To
which end very proper it is, that it be demonstrated to us, that the advenu'es,
the entries, the mode and way of their Reformation was agreeable to principles
of Christianity, that the work proceeded in a regular, sober, and orderly
manner, was not carried on by tumult, sedition, and Rebellion. For this has
been controverted, and no satisfaction given adaequate, or which has made even
with all scruples. Again, omitting how, and to examine what they did, we say
their several parcels of that new structure, which they cry up for so rare a
beauty, whose symmetry and proportion in the sense of many learned and
judicious men, holds no conformity to the rules of Christianity. They have, it
is feared, in an odd humor of singularity, abandoned the most excellent order
of Bishops, an order of 1500. years standing, before the new fangled
discipline; wherein if they have done well, the consequence must infallibly be,
that all those blessed Martyrs, Confessors Fathers, and others holy men of
former ages, did abuse the Church in preserving such a Prelacy, and that Gods
providence was supinely negligent, and fast asleep to permit his Church all
along so many Centuries, to be so mis-governed. To proceed, they have not only
laid aside these holy days above specified, but even the Lords day it self,
which our great adversaries themselves repute to be of Divine institution. True
it is, they make it a day of public assembling, but not for sacred
concernments alone, No, for civil also, having their markets kept upon those
days: Till these obstacles be removed, we hold it not just that they pretend
to the title of the best reformed Churches. Only one objection more I must not
fastidiously ^ Hieronym. ^pi^t.
slight. To which though, a clarissimo ingenio occupata sunt meliora, it has
been the exercise of a more learned pen, I shall endeavor an answer.

The Objection is this, many of these festivals had their rise and growth from
Christians conformity to the heathenish feasts, and customs, which is not
agreeable to Gospel principles. Answer; No proof being produced out of ancient
monuments to strengthen this assertion, it is as easily repelled as offered:
there is indeed reference made to Gregory the great, but that Epistle, being
the 71. of his 9. Book, speaks short; The Question is matter of Fact, whether
actually the Christian came in place of Pagan feastivals: of this Gregory
affords not a syllable, all he says is only this. That Augustine the monk,
who was his Emissary into England, desired his resolution what should be done
with the Pagan Temples, as also with their festivals. Gregory's direction in
this case was this, that the Temples he should convert into Churches, and the
Pagan festivals into Christian holy days. How far Augustine pursued his
Masters Order, there is no constat; suppose it acted what was commanded; then I
say, first, the same objection lies against our Churches also, which they have
urged against our festivals. Secondly, this is enough to confute that miserable
mistake that Christmas day took it is rise from the Paganish Saturnals, when
certain it is, that day was in observation hundreds of years before St.
Gregory, and for other Festivals, they must rather be then supposed translated,
then instituted, considering that Anno. 300.
Gildas speaking of the peace restored to the Church, after the Dioclesian
persecution, gives this account of the Christians doings, renovant Ecclesias ad
solum usque destructas, basilicas sanctorum martyrum fundant, dies festos
celebrant: they repair the Churches demolisht to the ground, they rear up
monuments for the blessed Martyrs, they celebrate holy days. This Gildas
delivers, who was near a century of years Gregory his Ancient. And if holy
days were celebrated then, they could not take rise from this Act of
Augustines 300. years after. Lastly, if the Christian festivals were removed
and translated to a coincidence with those of the Heathens, neither was the
either direction, or execution too blame: St. Paul, in order to the Jews
conversion made himself a Jew to them, upon this very score he circumcised
Timothy, and shaved his own head at Cenchrea; why might not Paul's act be a
leading case to all posterity, why might not Gregory and Augustine, show his
act for their warrant. Believe it, if they could by this compliance cheat the
Heathens of their Idolatry, and cozen them to the saving of their Souls, it was
for ought I see a pious fraud. If Gregory be thought to have adventured too far
in his direction, hear a Protestant of eminent note and account amongst us.
Learned Zanchy, speaking of the Jewish feasts of Pasch, Pentecost, Tabernacles,
Jubiles etc. Zanchi in 4. praecepti Q. 2. These. 1.
Quis prohibet, quin Ecclesia sicut Diem septimum transtulit in Dominicum, sic
etiam illos reliquos dies festos in alios transfer potuerit, who can hinder,
but as the Church did translate the seventh day into the Lords day, so she may
also change those festivals into others? Now if Zanchy be in the right as to
Jewsh festivals, what just cause can be showed why the festivals of the
Heathen, situated under the same parallel of legality, may not also be
converted into Christian Holy Days.

CHAP. III. The order where Morning and Evening prayer shall be used and said.
Common prayer, 2. B. of Edw. 6. THE morning and Evening Omitted in the 1. B.
of Edw. 6.
Prayer shall be used in the accustomed place of the Church, Chapel, or
Chancel, (B) except it shall be otherwise determined by the Ordinary of the
Place. (C) And the Chancels shall remain as they have done in times past. The
morning and Evening Prayer shall be used in such places of the Church, Chapel
or Chancel, and the Minister shall so turn him as the people may best hear. And
if there be any controversy therein, the matter shall be referred to the
Ordinary, and he or his deputy shall appoint the place. And the Chancels shall
remain as they have done in times past.

1. B. of Edw. 6. The Common prayer. 2. Book of Edw. 6. In the saying or
singing of Mattens and Evensong, Baptizing and Burying, the Minister in Parish
Churches and Chapels annexed to the same (E) shall use a Surplice. And in all
Cathedral Churches and Colleges, the Archdeacons, Deans, Provosts, Masters,
Prebendaries and fellows being Graduates, may use in the quire, besides their
Surplices, such hoods as pertain to their several degrees, which they have
taken in any university within this Realm. But in all other places every
Minister shall be at liberty to use any Surplice or no. It is also seemly that
Graduats when they do preach should use such hoods as pertain to their several
degrees. And here is to be noted, that the Minister at the time of the
Communion, and at all other times in his ministration shall use (D) such
ornaments in the Church as were in use by Authority of Parliament in the 2.
year of the reign of King Edw. the 6th. according to the act of Parliament set
in the beginning of the Book. And here is to be noted, that the Minister at the
time of the Communion and at all other times in his ministration, shall use
neither All, Vestment, nor cope, but being Archbishop, or Bishop he shall have
and wear a Rochet, and being a Priest or Deacon, he shall have and wear a
surplice only. Scotch Liturgy. And whenever the Bishop shall celebrate the
holy Communion in the Church, or execute any other public ministration: he
shall have upon him beside his Rochet a Surplice or Alb, and a Cope or
Vestment, and also his Pastoral staff in his hand, or else born or holden by
his Chaplain. And here is to be noted, that the presbyter or Minister at the
time of the Communion, and at other times of his ministration, shall use such
Ornaments, in the Church, as are prescribed, or shall be by his Majesty or his
successors according to the Act of Parliament provided in that behalf.

The Common Prayer. 1. B. of Edw. 6. An order for Morning Prayer daily
throughout the year. An order for Mattens daily throughout the year.

At the beginning both of Morning Prayer, and likewise of Evening This Rubric
with the sentences following, the Exhortation, the confession and Absolution,
wanting in the 1. B. of Edw. 6. Ezekiel. 18. Psalm 51. Psalm. 51.
Prayer, (F) the Priest shall read with a loud voice some one of these
sentences of the Scriptures that follow. And then he shall say that which is
written after the said sentences.

AT what time soever a sinner does repent him of his sin from the bottom of his
heart, I will put all his wickedness out of my remembrance, faith the Lord.

I do know mine own wickedness, and my sin is always against me.

Turn thy face away from our sins (O Lord) and blot out all our offenses.

A sorrow til spirit is a sacrifice to God: despise not (O Lord humble and
con^rite Psalm. 51.
hearts.

Rent your hearts, and not your garments, and turn to the Lord your God,
because Jocl 2.
he is gentle and merciful, he is patient and of much mercy, and such a one
that is sorry for your afflictions.

To thee (O Lord God) belongs mercy and forgiveness, for we have gone away
Dan. 9.
from thee, and have not bearkened to thy voice, whereby we might walk in thy
laws which thou have appointed for us.

Correct us, O Lord, and yet in thy judgment, not in thy fury, lest we should
Jer. 2.
be consumed and brought to nothing.

Amend your lives, for the kingdom of God is at hand. Matthew. 3.


I will go to my father, and say to him; Father, I have sinned against heaven,
and Luke 15.
against thee, I am no more worthy to be called thy son.

Enter not into judgment with thy servants, O Lord, for no flesh is righteous
Psalm 142.
in thy sight.

If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and there is no truth in
1 John 1.
us.

DEarly beloved brethren, the Scripture moves us in sundry places, to
acknowledge and confess our manifold sins and wickedness, and that we should
not dissemble nor cloak them before the face of Almighty God our heavenly
Father, but confess them with an humble, lowly, penitent, and obedient heart,
to the end that we may obtain forgiveness of the same, by his infinite
goodness and mercy. And although we ought at all times humbly to acknowledge
our sins before God: yet ought we most chiefly so to do when we assemble and
meet together, to render thanks for the great benefits which we have received
at his hands, to set forth his most worthy praise, to hear his most holy word,
and to ask those things which be requisite and necessary, as well for the body
as the soul. Wherefore I pray and beseech you, as many as be here present, to
accompany me with a pure heart and humble voice, unto the Throne of the
heavenly grace, saying after me.

A general confession, to be said of the whole congregation after the all
humbly] kneeling.

ALmighty and most merciful father, we have erred and strayed from thy ways
like lost sheep, we have followed too much the devices and desires of our own
hearts, we have offended against thy holy laws, we have left undon those things
which we ought to have done, and we have done those things which we ought not
to have done, and there is no health in us: but thou, O Lord, have mercy upon
us miserable offenders, spare thou them O God, which confess their faults;
restore thou them that be penitent, according to thy promises declared unto
mankind in Christ Jesu our Lord. And grant, O most merciful Father, for his
sake, that we may hereafter live a godly, righteous and sover life, to the
glory of thy holy name. [Scotch Liturgy, And the Salvation of our own souls,]
Amen.

The absolution or [remission of sins] to be pronounced by the Priest

Lmighty God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which desires not the death
of a sinner, but rather that he may turn from his wickedness and live, and
has given power and commandment to [Scotch. Lit. the Presbyters of his Church.
the ministers of his Gospel,] his Ministers, to declare and pronounce to his
people being penitent, the absolution and remission of their sins: he pardons
and absolveth all them which truly repent, and unfeignedly believe his holy
Gospel. Wherefore we beseech him to grant us true repentance and his holy
spirit, [Scot. Lit. That we may receive from his absolution from all our sins,]
that those things may please him which we ^o at this present, and that the rest
of our life hereafter may be pure and holy, so that at the last we may come to
his eternal joy, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The people shall answer, Amen.

Common prayer. 1. B. of Edw. 6. Then shall the Minister begin the with a loud
voice. [Scot. Lit. And in this, and in all other places of the Lit. where the
last words for thine is the kingdom, are expressed, the Presbyter shall read
them. But in all places where they are not expressed, he shall end at these
words, But deliver us from evil. Amen.] The Priest being in the Quire, shall
Here begin^ the Morning Prayer in the 1. B. o^ Ed. 6,
begin with a loud voice the Lords Prayer, called the Pater noster.

OUR father which are in heaven, hallowed be thy ^ame. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.
And lead us not into temptation, But deliver us from evil, [Scot. Lit. for
thine is the kingdom, the power and the glory, for ever and ever, (K) Amen.

Then likewise he shall say

O Lord open thou our lips.

Answer.

And our mouth shall show forth thy praise.

Priest.

O God make speed to save us

Answer.

O Lord make have to help us.

Priest.

[Scotch Liturgy, then all of them standing up, the Presbyter shall say or
sing.]

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son. etc.
As it was in the beginning, is now, etc.
Praise ye the Lord. 1. B. of Edw. 6. (O) [Scot. Lit. Answer The Lord be
praised.] (N) And from Easter to Trinity Sunday. Allelujah.

COMMON PRAYER.

Then shall be said or sung this Psalm following.

O Come let us sing unto the Lord, etc. Psalm. 95. Venite, exultemus domino.
Psalm 95.


Then shall follow certain Psalms, in order, as they be appointed in a Table
made for that purpose: except there be proper Psalms appointed for that day.
And at the end of every Psalm through the year, and likewise in the end of
Renedictus, Benedicite, Magnificat, and Nun^ dimittis, shall be repeated: Glory
be to the Father etc.

[Scot. Lit. And the people shall answer. As it was in the beginning etc. every
one standing up at the same.]

Then shall be read two Lessons distinctly, with a loud voice, that the people
may hear. The first of the old Testament, the Second of the new, like as they
be appointed by the Calendar, except there be proper Lessons assigned for that
day: the priest that reads the Lesson, standing, and turning him so, as he
may best be heard of all such as be present. (R) And before every Lesson the
Priest shall say thus, The first, second, third, or fourth Chapter of Genesis,
or Exodus, Matthew, Mark, or other like, as is appointed in the Calendar. And
in the end of every Chapter, he shall say, Here ends such a Chapter of such a
book.

And to the end the people may the better hear in such places where they do
sing, there shall the Lessons be sung in a plain tune, after the manner of
distinct reading, and likewise the Epistle and Gospel.

Common Prayer. 1 B. of Edw. 6. After the first Lesson shall follow (T) Te deum
Laudamus in English daily through the whole year. And after the first Lesson
shall follow in English daily throughout the year: except in ^ent, all the
which time, in the place of te Deum shall be used Benedicite omnia opera Domini
Domino in English, as follows.

WE praise thee O God: we acknowledge thee to be the Lord.
All the earth does worship thee: the Father everlasting. Te deum laudamus.

To thee all Angels cry aloud: the heavens, and all the powers therein. Psalm.
66. 4.

To thee Cherubin and Seraphin: continually do cry. ^say. 6. 3.

Holy, holy, holy: Lord God of Sabbath.
Heaven and earth are full of the majesty: of thy Glory.
The glorious company of the Apostles praise thee.
The goodly fellowship of the prophets: praise thee.
The noble Army of Martyrs: praise thee.
The holy Church throughout all the world: both knowledge thee.
The Father of an infinite majesty.
Thy honorable, true, and only Son.
Also the holy Ghost: the comforter. Psalm. 24. 8.

Thou art the King of Glory: O Christ.
Thou art the everlasting son of the Father.
When thou tookest upon thee to deliver man: thou did not abhor the Uirgins
womb.
When thou had overcome the sharpness of death: thou did open the
Kingdom of heaven unto all believers.
Thou sit on the right hand of God: in the glory of thy Father.
We believe that thou shall come: to be our judge.
We therefore pray thee help thy servants: whom thou have redeemed with thy
precious blood.
Make them to be numbered with thy Saints: in glory everlasting.
O Lord save thy people: and bless thine heritage. Psalm 28. 9.

Govern them: and lift them up for ever.
Day by day: we magnify thee. Psalm. 125. 2.

And we worship thy name: ever world without end.
Uouchsafe, O Lord: to keep us this day without sin. Psalm. 123. 2.

O Lord have mercy upon us: have mercy upon us. Psalm 33. 22.

O Lord let thy mercy lighten upon us: as our trust is in thee.
O Lord, in thee have I trusted: let me never be confounded. Psalm. 31. 1.

Or this Canticle (V) Benedicite omnia orpra domini domino.

O All ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magniffe him
forever.
O ye Angels of the Lord, bless ye the Lord. praise him and magnify him
forever.
O ye heavens bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnfie him for ever.
O ye waters that be above the fitmament, bless ye the Lord: praise him and
magnify him forever.
O all ye powers of the Lord, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnify him
for ever.
O ye Sun and Moon, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnify him for ever.
O ye stars of heaven, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnify him for ever.
O ye showers and dew, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnify him for ever.
O ye winds of God, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnify him for ever.
O ye fire and heat, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnify him for ever.
O ye winter and summer, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnify him for ever.
O ye dews and frosts, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnify him for ever.
O ye frosts and cold, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnify him for ever.
O ye (...) snow, bless ye the Lord, praise him and magnify for ever.
O ye nights and days, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnify him for ever.
O ye light and darkness, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnify him for
ever.
O ye lightnings and (...), bless ye the L^^d: praise him and magnify him for
ever.
O let the (...) ^^esse the Lord: yea, let it praise him and magnify him for
ever.
O ye mountains and hills, ^lesse ye the Lord: praise him and magnify him for
ever.
O all ye green things upon the earth, bless ye the Lord: praise him and
magnify him for ever.
O ye wells, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnify him for ever.
O ye seas and floods, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnify him for ever.
O ye Whales and all that move in the waters, bless ye the Lord: praise him
and magnify him for ever.
O all ye fouls of the air, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnify him for
ever.
O all ye beasts and cattle, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnify him for
ever.
O ye children of men, bless ye Lord: praise him and magnify him for ever.
O let Israel bless the Lord: praise him and magnify him for ever.
O ye priests of the Lord, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnify him for
ever.
O ye servants of the Lord, ble^e ye the Lord: praise him and magnify him for
ever.
O ye spirits and souls of the righteous, bless ye the Lord: praise him and
magnify him for ever.
O ye holy and humble men of heart, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnify
him for ever.
O Ananias, Azarias, and Misael, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnify him
for ever.
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son; and to the holy Ghost.
As it was in the beginning, is now, etc.
And after the second Lesson, shall be used and said (V) Benedictus, in English
as follows,

BLessed be the Lord God of Israel, etc. Benedictus.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, etc.
As it was in the beginning, is now, etc.
Or else this Psalm.

O Be joyful in the Lord (all ye lands;) etc. Psalm. 100. Jubilate Deo.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, etc. Psalm. 100.

As it was in the beginning, is now, etc. Omitted in 1. B. of Edw. 6.

1. B. of Edw. 6.

Then shall be said daily throughout the year the Prayers follwing, as well at
Evensong, as at Mattens, all devoutly kneeling.

Lord have mercy upon us.
Christ have mercy upon us.
Lord have mercy upon us.
The Common Prayer. 1. B. of Edw. 6. Then shall be said [Scot. Lit. or sung]
the creed by the Priest and the people standing. The shall the minister say the
Greed and the Lords prayer in English, with a loud voice.

I Believe in God the father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth, and in Jesus
Christ his only son our Lord, which was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of
the Uirgin Mary, suffered under Ponce Pilate, was crucified, dead, and buried,
he descended into Hell, the third day he rose again from the dead, he ascended
into Heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the father almighty, from
thence shall he come to judge the quick and the dead. I believe in the holy
Ghost, the holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints, the forgiveness of
sins, the resurrection of the body, and the life everlasting, Amed.

And after that, these prayers following, as well at Evening Prayer, as at
Morning Prayer: all devoutly kneeling, the Priest first pronouncing with a loud
voice.

The Lord be with you. This salutation and answer do enter between the
Versicles, and the Collect for the day, in the first Book of Edward the sixth.
Answer. And with thy spirit.

The Priest,
Let us pray.
Lord have mercy upon us.
Christ have mercy upon us.
Lord have mercy upon us.
Then the Priest, Clarks and people, shall say the Lord Prayer in English, with
a loud voice.

Our father which are in heaven, etc.
1. B. of Edw. 6. Answer. But deliver us from evil.
Then the Priest standing up, shall say.
O Lord show thy mercy upon us.
Answer.
And grant us thy salvation.
Priest.
O Lord save the King.
Answer.
And mercifully hear us when we call upon thee.
Priest.
Indue thy ministers with righteousness.
Answer.
And make thy chosen people joyful.
Priest.
O Lord save thy people.
Answer.
And bless thine inheritance.
Priest.
Give peace in our time O Lord.
Answer.
Because there is none other that fights for us, but only thou O God.
Priest.
O God make clean our hearts within us.
Answer.
And take not thy holy Spirit from us.
Then shall follow [1. B. of Edw. 6. daily.] Three Collects. The first of the
day, which shall be the same that is appointed at the Communion. The second for
Peace The third for Grace to live well. And the two last Collects shall never
alter, but daily be said at morning Prayer throughout all the year, as
follows. [1: B. of Edw. 6. the Priest standing up, and saying, Let us pray,
then the Collect for the day.]

The second Collect for peace.

O God, which art the author of peace, and lover of concord, in knowledge of
whom stands our eternal life, whose service is perfect freedom: defend us thy
humble servants in all assaults of our enemies, that we surely trusting in thy
defense, may not fear the power of any adversaries, through the might of Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Third Collect for Grace.

O Lord our heavenly father, Almighty and everlasting God, which have safely
brought us to the beginning of this day, defend us in the same with thy mighty
power, and grant that this day we fall into no sin, neither run into any kind
of danger, but that all our doings may be ordered by thy governance, to do
always that is righteous in thy sight, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

[Scot. Lit. After this Collect ended, follows the Letany, and if the Letany
be not appointed to be said or sung that morning, then shall be next said the
prayer for the Kings Majesty, with the rest of the Prayers following, at the
end of the Letany, and the Benediction.]

Annotations upon CHAP. III.
(A) Morning and Evening Prayer agreeable to the Jewish and Christian practice.
The three hours of Prayer in the Temple. The 6. of Private devotion. (B) Where
Morning and Evening prayer are to be said. Why the place left arbitrary to the
Bishop. (C) what meant by Chancels shall stand as as they have done. (D)
Ornaments in Cathedrals (E) the Surplice defended and Primitive practice set
down. (F) A discourse concerning the Translations of the Bible, where the
obstacle was, that our Liturgy was not reformed in this particular. (G) To
begin with confession ancient. (H) What meant by the word alone in the Rubric
of absolution. (I) The Lords Prayer why pronounced in a loud voice. (K) The
Primitive practice concerning Amen. (L) The versicles and Responds, Canonical
Scripture, approved by Bucer. (M) The original of the Decalogy, its antiquity.
(N) Hallelujah at what times to be used. (O) The Invitatory what and why
devised. (P) The Number of Lessons in the Romish Church. Our manner of reading
them most conformable to antiquity. The Contents of the Chapters of what use
(Q) The Primitive custom before every Lesson (R) The Benefit of mixing Psalms
or hymns with Lessons. (S) Te deum how ancient. (T) Benedicite ancient. (V)
Benedictus and other hymns vindicated, used by the Dutch Church (W) The Creed
anciently, no part of the Liturgy, how employed, why called the Apostles; the
Catholic Church a phrase as ancient as Ignatius. reason why so called. The
variety of Symbols whence derived, why the Creed pronounced standing. (X) The
Lord be with you, whence derived. difference betwixt it, and Peace be to you.
(Y) Let us pray, an ancient formula. (Z) Lord have mercy upon us etc. called
the Lesser Litany. (AA) O Lord show thy mercy upon us etc. are canonical
Scripture. (BB) Collects why so called.

MOrning and Evening Prayer] Prayer ought to be made as often as occasion Give us
this day our daily bread; The Lords mercies are new every morning, so should
our prayers and thanksgivings be, new in practice, though the same in form.
Upon this account were the Diurnal sacrifices of the Temple upon this account
did the Primitive Christians practice it, sacrificia quot idie ce^^bramus, we
daily offer sacrifices to God, says Epist. 53.
Cyyrian (...) says de Martyr.
Theodoret. Yea not only daily but twice a day at Morning and Evening according
to the order of our Church (...), says in 1 Timothy-2.
Chrysostom; all the faithful can bear witness of this, how it is observed in
the Morning and Evening Service, and to the same purpose (d) Epiphanius (...).
Morning Prayers and Hymns are continually used in the holy Church as also
Evening (...).
Prayers and Hymns (what these morning and evening hymns were, shall be seen
afterward) As for the hour of morning prayer with us it is nine in the
forenoon, agreeable to the Primitive practice of the Greek Church especially,
derived either from the miraculous descent of the holy Ghost at that hour upon
the Apostles, or from the Jewish custom of assembling for the performance of
Religious duties at that hour, their Third; whereof instances there are enough
in H. Scripture; This in all probability of divine establishment, not so I
conceive the next or sixth in order of Canonical hours, this being added by
private devotion: at which hour, after dinner, devout people resorted to the
Temple to offer up their more pecular supplications, in reference to their
private and proper wants. So Hannah rose up early after they had eaten in
Shiloh, and after they had drunk, and went into the Temple, and prayed unto the
Lord. 1 Samuel 1. 9. whence old Eli mistook her to be drunk Chrysostom. de Annu.
(...) says S. Chrysostom, from the heat of the day for it was about noon. So
the Prophet David at Morning and Evening and at high noon day will I rise up to
praise thee. In conformity to which the Ancient Christians preserved the same
observation, though satisfied I am not that it was an universal practice,
because Stromat. l. 7.
Clemens Alexandrinus restrains it to some (...), some allot set hours for
Prayers, the Third, Sixth, and Ninth.

Except it shall be otherwise determined by the Ordinary etc.] The first
Reformat on Bucer whose judgment was called in to aid, by Archbishop Cranmer,
in order to a future Reformation of our Liturgy, justly faulted it, wishing
quam primum corrigi that with all expedition it might be mended for Censura. p.
Oportet ut sacra omnia Populus audiant, percipiant que religione summa. Fit it
is that all holy offices the people should both hear and mind with all
possible devotion: and this they could not do in such Churches where the high
Altars were disposed very distant from the Nave or Body of the Church by the
interposition of a Belfrey as in many places it happened. Thereupon in the next
Liturgy order was given for the service to be used in such places of the Church
etc. as the people might best hear. And if controverted, the Ordinary to
determine the place. Now the last Reformers in Q. Elizabeth her time, observing
that in many Churches the edification of the people might be secured and the
ancient practice observed, restored the service to its former station, leaving
notwithstanding an overruling power in the Ordinary to dispose it otherwise, if
he saw just cause so to do. Whereby it appears that the Bishops lately
enjoining the service to be said at the holy Table or in the Chancel, did not
innovate but held to the Rubric, and that the officiating in the Desk was a
swerving from the rule, unless, where it was able to show Episcopal
dispensation expressly to warrant it.

And the Chancels shall stand as they have done.] In the beginning of the
Edward the 6. his Reign, Altars were taken down upon good and godly
consideration, as King Edwards Letter to Bishop Ridley imports. But as there is
no constat that all altars were then taken down, for the letter speaks but of
most part, not of all, the Churches in the Realm; so is it dubious whether they
were taken down by public order, or popular tumult, for the consideration
might be good and Godly, yet the way of proceeding therein not approvable: But
taken down they were, and by way of concomitancy, probably in many places the
steps of ascent were levelled also, set so as some were notwithstanding left in
their former state: about which much strife and contention arising in several
places, some eager to pull them down, others as earnest to continue them. The
wisdom of the Church interposeth to part the fray ordering in this Rubric no
alteration to be attempted therein: which notwithstanding, the people in the
beginning of Queen Elizabeth her Reign, began to be unquiet again in this
particular, so as she was enforced to restrain them by a new order in these
words. Orders Oct, 10. 3. Eliz,
Also that the Steps which be as yet at this day remaining in any our
Cathedral, Collegiate or P^rish Churches, be not stirred nor altered, but be
suffered to continue. And if in any Chancel the steps be transposed, that they
be not erected again, but that the place be decently paved. By which words
evident it is Authority had no design to end the dispute by closing with
either party, but by stating things in their present posture.

The minister shall use such Ornaments etc.] In the latter end of the Act for
Cathedrals the Chief Minister officiating at the Communion, shall wear a decent
Cope with Gospellor and Epistoler agreeable.

Shall use a Surplice.] Of civil concernment and politic necessity, it is,
that degrees, but sorts; To these sorts Custom, hitherto uncontroled, has
rationally assigned such vestments as set a peculiar mark upon them
distinguishing each from other. If amongst the rest, sacred institution has
separated some to serve at the Altar, why should not they be known by their
livery to what profession they belong, as well as others? and if so, why may
not also some attire be allotted them, select from the the ordinary, when they
are called to officiate in holy administrations. Religio Divina alterum habitum
habet in ministerio, alterum in usu communi says Comment. in Ezech. c. 44.
Hierom, Divine religion has one habit for ministration in the Church, another
for ordinary uses. What habit more decent then white, the badge and cognizance
of innocence; and which the practice of the primitive Church commends to us.
Quae sunt rogo inimicitia contra Deum si Episcopus Presbyter and Diaconus and
reliquus ordo Ecclesiasticus in Administratione sacrificiorun^ candida vest
processerint? what defiance is it, I pray, to God (expostulateth adv. Pelag. l.
1.
Hier. with the Pelagians) if the Bishop, Presbyter, and Deacon and others of
the Clergy in ministering at the Altar, use a white garment? did ever man speak
more express and clear, restraining the usage of these white vestments to the
Clergy alone, and to them only in officiating at the holy Altar? yet Mr. Apud
Amoss fresh suit against Cere. p. 506.
Brightman, the Oracle of them of the Revolt, has the face to tell us that
this Candida vestis of Hierom was no garment belonging to the minister alone in
Divine service, but a decent and cleanly vesture. The like interpretation he
gives us of St. Chrysostom, who reproving the Clergy of Antioch for not
excluding l Hom. 60. in Pop. Antiochen.
notorious offenders from the Eucharist, tells them, God requires somewhat
more from them, then only walking up and down the Church in white and shining
garments, when the Sacrament is administered. Such barefaced opposition to
manifest verities is to be pitied, not quarreled at. To these evidences out of
Hierom and Chrysostom, let me add that of Gregory Nazianzen, ancient to them
both, and Master to the first: who rendering the narrative of his dream,
describes himself sitting in his Throne his Presbyters seated on either hand,
and his Deacons standing by (...), Insomnium Greg. Nazia.
adorned in shining garments, no doubt according to his wonted fashion when he
was present at divine service. Indeed exterior objects have a potent influence
upon the soul, and variously affect it according to the quality of them, should
one behold a Priest officiating about those dreadful mysteries in cuerpo, or a
foolscoate, it would certainly excite thoughts of less respect; whereas a
vesture solemn, grave, and becoming, fitted with agreeable actions must need
move to a suitable reverence.

The Priest shall read with a loud voice some one of these sentences] The first
step to know we have offended; the next is, to acknowledge it. By these degrees
our Church labors to bring us to our knees, leading us to Confession by these
Excellent sentences, and an exhortation suitable to her purpose; and without an
humble and unfeined confession, it were madness in us to hope for pardon for
our transgressions. Homoes, (says the Ambros de. Paenit l. 2. c. 6
Father) and vis rogari, ut ignoscas: and putas D^um tibi non roganti
ignoscere? Thou art a contemptible man, yet wilt be entreated before thou
forgivest; and shall God remit thine own sins unasked? But before I advance
further, at this first threshold of our Liturgy I stumble upon an objection,
and an untoward one it is, I confess; for this first sentence referred by the
margin to Ezechiel is not there to be found, (...), or expressly the words of
the Prophet being these c. 18 v. 21. and 22. [But if the wicked will turn from
all his sins that he has committed, and keep all my statutes, and do that
which is lawful and right he shall surely live, he shall not die; all his
transgressions that he has committed, they shall not be mentioned unto him,]
Whereby it is evident that this sentence in our Liturgy resulteth from the
Original, rather by inference, then by translation. Now because many such
seeming blemishes will perhaps occur to captious inquirers in the comparing of
this old translation, with that of the best edition: it will be time well spent
to alleviate the burden of this, and all other Objections, emergent upon this
account. And first, we are ready to justify our Church, thus far, that she
never swerveth from the native verity in any one particular, relating to the
fundamentals of, either faith, or morality. Secondly, it will be proper to
examine what translation we follow. The first translation of the Bible into the
English tongue in order to our reformation, was performed by Mr. Tyndal, Anno
1530. afterward Martyr. But some Bishops had represented to King Henry the 8.
that Tyndal was of a seditious spirit, and had dispersed several books tending
thereunto (a most false aspersion, witness that most Loyal piece, called the
obedience of a Christian man) and that his Translation was very corrupt;
whereupon it was immediately called in and suppressed. But the Popes Authority
about the year 1536 going down, upon the entreaty and petition of the Clergy,
King Henry issued out an order for a new translation, indulging in the intrim
to his Subjects the use of a Bible then passing under a feined name of Matthews
Bible, not much differing from Tyndals; the King promising a new, and more
perfect Translation shortly to be published. This Translation came forth in the
year 1540, and was called the Bible of the great volume, or the Great Bible,
and sometimes Coverdales Translation. And though this Bible was enforced by the
aid of a Proclamation, yet was both it, and all other Translations abolished by
act of Parliamant 1542. and the public use of the Bible interdicted in
Churches without leave from the King or Ordinary first had: which interdict
lasted all King Henry's reign. But he not living many years after, and his son
Edward succeeding him, the former statute was soon repealed, and the Scripturs
made public again according to the Translation of Miles Coverdale, which in
truth does not differ much from Tyndals. In King Edwards time was our Liturgy
compiled, and no Translation being then more perfect then this of Coverdals,
reason good it should follow that. And from that does our Liturgy derive both
the Translations of the Psalms and other portions of Canonical Scripture But
there have been two new and more correct translations since; one in Queen
Elizabeth's Reign, called the Bishops-Bible, it being the labor of some Bishops
commissionated by the Queen, the other in King James his time, and why was not
our Liturgy reformed in this particular by those translations? shall I tell you
what I have heard, and from a very credible hand. A convocation in the Queens
time were once in good earnest upon this very design, but proceeding upon good
advice, they thought fit, first, to examine the gust of the Parliament then
sitting, by some confidence of theirs; these seriously dissuaded them from
further progress in it, declaring that this reformation being not very
feasible without dissolving the ancient frame, they had cause to fear it would
find so potent enemies in the house (a thing of no great wonder) as it would
scarce be allowed to pass again. The case standing thus, it sorted well with
Christian prudence to desist. And the same Christian prudence moved the
Compilers of the Scotch Liturgy, who had no other then the Royal Authority to
regard, to reform agreeable to the best Translation, not only these sentences,
but what else of sacred Scripture was ingredient into the service of that
Church.

A general confession to be said.] To begin Morning prayer with confession of
De nocte populus surgens antelucano tempore domum precationis petit, in labor,
tribulatione and Lachrymis indesinentibus facta ad Deum Confessione; says
Basil. Early in the Epist. 63.
morning at break of day the people rising, go straight to the house of Prayer
making confession of their sins to God with much sorrow, sobbs, and tears.
Which custom lest it should be thought a peculiar of his own Church, was, he
tells us consonant to all other Churches. Nor is he only a witness for
confession, but for confession so qualified as ours, the Congregation repeating
the words after the Minister, suis quisque verbis resipiscentiam profitetur,
every man pronounces his own confession with his own mouth.

The absolution to be pronounced by the Minister alone.] Of absolution I shall
Edw. 6. as it begins service with a confession in substantials Anno. 1551.
like to ours, so does it enjoin Absolution to follow presently upon it. As for
this it is, you see, appointed to the Minister alone to pronounce it, which
word alone has here a double import; first, in relation to the Public use of
the Morning service in the Church, where it implies that the people must not
in this, as in their antecedent confession, say after the Minister, but leave
it to be pronounced by him alone. Its second relation is to the private, for
you must know that Morning and Evening prayer were not in their Original
designation intended by our Reformers, as only peculiar to Church assemblies,
but as well appointed for the service of God in private families; this is
evident by ancient Primers set forth which are composed of those services, and
were designed to be, not only lessons for children to be initiaed into letters
by, but also as helps for devout people in the performances of family duties,
as is evident by the injunction proemial to them. Now lest in the private
exercises of piety the people or Laiety ignorantly should rush into the
Priestly office, this caveat is entered by the Church, declaring that the
Minister alone, and no layman ought then to officiate. I think it also not
improper here to acquaint you, that the words or Remission of sins was added,
as also the word Priest changed into Minister both here and in diverse other
places by the Reformers under K. James.

Then shall the Minister begin the Lords prays with a loud voice.] This prayer

Amen.] This word being an index of the peoples assent to the preceding with a
loud voice Hieron. in 2. Proaem. Com. in Galat.
ad similitudinem coelestis tonitrui Amen: populus reboat, the people echo out
the Amen like a thunderclap says St: Hierom. Stromat. l. 7.
Clemens Alexandrinus, relates a mode remarkable in his time at the
pronouncing thereof, (...), we raise our selves upon our tip-toes (for they
prayed standing) at this last acclamation of our prayers, and he assigns this
reason for it, (...), as if we desired that word should carry up our bodies as
well as our souls to heaven.

O Lord open thou our lips] These versicles with their Responds are pure
Canonical Psalm. 51. 15. Be pleased to deliver me, O Lord make have to help me.
Psalm. 40. 13. very aptly are they premised to usher in the ensuing doxology.
The answers are to be returned by the people, not by the Quire, as is the
Romish use, direct contrary to the ancient practice Hieron. ubi supra.
Populus cum sacerdote loquitur in precibus, the people and Priest spoke one to
another in prayers: conformable is the direction of Censura. p. 495.
Bucer, Dum sacrae preces recitantur nomine totius populi, respondeant
Ministro, and non tantum Amen, verumetiam omnia alia quaecunque ministris
solent: u^ in litania ac aliis precibus vetus mos obtinet. Whilst dovout
prayers are made in the behalf of all the people, let them answer the Minister,
and not only the Amen, but also all other responces which are wont to be
returned to the Minister, as the ancient wont has been both in the Liturgy and
other prayers.

Glory be the Father etc.] Glory is appropriated to God alone, his peculiar it
Psalm. 19. the Angels chant it Glory be to God on high. Luke 2. 14. The
Seraphins resound it; Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Hosts, the whole world is
full of his Glory Isai. 6. 3. Is man less obliged to this duty then these
blessed spirits? certainly no. If the celestial Quire were so ravished, so
transported with joy, as to sing that Angelical hymn, when they were employed
as Heralds to proclaim that general peace and reconciliation betwixt heaven and
earth, God and us, at the birth of our Savior, sure much more reason has man,
who is the grand concernment of that peace, to ply God with Doxologies; and
certainly no place on earth more proper for our Hallelujahs, then Gods own
house, in his Temple where every man does speak of his honor. Every man did so
in King David's time, did they so in ours, the Solemn prayers of God would take
up much more of the Lords day then in most places they do, as Master Baxter
says very well.

As for this Doxology so often repeated in the service of our Church, cause
there is to think it very ancient, and of much elder standing then the Council
of Nice. St. Basil derives it very high, cites Irenaeus for the use thereof,
calls it antiquam vocem, a phra^e of great antiquity. And doubtless so it
is, for Expositio fidei.
Justine mentions it, (...), Glorifying the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost
without a sound Confession of the Trinity is not enough to save us. So also
Clemens Paedagog. l. 3.
Alexandinus, (...) Glorifying the Father only, and the Son with the holy
Ghost. And in all probability to this had Tertullian regard, where interpreting
that of the prophet Malachi, Incense shall be offered and a pure offering, he
gives his sense of it thus, by id est Gloriae relatio Benedictio and Hymni, the
giving Glory to God, the blessings and Hymns. Truth it is, there might in the
former times be some small syllabical difference in the rehearsing of it, some
thus, Glory be to the Father, by the Son in the holy Ghost; some thus, Glory be
to the Father, and the Son with the holy Ghost, as Irenaeus in St. Basil:
others, as we use it now, in which diversity there was certainly nothing either
intended ill toward the truth, or which could be directly drawn into ill
construction, but when about the time of the Nicene Council, the Arrians began
to sow their seeds of heresy touching the inequality of the three Persons, and
the better to color their pretenses, sheltered themselves under the protection
of the Doxology, the Father, by the Son, in the holy Ghost, formerly used, to
which they constantly adhered; hereupon the Council of Nice to avoid all
occasion of future question, held her self to that form which came nighest to
the form of Baptism composed by our Savior, and the Doctrine of Christian
faith, prescribing it to be punctually observed by all such as were of the
Orthodox party. So that the Church being then split into two divisions, the
(...), and form of Doxology used by either side, because the (...) and note of
distinction from the other. Now whereas it may be urged out of Philostorgius,
that Flavianus first brought it into use, if the Author may not be questioned
as partial being an Arrian, yet may he be interpreted to speak in reference to
Antioch only. And whereas St. Hierom has been currantly delivered to be the
Author and composer of the second verse, As it was in the beginning etc. the
story of Leontius his cunning pronouncing of only the end of that versicle,
(...) i. e. world without end, in an audible tone, is evidence to the contrary,
Theodo^. l. 2. c. 24.
that Leontius, being contemporary with Athanasius, and both long before Jerome.

And from Easter to Whitsunday Hallelujah] The fifty days between Easter
Whitsunday, were days of excessive joy in the primitive Church in honor of
our Saviors Resurrection, and were in some particulars observed with equal
solemnity to the Lords day, as in not fasting, not kneeling, and chanting this
Angelical Hallelujah upon these days; which last was retained by our first
Reformers as a mark of honor fixed upon them. In the Scotch Liturgy by way of
responce is added, The Lords name be praised, more in compliance to exemplary
usage, then in advantage of the sense, which is complete enough without it: for
the Allocution of praise ye the Lord has no implied reference to any such
return from the people, but only regards the subsequent Psalm, for as let us
pray is usually premised to incite intention to an ensuing prayer, with the
same congruity is praise ye the Lord, assigned as an impressive invitatory to a
following Hymn, calling upon the people to join not not only mentally but
vocally by way of alternate response, after the Priest.

Then shall be said or sung this Psalm.] Such also was the mode in St. Basils
time. Epist. 63.
Ab oratione surgentes ad Psalmodiam instituuntur i. e. Rising from prayers
they (the Assembly) fall to singing of Psalms.

O come let us sing etc.] This is, not to say properly the Invitatory, but the
Invitatory O come let us worship and fall down and kneel before the Lord our
maker, which was in the Church of Rome often, no less then six times repeated
by the Priest, at certain closes and Periods of this Psalm, and as often returned
by the people: which our Reformers judging to be a vain Tautology, thought fit
to omit it, appointing the venite to be without the Invitatory. The Original of
this Invitatory was at first, of valuable consideration. For you must know,
that anciently (as appears out of Chrysoft. in Math.
Chrysostom) before the Congregation was complete and fully assembled, the
usage was to entertain the time with singing of Psalms, where of this was the
chief, And Rational. l. 5 c. 3. Sect. 11.
Durandus who lived about the 400 years since, tells us it was then the fashion
in some Churches for the people, who lay in expectation of the morning Service,
as soon as they heard this Psalm once began, presently they all hasted into the
Church.

Then shall follow certain Psalmes] Concerning the dividing of the Psalms into
certain portions for every day, I have spoke before.

Then shall be read two Lessons.] In the Romish Church there are usually
appointed the three next are short extracts out of the Homilies and Sermons of
the Fathers, the seventh is almost constantly out of the Gospel, next which
follows ashred of a homily out of the Fathers, which supplieth the place of
the Sermon in more ancient times, and is a short exposition upon the Gospel;
then two Lessons taken out of some ancient writer. Therefore in the first
injunctions of Edw. the 6. elder by a year then the first Liturgy, it is
appointed, that in order to the reading of the Epistles and Gospels, and one
Chapter in the New Testament in English, Injunct. 21.
when nine Lessons should be read in the Church, three of them shall be omitted
and left out with their Responds. The reading of Lessons out of the Old, as
also out of the New Testament, is in a punctual imitation of the Ancient
Church. Apolog. 2.
(...) says Justine Martyr, i. e. the Commentaries of the Apostles, and
writings of the Prophets are read, as the time permits. These Lessons except
before excepted are not left arbitrary, but either to be appointed by the
Calendar, or by the Table of proper Lessons: the first for Ordinary and
work-dayes, the second for Festivals. And such also was the Primitive Custom.
Ambrose Epist. l. 5. Ep. 38.
Audistis Librum legi Job (says Ambrose) qui solemni munere est decursus and
tempore, you have heard the book of Job read unto you, at its solemn office and
peculiar time. And a little after, sequente die (speaking of good-Fryday)
Lectus est de more liber Joniae, the next day according to the old wont was
read the book of Jonas, his convert St. Aust. to the same purpose. Nunc
interposita est solemnitas sanctarum dierum, quibus certas ex Evangelio
lectiones oportet in Ecclesia tractari, quae ita sunt annuae, ut aliae esse non
possunt. Praesat. in Johan.
Now is the Solemnity of the holidays (meaning Easter) wherein set Lessons,
out of the Gospel are ordered to be read, which are so determined and limited,
as they can be no other. And In Johan. Tract. 9.
elsewhere, intercesserunt, ut omitteremus textum hujus Epistolae, quaedam pro
diebus festis solemnia lectionum, quae non potuerunt nisi legi. Solemn Lessons
appointed for festival days, which must not be left unread, interposed and
caused me to omit a while the text of this Epistle.

The Contents of the Chapters were devised as helpful indexes, to facilitate
the more speedy finding out of the most remarkable passages, being only
serviceable for private use; For which reason, from the tenth Chapter of the
Prove. to the twenty fifth, there are no contents prefixed, these Chapters being
not as the other, written in method, or upon a set subject, but occasionally
uttered at several times, and observed by Solomon's Courtiers, who committed
them to writing as they occurred to their memories.

And before every Lesson the Minister shall say thus] The Primitive Custom in
Chrysostom. in Acts c. 9. Hom. 19.
the Deacon stood up, proclaiming aloud, Listen my Brethren. (...). Then the
Reader begins to read; first inviting his audience to attention by saying these
words. Thus says the Lord.

After the first Lesson shall follow Te Deum] This order of intermixing Hymns
Laodicea (...): it is not meet to sing the Psalms in a Can. 17.
continued course in the Church, but to interpose a Lesson between evey Psalm.
So ordered says Balsamon, that this might be as a rest in music, and after
that the congregation to sing again, that the service might not be thought
tedious: and therefore he Con's that Council many thanks for so discreet a
Canon. Indeed Breve Hiero. Epist. ad Laetam.
videbitur tempus, quod tantis operum varietatibus occupatur, The variety of
such changes is an excellent disposing of the time in such employments. Nothing
is certainly more delightful, not only to the outward senses of the Body, but
even to the very soul it self, then variety: this it is, which calls up in her,
her former vigor and vivacity, this that makes her shake off her former
lassitude, embracing every new object with a most greedy desire, every change
is, as it were: an unbending of the mind: the very heathen Orator found it so,
Stilus lectione requiescit and ipsius lectionis taedium vicibus levatur, The
style is refresht by reading, and reading it self is much relieved by
interchanges. The observation Quintilian l. ^. c. 12.
of this Rule in other relations, has been motive all sufficient to Gods
people in all ages, to frame their Divine service so Mosaic, of so many
pieces, so commodiously disposed to rescue each other from tediousness, as
upon every transition and passage from one Duty to another, the spirit may
still reserve an appetite, whence it is that Consessions, prayers, Doxologies,
Psalms, Lessons, etc. are assigned their proper vicissitudes, and divide the
time alloted for such sacred perfomances so as the soul may attend every motion
of them.

Te Deum laudamus.] This hymn passes up and down as the Composition Ambrose
and St. Augustine jointly, upon occasion of St. Augustines conversion and
Baptism by St. Ambrose. But the very learned Primate of Armagh produces two
very ancient M. S. S. wherein it is ascribed to Nicetius, de symbolo Apostolico.
and from Monardus, proves that it is not mentioned by any ancient Author
before St. Bennet betook himself to a monastic life, which was about the year
500, who speaks of it in his Canonical Rules, or Benedictine Office in whose
time one Nicetius a Bishop lived, and perhaps the same to whom it is ascribed.
But be he the Author, or be he not, the frame is so excellently modelled, as
the Church of human structure could not enjoin a better: and indeed the
structure it is alone that is human, the materials being divine, and of sacred
derivation, as for the avoiding of prolixity, I have noted in the Margin.

Or Benedicite.] This is called the Hymn of the three children; the first
mention Toledo Anno 634. Chap. 13.
which says, Ecclesia Catholica per totum Orbem diffusa celebrat, the
Catholic Church spread over all the Earth does sing it, and that juxta
antiquam consuetudinem, agreeable to the ancient custom.

Benedictus.] This hymn, with Nunc dimittis, and Magnificat are faulted,
because this or that; leaving in the minister a power to make his own election.
Again, this Argument has the same force and edge against David's Psalms, many
of which were composed upon private emergences, and seem as incommodious for
public concernments, which yet we dare not upon that account proscribe out of
the service of the Church, Nor may I pretermit the Canon of the Belgic Church
established by the Synod of Dort, Hymni Mariae, Zachariae, Simeonis Can. 69.
cantabuntur, the Hymns of Mary, Zachary, Sime on, shall be sung.

Then shall be said the Creed.] The Creed, neither this nor any other, was
never any part of the Liturgy, or public office either in the Greek, or in the
Latin Ruffinus tells us it was the Roman mode, qui gratiam Baptismi suscepturi
Russin. in Symbolum.
sunt, fidelium populo audiente symbolum reddunt: They who are about to receive
the grace of Baptism, rehearse the Creed in the hearing of all the faithful.
And being himself about to expound upon it, he first premiseth, that he intends
to tie himself to the order and form, quem in Aquileiensi Ecclesia per lavacri
gratiam susc^pimus, which in the Church of Aquileia we received, when we were
admitted to the laver of Regeneration. So for the Hiero solymitan Creed, Cyril
his Catecheses are explications upon it, for the instruction of the
Carechumens: so for the Nicene or rather the Constantinopolitan Creed,
Epiphanius Epiphan. in fine Anchyro.
tells us, that (...), every Catechumen who intended to come to the blessed
Laver, was first to learn it: not a man of them, nor any other author of
reputation, giving the least hint of it as any parcel of the Liturgy. As to the
ancient names by which it was called, there occur, first Regula fidei, the Rule
of faith used by Tertullian, then Symbolum fidei, the symbol of Faith as
Cyprian very often, sometimes confessio fidei the confession Faith. The Creed
here inserted passes under the Title of the Apostles Creed, supposed by many
to have been composed by the Apostles, when they were about to disperse
themselves into their several walks, to be the summary of their Faith, every
Apostle collating one Article, his share, to the frame. But our Church did not
confide in this Relation, and therefore has delivered her self very sparingly
in these saving terms, Symbolum quod vulgo Apostolorum dicitur, the Creed which
is vulgarly denominated from the Apostles. And learned Vossius has evidently
proved it is a vulgar error, and that really the Apostles made no such Creed.
His arguments are; first, there is not the least syllable witnessing any such
Creed Article 8. De tribus Symbol. Dissertatio p.
made by them, neither in the Acts of the Apostles, nor in their Epistles.
Secondly, amongst all the Ecclesiastical writers not a man mentions it.
Thirdly, that if any such Creed had been made by the Apostles, the Ancient
Fathers of the Church would never have presumed, or attempted to contrive so
many several confessions, but would have acquiesced in this. Fourthly, if this
Creed had been delivered, totidem verbis, by the Apostles, there would not have
appeared in several Churches such variety of confessions, with such Additions,
such omissions of Articles, as the year 400. represents, many instances
where-of he gives in comparing the three Creeds of Rome, Aquilegia, and the
East, as Ruffinus renders them. But whereas that judicious man takes exception
against the word Catholic in the Article of the Holy Catholic Church, and
Disser. 1. Sect. 39.
yields this reason, Apostolorum aetate nondum obtinebat consuetudo ut
Christiani dicerentur Catholici. In the Apostolical age custom had not yet
prevailed to call Christians Catholics. That assertion being negative, is
tenant only by courtesy, and were it precisely true, yet can it not be
rationally deduced from thence, that the word Catholic was not in that age
applied to the Church, especially there being Record extant to the contrary.
For Ignatius who (...) conversed familiarly with the Apostles, tells us (...),
Chrysostom. in laud gnatii. Epist. ad Smyrn. Vossius ubi supra.
where Jesus Christ is, there is also the Catholic Church. In the right he is,
confident I am, Catholicae nomen apponi caepit, ut Ecclesia quae toto orb
obtineret, distingueretur a conventiculis haere-ticorum. The word Catholic
began to be annexed, that the Church over spreading all the earth, might be
severed from the Conventicles of heretics. And so Clemens Alexandrinus, 120.
years before the Nicene Council, clearly applies it; for, speaking of those
Heretics of the primitive times, he says, Stromat. l. 7
(...), all their Conventicles were juniors to the Catholic Church, which
having demonstrated by evident reasons, at length he concludes (...),
supereminently, and by way of excellence, we say, the Primitive and Catholic
Church is one, to which perhaps that Article of the Constantinopolitan Creed
alluded, I believe one Catholic and Apostolic Church, for Apostolic and
Primitive are in that application Convertibles. If then the word Catholic
entered upon this account, viz. as a mark of difference to separate the true
Church from the Conventicles of Heretics, and such conventicles there were
(whereof there is no doubt) in the Apostles days, the inference is
spontaneously consequent, that in that early age, it might be entertained. But
to return to the Creed; if it was not framed by the Apostles, how came it to
derive denomination from them? my answer is, because it is an excellent epitome
of their Doctrine, and contrived in a near resemblance to their own Language,
or rather, because a great part of it was probably digested by the Apostolic
Church, though some Articles were added by after times. So the great Creed is
called the Nicene, though many things were affixt to it by the Council of
Constantinople, and some things since, For, certain it is, the Primitive Church
not far distant from the Apostolic age, had a Creed resembling this of the
Apostles, as to most particulars, and the substance of the Articles, though
with some syllabical variations, as it is evident by Tertullian de velandis
virginibus.
Tertullians Regula fidei, which he renders thus; [A Belief in one God
Allmighty Creator of the world, and his Son Jesus Christ born of the Virgin
Mary, crucified under Pontius Pilate, raised again the third day, received up
into heaven, sitting there now at the right hand of his Father, who shall come
again to judge both the quick and the dead, at the Resurrection of their flesh]
Where the Articles concerning the Holy Ghost. and the Church, being omitted,
they are to be supplied from the form of Catechizing then in use, which was in
truth a Creed: So Cyprian, Epist. 7.
si aliquis illud opponit, eandem legem Novatianum tenere quam Catholica
Ecclesia tenet, eodem quo and nos Symbolo baptisare. But some will say Novatian
holds the same rule of faith with the Catholic Church, baptiseth with the
profession of the same Creed, With the rehearsal then of the Creed they were
baptized, sub tribus nominibus testatio fidei pignoratur, the testification of
our faith is made under three sacred names, says the same Tertul. Ibid.
Tertullian, and thence infers, necessario adjicitur; Ecclesiae mentio,
quoniam ubitres, id est, Pater, and filius and spiritus Sanctus, ibi Ecclesia
quae trium corpus est. [Of necessity the mention of the Church must follow, for
where these three are, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, there is the Church
the body of all three.] Which perhaps was Ignatus his meaning when he said,
where Jesus Christ is, there is the Catholic Church. This is also further made
out by Cyprian, who lived not long after Tertullian, and an African too, for
mentioning a form of interrogation taken out of the Baptismal Symhol, he
renders it thus Epist. 70.
Credis in vi^an^ aeternam, and remissionem peccatorum per sanctam Ecclaesiam,
i. e. Do thou believe eternal life, and forgiveness of sins by the holy
Church, where there is not only mention of the holy Church, and of forgiveness
of sins, but also of life everlasting, which learned De spir. 1. Sect. 43.
Vossius will have to be an additional article after Russinus his time. True it
is, what he says out of Epist. ad Pammach.
Hierome; Omne Christiani dogmatis Sacramentum carnis resurrectione
concluditur. All the mysteries of the Christian faith were then terminated in
the Resurrection of the flesh, and so Tertullian concludes his rule of faith;
but yet, that notwithstanding, the Article of life everlasting might be, as by
S. Cyprian it is clear it was not, no new addition, but represented in a
different order. So that to draw to an end, uniting these African parcels
together, we have found a Creed, as to the essentials, very conformable to this
of the Apostles, and for the verbal diversity, it is the less to be wondered at,
when they who are conversant in the ancient Fathers know, their manner was in
citing even Canonical Scripture, not always to consult the Originals, but
often to deliver it in in such words as their memories suggested, provided they
preserved the sense entire. Probably from the same Liberty, practiced in those
accounts, they give of the Confessions of their faith, might arise this
diversity

This and the other Creeds in the offices of our Church, are always appointed
to be said after the reading of some part of Canonical Scripture; because Faith
comes by hearing, Romans 10. 17. first hearing, and then faith: it is ordered to
be read standing, for three reasons. First, because it is, as to the
substantials thereof taken out of the Gospels which were to be rehearsed
standing. Secondly, because the stationary posture is most significant, and
imports a Resolution to defend and maintain the faith we profess, when we
assert any thing with much earnestness, we usually say, this is truth, and we
will stand to it. Thirdly, in imitation of the Order of the Catechumens, who
did rehearse it in a stationary posture. St. Augustine relating one Victorinus
his deportment in this case speaks thus, ut ventum est ad horam profitendae
fidei, quae verbis certis, conceptis retentisque memoriter de loco eminentiore
in conspectu populi sidelis reddi solet. As soon as the time came for him to
make profession of his faith, which was used to be done in a set form of words
got by heart, and from an high place of ascent, so as all the faithful might
behold, the Presbyters offered him, that if he would, he should rehearse it in
private (as some others did, for fear of being daunted with so great an
audience) he refused it, saying, he would do it in the presence of the whole
congregation, and presently he mounted up. From which story very inferrible it
is, that as the eminence of the place was regularly required for the greater
evidence of the fact, so was the posture erect as most serviceable to that end,
although St. Austin says it not (...), in direct terms.

The Lord be with you.] The Psalms, Lessons, and hymns, having long employed
both minister and people, they now address themselves to prayer again, the
Salutation of the Priest, whom they re-salute with the Response, and with thy
spirit, derived as many conjecture, from Ruth. 2. 4. where Boaz said to the
Reapers, The Lord be with you, and they answered him, the Lord bless thee. Very
ancient it is, and one of the first formulas used in the Christian Church
Durandt Rational. l. 4. c. 14. Petrus Damian. c. 3.
Ritualists observe that this form was only an appurtenance to ministers of the
lower Orb, and that when the Bishop did Officiate, he did use in lieu thereof,
Peace be to you; and St. Chrysostom seems to persuade as much, (...). i. e.
The chief Priest or Bishop, wishes peace to all the people, as entering into
his Fathers house, and therefore whereas the Can. 21.
Braccarian Council decreed, that the Bishop and Presbyter should both use, one
and the same form, and determines that form by, The Lord be wioh you, with
this expression, sicut omnis retinet Oriens, as is generally retained in the
East, either the custom must be changed since St, Chrysostomes days, or else
we must reject a great part of his works for counterfeit, which give us
assurance of the contrary, viz. his homilies upon Pentecost, the Phillippians,
Colossians and others. This form of Salutation Ep^phanius says was derived
from our Saviors first greeting the Apostles after his Resurrection with his
(...) peace be to you. In-observed let it not pass, that this salutation
Haeres. 475.
did anciently denote, as it is here applied, a transition from one service to
another, and so St. Chrysostom upon the Colossians, Hom. 3. seems to render the
mode of his time.

Let us pray.] The intention of the mind is never so disposed to relax as
Chrysostom. in Psalm 1.
(...), i. e. when we come into Gods d^eadful presence, we yawn, and stretch
our selves, we scratch and scrub, we gape about us, or grow drowsy, while our
knees are upon the ground our minds are on wool-gathering, or about our
Law-suites, yea, as Cyprian says well, De Orat. Dominica.
while we supplicate God to hear our prayers, we do not hear them our selves.
To summon and rouse us therefore to a fixed intention toward the ensuing duty,
the Church has accustomed to call upon us often with an Oren^us, Let us pray,
an office anciently peculiar to the Deacon, as is evident out of St.
Chrysostom, Augustine and others. And agreeable to this was the practice of
those who followed only natures dictates. Plutarch. in Coriolano.
(...), when the Priest is officiating in sacred things, the Crier proclaims
with a loud voice, Attend or mind what you are about.

Lord have mercy upon us.] These three versicles Antiquity called the Lesser
Lib. 8. c. 5. and 6.
Clemens (...), i. e. at every of these allocutions of the Deacon, Let the
people say, Lord have mercy upon us. Fitly are they placed before the Lords
Prayer, because Dusand. Rational. l. 4. c. 13.
expedient it is we implore Gods mercy; before we resort to him in prayer. The
address in it is to the three persons of the blessed Trinity, and for that
cause repeated thrice by the Greeks, but the Western Church put (...), Christ
have mercy upon us. in the second place,

O Lord show thy mercy upon us.] These versicles, with their answers, are of
Show us thy mercy, and grant us thy salvation. Psalm. 85. 7 God save the King. 1 Samuel 10. 24. Hear me O Lord when I call. Psalm. 4. 1. Let thy Priests be
clothed with righteousness, and let thy Saints sing with joyfulnesse. Psalm.
132. 9. O Lord save thy people, and bless thine inheritance. Psalm. 28. 9.
Shall it not be good if peace be in my days. 2 Kings 20. 19. There is no
strength in us, but our eyes are toward thee. 2 Chronicles. 20. 12. Create in me a
clean heart, and take not thy holy spirit from me. Psalm. 51. 10, 11. And in
regard they are for the major part taken out of the Psalms of David, the Priest
is ordered to stand up.

Collects.] Collects are so called either because many Petitions are contracted
Gregory the great, and where others are omitted, it is upon this account,
because they contained something edifying toward the invocation of Saints.

CHAP. IIII.
[Scotch Lit.] After the sentences, Exhortation, Confession and Absolution, as
is appointed at Morning Prayer, the Presbyter shall say or sing.]

The priest shall say.

OUR father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.
And lead us not into temptation, But deliver us from evil, [Scot. Lit. for
thine

Then likewise he shall say.

O Lord open thou our lips.

Answer.

And our mouth shall show forth thy praise.

Priest.

O God make speed to save us

Answer.

O Lord make have to help us.

Priest.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son. etc.

As it was in the beginning, is now, etc.

Praise ye the Lord.

Answer.

Scot. Lit. [The Lord be praised.]

Then Psalms in order as they be appointed in the Table for Psalms, except
there be proper Psalms appointed for that day. Then a Lesson of the old
Testament, as is appointed likewise in the Calendar, except there be proper
Lessons appointed for that day. After that Magnificat in English, as follows.

MY soul does magnify the Lord, etc. Luke 1. Magnifica^ Luke x.
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, etc. As it was in the beginning, is
now, etc.

Or else this Psalm,

OSing unto the Lord a new song. Psalm 98.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, etc. Cantate domino. Psalm. 98.


As it was in the beginning, is now, etc.

Then a Lesson of the new Testament. And after that, Nunc dimittis in English,
as follows.

LOrd now let thou thy servant depart in peace: according to thy word etc.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son. etc. Luke 2.


As it was in the beginning; is now, etc.

Or else this Psalm.

GOd be merciful unto us, etc. Psalm 47.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son; and to the holy Ghost. Deus
misereatur. Psalm. 47.


As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end. Amen.

The Common Prayer. 1. B. of Edw. 6. Then shall follow the Creed, with other
Prayers as is before appointed at Morning Prayer after Benedictus. And with
three Collects. First of the day The second of peace. Third for aid against all
perils, as hereafter follows. Which two last Collects shall be daily said at
Evening prayer without alteration. Then the suffrages before assigned at
Mattins, the Clerk kneeling, likewise with three Collects, etc.

The second Collect at Evening Prayer.

O God, from whom all holy desires, all good counsels, and all just works do
proceed, give unto thy servants that peace which the world cannot give, that
both our hearts may be set to obey thy commandments, and also that by thee, we
being defended from the fear of our enemies, may pass our time in rest and
quietness, through the merits of Jesus Christ our Savior. Amen.

The third Collect, for aid against all perils.

LIghten our darkness we beseech thee, O Lord, and by thy great mercy defend us
from all perils and dangers of this night, for the love of thy only Son our
Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

[Scot. Lit. Then shall follow the prayer for the Kings Majesty, with the rest

Common Prayer 1 B. of Edw. 6. In the Feasts of Christmas, the Epiphany, St.
Mathy, Easter, the Ascension, Pentecost, St. John Baptist. St. James, St.
Bartholomew, St. Matthew, St. Simon and Jude, St. Andrew, and Trinity Sunday,
shall be sung or said immediately after Benedictus, this confession of our
Christian faith. [Scot. Lit. the Presbyter and all the people standing.] In the
Feasts of Christmas, the Epiphany, Easter, Ascension, Penrecost, and upon
Trinity Sunday, shall be sung or said immediately after Benedictus, this
confession of our Christian faith.

WHosoever will be saved: before all things, it is necessary that he hold the
Catholic faith. Quicunque vu^^.


Which faith, except every one do keep holy and undefiled; without doubt he
shall perish everlastingly.

And the Catholic faith is this; that we worship one God in trinity, and
Trinity in unity.

Neither confounding the persons; nor dividing the substance.

For there is one person of the Father, another of the Son, and another of the
holy Ghost.

But the Godhead of the Father, of the Son, and of the holy Ghost is all one:
the glory equal, the majesty coeternal.

Such as the Father is, such is the Son; and such is the holy Ghost.

The Father uncreate, the Son uncreate; and the holy Ghost uncreate.

The Father incomprehensible, the son incomprehensible; and the holy Ghost
incomprehensible.

The Father eternal, the son eternal; and the holy Ghost eternal.

And yet they are not three eternals; but one eternal.

As also there be not three incomprehensibles, not three uncreated, but one
uncreated, and one incomprehensible.

So likewise, the Father is almighty, the son almighty; and the Holy Ghost
almighty.

And yet they are not three almighties; but one almighty.

So the Father is God, the son is God, and the holy Ghost is God.

And yet are they not three Gods, but one God.

So likewise the father is Lord, the son Lord; the holy ghost Lord.

And yet not three Lords: but one Lord.

For like as we be compelled by the Christian verity, to acknowledge every
person by himself to be God and Lord:

So are we forbidden by the Catholic Religion, to say, there be three Gods, or
three Lords.

The Father is made of none; neither created nor begotten.

The son is of the Father alone; not made, nor created, but begotten.

The holy Ghost is of the father and of the son; neither made, nor created, nor
begotten, but proceeding.

So there is one father, not three fathers, one son, not three sons; one holy
Ghost, not three holy Ghosts.

And in this Trinity, none is before or after other; none is greater or less
then other.

But the whole three persons be coeternal together, and coequal.

So that in all things, as is aforesaid; the Unity in Trinity, and the Trinity
in Unity is to be worshipped.

He therefore that will be saved must thus think of the Trinity.

Furthermore it is necessary to everlasting salvation; that he also believe
rightly in the incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ.

For the right faith is, that we believe and confess, that our Lord Jesus
Christ, the son of God, is God and man.

God, of the substance of the father, begotten before the worlds, and man of
the substance of his mother, born in the world.

Perfect God, and perfect man, of a reasonable soul, and humane flesh
subsisting.

Equal to the Father as touching his Godhead; and inferior to the father,
touching his manhood.

Who although he be God and man; yet he is not two, but one Christ.

Due, not by conversion of the Godhead into flesh; but by taking of the manhood
into God.

Due altogether, not by confusion of substance; but by unity of person.

For as the reasonable soul and flesh is one man; so God and man, is one Christ.

Who suffered for our salvation; des^^nded into hell, rose again the third day
from the dead.

He ascended into heaven, he sits on the right hand of the father God
almighty, from whence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.

At whose coming all men shall rise again with their bodies; and shall give
account for their own works.

And they that have done good, shall go into life everlasting; and they that
have done evil, into everlasting fire.

This is the Catholic faith; which except a man believe faithfully he cannot
be saved.

Glory be to the father, and to the Son, etc.

As it was in the beginning, is now, etc.

Thus ends the order of Morning and Evening Prayer through the whole year.

Here follows the Letany, to be used upon Sundays, Wednesdayes, and
Fridayes, and
(Scotch Lit. and without omission of any part of the other daily service of
the Church on those days.)

O God the father of Heaven; have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the father of heaven, have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the son redeemer of the world; have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the son redeemer of the world; have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the holy Ghost, proceeding from the father and the son; have mercy upon
us miserable sinners.

O God the holy Ghost, proceeding from the father and the son; have mercy upon
us miserable sinners.

O holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity, three persons and one God; have mercy
upon miserable sinners.

O holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity, three persons and one God; have mercy
upon us miserable sinners.

Remember not Lord our of^ences, nor the offenses of our forefatheres, neither
take thou vengeance of our sins; spare us good Lord, spare thy people whom thou
have redeemed with thy most precious blood, and be not angry with us for ever.

Spare us good Lord.

From all evil and mischief, from sin, from the crafts and assaults of the
Devil, from thy wrath, and from everlasting damnation.

Good Lord deliver us.

From all blindness of heart, from pride, vain glory and hypocrisy, from
envy, hatred and malice, and all uncharitableness.

Good Lord deliver us.

From fornication and all other deadly sin, and from all the deceits of the
world, the flesh, and the Devil.

Good Lord deliver us.

From lightening and tempest, from plague, pestilence and famine, from battle
and murder, and from sudden death.

Good Lord deliver us.

From all sedition and privy conspiracy, [1. and 2. B. of Edw. 6. from the
tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, and all his detestable enormities,] from all
false doctrine and heresy, from hardness of heart, and contempt of thy word
and commandment.

Good Lord deliver us.

By the mystery of thy holy incarnation, by thy holy nativity and circumcision,
by thy baptism, fasting and temptation.

Good Lord deliver us.

By thy agony and bloody sweat, by thy cross and passion, by thy precious death
and burial, by thy glorious resurrection and ascension, and by the coming of
the holy Ghost.

Good Lord deliver us.

In all time of our tribulation, in all time of our wealth, in the hour of
death, and in the day of judgment.

Good Lord deliver us.

We sinners do beseech thee to hear us (O Lord God) and that it may please thee
to rule and govern thy holy Church universally in the right way.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to keep and strengthen in the true worshipping of
thee, in righteousness and holiness of life, thy servant our most gracious
King and governor.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to rule his heart in thy faith, fear, and love, and
that he may evermore have affiance in thee, and ever seek thy honor and glory.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to be his defender and keeper, giving him the victory
over all his enemies.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to illuminate all Bishops, Pastors, and ministers of
the Church, with true knowledge and understanding of thy word; and that both by
their preaching and living, they may set it forth, and show it accordingly.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to endue the Lords of the Council, and all the
Nobility with grace, wisdom, and understanding.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to bless and keep the Magistrates, giving them grace
to execute justice, and to maintain truth.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to bless and keep all thy people.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to give to all nations, unity, peace, and conc^rd.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to give us a heart to love and dread thee, and
diligently to live after thy Commandments.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to give to all thy people increase of grace, to h^a^
meekly thy word, and to receive it with pure affection, and to bring forth the
fruits of the spirit.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to bring into the way of truth, all such as have erred
and are deceived.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to strengthen such as do stand, and to comfort and
help the week hearted, and to raise up them that fall, and finally to beat down
Satan under our feet.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to succor, help, and comfort, all that be in danger,
necessity, and tribulation.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to preserve all that travel by land or by water, all
women laboring of child, all sick persons and young children, and to show thy
piti^ upon all prisoners and captives.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to defend and provide for the fatherless, children and
widdews, and all that be desolate and oppressed.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to have mercy upon all men.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to forgive our enemies, persecutors and slanderers,
and

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to give and preserve to our use the kindly fruits of
the earth, so as in due time we may enjoy them.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

That it may please thee to give us true repentance, to forgive us all our
sins, negligences and ignorances, and to endue us with the grace of thy holy
spirit, to amend our lives according to thy holy word.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

Son of God, we beseech thee to hear us.

Son of God, we beseech thee to hear us.

O Lamb of God that take away the sins of the world,

Grant us thy peace.

O Lamb of God that take away the sins of the world,

Have mercy upon us.

O Christ hear us.

O Christ hear us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us

Lord have mercy upon us.

Our father which art in heaven, etc.

And lead us not into temptation,

But deliver us from evil, Amen.

The Versicle.

O Lord deal not with us after our sins.

The Answer.

Neither reward us after our iniquities.

Let us pray.

O God, merciful father, that despisest not the sighing of a contrite heart,
nor the desire of such as be sorrowful: mercifully assist our prayers that we
make before thee in all our troubles and adversities whenever they oppress
us. And graciously hear us, that those evils, which the craft and subtilty of
the Devil or man works against us be brought to naught and by the providence
of thy goodness they may be dispersed, that we thy servants being hurt by no
persecutions, may evermore give thanks unto thee in thy holy Church, though
Jesus Christ our Lord.

O Lord arise, help us, and deliver for thy names sake.

O God we have heard with our ears, and our fathers have declared unto us, the
noble works that thou did in their days; and in the old time before them.

O Lord arise, help us and deliver us for thine honor.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son; etc.

As it was in the beginning, is now, etc.

From our enemies defend us O Christ.

Graciously look upon afflictions.

Pitifully behold the sorrows of our hearts.

Mercifully forgive the sins of thy people.

Favorably with mercy hear our prayers.

O son of David have mercy upon us.

Both now and ever vouchsafe to hear us, O Christ.

Graciously hear us O Christ, Graciously hear us, O Lord Christ.

The Versicle.

O Lord let thy mercy be showed upon us.

The Answer.

As we do put our trust in thee.

Let us pray.

WE humbly beseech thee, O father, mercifully to look upon our infirmities, and
for the glory of thy name sake turn from us all those evils that we most
righteously have deserved, and grant that in all our troubles we may put our
whole trust and confidence in thy mercy, and evermore serve thee in holiness
and pureness of living, to thy honor and glory, through our only mediator
and advacate Jesus Christ our Lord Amen.

A prayer for the Kings majesty.

O Lord our heavenly father, high and mighty, King of Kings, Lord of Lords, the
only ruler of Princes, which do from thy throne behold all the dwellers
This Prayer is omitted in the 1 and 2. B. of Edw. 6
upon the earth; most heartily we beseech thee with thy favor to behold our
most gracious sovereign Lord, and so replenish him with the grace of thy holy
spirit, that he may always incline to thy will, and walk in thy way, endue him
plentifully with heavenly gifts, grant him in health and wealth long to live,
strengthen him, that he may vanquish and overcome all his enemies, and finally
after this life he may attain everlasting joy and felicity, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, Amen.

[Scot. Lit. A prayer for the holy Clergy.

ALmighty and everlasting God, which only workest great marvails, send down
Omitted in 1. and 2. B. o^ Edw. 6. but is extant in ancient M. S. Letanies.
upon our Bishops and Curates, and all congregations committed to their charge,
the healthful spirit of thy grace, and that they may truly please thee, power
upon them the continual dew of thy blessing: grant this, O Lord, for the honor
of our advocate and mediator Jesus Christ, Amen.

[Scot. Lit. A prayer to be said in Ember weeks, for those which are then to be
admitted into holy orders: and is to be read every day of the week, beginning
on the Sunday before the day of Ordination.

ALmighty God, the giver of all good gifts, who of thy divine providence have

A Prayer of Chrysostom.

ALmighty God, which have given us grace at this time with one accord to make
our common supplications unto thee, and do promise that when two or three be
gathered together in thy name, thou will grant their requests: fulfill now, O
Lord, the desires, and petitio^s of thy servants, as may be most expedient for
them, granting us in this world knowledge of thy truth, and in the world to
come life everlasting, Amen.

THe grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship 2
Cor. 13. of the holy Ghost, be with us all evermore, Amen.

Scot. Litnrgies. For Rain, if the time require. O God Heavenly Father, whose
gift it is that the Rain does fall, the earth is fruitful, beasts increase, and
fishes do multiply: send us, we beseech thee, in this our necessity, such
moderate Rain and showers, that we may receive the fruits of the earth, to our
comfort, and to thy honor, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. O God Heavenly
Father, which by thy son Jesus Christ have promised These two Prayers conclude
the Communion office in the 1 B. of Edw. 6.
to all them that seek thy kingdom, and the righteousness thereof, all things
necessary to their bodily sustenance: send us, we beseech thee, in this our
necessity, such moderate Rain and showers, that we may receive the fruits of
the earth to our comfort, and to thy honor, through Jesus Christ our Lord,
Amen.

For fair weather.

O Lord God, which for the sin of man did once drown all the world, except
eight persons, and afterward of thy great mercy did promise never to destroy
it so again: we humbly beseech thee, that although we for our iniquities have
worthily deserved this plague of rain and waters, yet upon our true repentance,
thou will send us such weather, whereby we may receive the fruits of the earth
in due season, and learn both by thy punishment to amend our lives; and for thy
clemency to give thee praise and glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

In the time of dearth and famine.

O God heavenly father, whose gift it is that the rain does fall, the earth is
fruitful, beasts increase, and fishes do multiply; behold we beseech thee, the
afflicuons These 4. Prayers following Omitted in the 1. B. of Edw. 6.
of thy people, and grant that the scarcity and dearth (which we do now most
justly suffer for our iniquity) may through thy goodness be mercifully turned
into cheapnesse and plenty, for the love of Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with
thee and the holy Ghost, be praise for ever, Amen.

In the time of war.

O Almighty God, King of all Kings, and governor of all things, whose power no
creature is able to resist, to whom it belongs justly to punish sinners, and
to be merciful to them that truly repent: Save and deliver us (we humbly
beseech thee) from the hands of our enemies, abate their pride, assuage their
malice, and confound their devices, that we being armed with thy defense, may
be preserved evermore from all perils, to glori^ie thee which art the only
giver of all victory, through the merits of thy only son Jesus Christ our
Lord, Amen

In the time of any common plague or sickness.

O Lmighty God, which in thy wrath in the time of King David, did ^ay with
the plague of pestilence threescore and ten thousand, and yet remembering thy
mercy, did save the rest: have pity upon us miserable sinners, that now are
visited with great sickness and mortality, that like as thou did then
command thine Angel to cease from punishing: so it may please thee to withdraw
from us this plague and grievous sickness, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

O God, whose nature and property is ever to have mercy, and to forgive,
receive our humble petitions, and though we be tied and bound with the chain of
our sins, yet let the pitifulness of thy great mercy loose us, for the honor
of Jesus Christ's sake our mediator and advocate, Amen.

A Thanksgiving for rain.

O Gd our heavenly Father, who by thy gracious providence, do cause the All
these Thanksgivings added by King James, not extant in the former Liturgies.
former and the latter rain to descend upon the earth, that it may bring forth
fruit for the use of man: we give thee humble thanks, that it has pleased thee
in in our greatest necessity, to send us at the l^st a joyful rain upon thine
inheritance, and to refresh it when it was dry, to the great comfort of us thy
unworthy servants, and to the glory of thy holy name, through thy mercies in
Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

A Thanksgiving for fair weather.

O Lord God, who have justly humbled us by thy late plague of immoderate rain
and waters, and futhy mercy have relieved and comforted our souls by this
seasonable and blessed change of weather: we praise and glorify thy holy name
for this thy mercy, and will always declare thy loving kindness from
generation to generation, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

A Thanksgiving for plenty.

O Most merciful father, which of thy gracious goodness have heard the devout
prayers of thy Church, and turned our bearth and scarcity into cheapnesse and
plenty: we give thee humble thanks for this thy special bounty, beseeching thee
to continue this thy loving kindness unto us, that our land may yield us her
fruits of increase, to thy glory and our comfort, through Jesus Christ our
Lord, Amen.

A Thanksgiving for peace and victory.

O Almighty God, which art a strong tower of defense unto thy servants against
the face of their enemies: we yield thee praise and thanksgiving for our
deliverance from those great and apparent dangers, wherewith we were compassed:
we acknowledge it thy goodness, that we were not delivered over as a prey unto
them, beseeching thee still to continue such thy mercies toward us, that all
the world may know that thou art our Savior and mighty deliverer, through
Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

A thanksgiving for deliverance from the plague.

O Lord God, which have wounded us for our sins, and consumed us for our
transgressions by thy late, heavy and dreadful visitation, and now in the midst
of judgment remembering mercy, have reo^emed our souls from the jaws of death;
we offer unto thy fatherly goodness our selves, our souls and bodies, which
thou have delivered, to be a living sacrifice unto thee, always praising and
magnifying thy mercies in the midst of the Congregation, through Jesus Christ
our Lord, Amen.

Or this,

WE humbly acknowledge before thee (O most merciful father) that all
punishments which are threatened in thy law, might justly have fallen upon us,
by reason of our manifold transgressions and hardness of heart: yet seeing it
has pleased thee of thy tender mercy, upon our weak and unworthy humiliation,
to assuage the noisome pestilence wherewith we lately have been sore afflicted,
and to restore the voice of joy and health into our dwellings; we offer unto
thy Divine majesty the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, lauding and
magnifying thy glorious Name for such thy preservation and providence over us,
through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

The end of the Letany.
Annotations upon CHAP. IIII.
(A) Catechizing part of the Evening Office, The want thereof the cause of
heresies. Judgment of the Synod of Dort. Sermons where, in the Primitive
Church part of the Evening Office. (B) Evening Prayer why so called. An ancient
Evening hymn. (C.) The Doxology of the Pater Noster, why omitted in our service
(D.) A necessary Rubric added by the Scotch Liturgy. (E.) Athanasius his Creed
falsely so called, yet ancient, and extant in Anno 600. after Christ. (F.)
Litanies Ancient; in the Western Church long before Mamercus. Reformed by
Gregory the Great; ours whence derived: the Gesture proper for it. (G.)
Wednesdaies and Fridayes why days of fastings. Stations, what, and why so
called. Tertullian cleared. (H.) Forgiving our Enemies a peculiar of
Christianity. The Jewish and Romish practice contrary to it. (I.) Repeated
Prayers most powerful. (K.) The Thanksgivings for Rain etc. a necessary
Reformation.

AN order for Evening Prayer.] Though Evening service varieth not much Morning,
yet does it afford something which obliges our consideration. For (what is too
much forgot) I must reminde you that there is an Evening service before Evening
Prayer. Rubric after confirmation.
The Curate of every Parish, or some other at his appointment, shall diligently
upon Sundays and holy days, half an hour before Evening Prayer, openly in the
Church instruct and examine so many children of his parish sent unto him, as
the time will serve, and as he shall think convenient in some part of the
Catechism. The same rule is observed by the Canon. 68.
Belgic Church, and so did the Palatine Divines advise at the Synod at Act.
Synod. p. 31.
Dort, that it should be an afternoon exercise, with this positive resolution.
Non dubitamus, cur tot haereses, et nova dogmata locum passim inveniant causam
vel maximam esse, Catechizationis neglectum. We are consident that the neglect
of catechizing, is the main cause of so many heresies, and novel doctrines
which infest the Church. I wish they of the Presbyterian inclination would more
listen to these their friends, and if not for conformity's, yet for
Christianity's sake, not suffer Preaching so totally to usurp and justle out
this most necessary office, that as an Inmate to expel the right owner. The
Afternoon Sermon has not that countenance of Authority in our Church which
catechizing has, this being settled by express rule, that only tolerated, or
entering in by remote implication; and though late custom has invested it with
an honor commensurate with, and equal to that of the morning Sermon, sure I am
it was of minor reputation in the Apostolic, and next succeeding ages. So that
Mr. The serve. of God. at Relig. Ass. p. 405.
Thorndick demands to see what place these afternoon Sermons had in the Public
service of the ancient Church. If by Church he intend eth the Catholic and
universal Church, or the greatest and most considerable parcels of it, that
place I conceive cannot be found, nor is there any mention thereof any where,
Caesarea of Cappadocia, and Cyprus only excepted: of these Hist. l. 9. c. 21.
Socrates thus, Caesareae Cappadociae, et in Cypro; die Sabbato et Dominica
semper sub vesperam, accensis cucercris, Presby^eri et Episcopi Scripturas
interpretantur. At Caesarca of Cappad^cia, as also at Cyprus on the Sabbath and
Lords day, always at candle light in the Evening, the Presbyters and Bishops
interpret the Scriptures. And this I take it is the reason why St. Basil (who
was Bishop of that Caesarea) preached so many Homilies (evidently the 2. 7. and
ninth of his Hexamaeron) at the Evening. Now as this testimony of Socrates
chalketh out the place of the afternoon Sermon to be the same with that in the
morning, viz. after the reading of the Scriptures, so does it imply that the
custom was no where taken up but there, and that in other places preaching, at
Evening service, was but occasional and arbitrary, not stated as parcel of the
office. Let it not be thought that I here endeavor to disparage that ordinance
of Preaching, an ordinance so often instrumental to the conversion of souls.
No, my only design is to commend the other duty to more frequent practice: a
duty without whose pre-elementation Sermons themselves edify very little.

Evening Prayer] The office Catechistical being past, evening Prayer is to
afternoon, rather then Evening Prayer? I answer, because then the sun and
consequently the light begins to decline. It seems the Greek Church had two
services in the afternoon, one at one three, their nine; and another at the
close of the Evening as appears by the Council of Laodicea, Can. 18.
decreeing, (...), that the same service of Prayers ought to be made use of both
at the ninth hour and at Evening. This at evening was at candle lighting,
whence the prayers appropriated to it were (...) as the Psalms (...) or (...),
candlelight hymns: the reason is, because when the candles were first lighted
their mode was to glorify God with an hymn, one form whereof is still extant
in these words. (...). Blessed Jesus Christ, thou cheerful brightness of the
holy immortal glory of the heavenly and holy Father; when the Sun is set, no
sooner do we behold the Evening light to shine, then we glorify the Father,
Son, and holy Ghost. Son of God, giver of life, thou art worthy at all times to
be praised with holy voices, therefore the whole world does glorify thee. This
is that Eucharistical hymn whereof ad Amphilech. c. 29.
St Basil thus, (...), our Fathers thought mee^ not silently to pass by the
benefit of this evening light, but as soon as it appears, presently they gave
thanks, saying, Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost.
He that desires to see more of this particular, may resort to the same
fountain whence I had it, the late learned Primate de Symbolis, which being so
excellent a piece, and so undoubtly his, I cannot but wonder why Dr. Barnard in
his first and second Catalogue of his works omitted it.

For thine is the kingdom etc. [This Doxology not being affixt to the Lords
Luke represents it to us, and being omitted in very ancient manuscripts of St.
Mathews Gospel, Learned men conjecture, a Graecis ad Evanglii textum ascriptum
fuisse ex Liturgiis aut solemni alioqui consuetudine, it was transplanted out
of the Liturges of the Greek Church, or some such solemn usage into the text of
the Gospel. So Lucas Burgensis in his variae Lectiones: of the same mind are
Beza, Grotius, and most learned men Probably enough, for the Greek Church ever
had it in her Liturgies, as is evident from Clemens his Constitutions. Lib. 3.
c. 18. From Chrysostom, Theophylact, and others, and comment upon it. And the
Latin Church as constantly omitted it. Which is the very true reason why it is
left out in ours, complying more with the Western, then the Eastern forms.

Scot. Lit. Then shall follow etc.] A very necessary Rubric. For though use
Thus ends the order of Morning and Evening Prayer throughout the whole year,
want first a fit prayer for the King. If that Versicle of O Lord save the King,
be urged against me, I answer, That short versicle does not fit the Latitude of
our obligations to him, nor of those temporal advantages we desire to enjoy
under him, nor of his personal qualifications, as Man, as Father, as King, as
Christian, to all which our Prayers ought regularly relate, and which are
considered in the Litany Collects. Secondly they want the Dimissory Benediction
of the Priest; and it looks like a solecisme, for a religious assembly to break
off abruptly, as it were in the midst of sacred employment, and for the
people to depart without a Benediction. The premises well weighed, This Rubric
was very pertinently inserted.

Quicunque vult.] The Tradition is current, that this Creed was composed by
Athanasius and sent to Pope Julius, as an account of his faith. But the learned
de Tribus Symbol. dissertatio 2.
Vossius endeavors by many arguments to demonstrate that it is a mere
fiction, and that Athanasius could not in all probability be the Author
thereof. The reliances of his Assertion are, first, it rarely occurreth in any
ancient manuscript of that Fathers works; and where it does, it has not
Athanasius his name affixt to it. Secondly, that neither Nazianzen, Basil,
Chrysostom, nor any other of the Primitive Fathers, give any account of it.
Thirdly, that had it been extant and owned for Athanasius his composure Anno
777. or thereabout, when the controversy concerning the procession of the holy
Ghost was so eagerly debated between the East and Western Church, the Western
should have needed none other argument or testimony to produce against her
antagonist, then this very Creed, in respect of Athanasius his so high
reputation in that Church. Lastly, that there is seldom mention of it until
about a thousand years after Christ. These are the reasons persuading that
judicious man that the Tradition is fabulous. And it is likely enough to be so,
for the late reverend Primate, (that great inqui^er into ancient ^arities) in
one ubi supra.
very old manuscript observed it ascribed to a triumvirate. Eusebius,
D^onysius, and a namelesse third in another belonging to King Aethelstane,
about the year 924 it is called fides Sancti Athanasi^, the Creed of St.
Athanasius. In another ancienter far then the other two, it is called Symbolum
fide^ Catholicae, the Symbol of the Catholic Faith, without any name affixt.
Now this last being written in capital Letters, the Primate thence infers
Gregorii 1. tempore non fuisse recentius; it was (meaning the M. S.) at least
as old as the age of Gregory the great, and if so, the Creed it self must be
elder, and then be the Author who he will, satisfaction it is enough that it is
ancient.

The Litany.] Our sacred addresses and applications to God are quadrupartite,
supplication, deprecation, a praying to be delivered from dangers ghostly and
bodily, such as is the Litany. Secondly, (...), Petition, apprecation, an
invocation of divine blessings and benefits upon our selves. Thirdly, (...)
Intercession, an importuning the throne of grace in the behalf of others.
Lastly, (...), thanksgiving for blessings received either by our selves or
others. Did not this sufficiently warrant sacred Litanies, we might derive,
authority from the last Petition of the Lords prayer, Deliver us from evil. To
which pattern of our Savior, and precept of his Apostle, the Primitive Church
began early to conform. The (...) and first moment of their admission into the
Classis of Divine offices is difficult to define that these Litanies made a
distinct part of the Liturgy in St Epist. 119.
Augustins time is evident, for enumerating the several parcels thereof, he
expostulateth, Quando non est tempus cantandi in Ecclesia nisi cum Legitur, aut
disputatur, aut Antistites clara voce deprecantur, aut communis oration voce
Diaconi indicitur? What space is free from singing of Psalms in the Church,
unless it be when the Lessons are reading, or the Sermon Preaching, or the
Priests are rehearsing the Litany aloud, or Common prayer is enjoined by the
mouth of the Deacon. To ascend up unto Lpist. ad Demetrian.
St. Cyprian he testifies as much of his time. Pro arcendis hostibus, and
imbribus impetrandis and vel auferendis, vel temperandis adversis rogamus
semper and preces fun^imus: for deliverance from our enemies, for rain in time
of droughts, for the removing or moderating of our afflictions we constantly
pray. Senior to St. Cyprian ad Scapula^.
Tertul. Quando non geniculationibus nostris, and jejunationibus nostris
siccitates sunt depulsae? Tell me the time when by our kneelings and fastings
droughts are not changed into moisture? In the Greek Church they moved somewhat
slower, not entering until about the year 300. In the days of Gregory
Thaumatergus, who flourished about the year 260. Epist. 63.
St. Basil tells the Neocesarians there was not any such thing as Litanies
known, and his telling them so, implies that in his own time they had made
their entry. By what has already been said, Mr. Cartwrights mistake seems
gross enough in founding the first rise of Litanies upon Mamercus Bishop of
Vienna. He, if he did any thing in their establishment, probably went no
further then the reviewing of anteceding Litanies, and disposing them into a
form agreeable to Vienna's sad condition, and the assigning three days before
Ascension for that service. As did also the Council of Aurelia after him can.
23. Next Mamercus comes in Gregory the great, the supposed Author of the great
Litany, that of Mamercus being styled the less, and most probably so he was;
but the sneezing sickness being decryed by all learned men as fabulous, and so
it no motive or inducement to the work, some other cause must be assigned,
which perhaps might be some rage of contagious Pestilence; or else it may be
conjectured to have been compiled upon the general score of Reformation. For
Gregory, observing in the several offices of diverse Latin Churches many
things which gave cause of dislike, some being vain, some unapt, some scarce
making out sense, he presently applied himself to consider of and compare them
all together, and so to compile a Liturgy of the most choice pieces extracted
from them, which he performing left as a Legacy to his successors, which was at
first owned as the proper service of the Romish Church. Part of this Liturgy
was the Great Litany, which contained the very quintessence of all former
Models, with additions of his own, some for the better and some for the worse,
and these rather the blemishes of his times, then of himself. That age wherein
he lived was none of the learned, but declined much toward ignorance, which
is worthily styled the mother of blind devotion, or superstition: this
ignorance soon brought in the Invocation of Saints, an error which began to be
whispered in the writings of others some few years preceding, but never durst
show it self (...) barefaced in the service of the Church until this Gregory
led it in; who over facile to credit mis-reported miracles (as his Dialogues
demonstrate) was made susceptible of any error which presented it self under
the shape of devotion, and consequently of invocation of Saints. He therefore
imbibing this fallacious opinion, acted agreeable to its principles, and after
the address to the sacred Trinity inserted in the Litany an application, first
to the Virgin Mary, next to the Archangels. and Angels, then to the Apostles,
Martyrs, Confessors, and Virgins, bestowing upon every one an Orapro nobis,
nominally applied.

As for the Litany used in our Church, a very near resemblance it has with
that devised by St. Gregory, if he were the Author of the Sacramontary, as I am
prone to believe he was. The first part of it, whose Responsory terminations
are, Have mercy upon us, seems to be an exemplification of the most ancient
forms, for in those Liturgies extant under the names of misreputed Authors,
which nevertheless retain some relics of remote antiquity (...) is the great
ingredient into the Litanies: between these and the Deprecatory part,
immediately before Remember not Lord our iniquities etc. grew that ex^rescence
of misguided zeal, and the forementioned address to the Saints, which our
Church worthily expunged, Those answers of Good Lord deliver us, vary little
from the ancient mode. Those of we beseech thee to hear us good Lord, pretend a
near conformity to that model mentioned in the Lib. 8. c. 5. 6. 10.
Clementine constitution, and which answers in substance to our Prayer for
the whole state of Christ's Church: for that (...), or Catholic Collect, as it
is styled in the old Liturgies, which was a prayer for the Catholic Church,
was essentially the same with ours in the Communion office, and differed in
fashion only, being rehearsed Litany wise. Part of that prayer, so far as may
conduce to make good my Title, or may declare the Alliance of that service with
our Litany, I shall here subjoyn, and the rather, because to my apprehension,
those ancient constitutions have not many parcells of farther extraction.

(...). Let us pray for the Church and for the people. Let us pray for the
whole order of Bishops, Constitut. cap. 13.
for all Presbyters, for all Deacons, and ministers of Christ, and for the
whole family of the Church, that God would preserve and keep them. Let us pray
for Kings, and all in high places, that under them being peaceably and quietly
governed, we may spend our days in all godliness and honesty. Let us pray for
our brethren afflicted with sickness, that the Lord would please to free them
from their diseases, Cap. 10.
and restore them in perfect health to his Church. Let us pray for those that
sail by water, or travail by land. Let us pray for those that are condemned to
mines, to banishment, to imprisonment and bonds for the name of the Lord. Let
us pray for those that are oppressed. Let us pray for those that persecute us
for the Lords sake, that he would abate their rage and confound all their
devices against us. Let us pray for all those that err and are deceived, that
God would bring them into the way of truth. Let us pray for all widows and
orpha^s. Let us pray for seasonable and temperate Cap. 1^.
weather that we may receive the fruits of the Earth

As for the so frequent repetition of Lord have mercy upon us: In all
probability Christianity did not devise it new, but imitated elder patterns, I
mean that mode of the 136. Psalm, where for his mercy endures for ever, is
iterated no less then 27. times, and which versicle was used Litany-wise (that
is, returned by the people) in the service of the Temple, as is evident. 1 Chronicles. 16. 41. and 2 Chronicles 9. 13.

The gesture proper to this service must be kneeling. This is manifest by the
Rubric belonging to Commination, where the Litany is appointed to be read
after the accustomea manner, implying thereby both the place and posture
formerly used. Now the accustomed place was the midst of the Church, and the
accustomed posture was kneeling, for so was it appointed in the Injunct. 18.
Queens Injunctions, and in those of Injunct. 23.
Edward the sixth, the Priests shall kneel in the midst of the Church, and sing
or say plainly and distinctly the Litany. Indeed what fitter posture can there
be then kneeling. Excellently says Hom. in Psalm. 4.
St. Chrysostom (...), it is fit that he who applies himself to prayer, should
put on the outward garb and deportment, as well as the inward mind of a
supplicant: what scheam suits a supplicant better then lowly kneeling, and can
we kneel too low at such supplications as these? The motions of the body ought
to keep pace with the affections of the Soul, when this is most transported
with Zeal, the members of the body must move at the same rate, the higher the
spirit soars in Prayer, the lower falls the body. When our Savior prayed in
the Garden, his first posture was, (...), falling upon his knees: Luke 22. 41.
but (...), being brought to his agony, and to pray (...) more ardently, (...),
he cast himself prostrat upon his face, Matthew 26. 39. Now if the Litany be, as
certainly it is, our most fervent resort to God, fit it is it should be made in
the most significant, that is, in the lowest posture of supplication.

As for the exceptions made against this Litany, they are so few, and so
contemptible, as I disdain to honor them with a reply, and shall end in this
true character of it; That in all concernments, so excellently is it contrived
in accommodation to our general wants, so full of Christian Rhetoric, and
pious Raptures, as it justly deserves to be accounted a noble parcel of our
Liturgy. Nor can all the cavils of malevolent spirits, balance the honor it
has acquired abroad. For Gilbertus Cognatus, (a German and Amanuensis to the
famous Erasmus) very near an ICO years since, under this title, Litania veteris
Ecclesiae, the Litany of the Ancient Church, presents us with a form precisely
the same with ours, as then established by Act of Parliament.

On Wednesdayes and Fridayes.] These were in the Primitive times, days of I
fast twice a week, said the Pharisee. Luke 18. 11. and the Christians did
disdain to be short of them in what might promote the honor of God. The reason
given why these two days were chosen, is, because on the one, (Wednesday)
Judas conspired to betray his Master, and our Savior Christ; and on the other,
(Friday) he suffered death upon the Cross. And this is that which Stromat.
Lib. 7.
Clemens Alexandrinus intends in these words (...). i. e. he knows the
mystical sense of those days, the fourth and the Parasceve: and he is the
first Greek Author wherein it occurreth, unless we will resort to those
constitutions of the Apostles recorded by Epiphanius, whence he borrows so
much, and to which in all probability he refers, where he says Compend.
Doctrine.
(...). The Apostles ordained that there should be sacred conventions on the
Wednesdayes and Fridayes. Nor was this observation peculiar to the Greek
Church, for de Jejunio c. 2. and 3.
Tertullian expressly mentions, stationes Quartae and sextae feriae, the
stations of the fourth and sixth day of the week. The very nomination of these
days may be enough against all contenders, to decipher to us what this Ancient
meant by stations, viz. days of humiliation, and the context of the place will
not hear of any other construction, where pleading hard for Montanus against
the Catholic Church in the point of Fasts, he appeals to her self, whether the
Apostles did ever yoke her to any such observances, and whether the days she
has assigned for those intents, were not of her arbitrary choice: so that it
being indisputably evident that the Father here intended days of humiliation,
I cannot think it probable, though very learned men have so opined, that the
word should be capable elsewhere in this Author of a sense diametrically
opposite, or that it should import days of the highest Festivity and
rejoicing. For where he says, Similiter de stationum Diebus, non putant
plerique sacrificiorum orationibus interveniendum, quod statio solvenda sit
accepto corpore Domini. Ergo devotum Deo obsequium Eucharistia resolvit, an
magis obligat? nonne solemnior erit statio tua, si ad aram Dei steteris?
Accepto corpore Domini and reservato utrumque salvum est, and participatio
beneficii, and executio officii. Tertul. de. Oration. c. 14.
So also of days of Station, many think they must then forbear to come to the
prayers of the sacrifices, because the station is to be dissolved by the
receiving of the body of the Lord, what then does the Eucharist countermand the
duty due to God, does it not rather oblige us to it? Shall not thy station be
the more solemn, if performed before Gods Altar, the Body of our Lord being
taken and reserved both are secured, the participation of his blessed Son, and
the discharge of the duty. Here I say some understand by Stations, those days,
viz. All Sundays of the year, and all the interval between Easter and
Pentecost, on which, according to primitive custom, it was not permitted to
kneel at prayers, and these days were noted as of singlar contrariety to
Humiliation. The custom is acknowledged, and so also is it that statio properly
signifies standing, but both these concessions will be improved no further,
but only to render their interpretation a specious fallacy. For, to my
reading, statio is never by any Author of those early ages applied in reference
to that custom: not in Tertullian I am certain, no, not withstanding his ad
aram Dei steterts. For (not to reinforce the absurdity of one word denoting in
the same Author two things so contradictory, as fasting and feasting)
Tertullian tells us statio is of military extraction, de miluari exemplo nomen
accipit; it borrows its name from military example, if so, then not derived
from the pretended custom of standing. Now the military mode was this, so many
Soldiers were ordered to be upon the respctive guards, there were they to
continue completely armed, and on horseback ready to receive any impression of
an assaulting enemy: in that posture were they to abide anciently from morning
to night, until Live. l. 44. c. 33.
Paulus Aemylius observing it to be to great a burden both for horse and man,
appointed these gards should at noon be relieved with fresh both men and
horses. Now because, according to the martial discipline, none was permitted to
depart the guard until the time presixt; Christians, who on the days of
Humiliation tied themselves as strictly to Religious duty, did aptly enough
impose upon those days the name of Stations. And this will conclude
sufficiently for the figurative, against the proper sense of Stations. Further
to illustrate Tertullian, by Tertullian, elsewhere remonstrating the
mischievous consequences of unequal yokes where a Christian woman marches with
an Infidel, ^e delivers himself thus. Ad uxorem, l. 2. c. 4.
Si statio facienda sit, maritus eo Die conducat ad Balnea: si jejunia
observanda sunt, maritus cadem die convivium exerceat, If a station be to be
kept, the husband may the same day lead her to the Baths. If a solemn fast must
be observed, the husband may the same day make a feast, where statio must
necessarily denote a day of Humiliation. For Tertullians design is to show
that the Church and the Husband may be at cross purposes, and to command
things contrary to each other. And the Bath being, as the mode was then,
applied to Luxury, was as opposite to humiliation as a feast to a fast, But
here it seems, say some, Tertullian did not consider both these under a real
identity but as different things, for else one instance would have served. To
which I answer, true it is Tertullian does somewhat distinguish them, the
difference being this, that stations signified the less, and jejunia, the more
solemn fasts, these continued from morning to night, and they only to the
ninth hour or three in the afternoon, whence it is that Tertullian calls them
in a scoff de jajun. c. 13.
stationum semi-jejunia, Half-fasted stations,

Having thus, I hope, made a clear prospect into Tertullians dark mind in
reference to these stations, the construction of the former passage is very
facile. viz. That whereas many were scrupulous of coming to the Eucharist upon
wednesdayes and Fridays, lest the receiving of the Elements should prove a
breaking of their Fasts, which were to be continued until three in the
afternoon, Tertullian tells them they were in the wrong, and that the
Eucharist is so far from dissolving the duty of Fasting, as it makes the work
more valuable in Gods sight. But if they would not credit him then, there is
another expedient will salve both sores. viz. The taking of the Body, and
reservation of it to be eaten at home ante omnem cibum, Fasting, as he in the
same book does hint, whereby neither the Fast will be interrupted, nor the
other duty neglected.

To forgive our enemies etc.] Amongst all the inordinate lusts of our corrupt
hatred; and therefore our Savior at his Sermon upon the mount, that excellent
summary of Christian institution, administreth more expressly toward the
mortification of this immortal passion, Bless them that curse you, a precept
whereby the keen edge of revenge is not only blunted, but turned the contrary
way: A precept by way of (...), and additional explication of the fifth Petition
of the Lords prayer. For lest we should imagine the whole duty of charity
toward our neighbor lodged in a bare remission of the injury, and an
indisposition to revenge; he extends his discipline to an higher pitch,
commanding us not only to forgive our enemies, but to love them, yea, to
bless i. e. to wish all the good we can to those which curse us: for seeing
(...), are put hear as terms contradistinct, as in locum.
Groti^s has noted aright, and seeing that (...) never does, nor (considering
the simples whereof it is composed) can import any malediction but what is
attended with imprecation and cursing. I cannot conceive so meanly of (...) in
this place to think, with this learned man, it implies no more but benignis
verbis compellare, to Speak our Execrators fair: but that it intends a
serious praying for an accumulation of all blessings upon them, so I am sure
did the Primitive Fathers understand it: For in the prayer for all states which
was their Litany and very near resembles ours, one Petition was for those that
hate us, and persecute us, as is evident by the Constitutions ascribed to
Clemens, which I the more confidently rely upon, because Dialog. cum Tryph.
Justin martyr tells Trypho the Jew (...); For you and all men whatsoever, who
are maliciously minded against us, we send forth our Prayers. This I cannot but
note in recommendation of our Churches Charity in this Petition toward the
great enemies of her Religion; she Praying in this excellent and solemn form
even for those who do as solemnly curse her. The Jews first (...). Execrating
in their Synagogues all those who profess the Christian faith, So in ubi supra.
Justin Martyrs time, and so etiam nunc, even at this very present, as the
famous Annot. in Lib. 2. de verit Christ. Relig.
Grotius sufficiently demonstrateth. Secondly, the Papists, who make it a
peculiar part of their service appointed for Maunday-thursday, to curse with
bell, Book and candle all whom they account for heretics, as appears by
their Bulla Caenae.

O Christ hear us.] The Civilians have a saying, voluntas fortior attenditur ex
geminata expressione, the meaning of a man is best understood by iterating and
doubling of the expression. No less true in those resorts we make to God, the
frequent repeating of our supplications, striking the more forceable impression
upon our souls. Whence the so often redoubling of several members of David's
Psalms whence our Savior in his great agony, and conflict prayed (...) using
always the very same words; whence in the primitive Church the Litanies which
were, (...), the Prayers spirited with the greater vehemence, were always full
of such reduplications, as may be seen by the several forms mentioned by the
constitutions of Clemens, and in the several Liturgies of those early times.

A thanksgiving for rain] Gods blessings and our praises are the great
intelligencers Hooker on our Churches behalf, that this were better provided
for by select days assigned by supreme authority for that duty, and by set
forms agreeable thereunto, then by a small collect: That defense is in my
opinion, but partly satisfactory. For calamities are most commonly not
National, but sometimes Provinical, sometimes they quarter only in one City,
sometimes but in a petty village, and unless they spread to be Epidemical,
they rarely reach the cognizance of the supreme magistrate, or if they do, they
will not carry with them importance enough to persuade the indiction of days
of universal either Humiliation or thanksgiving, for such minute mergencies:
therefore, (not to defraud the reformation under king James of the honor it
has merited) the superadding of those relative Thanksgivings was not only a
commendable, but a necessary Act.

CHAP. V.
1. B. of Edw. 6.

The (A) Introits, Collects, Epistles and Gospels, to be used at the
Celebration of the Lords supper and holy Communion through the year, with
proper Psalms and lessons for diverse Feasts and days.

COMMON PRAYER

The Collects, (B.) Epistles and Gospels to be used at the Celebration of the
Lords Supper and holy Communion, through the year.

(C.) The first Sunday in Advent.

1. B. of Edw. the 6. Blessed is the man etc. Psalm. 1.

Glory be to the Father etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

ALmighty God, give us grace that we may cast away the works of darkness, and
put upon us the Armor of light, now in the time of this mortal life (in the
which thy son Jesus Christ came to visit us in great humility) that in the last
day, when he shall come again in his glorious majesty to judge both the quick
and the dead, we may rise to the life im mortal, through him, who lives and
reigns with thee and the holy Ghost, now and ^v^r, Amen.

The Epistle.

O we nothing to any man. Romans 13. verse 8. unto the end.

Scotch Liturgy, when the Presbyter or Minister reads the Gospel the people
shall stand up; and the Presbyter, before he begins to read the Gospel,
shall say thus. [The Gospel of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, written in
such a Chapter of such an Evangelist, beginning at such a verse] And the people
shall answer, Glory be to God.

The Gospel.

And when they drew nigh. Mat. 21. verse 1. to the end.

Scotch Lit. When the Gospel is ended the Presbyter or Minister shall say, Here
ends the Gospel; and the people shall answer, Thanks be to thee, O Lord.

And thus at the beginning and ending of the Gospel every Sunday and Holyday in
the year; or when else soever the Gospel is read.

The second sunday in Advent.

1. B. of Ed. 6. When I was in trouble etc. Psalm. 120.

Glory be to the Father etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

BLessed Lord, which have caused all holy scriptures to be written for our
learning: Grant us that we may in such wise hear them, read, mark, learn, and
inwardly digest them, that by patience and comfort of thy holy word, we may
embrace and ever hold fast the blessed hope of everlasting life, which thou
have given us in our Savior Jesus Christ.

The Epistle

Whatsoever things are written. Romans 15. verse 4. to verse 14.

The Gospel.

There shall be signs in the Sun. Lu. 21. verse 25. to verse 34.

The third Sunday in Advent.

1. B. of Edw. 6. Hear me when I call. Psalm. 4.

Glory be to the Father etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

LOrd, we beseech thee give ear to our prayers, and by thy gracious visitation
lighten the darkness of our heart, by our Lord Jesus Christ.

The Epistle.

Let a man this wise esteem us. 1 Cor. 4. verse 1. unto verse. 6.

The Gospel.

When John being in prison. Mat. 11. verse 2. unto verse 11.

The fourth Sunday in Advent.

1. B. of Edw. 6. Ponder my words O Lord. etc. Psalm 5.

Glory be to the Father etc.

As it was in the beginning. etc.

The Collect.

LOrd raise up (we pray thee) thy power, and come among us and with great might
succor us, that whereas (through our sins and wickedness) we be sore let and
hindered, thy bountiful grace and mercy (through the satisfaction of thy son
our Lord) may speedily deliver us: to whom with thee, and the holy ghost, be
honor and glory, world without end:

The Epistle.

Rejoice in the Lord always. Phil. 4. verse 4. unto verse 8.

The Gospel.

This is the record of John. John 1. verse 19. unto verse 29.

(D.) Christmas day.

1 B. of Edw. 6. Proper Psalms and Lessons on Christmas day.

At Mattens.

19. The first Lesson Esai. 9. unto the end. Psalm 45. 85. The second Lesson
Mat. 1. unto the end.

At the first Communion.

O sing unto the Lord a new song, etc. Psalm. 98.

Glory be to the Father. etc.

As it was in the beginning, etc.

The Collect.

GOd which make us glad with the yearly remembrance of the birth of thy only
son Jesus Christ, grant that as we joyfully receive him for our Redeemer, so we
may with sure confidence behold him when he shall come to be our Judge, who
lives and reigns etc.

The Epistle.

The grace of God that brings salvation. Tit. 2. verse 11. to the end.

The Gospel.

And it chanced in those days etc. Lu. 2. to verse 15.

(E) At the second Communion.

O Lord our Governor. etc. Psalm 8.

The Collect.

ALmighty God, which have given us thy only begotten son to take our nature
upon him, ^ this day to be born of a pure virgin: Grant that we being
regenerate and made thy children by adoption and grace, may daily be renewed by
thy holy spirit, through the same our Lord Jesus Christ, who lives and
reigns with thee etc.

The Epistle.

God in times past diversely. Heb. 1. verse 1. unto verse 13.

The Gospel.

In the beginning was the word, Joh. 1. verse 1. unto verse 15.

1. B. of Edw. 6. Proper Psalms and Lessons at Even-song.

89. The first Lesson. Esaias. 7. God spoke once again etc. to the end. Psalm
110. 132.

The second Lesson Tit. 3. The kindness and love etc. unto foolish questions.

(F) St. Stevens day at Mattens.

1. B. of Edw. 6. The second Lesson. Act. 6. 7. Stephen full of faith etc.
(unto) and when 40. years.

At the Communion.

Why boastest thou, thou Tyrant. Psalm. 3. Glory be to the Father etc. As it was
in the Beginning. etc.

The Collect.

GRant us, O Lord, to learn to love our enemies, by the example of thy martyr,
S. Steven, who prayed for his persecutors, to thee which live etc.

Then shall follow the Collect of the Nativity, which shall be said continually
unto Newyears day. [Scot, Lit. But instead of these words (and this day to be
born,) the Presbyter shall say, at this time to be born.]

The Epistle.

And Stephen being full of the holy Ghost Act. 7. verse 55 unto the end.

The Gospel.

Behold, I send unto you Prophets, Mat. 23. verse 34. unto the end.

1. B. of Edw. 6. The second Lesson at Evensong.

Acts 7. And when 40. years were expired (unto) Stephen full of the holy Ghost.

St John Evangelist's day

1. B. of Edw. 6. at Mattens.

The second Lesson, Apoc. 1. unto the end.

At the Communion.

In the Lord put I my trust etc. Psalm. 11. Glory be to the Father, etc.

As it was in the beginning, etc.

The Collect.

Merciful Lord, we beseech thee to cast thy bright beams of light upon thy
Church, that it being lightened by the doctrine of thy blessed Apostle and
Evangelist John, may attain to thy everlasting gifts, through Jesus Christ our
Lord, Amen.

The Epistle.

That which was from the beginning, 1 John 1. verse 1. unto the end.

The Gospel.

Jesus said unto Peter: John 21. verse 19. unto the end.

1. B. of Edw. 6. at Evensong the second Lesson Apoc. 22. unto the end.

The Innocents day.

1. B. of Edw. 6. at Mattens.

The first Lesson Jer. 31. (unto) moreover I heard Ephraim.

At the Communion.

O God the heathen are come etc. Psalm 29.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

As it was in the beginning, etc.

The Collect.

ALmighty God, whose praise this day the young Innocents thy witnesses have
confessed and showed forth, not in speaking, but in dying: mortify and kill
all vices in us, that in our conversation, our life may express the faith which
with our tongues we do confess, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.

I looked, and lo a Lamb Apoc. 14. verse 1. unto verse 6.

The Gospel.

The angel of the Lord appeared Mat. 2. verse 13. unto verse 19.

The Sunday after Christmas day.

1. B. of Edw. 6. I will lift mine eyes up to the hills etc. Psalm. 121.

Glory be to the Father etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

Almighty God which have given etc.

As upon Christmas day.

The Epistle.

And I say, that the hire. Galat. 4. verse. 1. unto verse 8.

The Gospel.

This is the Book of the generation. Matthew. 1. verse 1. unto the end.

The Circumcision of Christ.

1. B. of Edw. 6. At Mattens.

The first Lesson. Genesis 17. unto the end.

The second Lesson. Romans 2. unto the end.

(G) At the Communion.

I was glad when they said unto me etc. Psalm 122.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

As it was in the beginning, etc.

The Collect.

ALmighty God, which made thy blessed son to be circumcised, and obedient to
the law for man: grant us the true circumcision of the spirit, that our hearts
and all our members being mortified from all wordly and carnal lusts, may in
all things ovey thy blessed will, through the same thy son Jesus Christ our
Lord.

The Epistle.

Blessed is that man to whom Romans 4. verse 8. unto verse 15.

The Gospel.

And it fortuned, Luke 2. verse 15. unto verse 22.

1. B. of Edw. 6. at Evensong.

The first Lesson Deuteronomy. 10. And now Israel, unto the end.

The Second Lesson, Colos. 2. unto the end.

Omitted in the 1. B. of Edward 6.

If there be a Sunday between the Epiphany and the Circumcision: then shall be
used the same Collect, Epistle and Gospel, at the Communion, which was used
upon the day of Circumcision, [Scot. Lit. so likewise upon every other day from
the time of the Circumcision to the Epiphany.]

(H.) The Epiphany, 1. B. of Edw. 6. at Mattens.

The first Lesson Esaias. 60. unto the End.

The second Lesson Luke 3. and it fortuned; unto the end.

At the Communion.

O sing unto the Lord a new song, etc. Psalm. 96.

Glory be to the Father etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

O God, which by the leading of a star, did manifest thy only begotten son
to the Gentiles: mercifully grant, that we which know thee now by faith, may
after this life have the fruition of thy glorious God head, through Christ our
Lord.

The Epistle.

For this cause I Paul Ephesians. 3. verse 1. unto verse 13.

The Gospel.

When Jesus was born. Matthew. 2. verse 1. unto ver. 13.

1. B. of Edw. 6. At Evensong. The first Lesson, Isai. 49. unto the end. The
second Lesson John 2. After this he went down to Capernaum, unto the end.

The first Sunday after the Epiphanie.

1. B. of Edw. 6. How long will thou forget me etc. Psalm. 13.

Glory be to the Father etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

LOrd we beseech thee mercifully to receive the prayers of thy people. Which
call upon thee, and grant that they may both perceive and know what things they
ought to do, and also have grace and power faithfully to fulfill the same,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.

I beseech you therefore brethren, Romans 12. ver. 1. unto ver. 6.

The Gospel.

The father and mother of Jesus Luke 2. verse 41. unto the end.

The second Sunday after the Epiphany

1 B. Edw. 6. The fool has said in his heart etc. Psalm. 14.

Glory be to the Father etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

ALmighty and everlasting God, which ^ost govern all things in heaven and
earth: mercifully hear the supplications of thy people; and grant us thy peace
all the days of our life.

The Epistle.

Seeing that we have diverse gifts, Romans 12. ver. 6. unto ver. 16.

The Gospel.

And the third day was there Joh. 2. verse 1. unto ver. 12.

The third Sunday after the Epiphany.

1 B. of Edw. 6. Lord who shall dwell in thy tabernacle etc. Psalm. 15.

Glory be to the Father etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

ALmighty and everlasting God, mercifully look upon our infirmities, and in all
our dangers and necessities, stretch forth thy right hand to help and defend
us, through Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.

Be not wise in your own opinions. Romans 12. verse 16. unto the end.

The Gospel.

When he was come down Matthew. 8. verse 1. to verse 14.

The fourth sunday after the Epipiphany.

1. B. Edw. 6. Why do the Heathen so furiously rage together etc. Psalm. 2.

Glory be to the father etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

GOd which know us to be set in the midst of so many and great dangers, that
for man's ^railnesse we cannot always stand uprightly: grant to us the health
of body and soul, that all those things which we suffer for sin, by thy help
we may well pass and overcome, through Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.

Let every soul submit himself Romans 13. verse 1. unto ver. 8.

The Gospel.

And when he entered into a ship, Mat. 8. verse 23. unto the end.

The fifth Sunday after the Epiphanie.

1. B. of Edward 6. The Lord hear thee in the day of thy trouble etc. Psalm. 20.

Glory be to the Father etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

LOrd, we beseech thee to keep thy Church and household continually in thy true
religion, that they which no leau only upon hope of thy heavenly grace, may
evermore be defended by thy mighty power, through Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.

Put upon you as the elect of God Colos. 3. verse. 12. unto verse 18.

The Gospel.

The kingdom of heaven Mat. 13. verse 24. unto ver. 31.

The 6. Sunday (if there be so many) shall have the Psalm, Collect, Epistle, and
Gospel, that was upon the fifth Sunday.

The Sunday called Septuagesima.

1 B. of Edw. 6. The Lord is my Shepherd etc. Psalm. 23.

Glory be to the Father etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

OLord, we beseech thee favorably to hear the prayers of thy people, that we
which are justly punished for our offenses, may be mercifuly delivered by thy
goodness, for the glory of thy name, through Jesus Christ our Savior, who
lives and reigns world without end.

The Epistle.

Perceive ye not, how that they which 1 Cor. 9. 24. ver. 24. unto the end.

The Gospel.

The kingdom of heaven is like Mat. 20. verse 1. unto ver. 17.

The Sunday called Sexagesima.

1 B. of Edw. 6. The earth is the Lord* etc. Psalm. 24.

Glory be to the Father etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

LOrd God, which see that we put not our trust in anything that we do:
mercifully grant, that by thy power we may be defended against all adversity,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.

Ye suffer fools gladly, 2 Cor. 11. verse 19 unto ver. 32.

The Gospel.

When much people were gathered Lu. 8. verse 4. unto verse 16.

The Sunday called Quinquagesima.

1 B. of Edw. 6. Be thou my judge O Lord etc. Psalm. 26.

Glory be to the Father etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

O Lord, which do teach us that all our doings without charity are nothing
worth, send thy holy ghost, and power into our hearts that most excellent gift
of charity, the very bond of peace and all virtues, without the which whosoever
lives, is counted dead before thee: grant this for thy only son Jesus Christ's
sake.

The Epistle.

Though I speak with tongues of men, 1 Cor. 13. verse 1, unto the end.

The Gospel.

Jesus took unto him the twelve, Mat. 4. verse 31. unto the end.

(I.) The first day of Lent

1 B. of Edw. 6. O Lord rebuke me not in thine indignation Psalm. 6.

Glory be to the Father etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

ALmighty and everlasting God, which (...) nothing that thou have (...), and
do forgive the sins of all them that be penitent: create and make in us new
and con^rit^ hearts, that we worthily lamenting our sins, and knowledging our
wretchedness* way obtain of the^ the God of all mercy, perfect remission and
forgiveness, through Jesus Christ.

The Epistle.

Turn you unto me with Joel 2. verse 12. unto ver. 18.

The Gospel.

When ye fast be not sad Matthew. 6. verse 16. unto ver. 22.

The first Sunday in Lent.

1 B. of Edw. 6. Blessed is he whose unrighteousness is forgiven etc. Psa. 32.

Glory be to the Father etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

LOrd, which for our sake did fast forty days and forty nights: give us
grace to use such abstinence, that our flesh being sub^tied to the spirit, we
may ever obey thy godly motions in righteousness and true holiness, to thy
honor and glory, which live and raignest. etc.

The Epistle:

We as helpers exhort you 2 Cor. 6. verse 1. unto verse 11.

The Gospel.

Then was Jesus led away Luke 18. verse 1. unto ver. 12.

The second Sunday in Lent.

1 B. of Edw. 6. Out of the deep have I called etc. Psalm. 130.

Glory be to the Father etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

ALmighty God, which do see that we have no power of our selves to help our
selves: keep thou us both outwardly in our bodies, and inwardly in our souls,
that we may be defended from all adversities which may happen to the body, and
from all evil thoughts which may assault and hurt the soul, through Jesus
Christ etc.

The Epistle.

We beseech you brethren, 1 These. 4. verse 1. unto ver. 9.

The Gospel.

Jesus went thence, Matthew. 15. verse 21. unto verse 29.

The Third Sunday in Lent.

1 B. of Edw. 6. Give sentence with me O Lord, etc. Psalm. 45.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

As it was in the beginning, etc.

The Collect.

WE beseech thee almighty God, look upon the hearty desires of thy humble
servants, and stretch forth the right hand of thy majesty, to be our defense
against all our enemies, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.

Be ye the followers of God Ephesians. 5. verse 1. unto ver. 15.

The Gospel.

Jesus was casting out a devil Luk 11. verse 14. unto ver. 26.

The fourth Sunday in Lent.

1 B. of Edw. 6. God is our hope and strength, etc. Psalm. 46.

Glory be to the Father etc. As it was in the beginning, etc.

The Collect.

GRant we beseech thee almighty God, that we which for our evil deeds are
worthily punished, by the comfort of thy grace may mercifully be relieved,
through our Lord Jesus Christ.

The Epistle.

Tell me (ye that desire to be under Gal. 4. verse 21. unto the end.

The Gospel.

Jesus departed over the sea John 6. verse 1. unto ver. 15.

The fifth Sunday in Lent.

1 B. of Edw. 6. Save me O God for thy name sake etc. Psalm. 54.

Glory be to the Father, etc. As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

WE beseech thee almighty God, mercifully to look upon thy people, that by thy
great goodness they may be governed and preserved evermore, both in body and
soul, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.

Christ being an high priest Hebr. 9. verse 11. unto verse 16.

The Gospel.

Which of you can rebuke me of sin: Joh. 8. verse 46. unto the end.

(K.) Sunday next before Easter.

1. B. of Edw. 6. Hear my crying O God, etc. Psalm. 61.

Glory be to the Father, etc. As it was in the beginning, etc.

The Collect.

ALmighty and everlasting God, which of thy tender love toward man, have sent
out Savior Jesus Christ, to take upon him out flesh, and to suffer death upon
the cross, that all mankind should follow the example of his great humility:
mercifully grant, that we both follow the example of his patiente, and be made
partakets of his resurrection, through the same Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.

Let the same mind be in you Phil. 2. verse 5. unto verse 11.

The Gospel.

And it came to pass, Matthew. 26. verse 1. unto Chap. 27. ver. 57.

(L.) Monday before Easter.

The Epistle.

Who is this that comes Esa. 63. verse 1. unto the end.

The Gospel.

After two days was Easter, Mark 14. verse 1. unto the end.

Tuesday before Easter.

The Epistle

The Lord God has opened Esai. 50. verse 5. unto the end.

The Gospel.

And anon in the dawning Mar. 15. verse 1. unto the end.

The Wednesday before Easter.

The Epistle.

For where a Testament is, Hebr. 9. verse 16. unto the end.

The Gospel.

The feast of sweet bread Luke 22. verse. 1. unto the end.

1. B. of Edw. 6. at Evensong, the first Lesson Lamentations 1. unto the end.

(M.) Thursday before Easter.

1. B. of Edw. 6. at Mattens, the first Lesson, Lamentations 2. unto the end.

The Epistle.

This I warn you of, 1 Cor. 11. verse 17. unto the end.

The Gospel.

The whole multitude of Luke 23. verse 1. unto the end.

1. B. of Edw. 6. At Even-song the first Lesson Lamen. 3. unto the end.

(N.) On Good Friday.

1. B. of Edw. 6. At Mattens, The first Lesson, Genesis 22. unto the end.

The Collect.

Almighty God, we beseech thee graciously to behold this thy family, for the
which our Lord Jesus Christ was contented to be betrated and given up into the
hands of wicked men, and to suffer death upon the cross, who siveth and
reigns, and c:

1. B. of Edw. 6. My God, my God, look upon me etc. Psalm. 22.

Glory be to the Father etc.

As it was in the beginning, etc.

After the 2. Collects at the Communion shall be said these two Collects
following.

ALmighty and everlasting God, by whose spirit the whole body of the Church is
governed and sanctified: Receive our supplications and prayers, which we offer
before thee for all estates of men in thy holy congregation, that every member
of the same in his vocation and ministry, may truly and godlily serve thee,
through our Lord Jesus Christ.

MErciful God, who have made all men, and hate nothing that thou have made,
nor would the death of a sinner, but rather that he should be converted and
live: have mercy upon all Jews, Turks, Jufidels, and Heretics, and take from
them all ignorance, hardness of heart, and contempt of thy word: And so fetch
them home, blessed Lord to thy flock, that they may be saved among the remnant
of the true Israelites, and be made one fold, under one shepherd Jesus Christ
our Lord, who lives and taigneth, etc.

The Epistle.

The law which has Hebr. 10. verse 1. to verse 16.

The Gospel.

When Jesus had spoken John 18. verse 1. unto the end of Chap. 19.

1. B. of Edw. 6. At Evening, the first Lesson Esai. 53. unto the end.

(O.) On Easter Eve.

1 B. of Edw. 6. At Mattens, the first Lesson Lamen. 4. unto the end.

O Lord God of my salvation etc. Psalm. 88.

Glory be to the Father etc.

As it was in the Beginning, etc.

The Epistle.

It is better (if the will of 1 Pet. 3. verse 17. unto the end.

The Gospel.

When the even was come, Mat. 27. verse 57. unto the end.

(P.) Easter day.

At Morning prayer, in stead of the Psalm, O come let us. etc. These Anthems
shall be sung or said.

CHrist rising again from the dead, now dies not. Death from henceforth has
no power upon him. For in that he died, he died but once to put away sin, but
in that he lives, he lives unto God, And so likewise count your selves dead
unto sin, but living unto God in Christ Jesus our Lord. [1 B. of Edw. 6.
Allelujah, Allelujah.]

CHrist is risen again, the first fruits of them that sleep. For seeing that by
man came death, by man also comes the resurrection of the dead. For as by Adam
all men do die: so by Christ all men shall be restored to life.

1 B. of Edw. 6. The Priest.

Show forth to all nations the glory of God.

Answer.

And among all people his wonderful works.

Let us pray.

O God who for our Redemption did give thine only begotten Son to the death
of the cross: and by his glorious resurrection have delivered us from the
power of our enemy: grant us so to die daily from sin, that we may evermore
live with him in the joy of his Resurrection through the same Jesus Christ our
Lord Amen.

Proper Pfalms and Lessons at Mattins

2. The first Lesson. Exodus 12. Psalm 57. to the end. 111. The second Lesson
Romans 6. to the end.

At the first Communion.

Preserve me O God. Psalm. 16.

Glory be to the Father. etc.

As it was in the beginning, etc.

The Collect.

ALmighty God, which through thy only begotten Son Jesus Christ have overcome
death, and opened to us the gate of everlasting life: We humbly beseech thee,
that as by thy special grace preventing us, thou do put in our minds good
desires: so by thy continual help we may bring the same good to effect, through
Jesus Christ our Lord, who lives and reigns. etc.

The Epistle.

If ye be risen again with Christ, Colos. 3. verse 1. unto the 8.

The Gospel.

The first day of the Sabbothes John 20. verse 1. unto verse 11.

1 B. of Edw. 6. At the second Communion.

Lord how are they increased etc. Psalm. 3.

Glory be to the Father etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

ALmighty father which have given thy only Son to die for our sins, and rise
again for our justification, grant us to put away the leaven of malice and
wickedness, that we may always serve thee in pureness of living and truth
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.

Know ye not that a little leaven etc. 1 Cor. 5. verse. 6. unto verse 9.

The Gospel.

When the sabbath was past etc. Mar. 16 unto ver. 6.

At Even-song.

Proper Psalms and Lessons.

113. The second Lesson Act. 2. unto the end. Psalm 114. 118.

(Q.) Monday in Easter week.

1 B. of Edw. 6. At Mattens.

The second Lesson Mat. 28. unto the end.

My soul truly waits still upon God Psalm. 62.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

As it was in the beginning, etc.

The Collect.

ALmighty God, which through thy only begotten son Jesus Christ, have overcome
death, and opened unto us the gate of everlasting life: We humbly beseech thee,
that as by thy special grace preventing us, thou do put in our minds good
desires: so by thy continual help we may bring the same to good effect, through
Jesus Christ our Lord, who lives and reigns, etc.

The Epistle.

Peter opened his mouth, and said, verse 34. unto verse 44.

Act. 10

The Gospel.

Behold two of the disciples verse 13. unto verse 36.

Luke 24.

1 B. of Edw. 6. At Even-song.

The second Lesson Act. 3. unto the end.

Tuesday in Easterweek.

1 B of Edw. 6. At Mattens.

The second Lesson Luke 24. unto And behold two of them

Praise the Lord ye servants etc. Psalm. 113.

Glory be to the Father etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

ALmighty father, which have given thine only son to die for our sins, and to
rise again for our justification: grant us so to put away the leaven of malice
and wickedness, that we way always serve thee in pureness of living and truth,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.

Ye men and brethren, Act. 13. verse 26. unto verse 42.

The Gospel.

Jesus stood in the midst of Luke 34. verse 36. unto ver, 49.

1. B. of Edw. 6. at Evensong.

The Second Lesson, 1 Cor. 15. unto the end.

(R.) The first Sunday after Easter.

1 B. of Edw. 6. Blessed is the man that fears the Lord, Psalm. 112.

Glory be to the Father etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

Almighty God and. (As at the Communion on Easter Day.)

The Epistle.

All that is born of God, 1 John. 5. verse 4. unto ver. 13.

The Gospel.

The same day at night verse 19. unto verse 24.

John 20.

The second Sunday after Easter.

1 B. of Edw. 6. Have thee O God to deliver me etc. Psalm. 70.

Glory be to the Father etc. As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

ALmighty God, which have given thine only son to be unto us both a sacrifice
for sin, and also an ensample of good life: give us the grace that we may
always most thankfully receive that his inestimable benefit, and also daily
endeavor our selves to follow the blessed steps of his most holy life.

The Epistle.

This is thank-worthy verse 19. unto the end.

1 Pet. 2.

The Gospel.

Christ said unto his disciples, verse 11. unto ver. 17.

John 10.

The third Sunday after Easter.

1. B. of Edw. 6. Unto thee O God do we give thanks etc. Psalm. 75.

Glory be to the Father etc. As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

ALmighty God, which show to all men that be in error the light of thy
truth, to the intent that they may return into the way of righteousness: grant
unto all them that be admitted into the fellowship of Christ's religion, that
they may eschew those things that be contrary to their profession, and follow
al such things as be agreeable to the same, through our Lord Jesus Christ.

The Epistle.

Dearly beloved, I beseech you verse 11. unto verse 18.

1 Pet. 2.

The Gospel.

Jesus said to his disciples, ver. 6. unto ver. 23.

John 16.

The fourth Sunday after Easter.

1 B. of Edw. 6. God stands in the Congregation of Princes etc. Psalm. 82.

Glory be to the Father etc. As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

ALmighty God, which do make the minds of all faithful men to be of one
will: Grant unto thy people, that they may love the thing which thou
command, and desire that which thou do promise, that among the sundry and
manifold changes of the world, our hearts may surely there be fired, whereas
true joys are to be ^ound, through Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.

Every good gift, ver. 17. unto ver. 22.

James 1.

The Gospel.

Jesus said unto his disciples, vers^ 5. unto ver. 16.

John 16.

(S.) The fifth Sunday after Easter.

1. B. of Edw. 6. O how amiable are thy dwellings etc. Psalm. 84.

Glory be to the Father, etc. As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

LOrd from whom all good things do come, grant us thy humble servants, that by
thy holy Inspiration, we may think those things that be good, and by thy
merciful guiding may perform the same through our Lord Jesus Christ.

The Epistle.

See that ye be overs of the word, Jam. 1. verse 22. unto the end.

The Gospel.

Uerily, verily I say unto you. Joh. 16. verse 23. unto the end.

(T.) The Ascension day.

1. B. of Edw. 6 Proper Psalms and Lessons at Mattens.

8. The second Lesson, John 14. unto the end. Psalm 15. 21.

O Clap your hands etc. Psalm. 47.

Glory be to the Father etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

GRant we beseech thee almighty God, that ^^ke as we do believe thy on^y
begotten son our Lord to have ascended into the ^^ave^s: so we may also in
heart and mind thither ascend, and with him continually dwell,

The Epistle.

In the former treatise Acts 1 verse 1. to verse 12.

The Gospel.

Jesus appeared unto the Mark 16. verse 14. unto the end.

1. B. of Edw. the 6. Proper Psalms and Lessons at Evensong.

24. The second Lesson Ephesians. 4. unto the end. Psalm 68. 148

The Sunday after Ascension day.

1. B. of Edw. 6. The Lord is King etc Psalm 93.

Glory be to the father etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

O God the King of glory, which have exalted thine only son Jesus Christ with
great triumph into thy kingdom in heaven: We beseech thee leave us not
comfortless, but send to us thine holy ghost to comfort us, and exalt us unto
the same place whither our Savior Christ, is gone before, who lives and
^eigneth, etc.

The Epistle.

The end of all things is at hand. 1 Pet. 4. verse 7. unto verse 12.

The Gospel.

When the comforter is come, John 15. verse 26. and Chap. 26 end in ver. 4.

(V.) Whit-Sunday

1. B. of Edw. 6. Proper Psalms and Lessons at Mattens.

48. The second Lesson, Act. 10. Then Peter opened his mouth, unto the end.
Psalm 67. 145.

Rejoice in the Lord O ye Righteous etc. Psalm. 33.

Glory be to the Father etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

GOD which as upon this day have taught the hearts of thy faithful people, by
the sending to them the light of thy holy spirit: grant us by the same spirit
to have a tight judgment in all things, and evermore to rejoice in his holy
comfort, through the merits of Christ Jesu our Savior, who lives and reigns
with thee in the unity of the same spirit, one God, world without end, Amen.

The Epistle.

When the fifty days were come to an end, Acts 2. verse 1. unto ver. 12.

The Gospel.

Jesus said unto his disciples, John 14. verse 15. unto the end.

1. B. Edw. 6. Proper Psalms and Lessons at Evensong.

Psalm 104. The second Lesson Acts 19. It fortuned when Apollo went to Corinth,
unto After these things. 145.

Monday in Whitsun-week.

1 B. of Edw. 6. O be joyful in the Lord all ye lands, Psalm. 100.

Glory be to the Father etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

God which etc. As upon Whitsunday.

The Epistle.

Then Peter opened his mouth, Acts 10. verse 34. unto the end.

The Gospel.

So God loved the world, John 3. verse 16. unto verse 22.

Tuesday after Whitsunday.

1 B. of Edw. 6. My song shall be of mercy etc. Psalm. 101.

Glory be to the Father etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

God which have etc. (As upon Whitsunday.)

The Epistle.

When the Apostles which Acts 8. verse 14. unto ver. 18.

The Gospel.

Uerily, verily I say unto you, John 10. verse 1. unto ver. 11.

Trinity Sunday.

1. B. of Edward 6. At Mattens

The first Lesson Genesis 18. unto the end.

The second Lesson Mat. 3. unto the end.

God be merciful unto us and bless us etc. Psalm. 67.

Glory be to the Father etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

ALmighty and everlasting God, which have given unto us thy servants grace by
the confession of a true faith, to acknowledge the glory of the eternal
Trinity, and in the power of the divine Majesty to worship the Unity: We
beseech thee, that through the steadfastness of this faith, we may evermore be
defended from all adversity, which live and re^gnest one God, world without
end. Amen.

The Epistle.

After this he looked, and behold. Apoc. 4. verse. 1. unto the end.

The Gospel.

There was a man of the John. 3. verse 1. unto ver. 16.

The first Sunday after Trinity.

1 B. of Edw. 6. Blessed are those that are undefiled in the way etc. Psalm. 119.

Glory be to the Father etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

GOD the strength of all them that trust in thee, mercifully accept our
prayers: And because the weakness of our mortal nature can do no good thing
without thee, grant us the help of thy grace, that in keeping of thy
commandments, we may please thee both in will and deed, through Jesus Christ
our Lord.

The Epistle.

Dearly beloved, let us love one another, 1 John 4. 5, 6. ver. 7. unto the end.

The Gospel.

There was a certain rich man Luke 16. verse 19. unto the end.

The second Sunday after Trinity.

1 B. of Edw. 6. Where with shall a young man cleanse his way etc. Psalm. 119.

Glory be to the Father etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

LOrd, make us to have a perpetual fear and love of thy holy name, for thou
never failest to help and govern them, whom thou do bring up in thy steadfast
love. Grant this, etc.

The Epistle.

Marvel not, my brethren, 1 John 3. verse 13. unto the end.

The Gospel.

A certain man ordained Luke 14. verse 16. unto ver. 25.

The third Sunday after Trinity.

1 B of Edw. 6. O do well unto thy servant etc. Psalm 119.

Glory be to the Father etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

LOrd, we beseech thee mercifully to hear us, and unto whom thou have given an
hearty desire to pray, grant that by thy mighty aid we may be defended, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.

Submit your selves every man 1 Pet. 5. verse 5. unto ver. 12.

The Gospel.

Then resorted unto him Luke 15. verse 1. unto verse 11.

The fourth Sunday after Trinity.

1. B. of Edw. 6. My soul cleaves to the dust etc. Psalm. 119.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

As it was in the beginning, etc.

The Collect.

GOd the protector of all that trust in thee, without whom nothing is strong,
nothing is holy: increase and multiply upon us thy mercy, that thou being our
ruler and guide, we may so pass through things temporal, that we finally lose
not the things eternal: grant this heavenly father, for Jesus Christ's sake our
Lord.

The Epistle.

I suppose that the afflictions Romans 8. verse 18. unto verse 24.

The Gospel.

Be ye merciful, as your father Luke 6. verse. 36. unto verse 43.

The fifth sunday after Trinity.

1 B. of Edw. 6. Teach me O Lord the way of thy statutes etc. Psalm. 119.

Glory be to the Father etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

GRant Lord we beseech thee; that the course of this world may be so peaceably
ordered by thy governance, that thy congregation may joyfully serve thee in all
godly quietness, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.

Be you all of one mind and of one heart, 1 Pet. 3. verse 8. unto verse 15.

The Gospel.

It came to pass, Luke 5. verse 1. unto ver. 12.

The sixth Sunday after Trinity.

1 B. of Edw. 6. Let thy loving mercy come also unto me O Lord etc. Psalm. 119.
Glory be to the Father. etc. As it was in the beginning, etc.

The Collect.

GOd which have prepared to them that love thee, such good things as pass all
man's understanding: power into our hearts such love toward thee, that we loving
thee in all things, may obtain thy promises, which exceed all that we can
desire, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.

Know ye not, that all we Romans 6. verse 3. unto verse 12.

The Gospel.

Jesus said unto his disciples, Mat. 5. verse 20 unto verse 27.

The seventh Sunday after Trinity.

1 B. of Edw. 6. O think upon thy servant as concerning thy word etc. Psalm. 119.

Glory be to the Father etc.

As it was in the Beginning, etc.

The Collect.

LOrd of all power and might, which ar^ the author and giver of all good
things, graff in our hearts the love of thy name, increase in us true religion,
nourish us with all goodness, and of thy great mercy keep us in the same,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.

I speak grossly, because Romans 6. verse 19. unto the end.

The Gospel.

In those days, Mark 8. verse 1. unto ver. 10.

The eight Sunday after Trinity.

1 B. of Edw. 6. Thou art my portion O Lord etc. Psalm. 119.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

GOd whose providence is never deceived, we humbly beseech thee that thou will
put away from us all hurtful things, and give those things which be profitable
for us, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.

Brethren, we are debtors Romans 8. verse 12. unto verse 18.

The Gospel.

Beware of false Prophets Matthew. 7. verse 15. unto ver. 22.

The ninth Sundy after Trinity.

1 B. of Edw. 6. O Lord thou have dealt graciously with thy servant, Psalm. 119.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

GRant to us, Lord, we beseech thee, the spirit to think and do always such
things as be rightful, that we which cannot be without thee, may by thee be
able to live according to thy will, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.

Brethren, I would not that 1 Cor. 10. verse 1. unto verse 14.

The Gospel.

Jesus said unto his disciples Luke 16. verse 1. unto verse 10.

The tenth Sunday after Trinity.

1 B. of Edw. 6. Thy hands have made and fashioned me etc. Psalm. 119.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

As it was in the beginning, etc.

The Collect.

LEt thy merciful enrs, O Lord, be open to the prayers of thy humble servants,
and that they may obtain their petitions, make them to ask such things as
shall please thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.

Concering spiritual things 1 Cor. 12. verse 1. unto verse 12.

The Gospel.

And when he was come near Luke 19. verse 41. unto verse 47.

The eleventh Sunday after Trinity.

1 B. of Edw. 6. My soul has longed for thy salvation etc. Psalm. 119.

Glory be to the Father etc.

As it was in the beginning, etc.

The Collect.

GOd which declarest thy Almighty power most chiefly in showing mercy and
pity, give unto us abundantly thy grace, that we running to thy promises, may
be made partakers of thy heavenly treasure, through Jesu Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.

Brethren, as pertaining to the Gospel 1. Cor. 15. ver. 1 unto ver. 12.

The Gospel.

Christ told this parable Luke 18. verse 9. unto verse 15.

The twelfth sunday after Trinity.

1 B. of Edw. 6. O Lord thy word endures for ever in heaven, etc. Psalm. 119.

Glory be to the Father etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

ALmighty and everlasting God, which art always more ready to hear then we to
pray, and are wont to give more then either we desire or deserve: power down
upon us the abundance of thy mercy, forgiving us those things whereof our
conscience is afraid, and giving unto us that, that our prayer dare not presume
to ask, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.

Such trust have we through 2 Cor. 3. verse 4. unto verse 10.

The Gospel.

Jesus departed Mark 7. verse 31. unto the end.

The thirteenth Sunday after Trinity.

1. B. of Edw. 6. Lord what love have I unto thy Law? etc. Psalm. 119.

Glory to be the Father etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

ALmighty and merciful God, of whose only gift it comes that thy faithful
people do unto thee true and laudable service: grant we beseech thee, that we
may so run to thy heavenly promises, that we fail not finally to attain the
same, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.

To Abraham and his seed Gal. 3. ver. 16. unto ver. 23.

The Gospel.

Happy are the eyes which Luke 10. ver. 23. unto ver. 38.

The fourteenth Sunday after Trinity.

1 B. of Edw. 6. Thy word is a Lanthorn unto my feet etc. Psalm. 119.

Glory be to the Father etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

ALmighty and everlasting God, give unto us the increase of faith, hope, and
charity, and that we may obtain that which thou do promise, make us to love
that which thou do command, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.

I say walk in the Spirit, Gal. 5. verse 16. unto ver. 25.

The Gospel.

And it chanced as Jesus went Luke 17. verse 11. unto verse 20.

The fifteenth Sunday after Trinity.

1. B. of Edw. 6. I hate them that imagine evil things, etc. Psalm. 119.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

KEep we beseech thee. O Lord, thy Church with thy perpetual mercy. And because
the frailty of man without thee cannot but fall, keep us ever by thy help, and
lead us to all things profitable to our salvation, through Jesus Christ our
Lord Amen.

The Epistle

Ye see how large a letter Gal. 6. verse 11. unto the end.

The Gospel.

No man can serve two Matters: Mat. 6. verse 24. unto the end.

The sixteenth sunday after Trinity.

1 B. of Edw. 6. I deal with the thing that is lawful and right etc. Psalm. 119.

Glory be to the Father etc.

As it was in the beginning, etc.

The Collect.

LOrd we beseech thee, let thy continual pity cleanse and defend thy
congregation. And because it cannot continue in safety without thy succor,
preserve it evermore by thy help and goodness, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.

I desire that you faint not Ephesians. 4. verse. 13. unto the end.

The Gospel.

And it fortuned that Jesus Luke 7. verse 11. to verse 18.

The seventeenth Sunday after Trinity.

1. B. of Edw. 6. Thy testimonies are Wonderful etc. Psalm. 119.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

LOrd, we pray thee that thy grace may always prevent and follow us, and make us
continually to be given to all good works, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.

I (which am a prisoner of the Lords) Ephesians. 4. verse 1. unto ver. 7.

The Gospel.

It chanced that Jesus went Luke 14: verse 1. unto ver. 12.

The eighteenth Sunday after Trinity.

1. B. of Edw. 6. Righteous art thou O Lord etc. Psalm. 119.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

As it was in the beginning, etc.

The Collect.

LOrd we beseech thee grant thy people grace to avoid the infections of the
Devil, and with pure heart and mind to follow thee the only God, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.

I thank my God always 1 Cor. 1. verse 4. unto verse 9.

The Gospel.

When the Pharisees had Mat. 22. verse 34. unto the end.

The ninteenth Sunday after Trinity.

1. B. of Edw. 6. I call with my whole heart, hear me, O Lord etc. Psalm. 119.

Glory be to the Father etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

O God, forasmuch as without thee we are not able to please thee: Grant that
the working of thy mercy, may in all things direct and rule our hearts, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.

This I say and testify through Ephesians. 4. verse 17. unto the end.

The Gospel.

Jesus entered into a shi^, Matthew. 9. verse 1. unto ver. 9.

The twentieth Sunday after Trinity.

1. B. of Edw. 6. O consider mine adversity, and deliver me, etc. Psalm. 119.

Glory be to the Father etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

ALmighty and merciful God, of thy bountiful goodness keep us from all things
that may hurt us: that we being ready both in body and soul, may with free
hearts accomplish those things that thou woulost have done, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.

Take heed therefore how ye walk Ephesians. 5. verse 15. unto ver. 22.

The Gospel.

Jesus said unto his disciples Mat. 22. verse 1. unto ver. 15.

The xxi. Sunday after Trinity.

1 B. of Edw. 6. Princes have persecuted me without a cause, etc. Psalm. 119.

Glory be to the Father etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

GRant we beseech thee merciful Lord to thy faithful people pardou and peace,
that they may be cleansed from all their sins, and serve thee with a quiet
mind, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.

My brethren, be strong through Ephesians. 6. verse 10. unto ver. 21.

The Gospel.

There was a certain ruler John 4. verse 16. unto the end.

The xxii Sunday after Trinity.

1 B. of Edw. 6. Let my complaint come before thee etc. Psalm. 119.

Glory be to the Father etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

LOrd we beseech thee to keep thy household the Church in continual godliness,
that through thy protection it may be free from all adversities, and devoutly
given to serve thee in good works, to the glory of thy name, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.

I thank my God with all Phil. 1. verse 3. unto verse 12.

The Gospel.

Peter said unto Jesus, Matthew. 18. verse 21. unto the end.

The xxiii Sunday after Trinity.

1 B. of Edw. 6. If the Lord himself had not been on our side etc. Psalm. 123.

Glory be to the Father etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

GOD our refuge and strength, which are the author of all goodness, be ready
to hear the devout prayers of the Church: and grant that those things which we
ask faithfully, we may obtain effectually, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.

Brethren, be followers together Phil. 3. verse 17. unto the end.

The Gospel.

Then the Pharisees went out, Mat. 22. verse 15. unto verse 23.

The xxiiii Sunday after Trinity.

1 B. of Edw. 6. They that put their trust in the Lord etc. Psalm. 125.

Glory be to the Father etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

LOrd, we beseech thee assoil thy people from their offenses, that through thy
bountiful goodness we may be delivered from the bands of all those sins, which
by our frailty we have committed: Grant this etc.

The Epistle.

We give thanks to God Colos. 1. verse 3. unto ver. 13.

The Gospel.

While Jesus spoke unto Math. 9. verse 18. unto ver. 27.

The xxv. Sunday after Trinity.

1. B. of Edw. 6. Except the Lord build the house etc. Psalm. 127.

Glory be to the Father etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

STir up we beseech thee, O Lord, the wills of thy faithful people: that they
plenteously bringing forth the fruit of good works, may of thee be plenteously
rewarded, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Epistle.

Behold, the time comes Jer. 23. verse 3. unto ver. 9.

The Gospel.

When Jesus lift up his eyes John 6. verse 5. unto ver. 15.

Omitted in the 1 B. of Edw. 6.

If there be any more Sundays before Advent Sunday, to supply the same, shall
be taken the service of some of those Sundays that were omitted between the
Epiphany and Septuagesima.

(W.) Saint Andrews day.

1 B. of Edw. 6. Many times have they fought against me etc. Psalm. 129.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

As it was in the beginning, etc.

The Collect.

ALmighty God, which did give such grace unto thy holy apostle saint Andrew,
that he readily obeyed the calling of thy sou Jesus Christ, and followed him
without delay: grant unto us all, that we being called by thy holy word, may
forthwith give over our selves obediently to follow thy holy commandments,
through the same Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.

If thou knowledge with thy Romans 10. verse 9. unto the end.

The Gospel.

As Jesus walked by the Matthew. 4. verse 18. unto verse 23.

Saint Thomas the Apostle.

1 B. of Edw. 6. Blessed are all they that fear the Lord etc. Psalm. 128.

Glory be to the father etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

ALmighty and everlasting God, which for the more confirmation of the faith
did suffer the holy Apostle Thomas to be doubtful in thy sons resurrection:
grant us so perfectly, and without all doubt to believe in thy son Jesus
Christ, that our faith in thy sight never be reproved: hear us, O Lord, through
the same Jesus Christ, to whom with thee and the holy Ghost be all honor. etc.

The Epistle.

Now ye are not strangers Ephesians. 2. verse 19. unto the end.

The Gospel.

Thomas one of the twelve, John 20. verse 24. unto the end.

(X) The conversion of St. Paul.

1. B. of Edw. 6. at Mattens.

The second Lesson Acts 22, unto they heard him.

I will give thanks unto thee O Lord etc. Psalm. 138.

Glory be to the Father etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

GOd which have taught all the world through the preaching of thy blessed
Apostle saint Paul: grant we beseech thee, that we which have his wonderful
conversion in remembrance, may follow and fulfill thy holy doctrine that he
taught, through Jesu Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.

And Saul yet breathing out Act. 9. verse 1 unto ver. 25.

The Gospel.

Peter answered and said unto Matthew. 19. verse 24. unto the end.

1. B. of Edw. the 6. at Evensong.

The second Lesson Acts 26. unto the end.

(Y.) The purification of Saint Mary the Virgin.

1 B. of Edw. 6. Behold now praise the Lord etc. Psalm. 134.

Glory be to the Father etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

ALmighty and everlasting God, we humbly beseech thy majesty, that as thy only
begotten son was this day presented in the temple in substance of our flesh: So
grant that we may be presented unto thee with pure and clear minds, by Jesus
Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.

The same that is appointed for the Sunday.

The Gospel.

When the time of Luke 2. verse 22. unto verse 27.

Saint Matthias day.

1. B. of Edw. 6. Deliver me O Lord from the evil man etc. Psalm. 140.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

As it was in the beginning, etc.

The Collect.

ALmighty God, which in the place of the traitor Judas, bidst choose thy
faithful servant Matthias to be of the number of the twelve Apostles: grant
that thy Church being always preserved from false Apostles, may be ordered and
guided by faithful and true Pastors, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.

In those days Peter. Act 1. verse 15. unto the end.

The Gospel.

In that time Jesus answered Mat. 11: verse 25 unto the end.

(Z.) Annuntiation of the Virgin Mary.

1 B. of Edw. 6. Lord I am not high minded etc. Psalm. 131.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

We beseech thee Lord power thy grace into our hearts, that as we have known
Christ thy sons incarnation by the message of an angel: so by his cross and
passion we may be brought unto the glory of his resurrection, through the same
Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.

God spoke once again unto Ahaz, Isai. 7. verse 10. unto ver. 16.

The Gospel.

And in the sixth month Luke 1. verse 26. unto ver. 39.

Saint Marks day.

1 B. of Edw. 6. Lord I call upon 'thee, have thee unto me etc. Psalm. 141.

Glory be to the Father etc.

As it was in the beginning, etc.

The Collect.

ALmighty God, which have instructed thy holy Church with the heavenly doctrine
of thy Evangelist St. Mark, give us grace that we be not like children carried
away with every blast of vain doctrine: but firmly to be established in the
truth of the holy Gospel, through Jesus Christ. etc.

The Epistle.

Unto every one of us is given grace, Ephesians. 5. verse 4. unto ver. 17.

The Gospel.

I am the true vine, John 15. verse 1. to verse 12.

(A.) Saint Philip and James.

1. B. of Edw. 6. at Mattens.

The second Lesson Acts 8. unto when the Apostles.

Behold how good and joyful a thing it is etc. Psalm. 133.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

ALmighty God, whom truly to know is everlasting life: grant us perfectly to
know thy son Jesus Christ, to be the way, the truth and the life, as thou vast
taught Saint Philip and other apostles, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.

James the servant of God, James 1. verse 1. unto ver. 13.

The Gospel.

And Jesus said unto his disciples, Joh. 14 ver. 1. unto ver. 15.

Saint Barnabas Apostle.

1 B. of Edw. 6. at Mattens

The second Lesson Acts 14. unto the end.

I cried unto the Lord with my voice etc. Psalm. 142.

Glory be to the Father etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

LOrd almighty, which have endued thy holy Apostle Barnabas with singular gifts
of thy holy Ghost, let us not be destitute of thy manifold gifts, nor yet of
grace to use them always to thy honor and glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.

Tidings of these things Acts 11. verse 22. unto the end.

The Gospel.

This is my commandment, John 15. ver. 12. unto ver. 17.

1. B. of Edw. 6. At Evensong.

The second Lesson, Acts 15. unto after certain days.

Saint John Baptist.

1 B. of Edw. 6. Proper Lessons at Mattens.

The first Lesson Malach. 3. unto the end.

The second Lesson Mat. 3. unto the end.

Hear my Prayer O Lord etc. Psalm. 43.

Glory be to the Father etc.

As it was in the beginning, etc.

The Collect.

ALmighty God, by whose providence thy servant John was Baptist wonderfully:
born, and sent to prepare the way of thy son our Savior, by preaching of
^enance: make us so to follow his doctrine and holy life, that we may truly
repent, according to his preaching, and after his example constantly speak the
truth, boldly revuke vice, and patiently suffer for the truths sake: through
Jesus Christ etc.

The Epistle.

Be of good cheer my people, Isai. 40. verse 1. unto ver. 12.

The Gospel.

Elizabeth's time came Luke 1. verse 57. unto the end.

1 B. of Edw. the 6. proper Lessons at Even-song.

The first Lesson Malach. 3. unto the end.

The second Lesson, Mat. 14. unto when Jesus heard.

(B.) St. Peter's day.

1. B. of Edw. 6. At Mattens.

The second Lesson Acts 3. unto the end. Blessed be the Lord my strength etc.
Psalm. 144.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

ALmighty God, which by thy son Jesus Christ have given to thy Apostle St.
Peter many excellent gifts, and commandedst him earnestly to feed thy flock:
make we beseech thee all Bishops and pastors diligently to preach thy holy
word, and the people obediently to follow the same, that they may receive the
crown of everlasting glory through Jesu Christ our Lord.

The Epistle

At the same time, Herod the Acts 12. verse 1. unto verse 12.

The Gospel.

When Jesus came into the Mat. 16. verse 13. unto verse 20.

1. B. of Edw. At Evensong. The second Lesson Acts 3.

(C.) Saint Mary Magdalene.

Praise the Lord O my soul etc. Psalm. 146.

Glory be to the Father etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

MErciful father, give us grace that we never presume to sin through example of
any creature, but if it shall chance us at any time to offend thy divine
Majesty: that then we may truly repent and lament the same, after the example
of Mary Magdalene, and by lively faith obtain remission of all our sins through
the only merits of thy son our Savior Christ.

The Epistle.

Whosoever finds an honest faithful woman, etc. Prove. 31.

The Gospel.

And one of the Pharisees desired Jesus etc. Luke 7. ver. 36. unto the end.

St. James the Apostle.

1. B. of Edw. 6. O praise the Lord of heaven Psalm. 148.

Glory be to the Father etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

GRant O merciful God, that as thy holy Apostle Saint James, leaving his Father
and all that he had, without delay was obedient unto the calling of thy son
Jesus Christ, and followed him: So we forsaking all worloly and carnal
affections may be evermore ready to follow thy commandments, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.

In those days came Acts 11. verse 26. unto ver. 3. of chap. 12.

The Gospel.

Then came to him the mother Mat. 12. verse 20. unto verse 29.

Saint Bartholomew the Apostle.

1 B. of Edw. 6. Not unto us O Lord, not unto us etc. Psalm 115.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

As it was in the beginning, etc.

The Collect.

O Almighty and everlasting God, which have given grace to thine Apostle
Bartholomew truly to believe and to preach thy word: grant we beseech thee,
unto thy Church, both to love that he believed, and to preach that he taught,
through Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.

By the hands of the Apostles Acts 5. verse 12. unto ver. 17.

The Gospel.

And there was a strife among them, Luke 22. verse 24 unto ver. 31

Saint Matthew apostle,

1. B. of Edw. 6. O praise the Lord all ye heathen etc. Psalm. 117.

Glory be to the Father etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

ALmighty god, which by thy blessed son did call Matthew from the receipt of
custom, to be an apostle and Evangelist: Grant us grace to forsake all covetous
desires and inordinate love of riches, and to follow thy said son Jesus Christ,
who lives and reigns, etc.

The Epistle.

Sering that we have such an office, 2 Cor. 4. verse 1. unto verse 7.

The Gospel.

And as Jesus passed forth Mat 9. verse 9. unto ver. 14.

Saint Michael and all angels.

1 B. of Edw. 6. Praise the Lord ye servants etc. Psalm. 113.

Glory be to the Father etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

Everlasting God, which have ordained and constituted the services of all
angels and men in a wonderful order: mercifully grant, that they which always do
thee service in heaven; may by thy appointment, succor and defend us in earth,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.

There was a great battle in heaven, Apoc. 12. verse 7. unto ver. 13.

The Gospel.

At the same time came Matthew. 18. verse 1. unto ver. 11.

Saint Luke Evangelist.

1 B. of Edw 6. By the waters of Babylon etc. Psalm. 137.

Glory be to the Father etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

ALmighty God, which calledst Luke the Phisycian whose praise is in the Gospel,
to be a Phisycian of the soul: it may please thee by the wholesome medicines of
his doctrine, to heal all the diseases of our souls, through thy son Jesus
Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.

Watch thou in all things 2 Timothy 4. verse 5. unto ver. 16.

The Gospel.

The Lord appointed other Luke 10 verse 1. unto verse 7.

Simon and Jude Apostles.

1 B. of Edw. 6. O praise Gd in his holiness etc. Psalm. 150.

Glory be to the Father etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

ALmighty God, which have builded thy congregation upon the fundation of the
Apostles and Prophets, Jesu Christ himself being the head corner stone: grant
us so to be joined together in unity of spirit by their doctrine, that we may
be made an holy temple acceptable to thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Epistle.

Judas the servant of Jud. verse 1. unto ver. 9.

The Gospel.

This command I you John xv. verse 17. unto the end.

All Saints.

1 B. of Edw. 6t. Proper Lessons at Mattens.

The first Lesson Sapi. 3. unto, Blessed rather is the.

The second Lesson Heb. 11. ver. 12. unto If ye endure.

O sing unto the Lord a new Song etc. Psalm. 118.

Glory be to the Father etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

A Amighty God, which have knit together thy elect in one Communion and
fellowship in the mystical body of thy son Christ our Lord: grant us grace so
to follow thy holy saints in all virtuous and godly living, that we may come to
those unspeakable joys, which thou have prepared for them that unfeinedly love
thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Behold, I John saw Apoc. 7. verse. 2. unto verse 13.

The Gospel.

Jesus seeing the people etc. Matthew. 1. verse 1. unto ver. 13.

1 B. of Edw. 6.

Proper Lessons at Evensong.

The first Lesson Sapi. 5. unto, his jealousy also.

The second Lesson, Apoc. 19. unto, And Jesus saw an Angel stand.

Annotations upon CHAP. V.
(A.) The Introit, what. (B.) Epistles and Gospels very necessary, why Epistles
when all are not so. The reason, and defense of that denomination. (C.) Advent,
what, and why observed. (D.) Christmas day, Its antiquity, variously observed
in the Primitive times. The Precise day dubious, and unnecessary to be known.
Calvin passionately for it. Observed by the Synod of Dort and the Belgic
Church. A main argument for it (E.) Two Communions anciently in one fore-noon.
(F.) Why the Feasts of St. Stephen, St. John, and Innocents are celebrated near
Christmas day. (G.) Antiquity of the Circumcision feast. (H.) Epiphany what,
Ancient. (I.) Ashwednesday and Lent, the original and various observation of
them (K.) Palm Sunday how observed. (L.) The holy week why so called. (M.)
Maunday Thursday, a day of great note. (N.) Good Friday anciently a very high
day, a day of general Absolution. (O.) Easter-Eve the great day of Baptising
competents. watching the Sepulcher whence derived. (P.) Easter Day of
Apostolical institution. (Q.) Easter-Munday, and Easter-Tuesday very anciently
observed. (R.) Dominica in Albis. (S.) Rogation days why instituted. (T.)
Ascension day why rarely mentioned in Antiquity. Pentecost, what. Synods
anciently summoned about this time. (V.) Whitsunday why so called, a private
conjecture. (W.) St. Andrews day why the first festival. (X.) Conversion of St.
Paul why not observed. Paul and Peter one entire festival and anciently and of
late years. (Y.) The Purification of Mary anciently how called, why
Candlemass-day (Z) The Annuntiation of the virgin Mary how Ancient. (A) St.
Philip and Jacob, and All Saints. (B.) St. Peter has no single day. (C.) The
Festival of Mary Magdalen why discontinued.

THE Introites.] The Introites were certain Psalms, appointed for certain
days, and were at first devised as decent employments for the people, Altar.
They did somewhat resemble those Psalms of degrees appointed in the service of
the Temple.

Epistles and Gospels.] The Epistles and Gospels need no advocate to plead for
them, it not being imaginable that Christians assembling for sacred exercises,
Jews should have the Law and the Prophets read in their Synagogues every
Sabbath Day, as it is clear they had, and that the Christians should debar
themselves of having the Epistles and Gospels, (the great evidences of their
faith) rehearsed in their Assembly places, in their Churches, Having had
occasion before to deliver the Practice of the Primitive Church in this
particular, and to evidence that those leading Fathers did not, (...) at
peradventure, and casually read these Lessons, but were studious to fit and
dispose them to the concernment of every Festival, I shall not, actum agere,
but only, add that without those Lessons the Festivals would signify little,
for what can more illustrate the design of the holy day, then the recital of
the history upon which it is founded? so that these Canonical Narratives may
pass for the prime office of every day, for which they are set apart. But some
will say, why Epistles, when several of them are taken out of the Acts, as that
for St. Stevens day, and several others, some out of the Revelation, as that
for Innocents day, yea, some out of the old Testament, as that for
Ashwednesday, out of ^eremie and Isaiah, others. To this it is answered, that
(though it were more proper, in my opinion, to call them Lessons yet) since
Denomination usually is derived from the major part; the word Epistle is no
unapt Appellation for them, the paucity of the rest being considered.
Deplorable is that cause which has nothing but a Logomachy and word-war to
defend it: had this word-catcher Clemens Epist. ad Corinth.
searched into Antiquity he might have seen Clemens thus bespeaking the
Corinthi^ns (...); Take into your hands the Epistle of Blessed Paul ^he
Apostle, what writes he first to you, in the beginning of his Gospel? whence
evident it is that anciently the word Gospel denoted the whole system of the
new Testament which werestrain now to the noblest part of it. And it being so,
we shall the less weigh this objection, but pass on to discourse what has
come to our cognizance, as most observable, relating to those days severally
taken, not intending to speak to all, but to such only, as being of most
remark, have afforded the most plentiful matter for memorialls.

First Sunday in Advent.] The first initiation of our Savior into the office
of a Mediator was his manifestation in the flesh, and incarnation; a the
fullness of time was come. Gal. 4. 4. And the more remote from this time, the
more obscure the prophesies, the nearer the more explicit. First, Genesis 3. the
seed of the woman shall break the serpents head, go on to Abraham, Genesis 12. 3.
In thy seed (declaring specificatively in whose) shall all the nations of the
earth be blessed. Go on to David, of the fruit of thy body will I set upon thy
Throne, Psalm. 132. 11. Proceed to Esaias, the prophecy is more apodeictical, more
demonstrative, Behold a Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son, and she shall call
his name Emanuel. C. 7. v. 14. Go nearer to the approaching of this time, still
more Ecce's, Behold thou shall conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a Son, and
thou shall call his name Jesus. Luke 1. 31. And the Virgin Mary to her self.
Behold from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed, ib. v. 48. All
this to keep up the hope of the long looked for Theophany, and the Messiah his
appearance in the flesh. God himself having thus led in the Nativity of our
Savior, with such a train of anteceding predictions to assure man that he
would come; the Christian Church thought it also expedient, that the day of
commemoration, that he is come, should be somewhat more then ordinarily
attended. And upon this very account she has assigned to this great festival
the four Sundays preceding, (the first beginning always next before, or
after, or on St. Andrews day) which are as it were one Christmas Eve, or, as so
many heralds to proclaim the approaching of his feast, and are therefore called
Advent Sundays as fore-speaking Christ's birthday; and therefore the ancient
Author of the Nativity Sermon ascribed to Cyprian, begins it with, Adest diu
expectata Nativitas i. e. the long-looked for Nativity which we expected all
this time of Advent, is come at length. And upon this account proper Lessons
taken out of the Evangelist, or Gospel-Prophet Esaias, agreeable to their design
are allotted them.

Christmas day. This Anniversary solemnity cannot be denied to be as old
Gregory Nazianzens time, he and his great intimate St. Rasil, having each an
excellent Homily upon it, (...), says one, This celebrity is called Gods
appearance or his Nativity. (...), says the other. We name this our Festival
the Theophany. Nor is there in either Homily one syllable inferring the either
usage or institution of that day to have commenced then, wherefore we may
presume it was existant long before, indeed Nicephorus sadly tells us so,
relating no less then twenty thousand Christians massacred by fire on that
day, being assembled at Church under the Dioclesian persecution. A matter not
incredible, for if it be true, as little doubt is to be made of it, what Gildas
reports of us Britains, that after that Persecution ceased, the Christians
began again to repair their Churches and celebrated Festivals, Why should not
this great day make one? what rational argument can be opposed to dissuade us
that we should not think it of as long duration as any other festival, (the
Lords day excepted) whatsoever, considering that even Christianity it self
resulteth from it. In the determination of the precise and true day, Antiquity
it self has been to seek, as well as modern times. Stromat. l. 1.
Clemens Alexandrinus, who flourished about the end of the second Century,
says, that (...), the most curious inquisitors after the year and day of
Christ's Nativity have fixed it, some, on the 25. of the month of Pachon, (our
May,) and some on the 25. of Pharmouthi, (our April.) The Cassian. Collat. l.
1. c. 11.
Churches of Egypt observed it constantly upon the 6. of January, celebrating
both it, and his Baptism on the same day, which they called the Epiphany. The
Asiatick Grecians and Syrians turned over his Baptism to another day, retaining
still the 6. of January for his Nativity. The Church of Rome, pretending to a
more perfect information from the Censual Rolls of Augustus Caesar, kept close
to the 25. of December: from thence it was first transported to Antioch, as is
evident from St. Chrysostomes Homily preached there, upon that day, where he
declares the darkness of incertainty wherein those Christians were in before,
and from whence they were enlightened to the notion of the true day. Not long
after, either convinced that this was the very day of Christ's Nativity, or that
none truer could be assigned, it became about Anno 500. the general observation
of the Catholic Church. Since that, and near home to our times an opinion has
possessed some very learned men, that our Savior was born in September, in such
variety of judgments it is not safe dogmatically to determine one way, or the
other. Augustine.
Nihil opusest ut ea cum discrimine definiantur, quae absque crimine
nesciuntur. What necessity is there of positively defining that, whereof it is
no fault to be ignorant. And the best is, there is nothing in this particular
cogent to it. The exact notion of the day precise, is no concernment of the
Duty, which consists not in observing the day, but a day. God stands not upon
punctilio's with man, no, not in ceremonials of his own designation, wherein he
dispenses with the Churches liberty to vary, necessity or just occasion
inviting. The celebration of the blessed Eucharist is, by universal usage,
mis-timed from its first institution, now in the morning, then at night. So is
the Lord's Day, beginning in the Apostles times at the Evening preceding, with
us at one in the morning: why may not then the memorial of our Saviors
Nativity, be celebrated on a day varying from its true original, especially
considering that it is not yet infallibly discovered which it is? And if so,
why may we not, conforming to the practice of the Catholic Church, observe the
25. of December as our Church enjoyneth? To stand upon such niceties is but a
peevish kind of Devotion, mere superstition, and the next way to bring the
great mystery of our Saviors (...) and incarnation, first into contempt, and
next into oblivion.

And whereas we are upbraided with the practice of Reformed Churches, which
have discontinued the solemnization of this day; not to repeat what I have
instanced before out of the Churches of Helvetia, and Bohemia, out of Bucer,
and Zanchy, and to reach the very vitals of this objection, I must tell the
opponents, that for Geneva, the place so urged against us, Mr. Calvin himself
blusheth at her Reformation, and is so concerned, so moved with the Epist.
Hallero.
blemishes of it in this point, as he passionately apologizeth thus. Sancte
testari possum, me inscio, ac ne optante quidem, hanc rem fuisse transactum. I
can solemly protest, that the Abrogation of this festival was transacted,
without my knowledge, nay, against my wish. And again, Ex quo revocatus sum hoc
temperamentum quaesivi, ut Christi Natalis celebraretur vestro more. From the
very first of my return to this place, I endeavored this moderation, that
Christ's Birthday should be observed after your custom. If Calvin's judgment,
because single, will not be listened to, what say they to the very remarkable
practice of the Synod of Dort, for which in other relations they have so high a
friendship? Sessio. 36. Dec. 19.
Festum natalis Domini nostri Jesu Christi instabat, propter cujus
celebrationem actiones Synodi, per aliquot jam dies interrumpendae essent. The
Nativity of our Lord Jesus Christ was now at hand, in order to whose
celebration, the actions of the Synod were, for some few days, to be
interrupted: which was actually done, the Sesson being intermitted from Dec.
the 22. to the 28. as appears by the acts of that Synod. And lest it should
be thought this was done only to complement our British Divines, I shall
produce the warrant it self of its establishment from the very Can. 63.
Canons of that Church. Ecclesiae observabunt, praeter Diem Dominicum, etiam
diem Nativitatis Domini, Pascha item and Pentechosten, cum die insequente; Et
quoniam in plerisque urbibus, ac regionibus Belgiae insuper observantur festa
Circumcisionis, ac Ascensionis Christi; allaborabunt ministri, quibuscunque
locis id nondum est usu receptum, ut volente Magistratu, hac in part reliquis
accedant. The several Churches shall observe over and besides the Lord's Day,
the day also of Christ's Nativity, Easter also and Whitsunday with the day
following; And because in many places and Cities of Belgia, moreover the feasts
of Christ's Circumcision, and Ascersion, are celebrated also; The Minister shall
use his best endeavor, that the Magistrates consent first obtained, they, in
such places where these days are not yet received into use, would conform to
the practice of others. So this Canon, confirmed with the rest, by the
Synodical Act of Dort Anno 1619. confirmed I say, by a ratification
superinducted to a former establishment, as is evident by the Greek and Latin
edition of those Canons set forth by Jacobus Revius.

To be short, let our Adversaries be in their declamations against other
festivals, as obstreperous and loud as they please; such clamours we can both
hear, and pity: but when they de-cry with so much noise this grand Festival,
together with that of our Saviors Resurrection, and Ascension, and the descent
of the holy Ghost; to our Christian charity they stand obliged, if we do not
justly suspect, in good earnest, some design dangerous even to Christianity it
self, considering, that the main fundamentals of our faith have such direct and
immediate reference to those feasts, and that the yearly celebration of them, is
but a tacit Anniversary rehearsal of the chief Articles of our Creed.

At the second Communion.] Some festival days in the Primitive Church were of
higher repute then others. In the Greek Church the Nativity of Christ,
Epiphany, Easter, Ascension, and Pentecost, the Latin instead of the Epiphany,
advanced the passion day or good Friday. These days were called most commonly
by the Eastern Fathers X (...) The Christian Panegyries, as a note of
distinction from days of Lesser account, alluding to the custom of the Hea
then Greeks who called their Olympic, Isthmiack, Pythick and Nemean games,
(...), because the whole nation resorted to those solemnities, as at these
feasts, the whole Diocese did assemble, and this is the reason that in the
Homilies of the ancient Fathers and Bishops, who usually preached at their
Cathedrals on these days, the Church is so often said to be (...) thronged
with the concourse of the people. This confluence of the multitude being so
great when Christianity had once possessed whole nations, few Churches could
afford room convenient for so many to communicate at once; whereupon it was
directed, ut cum solemnior festivitas conventum populi numerosioris indixerit
quem simul recipere un a basilica non possit, sacrificii oblatio indubitanter
iteretur, That when some high Festival summoneth too many for one Church at
once to receive, then the celebration of the Sacrament to be without further
scruple repeated, whic practice continuing down to the reformation, and still
preserved in the first Liturgy of Edw. 6. was discreetly omitted in the second,
upon consideration that it was formerly the turn-key to let in the multitude of
Masses, so frequent in the Romish Church.

St. Stephen, St, John, St. Innocents.] Proclus Orat. 17.
(...), says Proclus upon St. Stephen. Here Is ons Festival upon the neck of
another, the servants honor attends his masters Birthday, and this is the
only account we have from Antiquity of his waiting upon Christ's Nativity in
his own solemnity. The constitutions called Apostolical, reckon St. Stephens in
the catalogue of holidays L. 8. c. 33.
(...). Let them cease from labor upon St. Stephans day, but when that his
Anniversary was to be celebrated, only Proclus informs us. As for St. John,
though there be no clear and express mention of his Festival in elder times,
yet considering that all the Apostles had their set days assigned, he is in
all reason to be supposed to have had his share of honor equal to the rest. As
for Innocents day, that Homily upon Matthew. 2. which if not Origens, is yet very
Ancient, speaks express, Horum and memoria semper ut dignum est in Ecclesia
celebratur secundum integrum ordinem sanctorum, ut primorum martyrum pro Domino
occisorum. The memory of the Innocents also is always, as fit it is,
celebrated in the Church, accoring to the order of the Saints, as of those who
were first slain for the Lord.

This juncto of Festivals are not here placed as evidences of the times of the
Death, or sufferings of those Persons. For if tradition fails not, St.
Stephen was stoned in August, and St. John died' on the feast of St. John
Baptist Rational. l. 7. c. 42.
Durandus, and from him other Ritualists, why these feasts rather then others
were ordered to accompany Christ's nativity, assigns this reason. There is,
says he, a threefold martyrdom; In will, and deed; In will, but not indeed; In
deed, but not in will. The first was undergone by St. Stephen, the second by St.
John, the third by the Innocents; And who fitter to attend our Savior then his
Martyrs? for if right-dear in the sight of the Lord is the death of all his
Saints, then most precious certainly to him must the death of them be, who not
only die in, but for him. This reason of Durandus is founded upon the
tradition, that St. John was miraculously preserved in a Chaldron of boiling
Oil, to which he was condemned at Rome: might I interpose mine own thoughts, I
should rather conceive that St. Stephen had the first place, because he was the
Proto-Martyr of Christianity, St. John the second, because his death falling
upon the Festival of another John, the Baptist, and reason good they should be
honored with days apart; no day could be assigned to this John more proper,
that he might be nigh his Master, he being the disciple whom Jesus loved. And
the Innocents might well pretend to the third, because as St. Cyprian says
Epist. l 4. Ep. 46.
Nativitas Domini a Martyriis Infantium statim caepit, the slaughter of the
Innocents was the first considerable consequent of his birth. Nor will I omit
what else seems a specious exposition upon the Original of these three. viz
that Martyrium, Amor, Innocentia, Martyrdom, Love, and Innocence are first to
be magnified as wherein Christ is most honored.

The feast of Circumcision.] I dare not affix any remote antiquity to this
holy day. The first mention of it under this title occurreth in Ivo
Carnot^nsis, who Bernard, and who has a Sermon upon it: under the name of the
Octave of Christ's nativity, we find it in Isidorus 4000. before. The reason
why it was not then observed was, as I conceive, because it fell upon the
Kalends of January, which were Solemnized among the Heathens with such
disorder, revellings, and profane appendants of Idolatry, that St. Chrysostom
called it (...) the Devils festival, and the sixth general Council absolutely
interdicted the observation of them. Trul. can. 62
(...), we decree that the Feast called the Calends, be utterly taken away from
the custom and society of the faithful.

The Epiphany.] This feast has several appellations amongst the Greek Fathers,
sometimes it is called (...), so Gregory Nazianzen, the day of sacred
illumination, this being in the Eastern Church, a day as signal for Baptism, as
Easter or Pentecost in the Western. Sometimes it is called (...). The
manifestations of God, so Horolog. Grac. upon the 6. of January place (...); it
is consest this word very often imports Christ's Birthday (...), Now is the
Festival of the Theophany, or Christ's nativity, says Nazianzen; yet sometimes
they are evidently distinguished, as in that apud Photium Tit. 7. de Jejun. c.
1.
imperial constitution (...) etc. The Nativity of Christ, and the Theophany
etc. are to be accounted for Holy Days. Most clear is that of Epiphanius Epiph
Cypr. Ep orat. in Ascen, Domini.
(...). The first festival is that of Christ's birth, the next is that of the
Theophany, where not only this feast is manifestly differenced from the
Nativity, but the feast of Circumcision, as I said before, remarkably excluded.
But of all the names most usual and most frequently applied to it is this of
Epiphany, which though the Egyptians, and such as were under the Patriarchate
of Alexandria communicated both to the Nativity and Baptism of Christ (possessed
with an opinion that he was baptized upon the Aniversary of his Birth) yet in
other places it past only current for the day of his Baptism; St. de
Baptismo. Christi.
Chrysostom puts a question to himself in these terms, (...); How comes it to
pass that not the day of Christ's Birth, but of his Baptism is called the
Epiphany? and he resolves it thus (...), because his Birth was obscure, but at
his Baptism he manifestly appeared to all men. The like has St. Comment. in
Ezech. l. 1.
Hierom Epiphaniorum Dies huc usque venerablils est, non (ut quidam putant)
natalis in carne, tunc enim absconditus est and non apparuit. The day of the
Epiphany is at this day venerable, I mean not Christ's Nativity (as some
suppose) for then he rather hid himself and appeared not.

By what has been already said, the day is without all question of no late
edition. Now for the grounds upon which the solemuity is founded Orat 1. de
Epiphania.
St. Augustine delivers them to be four, sive quod in Caelo stella ortus sui
nuncium praebuit: sive quod in Cana Galilaeae in convivio nuptiali aquam
convertit in vinum: sive quod in Jordanis undis aquas ad reparationem humani
generis suo Baptismo consecravit: sive quod, de quinque panibus quinque millia
hominum satiavit. Either because a star in the heavens became the Nuncio of his
birth; or because he turned water into wine at the Marriage feast; or because
being Baptized in the river of Jordan he consecrated the water for the
regeneration of man: or because he s^d five thousand men with five loaves. The
three first causes our Church seems to own in the conformity of her Divine
offices; the Collect for the day mentions the coming to the wisemen to worship
our Savior, by the convoy of the Star, and the Gospel is a narrative of the
Story. The second Lesson at Evening service being John the 2. recounts the
miracle wrought at the Marriage feast. And the second Lesson for Morning Prayer
being Luke 3. 22. is a relation of his Baptism, But as for the first, though it
be delivered by St. Augustine quoted before, and by Isidorus after him, to have
been a con-cause of this days Solemnity, yet I find the Greek fathers of
another judgment, these celebrating the coming of the wisemen and appearing of
the star on the day of Christ's nativity. So Orat. (...).
Nazianzen (...), follow the guide the star, and offer thy gifts with the
Wismen, applying the most remarkable occurrents of that day as inci^ements to
rejoice upon it. Consonant is that of St. Basil. de Nativ. Christi.
Basil who reckoning the special events on Christ's Nativity, says, (...). The
stars from heaven came to behold him, the Magicians among the Gentiles made
have to adore him.

Ash Wednesday and Lent.] Ash Wednesday has in antiquity two names. Dies
cinorum, in reference to the Penitents) whereof more under the title of
Commination) who were this day sprinkled with Dust and Ashes. Secondly, Caput
jejunii, the top of the Fast, or first day of Lent. Instituted it was by
Gregory the Great, the occasion this, Lent, commencing according to the former
mode on the Sunday after Quinquagessima, lasted six weeks or forty days: from
these substract six Sundays which were never to be fasted, there remained
thirty six Lenten days, the just tenth of the year, abating the fraction of
five days: for multiply 360 by 10 the quotient will be 36. so then, God by
this observation received from the Christians a tenth as well of their time, as
of their fruits, this was one design of Lents original. Now St. Gregory, that
the Churches practice might be more agreeable to the great exemplar of our
Saviors 40. days (the quotient observed by Moses and Elias) abstinence in the
wilderness, added these four days to complete the number of 40. days. But
though by this rule the Church conformed nigher to the pattern of our Savior
as to the Number of 40. yet in the appointment of that time she varied from his
copy, Christ fasting immediately after his baptism, she fasting before
Baptism: and great reason had she so to do, there were in those days many
persons adult, of full growth, who became converts to Christianity, and had
besides original, many actual sins to account for: these could not be cleansed
by the water of Baptism, unless they were first rinsed in the water of
contrition, therefore to these repentance was as necessary a requisite before
baptism as faith for as St. Basil says exellently (...) Repentance must l^ad
the way to Faith, whereas our Savior being without sin, had no need of
Repentance to precede his baptism. in this respect this Quadragesimal fast
(whose chief end is humiliation and Repentance) was very aptly premised before
Easter (the grand time designed for that Sacrament) as a preparation to it. And
not in this respect alone, but in several others, for at that great solemnity
Penitents were to be restored to a nearer Communion with the faithful, did they
show any evident signs of Godly sorrow or contrition, which the Scleragogy,
and hard treatment of so long a time of fasting and humiliation was most like
to create. And as Penitents were at that time to be reconciled to the faithful;
so were the faithful then also more then ordinarily to be reconciled to God,
Easter being the most solemn time alloted for the celebration of the Lords
supper, whereof the Jewish Passover was a Type.

As for the first Institution, uncertain it is from whom to derive it. Hierom.
Epist ad Laetam. 54.
St. Hierom ascends to Apostolical Tradition, Nos unam Quadragesimam toto Anno
jejunamus secundum traditionem Apostolicam: We observe in the whole year one
Quadragesimal Fast, according to Apostolical tradition: Not strictly so, I
conceive, but according to the latitude of the Language, or conception of those
times, wherein the same Epist. ad Lucinum.
Hierom tells us, Unaquaeque Provintia praecepta majorum l^ges Apostolicas
arbitratur: every Province accounts the Precepts of their Ancestors, as
Apostolical Ordinances: But though its derivation possibly will not reach so
far, yet considering that Origin; Tertullian, and the Council of Laodicea,
mention it, it must be allowed for very ancient.

For the manner how it was in general observed, (leaving particular days to be
spoken to in their proper order) the Council of Laodicea, informs us of these
four particulars. Cant. 49.
First, (...): That no consecration of the Sacrament be made in Lent, but only
on the Sabbath, and Lord's Day. This was done upon this account: The
consecration of the Bread and Wine was, as those Fathers supposed, an action
more properly allied to the nature of a Festival, then of a Past; and it being
the custom at that time to receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper every day,
that there might be wherewith to supply the concernments of that Service, and
also for a Viaticum to Penitents, and others in the^r fatal last, it was
thought meet that upon the Sabbaths and Lords Days, there should be
consecrated, such a surplusage to be reserved, as might be sufficient for those
intents; which consecrated Elements, so received, were called (...),
foreconsecrated: By this Canon the different, nay cont^ary customs of the East
and West, may be observed; the first keeping the Sabbath as a Festival, the
second as a Fast, yea, the Trullan Council, magisterially enough, decrees,
that the 66. Canon of the Apostles, which is penal to all such as fast on the
Sabbath day, shall be of force (...), in the very Church of Rome her self, For
which cause, says Bals. in lac.
Balsamon, that Church does disclaim this for an Ecumenical Council.

The second particular, is Canon 50. Can. 51.
(...): That it is meet to fast all Lent, eating dry-meats: These dry-meats, we
may safely presume, were Bread, water, and Salt, for so Epiphanius deciphereth
them at the end of his Panarium: If so, it may be positively concluded, that
Wine, Whit-meats, Oil, and Fish, as well as Flesh, were within the interdict of
the ancient Abstinence.

The third is, Can. 51.
(...): That the Birth days of the holy Martyrs be not celebrated in Lent, But
that their commemoration be transferred to the Sabbaths and Lords days;
whether this was extended to all other Festivals, as well as the Birth-dayes of
Martyrs, I cannot say, sure I am, the day (...), of the Annuntiation, which
always falls in Lent, was observed under the sixth General Can. 52.
Counsel.

The last, Can. 52.
(...), That there must no Marriages, nor Birth-dayes be celebrated during the
time of Lent.

At what hour this Fast was to determine, and when the people were to take
their repast, this Synod has no decree: in which point I observe in the
Primitive Church a diversity between the Quadragesimal, the Lent Fast, and that
of Wednesdayes and Fridays: The Lent, as all extraordinary and high Fasts, were
protended and reached to the evening thereof: Expectas vesperam ut cibum
oapias, says Orat de ^^junio.
Basil, of Lent Fast, thou waitest for the Evening that thou may refresh thy
self: The weekly Fast determined at the ninth hour or three in the afternoon,
Sub fine Panarii.
(...), says Epiphanius, All the year long, and Wednesdays and Fridayes, they
brake not their fasts until three in the afternoon: But this distinction was
not entertained in the Catholic Church, until after Ter. de Jejunio.
Tertullians time; for writing against the Orthodox Party as a Montanist, he
tells them, they continued their Fasts but to the ninth hour, whereas his
Brethren of the Discipline of Montanus, protracted theirs to the evening.

The Sunday before Easter.] This is called Palm Sunday, in Latin Dominica in
Ramis, in Greek, (...), so Epiphanius and Johannes Eucha^^ensis: All
Jerusalem; a Custom used by other Nations upon their reception of Kings, and
eminent Persons: So did they of Cremon^ entertain Vitellius, Tacit. Hist. l. 2.
Lauro rosisque viam constraverant, regium in morem, They had strewed the way
with Bays and Roses after a Princely manner; and so the Roman Commodus, Herodian
l. 1.
(...), Carrying Bays and all sorts of Flowers then in their Prime.

De Eccles. Offic. l. 1. c. 27.
Isidorus, that lived about 630, tells us, That this day the Creed, or Summary
of the Christian Faith, was wont to be delivered to the competents, or persons
who desired to receive the Seal of Baptism, the like is affirmed by De Divin.
Offic.
Alcuine, and perhaps it might be so, for St. Epist. ad Marcellin. 13.
Ambrose speaking of his Officiating upon this day, says, Post lectiones atque
Tractatum dimissis Catechumenis Symbolum aliquibus competentibus in
Baptisteriis tradebam Basilicae: After the Lessons and Sermon, I delivered the
Creed to the Competents, in the Baptisteries of the Church: Rational l. 6. c.
76.
Durandus (their junior 500 years) fixes this Custom upon Maundy Thursday, but
his word being traditur, may import that he only intended the practice of his
present, not of the Primitive times.

Monday before Easter.] This week had many appellations in Antiquity: It was
sometimes called Pasch, or Easter, so Adr. Audian.
Epiphanius, (...), The Church observes to celebrate the Feast of Easter, that
is, the week defined by the Apostles Constitutions: And In fine Panarii.
elsewhere he calls it, (...), the six days of Easter: So Sermon. 46. de verb.
domini.
Augustine, Ecce Paschaest, da nomen ad Baptismum, See it is now Easter, give
in thy name for Baptism: Perhaps for that very cause it became to be styled
also, The great Week, Easter being (...), (as St. John calls it, c. 19. v. 31.
and the Councels after him) The grand Festival; it was proportionable enough,
that this Septimana Paschae, or the Week preceding it, should be called the
Great Week; or else, as Hom. 30. in Genesis
St. Chrysostom in his Lenten Sermons yields the reason, (...), because great
and unutterable Blessings (as Christ's Passion, Burial and Resurrection) accrued
to us this Week: It was styled also the holy Week, because celebrated with
devotion extraordinary.

This Week had especial privileges; first it was a Justitium, and Vacation
from civil pleadings, and by the Edicts of Theodosius, and other godly Princes,
All prisoners committed for Debt or petty crimes, were then set at liberty:
Sanctis diebus Hebdomadis ultimae solebant debitorum laxari vi^cula, says
Epist. 33. l. 5.
Ambrose, In the holy days of the last week, the Bonds of Debtors were wont to
be loosed: So of Theodosius, Hom. 10. ad Pop. Antioch.
St. Chrysostom, that he commanded (...), All the Prisoners throughout the
Empire to be freed.

In this week were penitents reconciled into the Communion of the Faithful.
Epitaph. Fabiola.
St. Hieromes Fabiola ante diem Paschae stabat in ordine Poenitentium, Stood
before Easter in the row of Penitents, whom he presently renders, reconciled to
the Church.

This Week the Competents gave in their names for Baptism: Durandus, and others
of later Antiquity, apply this Custom to the Wednesday after the fourth Sunday
in Lent; possibly it was so in their days, not so certainly in St. Augustines
time, as is evident by his words above cited, and elsewhere: De Cura pro Mort.
c. 12.
Appropinquabat Pascha, dedit nomen inter alios competentes, Easter was at
hand, he gave in his name amongst other Competents.

Thursday before Easter.] This day was anciently called Aug Epist. 118.
Coena Domini, and in Greek, Chrysostom. in Prod. Jud. t Balsamon in Con. Laodic.
c. 50.
(...), the great fifth day, as a parcel of the great Week, and dies Mandati,
with us Maundy Thursday, because Christ this day instituted the Sacrament of
his Supper, commanding his Disciples, and in them Posterity, to do the same in
remembrance of him.

Many were the peculiars of this day: First, because the Bodies of such as were
to be Baptized on the next Sabbath, had contracted an offensive scent through
the observation of Lent, and it was therefore necessary that they should be
washed and cleansed before they entered the sacred Font: This day was set apart
for that lotion as St. Epist. 118.
Augustine informs us.

Secondly, The Catechumeni, or rather the Competents that gave in their names
for Baptism, were in the Council. Laodic. c. 46.
Greek Church to rehearse the Articles of their Faith, either to the Bishop, or
to the Presbyters.

Thirdly, Upon this day there was a double Communion, the blessed Eucharist
being given twice on this day by the Latin Church: Aug. ubi supra.
Bis in coena Domini Eucharistia datur, mane propter prandentes, ad vesperum
propter jejunantes: The Eucharist is given twice on that day whereon the Lord
instituted it, in the morning in respect of those that dine, in the evening for
their sakes who forbear meat all the day, which he says was done upon this
account, ut in honorem tanti Sacramenti, in as Christiani prius dominicum
corpus intraret, quam caeteri cibi: That for the honor of that great Sacrament,
the Body of Christ should have the precedence of entering in at our mouths
before ordinary meat.

Upon this day the now Church of Rome accurseth and Excommunicateth all
Protestants, under the notion of Heretics, and more then Protestants, his
Catholic Majesty of Spain also, for fingring some part of St. Peter's
Patrimony, but she soon makes him an amends, by absolving him on Good Friday.

Upon this day also the Kings of England, in imitation of our Savior, were
wont either themselves, or by their Eleemosynary or Almner, to wash the feet of
so many poor People as they were years of age.

Good Friday.] This day, with the Saturday and Sunday following, Ubi supra.
St. Augustine Sacratissimism triduum crucifixi, sepulti, suscitati: The most
sacred three days of Christ Crucisixt, Buried, and raised again: It was
anciently of so high esteem, as Eusebius. vit. Constable. lib. 4. c. 18.
Constantine entered it into the same Edict, wherein he commanded the
observation of the Lords Day: Augustine mentions Passionem Domini, The day of
Christ's Passion, amongst those which were of Catholic and universal
observation: In Galat. c. 4
Nos non Azymorum Pascha celebramus, sed Resurectionis and crucis, says St.
Hierome, We do not observe the Feast of unleavened Bread, but the days of
Christ's Resurrection and his Passion: It was a day of general absolution to all
the faithful: Oportet hoc die indulgentiam Criminum clara voc^ omnem Populum
praestolari, says the fourth Can. 6.
Council of Toledo: This day all the People are to expect Absolution of their
Sins, declared with a loud voice by the Priest: And in the next Canon it is
ordained that none dissolve the Fast, (children, aged, and sick persons
excepted) ante peractas Indulgentiae preces, before the absolution office be
over.

Why it is called Good Friday needs slender elucidation, every ordinary
pretender to Christianity is able to say, because it was the completory of our
eternal Redemption.

Upon this day the Gospel is taken out of St. John, probably as the Rupertus de
Divin. officiis, l. 6 c. 6.
Rationalists inform us, because he was (...), an eye witness of what he
relates: In the African Church, St. d Sermon. de temp. 144.
Augustine tells us, it was taken out of St. Matthew: Passio quia uno die
legitur, non solet leg i nisi secundum Mattheum: Because the Gospel appointed
for the Passion is read but one day, it is wont to be taken out of St. Matthew.

Easter Eve.] This was styled Sabbatum magnum, the great Sabbath: upon Clausum
Paschae, the close of Easter, and all the days within that enclosure, were
called octo dies Neophytorum, the eight days of the Neophytes, or new-made
Christians, which wore white vestments all that time.

There was a tradition amongst the Jews that Christ should come again upon
Easter Day at midnight (about the hour of his Resurrection) upon which ground
St. Hieron in Math. c. 25. in Can. 90. Council. 6. in Trullo.
Hierom conceived the tradition continued ut in die vigiliarum Paschae, ante
noctis medium Populos dimittere non liceat expectantes adventum Christi. That
on Easter-Eve the people should not be dismissed before midnight, as waiting
for Christ's coming. The like is attested by Theodorus Balsamon, limiting the
practice to those only who were (...), of the devoutest sort. A Relick of
which custom remained in this Church until the first reformation, employed in
that ceremony of setting up the Sepulture of Christ, and watching of the
Sepulcher frequently mentioned in the Ritual monuments of those times.

Upon this day it was the custom for the Bishop in imitation of our Savior, to
wash the feet of the new baptized persons; Ascendisti de font, quid secutum
est? succinctus est Sacerdos (licet enim Presbyteri fecerint, tamen exordium
ministerii est a summo Sacerdote) pedes tibi lavat, says St. de Sacramentis l.
3. c. 1.
Ambrose. Thou did arise out of the font, what was next? the chief Priest
being girt washed thy feet; for though the Presbyter officiateth, yet the
derivation of his power is from the chief Priest, where he seems to make this
ceremony proper only to the Bishop, as indeed so was all relating to Baptism,
according to the sense of Antiquity, (...) says Epist. ad. Smyrn.
Ignatius, it is not lawful to Baptize without license from the Bishop. Dandi
Baptismum ius habet summus Sacerdos, dein Presbyteri and Diaconi, non tamen
sine Episcopi authoritate, so de Baptism*
Tertullian, The Chief Priest has power to administer Baptism, so also have
Presbyters and Deacons, but not without authority derived from the Bishop.

Easter Day.] This was the Birthday of our Savior in his state of Glory the
great day; By Gregory S. Pac^ia.
Nazianzen (...), the Feast of Feasts. How could it be less, it being the day
(...), by way of eminence) which the Lord has made, Psalm. 118. 24. for of this
day do the Fathers unanimously expound that place, and therefore with them, as
it is with us, that Psalm was always part of the office of this day.

For the antiquity of the observation of this day, innumerable Authors might be
produced, but in a matter not at all controverted it would edify little. I
shall therefore supersede from others, and content my self with a Reference to
that known contest betwixt the Churches of the East and West about it, whether
it should be observed on the 14. of the first New Mood in March, as they of the
East pretended, or on the Lord's Day, as the Western custom was, wherein both
pleaded, and justly too, as I conceive, Apostolical tradition. The Quarta
decimani, or they who kept the fourteenth day, derived their practice from St.
John, the other from St. Peter. The matter being adiaphorous, they of the
Levant, the East, might in this, as they did in other things, condescend to the
customs of the Jews their cohabitants, on design to win upon them in higher
matters. And the Western Churches more conversant with Gentiles, having not the
same occasion, might rather make choice of the Lords day, it being the very day
of Christ's Resurrection, in memory whereof that feast was observed. That the
celebration of this day was Apostolical is a truth as radient, as if it were
written with the beams of the Sun, and needs no further demonstration then the
consideration how early this Question invaded the Church. The first news we
hear of it, is, from Polycarpus, his journey to the Roman Bishop Anicetus
Propter quasdam super die Paschae quaestiones, by reason of some questions
raised about Easter Day. So de Script. Eccles.
Hierom, and Hist. l. 4. c. 16
Eusebius. Polycarpus was St. John's disciple, and when Anicetus endeavored to
gain him to the western usage, his answer was, he would never desert that
custom, which he had received from St. John. So that though Polycarpus and
Anicetus argued the question, yet, like stout Champions, both kept their
ground, and which is most laudable, like good Christians, kept also the peace
of the Church. So did not Victor Bishop of Rome a while after, for being a man
composed of fire and tow, and inflamed with an Epistle of Policrates, then
Bishop of Ephesus, to him: he grew so choleric, that he renounced Communion
with all Asia upon that sole account; for which Ireneus, of Victors persuasion;
not of his Spirit, sent him a sound rattle. Let this suffice for the Antiquity
of this grand festival.

This day, with Christ's Nativity, Epiphany and Pentecost, were days of so high
solemnity, as all the Clergy Council. Agathen c. 64
were bound upon pain of excommunication for three years, not to be absent from
their Cures at any of them. And that such was the Practice for Easter Epist. 53.
St. Cyprian gives us early account, for being desired by Fortunatus and
others to consult with his confraternity about the receptions of Persons lapsed
through torture, he refers them for his answer to another time, because,
says he, Nunc omnes inter Paschae prima solemnia apud se cum fratribus
demorantur. Now all my Colleagues are tied to their proper Cures until the
Easter holy days be over.

The Anthymnes appointed by our Church are pure Canonical Scripture, whereof the
last beginning thus, Christ is risen again, being taken out of 1 Cor. 15. 20.
seems to be an Imitation of the Ancient practice of the Primitive Christians,
who were accustomed to greet one another every Easter morning, one saying
(...), the Lord is risen, and the other answered, (...), he is risen indeed,
and in the now Greek Church, some memorial of that custom remains in their
solemn hymn beginning Cassandr. Liturg.
(...). Christ is risen from the dead triumphing over and trampling one death
with another.

Easter Monday and Tuesday.] All this week which we call Easter week was
anciently kept holy, but above others these two days were of highest remark:
In Synod. 6. c. 66.
Theodorus Balsamon notes: therefore Hom. in Pasch.
Gregorius Thaumatergus styles the Easter Festivals (...), the three
holy days ordained by the Church. de Civit. Dec. l. 22. c. 8.
St. Augustine also mentions, ter^ium Festi diem, the third day of the Feast,
and to ascend higher Epist. ad Fortunat.
St. Cyprian, in all probability, meant no less, where he spoke of, prima
solemnia Paschae, the first solemn days of Easter.

In some particulars, the whole interval betwixt Easter and Pentechost, was
honored with an esteem adaequate to the Lord's Day, and the principal of them,
Easter it self. That is, in not fasting and Praying standing. I shall only
content my self with urging two, of very many Authorities. For the Western
Church De Corona militis.
Tertullian, Die dominico jejunium nefas ducimus, vel de geniculis adornare.
Eadem immunitate a die Paschae in Pentechosten usque gaudiamus, we count it a
great offense either to Fast, or kneel at Prayer on the Lord's Day. And the same
custom do we observe from Easter to Pentechost. for the East The Can. vlt.
Council of Nice (...), the holy Synod decrees that on the Lords day, and from
Easter to Pentechost Prayers be made standing, where also learned men suppose
an interdict from fasting also to be implied. The ground of this practice was
the sudden transition of the Church from one contrary Passion to another, that
is, from grief to joy which operated contrary motions in the body. All
Lent-long, Lords days excepted, not only the Penitents which were under the
Churches censures, but the very faithful themselves were (...) cast upon their
knees as in a state of humiliation. But the Resurrection day, the day of Jubilee
once come, the visage of the Church was changed, and nothing to be seen but
what signified excess of joy. Basil. Epist. ad Amphilochium.
St. Basil no man better unfolds the mystery (...). By our kneeling and rising
upright, we signify that we are cast down to the earth by our sins, and that
we are raised again to heaven by the Clemency of our maker. So that the posture
of standing was not only a ceremony significant of our Saviors Resurrection,
but also an emblem of the Churches rising with him, which was most graphically
described in their stationary mode, which Tertul, Apologet. c. 30.
Tertullian represents thus; in coelum suspicientes, manibus expansis, Looking
up to heaven, with their arms extended at length. Chrysostom. Hom. 22. in Heb.
St. Chrysostom more fully, and like what I formerly observed out of Clemens
Alexandrinus (...) i. e. I have known my self many men, almost elevated quite
from the earth, stretching out their hands as wide as possibly they could, and
as if they were malcontents that they could not fly even up to heaven, and in
that posture of ardent devotion to behave them selves at Prayer.

First Sunday after Easter.] This Sunday had several appellations in Antiquity:
the Latins called it Dominica in Albis, in relation to the white vestments
Neophytes, or new-made Christians. But why in Albis, and not rather post Albas?
the Sunday after white vestments, as De Divin. Offic.
Alcuin more truly calls it? considering that they deposited and laid aside
those whites upon the Eve of this day, called clausum Paschae, the close of
Easter, as the same Epist. ad Car. Magn.
Alcuin testifies elsewhere, and is comfirmed by Sermon. de temp.
St. Augustine Paschalis solemnitas hodierna festivitate concluditur, and ideo
Neophytorum habitus mutatur. The Paschal solemnity is this day (speaking of the
Easter Octave) determined, and therefore the new Christians change their habits
this day. The Greek called it (...), the reason is given by Nazianzen in Nov.
Dominic.
Gregory Nazianzen, because it is (...), the birthday of that salvation, which
had its commencement the Sunday before. By us it is vulgarly called Low-Sunday,
probably as our Rationilist has observed, as it succeeds and stands in
relation to Easterday, which was (...), an high day.

The fifth Sunday after Easter.] This Sunday is called Rogation Sunday, because
Rogation before Ascension day. These three fast-dayes were first instituted by
Mamercus Bishop of Vienna, upon occasion of a great earthquake, and incursion
of wolves, and wild beasts, to the extreme tetrour of the people. He knowing
no better expedient to divert so severe a chastisment, then fasting and
humiliation, ordered these days for that intent, and contrived a Litany apt
and suitable for such humble addresses. This pious course taking good effect,
succeeding times continued that Fast in their Anniversary practice, so as the
Can. 23.
Council of Aurelia established it by a decree. Which custom having had so long
footing in the Church, our Reformers were loath to be singular in rescinding it,
and the rather because she observed it fell casually and beyond its first
intention, upon such a season as might be very agreeable to the service of those
days. For this being that critical time of the year when all the fruits of the
earth are in greatest hazard of miscarrying, by frosts and unseasonable
weather, it is therefore exceeding proper to supplicate God for the withholding
of his judgments, and to implore his blessing upon the labors of the
husbandman. And although our Liturgy has no set office, yet has our Church
set homilies for it. And in the injunctions Anno 1559. and Advertisments Anno
7. Eliz. it was ordered, that in the Rogation days of procession, the Curat
sing or say in English the two Psalms, beginning Benedic Anima mea, etc. with
the Litany and Suffrages thereunto belonging.

Ascension Day.] I do not meet in any of the Fathers, before St. Augustines
time, mention of this as of an Holy day, yet doubtless it was of as ancient
Epist. 118.
Augustine reckons it amongst those days which toto terrarum orb observantur,
now observed all over the world, and which are supposed to have been instituted
by the Apostles themselves, or General Councels. A little after St. Augustine,
Proclus, Archbishop of Constantinople, enumerating the five grand Festivals,
makes this the 4th, (...): The fourth, says he, declares the ascent into
Heaven of him who was our first fruit: And after all, adds, (...), These are
the solemnities which the Lord has made. Now to take off the wonder why there
is so little news of it before St. Augustine, it must be considered, that
anciently all the interim between Easter and Whitsunday, was called by the name
of Pentecost, and was kept as one entire Festival, which moved De Idololatria.
Tertullian to oppose against the Pagans, Excerpe singulas nationum
solemnitates, and in ordinem texe, non Pentecosten implere non possunt, Gather
all the Festivals of the Gentiles, and put them together into one sum, the
Festival of Pentecost will outvy them all. As Tertullian delivered this for the
Western, so for the Greek Church, the Can. 20.
second Council of Antioch, Anno 341. speaking of the Synods to be yearly
assembled, decrees that the first convene, (...), after the third Week
following Easter, in the fourth Week of Pentecost. And so the Can. 37.
Canons denominated from the Apostles, limitteth the first Synod, (...), to the
fourth Week of Pentecost. And so was the practice of those times, for St.
Cyprians Ides of May, where in the Council he treats of Epist. 55. was held,
might probably fall upon that very week. To apply what has now been said to my
present purpose, it may very rationally be supposed, that those seven Weeks
being comprehended under the single denomination of one Festival, what other
days of sacred account did chance to happen within that time, were the less
distinguished or considered otherwise then as parcels of the great solemnity.

Whitsunday.] This day is called Pentecost, being the fiftieth day from Easter.
A day observed by the very Apostles themselves, Acts 2. 1. And all the reason
Sinai, called therefore the Feast of the Law, and the day whereon the Gospel
was given in Sion, by the descent of the holy Ghost; and therefore venerable
upon either account; but most venerable upon the last: This day was in the
Jewish practice one of their great Panegyries or Generals, as I may call them,
to which there was an universal confluence from all nations; and in the like
manner was it observed by the Christian Church, as a great Rendezvous for
persons resorting to be Baptized: This day is called Whitsunday by reason, say
some of the White Garments then put on by them who were at this time Baptized,
the probability whereof, as I cannot absolutely deny, so it may be free for me
to offer mine own conjecture, differing from it, and then I would rather derive
it from the French word huict, which signifies eight, and then Whitsunday will
be huict Sunday, the eighth Sunday accounting from Easter, which all men will
yield to be the first; and that this conceit may pass the better, let me
further it not only with an Argument drawn from the consonancy of the words
huict and whit, which sound exactly like, but also from another word of the
same denomination, used in our Law, I mean ut as, which is no more but the
huictas, in Latin, the Octavo of the anteceding Feast.

This Week was not entirely a Festival, like that of Easter, Council.
Gerundense. c. 2.
the Wednesday, Thursday and Friday being observed as Fasts, and days of
Humiliation and Supplication for a blessing upon the work of Ordination (which
was usually on the next Sabbath, imitating therein the Apostolic^ practice,
mentioned Acts 13. 3. And when they had fasted and prayed, and laid their hands
on them: This custom of Fasting this Week, is as ancient as Athanas. Apolog. de
Fuga sua.
Athanasius. In hebdomade post sacram Pentecosten, populus completis jejuniis
ad orandum abiit. i. e. In the Week following sacred Whitsunday, the People
having ended their Fasts, went to Prayer.

Having thus done my respects to the Festivals, Dominical especially, and of
highest remark, they which follow not affording any thing of extraordinary
note, I pass to the holy days of an inferior order, whereof very few will fall
under consideration, in regard antiquity has transmitted to us so little,
specifically relating to them.

St. Andrews day.] This Apostle leads the van in the Rubric of our Saints,
first came to Christ, and followed him before any of the other Apostles, John
1. 3^. Reason good he should have that honor, were this infallibly certain,
whereof the Scripture gives slender assurance, for the words of the Evangelist
are [the two Disciples heard him speak, and they followed Jesus] so that there
were two Disciples, one of them indeed was Andrew, but he being mentioned
jointly with the other (who most probably was St. John himself) Priority and
Posteriority, cannot be admitted: Andrew, true it is, first revealed the
Messiah to his Brother Simon, yet this no argument that he came the first of
Apostles unto Christ: And where it is said that these two Disciples followed
Christ, yet is it not thence inferrible that they followed Christ as Disciples,
but out of curiosity; for clear it is, they continued still in their vocations,
until they had their call, Matthew. 4. 18. as is evidently demonstrated by the
learned Annotator on that Place, and by Mr. Casaubon before him.

The Conversion of Paul.] This posthume Apostle, though he came late into
Christ's Livery, yet gives us this account of his service, that he toiled,
sweat, labored more, in Christ's vineyard, then all the rest, 1 Cor. 15. 10. and
therefore has gained the reputation to be understood, when we think fit to say
no more then the Apostle; and if such an eminent Saint should not be assigned a
room amongst his fellow Apostles in the Memorials of the Church, it may to any
seem a wonder; yet, in part, so has it come to pass: for though he has in the
service of our Church as much respect as the best of them, yet both in the
Calendar and Catalogue, he seems with his companion Barnabas to be omitted. The
truth is, I do not observe so high a value set upon him by the Romish Church,
as his labor has merited; for in the Roman Order, where the Letany gives the
names of all the other Apostles, and Canonized Saints, only St: Paul and
Barnabas are missing in that nomenclature: in their ancient Kalendars indeed,
and in that prefixed to King Henry the eighths Primer, though his conversion be
not dignified with a Rubric Note, yet is he yoked with St. Peter on the twenty
ninth of June, that day bearing the Dedication of St. Peter and St. Paul; upon
which consideration, perhaps our Reformers forbear the allotting him any other
day peculiar to himself.

The Purification of St. Mary the Virgin] This Feast is called by the Greeks,
Meeting, because Simeon and Anna the Prophetessmet at the presentation of our
Savior in the Temple: L. 27. c. 28.
Nicephorus ascribes the Institution thereof to Justinian the Emperor, about
the year 550. whether Justinian first instituted it, or whether he established
its Ecumenical Celebration, which perhaps before was but Provincial, that
Author is not express enough; with us in the vulgar Language it is called
Candlemass Day, because, says a Learned Montacutius de Originibus Eccles.
Bishop, the Lights formerly used all Winter through in the Evening Service,
were then laid aside, according to the Proverb, On Candlemas day, lay Candles
away: But more properly from the former custom of bearing Tapers lighted in
Procession; upon this day, in imitation of the five wise Virgins, represented
in the parable, Matthew. 25. as St. Bernard delivers, or to put Christians in
remembrance of Christ, the spiritual Light, of whom Simeon did Prophecy, as is
read in the Church that day.

The Annunciation of the Virgin Mary.] There pass two Homilies, the one
Gregorius Neocaesariensis, the other of Athanasius, which were Preached on this
Day: But in regard they are both Impostures, the youngest being at least 600
years after Christ, as the Ora pro nobis sufficiently demonstrateth, I shall
not urge them: Nor indeed could the celebration of this Day consist with the
Canons of the Church at that time, because it fell in Lent, a time of Fasting
and Humiliation, wherein the Can. 51.
Council of Laodicea decreed, (...), that the Birth-days or Passions of the
Martyrs, (and consequently other Festivals) be not celebrated; nor do I find
any mention of this Festival in any piece I dare confide in, before the sixth
general Council in Trullo, where the fifty second Canon stands thus, (...). i.
e. [that in all the days of the Lenten Fast, unle^s it be on the Sabbaths,
Lords-Days, or on the holy Annunciation Day, the service of the Elements
beforeconsecrated be performed.]

Philip and Jacob.] In ancient Martyrologies this day was styled the Feast of
Philip and Jacob, and All Saints. All Saints was indeed its first and most
genuine In Martyr.
St. Basil preaching upon this, or the like day, says, (...), i. e. for the
most part we celebrate the memory of the Martyrs (Martyrs, not of one Martyr)
this day. Now what this day was, at the end of that Homily he is more
explicit, (...). This very day determines the year past, and commenceth that
which is to come, evidently denoting New Years day. Now the Primitive
Christians of the East, began their year in April, (which they called
Hecatombaeon) in honor of their Easter, and so the distance of time could not
be much: As to the original of its Institution, it was this, The Apostles,
Evangelists and Martyrs, Luminaries of the greatest Magnitude, being honored
with days of single appropriation; it was withal considered, that very many
others, though of inferior note, had yet sacrificed their Lives in defense of
the Catholic Faith, and it was requisite their Honor should in some competency
be provided for; to gratify it with the assignation of a particular day to
every one, being so numerous, was impossible, therefore the best expedient was
to celebrate their memories by one day allotted to all, whereby God might be
glorified for them, as comprehended under one Constellation; why this Feast was
translated to the Calends of November, Ritualists give a probable, though
earthy and sensual account, viz. Because of the scarcity of Victuals in the
Spring, and plenty at the time of defoliation, or fall of the leaf, so
Rational. l. 7. c. 34. Biel. c. 127.
Durandus, Biel, and others. As to the persons now commemorated on this day,
the first is Philip, not the Evangelist; neither the Collect, second Lesson,
nor Gospel of our Church speaks him so, but the Apostle; and not he, because he
suffered on that day, as Chronologers and Ritualists of the Romish Church
assert; late Tradition I confess has crucified him, and so Johannes
Euchaitensis delivers, (...), Philip came to the same end with Peter: But
neither Eusebius nor Hierome, who followed him, knew of any such thing: and
Stromat. l. 4.
Clemens Alexandrinus, who lived near up to the Apostles times, is positive in
the contrary, (...), Matthew, Philip, Thomas and Levi, did not suffer as
Christian Confessors: The next is James, not he the son of Alpheus, nor he the
son of Zebedee, but James the brother of our Lord, though the Greek Menology
fixes this day upon the second.

St. Peter's Day.] This day was not dedicated to Peter alone, but to Peter and
Paul jointly, and in the Romish Church, June the 13 is allotted entirely for
Paul; the coupling of these two Apostles together in one Festival, is no late
invention, for Lib. ^
Theodorus Lector mentioning a Petition of one Festus a Roman Senator, to
Anastatius the Emperor, for the celebration of the memory of these two
Champions of the Church, Peter and Paul; he says, It was never kept with such
splendid solemnity as then, an Argument of its existence before.

St. Mary Magdalene.] Upon stricter scrutiny and inquiry to our second
Reformers, Grotius and other learned men, whether the Woman mentioned in the
Gospel applied to this day, was Mary Magdalene, or not; nay, they rather
inclined to think she was Mary the sister of Lazarus, upon which account the
Festival came to be discontinued in our Chruch.

CHAP. VI.
Common Prayer.

The Order for the Administration of the Lords Supper or holy Communion.

1 B. of Edw. 6.

The Supper of the Lord, and the holy Communion Commonly called the Mass.

SO many as intend to be partakers of the holy Communion, shall signify their
names to the Curate over night, or else in the morning, before the beginning of
Morning prayer, or immediately after.

And if any of those be an open and notorious evil liver, so that the
congregation by him is offended, or have done any wrong

The same order shall the Curate use with those betwixt whom he perceives
malice and hatred to reign, not suffering them to be partakers of the Lords
table, until he know them to be reconciled. And if one of the parties so at
variance, be content to forgive from the bottom of his heart all that the other
has trespassed against him, and to make amends for that he himself has
offended, and the other party will not be persuaded to a godly unity, but
remain still in his frowardness and malice: The Minister in that case ought to
admit the penitent person to the holy Communion, and not him that is obstinate.

1 B. of Edw. 6.

Upon the day, and at the time appointed for the ministration of the holy
Communion, the Priest that shall execute the holy ministry, shall put upon him
the vesture appointed for that ministration: that is to say, a white Alb plain
with a vestment or cope. And where there be many Priests or Deacons, there so
many shall be ready to help the Priest in his ministration as shall be
requisite; and shall have upon them likewise the vestures appointed for their
ministry, that is to say, Albes with tunicles. Then shall the Clerks sing in
English for the office or Introite (as they call it) a Psalm appointed for that
day.

Common Prayer.

The Table having at the Communion time [Scot. Lit. a Carpet and] a fair white
linen cloth upon it [Scot. Lit. with other decent furniture, meet for the high
mysteries there to be celebrated, shall stand at the uppermost part of the
Chancel or Church, where the Presbyter standing at the North side or end
thereof, shall say] shall (D) stand in the body of the Church or in the
Chancel, where morning Prayer and Evening Prayer be appointed to be said.

Common Prayer. 1 B. of Edw. 6. And the Priest, standing at the north side of
the Table shall say the (E) Lords Prayer with this Collect following [Scot.
Lit. for due preparation.] The Priest standing humbly before the middle of the
Altar, shall say the Lords Prayer with this Collect.

ALmighty God, unto whom all hearts be open, all desires known, and from whom
no secrets are hid: cleanse the thoughts of our hearts by the inspiration of thy
holy spirit, that we may perfectly love thee, and worthily magnify thy holy
name, through Christ our Lord, Amen.

Common Prayer. 1 B. of Edw. 6. (F) Then shall the Priest [Scot. Lit. Turning
to the people] rehearse distinctly all the ten Commandments: and the People
[Scot. Lit. all the while] kneeling [Scot. Lit. and asking God mercy for the
transgression of every duty therein; either according to the letter, or
mystical importance of the said Commandment] shall after every Commandment,
ask Gods mercy for their trrnsgression of the same, after this sort. Then shall
he say a Psalm appointed for the introite, which Psalm ended, the Priest shall
say, or else the Clerks shall sing iii Lord have mercy upon us. iii Christ have
mercy upon us. iii Lord haeve mercy upon us.
Then the Priest standing at Gods board shall begin, Glory be to God on high.
Minister. The Clerk. The Commandments and their responds wanting in 1 B. of Ed.
6. This Rubric and Versicles omitted in Bucer.
God spoke these words and said, I am the Lord thy God: Thou shall have no
other Gods but me. And in earth Peace, good will toward men, we praise thee,
we bless thee etc. As in the hymn before the blessing in the Common Prayer.
Then the priest shall turn himself to the People and say. The Lord be with you.
The Answer. People. And with thy spirit. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline
our hearts to keep this law. The Priest. Let us pray.

Minister. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, nor the likeness
of any thing that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in the water
under the earth, thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them: for I the
Lord thy God am a jelous God, and visit the sin of the fathers upon the
children, unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me, and show
mercy unto thousands in them that love me, and keep my commandments.


People. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.


Minister. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain: For the
Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain.


People. Lord have mercy upon us and incline our hearts etc.


Minister. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day: Six days shall thou
labor and do all that thou have to do, but the seventh day is the Sabbath of
the Lord thy God. In it thou shall do no manner of work, thou and thy son, and
thy daughter, thy manservant, and thy maid servant, thy cattle, and the
stranger that is within thy gates. For in six days the Lord made heaven and
earth, the sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore
the Lord blessed the seventh day and hallowed it.


People. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts etc.


Minister. Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long in the
land which the Lord thy God gives thee.


People. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts etc.


Minister. Thou shall do no murder.


People. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts etc.


Minister. Thou shall not commit adultery.


People. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts etc.


Minister. Thou shall not steal.


People: Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts etc:


Minister. Thou shall not ^ear false witness against thy neighbor.


People. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts etc.


Minister. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy
neighbors wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his Ox, nor his Ass, nor
any thing that is his.


People. Lord have mercy upon us, and write all these thy laws in our hearts,
we beseec^ thee.


Then shall follow the Collect of the day, with one of these two Collects
following for the King, the Minister standing up, and Omitted in the 1 B. of
^dw. 6.
saying,

Let us Pray.

ALmighty God, whose kingdom is everlasting, and power infinite, have mercy
upon the whole congregation, and so rule the heart of thy chosen servant our
King and governor, that he knowing whose minister he is, may above all things
seek thy honor and glory, and that we his subjects (duly considering whose
authority he has) may faithfully serve, honor and humbly obey him in thee,
and for thee, according to thy blessed word and ordinance: through Jesus Christ
our Lord, who with thee and the holy Ghost, lives and reigns ever one God,
world without end, Amen.

ALmighty and everlasting God, we be taught by thy holy word, that the hearts
of kings are in thy rule and governance, and that thou do dispose and turn
them as it seems best to thy godly wisdom: we humbly beseech thee, so to
dispose and govern the heart of thy servant our King and governor, that in all
his thoughts, words, and works, he may ever seek thy honor and glory, and
study to preserve thy people committed to his charge, in wealth, peace and
godliness: Grant this, O merciful father, for thy dear sons sake, Jesus Christ
our Lord, Amen.

Common Prayer. 1 B. of Edw. 6. Immediately after the Collects, the minister
shall read the (G) Epistle, saying thus. The Epistle written in the Chapter of
[Scot. Lit. at the verse. And when he has done, he shall say, here ends the
Epistle] And the Epistle ended [Scot. Lit. the Gospel shall be read] he shall
say, the Gospel beginning thus. The Gospel written in the Chapter of [Scot.
Lit. at the verse and then the people all standing up shall say, Glory be to
thee O Lord. At the end of the Gospel, the Presbyter shall say, so ends the
holy Gospel. And the people shall answer, Thanks be to thee O Lord.] And the
Epistle, and the Gospel being ended, shall be said [Scot. Lit. or sung] this
^reed. [Scot. Lit. All still reverently (H) standing up.] The Collects ended,
the Priest, or he that is appointed shall read the Epistle, in a place assigned
for the purpose, saying, The Epistle of St. Paul written in the Chapter of to
the The Minister then shall read the Epistle. Immediately after the Epistle
ended, the Priest or one appointed to read the Gospel shall say, The holy
Gospel written in the Chapter of The Clerks and people shall answer, (I.) Glory
be to thee O Lord. The Priest or Deacon then shall read the Gospel: after the
Gospel ended the Priest shall begin. I beleve in one God. The Clerks shall sing
the Rest. Omitted in Bucer.

I Believe in one God the father almighty, maker of heaven and earth, and of
all things visible, and invisible: and in one Lord Jesu Christ, the only
begotten son of God, begotten of his father before all worlds, God of God,
light of light, very God of very God, begotten, not made, being of one
substance with the father, by whom all things were made: who for us men, and
for our salvation came down from heaven, and was incarnate by the holy Ghost of
the virgin Mary, and was made man, and was crucified also for us under Poncius
Pilate. He suffered and was buried, and the third day he rose again according
to the Scriptures, and ascended into Heaven, and sits at the right hand of
the Father. And he shall come again with glory, to judge both the quick and the
dead: whose kingdom shall have none end, and I believe in the holy Ghost, the
Lord and giver of life, who proceeds from the Father and the Son, who with
the Father and the Son together is worshipped and glorified, who spoke by the
Prophets. And I believe one Catholic and Apostolic Church. I acknowledge one
Baptism for the remission of sins. And I look for the resurrection of the dead,
and the life of the world to come.

After the Creed, if there be no Sermon, shall follow one of

Common Prayer. 1 B. of Edw. 6. After such Sermon, Homily or Exhortation, the
Curate for the Offertory] one or more of these [Scot. according to the length
or shortness of time that the people are offering.] Then shall follow for the
Offertory, one or more of these Sentences of Scripture, to be sung whiles the
People do offer, [or else one of them to be said by the Minister immediately
after the offering.] The Offertory and Sentences follow after the two
Exhortations to the Communion, and the last clause is omitted by Bucer.

Scotch Lit.

And in process of time it came to pass, that Cain brought of the fruit of the
Genesis 4. 3.
ground an offering unto the Lord; and Abel, he also brought of the firstlings
of his Flock, and of the fat thereof: And the Lord had respect unto Abel and to
his offering; but unto Cain and to his offering, he had not respect.

Speak unto the children of Israel, that they bring me an offering: of every
man that gives it willingly with his heart, ye shall take my offering. Exodus
25. 2.


Ye shall not appear before the Lord empty: every man shall give as he is able,
according to the blessing of the Lord your God which he has given Deuteronomy. 16.
you.

David blessed the Lord before all the Congregation; and said, Blessed be thou,
O Lord God, for ever and ever: Thine, O Lord, is the Greatness, and 1 Chronicles.
29. 10.
the Glory, and the Victory, and the Majesty: for all that is in the Heaven and
in the Earth is thine: thine is the Kingdom, O Lord, and thou art exalted as
head above all. Both riches and honor come of thee, and of thine own do we
give unto thee. I know also, my God, that thou tryest the heart, and have
pleasure in uprightness. As for me in the uprightness of my heart I have
willingly offered all these things: And now have seen with joy thy people which
are present here to offer willingly unto thee.

Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his name: bring an offering and come
into his Courts.

Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify Psalm. 96. 8.
your father which is in Heaven.

Lay not up for your selves treasure upon the Earth, where the rust and moth
does corrupt, and where Thieves break through and steal: But lay up for your
selves treasures in Heaven, where neither rust nor moth does corrupt, and where
thieves do not break through and steal.

Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, even so do unto them, for
Matthew. 7. Omitted in he Scotch Lit.

Matthew. 7. Luke 19.

Omitted in the Scotch Lit.


this is the Law and the Prophets.

Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of
heaven: but he that does the will of my Father which is in heaven.

Zacheus stood forth and said unto the Lord, Behold Lord, the half of my goods
I give to the Poor, and if I have done any wrong to any man, I restore fourfold.

Scotch Lit.

Jesus sat over against the Treasury, and beheld how the People cast money
into it; and many that were rich cast in much. And there came a certain poor
Mar. 12. 41. etc.
Widow, and she threw in two Mites, which make a farthing: And he called unto
him his Disciples, and says unto them, Verify I say unto you, that this poor
Widow has cast in more, then all they which have cast into the Treasury; for
all they did cast in of their abundance, but she of her want did cast in all
that she had, even all her living.

Who goes a warfare at any time of his own cost? who planteth a vineyard, and
1 Cor. 9.
eats not of the fruit thereof? Or who feeds a flock, and eats not of the
milk

If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great matter if we shall
reap 1 Cor. 9.
your worldly things?

Do ye not know, that they which minister about holy things, live of the
sacrifice? 1 Cor. 9.
They which wait of the Altar, are partakers with the Altar: Even so has the
Lord also ordained, that they which preach the Gospel, should live of the
Gospel.

He which sows little, shall reap little: and he that sows plenteously,
shall 2 Cor. 9.
reap plenteously. Let every man do according as he is disposed in his heart,
not grudging, or of necessity, for God loves a cheerful giver.

Let him that is taught in the word, minister unto him that teaches in all
good Galat. 6.
things. Be not deceived, God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man sows, that
shall be reap.

While we have time, let us do good unto all men, and specially unto them which
Galat. 6. Omitted in the Scotch Lit.

1 Timothy 6. Omitted in the Scotch Lit.

1 Timothy 6.


are of the household of faith.

Godliness is great riches, if a man be contented with that he has: For we
brought nothing into the world, neither may we carry any thing out.

Charge them which are rich in this world, that they be ready to give, and glad
to distribute, laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the
time to come, that they may attain eternal life.

God is not unrighteous, that he will forget your works and labor that
proceeds of love, which love ye have showed for his names sake, which have
ministered unto Heb. 6.
the Saints, and yet do minister.

To do good, and to distribute, forget not: for with such sacrifices God is
pleased.

Whosoever has this worlds good, and sees his brother have need, and shuts up
his compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in Hebr. 13. 1 John 3.
All these sentences to the end omitted in the Scotch Lit. Tob. 4. Tob. 4.
him:

Give alms of thy goods, and turn never thy face from any poor man, and then
the face of the Lord shall not be turned away from thee.

Be merciful after thy power. If thou have much give plenteously. If thou have
little, do thy diligence gladly to give of that little: for so gatherest thou
thy self a good reward in the day of necessity.

He that has pity upon the poor, lends unto the Lord: and look what he Prove.
19. lays out, it shall be paid him again.

Blessed be the man that provideth for the sick and needy: the Lord shall
deliver Psalm. 41. him in the time of trouble.

1 B. of Edw. 6. Editio Lat. Buceri. Where there be Clerks, they shall sing one
or many of the sentences above written, according to the length and shortness
of the time that the people be offering. Harum and similium sententiarum ex
Thobia, Proverbiis, vel Psalmis una aut plures canentur, ut tempus oblationis
and numerus offerentium postulabit.

Scotch Lit. Common Prayer. 1 B. of Edw. 6. While the Presbyter distinctly
pronounces some or all of those sentences for the offertory, the Deacon, or
(if no such be present) one of the Churchwardens shall receive the devotion of
the people, there present, in a basin provided for that purpose. And when all
have offered, he shall reverently bring the said basin, with the oblations
therein, and deliver it to the Presbyter, who shall humbly present it before
the Lord, and set it upon the holy Table. (P) Then shall the Churchwardens, or
some other by them appointed gather the devotion of the people, and put the
same into the poor man's box: and upon the (Q) offering days appointed, every
man shall pay unto the Curate the due and accustomed offerings. After which the
Minister shall say. And in the mean time whilst the Clerks do sing the
offertory, so many as are disposed shall offer unto the poor man's box, every
man according to his ability and charitable mind. And at the offering days
appointed, every man and woman shall pay to the Curate the due and accustomed
offerings.

And the Presbyter shall then offer up, and place the Bread and Wine prepared
for the Sacrament, upon the Lords Table, that it may be ready for that service,
and then he shall say.

(R) Let us pray for the whole state of Christ's Church, militant here in earth.

ALmighty and everlasting God, which by thy holy Apostle Omitted in the 1 B. of
Edw. 6.
have taught us to make prayers and supplications, and to give thanks for all
men, we humbly beseech thee most mercifully to accept our alms and to receive
these our prayers, which If there be none alms, given unto the poor, then shall
the words of accepting our alms be left out unsaid.
we offer unto thy divine majesty, beseeching thee to inspire continually the
universal Church with the spirit of truth, unity and concord, and grant that
all they that do confess thy holy name, may agree in the truth of thy holy
word, and live in unity and godly love. Me beseech thee also to save and defend
all Christian Kings, and Princes, and Governors, and specially thy servant our
King, that under him we may be godly and quietly governed: and grant to his
whole Council, and to

1 B. of Edw. 6. Scotch Lit. And here we do give unto thee most high praise,
and hearty thanks, for thy wonderful grace and virtue declared in all thy
Saints, from the beginning of the world. And chiefly in the glorious and most
blessed (T) Virgin Mary, mother of thy Son Jesus Christ our Lord and God, and
in thy holy Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and Martyrs, whose examples (O
Lord) and steadfastness in thy faith, and keeping thy holy Commandments, grant
us to follow: we Commend unto thy mercy (O Lord) all other thy servants, which
are (V.) departed from us with the sign of faith, and now rest in the sleep of
peace: grant unto them, we beseech thee, thy mercy and everlasting peace, and
that at the day of the general resurrection, we and all they which be of the
mystical body of thy Son, may altogether be set on his right hand, and hear
that his most joyful voice. Come ye blessed of my Father and possess the
kingdom which is prepared for you, from the beginning of the world. And we also
bless thy holy name for all those thy servants, who having finished their
course in faith, do now rest from their labors. And we yield unto thee most
high praise and hearty thanks, for the wonderful grace and virtue declared in
all thy Saints, who have been the chosen vessels of thy grace, and the lights
of the world in their several generations: most humbly beseeching thee, that we
may have grace to follow the example of their steadfastness in thy faith, and
obedience to thy holy Commandments: that at the day of the general
Resurrection, we, and all they which are of the Mystical body of thy Son, may
be set on his right hand, and hear that his most joyful voice. Come ye blessed
of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the
world.

Grant this, O father for Jesus Christ's sake, our only Mediator and Advocate.

Amen.
Annotations upon CHAP. VI.
(A.) Immediately after, what meant by it; a Bell usually rang betwixt Morning
Prayer, and the Sermon; so also in Scotland. (B.) Notorium what; who notorious
Offenders in the sense of our Church: the 109 Canon, the Committee, 1641. the
Ordinance of Parliament, Octo. 20. 1645. the Imperial Law, Primitive practice,
our Saviors president in admitting Judas: The main reason for free admission.
(C.) Charity how necessary to a Communicant. One loaf in the Primitive Church.
Agapae, the holy Kiss. (D.) The Table where to stand in Communion time. (E.)
The Lords Prayer always part of the Communion Office. (F.) The ten
Commandments, with their Responces, a laudable part of our Service. (G.)
Epistles, their ground. (H.) Clory be to thee, O Lord, Its ancient use. (I.)
Standing up at the Gospel very ancient, why appointed, what posture anciently
used at the Lessons read, and word preached. Africa differed from other
Churches. (K.) The Nicene Creed. Creeds enlarged in Articles as Heresies sprung
up. The Ancients observed no strict formula's. The Hierosolymitan Creed
compared with other parcels of Antiquity. No Creed in the ancient Service of
the Eastern Church, till Anno 511. nor till after that in the Service of the
Western. (L.) Postils, why so called: Bidding of Prayers before the Sermon. The
original ground of them. An ancient form thereof. Preachers varyed therein.
Bidding and Praying, all one in effect. Prayer before the Sermon in the
Primitive Church. St. Ambrose his Form. The People also prayed for the
Preacher. In the first times many-preached one after another in one Forenoon.
The ancient Homilies, avoid thorny subtilties and nice questions. King James
his Order recommended to present practice. (M.) A discourse upon the 18 Canon
of the Council of Laodicea. The order of Divine Service then. The Prayer for
the Catechumens begun the Service. Its formula out of Chrysostom. The
Communion did not begin in the Eastern Church upon the dismission of the
Catechumens. The several dismissions of that Church. All comprehended in the
Missa Catachumenon, of the Western Church, (...) what, (...). (N.) Four
offerings at the Communinion. (...), Alms, a constant concomitant, not accepted
from all. Difference in the Offertory, Sentences betwixt the Scotch Service and
ours, whence derived. (O.) Two Offerings intended by our Church. Oblations how
distributed in the Primitive Church. Sportulantes fratres, who. Mr. Seldens
mistake. Oblations ceased not upon the payment of Tithes. (P.) Oblations
anciently brought to the Altar. The Chest for Alms where placed in the
beginning of the Reformation. (Q.) Offering-days, what. Collar-days at Court.
Hermanus. (R.) Prayer for the whole state of Christ's Church. Many ancient
Formula's thereof. (S.) Dypticks, Rolls, not Tables. (T.) Commemoration of the
Dead. Innocent at first, but after abused. (V.) Two sorts of Dead commemorated.
The Commemoration anciently used after the Elements were consecrated. Why the
Order transposed by our Reformers.

OR immediately after.] A great question there has been of late about the
alliance of this word After, and to what it should relate, one would have
beginning of Morning Prayer, as if it had been said, Immediately after the
beginning of Morning Prayer, and videtur quod sic, because the Latin
Translator has in this particular assumed the Office of an Interpreter,
rendering it, Immediate post principium Matutinarum precum. This
notwithstanding, I approve rather of their sense who make it relative to
Morning Prayer, and suppose as if the structure were immediately after Morning
Prayer, that is, when it is ended; and this, I take it, is plainly inferrible
from the very scope of this Rubric, which was not as some may think, [to allot
some space of time to make provision according to the number of the
Communicants] for the interstitium between the beginning of Morning Prayer, and
the time of the Communion, is so slender a space for the provision of those
Elements, as should there be a want, not half the Country Villages in this
Kingdom can be timely supplied therewith: No, it is clearly otherways, and that
the design was, that the Curate might have timely notice of the several persons
offering themselves to the Communion, and consequently might pe^swade notorious
Offenders, or malicious persons to abstain, and if obstinate, absolutely reject
them according to the purport of the two Rubricks following; for that those two
Rubricks are of the same Syntax and cohaerence with this, the Relative pronoun
those infallibly implies, for what, those? but they who were ordered before to
give in their names over night, or else in the morning, before the beginning of
Morning Prayer, or immediately after. Now how could the Curate possibly confer
with such notorious evil livers, or malicious persons, between the beginning of
Morning Prayer, (which imployd him wholly) and the Communion, unless there were
some vacation allowed him between those two offices, and that such a convenient
space was allotted to intervene, is evident by the practice of those times. For
the Morning Prayer and Communion were not continued as one entire Service, but
abrupt, broken off, and distinct, each office from the other, by these words,
Thus ends the Order of Morning and Evening Prayer: This was done, that the
Holy Day Service might be separated from the Weekly. Whether or not the
Congregation departed hence upon Sundays and Holy Days after the end of Morning
Prayer, and returned again to the Communion Service, I will not positively
determine, I rather think not: Because the Authors of the Admonition, whose
captious curiosity nothing could escape which seemed to promove their beloved
quarrel, have these words, We speak not of ringing when Mattins is done, which
could not administer the least show of blame, had it been done in absence of
the Assembly, or had not the Congregation been then religiously employed: For
this Bell was usually rung in the time of the second service, viz. the Litany,
to give notice to the People, not that the Communion Service, as has been
supposed, but that the Sermon was then coming on. All Ringing and Knowling of
Bells, in the time of the Letany, high Mass, etc. was interdicted by the
Injunctions of Edward the sixth, and Queen Elizabeth, Except one Bell in
convenient time to be rung before the Sermon: In reference to the Sermon only
it was rung, called therefore the Sermon Bell, so that when there was to be no
Sermon, the Bell was not rung; and Sermons were rare, very rare in those days,
in some places but once a quarter, and perhaps not then, had not Authority
strictly enjoined them; which usage of Sermon Bells has been practiced, and is
still, if I mistake not, in some parts of Germany; in Scotland I am sure, or
the Reverend B. Cooper his seventh days conference.
Bishop of Galloway deceives me: Having persued his Narrative through all the
divisions of that Churches first Service, at length he adds, [You hear the
third Bell ringing, and in this space the Reader cease, and at the end of the
Bell ringing, the Preacher will come.] There being then, as I have said, so
apparent and visible a breach between the first and second Service, the Morning
Office, and the Letany, it is very probable, though the Assembly did not
dissolve, yet was there such a ceasing and rest from sacred Employments, as
might give the Curat^ time in that Interval, both to receive the names of such
as intended to communicate, as also to admonish, and in case of obstinacy to
repel scandalous persons from that Ordinance; sure I am, he was then more at
leisure then he could be at any other time after Morning Prayer begun, and
before it were ended.

And if any of them be an open and notorious evil liver, etc.] Notorium amongst
the Civilians and Canonists, is threefold. First, there is Notorium
Praesumptionis, a notoriousness of Presumption, where Evidentia rei est
evidenter a Jure praesumta, The evidence of the thing is taken for evident, by
presumption of Law. As where it presumes one to be the Son of such a man,
because he was born in Wedlock. Secondly, There is Notorium Juris, a
notoriousness of Law, when the offense is proved either per confessionem factam
in Jure, by confession made in open Court, or per Sententiam Judicis, by the
Sentence of the Judge. Lastly, There is Notorium facti, a notoriousness of
Fact, when per evidentiam rei nulla potest tergiversations celari. The evidence
is so clear, as the Accusation can by no shifts be avoided. Now to which of
these three the term Notorious in this Rubric relates, is a great question:
The learned Prelate, Bishop Notes upon the Common Prayer.
Andrews, restrains it positively to the second: Our Law of England, says
he, will not suffer the Minister to judge any Man a notorious Offender, but him
who is so convinced by some legal Sentence: The Law of England will not suffer
it, so that should the Ecclesiastical permit it, the Municipal Law would not,
and if it comes to an Antinomy, a justle between the Canon Laws of our Church,
and the Law of the Land, this it is must overruled. But does our Canon Law give
any such toleration? does it empower any Minister to exclude his Parishioner,
(claiming his Christian privilege in those blessed Mysteries) from the
Sacrament, or to make his private discretion the supreme Judge of the
Notoriousness here mentioned? certainly no. As for the 26 and 27 Canons, which
are produced to the contrary, they neither speak explicitly enough, nor do they
sufficiently direct in this Affair: The Canon wherein our Church declares her
mind more articulately, is the 109. If any offend their Brethren, either by
Adultery, Whoredom, Incest, or Drunkenness, or by Swearing, Ribaldry, Usury, or
any other uncleanness and wickedness of life, the Church Wardens, or Quest-men
and Sidemen, in their next Presentment to their Ordinaries, shall faithfully
present all and every of the said Offenders, to the intent that they and every
of them may be punished by the severity of the Laws, according to their
deserts, and such notorious Offenders shall not be admitted to the Communion,
till they be reformed; where I note, First, the Crime must be scandalous, an
Offense to the Brethren. Secondly, it must be presented to the Ordinary.
Thirdly, That such scandalous Offenders, so presented to the Ordinary, are not
to be admitted to the Communion. But some perhaps will say this was one of the
failings of an ill regulated State and Church, which justly called for a
Reformation, and so indeed it was pretended by Dr. Burgess and Mr. White of
Dorchester, at a Committee sitting in the Lords House, in March 1641. But, upon
a full debate, it was determined at that Committee, to the very conviction of
the Opponents, that open and notorious evil-livers, were none but such as the
Laws had adjudged to be so: Agreeable to this determination did the Parliament
afterward ordain, Ordinance Oct. 20. 1645.
That no person be suspended from the Communion for any matter of scandal, but,
either upon his confession before the Eldership to have committed such an
offense, or upon the testimony of two Witnesses at least, and those examined
upon oath: So was it ordained by this Parliament, sufficiently Presbyterian,
against the liking of an Assembly of Presbyters, which did Enixins Dogmatis and
Argumentis in contrarium, nec semel, sed frustra, contendere; vehemently,
though all to little purpose, (more then once) oppose it with all the Arguments
they could, as De Synedriis l. 1. c. 10.
Mr. Seldom assures us: Having opened the mind of our both Church and State,
as to this particular, it will not be amiss to represent the conformity it
bears with the Imperial Edict, and practice of the Primitive Church. As for
the Emperial Law, it speaks loud enough, Novel 123. c. 11. Collat. 9. tit. 15.
c. 11.
Omnibus Episcopis and Presbyteris interdicimus segregare aliquem a sacra
communione, antequam causa monstretur, propter quam Sanctae regulae hoc fieri
jubent, We prohibit all, both Bishops and Presbyters, from shutting out any one
from the Communion, before just cause be shown that the holy Canons warrant
them so to proceed: As for the primitive usage, St. Augustine fully, Nos a
Communione quenquam prohibere non possumus, nisi aut sponte confessum, aut in
aliquo Judicio Ecclesiastico, vel seculari nominatum, at que convictum, We
cannot repel any man from the Communion, unless he has freely confessed his
offense, or has been accused and convicted in some secular Court, or
Ecclesiastical consistory: Indeed so was the Legislative pattern of our Savior,
in the first institution of his Supper: Never was there a more detestable
Crime, then Judas his Treason, never was Delinquent convicted upon Evidence so
infallible, as his Masters Omniscience: But though he had already projected the
conspiracy, and our Savior already knew it, yet did he not interdict him from
participating with his elect Apostles, recommending thereby to his Church this
Lesson, that no outward communion of the wicked with us, in those sacred
Ordinances, can possibly render them ineffectual to his holy Ones: It Is true, I
grant some learned men depart from this sense, and because St. John says, that
Judas, having received the sop, went immediately out, thence infer his absence
at the time of Christ's instituting his last Supper: But our Church is positive
in the contrary, nor can St. John be otherwise reconciled to the rest of the
Evangelists: To conclude, the result of all the premises is, That none are to
be suspended from this Sacrament, but the notorious Delinquents, and that none
are notorious, but they whom the Sentence of the Law, or their own confessions
have stated so to be: All reason it should be so. My temporal Estate no private
person can deprive me of, until it be legally evicted from me by course of Law,
and shall it be in the power of any mortal man to divest me of my interest in
that blessed Banquet, before I be adjudged to have forfeited it upon fair
hearing? what were this, but to expose Christians to the infirmities, passions,
and somewhat else, quod dicere nolo, of their spiritual Pastors?

The same order shall the Curate use with those betwixt whom he perceives
malice, and hatred to reign, etc.] Amongst the three Graces the Apostle has
given the supremacy of dignity to Charity, 1 Cor. 13. 13. and this most
excellent Grace is never so resplendent as in the celebration of the Eucharist,
in relation to which, she is most strictly enjoined by our Savior himself: If
thou bring thy gift unto the Altar, and there remembrest that thy Brother
has ought against Matthew. 5. 24.
thee, leave thy gift before the Altar, and go first and be reconciled to thy
Brother; which is very rationally thought by learned men to be the Institution
of an Evangelical Ordinance, because it was not commanded under the Law to such
as were to present their Oblations, and it is not like that Christ would
superinduce any new establishment to former Rights, when the ceremonial Law was
expiring; concurrent with the Masters Precept, is the order of his Disciples,
St. Paul, 1. Cor. 11. 18. When ye come together in the Church, I hear that
there be divisions among you. What these divisions were he tells them in the
21. verse, viz. that when they came to their Love Feasts, wherewith this
Sacrament was joined, and which were instituted for the preservation of
Christian fellowship, and levelling of all, not only animosities, but
highthoughts; this notwithstanding, the rich, who brought plenty, presuming he
might be master of what he offered, either fell to apart, or with some select
and choice friends of his own exceedings fed liberally, while the poorman had
not wherewith to stay his stomach; which inferred a disdain not agreeable to
the design of that charitable collation: upon these proceedings, the Apostle
being to pronounce his judgment, he assures them they are much in the wrong,
and that this is not to eat the Lords Supper i. e. that this practice and the
Communion are two, inconsistent and incompatible one with the other. Charity
being so essentially requisite to the right participation of the Sacrament, as
it has imposed denomination to it. It being called the Communion, 1 Cor. 10.
16. why so, he tells us in the next verse [for thereby we being many are one
Bread and one body, for we are all partakers of that one Bread.] Now there
cannot possibly be union, where there is not charity, the breach of this grace
being the same in the spiritual Body of the Church, that a wound is in the
natural, Solutio continui, a rupture of the part entire. And in Symbolical
reference to this, it may be here aptly hinted that in the Primitive Church for
certain, and probably in the Apostolic, they used in the celebration of this
Sacrament to have but one loaf, and one cup for the whole Congregation, to
which in all likelihood Ignatiu^ad Philadelphenos.
Ignatius alluded (...) i. e. One Bread is broken and one cup distributed to
the whole Congregation, which passage though that most excellent edition of
Isaacus Vossius (exactly agreeing with the very ancient Translation published
by the Reverend Primate of Armach) does not own, yet I presume the rather to
cite, because he speaks elsewhere of some, Epist ad Ephesians.
(...), i. e. breaking one Bread. A matter not improbable in such times when
Communicants were not by the tith so numerous as now. And though I deny not,
but this Father might have chief regard to Christ, the mystical Bread which
came down from heaven, yet does not that hinder, but he might also allude to
what was then matter of fact in the celebration of the Eucharist. Besides this
nominal indication of the necessity of this virtue from the word Communion,
further evidence may be produced from Antiquity for its high reputation. As
that it was a constant adjunct to those (...), or feasts of love, which were
fellow-like collations intended as a repast for the poor, together with the
wealthy, and though several abuses stepping into that sacred confraternity and
Brotherhood, Christian prudence thought fit soon after in the Greek Church (for
in the African they continued to gether up to Tertul Apolog. c. 39.
Tertullians time) to disjoyn them, ordering the Lords Supper to be celebrated
in the morning fasting, yet that it might still lay claim and title to its
ancient appellation of a Love feast, it was accommodated with ceremonies of
like import. Whence in the entrance into service of those blessed mysteries,
the Deacon was appointed to cry aloud (...), i. e. let no man be at one with
another, (a Phrase borrowed I conceive from that of Ign. Epist. ad Trall.
Ignatius (...), i. e. Let not man have any controversy with his neighbor,)
and this proclamation once past the holy kiss and embraces amongst the
faithful presently followed; ^ust. Marty. Apol. 2. Constit. Apost. l. 2. c. 57.
(...), i e. Prayers ended, we s^lute one another with an holy kiss, that is,
(...), as the constitutions have it; men, men, and women, women; and it cannot
otherwise be conceived, considering their stations were so disposed in holy
Assemblies as each Sex was severed and apart from the other. From hence also
Tertullian calls this signaculum orationis, the Seal and close of prayer.
This is Tertul. de. Orat
that which the Council of Leodicea, and the Greeks in their Liturgies, call
(...), the Latins Pax, the Salutation of Peace, and is still retained by the
Church of Rome, derived originally from that of the Apostle, Romans 15. 16.
Salute one another with a holy kiss. Lastly when the Congregation was
departed, this noble virtue of Charity was still preserved, by sending
sometimes blessed loaves, sometimes part of the consecrated bread to their
absent friends as tokens of their Christian correspondence, whereof mention is
made in the Epistle of Ireneus to Victor Bishop of Rome cited by Hist. Eccles.
Eusebius, and in the several Epistles of Augustine and Paulinus under the name
of Pa^is Benedictus, blessed bread. The result of all this tends, not as to the
decision of a question controverted, but to the exciting us up to a due
estimation of this Grace, and to mind us that this Sacrament should be
somewhat beside (...), a memorial of Christ's Sacrifice upon the cross (which
is granted to be the chief motive to its institution) and that also it is
intended to be (...), an act of oblivion, according to the Athenian mode of
injuries received.

Shall stand in the Body of the Church or in the Chancel.] This Rubric being
not explicit enough as to the proper station of the holy Table, is illustated
Elizabeth her first Injunctions, and succeeding Orders. In the Canon the Order
is, that the Table shall stand where it is placed, viz at the east end of the
Chancel. Saving when the holy Communion is to be administered. At which time the
same shall be placed in so good sort, as thereby the Minister may be more
conveniently heard of the Communicants, and the Communicants also may more
conveniently, and in more number communicate with the Minister. Which words are
almost verbatim transcribed out of the Queens injunctions, these only
superadding. And after the Communion done from time to time the same holy table
to be placed where it stood before. Nothing can be more express; and
demonstrative, that the table placed where the Altar stood; was but supposed,
set out of the way, during only the Time of Non-communication, and that at the
time of the Communion, it was to be removed, as the word Saving, mentioned both
in the Canon and in the injunctions, and the cited member of the Injunctions
infallibly implies, if these instances afford not satiety to quiet all
scruples; the Orders of that Queen speak shril enough. And if in any Church the
steps be transposed, that they be not erected again, but that the place be
decently paved, where the Comnunion Table shall stand, Out of the time of
receiving of the holy Communion. Order. Oct. 10. 3. Eliz. So that out of
Communion time the Table is to stand Altarwise as we, and only we do phrase
it, for Altarwise is an idiome peculiar to us English, not known abroad in
foreign parts, and they who can find Popery in that position, have better
eyes then ordinary. Altars with them do not observe one regular position, some
are placed in the middle of the Quire, some at the upper part, end-wayes north
and south, and if eye witnesses may be trusted, the chief Altar in St. Peter's
Church at Rome stands in the midst of the Chancel. As for the Priest standing
at the north side of the Table, this seems to avoid the fashion of the
Priests standing
with his face toward the East, as is the Popish practice. So the M. S.
collections of a learned man.

Shall say the Lords prayer.] The Lords Prayer has been ever since
Christianity a considerable portion of the Communion service, and instituted so
to Adv. Pelag. 1. 3.
St. Hierom, Docuit Apostolos ut quotidie in corporis illius sacrificio
credentes audeant loqui, Pater Noster etc. i. e. Christ taught his Apostles the
boldness to address themselves to God in his own words in the daily sacrifice
of his body. The like is affirmed by St. Augustine Epist. 59. and Gregory Lib.
7. Epist. 63.

Then shall the Priest rehearse the ten Commandments.] The recital of the
Decalogue with the Pater Noster and Creed, were enjoined by Henry the 8. and
his Son Edward in his first in junctions: but the rehearsal of them after this
sort, that is before the Epistle and Gospel, and with these Responses, was not
introduced until the second Liturgy of Edward the 6. An order it is, of as
high prudence as can be devised in such a Christian affair. Here is God
speaking by the Priest, another Moses to the people, so it should be, speak
thou unto us all that the Lord our God shall say unto thee, and we will hear
thee, Deuteronomy. 5. 27. he stands delivering Gods message to us, while we ly
prostrate in the lowest posture we can, stricken down with terror at those
dreadful Laws, the violation of the least of which, were enough in Gods strict
eye eternally to condemn us. Laws which never any man without Gods preventing
and assisting grace did or can observe, and therefore we are directed by the
Church to invoke Gods grace for our performance of his will; to every Precept
we are taught to apply St. Augustines, Da quod jubes, grant me to do what thou
command. The sum of this Petitionary Responce is derived from Deuteronomy. 5. 29.
Oh that there were such an heart in them that they would keep all my
Commandments. And as we crave such an heart from God, so we implore his mercy
for our violation of them.

The Priest shall read the Epistle.] The Rupertus de Div. Officiis l. 1. c. 32.
Epistle, or as the ancients sometimes called it the Apostle, was instituted to
personate and represent the Law,

Glory be to thee O Lord.] This Doxology is omitted in our Reformed Liturgy,
not out of any particular disgust against it, but because our Church Chrysostom
de Circo.
(...) i. e. The Deacon going about to open the Gospel consisting of four
parts, we all fix our eyes upon him, as still as may be, and when he begins to
read the Gospel (by declaring whence it is taken) we presently all rise up
acclaiming, Glory be to thee O Lord De divinis Officiis.
Alcuin gives a satisfactory reason for it, Quasi dicat, Quia verba salutem
conferentia mox audituri estis, laudate Dominum cujus ben^ficio hanc gratiam
percipere meruistis. Because you expect to hear the words of the Gospel which
brings salvation to all true believers, therefore praise that God who has
graciously dispensed to you so great a blessing.

Standing up.] (...), when the Gospel is read, let all Prosbyters, Deacons and
all the people stand up with much silence and attention Clem. Constable. l 2. c.
57. so also the word (...) mentioned in the foregoing place of Chrysostom
imports a custom anciently observed with that punctual strictness, as none of
what quality soever was exempted from it, as the same Father assures us
Chrysostom de Circo.
(...) i e. while the holy Gospel is reading, we do not attend in a careless
posture, but standing up with much gravity, we so receive the message etc. yea
the greatest potentate on earth stands upalso with awful reverence, takes not
the liberty to cover his head with his imperial Diedem, but in all submissive
manner behaves himself in the presence of God, who speaks in those sacred
Gospels, standing is in truth, the most proper posture of attention, and if any
part of Scripture requires attention, the Gospel does it in an eminent degree,
the reading whereof is Chrysostom in Isai, Hom 2.
(...) the setting of heaven gates wide open; not with the Psalmist, for the
King of Glory to enter in, but for the King of Glory to come forth. Nor shall
it pass without a note, that this passage of Chrysostom presents the Emperor
himself, not only standing, but also standing bare at the reading of the
Gospel, such honor was then deferred to those Evangelical tidings. But here it
will be demanded what assurance I can give that those early Christians did not
stand at all the rest of the service, kneeling time only excepted, and if they
did, my observation signifies nothing. In answer to which, I say, the practice
was not uniform in this point in all places. In the Aphrican Church the fashion
was for the Auditory to stand so while the Lessons were read. So Cypr. Epist.
24.
St. Cyprian represents Aurelius and Colerinus, both made Readers, standing in
loco Altiore: in a place of higher advance, meaning the Desk or Pulpit, ab omni
populo circumstante conspecti, beheld of all the Audience standing round about
them, which mode continued there even up to Aug. Sermon. 49. de diversis.
St. Augustines time, who often mentions it, Ego sedens loquor, vos stando
laboratis: I preach unto you sitting, you toil yourselves in standing to hear
me. Yet id de Catechizand. Rudibus l. 3.
in another place he rather commends the sitting posture, long consultius in
quibusdam Ecclesiis Transmarinis, non soluns Antistites sedentes loquuntur ad
populum, sed ipsi etiam populo sedilia subjacent, ne quisquam infirmior stando
lassatus, a saluberima intention avertatur, aut ctiam cogatur abscedere. It is
better ordered in some beyond sea Churches, where not only the Preachers sit
while they teach the people, but seats are also provided for the Audience,
least any through infirmity wearied with long standing, should be either
hindered from attention or enforced to depart the Church. This custom indeed of
standing seems a peculiar of Aphrica, for other Churches used sitting. So St.
Ad Eustoch. de virginitate servanda.
Hierom gives the practice of the Monks of his time, complet is orationibus,
cunctisque residentibus, medius incipit disput are, prayers being ended, and
all sitting down again, one from amongst them begins to preach. And that this
was the uniform practice of the Greek Church, is inferrible from Apol. 2.
Justin Martyr, who laying down how the Scriptures were read, and the Sermon
delivered in the Assemblies, proceeds thus, (...) after this we rise up all
together and send forth our prayers: So also that known proclamation of the
Deacon, so frequent in St Chrysostom, (...), Let us stand upright with all
reverence, when there was a transition from the other part of divine
Service-Prayers, now this rising up, and standing upright must necessarily
infer that they sat before. So also, not to urge the l. 2. c. 57.
Clementine Constitutions, St. Chrysostom is most express, speaking of the
irreverence of some in holy Assemblies in Hebr. Hom. 16.
(...), if the Preacher be somewhat more elegant then ordinary, presently they
who sit to hear him fall on laughing. But what can be more either full or
Authentic then our Saviors practice in St. Luke 2. 46. whom his Parents.
found in the Temple sitting in the midst of the Doctors, and hearing them.

The Gospel being ended, shall be said the Greed.] Having had formerly occasion
to speak of the Latin Creed, surnamed the Apostles, we come now to that of the
Greek Church, whereof this following is the most large, I say not the Father
Son and holy Ghost, as was the very direction of our Savior relating to
Baptism; which Exposit Fidci.
Justin Martyr, expounds by, (...). One God of the whole universe, under the
nations of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost. Afterward as upstart heresies did
administer occasion, several Articles were added in opposition to those false
teachers: for instance, maker of heaven and earth against Epiphan. haeres. 22.
Menander, who held the world was created by angels. His only Son, born of the
Virgin Mary, in opposition to Ebion and Cerinthus, who maintained he was mere
man, begat by Joseph, Crucified, dead, and buried, in opposition to Simon
Magus, who denied Christ's humanation, or incarnation, saying, that all his
conversation here on earth was (...), seemingly only, and not in verity; for
which reason Epist ad Tral.
Ignatius, who undertakes him, and his adherents, so often repeateth the word
(...), he was truly born, truly crucified, he truly rose again. Further
instances might be produced were it necessary or advantageous to my present
purpose. Though the emergency of such heterodox opinions occasioned the
addition of such defensitives against them, yet as learned Grotius has well
noted, all Churches did not observe a vocal uniformity, or bind themselves
strictly to the letter, but varied in the make or outward frame, though they
agreed in the substance; whence it is that in ancient confessions there
appears such a verbal diversity, when in truth the mental result of all is
the same. And when one precise formula was once agreed upon, yet was that form
modelled always suitable to the essential import, and very often in the
express words of elder presidents. Take the most ancient of Creeds extant,
which the most ancient of Churches (that of Heirusalem) is likeliest to afford
us. Take, I say, that Creed,, and compare it with those few monuments we have
of earlier times, and you will find very many parcels thereof so near
resembling, as may persuade us they did relate each to other. Several of them
Grotius has collected to my hand, and some others my slender reading shall
contribute.

Symbolum Hierosolymitanum.

(...) (...), Ireneus. (...) (...), Justin Mart. Exposit. Fid. (...) (...),
Ignat. Epist ad Ephesians. (...) (...) Ireneus. (...). (...) Clem. Alexandr. Strom.
l. 7.

Nay even those superstructures which were afterward affixt to this Creed by
the Councels of Nice and Constantinople have preserved the like regard to
antiquity, whereof some instances may be given: as where Christ is rendered to
be (...), light of light, Justin Expositio Fidei.
Martyr has the very same expression, (...), so where he is said (...),
consubstantial with his Father, the same Justin to the same effect, (...), so
where the Council of Constantinople added concerning the holy Ghost (...), his
Procession from the Father, the said Justin, (...).

This Creed, as Nicene, was contrived by the great exemplar of humane frailty,
Hosius Bishop of Corduba. It past the Counsels so great approbation, that
Chrysoft. d^dicto Abrahami Hom.
(...), there were of three hundred and eighteen Bishops there present but
seven that dissented. So inconsiderable then was the Arrian Party, which not
long after so ranted and domineered, as to compel this very Hosius to renounce
his own confession, and infallibility it self (the Bishop of Rome) to fail and
subscribe to their faith. The supplemental parcels which relate to the holy
Ghost were added by the Constantinopolitan fathers, and some say, framed by
Gregory Nyssen, but I see no full evidence for it. As for the Public use of
this Creed, in the daily offices of the Church, Durandus, Polydor Virgil, and
some late Authors, fixed the first original upon Marcus and Damasus Bishops of
Rome. But Walfridus Strabo, who flourished 850. and therefore g De Reb. Eccles.
c. 22.
likelier to know the truth then his juniors, delivers no such thing,
referring us to the third Concel of Cap. 2.
Toledo celebrated Anno 589. And this Council tells us whence she had it,
decreeing ut per omnes Ecclesias Hispaniae and Galliciae, secundum forman
Orient alium Ecclesiarum Concilii Constantinopolitani Symbolum recitetur, that
throughout all Churches of Spain and Gallicea, according to the mode (of whom,
of the Western? No, but) of the Eastern Churches the Constantinopolitan Creed
should be rehearsed. Certainly had the use thereof been in the Church of Rome,
at this time, the Council would not have rambled unto the East for a president.
And confessed it is by all Romanists generally, that from the Greeks they had,
not only the Creed it self, but also the first hint of making it an Auctory to
the Liturgy. If so, then it will be taken tarde, to enter very late, and very
short of Damasus his time. For Vossius de Tribus Symb.
from Theodorus Lector proves evidently the Greeks themselves had it not very
many years before this Council. [Macedonius an Orthodox Patriarch of
Constantinople being violently expelled by Anastasius the Emperor to make way
for Timotheus (an heritick of the Eutychian Sect:) no soonor was Timotheus
settled in his See, but presently at the entreaty of his friends, he ordered
that the Constantinopolitan Creed should be said at every Church meeting, or
time of public Prayer, to the discredit of Macedonius, as if he were
disaffected to it, whereas until that time it was only rehearsed once a year,
when the Bishop Catechized on Maundy Thursday. Thus Collectan. l. 2.
Theodorus, and this was about the year 511. which being the first hint we have
in all antiquity of this, or any other symbol, represented as Parcel of the
public Liturgy: we will give those Ritualists leave to say their pleasure, and
we will have the like liberry to think what we list. But though the Church
Primitive was ^low in employing it, as we now do, they having designed it for
other very Religious intents: yet can that be no competent bar to us, but we
may, both this and others, dispose, as we do, to the best improvement of our
faith, and edification of the Common interest of the Church.

After the Creed if there be no Sermon.] In the Primitive service, no Creed
Sermon immediately followed the Gospel, and was an usual explication upon it,
whence I conceive the name Postil is derived, quasi post illa Evangelia, Postil
being nothing but a discourse upon, and subsequent to the Gospel. These Popular
discourses had in Antiquity various appcllations, in the earliest times (...)
was the most usual, so (...), a word of exhortation Acts 13 14. So in Clemens
his constitutions, (...), next let the Presbyters exhort the people; then they
called them (...), homilies, then (...) Sermons. Among the Latins St Cyprian
especially Tractatus a tract is most familiar, in Augustine and Ambrose,
disputatio, a disputation frequently occurreth, because therein they usually
undertook the confutation of either Heathens, Jews or heretics. Lastly Sermo a
Sermon was then also in use.

Regularly, and of courses the ancient form of bidding of prayers will here
fall under cognizance, and the rather, because some thing like it, is
established by the Canons of our Church. Its original extraction claiming
precedence of consideration, I shall begin with that.

The Agenda of Religion in our Church, before the Reformation, were performed,
it is well known, in Latin, a Language very in^difying to a nonintelligent
people. That so many, so much interested and concerned in those sacred offices,
should not be totally excluded, as idle spectators, or fit for nothing but, now
and then, to return an Amen to they knew not what, this expedient was devised.
The people were exhorted to join in prayers, according to certain heads,
dictated to them by the Minister in the English tongue, observing the method
and materials of the then Prayer for all States, so that of all the service
then used, this only could properly be called Common Prayer, as being the
only form, wherein the whole Congregation did join in consort, and therefore
the title of it in the Injunctions of Edw. 6. Anno 1547. is. The form of
bidding the Common Prayers. Now because it was made by Allocution, or speaking
to the people, agreeing with what the Primitive Church called (...), it was
called Bidding of prayers. Thus in short, as to the ground of this ancient
form: will you now see the form it self? behold it here.

After a laudable custom of our Mother holy Church, ye shall kneel down, moving
your hearts unto Almighty God, and making your special prayers for the three
Estates, concerning all Christian people, i. e. for the Spiritually, the
Temporalty, and the souls being in the pains of Purgatory. First for our holy
Father the Pope with all his Cardinals: for all Archbishops, and Bishops, and
in special for my Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, your Metropolitan, and also
for my Lord Bishop of this Diocese; and in general for all Parsons, Vicars,
and Parish Priests having cure of souls, with the Ministers of Christ's Church,
as well Religious as not Religious, Secondly, ye shall pray for the unity and
peace of all Christian Realms, and especially for the Noble Realm of England,
for our Sovereign Lord the King etc. and for all the Lords of the Council, and
all other of the Nobility which dwell in the Countries, having protection and
governance of the same. That Almighty God may send them grace, so to govern and
rule the Land, that it may be pleasing unto Almighty God, wealth and profit to
the Land, and salvation to their souls. Also ye shall pray for all those that
have honored the Church with light, lamp, vestment, or Bell, or with any other
ornaments, by which the service of Almighty God is the better maintained and
kept. Furthermore ye shall pray for all true travelers and tillers of the
earth, that truly and duly done their duty to God and holy Church, as they be
bound to do. Also ye shall pray for all manner of fruits that be done upon the
ground, or shall be, that Almighty God of his great pity and mercy may send
such wedderings, that they may come to the sustenance of man. Ye shall pray
also for all those that be in debt or deadly sin, that Almighty God may give
them grace to come out thereof, and the sooner by our prayer. Also ye shall
pray for all those that be sick or diseased, either in body or in soul, that
the Almighty would send them the thing that is most profitable as well bodily
as ghostly. Also ye shall pray for all Pilgrims, and Palmers, that have taken
the way to Rome, to saint James of Jerusalem, or to any other place: that
Almighty God may give them grace to go safe, and to come safe, and give us
grace to have part of their prayers, and they part of ours. Also ye shall pray
for the holy Cross, that is in possession and hands of unrightful people: that
God Almighty may send it into the hands of Christian people, when it pleases
him. Furthermore I commit unto your devout prayers, all women that be in our
Ladies bonds: that Almighty God may send them grace, the child to receive the
Sacrament of Baptism, and the mother purification. Also ye shall pray for the
good man and woman, that this day gives bread to make the holy-loaf, and for
all those that first began it, and them that longest continue. For these and
for all true Christian people every man and woman say a Pater Noster and an Ave
etc.

After this follows a Prayer for all Christian Souls, reckoning first
Archbishops, and Bishops, and especially Bishops of the Diocese, then for all
Curates, etc. then for all Kings and Queens, etc. then for all Benefactors to
the Church, then for the Souls in Purgatory, especially for the Soul of N.
whose Anniversary then is kept.

This was the form preceding the Reformation of it, made by King Henry the
eighth: This King having once ejected the Popes usurped Authority, used all
possible Artifice to keep possession of his new-gained Power: That by the whole
^lergy in Convocation, that by Act of Parliament he was recognized Chap. 1.
Supreme Head of the Church of England, he thought it not enough: But further
ordered, the Popes name to be utterly rased out, (so are the words of the
Proclamation) of all Prayers, Orisons, Rubrioks, Canons of Mass Books, and all
other Books in the Churches, and his memory never more to be remembered, except
to his contumely and reproach: Accordingly also he caused this Form to be
amended, by omitting the Popes name, with all his Relations, by annexing the
title of Supreme head to himself, and by contracting it into a narrower model.
But though this King corrected so much as served his own turn, yet all the
Popery of this form he did not reform, but left the Prayer of the Dead
remaining. As for King Edward the sixth, the form enjoined by him, was the same
precisely with that of Henry the eighth: That of Queen Elizabeth varieth, for
the better, from both these; Praying for, being changed into, Praising God for
the dead; and with her form agrees that in the 55 Canon of our Church, almost
to a syllable

Before all Sermons, Lectures, and Homilies, Preachers and Ministers shall move
the People to join with them in Prayer in this form, or to this effect, as
briefly as conveniently they may. Ye shall pray for Christ's holy Catholic
Church, that is, for the whole Congregation of Christian People dispersed
throughout the whole world, and especially for the Churches of England,
Scotland and Ireland. And herein I require you most especially to pray for the
Kings most excellent Majesty our Sovereign Lord James, King of England,
Scotland, France and Ireland, Defendor of the Faith, and Supreme Governor in
these his Realms, and all other his Dominions and Countries, over all persons,
in all causes as well Ecclesiastical as Temporal. Ye shall also pray for our
gracious Queen Anne, the Noble Prince Charles, Frederick Prince Elector
Palatine, and the Lady Elizabeth his wife. Ye shall also pray for the Ministers
of Gods holy word and Sacraments, as well Archbishops and Bishops, as other
Pastors and Curates. Ye shall also pray for the Kings most honorable Council,
and for all the Nobility and Magistrates of this Realm, that all and every of
these in their several Callings, may serve truly and painfully to the glory of
God, and the edifying and well governing of his people, remembering the account
that they must make. Also ye shall pray for the whole Commons of this Realm,
that they may live in true Faith and Fear of God, in humble obedience to the
King, and brotherly charity one to another. Finally, let us praise God for all
those which are departed out of this life in the Faith of Christ, and pray unto
God that we may have grace to direct our lives after their good example: that
this life ended, We may be made partakers with them of the glorious
Resurrection in the life Everlasting. Always concluding with the Lords prayer.

Having beheld the Reformation of the form, it will not be amiss to look into
the practice. This upon my best inquiry, all along, the days of Edward the 6.
and Queen Elizabeth, is exhibited by only six Authors. Two Archbishops,
Parker and Sands: Four Bishops, Gardner Latimer, Jewel and Andrews. In all
these I observe it interveneth betwixt the Text delivered and the Sermon,
Archbishop Parker only excepted, who concludes his Sermon with it. I observe
also in them all, that it is terminated in the Lords Prayer or Pater Noster,
for which reason it was styled Bidding of Beads, Beads and Pater Nosters being
then relatives. Lastly, I observe in every of them some variation, more or
less, as occasion is administered, not only from the precise words, but even
contents of this form. And from hence I infer that the Injunctions both of Edw.
the 6. and Queen Elizabeth, being framed before any reformed Liturgy was by
Law established, did not bind Preachers so strictly to the precise words of
that form when the service was rendered in English, as when in Latin, for it is
not presumable those eminent men would have assumed such a liberty to vary the
expression and enlarge in some other matters, had not they understood the
Churches dispensation therein. But there were afterward some overforward to
abuse this Liberty, and minding the interest of their own Principles, took the
boldness to omit the main Conference at Hampt. Court 2, day.
who could be content to pray for James King of England, France and Ireland,
defender of the faith, but as for supreme Governor in all causes and over all
Persons (as well Ecclesiastcal as Civil) they passed that over in silence, as
that very King has it, who thereupon reinforced the form by the Canon before
specified. As for the late practical change of Exhortation Let us pray, into
Invocation, we pray. In my weak apprehension it is but the very same in effect
and operation, and neither to be justly quarrelled at, especially when the
Lords Prayer (which (...), summarily comprehends all we can ask, is the close
to both.

Having discoursed the practice of our own Church, it will not be amiss to
examine that of the Primitive Church, and the rather because many have been of
that opinion that no prayer before the Sermon was used in those times. Counter
to which, several Authorities may be opposed De incomprehensibili Dei natura.
De Doctrina Christiana.
(...); What good can a Sermon do Which is not accompanied with Prayer? the
Prayer first, and then the Sermon, so Chrysostme; Augustine not unlike, who
thinks it fit, ut Pastor orando prose, ac pro illis quos est allocuturus, sit
Orator, antequam dictor: that the Preacher praying for himself and those he is
to speak to, be first an entreater before a Teacher. A thing so clear as
Ferrarius summeth up the contents of his eight Chapter Lib. 1. in these words.
Preces ad Deum concioni sensper antecessisse, that Prayers to God always
preceded the Sermon, and ends that Chapter with St Ambrose his formula. Obsecro
Domine and suppliciter Rogo etc. Give unto me O Lord I humbly pray and beseech
thee, sober knowledge which may edify; give unto me eloquence prudent and meek
which knows not what Pride is, nor to boast above others my brethren. Put
into my mouth the word of consolation, edification, and exhortation by thy holy
spirit, that I may be able to persuade the good still to improve, and with the
power of thy word and mine own example recall such as go astray to the rule of
thy uprightness, Let the words which thou shall grant unto thy servant be as
sharp arrows and burning darcs, which may penetrate and inflame the hearts of
the hearers, with the fear and love of thee. So the Ambrosian Office in
Ferrarius. And as the Preacher invocated Gods blessing upon the word he was to
deliver, so did the people also for him who was to instruct them, which Mr.
Thorndike conceives to be intended in that form of the peoples resaluting the
Priest, and with thy spirit, which was used also at his going up into the
Pulpit. Whither or not this rite had any reference to such an intent I will
not, nor need I contend, having so convincing and satisfactory Authority out of
St Chrysostom, who mentions the Deacon crying out de Prophet. Obscur. Hom. 2.
(...), let us pray for the Bishop that he may rightly divide the word of truth
among us. Nor is it much dissonant what is delivered as the practice in our
Church before the Reformation to have been spoken to the Preacher, about to
ascend the Pulpit. The Lord be in your heart, and in your mind, and mouth to
pronounce and show forth his most blessed Gospel.

In the Apostolical age the extraordinary effluvium, and outgoing of Gods
spirit governed all, both in Prayer and Preaching: nothing was premeditated,
but all performed as the spirit at that instant suggested, according to the
measure of their gifts, and for trial of those gifts, it was permitted by the
Apostle for the faithful at their holy meetings, to speak, prophesy, and
expound one after another. For ye may, says he, all prophecy one by one that
all may learn and all may exhort. Nor was this custom peculiar only to the
Apostolic Church, but derived lower to succeeding times. So Clemens in his
Constitutions, (...). Let the Priests every one by himself, not altogether, and
the Bishop in the last place instruct the people. And in several Homilies of
Chrysostom the same practice is observed by others. To this custom perhaps the
fathers of the Council of Laodicea had an eye, when they spoke of Homilies, of
Bishops in the plural number, (...), whereof anon.

As for the materials of the Primitive Homilies, it is rare to find any thing
polemick in them, and where it occurreth, the controversy is about matters
fundamental: Faith and the principles of an holy life are the main they
inculcate, declining nice, thorny and inedifying disputes. Thrice happy were
this nation would our Ministers conform to that good old way, and indeed to the
excellent direction of that learned Prince, who ordered. That no Preacher King
James his directions
of what title soever, under the degree of a Bishop or Dean, at the least, do
presume to preach in any popular Auditory, the deep points of Predestination,
Election, Reprobation, or of the universality, efficacy, resistibility or
irresistibility of Gods grace, but rather leave those theams to be handled by
learned men, and that modestly and moderately by use and application, rather
then by way of positive Doctrine, as being fitter for Schools and Universities,
then for simple Auditories.

After the Sermon.] Between the Sermon and the Off^rtory, several things
intervene, Can. 18.
Leodecea, I shall first give you the Canon it selfintire, and then parcel it
out into considerations apart: the Canon is this. (...). i. e. [It is thought
fit that by themselves and apart first after the Homilies of the Bishops the
prayer for the Catechumens be performed, and when the Catechumens are departed,
then the prayer for the Penitent be made, and these having been under
imposition of hands and gone away, the prayers of the Faithful. So three
prayers to be made, the first in a low voice, the second and third by the
Deacons speaking to them, and then the kiss of peace to be given, and so the
holy oblation to succeed.] In these words I observe, First, that these prayers
were to be (...), apart, and every one by it self. Secondly, that the prayers
for the Catechumens began the service, which is demonstrable out of I. 1. c. 5.
and 6
Clemens Constitutions, where it is ordered, that before this prayer, the
Deacon standing upon some place or advantage, should proclaim (...). i. e. away
Infidels, away hearers, (...), i. e. then silence being made, let him say, Pray
ye Catechumens; where by the way I note, a manifest difference is put between
Hearers and Catechumens, as shall be farther illustrated against the common
opinion, when I come to treat of Confirmation, out of the 1. Council of Nice,
and the 4. of Carthage. What is intended by this (...), whether the prayer of
the Catechumens for themselves, or that of the faithful for them, I am not able
to determine. But assuredly both they had, and if not the very same here
intended, yet of near alliance to it, as is to be found in Chrysostoms second
of his seven genuine Homilies (for the rest are mere Impostures) upon the
second to the Corinthians. And these Prayers of St Chrysostom agree almost
word for word with the form mentioned in Clemens his Constitutions, which
excellent piece, though I dare not father it upon so early an Author, and must
acknowledge that the Legerdemain and traces of some false hand are visible
enough in some parts thereof, yet am I convinced that it contains many
considerable monuments of the most ancient customs, and that the genuine part
of it may worthily derive it self from the first three Centuries after Christ.
The prayers cited in Chrysostom, are to this effect. (...) etc. i e. [The
Deacon pronounces, Let us stand up with reverence, Let us pray earnestly for
the Catechumens. That the most merciful God would hear their prayers, would
open the eyes of their hearts that they may hear such things as the eye never
saw, the ear never heard, nor can it enter into the heart of man to conceive.
That he would instill into them the word of truth, would sow his fear in them,
and establish his faith in their minds. That he would reveal unto them the
Gospel of righteousness, and give them a mind divinely inspired, a prudent
understanding, and a virtuous conversation, always to mind, always to regard
what belongs to him, and to mediate upon his Law day and night. Let us pray yet
more ardently for them. That God would deliver them from whatsoever is vile or
inconvenient, from all diabolical works, and the circumventions of the
Adversary. That he would at length in due time bring them to the Laver of
Regeneration, and remission of sins. That he would all along their whole lives,
bless their goings out and comings in, their houses, and families; That he
would add increase to them, and instruct them until they come to a perfect
stature of wisdom. And that he would direct all their purposes to their own
benefit.] This said, the Deacon commands them to rise, having laid prostrate
all along before, and bids them also pray for themselves, he dictating to them
thus.] Pray to God, ye Catechumens, for his Angel of peace, that all your
purposes may have a peaceable effect, that this day and all the rest of your
lives, may end in Peace; Pray especially, which is profitable and becoming, and
the chief of all blessings, that you may be made perfect Christians, and so
commend your selves to the everlasting God, and Jesus Christ.] After this they
are commanded to bow down their heads, to receive the blessing, all the
Congregation crying aloud Amen. These prayers being so declarative of the
Ancient forms in this particular, I could not well contract into fewer words
without prejudice to my present purpose.

Thirdly, from this Canon (for to that I must return) I further collect, that
these Catechumens (their prayers and blessings once past) were to depart the
Assembly. But did the Communion service Commence upon their dispatch? This
Canon says clearly, no, for (...): after they were sent away, the penitents
turn was next, and so the Communion service not to begin until they were
dismissed also, wherein there is an evident diversity between the Greek Church,
as it was now, and as it was in Gregory Neocaesariensis his time, as shall be
demonstrated when I come to the Office of Commination. But a far greater
between it and the Latin. For, with these two mentioned here, I observe no
less then three dismissions in the Greek Church before the celebration of the
Eucharist, whereas the Latins had but one. The first was, as I cited out of
Clemens, that of the Infidels and Hearers, and I conceive it was consequent to
their exclusion, what Chrisost. advers. Jud.
Chrysostom tells us of the Deacon thundering out (...) i. e. look well to your
selves, (...), Least any Infidels, Jews or strangers to your Religion, be among
you, now Catechumens were not properly either Hearers or Infidels; not Hearers,
as shall be demonstrated afterward, not Infidels, because they were Catechized
and instructed in the principles of the true Religion, and so were moving
toward Christianity: upon which very account, in the Latin service, they were
considered single and apart from Infidels. For infidels God was invocated
Augustine. Epist. Vitali. 107.
ut eos convertat ad fidem, for their conversion; for Catechumens, ut eis
desiderium regenerationis inspiret, that he would inspire them with a desire of
Baptism. The second dismission was this of Catechumens. The third that of the
Penitents, and at their sending away, I conceive, it was that the Deacon
usually cried out, Chrysostom. in Hebr.
(...), holy things for holy persons. Probable also it is, that the Energumeni,
persons distracted, or possessed with unclean spirits had their mittimus with
these Penitents. Learned The service of God at Relig. Assemb. p. 340.
Mr. Thorndike seems to add another dismission, viz. of such Believers as
were present at the prayers of the congregation for all states, and did not
intend to communicate. This he infers out of a passage of the Constitutions,
the words these, (...), you that pray the first prayer depart. But (...), the
first prayer cannot in that place signify that for all states. For in that
very Chapter after these words, follow the Ancient order of the Communion
service, and toward the latter end of it the prayer for all states, so that
this dismission must be dispatched before the Prayer for all States. Yet true
it is according to the Primitive Rules, no man of the faithful people might
stay behind and not communicate upon pain of Excommunication, (...), says the
Apostolical Canon. Let every Faithful man that comes into the Church and
continues not in prayer and participation of the blessed mysteries, be
excommunicated. And to the same effect is the Second Canon of the Council of
Antioch. This notwithstanding, for matter of fact, clear it is, all did not
conform, St. Chrysostom reproving some upon that very score (...); why stayest
thou behind, and do not communicate? But as for persons who were in (...),
and serving out the last years of their Ecclesiastial censure, these were
permitted to remain with the faithful, as shall be made evident, when I come to
discourse of them in the Commination office.

Now (that I may declare the difference I mentioned before) for those three
dismissions, the Latin Church had only one, called missa Catechumenorum, The
Dismission of the Catechumens, not because she had not those several sorts of
Hearers, Penitents, and Energumens: but because the Catechumens were far more
numerous, and so their dismission gave denomination to all.

Fourthly, it is to be noted that of these prayers, the first was (...),
silently, the other two (...), by allocution: that which was (...), was
performed either (...), as they usually called it, in a lower voice, or by the
faithful praying to themselves, and so Clemens gives the rule for this very
Prayer. The Hearer and unbeleevers being sent away, (...) (...), And silence
being made, let the Deacon say, Pray ye, Catechumens, and let all the faithful
pray mentally for them thus, Lord have mercy. As for (...) or allocution, it
must be understood, that anciently that part of the service which was most
properly Common prayer, was peculiarly assigned to the Deacon to dictate, Aug.
Epist. Januario 119.
Communis oration voce Diaconi indicitur, Common prayer is dictated by the mouth
of the Deacon: (...), out of the Pulpet, or (...), standing upon some advanced
place (as the constitutions have it) his manner was, not only to instruct the
people what they were to do upon Religious occasions, as when to attend, when
to pray, when to bow their heads to the Benediction, when to stand upright,
when and who to depart, but also to call upon them to pray in such manner and
form as he dictated to them, as is evident by that Prayer for the Catechumens
lately cited out of St Chrysostom, where the Deacon all along, premiseth every
particular of that prayer.

The fifth thing observable, from the Canon is the kiss of Peace, for that is
meant by the word (...), whereof before.

The last is, (...) i. e. the second oblation, which is the next thing offers
it self in our service, and is called the Offertory.

The Offertory.] The whole action of the sacred Communion is elemented Phillip.
4. 18. and Hebr. 13. 16. and declared to be well pleasing to God; pleasing to
God, though extended to the poor: these have a warrant of Attorney from God
himself to receive our Alms. He that has 1 Cor. 16. 2.
pity on the poor lends to the Lord. Prove. 19. 17. So that when we come
together to Break bread, in the Scripture notion, that is, to communicate, we
must break it to the hungry, to God himself in his poor members, as ever we
expect a share in that last venice, Come ye blessed etc. These acts of mercy
being only set down as the reason of that venite, Come ye blessed etc. for I
was an hungry, and ye gave me to eat etc. Matthew. 25. 35.

The second sacrifice is the Consecration of the Elements, and presenting them
up to God by the Prayers of the Minister and Congr^gation, whereby they become
that Sacrament for which they are set apart and deputed.

The third is the sacrifice of prayers, and prayers unto God which are styled
sacrifices. Psalm. 50. 23. and 141. 2 Heb. 5, 7. and 13. 15.

The fourth is the Oblation of our selves, of our souls, and bodies (...),
aliving, holy, and reasonable sacrifice Romans 12. 1. Now to restrain my
discourse, as I promised, to the sacrifice of Almsdeeds, it will be necessary
to take notice of the Apostolic and primitive practice in this concerment, and
thereby to observe the agreeableness of our own Rule with it. First then we
are not ignorant, I hope, that the Apostolic custom of communicating was at
their Agape's and Love Feasts. These feasts were a joint and liberal collation
of all the Assembly, every man contributing, (...), as God had blessed him, the
rich for the poor. Out of the offerings brought, so much as was thought
convenient for the Sacrament was taken by the party who officiated, and the
remains were deputed both for the refreshment of the Congregation, and also for
relief of the poor: and these oblations were by the Apostles constitution to be
set apart, (...), every Lordsday. Of these Feasts St. Jude in his Epistle makes
mention, speaking of spots in the Christians Love Feasts, and not long after
him, Epist. ad Smyrneos.
Ignatius, (...), it is not suffered to celebrate the Agape without leave from
the Bishop. Of the mode Tertullian is most express. Modicam unusquisque stipem
menstrua Die, vel cum velit, and si modo possit, apponit. Apologet. c. 4.
Haec quasi deposita pietatis sunt: inde non epulis, nec potaculis, nec
ingratis voratrinis dispensatur, sed egenis alendis, humandisque and pueris
puellisque re ac parentibus destitutis, etateque domitis senibus, item
naufragis, and si qui in metallis, and si qui in insulis vel in custodiis
duntaxat ex causa Dei fiunt. Some little modicum or portion of contribution,
every man once a month, or oftener, if he can, and will, lays aside for this
purpose. These collations are the pledges of piety: nor are they disposed to
the satisfying of our gluttenous appetites, but for the relief or burial of the
poor or Orphans, or aged or shipurackt persons, or for the maintenance of such
as suffer imprisonment or exile for the cause of Christ. But abuses of excess
having crept into these feasts, the junketings, comeslations, and mealing
together were soon laid aside; and where they were so, though the Sacrament had
nothing but of religious import, yet the eleemosinary Oblations still
continued. For Apollog. 2.
Justin Martyr, rendering the practice of his time, tells us, (...). They that
are well to pass, if they are so disposed, every man as he p^easeth, offers
somewhat of that he has, and this collection is deposited with the chief
President, who therewith relieveth Orphants, Widows, such as are sick, or in
want upon the like cause, such also as are in prison, or travailers which come
from far Countries: and to this usage I conceive Stromat J. 1.
Clemens Alexandrinus had an eye, where he said many resorted to hear the word
of God, (...), knowing that Christians communicated to the needy things
necessary. To the same effect Cyprian de Opere and Eleemosynis.
St. Syprian, Thou art rich and wealthy, and do thou believe thou can
rightly celebrate the Lords Supper, who do not mind the Poor-mans box, who
appearest in the Lords house empty, without the sacrifice of Alms deeds, nay,
who take thy share of that sacrifice which the poor man himself offered? Not
to trouble you with multiplying more, Authorities in so clear a matter, it may
suffice once for all to reminde you, that upon this very account the sacred
mysteries gained in the Primitive Church, so frequently to be called (...), the
sacred gifts or offerings, But though Almes-giving be a necessary duty, yet
does not God accept it from all, but in these Oblations, he respects the men
not the gifts; there are some Cains, of whose sacrifices he will none, and
therefore in the Primitive Church, such persons as had misdemeaned themselves,
or scandalized Religion Cypr. Ep. ad Clem.
St. Cyprian positively orders, prohibeantur offerre, let them be kept back
from offering, so also for such as harbored malice against their brethren, the
Counsel of Can. 94.
Carthage ordemed, neque in sacrario, neque in Gazophylacio recipiantur eorum
Oblationes, that their offerings should be accepted of, neither at the Altar,
nor in the Church treasury. Now although the elements of bread and wine are
provided by an establishment of our Church, differing from the ancient custom,
yet can there be no reason showed, why we should prescribe, and cast away that
most necessary sacrifice of Alms; which though at first introduced as
concomitant with the former, yet has sufficient interest in Religion, to
entitle it self to a place in the course of the grand sacrifice, and the Church
has very fitly assigned it this place, as Preambulatory to the Prayers
ensuing, it being properly styled by St. Chrysostom (...), the wing of prayer,
upon which wing the prayers of Cornelius ascended up into Heaven. Acts 10 2.
Chrysostom de Jejun.


As to the sentences of this Offertory, they which differ in the Scottish
service from ours, are taken out of Bishop Andrews his notes upon the Book of
Common prayer.

Who goes a warfare.] This with the four succeeding sentences 7, 8, 9, 10.
Cor. 16. 2. next in flux of time, and in the Tertullian: ubi supra.
African Church, menstrua die, once a month. The depositary and Trustee of
these Offerings was, in chief, the Bishop, who had Synod. Antiochen. 25.
(...) the power over affairs of the Church, to dispose them, (...), with the
consent of the Presbyters and Deacons. The employment of these Cyprian Epist
34. id. Epist. 36.
mensurna divisiones, or monthly dividends, was quadrupartite. One portion to
the Bishop, whence St. Cyprian speaks often, de quantitate sua propria, of
his own proper share. Another to the inferior Clergy, who not the people who
offered, as Hist. of Tith. c. 4.
Mr. Seldom has mistaken) were therefore called Cyprian Epist. 66.
Sportulantes fratres, Brethren of the Dole. The third was for sacred
utensils, and reparation of Gods house. And the last for the relief of the
poor, strangers, prisoners and the like, as has been said before. And though
Christian Princes restored, in aftertimes to God his own, and endowed the
Church with Tithes, yet did not these oblations cease thereupon; that had been
a favor with a mischief, these Offerings advancing an Ecclesiastical intrade,
far exceeding the Decimal availes, as appears by St. Cyprian. No, all along,
Oblations, both spontaneous, and such as custom had established, continued
together with tithes, even unto our days, which some of the Reverend Clergy
find to be a woeful truth. Is it not so? when, having lost the benefit by a
long disuse, they still groan under the burden it has laid upon them. For
upon this very account, consideration being anciently had to the great harvest
such Oblations did then in some parts annually import, some livings were
estimated in the Kings Books at a rate so high, as now those wonted oblations
are withdrawn, amount to the utmost value of them, to the great grievance of
the incumbent, who is to answer his first fruits and other payments to the
Exchequer at that great proportion. Again, to manifest that the Clergy has not
totally lost their interest in these oblations, insignificant it is not, that
when a Personage is demised entire, the Lessee, even in these our days, does
covenant to receive all Obventions, Oblations, etc.

The Churchwardens or some other.] The ancient mode was an exact pursuance In
Laud. Basilii
Gregory Nazianzen sets it down very expressly, speaking of Valens the Emperors
offering, (...) i. e. when the time was come for him to bring his gifts to the
holy table, which he was to do himself, none would, as the custom was, receive
them. The like has Theodoret concerning The^odsius, but not so full; and more
conformable to this usage was the order in the beginning of the Reformation, by
which the Parishioners were enjoined themselves, to Injunctions Edw. 6. 29.
put their Alms into the poor man's chest, which then was placed near the High
Altar. Bishop Andrews fault^th the Churchwardens going up and down to receive
the Alms: Sapit hac collectio per singula capita Genevensem morem, This
collecting Alms by the poll savours of the Geneva mode, whence it is that the
Scottish Rubric was rectified in this particular, as in others, conformable to
his notes.

Offering days appointed.] Anciently offering days appointed were, Quaelibet
dies Dominica and alii dies festi solemnes quorum vigiliae jejunantur, every
Lordsday, and all high festivals, whose Eves were fasted. Such were those
solemn days called lately in the Court, Collar-dayes, because then the Knights
of the Garter attended the King in their St. Georges Collars, when the fashion
was for the King, and his Nobles to offer. But these are not the offering days
intended by this Rubric, but those mentioned in the Statute 37. H. 8. c. 12.
viz. The feasts of Easter, of the nativity of Saint John Baptist, the feast of
St. Michael the Archangel, and the Nativity of our Lord. These feasts
aforesaid being ordered by that Kings injunctions Anno 1536. To be taken for
the four general offering days, quarterly payment of such oblations, I find
to have been in use long before, for in a parchment M. S. of Constitutions made
by a Synod held in Exeter by Peter Quivel Bishop of that Diocese, Anno 1287.
it is thus decreed. Statuimus quod omnis adult us, viz. quatuordecim annorum,
quater in Anno, scilicet, Natali Domini, Paschali festivitate, and festivitate
Dedicationis suae Ecclesiae parochialis, vel festivitate omnium Sanctorum,
Ecclesiam suam Parochialem suis oblationibus veneretur. We ordain that every
one of 14. years old, shall quarterly, viz. at the feasts of Christ's Nativity,
of Easter, of the Dedication of their Parish Church and of all Saints, shall
honor their Church with Oblations. Nor is it impertinent here to mind you
that the Reformation begun by Hermannus that pious, but unfortunate Bishop of
Colen, commands that the four offering days in a year be kept. But it is not
expressed what they were.

The former statute of H. 8. declaring so explicitly what the offering days
were, it also helps us to understand the import of accustomed offerings, for
it commands all Citizens and inhabitants of London to pay their Tithes, that
is, 16. d. ob. for every 10. s. rent of their houses quarterly, viz. at the
feasts above specified, and though the Statute seems to have a peculiar
relation to London, yet custom has in other Cities established a not much
different proportion If to any the word offerings may seem to import other
dues, excluding Tithes, further satisfaction may be given them from the Latin
Translation ratified by Authority 20. Eliz. which in this Rubric renders them
by Oblationes and Decimas, Oblations and Tithes, clearly implying that Tithes
were comprehended therein.

For the whole State of Christ's Church.] This Prayer shows its warrant at I
exhort therefore that first of all supplications, Prayers, intercessions and
Thanks givings be made for all men. The preface of giving thanks for all men,
when in the process of the Prayer, there is no thanksgiving for any man, was
interpreted a slip in the Supervisors of the Liturgy, who should either have
expunged it, or added some such clause as the Scotch Litturgy exhibiteth, as
Eucharistical for the Saints departed in the faith. As for this prayer there
are presidents enough of the like form. Apologet.
Tertullian, first, Oramus pro Imperatoribus, pro ministris eorum, and
potestatibus seculi, pro rerum quiet, pro mora finis. i. e. we pray for the
Emperors and their Ministers, for secular potentates, for Peaceable times, for
long life. Then Constit. l. 2. c. 51.
Clemens, (...) i. e. Let the Deacon pray for the Universal Church, the whole
world, and all the parts thereof, and the fruits of the earth, for the Priests,
and Governors, for the chief priests and Kings, and the general peace. Next
Eusebius, speaking how the Priests were employed at the celebrity of the
Dedication of the Temple at Jerusalem, he gives in part this account de vita
Constan. l. 4. c. 45.
(...) i. e. they offered up their supplications for the general peace, for the
Church of God, for the Emperor, and for his children beloved of God. After him
Catech. 10.
Cyril declaring the practice of his time at the celebration of the Eucharist,
thus, (...). i. e. Over this Propitiary Sacrifice, we call upon God for the
general peace of all Churches, for the tranquillity of the World, for Emperors,
their Armies, and all that fight for them. I shall conclude with St. de Sacr^m.
l. 4. c. 4.
Ambrose, Oration praemittitur pro populo, pro Regibus, pro caeteris: First,
(before Consecration) Prayer is made for the People, for Kings, and for others:
And though this Prayer be in our Church only a peculiar of Morning Service,
yet St. Chrysostom seems to render the same usage in his time at the Evening
Prayers also, for putting the question, (...), what means this speech; first
of all, he resolves it thus, (...): That is in the daily Service, (...), i. e.
And this is well known to the Priests, that it is performed every day, both at
Evening and Morning Prayers: But I will not over-confidently assert it upon
this single testimony, especially when perhaps his words may bear another sense.

And especially thy Servant our King.] In the fifth General Council,
Constantinople, frequent mention there is of the Dypticks, which are described
to us by Vicecomes, and other Ritualist, to be two Tables or Leaves of Board,
whereof one Column contained the names of the Living, the other the names of
the Dead, which were rehearsed in the Communion Service* That they were two,
the first syllable of the word demonstrateth clearly; but that they were
Tables, strictly so taken, the last syllable seems to question, and to imply
that they were rather Rolls of Parchment folded up, as the word (...), to fold
together evidently imports. As for the Contents thereof, the description is
not to be faulted, saving that it is not explicit enough in declaring what
those persons were, that is, of what rank, order, or state, whether living or
dead; which defect is supplied by the Liturgies pretended to be of St. James,
St. Peter, etc. whereby it appears that the Roll of the Living contained the
names of the Emperors, Kings, Bishops, and other eminent Persons living at
that time, and which passed under the account of Orthodox; some traces of this
ancient Custom are still visible in the Canon of the Romish Mass, where the
Pope, Bishop of the Diocese, and the King, are by name prayed for, Cum omnibus
Orthodoxis atque Catholicae and Apostolicae fidei cultoribus, i. e. With all
such as are Orthodox and addicted to the Apostolic faith.

And chiefly in the most blessed Virgin Mary.] The commemoration of the
exceedings upon the account of those Martyrs, to whose memory the days were
consecrated: This introducts us to the meaning of Tertullian: Oblationes de
Coron, Milet.
pro defunctis, pro Natalitiis, annua die facimus, i. e. We offer sacrifice for
the dead yearly at their days of Passion, which we call their Birth days: As
also of Epist. 24.
Cyprian, Sacrificia pro eis semper, ut meministis, offerimus, i. e. We always
Sacrifice, as you well remember, for those Martyrs departed: In both which
Authors, nothing is intended of praying for them, which were a mere vanity in
their Opinions, but of offering to God the Sacrifice, either of Praise or else
of Alms for them, both coming under that notion by express warrant from holy
Text, as has been showed already: Nor did they only make commemoration of the
Martyrs, but also of others, agreeable to the Form used in this first Liturgy
of Edw. 6. Epiphan. h^res. 75.
(...), i. e. We praise thee for the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles,
Evangelists, Martyrs, and Confessors; and so also Catech. 5.
Cyril in his Catecheses describes the very same Fashion; only by the way
observe, First, That in neither Epiphanius nor Cyril, is there a syllable of
the Virgin Mary; Secondly, That in the Service of the Church in Epiphanius his
time, which was about 390. what ever some few thought in private, there was not
the least hint of intercession, the first step to Invocation of Saints. Not
long after, when it was at last generally resolved that the Saints did
intercede for the universal Church; at the end of this commemoration, there was
added a clause of Invocation to God, That he would receive the Prayers of the
Church, by the intercession of those blessed Souls departed, as Cyril tells us
in the place before quoted; and this is the first notice given of the
Intercession of Saints in any Liturgy or public Service, and all this time not
a syllable of Invocation of, or address to them: Yea, St. Augustine, who lived
much about the same time, is express to the contrary, assuring us, that though
those holy men, De Civit. Dei, l. 22. c. 10.
suo loco and ordine nominantur, non tamen a sacerdote qui sacrificat
invocantur, are named in their proper course and order, (in the Communion
Service) yet are they not invocated, or prayed to by the Priest who
officiateth: This passage of this Father informing us, that those Saints
departed were named in their course and order, leads us to the other
Dyptick-Roll, which was a Nomenclator, framed on purpose as a dictamen for the
officiating Priest, some resemblance whereof is still extant in the Canon of
the Mass, called by Ritualists, Litania Sanctorum nominum, The Litany of the
Saints names: This nominal recital, Walfridus Strabo says, came into practice
soon after St. Jerome had composed his Martyrology. General Intercession being
thus admitted (as what z De Reb. Eccl. c. 28.
could hinder it?) into the Church, the next step was that of singular Saints,
for single persons, and occasions; yet this not all at once neither, for before
any other were thought qualified for the purpose, the Virgin Mary was enstalled
a Mediatrix, and she called into aid in several Prayers of the Church, which
Nicephorus ascribes to Petrus Gnapheus, as the first Author thereof, about the
year 500. She once thus admitted, did not only her self keep possession, to
the very almost justling out of her Son and Savior, but did let in all the
train of the blessed Apostles, Martyrs and others, who by Pope Gregory, about
Anno 600. were dis-honored with an Ora pro nobis, in that his otherwise gallant
model of the Litany.

We commend unto thy mercy all other thy Servants.] The Commemorations
Epiphanius divides into two ranks or Classes, (...), Just-men and Sinners,
understanding thereby less perfect Christians. The order of the Just, was that
of the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, Martyrs, and Confessors,
mentioned before; these were supposed directly to go to Heaven, without calling
in at Purgatory, or any other withdrawing room, and therefore thought it a
vanity to pray for such, who were conceived already arrived at a perfect state
of bliss; nay more then a vanity, a wrong, Aug. Sermon. 17. de verb. Apost.
Injuriam facit Martyri qui orat pro Martyr, he does injure the Martyr, who
prays for him: The other Classis, that of Sinners, were conceived by the
Ancients to be disposed of in some base Court, as I may so say, or inferior
appurtenance of heaven, which for want of a better name, they called Paradise:
there they conceived these souls did abide whilst they were in mora
resurrectionis, expecting the general Resurrection, did pant and thirst for the
beatifical vision of God; and for these they prayed that God would give them
some comfortable refreshment to slack that thirst, This is the uttermost of
their opinion, fo far as their own records informs us, and this scarce came to
opinion neither, not a man of them, for the first five hundred years,
delivering himself positively, but very staggeringly touching this point. This
and the former commemoration, our second Reformers very judiciously omitted,
being loath to retain any thing liable to so just exceptions.

This prayer, according to the primitive mode, was made after the later
consecration; For the Sacramental elements were twice consecrated. First, when
they were in the general mass of all oblations, which were consecrated at
large by thansgiving to God for all those benefits, and invocation of his
blessing upon them, as they were provided for bodily refreshment: and again,
when they were separated from the residue, and by a particular Benediction,
deputed for the Symboles of the Eucharist, which being thus consecrated (...)
says Mistag. 10.
Cyril, we invocate God over that propitiatory host, for the Common peace etc.
and what he calls (...), we entreat, others usually say (...), we offer unto
thee. All intending thereby, that they offered up their Prayers to God for
those particulars, by and through the intercession of Jesus Christ, represented
in the signs of that holy mystery: certainly an edifying, and innocent rite.
But the Church of Rome foysting in, under the disguise of this excellent
custom, private Masses, and in them a pretense of Christ really not mystically
sacrificed, and that sacrifice applied and determined to the souls of such
persons as the Priest shall by his memento's limit: Our Reformers, endeavoring
to a-move all occasion of abetting that wicked practice, transposed and
inverted the Order of this prayer to the Place you see.

CHAP. VII. THE COMMUNION.
Then shall follow this exhortation, at certain times This Rubric and
Exhortation Omitted in 1. B. of Edw. 6.
when the Curate shall see the people negligent to come to the holy Communion.

WE be come together at this time (dearly beloved brethren) to feed at the
Lords supper, unto the which in Gods behalf I bid you all that be here present,
and beseech you for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, that ye will not refuse to
come thereto, being so lovingly called and bidde^ of God himself. Ye know how
grievous and unkind a thing it is when a man has prepared a rich feast,
decked his table with all kind of provision, so that there lacks nothing but
the guests to sit down: and yet they which be called, without any cause most
unthankfuly refuse to come. Which of you in such a case would not be moved: Who
would not think a great injury and wrong done unto him: Wherefore most dearly
beloved in Christ, take ye good h^ed, lest ye, withdrawing your selves from
this holy supper, provoke Gods indignation against you. It is an easy matter
for a man to say, I will not communicate, because I am otherwise let with
worldly business: but such excuses be not so easily accepted and allowed
before God. It any man say, I am a gr^evous sinner, and therefore am afraid to
come: Wherefore then do you not repent and amend* When God calls you, be you
not ashamed to say you will not come? When you should return to God, will you
excuse your self and say that you be not ready? Consider earnestly with your
selves, how little such feigned excuses shall avail before God. They that
refused the feast in the Gospel, because they had bought a farm, or would try
their yokes of Ore^, or because they were married, were not so excused, but
counted unworthy of the heavenly feast. I for my part am here present, and
according to mine office, I bid you in the name of God, I call you in Christ's
behalf, I exhort you as you love your own salvation, that ye will be partakers
of this holy Communion, And as the son of God did vouchsafe to yield up his
soul by death upon the cross for your health; even so it is your duty to
receive the Communion together in the remembrance of his death, as be himself
commanded. Now if you will in no wise thus do, consider with your selves how
great injury you do unto God, and how sore punishment hangs over your heads
for the same. And whereas you offended God so sore in refusing this holy
banquet, I admonish, exhort, and beseech you, that unto this unkindnesse ye
will not add any more: Which thing ye shall do, if ye stand by as gazers and
lookers on them that do communicate, and be no partakers of the same your
selves. For what thing can this be accounted else, then a further contempt and
unkindnesse unto God: Truly it is a great unthankfulness to say nay when ye
be called: but the fault is much greater, when men stand by, and yet will
neither eat nor drink this holy Communion with other. I pray you what can this
be else, but even to have the mysteries of Christ in derision? It is said unto
all, Take ye, and eat, take and drink ye all of this, Do this in remembrance of
me. With what face then, or with what countenance shall ye hear these words?
what will this be else, but a neglecting, a despising, and mocking of the
Testament of Christ? Wherefore rather then ye should so do depart you hence,
and give place to them that be godly disposed. But when you depart, I beseech
you ponder with your selves from whom you depart: Ye depart from the Lords
table, ye depart from your brethren, and from the banquet of most heavenly
food. These things if ye earnestly consider, ye shall by Gods grace return to a
better mind, for the obtaining whereof, we shall make our humble petitions,
while we shall receive the holy Communion.

Common Prayer. 1. B. of Edw. 6. And sometime shall be said this also, at the
discretion of the Curate. And if upon the Sunday, or holyday the people be
negligent to come to the Communion. Then shall the Priest earnestly exhort his
Parishoners, to dispose themselves to the receiving of the holy Communion more
diligently, saying these, or the like words. DEarly beloved, for as much as our
duty is to render to Almighty God, our heavenly Father, most hearty thanks, for
that he has given his Son our Savior Jesus Christ, not only to die for us,
but also to be out spiritual food and sustenance, as it is declared unto us, as
well by Gods word, as by the holy Sacraments of his blessed body and blood, the
which being so comfortable a thing to them which receive it worthily, etc. Dear
friends, and you especially upon whose souls I have cure and charge, on next I
do i^t^nd, by Gods grace to offer to all such as shall be godly disposed, the
most comfortable sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, to be taken of
them, in remembrance of his most fruitful and glorious passion, by the which
Passion we have obtained remission of our sins, and be made partakers of the
Kingdom of heaven, whereof we be well assured and ascertained, if we come to
the said Sacrament with hearty repentance for our offenses, steadfast faith in
Gods mercy, and earnest mind to obey Gods will, and to offend no more:
wherefore our duty is to come to these holy mysteries, with most hearty thanks
to be given to almighty God for his infinite mercy and benefits given and
bestowed upon us his unworthy servants, for whom he has not only given his
Body unto death, and shed his blood, but also does vouchsafe, in a Sacrament
and mystery, to give us his said Body and blood to feed upon Spiritually. The
which Sacrament, being so divine and holy a thing, and so comfortable to them
which receive it worthily etc.

Common prayer.

And so dangerous to them which will presume to take the same unworthily, my
duty is to exhort you to consider the dignity of the holy mystery, and the
great peril of the unworthy receiving thereof, and so to search and examine
your own consciences, as you should come holy and clean to a most godly and
heavenly feast: so that in no wise you come but in the marriage garment,
required of God in holy Scripture, and so come and be received as worthy
partakers of such a heavenly table. The way and means thereto, is: First, to
cramine your lives and conversation by the rule of Gods Commandments, and
wherein so ever ye shall perceive your selves to have offended, either by will,
word, or deed, there bewall your own sinful lives, confess your selves to
almighty God with full purpose of amendment of life. And if ye shall perceive
your offenses to be such, ^^ be not only against God, but also against your
neighbors: then ye shall reconcile your selves unto them, ready to make
restitution and satisfaction according to the uttermost of your powers, for all
injuries and wrongs done by you to any other, and likewise being ready to
forgive other that have offended you, as you would have forgiveness, of your
offenses at Gods hand: for otherwise the receiving of the holy communion does
nothing else but increase your damnation. And because it is requisite that no
man should come to the holy Communion but with a full trust in Gods mercy, and
with a quiet conscience: therefore if there be any of you, which by the means
aforesaid cannot quiet his own conscience, but requires further comfort or
counsel, then let him come to me, or some other discreet and learned minister
of Gods word, and open his grief, that he may receive such sho^tly counsel,
advice, and comfort, as his conscience may be relieved, and that by the
ministry of Gods word be may receive comfort, and the benefit of absolution to
the quieting of his conscience, and avoiding of all scruple and doubtfulness.
[1 B. of Edw. 6. Requiring such as shall be satisfied with a general
confession, not to be offended with them that do use, to their further
satisfying, the Auricular and secret confession to the Priest: nor those also
which think needful or convenient, for the quietness of their own consciences,
particularly to open their sins to the Priest: to be offended with them that
are satisfied with their humble confession to God, and the general Confession
to the Church. But in all things to follow and keep the rule of Charity, and
every man to be satisfied with his own conscience, not judging other men's minds
or consciences: whereas he has no warrant of Gods word to the same.]

Common Prayer. 1. B. of Edw. 6. Then shall the Minister say this exhortation.
After the Creed ended shall follow the Sermon, or Homily, or some one portion
of one of the Homilies, as they shall be hereafter divided: Wherein if the
people be not exhorted to the worthy receiving of the holy Sacrament of the
body and blood of our Savior Christ: then shall the Curate give this
exhortation, to those that be minded to receive the same.

The Common Prayer.

DEarly beloved in the Lord, ye that mind to come to the holy communion of the
body and blood of our Savior Christ, must consider what Saint Paul writes to
the Corinthians, how he exhorts all persons piligently to try and examine
themselves, before they presume to eat of that bread, and drink of that cup.
For as the benefit is great, if with a true penitent heart and lively faith we
receive that holy Sacrament (for then we spiritually eat the flesh of Christ,
and drink his blood, then we dwell in Christ, and Christ in us, we be one with
Christ, and Christ with us) so is the danger great, if we receive the same
unworthyly: For then we be guilty of the body and blood of Christ our Savior,
we eat and drink our own damnation, not considering the Lords body, we kindle
Gods wrath against us, we provoke him to plague us with diverse diseases, and
sundry kinds of death.

Therefore if any of you be a blasphemer of God, an hinderer or slanderer of
his word, an adulterer, or be in malice or envy, or in any other grievous
crime, bewail your sins, and come not to this holy table, lest after the taking
of that holy Sacrament, the divil enter into you, as he entered into Judas, and
fill you full of all iniquities, and bring you to destruction both of body and
soul. Judge therefore your selves (brethren that ye be not judged of the Lord.
Repent you truly for your sins past. Have a lively and steadfast faith in
Christ our Savior. Amend your lives, and be in perfect charity with all men,
so shall ye be meet partakers of those holy mysteries. And above all things, ye
must give most humble

1. B. of Edw. 6.

In Cathedral Churches, or other places, where there is daily Communion, it
shall be sufficient to read this exhortation above written once in a month.
And in parish Churches upon the week day it may be left unsaid.

Then so many as shall be partakers of the holy Communion shall Th^se two
Rubricks come in after the Offertory in 1. B. of Edw. 6.
tarry still in the Quire, or in some convenient place nigh the quire; (B) the
men on one side, and the women on the other side. All other (that mind not to
receive the said holy Communion) shall depart out of the quire except the
Ministers and Clerks.

Then shall the Minister take so much Bread and Wine as shall suffice for the
persons appointed to receive the holy Communion, laying the Bread upon the
Corporas, or else in the pattin, or in some other comely thing prepared for
that purpose. And putting the wine into the Chalice, or else in some fair
convenient cup, prepared for that use if the Chalice will not serve, putting
thereto (C) a little pure and clean water. And setting both the Bread and Wine
upon the Altar. Then the Priest shall say,

The Lord be with you,

Answer.

And with thy Spirit.

Priest.

Lift up your hearts etc. to the end of the Prefaces.

Common Prayer. 1 B. of Edw. 6. Then shall the Minister say to them that come
to receive the holy Communion. [Scot. Lit. this Invitation. Here the Priest
shall turn him toward those that come to receive the holy Communion, and shall
say,

YOU that do truly and earnestly repent you of your sins, [1 B. of Edw. 6. to
Almighty God] and be in love and charity with your nieghbours, and intend to
lead a new life, following the commandments of God, and walking from
henceforth in his holy ways (D) Draw near, and take this holy Sacrament to
pour comfort, make your humble confession to almighty God, before this
congregation here gathered together in his holy name, meekly kneeling upon your
knees.

(E) Then shall this general confession be made, in the name of all those that
are minded to receive the holy Communion [Scot. Lit. by the Presbyter himself
or the Deacon] either by one of them, [Lit. of Q. Eliz. or else by one of the
Ministers, or by the Priest himself,] or else by the Minister himself, [Scot.
Lit. both he and all the people] all kneeling humbly upon their knees.

ALmighty God, father of our Lord Jesus Christ, maker of all things, judge of
all men, we knowledge and bewail our manifold sins and wickedness, which we
from time to time most grievously have committed, by thought, word, and deed,
against thy divine majesty, provoking most justly thy wrath and indignation
against us, we do earnestly repent, and be heartily sorry for these our
misooings, the remembrance of them is grievous unto us, the burden of them is
intolerable: have mercy upon us, have mercy upon us most merciful father, for
thy son our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, forgive us all that is past, and grant
that we may ever hereafter serve and please thee in newness of life, to the
honor and glory of thy name: through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Then shall the Minister, [or the Bishop being present,] stand up, and turning
him These words [ ] omitted in 1 B. of Edw. 6.
self to the people, [Scot. Lit. pronounce the Absolution as followeth] say
thus.

ALmighty God, our heavenly father, who of his great mercy has promised
forgivness of sins to all them which with hearty repentance and true faith
turn unto him: have mercy upon you, pardon and deliver you from all your sins,
confirm and strength you in all goodness, and bring you to everlasting life,
through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Then shall the Minister also say.

Hear what comfortable words our Savior Christ says to all that truly turn
to him, Come unto me all that travail and be heavy laden, and I shall refresh
you. So God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son, to the end
that all that believe in him, should not perish, but have life everlasting.

Hear also what saint Paul says. This is a true saying, and worthy of all men
to be received, that Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners.

Here also what saint John says. If any man sin, we have an advocate with the
father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propiciation for our sins.

After which, the Minister shall proceed, saying. Lift up your hearts.

Answer.

We life them up unto the Lord.

Minister.

Let us give thanks unto our Lord God.

Answer.

It is meet and right so to do.

Minister.

It is very meet, right, and our bounden duty, that we should at all times and
in all places, give thanks unto thee, O Lord, holy father, almighty everlasting
God.

Here shall follow the proper preface, according to the time, if there be any
specially appointed. Or else immediately shall follow: Therefore with angels.
etc.

Proper Prefaces.

Upon Christmas day, and seven days after.

BEcause thou did give Jesus Christ thine only son to be born as this day
for us, who by the operation of the holy Ghost, was made very man, of the
substance of virgin Mary his mother, and that without spot of sin, to make us
clean from all sin. Therefore with etc.

Upon Easter day and seven days after.

BUt thiefly are we bound to praise thee, for the glorious resurrection of thy
son Jesus Christ our Lord: for he is the very Pascal Lamb which was offered for
us, and has taken away the sin of the world, who by his death, has destroyed
death, and by his rising to life again, has restored to us everlasting, life.
Therefore with. etc.

Upon the Ascension day, and seven days after.

THrough thy most dearly beloved son Jesus Christ our Lord, who after his most
glorious resurrection manifestly appeared to all his Apostles, and in their
sight ascended up into heaven to prepare a place for us, that where he is,
thither might we also ascend, and reign with him in glory. Therefore with
angels. etc.

Upon Whitsunday, and six days after.

THrough Jesus Christ our Lord, according to whose most true promise the holy
ghost came down this day from heaven, with a sudden great sound, as it had been
a mighty wind, in the likeness of fiery tongues, lighting upon the apostles
to teach them, and to lead them to all truth, giving them both the gift of
diverse languages, and also boldness, with servent zeal constantly to preach
the Gospel unto all nations, whereby we are brought out of darkness and
error, into clear light and true knowledge of thee, and of thy son Jesus
Christ. Therefore with. etc.

Upon the Feast of Trinity only.

IT is very meet, right, and our bounden duty, that we should at all times, and
in all places, give thanks to thee, O Lord, almighty and everlasting God, which
art one God, one Lord, not one only person, but three persons in one
substance. For that which we believe of the glory of the father, the same we
believe of the son, and of the holy Ghost, without any difference or
inequality. Therefore with. etc.

After which prefaces, shall follow immediately.

THerefore with angels and archangels, and with all the company of heaven, we
laud and magnify thy glorious name, evermore praising thee, and saying I
Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of hosts. Heaven and earth are full of thy glory:
glory be to thee, O Lord most high.

Then shall the Minister [1 B. of Edw. 6. turning himself to Gods board kneel
down and] kneeling down at Gods board, say in the name of all them that shall
receive the Communion, this [Scot. Lit. Collect of humble access to the holy
Communion, as follows.] prayer following.

WE do not presume to come to this thy table (O merciful Lord) trusting in This
prayer in 1 B. of Ed. 6. and in the Scot. Lit. are placed next before the
delivery of the Sacrament.
our own righteousness, but in thy manifold and great mercies. We be not
worthy so much as to gather up the crumbes under thy table: But thou art the
same Lord whose property is always to have mercy. Grant us therefore (gracious
Lord) so to eat the flesh of thy dear son Jesus Christ, and to drink his blood,
that our sinful bodies may be made clean by his body, and our souls washed
through his most precious blood, and that we may evermore dwell in him, and he
in us, Amen.

Common Prayer Scot. Lit. Then the Minister standing up shall say as follows.
Then the Presbyter standing up, shall say the prayer of consecration, as
follows, but then during the time of Consecration, he shall stand at such a
part of the holy Table where he may with the more ease and decency use both his
hands.

ALmighty God our heavenly Father, which of thy tender mercy, did give This
prayer is continued with the prayer for the whole state of Christ's Church in the
1 B. of Edw. 6.
thine only son Jesus Christ, to suffer death upon the cross for our
Redemption, who made there (by his one oblation of himself once offered) a
full, perfect, and sufficient sacrifice, oblation, and satisfaction, for the
sins of the whole world, and did institute, and in his holy Gospel commandus,
to continue a perpetual memory of that his precious death, until his coming
again. Hear us, O merciful Father, we beseech thee.

Scot. Lit. 1 B. of Edw. 6. And of thy almighty goodness vouchsafe so to
bless, and sanctify, with thy word and holy Spirit, these thy gifts and
creatures of bread and wine, that they may be unto us the body and blood of thy
most dearly beloved Son, so that we receiving them according, etc. And with thy
holy spirit and word vouchsafe to bless and sanctify these thy creatures and
gifts of bread and wine, that they may be unto us the body and blood of thy
most dearly beloved Son Jesus Christ, who in the same night that he was etc.

And grant that we receiving these thy creatures of bread and wine, according
to thy son our Savior Jesus Christ's holy institution, in remembrance of his
death and passion, may be partakers of his most blessed body and blood: who in
the same night that he was betrayed, took bread, and when he had given thanks,
he broke it, and gave it to his disciples, saying, (K) Take, eat, this is my
body which is given for you, do this in remembrance of me. Likewise after
supper, he took the Cup, and, when he had given thanks, he gave it to them,
saying, Drink ye all of this, for this is my blood of the new Testament which
is shed for you, and for many for remission of sins, do this as ^^t as you
shall drink it in remembrance of me.

Scot. Lit. 1 B. of Edw. 6. At these words (took bread) that Presbyter that
officiates is to take the patten in his hand. Here the Priest must take the
bread into his hands. At these words (took the cup) he is to take the chalice
in his hand, and lay his hand upon so much (be it in the chalice or slaggon) as
he intends to consecrate. Here the Priest shall take the cup into his hands.

Scot. Lit. 1 B. of Edw. 6. Immediately after shall be said this memorial or
Prayer of Oblation as follows. These words before rehearsed are to be said,
turning still to the Altar, without any elevation or showing the Sacrament to
the people.

Wherefore, O Lord, and heavenly Father, according to the institution of thy
dearly beloved Son our Savior Jesus Christ, we thy humble servants, do
celebrate and make here before thy divine majesty, with these thy holy gifts,
the memorial which thy Son has willed us to make, (L) having in remembrance
his blessed passion, mighty resurrection and glorious ascension, rendering thee
most hearty thanks, for the innumerable benefits procured unto us by the same,
entirely desiring thy fatherly goodness to accept etc. as in the prayer after
the Elements delivered.

1 B. of Edw. 6.

Let us pray.

[Scot. Lit. Then shall the Presbyter say,] As our Savior Christ has
commanded and taught us, we are bold to say, Our Father etc.

The Answer.

But deliver us from evil. Amen.

Then shall the Priest say.

The peace of the Lord be always with you,

The Clerk.

And with thy spirit.

The Priest.

Christ our paschal Lamb is offered up for us, once for all, when he bare our
sins on his body upon the Cross, for he is the very Lamb of God that takes
away the sins of the World: wherefore let us keep a joyful and holy feast with
the Lord.

Scotch Liturgy. Common Prayer. 1. B. of Edw. 6t. Then shall the Bishop, if he
be present, or else the Presbyter that celebrateth, first receive the Communion
in both kinds himself, and next deliver it to other Bishops, Presbyters and
Deacons (if any be there present) that they may help him that celebrateth; and
after to the People in due order all humbly kneeling. Then shall the Minister
first receive the Communion in both kinds himself, and next deliver it to
other ministers, if any be present (that they may help the chief Minister) and
after to the people in their (M) hands (N) kneeling. Then shall the Priest
first receive the Communion in both kinds, himself, and next deliver it to
other Ministers, if any be present there (that they may be ready to help the
chief minister) and after to the people. And when he receives himself, or
delivers the bread to others, he shall say this Benediction. And when he
delivers the Bread, he shall say, And when he delivers the Sacrament of the
Body of Christ, he shall say to every one these words, 1. B. of Edw. 6. 2. B of
Edw. 6 The body of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was given for thee, preserve
thy body and soul unto everlasting life. (O) The body of our Lord Jesus Christ
which was given for thee, preserve thy body and soul into everlasting life, and
fake and eat this in remembrance that Christ died for thee, and feed on him in
thy heart by faith with thanksgiving The body of our Lord Jesus Christ which
was given for thee, preserve thy body and soul unto everlasting life. Take and
eat this in remembrance that Christ died for thee, and feed on him in thine
heart by faith with thanksgiving. Here the party receiving shall say (P) Amen.
1. B. of Edw. 6. And the Presbyter or Minister that receives the Cup himself,
or delivers it to others shall say this Benediction. And the Minister that
delivers the Cup shall say, And the Minister delivering the Sacrament of the
body and blood of Christ, and giving every one to drink once and no more, shall
say 1. B. of Edw. 6. 2. B. of Edw. 6. The blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, which
was shed for thee, preserve thy body and soul unto everlasting life. The blood
of our Lord Jesus Christ which was shed for thee, preserve thy body and soul
unto everlasting life, drink this in remembrance that Christ's blood was shed
for thee, and be thankful. The blood of our Lord Jesus Christ which was shed
for thee, preserve thy body and soul unto evey lasting life. Drink this in
remembrance that Christ blood was shed for thee, and be thankful. Here the
Party receiving shall say Amen.

1 B. of Edward 6.

If there be a Deacon, or other Priest, then shall he follow with the Chalice,
and as the Priest ministers the Sacrament of the body, so shall he (for more
expedtion) minister the Sacrament of the blood in form before written.

In the Communion time the Clerk shall sing.

O Lamb of God that take away the sins, etc. have mercy upon us.

O Lamb of God that take away the sins, etc. Grant us thy peace.

Beginning so soon as the Priest does receive the holy Communion, and when the
Communion is ended, then shall he sing the Post-Communion.

Sentences of holy Scripture to be said or sung every day one, after the holy
Communion, called the Post Communion. Matthew. 16. 24. Mar. 13. 13. Luke 1. 68.
and 12. 37. 40. 47. John 4. 23. and 5. 14. and 8. 31. and 12. 36. and 14. 21,
23. and 15. 7, 8, 12. Romans 8. 31, 32, 33. and 13. 12. 1 Cor. 1. 30. and 3. 16.
and. 6. 20.

Then the Priest shall give thanks to God in the name of all them that have
communicated, turning him first to the people and saying,

The Lord be with you.

The Answer.

And with thy Spirit.

The Priest.

Let us pray.

Almighty and everlasting God we most heartily etc.

The Common Prayer.

Then shall the Minister say the Lords prayer, the people repeating after him
every petition.

After shall be said as follows.

O Lord and heavenly father, we thy humble servants entirely desire thy
fatherly goodness, mercifully to accept this our sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving, most humbly beseeching thee to grant, that by the merits and
death of thy son Jesus Christ, and through faith in his blood, we and all thy
whole Church, may obtain remission of our sins, and all other benefits of his
passion. (Q) And here we offer and present unto thee, O Lord, our selves, our
souls and bodies, to be a reasonable, holy and lively sacrifice unto thee,
humbly beseeching thee, that all we which be partakes of this holy Communion,
may be fulfilled with thy grace and heavenly benediction. And although we be
unworthy, through our manifold sins, to offer unto thee any sacrifice: yet we
beseech thee to accept this our bounden duty and service, [1 B. of Edw. 6. And
command these our prayers, and supplications, by the ministry of thy holy
Angels, to be brought up into thy holy Tabernacle, before the sight of thy
divine Majesty,] not weighing our merits, but pardoning our offenses, through
Jesus Christ our Lord, by whom and with whom, in the unity of the holy Ghost,
all honor and glory be unto thee O father almighty, world without end, Amen.

Or this, Scot. Lit. When all have Communicated, he that celebrates shall go to
the Lords Table, and cover with a fair linen cloth, or corporal, that which
remains of the consecrated elements, and then say this Collect of
thanksgiving as follows.

ALmighty and everliving God, we most heartily thank thee, for that thou do
vouchsafe to feed us which have du^ly received these holy mysteries, with the
spiritual food of the most precious body and blood of thy son our Savior Jesus
Christ, and do assure us thereby of thy favor and goodness towar^ us, and
that we be very members incorporate in thy mistical body, which is the blessed
company of all faithful people, and be also heirs through hope, of thy
everlasting kingdom, by the merits of the most precious death and passion of
thy dear son: We now most humbly beseech thee, O heavenly father, so to assist
us with thy grace, that we may continue in that holy fellowship, and do all
such good works as thou have prepared for us to walk in, through Jesus Christ
our Lord, to whom with thee and the holy Ghost, be all honor and glory, world
without end, Amen.

Then shall be said or song. [Scot. Lit. Gloria in Excelsis, in English.]

GLory be to God on high, and in earth peace, good will toward men. We praise
This in the 1 B. of Edw. 6. is placed near the beginning of the Communion
office. And from these words we praise thee etc. all is omitted in Bucer.
thee, we bless thee, we worship thee, we glorify thee we give thanks to thee
for

Then the minister, or the Bishop, if he be present, shall let them depart with
this blessing.

THE peace of God which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds
in the knowledge and love of God, and of his son Jesu Christ our Lord. [And the
blessing of God almighty, the Father, the Son, and the holy These words thus []
enclosed omited in Bucr.
Ghost, be amongst you, and remain with you always,] Amen.

[Scot. Lit. After the Divine service is ended, that which was offered shall be
divided in the presence of the Presbyter and the Churchwardens, whereof one
half shall be to the use of the Presbyter, to provide him books of holy
divinity; the other half shall be faithfully kept and employed on some pious or
charitable use, for the decent furnishing of that Church, or the public relief
of their poor, at the discretion of the Presbyter and Churchwardens.]

Collects to be said after the Offertory, when there is no Communion, every
such day one. [And the same may be said also as often as occasion shall serve,
All included thus [] omitted in the 1 B. of Edw. 6.
after the Collects either of Morning and Evening prayer, Communion, or Letany,
by the discretion of the Minister.]

ASsist us mercifully, O Lord, in these our supplications and prayers, and
dispose the way of thy servants toward the attainment of everlasting salvation,
that among all the changes and chances of this mortal life, they may ever be
defended by thy most gracious and ready help, through Christ our Lord, Amen.

OAlmighty Lord and everliving God, vouchsafe we beseech thee to direct,
sanctify, and govern, both our hearts and bodies in the ways of thy laws, and
in the works of thy commandments, that through thy most mighty protection, both
here and ever, we may be preserved in body and soul, through our Lord and
savior Jesus Christ, Amen.

GRant we beseech thee, almighty God, that the words which we have heart this
day with our outward ears, may through thy grace be so graffed inwardly in our
hearts, that they may bring forth in us the fruit of good living, to the honor
and praise of thy name, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

PRevent us, O Lord, in all our doings, with thy most gracious favor, and
further us with thy continual help, that in all our works begun, continued and
ended in thee, we may glorify thy holy name, and finally by thy mercy, obtain
everlasting life, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

ALmighty God, the fountain of all wisdom, which know our necessities before
we ask, and our ignorance in asking: we beseech thee to have compassion upon
our infirmities, and those things which for our unworthy nesse we dare not, and
for our blindness we cannot ask, vouchsafe to give us, for the worthynesse of
thy son Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

ALmighty God, which have promised to hear the petitions of them that ask in
thy sons name: We beseech thee mercifully to incline thine ears to us that have
made now our prayers and supplications unto thee, and grant that those things
which we have faithfully asked according to thy will, may effectually be
obtained, to the relief of our necessity, and to the setting forth of thy
glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Common Prayer. 1 B. of Edw. 6. (T) Upon the holy days (if there be no
Communion) shall be said all that is appointed at the Communion, until the end
of the Homily, concluding with the general prayer (for the whole state of
Christ's Church miliant here in earth) and one or more of these Collects before
rehearsed, as occasion shall serve. Upon Wednesdayes and Fridayes, the English
Litany shall be said or sung in all places, after such form as is appointed by
the Kings Majestyes Injunctions: or as is, or shall be otherwise appointed by
his Highness. And though there be none to Communicate with the Priest, yet
these days (after the Litany ended) the Priest shall put upon him a plain Alb
or surplesse, with a Cope, and say all things at the Altar (appointed to be
said at the celebration of the Lords supper) until after the Offertory. And
then shall add one or two of the Collects before written, as occasion shall
serve by his discretion. And then turning him to the people, shall let them
depart with the accustomed blessing. And the same order shall be used all other
days, whenever the people be customably assembled to pray in the Church, and
none disposed to Communicate with him.

Common Prayer. 1 B. of Edw. 6. And there shall be no [Scot. Lit. publick]
celebration of the Lords Supper, except there be a good number to Communicate
with the Minister, according to his discretion. Likewise in Chapels annexed,
and all other places, there shall be no celebration of the Lords Supper, except
there be some to Communicate with the Priest. And in such Chapels annexed,
where the people has not been accustomed to pay any holy bread, there they
must either make some charitable provision for the bearing of the charges of
the Communion, or else (for receiving of the same) resort to their Parish
Church.

Common Prayer. 1 B. of Edw. 6. And if there be not above twenty persons in the
Parish, of discretion to receive the Communion, yet there shall be no
Communion, except four (or three at the least) Communicate with the Minister.
Also that the receiving of the Sacrament of the Blessed Body and blood of
Christ may be most agreeable to the institution thereof, and to the usage of
the Primitive Church: In all Cathedral and Collegiate Churches, there shall
always some Communicate with the Priest that ministers. And that the same may
be also observed every where abroad in the Country, some one at the least of
that house in every Parish, to whom by course, after the ordinance herein made,
it pertains to offer for the charges of the Communion, or some other whom
they shall provide to offer for them, shall receive the holy Communion with the
Priest; The which may be better done, for that they know before when their
course comes, and may therefore dispose themselves to the worthy receiving of
the Sacrament. And with him or them who does so offer the charges of the
Communion, all other, who be then Godly disposed thereunto, shall likewise
receive the Communion. And by this means the Minister, having always some to
Communicate with him, may accordingly solemnize so high and holy mysteries,
with all the suffrages and due order appointed for the same. And the Priest in
the week day, shall forbear to celebrate the Communion, except he have some
that will Communicate with him. And in Cathedral or Collegiat Churches, where
be many Ministers, and Deacons, they shall all receive the Communion with the
Minister every Sunday at the least, except they have a reasonable cause to the
contrary.

2 B. of Edw. 6.

(V) Although no order can be so perfectly devised but it may be of some,
either for their Ignorance and infirmity, or else for malice and obstinacy
misconstrued, depraved, and interpreted in a wrong part, and yet because
brotherly Charity wills that, so much as conveniently may be, offenses should
be taken away: therefore we, willing to do the same. Whereas it is ordained in
the Book of Common prayer, in the Administration of the Lords Supper, that the
Communicants kneeling should receive the same, which thing being well meant for
a signification of the humble and grateful acknowledging of the benefits of
Christ, given unto the worthy receiver, And to avoid the profanation and
disorder which about the holy Communion might else ensue; least yet the same
kneeling might be thought or taken otherwise, we do declare that it is not
meant thereby that any adoration is done or ought to be done, either unto the
Sacramental Bread or wine there bodily received, or unto any real, and
essential presence there being, of Christ's natural flesh and blood. For as
concerning the Sacramental Bread and wine, they remain still in their very
natural substances, and therefore may not be adored, for that were Idolatry, to
be abhorred of all faithful Christians; And as concerning the natural Body and
Blood of our Savior Christ, they are in heaven, and not here, for it is
against the truth of Christ's true natural body to be in mo places then one.

Common Prayer. 1 B. of Edw. 6. And to take away the superstition, which any
person has or might have in the bread and wine: it shall suffice that the
bread be such as is usual to be eaten at the table with other meats, but the
best and purest wheat bread that conveniently may be gotten. (W) And if any of
the bread and wine remain the Curate shall have it to his own use. [Scot. Lit.
And if any of the Bread and Wine do remain, which is consecrated, it shall be
reverently eaten and drunk by such of the Communicants only as the Presbyter
which celebrates shall take unto him, but it shall not be carried out of the
Church. And to the end there may be little left, he that officiates is required
to consecrate with the least, and then if there be want, the words of
consecration may be repeated again over more, either Bread and Wine. The
presbyter beginning at these words in the Prayer of consecration. Our Savior
in the night that he was betrayed etc. For avoiding of all matters and occasion
of dissension, it is meet that the bread prepared for the Communion be made
through all this Realm, after one sort and fashion, that is to say, unleavened
and round, as it was before, but without all manner of print, and something more
larger and thicker then it was, so that it may be aptly divided in diverse
pieces: and every one shall be divided into two pieces, at the least, or more
by the discretion of the Minister, and so distributed. And men must not think
less to be received in part then in the whole, but in each of them the whole
body of our-Saviour Jesus Christ.

Common Prayer. 1. B. of Edw. 6. The bread and wine for the Communion, shall be
provided by the Curate and Churchwardens, at the charges of the Parish, and
the Parish shall be discharged of such sums of money, or other duties, which
hitherto they have paid for the same by order of their houses every Sunday.
And for as much as the Pastors and Curates within this Realm, shall continually
find at their costs and charge in their Cures, sufficient bread and wine for
the holy Communion (as often as their Parishioners shall be disposed for their
spiritual comfort, to receive the same.) It is cherefore ordered, that in
recompense of such costs and charges, the Parishioners of every Parish shall
offer every Sunday, at the time of the Offertory the just value and price of
the holy Loaf, (with all such money and other things as were wont to be offered
with the same) to the use of their Pastors and Curates, and that in such order
and course, as they were wont to find, and pay the said holy Loaf.

Common Prayer. 1 B. of Edw. 6. And note that every Parishioner shall
Communicate at the least three (X) times in the year, of which Easter to be
one, and shall also receive the Sacraments, and [Scot. Lit. observe] other
rites, according to the order in this book appointed. And yearly at Easter,
every Parishioner shall reckon with his Parson, Vicar, Curate or his or their
Deputy or Deputies, and pay to them or him all Ecclesiastical duties
accustomably due then, and at that time to be paid. Furthermore, every man and
woman to be bound to hear and to be at Divine service, in the Parish Church
where they be resident, and there with devout Prayer, or Godly silence and
meditation to occupy themselves. There to pay their duties, to communicate once
in the year at the least, and there to take, and receive all other Sacraments
and rites, in this book appointed. And whosoever willingly upon no just cause
does absent themselves, or does ungodly in the Parish Church occupy themselves:
upon proof thereof, by the Ecclesiastical laws of the Realm to be
excommunicated or suffer other punishment as shall be to the Ecclesiastical
Judge (according to his discretion) seem convenient.

And although it be read in ancient writers that the people many years past
received at the Priests hands, the Sacrament of the body of Christ in their own
hands, and no Commandment of Christ to the contrary: yet for as much as they
many times conveyed the same secretly away, kept it with them, and diversely
abused to superstition and wickedness: Least any such thing hereater should be
attempted, and that an uniformity might be used, throughout the whole Realm: it
is thought convenient the people commonly receive the Sacrament of Christ's
body, in their mouths at the Priests hands.

Annotations upon CHAP. VII.
(A.) The Eucharist whence derived, (...) and (...) different things, and had
different forms. (B.) Men and women, sat separate one from another. (C.)
Mixing of water with wine. Ancient. The reasons for it. (D.) Draw near, when to
be said. Chancels anciently peculiar to the Clergy. The Emperor only
privileged. Laique Communion, what why Chancels allotted to the Clergy only.
The people usulaly received at the Chancel door. (E.) Confession why necessary
before the Communion. The Priests posture at the Altar, standing, and why. (F.)
Sursum corda, Ancient. (G.) So also the Responces. (H.) Proper Prefaces. (I.)
Trisagium Ancient. Two hymns so called. (K.) Consecration not performed by the
words of Primitive Institution. The sense of the Fathers. The Ancient custom of
saying Amen to the concecration. (...) what in Justin Martyr. (L.) Remembrance
of Christ's Passion at the Eucharist, ought to be as well by verbal
commemoration, as by mental meditation. The ancient forms. (M.) The bread
anciently delivered into the Communicants hands. (N.) Kneeling in the act of
receiving commended, sometime used in Antiquity, where practiced since the
Reformation. (O.) The various forms of delivering the Eelements. That of our
Church justly preferred before the rest. (P.) The Scotch order for saying Amen
by the party receiving, commended Singing of Psalms during the Communicating
ancient. (Q.) The Roman order defective in the most proper Sacrafice. (R.) The
Angelical hymn. Difference betwixt an hymn and a Psalm. The hymn mis-placed in
the M^sse-Book. Our order more consonant to Antiquity. The Council of Carthage
cleared. (S.) The Benediction by whom to be given. The custom of bowing at it.
(T.) The second service when to be read. (V.) A Rubric unhappily Omitted. (W.)
The remains of the Consecrated Elements, how anciently disposed. (X.) To
Receive thrice in the yevr an ancient practice.

AND above all things etc.] That the holy Communion, even in the Apostolical
age, was celebrated at the same both table and time, when Christians met for
their ordinary repast at meals has been said before. No part of that, either
spiritual, or temporal food, was received without some religious application to
God, relative and directed to the ends for which those Collations were
prepared: which application, whither it concerned the creature destined for
bodily, or for Mystical refreshment, consisted of either two prayers distinct,
or two distinct members of one prayer. The first was (...), (...) Thanksgiving
to God for those benefits. The second (...) Invocation, of his blessing upon
them. To speak appositly to the matter in hand, when this application related
to the elements separated for the holy Communion, Thanksgiving was made to God
the Father much to the same effect of this, that is, for the redemption of the
world, by the death and passion of our Savior Jesus Christ etc. And from this
very use the Communion contracted the name of Eucharist, and not as hitherto
has been commonly supposed, from any words constituting Consecration.
Consecration of the Elements was made indeed with thanksgiving, not by it; by
blessing it was performed, by blessing joined with thanksgiving in one
continued form of prayer, or by blessing concomitant with thanksgiving in two
distinct forms. Clear it is, though I grant the words were anciently used in a
promiscuous sense, these two thanksgiving and blessing, as distinct things,
have in Antiquity several designs, and also several forms. Dialog. cum
Tryphon.
Justin Martyr describing the Eucharist or thanksgiving in his time, says,
(...). The Lord has commanded, that Withal we should give thanks to God, for
the Creation of the world and all things therein for the benefit of man. And
for his delivering us from the misery wherein We were born, and overthrowing
principalities and powers with a total defeat, by him that suffered according
to his Counsel For farther illustration of this place, you must know that
though the Agapae were now (for the cause before specified) antiquated in the
Greek Church, yet in regard the Collations were so very bountiful, as the
Communion accommodations served there remained fair dole for the poor, the
Ancient form of thanksgiving, used at their ordinary meals, was in part
retained viz. that by which special recognisance was made to God as the
Creator, Lord and giver of all things. After this, relating to the creatures
deputed for charitable and common use follows the thanksgiving for the
benefits of Christ's redemption and passion; and as he elsewhere adds Apalog.
2. c Constable. Apost. l. 7. c, 26
(...). For that God did deigne them the favor of those gifts of bread und
wine. To the very same purpose is that (...) in the Clementine Constitutions
(...) etc. we give thee hearty thanks O our Father, for the life thou have
given us by thy Son Jesus Christ etc. (...). Whom thou sentest to become man
for our salvation etc. so gradually proceeding through the whole economy of his
Mediatorship, it concludes thus, (...). We further thank thee, O our father,
for the precious blood of Jesus Christ shed for us, and for his precious body.
The antitypes whereof we now celebrate, he having commanded us to show forth
his death. Thus have I made it evident whence the word Eucharist is derived,
and that this thanksgiving was anciently distinct from the consecrating or
blessing of the elements, whereof the several forms are also as easily to be
produced, but I shall supersede them for the present, having occasion anon to
declare them.

The men on one side, and the women on the other side.] Such was the Primitive
Let it be their care (speaking of Deacons) to see that the people sit on one
side with all stillness and order: and that the women sit apart by themselves.
Nor did they only sit in places distinct, but in reference to those places,
had distinct, officers Constable. Apost. l. 2 c. 57
(...). Let the door keepers attend upon the entrance of the men, and the
Diaconisses upon the entrance of the women.

A little pure and clean water.] So was the ancient practice, Just. Martyr
Apol. 2. vide Conci. Carthag. c. 40. and Council. 6. Can. 32.
(...), bread is brought forth and wine, and water, says the ancient Father.
This was in opposition to two contrary Sects; first the Armenians, who held
that it was only lawful to use wine alone, without water. Secondly, against
the Hydroparastatae, who officiated with water unmixt with wine. The reason of
this mixture was, partly in imitation of our Saviors act in the first
institution of the E^charist, agreeable to the custom of that hot climate,
which constantly used to allay the heat of the wine with water; and partly,
because that when our Saviors side was pierced with the lance, there issued
out both water and blood. John 19. 34.

Draw near.] This exhortation with the former should regularly be said
Mountagu. Art. of visit. Tet. 7. Art 7.
Bishop concurring in opinion with me; and for the latter, these very words
Draw near, seem to imply as much; which would sound very superfluous and idle,
where the Communicants already ascended. Therefore Bishop Andrews has affixt
this marginal note, forte non est opus his verbis, quia jam accesserunt.
Perhaps these words might be better spared, because they are already come.
Again, the Rubric before this invitation confirms this opinion, enjoining it
to be said to them that come (not to those that are already come) to receive
the holy communion. Now to enquire into the practice of Antiquity. First you
must know, that the laity, the people were not permitted, so much as to enter
the Chancel Council. Laodic. can. 19.
(...); it is only lawful for the Clergy to enter the Chancel and there to
communicate. So also another Canon of another Council, Council. 6. in Trull.
can. 69.
(...). Let no lay man be permitted to come within the Quire: but this is with
an exception of honor to the Emperor, who had a dispensation to enter this
holy place, (...), when he had a mind to present his oblations to his Creator.
I do not think that this is the first Council which past this Grace to the
Emperor, because Nazianzen, before cited, in the last chapter gives so clear
an account of the matter of fact. I shall not over-charge you with too many
proofs in so known a custom, which needs no further demonstration then that
familiar phrase of Laique Communion, so frequent in St Cyprian, and the African
Fathers, which denoted the deposing of a Clergyman, and compelling him to
Commuincate amongst the people, in a place distinct from the Clergy, whence
first this distinction grew, Bishop Jewel gives this reason, That they might
not be disturbed in the office of their Ministry: I may assign another,
because at that time the quire was not susceptible of both states: for without
dispute the Clergy were then surpassing numerous, so as Apologe^.
Nazianzen speaks complainingly, (...), they were very near as many as the
flock under their cure. In the Church of in Aug.
Constantinople there were by imperial determination, 60. Priests, 100.
Deacons, 110. Readers, and 25. singers.

The people being thus shut out of the Quire, some place they must of necessity
be allotted, to which the phrase draw near (for it was of ancient usage) must
have respect: this was the Chancel door, or entrance into it: for the Clergy
having communicated, Council. Tolet. 4 c. 17.
the Superior orders within the Rails, at the Communion Table, the inferior
within the body of the Quire, the priest went down to the Chancel door, opened
both leaves which before were keept shut, upon which occasion St. Chrysostom
has this excellent advertisment Chrysostom. Hom. 3. in Ephesians.
(...), (...), when thou beholdest the two doors of the Cancollum or travers
doors opened, think with thy self thou then beholdest heaven it self displayed,
and the Angels descending from above, there (...), i Chrysoft. Hom. 17. in Hebr.
with a loud voice and thundering noise, like a Crier, lifting his hand on high,
mounted up visible to all men, these he inviteth to participate, those he
drives away. The form of invitation, if we may credit the Liturgy, which
bears St. Chrysostomes name, was this, (...), in the fear of God with faith
draw near, and the very same is in the Liturgy ascribed to James. Certain it is
the Priest did not run ambling with the Elements up and down from man to man,
but that the Communicants came to him, and this is further manifest by the
constitutions called Apostolical. L. 2. c. 57.
(...). Let every order by it self, in course, participate of the body of the
Lord, and of his precious blood, with all fear and reverence, as approaching to
the presence of a king.

Then shall this general Confession be made.] The Church very aptly disposes
Confession at the beginning of the Communion service: for considering that
solemn Penance, of so laudable practice in the Primitive Church, is laid
aside, and the necessity of Auricular confession worthily abolisht, reason good
some account should be given to the Church, and in the Church, of our humble
acknowledgement of our sins and hearty contrition for them, as preparatives
necessary to the ensuing duty.

During the whole time of the Priest his officiating at the Communion, setting
aside in the very instant of his receiving, you find him but twice upon his
knees, whereof this is the first; at all other times, and parts of the service,
he is ordered to stand, and so was the practice of the Primitive Church. So the
L. 8. c. 12. De Civit. Dei. l. 8. c. 27.
Constitutions (...). The Bishop in a white and shining vestment, and standing
at the Altar praying. So Augustine very often, especially where he
expostulateth, Quis audivit aliquando fidelium, stantem Sacerdotem ad Altar
dicere in precibus, Offero tibi sacrificium Petre vel Paul? etc. What one of
all the faithful ever heard the Priest standing at the Altar say in his
prayers, I offer sacrifice to thee Peter, or thee Paul? This posture was taken
up by the Christian Church, in imitation of the Temple-service, where the legal
sacrifices were offered by the Priest standing. Now the correspondence bewixt
the legal, and our Evangelical sacrifice being such, as is betwixt the
substance and the shadow, why should we not agree in the Posture also: for the
Priest performing the Agenda of this office, is employed in several oblations.
First, to offer (...), the incense of prayers and praises, those of the
Congregation. Secondly, the oblation of our Alms. Thirdly, the oblation of our
selves, souls, and bodies. Lastly, the grand sacrifice of all, the Lamb of God
slain for us, and his death represented in the blessed symbols. But why then
does he not stand at this prayer also? I answer, because it is not part of the
former oblations, but an^ humble confession of his own, and the Congregations
transgressions.

Lift up your hearts] Of the excellent design and antiquity of this Preface,
De orat. Dom.
St. Cyprian gives undeniable evidence. Quando stamus ad Orationem, cogitatio
omnis carnalis and secularis abscedat, nec quicquam. tunc animus quam idsolum
quod cogitat precatur. Ideo and Sacerdos ante orationem, Praefatione praemissa,
parat fratrum animos dicendo, sursum corda, and dum responde^ plebs, habemus ad
Dominum, admoneatur, nihil se quam Dominum cogitare. When we are employed in
prayer, all carnal and worldly thoughts should be banished; nor must we mind
any thing but what we are about, our Prayers: and therefore the Priest before
he begins to pray prepares the bearts of the people with this Preface, saying,
Lift up your hearts; and when they reply, We lift them up unto the Lord, they
are thereby admonished to think of nothing but God.

Let us give thanks unto the Lord.] These Verses are but Tables annexed to the
other of sursum corda, and have reference to them: August. de Sp. and l. 1. c.
11.
Quis gratias agit Deo, nisi qui sursum habet corda ad Dominum, Who does give
thanks to God, but he who has his heart lift up unto the Lord, with Augustine;
and elsewhere more fully, Idem de viduitate.
De hoc tanto bono levati cordis, non nobis gloriam quasi nostraurm virium
tribuimus, hoc enim continuo admonemur, quia hoc dignum, hoc justum est, For
this so great benefit of our hearts lifted up, we ascribe not glory to our
selves, as proceeding from our own natural power: For we are presently
admonished: It is meet and right so to do: Much it is for the honor of this
Preface, that whereas the East and West in other parcels differed very much,
yet in this they both agreed, as is to be seen in all the Liturgies extant of
those ancient times, whereof having given you instance for the Latin, I shall
for brevity sake only, for the Greek produce the Apostolical Constitutions, L.
8. c. 12.
(...): The Bishop, Lift up your hearts: The People, We lift them up unto the
Lord: The Bishop, Let us give thanks unto the Lord: The People, It is meet and
right: The Bishop, True, it is very meet and right to praise thee the true God,
etc.

Proper Prefaces.] In the Church of Rome there were ten proper Prefaces, which
our Reformers, desirous to contract the Office into more ease, reduced Proper
to days of more eminent remark.

Holy, holy, holy, etc.] This Hymn was anciently called Trisagium, because
Holies: I find in antiquity two forms of Hymns under this name: One thus,
(...). Can. 62.
Holy God, holy Mighty, holy Immortal, have mercy on us: This is that Hymn
mentioned in the Trullan Council, as the frame, (...), of the ancient Fathers,
which Balsomon interprets, to be the Fathers of the Council of Chalcedon:
Extant it is in the Liturgy ascribed to Saint Basil, but not in that of St.
Chrysostom, and therefore either that Liturgy must not be St. Chrysostoms, (who
I conceive may best pretend to it) or else this Hymn was not used in the
Constantinopolitan Church until Proclus his time, who upon the event of a
Miracle, had advice from Heaven to order the singing of it in his Church, if
there be any faith in those Historians who deliver it for truth. The other form
of Trisagium is this retained by our Church, expressly and almost to a syllable
agreeing with that in the Gregorian Service, in Saint L. 8. c. 12. ^^ 13.
Chrysostoms Liturgy, and before them in the Constitutions: The composition is
most excellent, wherein the Celestial Quire are drawn into consort with the
Church, joining as a Chorus in the words of the People, magnifying his
humanity, saying, Glory be to thee, O Lord most high* or rather, as in the
Original, Hosanna to the Son of David, Blessed is he that comes in the name of
the Lord, Hosanna in the Highest, for so it is in the Latin Translation set
forth 2o Eliz. Osanna in excelsis, Benedictus qui venit in nomine Domini,
Osanna in excelsis.

Saying, Take eat, this is my Body.] The recital of these words pass in the
Consecration; were I Romishly inclined, I should rather impute unto them the
power of Transubstantiation, for that a bare Narrative can be qualified to
consecrate, is certainly new Divinity, unknown to Scripture, and Antiquity
interpreting it: Therefore I must adhere in judgment to those learned men, who
derive Consecration from the word of God and Prayer, the very way by which our
Savior himself sanctified those Elements in his first institution, Matthew. 26.
26. (...) calling upon God for his blessing, and (...), giving thanks, in which
action it must be supposed, that Christ had more then a general design of
saying Grace, as we phrase it, for those elements as Creatures ordained for
common nutriment, viz. An intention of invocating Gods blessing upon them, in
reference to those ends, for which he meant by his institution to separate and
depute them: And though the Primitive Fathers, in the Act of Consecration, did
usually join the Narrative of Christ's Institution, with the words of Blessing
and Thanksgiving, thereby as it were showing their commission, yet were they
far from imagining that the Elements were sanctified any other way then by
Prayer, if they must be thought (as sure none will question it) to mean as they
said: Justin Martyr is express, Apolog. 2.
(...), i. e. Those viands by which our flesh and blood are nourished, being
blessed by the Prayer and Thanksgiving of the Priest, we are taught, became
thereby the body and blood of Christ, who was Incarnate: Cyprian, De Caena Dom.
Panis ille super substantialis, and calix benedictione solemni consecratus, i.
e. That supersubstantial Bread and Wine consecrated by solemn benediction;
Catech. 77.
Nyssen, (...), i. e. The Eucharist is sanctified by the word of God and
Prayer: Mystag. 1.
Cyril, (...), i. e. Invocation being made, the Bread becomes the Body of
Christ: Hierome, Quid patitur mensarum Minister, ut supracosse tumidus efferat,
ad quorum preces Christicorpus sanguisque conficitur, i. e. Ad Euagrium.
What aileth this Table-Servant and Deacon, that he carries himself so loftily
above those with whose Prayers the body and blood of Christ is effected in the
Eucharist: His Convert St. Epist. 59.
Austin: Benedictus and sanctisicatur illud quod est in Dominimensa Oratione,
i. e. The Symbols lying on the holy Table are blessed and sanctified by Prayer:
Nor do ^ find in all Antiquity any one genuine piece of a different sense,
only St. Ambrose in his de Sacramentis (if it be his) seems to vary,
Antequam consecretur, panis est: ubi autem verba Christi accesserint corpus est
Christi, before consecration it is mere bread, but when once Christ's words of
institution are recited, it becomes the body of Christ. Which yet is not
directly opposite to what I have delivered before, especially taking Ambrose
entire, for he begins his Chapter thus, visscire quia verbis celestibus
consecratur? Accipe nunc quaesunt verbae. Dicit Sacerdos. Faec nobis hanc
oblationem ascriptam, rationabilem, acceptabilem, quod est figura corporis and
sanguinis Domini nostri Jesu Christi, qui pridie quam pateretur etc. i. e. But
will you know that the Elements are Consecrated with heavenly words? hear the
words themselves. The Priest says, Make this sacrifice which is the figure of
the body and blood of Christ, imputable, reasonable, acceptable for us, who the
night before he suffered etc. reciting Christ's action at the institution from
the Evangelists, where the narrative of the institution being continued with
the prayer of the Priest, the consecration may seem to be completed by those
words, though in truth the prayer it was that operated the main, and without it
the words could have effected nothing, and this is the reason, why both in the
now Canon of the mass, and the ancient Liturgies, there is always affixt a
prayer of Benediction, that (...) mentioned before, whose forms I shall here
exhibit in reference to my former promise. In the Romish Canon thus, ut haec
oblatio nobis corpus et sanguis fiat dilectissimi filii tui Domini nostri Jesu
Christi, that this oblation may become to us the body and blood of thy most
beloved son our Lord Jesus Christ. In the Liturgy of St Basil, God is invocated
that he would send his holy spirit, (...), upon the gifts there present, that
he would bless and sanctify them. That of St. Chrysostom more full, (...)
Bless O Lord this holy bread, make it the precious body of thy Christ. Elder
then these the Clementine Constitutions. Having premised the words of
institution, (a mode observed by all Greek Liturgies, herein differing from the
Latin he adds, (...), Constit. 1. 8. c,
etc. we beseecb thee that thou would graciously behold these oblations
presented before thee, thou God that want nothing, and send down thy holy
spirit upon this sacrifice, being the commemoration of the Passions of our Lord
Jesus, to exhibit this bread as the body, and this cup as the blood of thy
Christ. Now it were, I say, vain to prefix with the Latins. or to affix with
the Greeks, such an Invocation, if the bare affirmative words of our Savior
his institution were consecration all sufficient,

By the marginal Ascription of the 1 B. of Edw. 6. we may observe from whence
the custom is derived, for the Minister to take the Elements into his hands,
upon his pronouncing of the words of institution. I humbly offer it to better
Judgments whither that direction being expunged by our second Reformers, it
would not be a safe, and as proper a course to begin that action at these
words, Grant that we receiving these thy creatures etc. and to continue the
rite until the words of Institution be past. For as I said before, the words
Invocation of Gods blessing, jointly with those of Christ's Institution
constitute the Consecration. Now if the blessing of the symbols be, as it is,
an essential part of Consecration, then reason good, that with the words
whereby it is accommodated and applied, the ceremony proper to it, that I mean
of imposing of hands, should be used also: nevertheless I see not how the
either precept or use thereof, as Bucer suspected, can at all officiat to the
error of Transubstantiation, considering that the direction refers not to
the words of Institution, which the Papists make the great operators in the
conversion, but to the words took bread, and took the cup, as is rightly noted
in the Scotch Liturgy, where the same direction is revived. As to the words of
Institution, I must here note, against all who pretend our service is taken out
of the Masse-Book, that the Church of Rome has halved them, as well as the
Communion it self. For whereas our Church, agreeable to the general manner of
all other Liturgies, indeed agreeable to St. Paul, and his associate St. Luke
(who supplied what St. Matthew and St. Mark had omitted) after these words,
This is my body, continues, which is given for you, the Cannon of the Mass
chops off the words, Quod pro vobis traditur, contenting it self with Hoc est
corpus meum.

Though all our Liturgies stand silent in it, yet may I not omit what here by
the way does offer it self as observable, viz. That at the close of the
Eucharistical prayer, the ancient manner was for the people to contribute their
Amen: which the Annotator. Mr. Thorndick, and some other learned men conceive
to be the mind of St. Paul. 1 Cor. 14. 16. How shall he that occupies the
room of the unlearned say, Amen, at thy giving of thanks? applying (...), to
the Consecrating prayer, which included Thanksgiving: fitly and concinn enough,
and the practice of the Primitive Fathers gives the same interpretation, (...),
says Just in Martyr. Bread and wine is brought forth, and the President, with
all intention of spirit, powers forth prayers and thanksgivings, and all the
people acclaim Amen. here is evidence clear enough to serve my turn, if my
translating (...), with all intention of Spirit, gives check to so many of
Smectymnuus as yet survive, who will have it according to his ability, and
thereby advance extempore prayer. I must tell them their own Beza renders the
phrase quanta potest contentione, I must tell them that the words in their
native and proper energy can in 1 Cor. 14: (...).
signify nothing else, witness Gregory Nazianzen, who understood them better
then they or I. (...) etc. Come Let us with all intention of Spirit chant that
triumphant ode, which sometime the Israelites sung upon the overthrow of the
Egyptians in the red sea (...), being limited precisely to (...), utterly
shuts out all arbitrary conceptions. To pursue my former purpose, one who was
baptized by haereticks, became somewhat afflicted in his conscience suspecting
his baptism for illegitemate, there upon he resorts to Dionisius Alexandrinus,
desiring that he might be rebaptized. Dionisius replied no, and assigned this
reason for it, he might not rebaptise (...), One who had Eusebius. Hist. l. 7 c. 8.
been present at the Mystical Thanksgiving, and had with the Congregation
joined his Amen. The same fashion is extant in all the Greek Liturgies, that of
the Clementine Constitutions excepted. For the Latin Church let St Ambrose
speak, Ante Consecrationem aliud dicitur, post Consecrationem sanguis
nuncupatur, and tudicis Amen. Before the Consecration (wherewith thanksgiving
was joined) it is called somen hat else, but after Consecration it is styled
the blood of Christ, and thou say Amen.

Having in remembrance his blessed passion.] This blessed Sacrament is
Commemoratio Dominicae passionis, a Commemoration of our Saviors passion. So
was his express command when he first instituted this holy Rite, (...), do
this in remembrance of me, which words import somewhat more then a calling of
his passion to our mind, a meditating and thinking upon it when we are
conversant about that Sacred action, as is vulgarly apprehended. Sure I am the
Primitive Church stretched it further, and held her self obliged thereby, not
only to a mental, but a vocal commemoration, therefore witness her Liturgical
formulas, constantly running after one tenor importing as much, (...). Making
Commemoration of what he suffered for us, we give thee thanks Almighty God, and
so fulfill his appointment. So the Constitutions, whereby it is manifest, not
only that such commemoration was made, but that it was made upon the account
of Divine institution. In all the Liturgies ascribed to St. James, St. Basil,
St. Chrysostom etc. the De Sacram. l. 4. c. 6.
like commemoration passes current. For the Latins, listen to St. Ambrose
Sacerdos dicit, ergo memores gloriosissimae ejus passionis and ab inferis
resurrectionis, and in coelum ascensionis Offerimus tibi etc. The Priest says;
Therefore commemorating his most glorious passion, resurrection from the Dead,
and Ascension into heaven we offer up unto thee etc. Agreeable to which is the
now Canon of the mass; whence it is that the same Ambrose of the words do this
in remembrance of me, gives this paraphrase. Mortem meam praedicabitis,
resurrectonem meam annunciabitis, adventum sperabitis donec iterum ad-veniam;
ye shall set forth my death, declare my resurrection, and hope for my coming,
until I shall come again. Indeed St. Paul himself seems so to interpret them,
saying. For as often as ye shall eat this bread and drink this cup ye show the
Lords death till he come, 1 Cor. 11. 26. implying that Annunciation or
declaration of Christ's passion was usually made at the celebrating the
Eucharist, which could no otherwise be, then by verbal commemoration.

To the people in their hands] so was the celebration observed by Christ
himself, Eusebius is said, (...), to stretch out his hand for the receiving of
the sacred food. So St. Cyprian speaking of persons lapsed, who intruded to the
Communion, before they had performed those solemnities of penance which the
Church required, says Plus modo in Dominum manibus et ore delinquunt quam cum
Dominum negaverunt. Cyprian de La psis.
They did more heinously offend God with their hands reached out to take, and
their mouths open to devour those precious symbols, then they (the Jews) did
with their tongues when they denied him. To the same purpose this father
elsewhere very often, so also Clemens, Alexandrinus, Augustine, who not? In
tract of time some indiscreet persons pretending greater reverence to the
mysteries, as if they were defiled with their hands, were at the cost to
provide certain saucers, or little plates of gold (why not as well golden
mouths and stomachs) to receive it: until they were forbidden by the Can. 10.
sixth Council in Trullo. Another abuse the Church of Rome brought in, where
the Priest puts it into the peoples mouth, least a crum should fall beside,
which favoring Transubstantiation, is by our Church discontinued.

Kneeling] The ancients made it their study to adorn the blessed Eucharist
Donys. Artop.
(...): i. e. the perfection of perfections; some (...), the dreadful
mysteries; some Nazianz.
(...), the exemplar Chrysostom.
of high mysteries. The table, on which it was said, was called (...) the holy
Table: (...), the mysticnl Table; (...) the terrible and dreadful Table; much
cost to slender purpose, if after all it be now be discovered they were in the
wrong, and that this Sacrament has nothing of that veneration, nothing of that
dreadfulness which they imputed to it, and that it is so same and despicable an
Ordinance, as will admit of any negligent posture, and that kneeling is too
good for it. Miserable infatuation! Good God how well may thou say to those
missed souls as Augustus to him who entertained him meanly, I did not think you
and I had been so familiar; Blessed Jesus, were thou so gracious to us
wretches, as to leave and bequeath us this mystery of our eternal redemption,
and great charter of all thy benefits, and shall we dare to receive it in any
other then the lowest and humblest posture? What is, if this be not (...), not
to disdiscern the Lords Body, and what the consequence of that in distinction
is, let all them consider who would avoid it. But it may be said, that Kneeling
was not the gesture of the Primitive Church. Confessed, generally it was not:
because their fashion was upon Communion days, to pray standing. Nevertheless
the communicant was enjoined to receive those mysteries Cyril. Catech. 5.
(...), bowing himself after the manner of vene^ation and Adoration. Now can
Augustines words be otherwise truly interpreted. Aug. in Psalm. 98.
Nemo carnem illam manducat nisi prius adoraverit. Let none presume to eat that
flesh until he has done his Obeisance. Nor was this Ecumenical and universal
practice, for Hist. l. 8. c. 5.
Sozomen tells a story of a woman which to please her husband, coming to the
Communion, took the bread when the Priest gave it her, and kneeling down, as if
it had been to secret prayer, conveyed it away, her maid (then by) privily
stealing a piece of common bread into her hands which she eat instead of the
other: whence it appears that kneeling was not then interdicted. A gesture
used by the Protestants of Harm. Consess. page 120.
Bohemia, upon whose custo me mentioned in their Confession, the French and
Dutch Churches passed this judgment. In hoc ritu suam cuique Ecclesiae
libertatem salvam relinquendam arbitramur. As to this ceremony, we hold it fit
that every Church be left to her own liberty. A gesture which by Bez. Epist. 12.
Beza's own confession, olim potuit cum fructis usurpari, might in times past
have been used with edification. In time past? why not now as well, yea much
rather, when as the fear of reverting to Popish Idolatry is altogether vain, so
the danger of Apostatizing from Christ is very great, and no way sooner
occasioned then by a sitting posture, it being observed by the Polish Church,
that the men who lapsed there into the Arrian haeresie, were all such as
addicted themselves to that posture at the Communion.

The body of our Lord etc.] If you take a view of the elder forms, as they of
Christ's death and passion which those divine Mysteries were ordered to
represent, as it is the precise formula of the Masse-book, so might it be
suspected as overserviceable to the Doctrine of Transubstantion, to which the
Romanists applied it. Again in the next Book the Commemoration being let in,
and the body and blood of Christ shut out, that real Presence which all sound
Protestants seem to allow, might probably be implied to be denied. Excellently
well done therefore was it of Q. Elizabeth her Reformers, to link them both
together. for between the body and blood of Christ in the Eucharist and the
Sacramental commemoration of his passion there is so inseparable a league as
subsist they cannot, unless they consist. A sacramental verity of Christ's body
and blood there cannot be, without the Commemoration of his death and Passion,
because Christ never promised his mysterious (yet real) presence, but in
reference to such Commemoration. Nor can there be a true Commemoration without
the body and blood exhibited and participated; because Christ gave not those
visible Elements, but his body and blood to make that spiritual representation.

Here the party receiving shall say, Amen.] This order is a piece of
Reformation, Lib. 8. c. 13.
Let the Bishop give the Oblation of bread, saying, The body of Christ, and let
him that receives it say, Amen. Then the Deacon having the cup, and delivering
it let him say, The blood of Christ, the cup of salvation, and let him that
drinks say, Amen. By St. Augustine it Respons. ad ^ quest. Orosil 49.
should seem to have been of general usage, saying, Universa Ecclesia accepto
sanguine Chirsti dicit Amen. The universal Church at the Receiving of the blood
of Christ, answers Amen. Thus you see upon what terms of conformity the
Scotch service, in this particular, stands with the ancient practice.

Though I have neither rule nor text, in any one of the Liturgies I discourse
upon, engageing me to it, yet is it no extravant vagary here to take into
consideration the general fashion used in our Church of employing the
Congregation in singing during the time of Communicating: whither that time can
be better transacted and laid out, then in Psalms suitable to the subject of
those blessed Mysteries, not falling under dispute, must pass in the negative;
this being so, the only concernment to which I am obliged is, to show that the
custom flows from the prescript of Primitive tradition, whereof the ancient
Liturgies are evidence enough, that especially exhibited in the Constitutions
above mentioned. (...). ubi supra.
Let the thirty third Psalm be said whilst the rest Communicate. For the
African practice speaks St Augustine, Mos caeparat apud Carthagenem ut hymni ad
Altar dicerentur de Psalmorum libro, sive Retract. l. 2. 4. 11.
ante Oblationem sive cum distribueretur populo quod fuisset Oblatum. Hunc
morem Hilarious Laicus, maledica reprehensione ubicunque poterat laterabat,
asserens fieri non oportere. A custom was begun at Carthage, that hymns out of
David's Psalms both before the Oblation, and at the distribution of it should be
sung. This fashion one Hillary a layman, wheresoever he could, envied against,
affirming it ought not to be done.

And here we offer and present etc.] This high and eminent place, looks
Mass, challenging the Authors thereof to exhibit where it is to be found in
the Canon of that Mass. No, to the utter shame of the Romish party, our Church
upbraideth them, that whereas they contend so much for the propriety of the
sacrifice, of their Mass, the whole Canon of that Mass has not one syllable
of this most proper sacrifice, this (...), indivisible Sacrifice, of both
bodies and souls, a sacrifice enjoined by Apostolical precept Romans 12. 1. and
which did in the Primitive times, constitute an illustrious part of the
Eucharistical office.

Glory be to God on high] Antiquity called this the Angelical hymn, and in
Angelical. it must be an hymn, (...) says Chrysostom. Angels and the Celestial
Quire, send forth hymns they sing not Psalms. And so Clemens Alexandrinus,
(...), let hymns be only the praises of God, the reason is, (...). Psalms
contain all things both Divine and Moral, Hymns only the praises of God.
Called it is the Angelical hymn, because the first part thereof is the
Nativity-Carol mentioned Luke 2. 13. sung by the Angels: the rest was composed
by Ecclesiastical Doctors, some think St. Hillary, and the fourth Council of
Toledo seems to imply as much. But the Constitutions of Clemens persuade me
it was of earlier entrance, it being there completely the same with ours in all
materials but disposed in two several Prayers, and is that (...), that
morning-hymn, as I suppose, to which Epiphanius, a great follower of Clemens
relates in a place formerly cited. Part it was of the Missa Catechumenorum, in
the Masse-book, but worthily translated into the Communion service by our
discreet Reformers, it being formerly mis-laid, this being its proper ubi; or
place, for two reasons: First, because it is an hymn. To sing an hymn, after
the distribution of the Elements is conformity to the mode of Christ Chrystost.
de Bapt. Chrsti Hom. 24.
(...) i. e. thou see^t that the last prayer after the Eucharist is celebrated,
is made in imitation of our Saviors practice. Again it is a compound piece,
made up partly of Donology, partly of Prayer; and of Prayer addressed to Jesus
Christ, the Lamb of God: now it is improper to apply our selves to Christ,
before the action of participation is past: the reason is, because the blessed
Eucharist is a sacrifice, wherein our Savior Christ is considered as an
immaculate Lamb, offered upon the Altar to God the Father for the Remission of
our sins. And this I take to be the meaning of the third Counsel of Carthage
decreeing Can. 23.
ut nemo in precibus vel Patrem pro Filio vel Filium pr^ Patre nominet, and cum
altari assistitur semper ad Patrem airigatur oration. That no man name the
Father for the Son, nor the Son for the Father, in public prayers, and when
any officiate at the altar (viz. before distribution of the Elements) that the
prayer be always directed to the Father. For which I can assign no other
reason, but because Christ is then the great sacrifice, and the Father is the
person to be appeased.

The Peace of God.] This benediction is a peculiar of the Bishops office, if
present: the less is blessed of the greater. Hebr. 7. 7. (...). m Chrysostom.
lit.
The principal Priest dismisseth the people with his blessing. After this
pronounced, the Deacon usually said, (...), Go in peace, when the people n
Chrysostom in eos qui Pasch jejun.
received it they bowed down their heads, (...). Let the Bishop give the
benediction, the people bowing o Clem. Constable.
down their heads. This gesture imports a kind of adoration. Eccles. 50. p
Chrysostom. de in Dei Not.
23. The Jews are said to bow down themselves to worship the Lord. So in the
Primitive Church the Energumenj were commanded to bow their heads, and H. 28.
(...), in that fashion to perform their bodily reverence.

Upon the holidayes if there be no Communion.] Anciently upon holy days
Communions Proclus says, (...), a Festival is the poor man's harvest, because
he had q de Incarn. Or. 3.
then his dividend of offerings. But afterward, as devotion relaxed, they were
content with Sundays, appointing nevertheless, that which they called missam
Catechumenorum, the service of the Catechumens to be used upon such days as
there was no Communion: and this went under the appellation of Missa sicca,
Dry-masse. To speak in particular of our Church, this Rubric is a very pious
and prudent provision: what pity were it that the congregation r Durand.
Ration. l. 4. cap. 1.
should, for default of a Communion, be deprived of that excellent ex homo
logesis, confession of sins implied in that (...), Lord have mercy upon us, and
invocation of Gods grations assistance which the Decalogue service constrains
us to? what is there in those Collects succeeding, what in the
Constantinopolitan Creed, what in the Prayer for the whole state of
Christs-Church, which creates in them an inseparable relation to the
Eucharist, or which may not exceedingly officiate to the edification of the
Assembly at all times, would leisure permit? Nay, how absurd would it seem to
celebrate those holy days, and merely for the defect above said, to turn out
of doors so large portions of holy Scripture, as the Epistles and Gospels,
these last with their Collects giving us the only account why these days are
observed.

Under the notion of Holy Days in this place, such Sundays are also to be
comprehended, on which there is no communion, in Country villages, where
congregations are thin: for Sundays are put into the Catalogue of holy days
in the Act of Parliament, and order of our Church.

But it is ordered here only what shall be said for the second service,
without determining the place where, and this has been a very intricate, and
almost interminable question. The visitation Articles of some Bishops enjoined
it to be read at the holy Table, placed at the East end of the Chancel, and the
late Archbishop infers direction for it from the Rubric before the
Communion, appointing that the Priest standing at the North side of the holy
Table, shall say the Lords prayer with that which follows. But this order
has reference to the Communion time, the Rubriok is expressly so; and in
Communion time, I have evidently demonstrated before, the Table was to be
placed in the middle of the Church or Chancel, and consequently I conceive this
Rubric refers not to this service out of Communion time, where then is it
to be read? I agree at the holy Table set Altarwise, at the East end; and in
this I persuade my self the Bishops were right, though they perhaps mistook the
reason; so it was I am certain in the first Reformation, the Rubric parallel
to ours, ordering all these things to be said at the Altar. But it may be said,
the second Reformation expunging this rule, as to this particular, we may
presume it meant to reform the practice also. I answer, our Reformers are best
understood by their own orders, Now this Rule constitutes this service either
as a label annexed to morning prayer, or parcel of the Communion service: take
which you will, by the order of the Church it must be said at the holy table
set Altarwise, at the East end: for there regularly ought both the morning and
the Communion office to be read out of Communion time. As for the Morning
prayer, both it and Evening prayer shall be used in the acoustomed place of the
Church, Chapel, or Chancel. So are the very words of the Rubr. before Morn.
prayer.
Rubric. The accustomed place was then, without dispute, the Quire: for all
along Queen Marses days, nay from her death being the 27. of November to the
feast of St. John Baptist when this Common prayer was to commence, by the
statute, Mattins and Mass, yea, all Divine offices were performed after the
popish manner, and that was undoubtedly in the Quire, at the high Altar, and
consequently to that place must the word accoustomed have relation in this
Rubric. True it is, there is an exception against this rule, in case the
ordinary shall otherwise determine. So that till the Ordinary shall state it
otherwise, the rule holds firm, and consequently Morning prayer with all its
appendants (not otherwise settled by express order) is to be said at the Altar.
Now if it be considered as part of the Communion service, the words of the
Rubric are express, The Priest standing at the North side of the Table, shall
say etc. So he is to stand and officiate at the North side of the Table, and
this, out of Communion time, must be situated at the East end, and
consequently the service to be read there.

Although no order etc.] How, by whom, or upon what account, and inducement,
Rubric, ancientiy called a protestution touching the gesture of kneeling, came
to be omitted in Queen Elizabeth her Liturgy, I cannot determine, and would
gladly learn

And if any of the Bread or wine remain etc.] In the Primitive Church, the
remains: this was done at first, by sending some parcels to absent friends, as
pledges and tokens of love and agreement in the unity of the same faith,
whereof Hist. Eccles. l. 5. c. 24.
Eusebius makes mention in Ireneus his Epistle to Pope Victor. But this
custom being abused, was interdicted by the Council of Leodicea Can. 14.
(...). That the consecrated bread be no more sent abroad to other Parishes at
Easter, under the notion, and in resemblance of the blessed loaves. After this
the Remains began to be divided amongst the Clergy, Consist. 1. 8. c. 31.
(...), says Clemens. What is left of the consecrated Elements, let the
Deacons divide among the Clergy, and sometimes the other Communicants were
allowed their share, Theophel. Alex. can. 7. apud Balsam.
(...). Let the Clergy, and with them the faithful brethren divide amongst
themselves the Oblations of the Eucarist when every one has participated. As
for the order of our Church, it is very circumspect, for by saying the Curate
shall have it to his own use, care thereby is taken to prevent the
superstitious reservation of this Sacrament, as the Papists formerly practiced.

At the least three times in the year.] So did the Counsel of Can. 18.
Agatha decree, prescribing these very days also. Qui in Natali Domim,
Paschate and Pentechoste non communicant catholici non credantur nec inter
Catholicos habeantur. They which do not communicate at the Nativity of our
Lord, Easter, and Pentechost, let them not be accounted amongst the members of
the Catholic Church. So also the Can. 63.
Belgic Church, Commodumerit die Pascates, Pentechostes and Nativitatis
salvificae Dominicam caenam celebrari, It is very convenient that the Lords
supper be celebrated on Easter, Whitsuntide, and on the birth day of our
Savior. The word Parishioner must here be understood according to several
qualifications and capacities. First it intends the Laity, and therefore this
Rubric is no dispensation to the Clergy belonging to Cathedrals, who are still
obliged to receive every Sunday, unless they show cause to the contrary.
Secondly, it means such as can say their Catechism, and have been confirmed,
as is in the Rubric at the end of Confirmation. Lastly, it imports infants
also, which in the second qualification it excluded, for it is said, every
Parishioner shall also receive the Sacraments etc. meaning when Infants,
Baptism; and when of riper years the Eucharist, else we make more then two
Sacraments, contrary to our Church Catechism.

CHAP. VIII.
Common Prayer.

The Ministration of (A) Baptism, to be used in in the Church.

1 B. of Edw. 6.

Of the Administration of Public Baptism to be used in the Church.

IT appears by ancient writers, that the (B) Sacrament of Baptism in the old
time was not commonly ministered but at two times in the year: (C) at Easter and
Whitsuntide. At which time it was openly ministered in the presence of all the
Congregation, which custom now being grown out of use (although it cannot, for
many considerations, be well restored again) yet it is thought good to follow
the same as near as conveniently may be, wherefor the people are to be
admonished, that it is most convenient that Baptism should not be ministered
but upon Sundays, and other holy days, when the most number of people may
come together, as well for that the congregation there present may testify the
receiving of them that be newly baptized into the number of Christ's Church, as
also because in the Baptism of infants, every man present may be put in
remembrance of his own profession made to God in baptism. For which cause also
it is expedient, that Baptism be ministered in the English tongue.
Nevertheless (if necessity so require) children 1 B. of Edw. 6. ought at all
times to be baptized, either at the Church or else at home] may at altimes be
baptized at home.

Public Baptism.

When there are children to be baptized upon the Sunday or holy day, the
parents shall give knowledge overnight, or in the morning before the beginning
of morning prayer, to the Curate. And then the Godfathers, Godmothers, and
people, with the children, (D) must be ready at the Font, [1 B. of Edw. 6. at
the Church door,] either immediately after the last [1. B. of Edw. 6. Canticle]
Lesson at Morning prayer, or else immediately after the last [1 B. of Edw. 6.
Canticle] Lesson at Evening prayer, as the Curate by his discretion shall
appoint. And then standing there, the minister shall ask whether the children
be baptized, or no? If they answer no: Then shall the Minister say thus.

DEarly beloved, forasmuch as all men be conceived and born in sin, and that
our savior Christ says, None can enter into the kingdom of God, except he be
regenerate and born a new of water and the holy ghost: I beseech you to call
upon God the father, through our Lord Jesus Christ, that of his bounteous mercy
he will grant to these children that thing which by nature they cannot have,
that they may be baptized with water and the holy ghost, and received into
Christ's holy Church, and be made lively members of the same.

Then the Minister shall say, Let us pray.

1 B. of Edw. 6. ALmighty and everlasting God, which of thy great mercy did
save Noah and his family in the Ark from perishing by water: and also did
safely send the children of Israel thy people through the red sea, figuring
thereby thy holy Baptism: And by the Baptism of thy well beloved son Jesus
Christ* did sanctify the flood Jordan, and all other waters to the mystical
washing away of sin [Scot. Lit. sanctify this fountain of Baptism, thou which
art the The water in the font shall be changed twice in in the month at least:
and before any child be baptized in the water so changed, the Presbyter or
Minister shall say at the font the words thus enclosed. [ ]
Sanctifier of all things.] And further we beseech thee for thy infinite
mercies, that thou would mercifully look upon these children, sanctify and
wash them with the holy Ghost, that they being delivered from thy wrath, may be
received into the Ark of Christ's Church, and being steadfast in faith, joyful
through hope, and rooted in charity, Almighty and everlasting God, which of thy
justice did destroy by floods of water the whole world for sin, except eight
persons, whom of thy mercy (the same time) thou did save in the Ark: And when
thou did drown in the red sea wicked king Pharaoh with all his Army, yet (at
the same time) thou did lead thy people the children of Israel safely through
the midst thereof, whereby thou did figure the washing of thy holy Baptism.
And by etc. 1. B. of Edw. 6. May so pass the waves of this troublesome world,
that finally they may come to the land of everlasting life, there to reign with
thee, world without end, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. May ever serve
thee, And finally attain to everlasting life, with all thy holy and chosen
people. This grant us we beseech thee for Jesus Christ's sake our Lord, Amen.

1. B. of Edw. 6.

Here shall the Priest ask what shall be the name of the child, and when the
Godfathers, and Godmothers have told the name, then shall he make a (F)
Cross upon the child's forehead, and breast, saying.

N. Receive the sign of the holy Cross, both in thy forehead and in thy
breast, in token that thou shall not be ashamed to confess thy faith in Christ
crucified, and manfully to sight under his bannor against sin, the world, and
the Devil, and to continue his faithful soldier and servant unto thy lives
end, Amen.

And this he shall do, and say, to as many children as be present to be
baptized, one after another.

1 B. of Edw. 6.

Let us pray.

Almighty and immortal God etc.

Common prayer.

ALmighty and Immortal God, the did of them that need, the helper of all hat
flee to thee for succor, the life of them that believe, and the resurrection
of the dead: we call upon thee for these infants, that they coming to thy holy
baptism, may receive remission of their stirs by spiritual regeneration.
Receive them (O Lord) as thou have promised by thy welbeloved son, saying, Ask,
and you shall have, seek, and ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto
you. So give now unto us that ask, let us that seek find, open the gate unto
us that knock, that these infants may enjoy the everlasting benediction of thy
heavenly washing, and may come to the eternal kingdom which thou have promised,
by Christ our Lord, Amen.

1 B. of Edward the 6.

Then let the Priest looking upon the children, say,

I command thee (G) unclean spirit, in the name of the Father, of the Son, and
of the holy Ghost, that thou come out, and depart from these infants, whom our
Lord Jesus Christ has vouch^a^ed to call to his holy baptism, and to be made
members of his body, and of his holy congregation, therefore thou cursed spirit
remember thy sentence, remember thy judgment, remember the day to be at hand,
wherein thou shall burn in fire everlasting prepared for thee and thy Angels.
And presume not hereafter to exercise any Tyrany toward these Infants, whom
Christ has bought with his most precious blood, and by this his holy Baptism
calls to be of his flock.

Then shall the Priest say,

The Lord be with you,

The people.

And with thy spirit.

The Minister

Hear now the Gospel written by St. Mark.

AT a certain time they brought children unto Christ, that he should touch
them: and his disciples rebuked those that brought them. But when Jesus sow it.
he was displeased, and said unto them, suffer little Children to come unto me,
and forbid them nor, for to such belong the kingdom of God. Uerily I say unto
you, whosoever does not receive the kingdom of God, as a little child, be
shall not enter therein. And when he had taken them up in his arms, he put his
hands upon them, and blessed them.

After the Gospel is read, the Minister shall make this brief exhortation upon
the words of the Gospel.

Friends, you hear in this gospel the words of our savior Christ, that be
commanded the children to be brought unto him: how he blamed those that would
have kept them from him: how be exhorts all men to follow their innocence.
You perceive how by his outward gesture and deed, he declared his good will
toward them: For he unbraced them in his arms, he laid his hands upon them,
and blessed them. Doubt not ye therefore, but earnestly believe, that he will
likewise favorably receive these present infants: that he will embrace them
with the arms of his mercy: that he will give unto them the blessing of
eternal life, and make them partakers of his everlasting kingdom. Wherefore we
being thus persuaded of the good will of our heavenly father toward these
infants, declared by his son Jesus Christ, and nothing doubting but that he
favorably allows this charitable work of ours, in bringing these children to
his holy baptism: let us faithfully and devoutly give thanks unto him, and say.

1 B. of Edw. 6. And say the prayer which himself has taught, and in
declaration of our faith, let us recite also the articles contained in our
Creed.

Here the Minister with the Godfathers. and Godmothers, and people present,
shall say,

Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be etc.

And then shall say openly.

I believe in God the Father Almigihty etc.

Then shall he add also this prayer.

ALmighty and everlasting God, heavenly Father, we give thee humble thanks,
that thou have vouchsafed to call us to the knowledge of thy grace and faith in
thee: Increase this knowledge, and confirm this faith in us evermore, give thy
holy spirit to these infants, that they may be born again, and be made heirs
of everlasting salvation, through our Lord Jesus Christ, who lives and
reigns with thee and thy holy spirit, now and for ever, Amen.

Then the Minister shall speak unto the Godfathers and Godmothers, on this wise.

WE beloved friends, ye have brought these children here to be baptized, ye
have prayed that our Lord Jesus Christ would vouchsafe to receive them, to lay
his hands upon them, to bless them, to release them of their sins, to give
them the kingdom of heaven, and everlasting life. Ye have heard also that our
Lord Jesus Christ has promised in his Gospel, to grant all these things that
ye have prayed for: Which promise, he for his part will most surely keep and
perform. Wherefore, after this promise made by Christ, these infants must also
faithfully for their part, promise by you that be their suerties, that they
will forsake the devil and all his works, and constantly believe Gods holy
word, and obediently keep his commandments.

1 B. of Edw. 6. Then shall the Minister demand (H) of the Godfathers and
Godmothers these questions following. Then shall the Priest demand of the
child (which shall be first baptized) these questions following: first naming
the child, and saying. (I) Do thou forsake the devil and all his works, the
vain pomp and glory of the world, with all covetous desires of the same, the
carnal desires of the flesh, so that thou will not follow nor be led by them?
N. Do thou forsake the devil and all his works? Answer. I forsake them.
Minister. Answer. Do thou forsake the vain pomp and glory of the world, with
all the covetous desires of the same? I forsake them all. Answer. I forsake
them.

Minister.

Do thou believe in God the Father almighty, maker of heaven and earth? And
in Jesus Christ his only begotten Son our Lord? And that he was conceived by
the holy ghost, born of the Nirgin Mary, that he suffered under Pontius Pilate,
was crucified, dead, and buried, that he went down into hell, and also did rise
again the third day, that he ascended into heaven, and ^itteth at the right
hand of God the Father Almighty, and from thence shall come again at the end of
the world to judge the quick and the dead* And do thou believe in the holy
Ghost, the holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints, the remission of
sins, the resurrection of the flesh, and everlasting life after death.

Answer.

All this I steadfastly believe

Minister,

Will thou be baptized in this faith?

Answer.

That is my desire.

Minister.

Do thou forsake the carnal desires of the flesh so that thou will not
follow, nor be led by them?

Answer.

I forsake them.

Minister.

Do thou believe in God the Father Almighty maker of heaven and earth?

Answer.

I believe,

Minister.

Do thou believe in Jesus Christ his only begotten son our Lord? etc.

Answer.

I believe.

Minister.

Do thou believe in the holy Ghost, the holy Catholic Church, the Communion
of saints, remission of sins, Resurrection of the flesh, and everlasting life
after death.

Answer.

I believe.

Minister.

What is thy desire.

Answer.

Baptism.

Minister.

will thou be baptized.

Answer.

I will.

1 B. of Edw. 6.

The water in the Font shallbe changed every month once at the least, and
before any child be baptized in the water so changed, the Priest shall say at
the font these prayers following.

O most merciful God, our Savior Jesus Christ, who have ordained the element
of water for the regeneration of thy faithful people, upon whom being baptized
in the river of Jordan the holy Ghost came down in the likeness of a dove:
send down, we beseech thee, the same thy holy spirit to assist us, and to be
present at this our invocation of thy holy name: Sanctify this fountain of
Baptism, thou that art the sanctifier of all things, that by the power of thy
word all those that shall be baptized therein may be spiritually regenerated,
and made the children of everlasting adoption. Amen.

Then shall the Minister say. 1 B. of Edw. 6. O Merciful God, grant that the
old Adam in these children may be so buried, that the new man may be raised up
in them. Amen. O merciful God grant that the old Adam in them that shall be
baptized in this fountain may so be buried, that the new man may be raised
again. Amen.

Grant that all carnal affections may die in them, and that all things
belonging to the spirit, may live and grow in them. Amen. Grant that all carnal
offections may die in them, and that all things belonging to the spirit may
live and grow in them. Amen. Grant that they may have power and strength to
have victory, and triumph against the devil, the world and the flesh. Amen.
Grant to all them which at this fountain forsake the Devil and all his works:
that they may have power and strength to have victory, and to triumph against
him, the world, and the flesh. Amen.

Whosoever shall confess thee, O Lord recognize him also in thy kingdom, Amen.

Grant that all sin, and vice here may be so exstinct, that they never have
power to reign in thy servants. Amen.

Grant that whosoever here shall begin to be of thy flock, may evermore
continue in the same. Amen.

Grant that all they which for thy sake in this life do deny and forsake
themselves; may win and purchase thee, O Lord, which art everlasting treasure.
Amen.

Common Prayer.

Grant that whosoever is here dedicated to thee by our office and Ministry, may
also be endued with thy heavenly virtues, and everlastingly rewarded through
thy mercy, O blessed Lord God, who do live and govern all things world
without end. Amen.

ALmighty everliving God, whose most dearly beloved son Jesus Christ, for the
forgiveness of our sins, did shed out of his most precious side both water and
blood, and gave commandment to his disciples, that they should go teach all
nations, and baptize them in the name of the father, the son, and of the holy
ghost: Regard we beseech thee the supplications of the congregation, and grant
that all thy servants which shall be baptized in this water, [Scot. Lit. which
we here bless and dedicate in thy name to this spiritual washing] may receive
the fullness of thy grace, and ever remain in the number of thy faithful and
elect children, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

1 B. of Edw. 6. Then shall the Minister take the child in his hands, and ask
the name: (K) and naming the child, shall (L) dip it in water, so it be
discretly and warily done saying. Then shall the Priest take the child in his
hands, and ask the name: and naming the child, shall dip it in the water (M)
thrice. First dipping the right side. Secondly the left side, the third time
dipping the face toward the font. So it be discreetly and warily done. saying,
N. I baptize thee in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy
ghost. Amen. N. I baptize thee etc. And if the child be weak, it shall
sufffice to power water upon it, saying the same words. And if the child be
weak, it shall suffice to pour water upon it, saying the foresaid words, I
baptize thee etc. Then the Godfathers, and Godmothers shall take and lay their
hands, upon the children, and the Minister shall put upon him his white vesture
(N) commonly called the Chrysom. And say, N. I baptize thee in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. Amen.

Take this white vesture, for a token of the Innocence which by Gods grace in
this holy Sacrament of Baptism is given unto thee: and for a sign where by
thou art admonished, so long as thou live, to give thy self to innocence of
living; that after this transitory life, thou may be partaker of the life
everlasting. Amen.

Then the Priest shall (O) anoint the infant upon the head saying,

Almighty God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. who has regenerate thee by
water and the holy Ghost, and has given unto thee remission Omitted in Bucer.
of all thy sins: he vouchsafe to anoint thee with the unction of his holy
spirit, and bring thee to the inheritance of everlasting life. Amen.

When there are many to be baptized, this order of demanding, Baptising, putting
on the Crysome, and anointing shall be used severally with every child. Those
that be first Baptized departing from the Font, and remaining in some
convenient place within the Church until all be baptized.

Common prayer.

(P) Then the minister shall make a cross upon the child's forehead, saying.

WE receive this child into the [Scot. Lit. Church of Christ] Congregation of
Christ's flock, and do sign him with the sign of the cross, in token that
hereafter be shall not be ashamed to confess the faith of Christ crucified:
and manfully to fight under his banner against sin, the world and the devil,
and to continue Christ's faithful soldier and servant unto his lives end. Amen.

Then shall the Minister say.

SEeing now, dearly beloved brethren, that these children be regenerate and
grafted into the body of Christ's congregation, let us give thanks unto God for
these This Exhortation with the Lords prayer, thanksgiving following are
omitted in 1 B. of Edw. 6.
benefits, and with one accord make our prayers unto almighty God, that they
may lead the rest of t^^ir life according to this beginning.

Then shall be said.

Our father which art in heaven. etc.

Then shall the Minister say,

WE yield thee hearty thanks, most merciful father, that it has pleased thee
to regenerate this infant with thy holy spirit, to receive him for thine own
child by adoption, and to incorporate him into thy holy congregation: And
humbly we veseech thee to grant, that he being dead unto sin, and living unto
righteousness, and being buried with Christ in his death, may crucify the old
man, and utterly abolish the whole body of sin: that as he is made partaker of
the death of thy son, so he may be partaker of his resurrection, so that
finally, with the residue of thy holy congregation, he may be inheritor of
thine everlasting kingdom, through Christ our Lord, Amen.

At the last end, the Minister calling the Godfathers and Godmothers together
shall say this exhortation following.

FOrasmuch as these children have promised by you to forsake the devil and all
his works, to believe in God, and to serve him: you must remember that it is
your parts and duties to see that these infants be taught, so soon as they
shall be able to learn, what a solemn vow, promise, and profession they have
made by you. And that they may know these things the better, ye shall call upon
them to hear sermons. And chiefly ye shall provide that they may learn the
Creed, the Lords prayer, and the ten Commandments in the English tongue, and
all other things which a Christian man ought to know and believe to his souls
health, and that these children may be virtuously brought up to lead a godly
and a Christian life, remembering always that baptism does represent unto us
our profession: which is, to follow the example of our Savior Christ, and to
be made like unto him, that as he died and rose again for us, so should we
which are baptized, die from sin, and rise again unto righteousness,
continually mortifying all our evil and corrupt affections, and daily
proceeding in all virtue and godliness of living.

1 B. of Edw. 6. The Minister shall command that the children be brought to the
Bishop, to be confirmed of him, so soon as they can say in their vulgar tongue
the Articles of the faith, the Lords prayer, and the ten Commandments, and be
further instructed in the Catechism set forth for that purpose, accordingly as
it is there expressed. The Minister shall command that the Crisoms be brought
to the Church, and delivered to the Priests after the accustomed manner, at the
purification of the Mother of every child. And that the children be brought to
the Bishop, to be etc. And so let the Congregation depart in the name of the
Lord. Note, that if the number of children to be baptized, and multitude of
people present be so great, that they cannot conveniently stand at the Church
door: then let them stand within the Church in some convenient place nigh
Omitted in Bucer.
unto the Church door. And there all things be said and done, appointed to be
said and done at the Church door.

(Q) Of them that are to be Baptized in private houses in time of necessity, By
the Minister of the Parish, or any other lawful Minister that can be procured.

(...) and Curates shall often admonish the people, that they defer not the
(...) infants any longer then the Sunday or other holy day next after the
child be born, unless, upon a great and reasonable cause declared to the
Curate, and by him approved.

And also they shall warn, that without great cause and necessity, they procure
not their children to be baptized at home in their houses. And when great need
Omitted in Bucer.
shall compel them so to do, then Baptism shall be administered on this
fashion,

Common Prayer. 1 and 2 B. of Edw. 6. and Lit. of Q. Eliz. First let the lawful
Minister and them that be present call upon God for his grace, and say the
Lords prayer, if the time will suffer And the child being named by some one
that is present the said lawful Minister shall dip it in the water, or pour
water upon it saying these words. First let them that be present call upon God
for his grace and say the Lords prayer if the time will suffer. And then (R)
one of them shall name the child and dip him in the water or pour water upon
him saying these words.

I baptize thee in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost.

And let them not doubt, that the child so baptized is lawful and
sufficiently baptized, and ought not to be baptized again. But yet
nevertheless, if the child which is after this sort baptized, do afterward
live, it is expedient that it be brought into the Church to the intent,

1 B. of Edw. 6. That if the Priest or Minister of the same Parish did himself
baptize that child the Congregation may be certified of the true form of
Baptism by him privately before used* To the intent the Priest may examine and
try whither the child be lawfully baptized or no. And if those that bring any
child to the church etc. Or if the child were baptized by any other lawful
Minister, that then the Minister of the Parish where the child was born or
Christened shall examine and try, whither the child be lawfully baptized or no.
In which case if those that bring any child to the Church, do answer that the
same child is already baptized, then shall the Minister, examine them further,
saying.

Common Prayer. 1 and 2 B. of Edw. 6. and Lit. of Q. Eliz. By whom was the
child baptized? By whom was the child baptized? Who was present when the child
was baptized? Who was present when the child was baptized? And because some
things essential to this sacrament, may happen to be omitted; through fear or
have, in such times of extremity, therefore I demand further of you. Whither
thy called upon God for Grace and succor in that necessity? (T) With what
matter was the child baptized: With what thing or what matter they did baptize
the child? (V) With what words was the child baptized: With what words the
child was baptized? Whither they think the child to be lawfully, and
perfectly baptized? Whither think you the child to be lawfully and perfectly
baptized.

And if the Minister shall prove by the answers of such as brought the child,
that all things were done as they ought to be: Then shall not he Christen the
child again, but shall receive him as one of the flock of the true Christian
people, saying thus.

I Certify you, that in this case ye have done well, and according unto due
order, concerning the baptising of this child, which being born in original
sin, and in the wrath of God, is now by the laver of regeneration in baptism,
received into the number of the children of God, and heirs of everlasting
life. For our Lord Jesus Christ does not deny his grace and mercy unto such
infants, but most lovingly does call them unto him, as the holy Gospel does
witness to our comfort, on this wise.

AT a certain time they brought children unto Christ, that he should touch
them, and his disciples rebuked those that brought them. But when Jesus saw it,
he was displeased, and said unto them, Suffer little children to come unto me,
and forbid them not, for to such belongs the kingdom of God. Uerily I say
unto you, whosoever does not receive the kingdom of God as a little child, he
shall not enter therein. And when he had taken them up in his arms, he put his
hands upon them, and blessed them.

After the Gospel is read, the Minister shall make this exhortation upon the
words of the Gospel.

FRiends, you hear in this Gospel the words of our savior Christ, that he
commanded the children to be brought unto him: how he blamed those that would
have kept them from him: how he exhorted all men to follow their innocence. Ye
perceive how by his outward gesture and deed, he declared his good will toward
them: For he embraced them in his arms, he laid his hands upon them, and
blessed them. Doubt ye not therefore, but earnestly believe, that he has
likewise favorably received this present insant, that he has embraced him
with the arms of his mercy, that he has given unto him the blessing of
eternal life, and made him partaker of his everlasting kingdom. Wherefore we
being thus persuaded of the good will of our heavenly father, declared by his
son Jesus Christ toward this infant: let us faithfully and devoutly give thanks
unto him, and say the prayer which the Lord himself taught and in declaration
of our faith, let us re^^te the articles contained in our Creed.

Here the Minister, with the Godfathers and Godmothers, shall say.

Our father which art in heaven. etc.

Then shall the Minister demand the name of the child, which being by the
Godfathers and Godmothers pronounced, the Minister shall say.

Do thou in the name of this child forsake the devil and all his works, the
vain pomp and glory of the world, with all the covetous desires of the same,
the carnal desires of the flesh, and not to follow, and be led by them?

Answer.

I forsake them all.

Minister.

Do thou in the name of this child profess this faith, to believe in God
the father almighty, maker of heaven and earth, and in Jesus Christ his only
begotten son our Lord, and that he was conceived by the holy, Ghost, born of
the Uergin Mary, that he suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead,
and buried, that he went down into hell, and also did rise again the third day,
that he ascended into heaven, and siteth at the right hand of God the father
almighty, and from thence he shall come again at the end of the world, to judge
the quick and the dead? And do you in his name believe in the holy ghost: The
holy Catholic Church? the Communion of saints: The remission of sins?
Resurrection, and everlasting life after death:

Answer.

All this I steadfastly believe.

Let us pray.

ALmighty and everlasting God, heavenly father, we give thee humble thanks, for
that thou have vouchsafed to call us to the knowledge of thy grace and faith in
thee: increase this knowledge, and confirm this faith in us evermore; Give thy
holy spirit to this infant, that he being born again, and being made heir of
everlasting salvation. through our Lord Jesus Christ, may continue thy servant,
and attain thy promise, through the same our Lord Jesus Christ thy son, who
lives and reigns with thee in the unity of the same holy spirit
everlastingly, Amen.

Then shall the Minister make this exhortation to the Godfathers and Godmothers.

FOr as much as this child has promised by you, to forsake the devil and all
his works, to believe in God, and to serve him: you must remember that it is
your part and duty, to see that this infant be taught, so soon as he shall be
able to learn, what a solemn vow, promise, and profession he has made by you.
And that he may know these things the better, ye shall call upon him to hear
Sermons, and chiefly you shall provide that he may learn the Creed, the Lords
prayer, and the ten Commandments in the English tongue, and all other things
which a Christian ought to know and believe to his souls health: and that this
child may be virtuously brought up, to lead a godly and Christian life:
remembering always that Baptism does represent to us our profession, which is to
follow the example of our Savior Christ, and be made like unto him: that as he
died and rose again for us, so should we which are baptized, die from sin, and
rise again unto righteousness, continually mortifying all our evil and corrupt
affections, and daily proceeding in all virtue and godliness of living.

And so forth as in public baptism.

Common prayer. Scot. Lit. (W) But if they which bring the infants to the
Church, do make an uncertain answer to the Ministers questions, and say that
they cannot tell what they thought, did, or said, in that great fear and
trouble of mind (as often times it chances, then let the Minister baptize him
in form above written, concerning public baptism, saving that at the dipping
the child in the Font, he shall use this form of words. But if they which
bring the infants to the Church, do make such uncertain answers to the
Presbyters questions, as that it cannot appear that the child was baptized
with water, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost,
(which are the essential parts of baptism) then let the Presbyter baptize it
in form above written, concerning public baptism, saving that at the dipping
of the child in the Font, he shall use this form of words.

If thou be not already baptized N. I baptize thee in the name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. Amen.

Annotations upon CHAP. VIII.
(A) Baptism how called in Antiquity, why (...), or Illumination, Barnabas his
Epistle corrected. Why the Laver of Regeneration, a dissent from Mr. Seldom and
Dr. Hamond about its derivation. (B) Sacrament: What, Whence derived;
Sacramentum and Jusjurandum differ. Baptism most properly a Sacrament; why the
office in order of place after the Communion. (C) Easter and Whitsuntide, why
anciently times allotted for Baptism. (D) Rivers the first Fonts. Baptisteries
when erected, the Directory felo de se. (E) Sanctifying of water, what it
means. (F) Two signings with the Cross anciently relating to Baptism, one
before, and the other after,; why the Cross used in our Church after Baptism.
(G) The form of ancient Exorcisme. (H) Interrogatories moved to Infants
vindicated by the Primitive practice, and parallel with the civil usages of
others. (I) Abrenunciation ancient, several modes observed therein. (K)
Imposition of names, why used at Baptism. (L) Dipping not necessary, England
noted of singularity in that particular, inconveniences thereof. Many baptized
in the same Baptisteries. Women and men had several rooms in one Baptistery.
Diaconisses their office at the Baptising of women. (M) Triple mersion ancient:
why ordained, single mersion or aspersion the rule of our Church. (N) White
vestments ancient. (O) T^ro Unctions anciently distinguished 4 several ways.
(P) The Rubrique explained concerning the Cross. The first original ground of
that Ceremony, Miracles wrought with it. Why miracles ceased, why Timotheus and
Epaphroditus cured without them. Dr. Reinolds a friend to the Cross after the
explanation of it. The Cross not operative, demonstrated by K. James his
omitting it in the Charismal office. (Q) Private Baptism proved lawful by
several Authorities. (R) The former Rubrique allowed of women's Baptising. (S)
Necessity dispenceth with accidental formalities. (T) Water a necessary
element. Beza his erour. (V) What are the essential words of Baptism. (W)
Children to be baptized where the testimony is doubtful.

BAptism has in Antiquity various appellations, (...), It is called Grace,
Illumination, Perfection, and the Laver, says (...) Bib. ae.
Clemens Alexandrinus, who there gives the reason why it is so called. To the
same purpose, but more copious De Baptism.
Nazianzen (...), We call it the Gift, Grace, Baptism, Unction, Illumination,
the vestment of incorruption, the Laver of Regeneration, the Seal. The great
variety of these denominations flows from the several benefits accruing
thereby. The most noble and most emphaticall of these are, first (...)
illumination, to which the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, S. Paul, as I
conceive had regard in the word enlightened, Heb. 6. v. 4. Illumination it was
called out of a triple respect. First, Just. Martyr.
(...), because the understandings of ihose who are chatcchised antecedent to
it are enlightened. Secondly, because it is our first entrance into
Christianity, for as many as are baptized into Christ, do put on Christ, Gal.
2. v. 27. And Christ is (...), that supereminent light, which lighteneth every
man that comes into the world, those especially which are born again by
Baptism, he being Naz. ubi supra.
(...), the same to the intellect, that the sun is to the sense. Thirdly,
because Satan the Prince of darkness was then usually by exorcisme driven out
of the party baptized, to make room for Christ: for as Philo Judaeus.
(...), the egresse of vice is virtues ingresse: So the expelling of Satan is
the admittance of Christ. Now all such as were Idolaters, and worshipped false
gods, were supposed to be under the dominion of Satan, and, in a qualified
sense, as energumeni, possessed with unclean spirits, and therefore it was
expedient thought, they should be dispossessed by Exorcism Stromat. l. 2.
(...), or rather (as Clemens Alexandrinus more correctly omitting (...))
(...). Before we believed in the true God the Tabernacles of our hearts were
impure and weak in truth, the very habitation of devils, says Epist.
Barnabas. Much to the same purpose Aug. cont. Pelag. l. 1. c. 2.
St. Augustine, Exorcizatus es, ut a potestate erutus tenebrarum transferreris
in regnum Christi. Therefore art thou exorcised, that thou may be translated
from the power of darkness, into the Kingdom of Christ, Again, as Satan by this
matriculation and admission into the pale of Christ's Church was expelled; so
was he by excommunication let in again, such as lost their interest in that
holy Society, either through Doctrinal or Moral Apostasy, being said to be
delivered up to Satan. Why it is called the Laver of Regeneration may seem a
great Question. Mr. Seldom, and Dr. Hamond, build the whole fabric of Baptism
on the customary Baptism among the Jews, as upon a Basis. This Jewish Baptism
they make parallel with that of Christians, in three particulars. First, it was
say they, a rite of initiating both Original, natural Jews and Proselites in
the Covenant, so is ours, a Ceremony of admission into Christianity. Secondly,
It was never to be iterated, so is ours. Thirdly, That the Jews had their
Triumviri, which did promise and profess for Infants, and we have our
Sponsores, answering them. Now all this admitted for truth, speaks pertinently
to the Laver, not so fully to the regeneration, as something else, whereof I
shall take notice by and by. I say, this admitted for truth, whereof just doubt
may be made. My reason is, because the authorities these learned men rest upon,
are only the Talmud and Talmudical Doctors: But the eldest of the Talmuds,
being accounted near five hundred years junior to our Saviors birth, and the
other above, and both being stuffed with matters so palpably fabulous, as
Josephus in the account of a learned Mountague.
Bishop, is preferred before them all: these things considered, and withal
that in Josephus, there is not the least syllable taking notice of any such
Baptism, which so faithful an Historian would certainly not have omitted, had
it existed in his time. As also that as profound a silence is there in his
contemporary Philo, who has so often, and unavoidable occasion to mention it.
Now these two eminent Authors, Jews both, and of the same Saeculum with our
Savior, standing thus mute in a matter of so univetsall practice (as is
pretended) and so considerable remarque, make it a very disputable case,
whether there was any such custom in our Savior's time. And though for matter
of fact, it be urged by those Learned men, that it was so commonly taken notice
of among the Jews, that John 3. v. 10. Christ wonders at Nicodemus his
ignorance, that he understood it not. To this it may be replied, that Christ
might well enough wonder at Nicodemus his ignorance, without the hypothesis or
supposition of any such rite, considering that the Prophets, Isajah, Jeremiah,
and Ezekiel had declared, what regeneration there should be in the days of the
Messiah, whereof so great a Doctor as Nicodemus, should not have been ignorant.
This, with the famous Inlocum.
Grotius, I take to be the meaning of Christ's Expostulation. But prove the
custom as it may, or as they would have it, that there really was such a custom
amongst the Jews, yet may it still be questioned, whether Baptism were founded
upon it by our Savior in its primary institution. Not that I doubt of his
accommodation of his own practice to several usages of theirs. But because I
perceive the Learned Doctor acknowledges the Jewish custom it self, to be
founded upon another, viz. that of washing of Newborn babes. Now if the Jewish
custom was but derivative from that, why might not our Savior resort in this
particular consideration, to the fountain it self, rather than follow a
transcript of it, especially considering that the Original Example would better
suit his purpose than the after draught? And to that custom of washing Newborn
babes, Mr. Mead another very Learned man has applied it. Indeed the Analogy
and conformity between Christian Baptism and that custom, is more concinne and
proper, both in relation to the Laver, and also to Regeneration. In relation to
the Laver, because as the Laver or elemental water does wash away and cleanse
our bodies of filth contracted; so does the Mystical washing of the Holy Ghost
purg our souls from all former pollution. In relation to Regeneration, for as
it is at our Generation, so is it in our Regeneration. At our Generation or
Birth, when we were born men, we were washed, so are we when we are born
Christians, and washed from a pollution exactly agreeable also. When we were
born, we were washed from the pollution we contracted from our Parents womb,
when we are newborn, we are washed by Baptism from that Original sin, which is
derived to us from our first Parents: (...), Our new birth by Baptism, does cut
off that film of corruption we contract form our natural birth. Nazianzen. So
that the case is clear, as we are washed at our natural birth, so are we at our
spiritual. In the first, there is (...), the putting of the filth of the flesh,
1 Pet. 3. 21. So is there in the second, (...), the laying off the Old man,
Ephesians. 4. 22. And a total clensing of the soul from all impurity contracted and
derived from him. And though this Analogy proceeds most regularly in the
Baptizing of Infants, who are only charged with only Original sin, yet does
it hold also in persons adult, whom our Savior directs the same way to heaven,
viz. by becoming as little children; that is, by purging our souls from the
stain of actual transgressions, and making our selves thereby as innocent as
those tender babes; and this is done by another Laver of Regeneration, called
Repentance: upon which account, according to the Primitive mode, Baptism was
never afforded to persons adult without Repentance, proemial and preparatory to
it. This to scour away Actual, as the other Original pollution. A custom
derived at first from the Baptist St. John, Mat. 3. 11. Whose Baptism was called
(...), the Baptism of Repentance for the remission of sins. That it was so for
matter of fact in the Primitive Church these instances may suffice to
demonstrate. Justin Martyr, delineating the Baptismal mode in his time,
describes it thus; first Apolog.
(...). They who desire Baptism, are taught by fasting and prayers, to seek of
God remission of their sins, and then are brought to the water. Confirmable in
that of de Bapt. c. 19.
Tertullian. Ingressuros Baptismum Orationibus crebris, jejuniis and
geniculationibus, and pervigiliis or are oportet, and cum confessione omnium
delictorum. They who are to enter Baptism, it is required that with frequent
prayers, fasting, supplications, watchings, and with a confession of all their
bygone offenses they ply the Throne of Grace.

The Sacrament of Baptism] Sacrementum est sacrae rei signum St. Austen, n de
Doctr. Christ. l. 2.
A Sacrament is that by which a sacred thing is denoted: And in this large
sense, the Ancients apply it to twenty several things. But because some were
instituted by our Savior, as the proper badges of our Christian Profession,
and effectual signs of grace, and Gods good will toward us, They alone are by
our Church owned for proper Sacraments, which defines a Sacrament to be, An
outward and visible sign of an inward and spiritual grace, given unto us, and
ordained by Christ himself, as a means whereby we receive the same, and a
pledge to assure us thereof. The Greek word is (...) so used, by St. Paul,
Ephesians. 5. 32. calling the conjunction of Christ with his Spouse, the Church,
(...), a great mystery. The Latin word Sacrament is of military extraction, it
being properly Herodian. Hist. l. 8.
(...), the Soldiers Oath, by which upon their first inrollment they engaged
themselves, omnia strenuo facturos quae praeceperit Imperator, i. e. stoutly to
act whatsoever their General should command, as De Re Militari. l. 2.
Vegetius has it, and from thence it came at length to an indefinite notion,
signifying whatsoever was transacted by the interposition of an Oath, which
because it has something of Religion more than ordinary, might well deserve
the appellation of a Sacrament. Yet though very learned Men seem to confound
the words Sacramentum, Sacrament, and Jusjurandum, Oath, and to take them
promiscuously, to be of adequate import each to other, the great Historian
gives me cause to suspend my assent, and to think, that originally they were
several, and distinguished, and that Sacramentum signified a voluntary Oath
spontaneously taken, when the Soldiers first listed themselves; and Jusjurandum
denoted such an Oath, as was improved by the coercive power of the Magistrate,
Martial, or Civil. The Romans being to raise new forces to go under the conduct
of Terentius Varro, and Paulus Aemilius, against Hannibal. Livii. l. 22.
Milites tunc, quod nunquam antea factum erat, jurejurando a tribunis Militum a
dacti, jussu consulum conventuros, neque injussu abituros, nam ad eum diem nil
praeter Sacramentum erat, and sua voluntate ipsi inter se equites decuriati,
centuriati pedites conjurabant. i. e. The Soldiers then (says my Author) a
thing never done before, were compelled by their Commanders to swear, that they
would rendevous at the order of the Consul, and not depart without it: For till
that day, all was done by Sacrament only, and the Soldiers freely of
themselves, without coaction, the Horse by tens, the foot by hundreds entered
into oath, to forsake their colors etc. Whereby a clear discrimination and
difference is put between these two. Now to make the best improvement of this
to my present purpose; I say that Sacrament in this most genuine and proper
notion. is very aptly applied to Baptism, and keeps correspondency with other
ceremonies thereof. For Baptism is our first enrolment into Christ Militia,
therein we receive the cognizance of our General in our foreheads, being
signed with the Cross, in token that we will manfully sight, under Christ's
banner against sin, the World, and the devil, therein we voluntarily enter into
Covenant and promise of renuntiation against those foresaid enemies, called
therefore by Nazianzene (...), an engagement and contract of a purer
conversation toward God; therein we receive and return our Military Symbol,
Symbolum fidei, the only character by which we Christians know one another,
our friends from our foes, for Christians are not distinguished Nazianzen
(...), by their faces, but by their faith. This is that (...), that martial
word or Shiboleth by which we are discovered to what General we belong.
Excellent is that of St. Augustine, In nullum nomen Cont. Fust. l. 19. c. 11.
Religionis, seu verum seu falsum, coagulari homines possunt nisi aliquo
signaculorum, vel sacrament orum visibilium consortio colligentur. Impossible
it is that men should be united under any one Religion, be it true or be it
false, unless they be knit together by some visible Seal or Sacrament, one or
other. So that Baptism may very well, upon various accounts be styled Ambrose.
nostrae Militia Sacramentum, the Sacrament of our Militia.

But if Baptism be, as it is, the Sacrament of our initiation and entrance
into Christianity, it may be demanded, why has not the Office belonging to it
the pre-eminence? why is it not in our service Book inserted and marshalled
before that of the Communion; this Sacrament being in order of nature after
that? My answer is, the Communion was, both in the Primitive Church and in the
beginning of our Reformation accounted the principle part of the Diurnal
service of God in public, it being celebrated daily in both times instanced,
as I have proved before, for the ancient Church, and as may be evidenced for
the last, by the Rubric after the exhortation to the Communion, in the first
book of Edw. 6. The Eucharistical Office being then so concomitant with the
daily prayers, and Baptism more rarely happening, the Church thought fit to
make them contignous in order, which were so frequent companions in use.

At Easter and Whitsunday.] So did the Council Gerundense decree, Can. 4.
Easter, because it was the Monument of Christ's Resurrection, to which Baptism
did refer. [Therefore we are buried with him by Baptism into death, Romans 6. 4.
that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father:
even so we also should walk in newness of life.] for this cause says St.
Basil, no time more proper to receive De Baptismo.
Gratiam Resurrectionis, the benefit of our Resurrection, then in Die
Resurrectionis, on the day of the Resurrection, the Paschal-day. At Whitsun-day
in memory of the three thousand persons baptized that day Acts 2. And for
children, Beatus Rhenan. in Tertul. de Cor. Milit.
all such as were born after Easter, were kept until Whitsunday, and all born
after Whitsunday were reserved until next Easter, unless some eminent danger
of death created a necessity of accelerating Baptism, but this custom of
Baptising only at Easter and Whitsunday must only be understood in reference
to the western Church for without controversy it is, that they of the East
assigned also the Feast of Epiphany for this Sacrament, and this was done in
memory of our Saviors being, as it is supposed, baptized on that day, upon
which there is extant an excellent Oration of Gregory Nazianzene under this
title (...) i. e. upon the sacred Illumination or Baptism celebrated on
Epiphany.

Must be ready at the Font.] When Christianity first entered the world, she
houses were her Churches, so rivers were her fonts. No other Baptisteries had
she for two hundred years; this is evident from Justin Martyr and Tertullian;
the first treating of persons fitted for the sacred seal, says, A polog. 2.
(...), then (that is after we had prayed together for and with them, as in the
foregoing words) they are led by us to some place where there is water. Now
lest it should be conceived that this expression may admit of a font within the
Church, (as we use to carry children according to the rites of our Church) in
the persuit of his Narrative he goes on thus, (...): Then we, after the
believer is thus washed, return with him to the place where the brethren are
assembled for common Prayer. The second de Cor. Militis c. 3.
Aquam adituri ibidem, sed et aliquanto prius in Ecclesia, sub Antistitis manu
contestamur nos renunciare Diabolo, etc. Being ready to step into the water,
there also, as we had done a little before in the Church, the Priest holding us
up by the head, we make Abrenunciation of the Devil, etc. Clear proofs that the
places where they baptized were distant from Churches. Probably their practice
was counter to ours, for as we bring water to our Churches, so in all
likelihood they carried their churches to the water, that is, they had their
places of Religious assemblies near unto Rivers, (not unlike the Proseucha
mentioned, Acts 16. v. 17.) for the better accommodation of this sacrament.
After the second Century Baptisteries were erected, but not contiguous, or
annexed to Churches, but a little separated from them; and not every where
neither, but only nigh unto Cathedrals, called therefore Ecclesiae Baptismales,
Baptismal Churches; not long after they were brought into the churches, and
there disposed near the door, at the lower end, denoting thereby that persons
baptized did in that sacrament make their first ingresse into Christianity, who
were therefore situated by Nazianzens description (...), in the entry to
Godliness. But now it seems these Baptisteries are turned out of doors, and
more then so, a note of abomination affixt to the places where they stood. For
baptism is to be administered Directory.
not in the places where fonts stood, and this by the direction of those very
men, who yet after ingenuously confess, no place is subject to such pollution
by any superstition formerly used, and now laid aside, as may render it
unlawful or inconvenient for Christians to meet together therein, for the
public worship. What can hinder the Directory from being herein felo de se,
unless it be interpreted to speak in the first place of what is to be done in
order to its directions, not of what is to be done of absolute necessity,
flowing from the nature of the thing, and if they so intended it had been a
kindness, had those learned Divines been more explicit therein.

Did sanctisie the flood Jordan.] Such was the language of the Primitive
Church, not that they thought the water contracted any new quality in Omnes
aqua says Tertul. de Bapti.
Tertullian, sacramentum sanctificationis consequuntur invocato deo i. e. all
waters obtain the mystery of sanctification by invocation of God. So Gregory
Nazianzen speaks of our Savior, Nazianz. (...)
(...) i. e. sanctifying the waters by his own washing. So Hierom Dominus
noster Jesus Christus Lavacro suo universas aquas mundavit. Our Lord Christ by
his own washing, being exemplary to us, cleansed all waters. Lastly, Ambrose,
Sacerdos precem defert, ut sanctificetur fons, and adsit praesentia trinitatis
aeternae, i. e. The Priest prays that the Font may be sanctified, and that
the Eternal Trinity would vouchsafe to be present at the Ordinance.

Then shall be make a crosse] There were anciently in the Primitive Church two
several signings with the Cross, one before Baptism, as is confirming, whereof
I shall treat in Confirmation. That they used signing antecedent to Baptism, I
shall make proof from S. Ambrose, and S. Augustine. The first thus. Credit
etiam Catechumenus in crucem Domini, qua and ipse signatur, sed nisi baptizatus
fuerit in nomine Patris, filii, and Spiritus Sancti, remissionem non potest
accipere peceatorum. De iis qui iniciantur, c. 4.
The very Chatechumen or new instructed believes in the Cross of Christ,
wherewith also he is signed, but unless also he be baptized in the name of the
Father, the Son and the holy Ghost, he shall not obtein remission of sins. The
second, Nondum per sacrum baptismum renati est is, sed per signum Crucis in
utero sancte matris Ecclesiae jam concepti est is. August. de Symbolo, 1. 2. c.
1.
Ye are not yet regenerated by holy Baptism, but you are conceived by the sign
of the Cross, in the womb of the Church your holy mother. But here it may be
demanded, how comes it to pass that our second Reformers mislaid this
Ceremony, assigning it a place subsequent to Baptism, varying herein from the
current practices of Antiquity? For answer to this I shall refer you to another
place, where I shall have occasion to declare it.

I command thee unclean spirit, etc.] This Form of Exorcising was agreeable to
the usage of the first Church, who applied it not only to the Energumeni or
Persons possessed by evil spirits, (who were not few in those days) but also
to Infants and competents whom they accounted under the Dominion of Satan,
until he was by such increpation expelled. Auguftin. Epist. 105.
Si Diabolus non dominatur infantibus, quid respondebunt Pelagiani quodilli
exorcizantur, says Augustine, i. e. if the devil has not children in
subjesiion, what will the Pelagians say, that they are exorcised. Of this
custom there is very frequent mention in S. Cyprian, Tertullian and other
Ancients.

The moving of these following interrogatories to Infants, as they are
represented by their Godfathers, has to many seemed overlight for a
Paedo-Baptism.

This Sacrament, all men know and grant, is the initiation, the first admission
into the Gospel Covenant, a Covenant must be Bipartite, there must be at least
two parties to it. Christ here for his part promises to persons baptized,
remission of sins Acts 2. 8. (as also in that great Charter of Ask and ye shall
have) and all other things advancing their eternal salvation. And that this
prove not nudum pactum, a naked contract, without quid pro quo, reason good he
should covenant with persons to be baptized, That they forsake the devil and
all his works, and constantly believe Gods holy word, and obediently keep his
commandments. Now because tender Babes are in no capacity to stipulate for
themselves, therefore the Church, who is the common Mother to all such as
profess Christianity, assigns to those Infants, and to all persons naturally
so impedited, Sponsores, i. e. Godfathers or Guardians to undertake and assume
for them what they ought to do for themselves, were it consistent with their,
rather days then years. For the presentment of children at the Font, is most
properly the Act of the Church, and but ministerially the Act of the Sponsores.
Aug. de verbis Apost Sermon. 10.
Accommodat illis matter Ecclesia aliorum pedes, ut veniant, aliorum cor ut
credant, aliorum linguam ut fateantur; says S. Augustine, i. e. The Church
furnishes them with others feet to come, with the heart of others to believe,
and with the tongues of others to confess their faith. And it is an Act of her
charity indulged unto the Infants of all such as have consigned up their names
to Christianity, without regard to the either, perhaps blame worthy
conversation, or misbelief in points of Religion of the Parents, much less to
spurious generation. Nor this a practice rare and unheard of, but has its
parallel amongst almost all Nations in civil transactions, they indulging the
like favor not only to Infants, but also to all that labor of the like
incapacity Livius lib. 31. c. 5.
Valerius Flaccus aedilis creatus, quia Flamen Dialis erat, jurare in leges non
poterat, and magistratum plus quinque dies, nisi qui jurasset in leges, non
licebat gerere, ideo petiit ut legibus solveretur: quare datus alter, viz.
Frater ejus, qui pro eo juraret plebesque scivit, ut perinde esset, ac si ipse
aedilis jurasset, i. e. Valerius being before Flamen Dialis, or Jupiters high
priest, soon after was created Aedile (or overseer of Dilapidations) As he was
high pr^e^t he ought not to swear (the Law of the Romans, supposing such a
sacred person would voluntarily do what an oath would compel, much like the
value our Nation has for her nobility upon that very account, not demanding
corporal oath from such persons of honor) and no man could hold any Office of
Magistracy above five days, unless^ he first took oath to observe the Laws:
whereupon he moved the Law might be dispensed with, wherefore another was
assigned for his Proxy, and his Brother sworn in his stead, the people
decreeing that it should be as firm in Law as if the Aedile himself had taken
the oath.. So the Civil Law confirms all stipulations of the Guardians or
Tutors of Pupils, which are made for the benefit of the Minor, and so does the
Common Law of this land. Cowell de Fitsherb.
Authorit as custodum sit, ut contrahant, in judicio stent, reliquaque faciant
pro pupillo suo, quaererum statusque sui vel conservationem, vel incrementum
spectant, i. e. Guardians have full authority to contract, to bring an action,
and to act any thing in their Pupils behalf, which may tend to the preservation
of his estate, or advantage of his affairs. Yea, Custos in animam minoris
jurare potest, i. e. the Guardian may swear for his Minor, says the same
Author: And I my self am not ignorant, that in Court Rolls, Entries are to be
found of several persons, who have been sworn for Minors and Infants, who in
respect of tenure were obliged in course to bear offices relating to their Lord
Paramount.

Do thou forsake the devil, etc.] This form of Abrenuntiation is no ^ovice,
De Coronmilet.
Teatullian mentions it expressly. sub Antistitis manu coutestamur nos
renunciare Diabolo and pompiae and Angelis ejus. Whilst the hand of the priest
is upon us, we declare that we renounce the devil, his pomp and his angels. S.
Epist. Rogatiano
Cyprian. Saeculo renuncia veramus cum Baptisati sumus. We gave defiance to the
world when we were first baptized. The direction in the Constitutions is very
considerable, (...). Constit Apost l. 7. c. 42
(...). Let him who is to be baptized renounce in this firm. I renounce the
devil and all his works, and his pomps, and his services, and his angels, and
all his devices. And after this renunciation let him proceed thus, I list and
enroll my self in the service of Christ.

The Ancient mode in this Renunciation presents us with these remarkables.
First it was distinguished into, sometimes two, sometimes three questions (as
it was in the 1. Liturgy of Edw. 6.) and as many replications. Ambrose de
Sacram. l. 1. c. 2.
Quando te interrogavit Sacerdos. Abrenuncias diabolo, and operibus ejus, quid
respondisti? Abrenuncio. Abrenuncias saeculo and voluptatibus ejus, Quid,
Respondisti? Abrenuncio. Whilst the priest demanded of thee do thou renounce
the devil and all his works, what did thou answer? I renounce them all. Do
thou renounce the world and all the pleasures thereof, what did thou answer?
I renounce them all. This for double Renunciation. As for triple, the Author of
the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, and S. Gregory the great witnesses it.
Secondly, it is observable, that the party renouncing did use first to turn
himself to the west. Hieronym. in Amos c. 6. Cyril. Hierosol. cat. 1.
Primum renunciamus ei, qui in occidente est, and so renounce; and then versus
Orientem pacium in imus cum Sole justitiae: Turning about to the East, there we
make a Covenant with the Sun of righteousness. Now this Abrenunciation
denoting a motion from the service of the world, the flesh and the devil, to
the worship of Jesus Christ, it is also very remarkable, that Satan observes
the same rule in the admission of his Neophytes. For (which I note as a
singular evidence for the verity of Christian Religion) K. Lames, D^m, l. 2. c.
2.
the first operation in the first method of his stipulation is, that all his
converts renounce their Baptism, that is recant their Baptismal renunciation,
and this he observes precisely toward all such as he subverts, as well in the
profession of the Church of Rome, as England.

Naming the child] The imposition of the name in Baptism, is both a decent
imitation of the same practice in Circumcision, whereof there John Baptist,
several other instances, and a prudent parcel of Religious policy, whereby the
person baptized might be the better distinguished, in albo Christianorum, in
the Christian register; and for this cause the Priests were anciently
commanded, Dionys. Areopag.
(...). To enroll the names both of the person baptized, and of his Godfather
or Surety. Indeed fit it was that they who gave themselves up to Christ, and
listed themselves in his Militia, should be enrolled upon their first
admission, that the Church might the better know who were hers. Now whereas
Proselytes adult were entered into the Register under their former names,
unless they thought fit to assume others, when they were in composition for
Baptism. So Infants upon whom no names were formerly imposed, were before they
were brought to the sacred Font, named by their Parents or such as represented
them, viz. the Godfathers.

Shall dip] Me^sion or dipping is not of the necessity of this Sacrament,
Epict. ad Magn.
S. Cyprian has (for it is one of the questions he undertakes to resolve) most
excellently determined. Non sic in Sacramento salutari delictorum contagio, ut
in lavacro carnali sordes corporis abluuntur. The filth and pollution of our
sins is not so cleansed in the Sacramental Laver, as our bodies are in
natural water. And though dipping was the more ancient custom, in respect of
persons adult, who were better able to undergo it; yet after, when whole
Nations became Christian, and rarely any were offered to the Font but Infants,
whose tender bodies would not well endure it, this custom, in the Western
Church especially, was discontinued, and aspersion ouly used; so that apud
Pamel. in Cyprian. ubi supra.
Erasmus noted it, as a piece of singularity in us English, that in his time we
used mersion. And though dipping was constantly practiced in the Eastern
countries, and is so still at this day, yet for children the use was then, and
so is now to warm the water, Christopherus Angelus.
(...): with sweet herbs, a trouble avoided by aspersion. Again, sprinkling is
much more to the advantage of modesty, as to women especially, or where many
are baptized together, as the then fashion was. For even when Baptisteries were
erected, they were, made susceptible and capable to receive more then one:
(...).
(...), says Gregory Nazianzen, i. e. Do not disddin, if thou be rich to be
baptized in the same Font with the poor, if nobly born with the obscure, if a
master with thy servant. Nor could the company and presence of others create
any inconvenience, had they not entered the Font stripped of all, and totally
naked, as it is clear they did. Leno Veronensis Invit. 2. ad fontem.
In fontem nudi demergitis, sed aetherea vest vestiti: Ye dive into the Font
naked, only invested with an dery mantle. An usage not peculiar to men, but
practiced also by women, as is evident by S. Chrysostom, who speaking of an
outrage acted by rude people in the time of persecution, makes amongst other
things this relation; Epict. Innocent.
(...), i. e. The women of the sacred Oratories having put off their clothes in
order to Baptism, ran away naked. True it is these women were not baptized
promiseuously with men: for the Baptistery was parted in the middle with a
skreen or traverse of wood, one division being alloted for the men, and the
other for the women, which were so close joined, that neither could make any
discoveries into the other; that they were thus separated l. 22. c 8. de Civ.
Dei
Augustine gives us cause to believe, who relates a miracle of Innocentia,
that was cured of a Cancer in her breast, by being signed there with the cross,
by the new baptized woman, who first came to her as she stood in part
foeminarum ad Baptisterium, in the division assigned for the baptizing of
women. And these divisions probably the fathers had an eye to, when they
mention Baptisteries in the plural number (as Ambrose in his Epistle to
Marcellina) not intending several structures, but several divisions in one
structure. But though this traverse blinded them from the view of men who came
upon the same account they did, it did not hide them from the fight of the
Baptist, who was regularly to be a man: And therefore that all possible
provision for modesty might be made; certain women were set apart for that
service, their office being, (...): To assist the Deacons in Baptising women
more decently, as the li c. 29.
Anthour of the Constitutions has it: The like is repeated also by In fine
Panarii.
Epiphanius, who has transcribed much from him, (...): i. e. Diaconisses are
appointed for the ministration of women for modesty sake, in case there be any
occasion to baptize them. I have dwelt the longer upon this subject, not only
to discover the manifold inconveniences of Immersion and dipping in persons
adult, but also to represent the various customs of the Primitive times,
perhaps not known to all.

Thrice] what the Apostolical mode was, whither single or triple mersion,
quotient to confirmation, and the confession of their faith. Ambrose de Sp.
Saneto l. 2. c. 11.
In mysteriis interrogatio trina defertur; and confirmatio trina celebratur;
nec potest quis nisi ^rina confessione purgari, says Ambrose, i. e. in the
mystery of initiation or Baptism, three interrogatories are put, thrice is the
party confirmed, so that no man can be cleansed in that Laver, but by a
threefold confession. And for the manner more explicitly in another place Idem
de Sacramentis l. 11 c. 7.
Interrogatus es credis in De^m Patrem Omnipotentem? Dixisti credo, and
mers^i^i iterum interroga^us es, Credis in Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum, and
in crucem ejus? Dixisti credo, and mersisti. Tertio imerregatus es, Credis in
Spiritum Sanctum? Dixisti credo and tertio mersisti. Thou art asked, Do thou
believe in God the Father Almighty? Thou inswerest, I believe, and thou were
dip! ped. Again, thou were demanded, Do thou believe in our Lord Jesus Christ
and in his Cross? Thou answerest, I believe, and then thou were dipped again.
Thirdly, thou were asked, Do thou believe in the Holy Ghost? Thou answerest I
believe, and then thou were dipped the last time. This Ceremony of
interrogating thrice, l. 12. c. 36.
St. Ambrose in this place, and Cyril on John, deriving from our Savior's
thrice demanding of St. Peter if he loved him, John 21. But I rather think, it
was so ordered, as a distinct denotation of the personal Trinity, as single
mersion, or aspersion answers the Unity of the Diety, and upon that account
was enjoined by the fourth Counsel of Can. 4.
Toledo, in opposition to the Arrian Haeretiques. The truth is, neither
practice can justly be condemned and are left in different, so as every
particular Church may order which she will, and judges best accomodated to the
temper of her members. As for ours, a late Bishop of no mean note in his B
Montague.
Articles of visitation, positively asserts that the Child is thrice to be
aspersed with water on the face. An error certainly, and to prove it so, this
very Rubrique of the first Book of Edward the sixth, is argumentative enough:
For this Rubrique enjoining triple sprinkling, and being clearly omitted and
outed by the second Reformers, infallibly argues they intended the
discontinuace of the former practice. And the sense of those Reformers must be
the rule of our obedience.

His white vesture ] This was a relic of the Ancient custom, taken up upon
the same signification Ambros. de iis qui initiantur.
Accepisti vestimenta candida, ut esset judicium quod exueris involucrum
peccatorum indueris innocentiae casta velamina. Thou have taken thy white
vestments, as a sign that thou have put off the old rags of thy sins, and
have put on the chaste robes of innocence. These Robes, they anciently wore for
the space of eight days inclusive, beginning their account from Easter Eve,
the term of their investure, and continuing to the ensuing Saturday, or
Sabbath, when they were to leave them off. As for the name Chrism, it is but of
late invention, and so called, because it was employed to stay the defluxion of
the (hrism, or confirming Ointment from flowing away at first.

Then shall the Priest anoint the Infant ] There were in the Primitive times,
relating to this Sacrament, two unctions, distinguished four ways. Tert. de
Baptism.
Tertullian, Egressi de lavacro perungimur benedicta unctione de pristina
disciplina, debinc manus imponitur: as we arise out of the water we are
anointed, according to the ancient Order with a consecrated unguent, then hands
are imposed upon us; So also Epist. ad Ja^uar.
Cyprian, Ungi necesse est eum qui baptizatus sit. He who is baptized must
presenly be anointed, and de Eccles. Dogm.
Augustine, speaking of children baptized, Sic manus imposione and chrismate
communiti, mysteriis Eucharistiae admittantur: then with imposition of hand and
unction, let them be admitted to the mysteries of the Eucharist. In the manner.
The first unction being always applied many days after the signing with the
Cross, and the later constantly with it. In their materials, they were severed:
The first being always performed (...), as the Greeks, cleo as the Latins,
with oil, the last (...) as the Greeks, unguento as the Latins, with unguent.
Constit. l. 7. c. 23.
Clemens his order is conformable (...). i. e. first you shall anoint him with
oil, then you shall baptize him in water, lastly you shall an int him with the
sign of the Cross. For such is the import of the word (...) in the most
general sense of Antiquity, as is evident by St. Chrysostom in very many
places, one more remarkable, where endeavoring to take the Christians off from
Paganish amulets and charms, he gives advice (...). art thou a faithful
Believer, instead of those charms sign thy self with the Cross? Hom. 8. in
Coloss. So the Author of these questions, assuredly very ancient, and as
assuredly none of (l) Justin Martyrs (...). i. e. First we anoint him over with
oil, then we dispatch the other mysteries in the Laver; Lastly, we sign him
with the holy unction. Lastly, distinguished they were in the scope of their
designation. The first unction alluded to the mode of wrastlers, Chrisost. Hom.
8. ad Colos.
(...). i. e. He is anointed like a wrastler, going to enter the list. Unctus
es ficut athleta Christi, quasi luctamen hujus seculi luctaturns. Ambros, de
Sacram. l. 1. c. 2.
Thou art anointed like the wrastler of Christ, to struggle with the powers of
this world. The last unction was intended as a ceremony, adjuvant to the
collation of the Holy Ghost, and a persuance of the literal sense of that Text,
2 Cor. 1. verse. 21. Now he who has confirmed us with you in Christ, and has
anointed us, is God, who has also washed us and given the earnest of the
Spirit in our hearts. Where there is first confirmation. 2. Unction. 3. Sealing
or signing. Lastly, the giving of the Holy Ghost. Wherefore it was anciently
said to be Cyril.
(...). The worker of the Holy Ghost. Spiritus signaculum, the seal of the
Spirit, because it signified the invisible unction of the Spirit. Unctio
Invisibilis, Spiritus Sanctus: Augustine.
the invisible unction is the Holy Ghost. To this ceremony, confessed very
ancient, the Romanists are beholding, for the matter and external Symbol of
their Sacrament of Confirmation, which can neither be demonstrated to be
Christ's institution, or Apostolical usage, and were it so, yet are they to seek
for the Prescript form of words, as shall be urged elsewhere. Again, this last
unction being partial, upon the head only, in imitation of that of our
Savior; and the other being (...), all over the body, creates another
diversity not mentioned before. But here will arise another question. If this
last unction be an associate of Confirmation, how comes it then to pass, that
it is here affixt to Baptism, which should rather belong to the Office of
Confirmation. My answer is, that this disposing of it in this place is no
novelty, although differing from the Original practice, and upon what account
it came to be divided from the Office of Confirmation, I shall further declare,
when I come to take a survay of that Office.

Shall make a Cross.] This Rubrique must be expounded by the thirtyeth Canon of
our Church, and by that which follows; for the signing We receive this Child
into the Congregation of Christ's Flock. And then to sign, and so the words do
sign, in the present tence infallibly import. For the Church studions to retain
this ancient and universal ceremony, of the purest Primitive times, was also
careful to decline all fear of superstitious intendment; as if she thought the
Sacrament imperfect without it. Therefore whereas the Primitive mode made it to
usher in Baptism, our Church inverted the order, and made it come after, and so
to follow it, as she expressly first declares Canon. 30.
the child to be received into the Congregation of Christ's Flock, as a perfect
Member thereof, and not by any power ascribed to the sign of the Cross. And
further to assure all distrustful minds, that she makes it not of the
substance of the Sacrament, she has totally omitted it in the Office of
private Baptism. Having yielded a Reason of this remove in the Service of our
Church, it will be proper and pertinent to inquire into the Original inducement
to this Cermony. These I observe to be three. First, an ancient Rite it was,
for servants or captives to be stygmatized or branded with the names of their
Masters on their foreheads, as it was for their soldiers enrolled, with the
names of their Emperors or Generalissimo's on the hands, declaring thereby to
whom they did belong. To this custom the Prophet Ezechiel is thought to
allude, chap. 9. verse. 4. Set a mark upon the forehead of them that mourn, and
cry for all the abominations that are done in the midst of Jerusalem. To this
custom the Angel in the Revelation is thought to regard, chap. 7. verse. 3.
Hurt ye not the earth, etc. until we have sealed the Servants of God on the
forehead, and chap. 14. verse. 1. where the retinue of the Lamb are said to have
his Fathers name written on their foreheads. And as Christ's Flock carried
their cognizance on their foreheads; so did his great adversary the Beast, sign
his servants there also, Revel. 14. 9. If any man shall receive the mark of the
Beast on his forehead, or on his hand. Now that the Christian Church might hold
some Analogy with those sacred applications, she conceived it a most
significant ceremony for Baptism, (it being our first admission into Christian
Profession) that all her children should be signed with the Cross, on their
forehead, at their reception of it, signifying thereby their consignment up to
Christ, whence it is so often called by the Fathers, Signaculum Dominicum, the
Lords Signet, (...) Christ's broad Seal, or by words of the same import: and
hence de Baptismo. c. 4.
Tertullian signat illic in front milites suos: he marketh on the forehead his
own soldiers. Secondly, The real miracles which were in those times daily
wrought by the use thereof, both in expelling and driving out of the Devil, and
by healing of corporal diseases, whereof I lately produced one Testimony out of
St. Augustine, who from that very place can furnish you with many more: So that
woman in Here Is. 30.
Epiphanius was preserved from Poison, (...). She was helped by the sign of the
Cross and faith in Cirist. Not by either separated, but by both together. Many
other instances might be produced; Now in case any shall object, that many of
those anciently recorded miracles were impostures and mere fables; were it
possible to be proved, it would be of no force, unless they could also prove al
were so, which is a thing impossible, considering that so many of the Primitive
Fathers witness the contrary: nor is there any Protestant of remarque, who
does not acknowledge as much. Confessed it is, this gift of working miracles
lasted not many Centuries after Christ; and that for two reasons, one least the
familiarity of them should breed contempt: for (...)
(...), says elegant Philo, real miracles loose their estimation when they
grow common. Again, the work was done for which they were wrought: (...). when
the knowledge of the Christian faith was not far diffused, miracles were wrought
as necessary; for the conversion of Proselites, but when the Gospel began to be
spread abroad, Chrisost. n Psalm. 142. 1 Cor. 14. 22. Ambrose in Luc.
(...), there was no further need of that way of teaching. Therefore St. Paul
says, (...): wonders were exhibited more for the unbelievers than for the
faithful, which is the cause that Timothy and Epaphroditus being sick, 1 Timothy
5. 73. Phil 2. 30. No miracle was applied to recover them, they being faithful
and confirmed believers. Lastly, The Heathens were wont to deride the
Christians, and to speak disdainfully of them, as worshippers of a Malefactor
crucified: To encounter which reproach, and to show that they gloried in the
Cross of Christ, Galath. 6. 14. Taking it to be an honor, not an ignominy,
they assumed this Ceremony of signing themselves with the Cross, both in
Baptism, and at several other times. Aug. de Verb. Apost.
Cor quidem habemus, non tamen tale quale vos habet is, nec nos pudet
crucifixi, sed in part ubi pudoris signum est, signum ejus crucis habemus: We
have an heart, (says Austen to the Pagans) but of a better mould than yours,
nor are we at all ashamed of Christ crucified, but bear his cognizance in our
foreheads, the seat of shamefacenesse. Now, as to the establishment of this
Ceremony, by our Church, though we have slender expectation that it should
operate as formerly, yet why may it not be retained as an honorable memorial of
its miraculous effects of old. But the Church is so exceedingly express, and
perspicuous in her explanation of the use thereof, as nothing can be disired
more; which Canon. 30.
explication being the product of the Conference at Hampton Court, was so
abundantly satisfactory to the Foreman of those Opponents Dr. Reinolds, as
having once perused it, he ingenuously professed, he would never gainsay that
Ceremony any more. In that Explication not a syllable appears of any operation
ascribed to this sign, therefore they who have adhered to any such opinion,
cannot plead the Church of England, for their guide. Eminent and most
remarkable was the great prudence of King James, in this concernment. All along
King Edward the sixt'h, and Queen Elizabeth her Reign, when the Strumosi, such
as had the King's evil, came to be touched, the manner was then for her to
apply the sign of the Cross to the tumor, which raising cause of jealousies,
as if some mysterious operation were imputed to it. That wise and learned King,
not only (with his son, the late King) practically discontinued it, but
ordered it to be expunged out of the prayers relating to that Cure; which has
proceeded as effectually, that omission notwithstanding, as it did before. The
sign of the Cross being then significant only, and not operative, and
significant of a duty to be elicited by future practice, good reason has our
Church to continue it, in which sense, non est reprobanda, with Zanchy, it is
not to be disallowed, Adhiberi nec indecens, nec inutile esse existimo, says
Bucer. p. 479. in my opinion the use of it is neither unseemly, nor
unprofitable. Opusc, Ang.


Of them that be baptized in private houses, if the custom of the out of and
apart from the public Congregation, in case of necessity, can draw its
extraction as high as almost any other part of our Divine Service. When Philip
converted and baptized so many in Samaria, Acts 8. We do not read any thing
implying, much less expressing that he did it in the place of public worship,
or in the face of the Congregation So when he baptized the Eunuch, ibid. 38. He
did it not in the place of publi^k worship, nor in the face of the
Congregation. When Ananias baptized Saul, Acts 9. 18. The place was private
enough, being the house of Judas, and the Congregation thin enough: No Believer
there but Ananias. So when Paul and Silas baptized the Keeper of the prison,
Acts 16. 33. The place was a Prison, most unfit for public worship, and two
the total of the Congregation, many other instances might be given, were not
the labor a Council. Laod. can. 47.
supervacaneous and needless. Descend to the next succeeding times, the Council
of Laodicaea, has a Canon concerning (...) i. e. them which are baptized on
their sick beds, not disapproving of it, but ordeining that if they recover,
they learn the Christian faith, that they may taste the excellency of that
Divine gift. Not long after this Synod, Timothius Bishop of Alexandria, a
member of the first Constantinopolitan Synod, being demanded if (...) i. e. a
Catechmen Possessed with a wicked spirit and desires to be baptized, whether b
Respons Timith. Alexander Ep. apud. Balsamonem.
or not he may receive that seal. The Bishop returns no, (...), he cannot, in
the public and ordinary way of the Church, (...) i. e. but when he lies in
extremis, at the point of death he must be baptized: uncontrollable evidences
of the charitable dispensation of those tender Fathers in cases of extremity.
Come to the late Reformation, Bucer, a learned and sober Divine, being
entreated to deliver his judgment upon King Edwards first Liturgy, passes
this censure upon this private Baptism. In hac constitutione sunt omnia
Saencte proposita i. e. in this constitution all things are framed agreeable to
piety. One would think that Private Baptism backed with such c Bocer in
Anglicam. p. 481.
fortifications, might with confidence and assurance enough appear amongst o
there is of our sacred offices. But it has proved otherwise, for of late the
assembly of Divines in their Directory tell us possitively, that Baptism is
not to be administered in private places, or privately, but in the place of
public worship, and in the face of the Congrecation: that it ought not to be
so administered ordinarily, is the express Doctrine of our Church: that it
ought not absoluly, and without regard to cases of necessity to be so
administered will be denied by me and many more, for whose satisfaction, it had
been labor well bestowed, had those learned Divines, who pretend that in the
framing of that Directory [they consulted not with flesh and blood, but with
the word of God,] had they, I say produced from that word (for to that we all
appeal) one syllable enforcing the place of Public worship, or a Congregation,
to be of the absolute necessity of this Sacrament.

And then one of them shall name the Child,] One of them, of whom? of that be
present, as it is in the beginning of this paragraph, so undoubtly. And that may
be, not only a layman, but even a woman, as it was rightly objected by those
malcontents, and truly sensed by King James in the Conference at
Hampton Court: whereby a greater liberty was given for Women to baptize, then
was intended by the Reformers of our Liturgy, and a Reformation justly called
for, which was both granted and effected speedily, by restreining it to the
Minister, as our Service Book exhibits it: yet this very reformation of out
Church her oversight is now made her crime, and so made by that very party who
were so loud, so clamerous for the change, this change being part of those most
uncharitable cavils which Smectimnuus have vented against our Liturgy.

N. I baptize thee etc.] Here is Baptism soon dispatched without further ado;
Cyptian Epist. ad Magn.
in Saoramentis salutaribus necessiitate cogente, and Deo indulgentiam suam
largienti totam credentibus conferunt Divina compendia, says the Martyr
excellently i. e. in the celebration of the wholesome Sacraments, necessity
being cogent, and God Almighty dispensing his blessing, Divine abridgments and
compendiums confer upon believers all they desire.

With what matter was the child baptized?] This interrogatory is led in with
viz. that it is essential to the Sacrament, and so is St. Augustines rule.
Accedit verbum ad elementum and fit Sacramentum. The word and the Element
together constitute the Sacrament. And the Element necessary to be ingredient
into this Sacrament is water not Lie or Broth, be the necessity never so
cogent, si aquam detrahas non-stat Baptismatis Sacramentum, take away the
water, Baptism is a mere nullity says Deiis qui in. intientur c. 41
Ambrose. This notwithstanding, the opinion it is of several of the Toilt. l.
2. c. 18. valentia Lom. 4. Disp. 4. q. 1.
Remish party, that baptism administered in broth, or lie is legitimate enough.
Nor is it their opinion alone, but asserted by one of a clear other persuasion
in other points viz. Beza. Non minus rite ego quovis alio liquore quam aqua
Baptizarim, I would baptize every way as well with any other liquor as with
water.

With what words was the child baptized?] This is another essential of
Baptism, Bellerm. de Sacr. Baptim. l. 1. c. 3. Christ. Angel. c. 22.
The western, Ego baptiso te, I baptize thee. The Greek and Eastern, (...) N.
let N. be baptized, so anciently; now (...), such an one is baptized, yet all
valid: provided the essential words of Christ's institution be subjoyned, in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. Not in the name of
the Trinity making only three names, nor three persons, as did the
Cataphryges, or Pepusiani, and Paulianists, and were by decrees of the i Can.
18.
Nicene, and Constantinopolitan Council, rebaptised. Not in the name of the
Father by the Son, as did the Can. 17.
Arians upon the haeresie of inequality. Nor yet in the name of Christ alone,
or into his death, as the Neceph. lib. 13. c. 35.
Eunomians. For though mention be made in the Acts of the Apostles of baptising
in the name of Christ as Chapter 2 v. 38. and 19. 5. yet must not the Apostles be
supposed so to have baptized, as Socrates l. 5. c. 23.
excluding the other two persons, nor can the word Christ in those places
rationally include, the Father, and Son, that is the Person anointing, the
person anointed, and unction wherewith he was anointed, as learned Grotius,
after Ireneus, inclines to think. For in truth, as Beza has well observed, St.
Luke does not there describe the rite and formula of Baptism, but the end and
scope of initiating persons into Christianity thereby. The express precept of
our Savior obliged even the Apostles themselves, and all their Ecclesiastical
derivatives, to such a form of Baptism as might distinctly and nominally
mention the three persons of the glorious Trinity, which was so indispenceably
necessary, as the omission of any one constituted the Baptism null. This
nominal distinction being observed, lawful it was for them to superadde some
characteristical notes, more graphically explaining them, so was this word
Christ annexed to the second Person in the Apostles times, so in Justin Martyr,
the form is this (...), In the name of the Father of all things, Apol. 2.
the Lord God, and of Jesus Christ who was crucified under Pontius Pilate, and
of the holy Ghost, who foretold by the Prophets all things concerning Christ.

But if they which bring the Infants etc.] This is a very prudent and Christian
Can. 6.
Carthage. Placuit de infantibus, quoties non inveniuntur firmi testes qui eos
sine coninversia Baptisatos esse dicant, sine ulla offensione posse eos
Baptisari, it is decreed concerning infants whenever there want witnesses to
assure that they were before baptized, that without further scruple they shall
be baptized.

CHAP. IX.
Common Prayer.

(A) The order of Confirmation, or laying on of hands upon children baptized,
and able to render an account of their faith according to the Catechism
following.

1 and 2 B. of Edw. 6. and Lit. of Q. Eliz.

Confirmation, wherein is contained a Catechism for Children.

TO the end that Confirmation may be ministered to the more ^defying of such as
shall receive it according onto St. Paul's doctrine, who teaches that all
things should be done in the Church to the edification of the same) it is
thought good, that none hereafter shall be confirmed, but such as can say in
their mother tongue, the Articles of the faith, the Lords prayer, and the ten
Commandments, and can also answer to such questions of this short Catechism,
as the Bishop or (such as he shall appoint) shall by his discretion appose them
in. And this order is most convenient to be observed for diverse considerations.

First, because that when children come to the years of discretion, and have
learned what their Godfathers and Godmothers promised for them in Baptism,
they may then themselves with their own mouth, and with their own consent
openly before the Church, ratify and confirm the same: and also promise that
by the grace of God, they will evermore endeavor themselves faithfully to
observe and keep such things as they by their own mouth and confe^sion have
assented unto.

Secondly, for as much as Confirmation is ministered to them that be baptized,
that by imposition of hands and prayer, they may receive strength and defense
against all temptations to sin, and the assaults of the world and the devil, it
is most meet to be ministered when children come to that age, that partly by the
frailty of their own flesh, partly by the assaults of the world and the devil,
they begin to be in danger to fall into sundry kinds of sin.

Thirdly, for that it is agreeable with the usage of the Church in times past,
whereby it was ordained that Confirmation should be Ministered to them that were
of perfect age, that they being instructed in Christ's religion, should openly
profess their own faith, and promise to be obedient unto the will of God.

(B) And that no man shall think that any detriment shall come to the children
by deferring of their Confirmation, he shall know for truth that it is certain
by Gods word, that children being baptized, [1 B. of Edw. 6. if they depart out
of this life in their infancy] have all things necessary for their salvation,
and be undoubtedly saved.

(C) A Catechism, that is to say, An instruction to be learned of every child
before he be brought to be confirmed of the Bishop.

Question. What is your name.
Answer. N. ^r M.

Question. Who gave you this name:
Answer. My Godfathers and godmothers in my baptism, wherein I was made a
member of Christ, the child of God, and an inhertour of the kingdom of heaven.

Question. What did your Godfathers and Godmothers then for you?
Answer. They did promise and ^ow three things in my name. First, that I should
forsake the devil and all his works, the pomps, and vanities of the wicked
world, and all the sinful Justs of of the flesh. Secondly, that I should
believe all the articles of the christian faith. And thirdly, that I should
keep Gods holy will and commandments, and walk in the same all the days of my
life.

Question. Do thou not think that thou art bound to believe, and do to as
they have promised for thee?
Answer. Yes verily. And by Gods help so I will. And I heartily thank our
heavenly father, that he has called me to this state of salvation, through
Jesus Christ our Savior, and I pray God to give me his Grace, that I may
continue in the same unto my lives end.

Question. R^hearse the Articles of thy belief,
Answer. I Believe in God the father almighty, maker of heaven and earth, and
in Jesus Christ his only son our Lord, which was conceived by the holy ghost,
born of the virgin Mary, suffered under Ponce Pilate, was crucified dead and
buried, he descended into hell, the third day he rose again from the dead. He
ascended into heaven, and sits at the right hand of God the father almighty.
From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. I believe in the
holy ghost. The holy Catholic Church. The Communion of Saints. The
forgiveness of sins. The resurrection of the body. And the life everlasting,
Amen.

Question. What do thou chiefly learn in these articles of thy belief?
Answer. First, I learn to believe in God the Father, who has made me and all
the world.

Secondly, in God the son, who has redeemed me and all mankind.

Thirdly, in God the holy ghost, who sanctifies me, and all the elect people
of God.

Question.
You said that your Godfathers and Godmothers, did promise for you, that you
should keep Gods Commandments. Tell me how many there be.

Answer.

Ten.

Question.
Which be they?

Answer.

THE same which God spak in the xx. Chapter of Exodus, saying, I am the Lord
thy God, which have brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of
bondage.

i Thou shall have none other Gods but me.

ii. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, nor the likeness of any
thing that is in heaven above, or in the earth, beneath, nor in the water under
the earth. Thou shall not ^ow down to them nor worship them. For I the Lord my
God am a jealous God, and visit the sins of the fathers upon the children, unto
the third and fourth generation of them that hate me, and show mercy unto
thousands in them that love me, and keep my Commandments.

iii. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain: for the Lord
will not hold him guiltless, that takes his name in vain.

iiii. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day, Sir days shall thou
labor and do all that thou have to do: but the seventh day is the Sabbath of
the Lord thy God. In it thou shall do no manner of work, thou and thy son and
thy daughter, thy manservant, and thy maidservant, thy cattle, and the
stranger that is within thy gates: for in six days the Lord made heaven and
earth, and the sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day.
Wherefore the Lord blessed the seventh day and halowedit.

v. Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long in the land
which the Lord thy God gives thee.

vi. Thou shall do no murder.

vii. Thou shall not commit adultry.

viii. Thou shall not steal.

ix. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

x. Thou shall not covet thy neighbous house, thou shall not covet thy
neighbors wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his Ox, nor his Ass, nor
any thing that is his.

Question.
What do thou chiefly learn by these Commandments?

Answer.

I learn two things. My duty toward God, and my duty toward my neighbor.

Question.
What is thy duty toward God?

Answer.

My duty toward God is, to believe in him, to fear him, and to love him with
all my heart, with all my mind, with all my soul, and with all my strength. To
worship him. To give him thanks. To put my whole trust in him. To call upon
him. To honor his holy name and his word, and to serve him truly all the days
of my life.

Question,
What is thy duty toward thy neighbor.

Answer.

My duty toward my neighbor is, to love him as my self, and to do to all men,
as I would they should do unto me. To love, honor, and succor my father and
mother. To honor and obey the King and his Ministers. To submit my self to all
my governors, teachers, spiritual Pastors and Masters. To order my self lowly
and reverently to all my betters. To hurt no body by word nor deed. To be true
and just in all my dealing. To bear no malice, nor hatred in my heart. To keep
my hands from picking and stealing, and my tongue from evil speaking, lying and
slaudring. To keep my body in temperance, soberness and chastity. Not to cover
nor desire other men's goods: But learn and labor truly to get mine own
living, and to do my duty in that state of life, unto which it shall please God
to call me.

Question.
My good child know this, that thou art not able to do these things of thy
self, nor to walk in the commandments of God, and to serve him without his
special grace, which thou must learn at all times to call for by diligent
prayer. Let me hear therefore if thou can say the Lords prayer.

Answer.

OUr Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.
And lead us not into temptation: but deliver us from evil, Amen.

Question.
What desire thou of God in this prayer:

Answer.

I desire my Lord God our heavenly father, who is the giver of all goodness,
to send his grace unto me, and to all people, that we may worship him, serve
him, and obey him as we ought to do. And I pray unto God, that he will send us
all things that be needful, both for our souls and bodies: And that he will be
merciful unto us, and forgive us our sins: and that it will please him to save
and defend us in all dangers ghostly and bodily: And that he will keep us from
sin and wickedness, and from our ghostly enemy, and from everlasting death.
And this I trust he will do of his mercy and goodness, through our Lord Jesu
Christ. And therefore I say, Amen. So ^e it.

Question.
HOw many Sacraments has Christ ordained in his Church.

Answer.

Two only as generally necessary to salvation: that is to say, Baptism, and
the supper of the Lord.

Question.
What meanest thou by this word Sacrament:

Answer.

I mean an outward and visible sign, of an inward and spiritual grace given
unto us, ordained by Christ himself, as a means whereby we receive the same,
and a pledge to assure us thereof.

Question.
How many parts are there in a Sacrament?

Answer.

Two: the Outward visible sign, and the inward Spiritual Grace.

Question.
What is the Outward visible sign, or form in baptism?

Answer.

Water: wherein the person baptized is dipped, or sprinkled with it, in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost.

Question.
What is the inward and spiritual Grace:

Answer.

A death unto sin, and a new birth unto righteousness: For being by Nature
born in sin, and the children of wrath, we are hereby made the children of
Grace.

Question.
What is required of persons to be baptized?

Answer.

Repentance, whereby they forsake sin* and faith, whereby they steadfastly
believe the promises of God, made to them in that Sacrament.

Question.
Why then are Infants baptized, when by reason of their tender age, they cannot
perform them?

Answer.

Yes: they do perform them by their Suerties, who promise and vow them both in
their names: which when they come to age, themselves are bound to perform.

Question.
Why was the Sacrament of the Lords supper ordained:

Answer.

For the Continual remembrance of the Sacrifice of the death of Christ, and the
benefits which we receive thereby.

Question.
What is the outward part, or sign of the Lords Supper?

Answer.

Bread and Wine, which the Lord has commanded to be received.

Question.
What is the inward part, or thing signified?

Answer.

The body and Blood of Christ, which are verily and indeed taken and received
of the faithful in the Lords Supper.

Question.
What are the benefits, whereof we are partakers thereby?

Answer.

The strengthening and refreshing of our souls by the body and blood of Christ,
as our bodies are by the bread and wine.

Question.
What is required of them which come to the Lords Supper?

Answer.

To examine themselves whether they repent them truly of their former sins,
steadfastly purposing to lead a new life: have a lively faith in Gods mercy
through Christ with a thankful remembrance of his death, and be in Charity with
all men.

So soon as the children can say in their mother tongue the articles of the
faith, the Lords prayer, the ten Commandments, and also can answer to such
questions of this short Catechism, as the Bishop) or such as he shall appoint)
shall by his discretion appose them in: then shall they be brought to the
Bishop by one that shall be his Godfather or Godmother, that every child may
have a witness of his Confirmation.

And the Bishop shall confirm them on this wise.

Confirmation, (Or (D) laying on of hands.) The words enclosed [ ] are wanting
in the former. Liturges.


Our help is in the name of the Lord. Answer. Which has made both heaven and
earth. Minister. Blessed is the name of the Lord. Answer. Henceforth world
without end. 1 B. of Edw. 6. Minster. Minister. Lord hear our prayer. The Lord
be with you. Answer. Answer. And let our cry come unto thee. And with thy
spirit.

Let us pray.

ALmighty and everliving God, who has vouchsafed to regenerate these thy
servants by water and the holy ghost, and have given unto them forgiveness of
all their sins: strengthen them we beseech thee (O Lord) with thy holy ghost
the comforter and daily increase in them thy manifold gifts of grace, the
spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsil and Ghostly strength,
the spirit of knowledge and true Godliness, and fulfill them (O Lord) with the
spirit of thy holy fear [1 B. of Edw. 6. answer.] Amen.

Common Prayer. 1 B. of Edw. 6. Then (E) then shall the Bishop lay his hands
upon every child severaly, saying. Minister. Defend (O Lord) this child with
thy heavenly grace, that he may continue thine for ever, and daily increase in
thy holy spirit more and more, until he come to thine everlasting kingdom,
Amen. Sign them (O Lord) and mark them to be thine for ever by the virtue of
thy holy cross and passion (F) Confirm and strengthen them with the inward
unction of thy holy Ghost, mercifully unto Everlasting life, Amen.

Then the Bishop shall (G) cross them in the fore head, and lay his hands upon
their heads, saying.

N. I sign thee with the sign of the Cross, and lay mine hand upon thee. In
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. Amen.

And thus shall he do to every child one after another. And when he has laid
his hand upon every child then shall he say.

Omitted in Bucer. The peace of the Lord abide with you. Answer. And with thy
spirit.

Common Prayer.

Then shall the Bishop say.

Let us pray.

ALmighty everliving God, which makes us both to will, and to do those things
that be good and acceptable unto thy majesty: we make our humble supplications
unto thee for these children, upon whom (after the example of thy holy
Apostles) We have laid our hands, to certify them (by this sign) of thy
favor, and gracious goodness toward them: let thy fatherly hand, we beseech
thee, ever be over them, let thy holy spirit ever be with them, and so lead
them in the knowledge, and obedience of thy word, that in the end they may
obtain the everlasting life, through our Lord Jesus Christ, who with thee and
the holy Ghost lives and reigns one God, world without end, Amen.

Then the Bishop shall bless the children, saying thus.

The blessing of God almighty, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, be upon
you, and remain with you for ever, Amen.

The Curate of every parish, or some other, at his appointment, shall
diligently upon Sundays and holy days, half an hour before Evensong, openly
in the Church instruct and examine so many children of his parish sent unto him
as the time will serve, and as he shall think convenient in some part of this
Catechism.

And all Fathers, mothers, Masters, and Dames, shall cause their children,
servants, and prentises (which have not learned their Catechism) to come to
the Church at the time appointed, and obediently to hear, and be ordered by the
Curate, until such time as they have learned all that is here appointed for
them to learn. And whenever the Bishop shall give knowledge for children to
be brought before him to any convenient place, for their confirmation: then
shall the Curate of every parish, either bring or asend in writing (H) the
names of all those children of his parish, which can say the articles of their
faith, the Lords prayer, and the ten Commandments, and also how many of them
can answer to the other questions contained in this Catechism.

(I) And there shall none be admitted to the holy Communion, until such time as
he [can say the Catechism,] and be confirmed. [] Omitted in the 1 B. of Edw. 6.


Annotations upon CHAP. IX.
(A.) Confirmation in what sense a Sacrament. The closing ceremony of Baptism.
Why very expedient at this time. The Directory defective toward her own
Principles. (B.) Confirmation by what names anciently called. (C.) The
necessity of Catechysing. What Catechists were, a dissent from Learned men,
Catechists, not Presbyters. Usually laymen. Women Catechized by women, and
why, an especial reason for it in the Greek Church. Sanctimonial Catechumens
what, not the same with Audientes as is commonly supposed, in what sense
sometimes called Audientes. Lent set apart for Catechizing. Competents what.
The excellency of our Catechism. K. James his most judicious direction. (D.)
The language of the hand: what Imposition of hands denotes. (E.) Confirmation
peculiar to the Apostles, and their successors, Bishops. Why so. Never
performed by Presbyters. What meant by Presbyteri consignant in the counterfeit
Ambrose. (F.) Unction or Chrism an ancitient ceremony belonging to
Confirmation, why separated at length from it, and indulged to Presbyters. The
Arausican Council diversity of readings. Sirmundus his Edition defended. Whence
two Chrismations in the Church of Rome. (G.) signing with the Cross a Companion
of unction. (H.) Children when anciently confirmed. (I.) Communication of the
Eucharist to succeed presently upon Confirmation.

COnfirmation is by the Church of Rome held for a Sacrament, and so some of the
ancient Fathers represent it. St. Epist. 72. ad Stephanum.
Cyprian, speaking of Baptism Confirmation. Tunc esse filii Det esse possunt,
si utroqve Sacramento nascantur. Then are they made the sons of God, when they
are born again by both Sacraments. So St. Augustine mentions Chrismatis
Sacramentum; and in both their senses (they applying that title to all things
of mysterious import in a L. 2. cont. lit. Petil. 104.
large construction, as Augustine not less then 19. times in his de
celebratione Paschae) we will allow this for a Sacrament. But that it is so, in
true propriety of speech, our adversaries shall never obtain from us, until
they can find verbum, et Elementum, and both of Christ's Institution, to meet
in it; neither of which, as they confess, are yet to be found, their great
Bellarm. de S. confirm. c. 8
Cardinal putting us off for both to tradition unwritten. But although we
entertain it not as a Sacrament, yet being of Apostolical practice, and
exercised with the product of such mavelous effects and operations: we, who
pretend not to any such miraculous gifts, have not yet so slight a value for it
as absolutely to reject it, being well persuaded, that, accompanied with such
fervent prayers, it will be the readier way to convey those graces of the holy
spirit into the soul of the party baptized, which are necessary to establish
him in every good word, and work. For the gift of the Holy Ghost, in order to
which this rite is used, is not so much an effect of the Hands imposed, as of
the Invocation then applied. Ad invocationem sacerdotis spiritus sanctus
infunditur, says St. Ambrose very well, at the Invocation of the Bishop the
holy Ghost is infused.

This Ceremony was considered by the Apostles, and succeeding Fathers, as De
lis qui initiantur.
the completory and close of Baptism, not that Baptism was ineffectual
without it, but as an assistant to it, and therefore Confirmation in persons
adult immediately succeeded the very act of baptizing and dipping. And if the
Primitive Church held her self obliged to preserve it upon the score of
Apostolical usage, and to tender it to such as were of full growth, much more
reason have we to continue it, with whom Paedo-Baptisme, is almost the sole
practice. Baptism, as the Apostle St. Peter describes it, is (...). The
Answer, or rather Interrogatory, of a good conscience toward God; that is, a
question how the party stands disposed toward God, not unlike our
Interrogatory, Do thou for sake the Devil, etc. To take of the supposed
vanity of this Interrogatory administered to Infants, who are in no capacity to
reply, the Church, their most tender Mother, has devised this expedient of
assigning sureties to undertake in their behalf, what Christianity requires
from them. They being thus charitably provided for, in the minority of their
intellectuals, extreme rational it is that the Church exact from them, and that
they render to her, an account when they come to riper years, what progress
they have made in learning the Elements of the christian faith; exceeding
proper it is they enter new security to her that they will, by Gods grace, make
good those stipulations, and promises which their sureties undertook before in
their behalf, and that after all these they may receive the Churches
Benediction, administered to them by the Bishop, their spiritual Father. There
is not any thing wherein the late pretended Reformers amuse me more then in
this particular. I hear them declare, That all who are baptized in the name of
Christ, ^o renounce, and by their Baptism are bound to fight against the
Devil, the World, and the Directory.
Flesh. And yet by abolishing of sureties, they render Infants unable to make
such Abrenunciation, or take such an engagement by their proxies, and do not
any where throughout all their appointments, require from persons baptized when
they become adult any such actual promise. Where is then this Renunciation and
obligation entered against those common Enemies these men talk of? If they say
they are mental, supposed, and impli'd. I answer, that is not enough, the
Church must take cognizance of all her members that they are all of a piece,
that they agree in the unity of profession, which she can not, unless they give
her not only some verbal account of their knowledge in the principles of
Religion, but also explicit promises to live agreeable to those principles.
And therefore it surpasses my understanding with what color of reason they
can admit such persons to the highest degree of christian Society, the blessed
communion, who never engaged to conform to the Rules of Christianity.

Have all things necessary for their Salvation.] The outward Essentials of
Baptism are the Element water; and the words of Institution, I baptize thee in
the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. These, without more ado,
constitute a seal all-sufficient to initiate children within the Gospel
covenant: no absolute necessity have they, as children, of any thing else. But
though, as children, they want nothing necessary for their Salvation, yet have
they not all things necessary for years more adult, when of another Sacrament,
the principles of Christianity oblige them to participate, and require from
them, no procurated, but a personal, and actual faith, repentance, obedience,
and what else their Baptismal engagement tied them to perform. And until they
have given better security for all these in confirmation, the Church
(regularly) precludeth to them all advenues to higher mysteries: so that this
excellent ceremony is (...), the cement which does sodder both Sacraments
together, whence anciently they who were admitted to it were said to be
consummated Cyprian Epist. 83.
signaculo Dominico, by the Lords signature. And semblably Diou. Areop. Eccles.
Hierach. c. 4.
(...), the perfecting u^ction, is it called by another: which consummation,
Janus-like, looked both ways. Backward to Baptism, of which Sacrament it was
the finishing and closing ceremony, and so the party confirmed was consummated
as to that: Forward to the Eucharist, whereof it was the initiatory and
preparing rite, and so he was made perfect as to that, confirmation giving him
a right (...), to participate of the Sacrament of perfection, as the Council.
Ancyran. passim.
ancients styled it.

A Catechism, that is to say, an Instruction.] Our Church gives here the
notation of the word Catechism, telling us it is an Instruction: and so it is,
Instruction in the first rudiments of Christianity; the Author of the Epistle
to the Hebrews goes as high in its advancement as possibly he can, with him it
is (...), the laying of the first foundation, Chap. 6. v. 1. implying that, as
a foundation is to the Superstructure, so is catechizing to the sublimer
mysteries of our Religion: and what an edifice is without a foundation our
Saviors parable speaks plainly enough. And this may be sufficient to preserve
it not only from scorn and contempt, but in an high esteem, seeing it is
suppodaneous, the Pedestal to support noblet truths: for as St. Epist. ad
Laetam.
Hierome excellently. Non contemnend a sunt parva, sine quibus magna constare
non possunt. nothing, be it never so small, is to be slighted, when it is (the
fine qua non) that without which greater things cannot stand. Nor may it be
omitted as another argument of its worth, that St. Augustine, St. Cyril, St.
Athanasius, Gregorius, Nyssenus, Origin, Clemens Alexandrinus eminent Fathers,
yea St. Paul himself were catechists in their respective times.

Now because a Catechism does necessarily suppose a Catechist, and a
Catchumen, the Instructor, and Instructed, of both which there is so frequent
mention in antiquity; requisite it will be to take them into a more curious and
choice consideration: and the rather, because I find very learned men have
hitherto failed in a true apprehension of them; the more excusable, because
controversy having hitherto so little intermedled in this matter, occasion was
not offered for search into a more distinct cognizance of them.

First, then Catechists, taken in a proper and separate notion, as they
constituted an order, severed and apart from others, were, certi quidam
homines, qui Scholam Christianae Institutionis exercebant, as De Antiq. Ritibq.
Baptism. l. 2. c. 7.
Vicecomes describes them, certain men, which kept a School for christian
Institution: but whether those certain men, were lay, or Clergy, or what they
were, he determines not. The In 1 Timothy 5. note f.
Annatator and Mr. Right of the Church, etc. p. 16.
Thorndike very learned men both, seem to affirm them Presbyters, for where
Clemens Alexandrinus demands, Stromat. l. 3. c. 11.
(...); whom shall the Presbyter lay hands upon, whom shall he bless? They
understand him, as if he meant the solemnity with which the catechists dismissed
those that were catechized. And in confirmation of this interpretation, the Dr.
produces De vit. Constant. l. 4.
Eusebius, who says of Constantine that (...). He made profession, and then
was vouchsafed those Prayers, which were given by imposition of hands. But I
conceive, neither of those places are at all appyable to catechizing. Not this
of Eusebius, neither the act done, nor the place where it was done will admit
it. Not the act being (...), which is not in that place the making of
profession, as the Dr. renders it, but confession of sins, and the prayers
there mentioned was the Absolution, a consequent of that confession, and which
was always performed with Imposition of hands. Not the place, because it was in
that destined for public worship, and so not proper for Catechizing. Grant I
do that the Catechumeni, had their (...), dwellings, annexed and adjoined to the
temples, which for that very cause were called Council. Trul. can. 9^.
(...) venerable houses, perhaps some rooms in the Baptisteries as St. Ambrose
in the Epistle forementioned. But that they were actually catechized in the
Church where the congregation of the faithful assembled, I find not one
syllable in antiquity, but much to the contrary, as shall be seen anon. To come
to Clemens Alexandrinus, I say, that passage of his to Catechistical
Benediction neither did, nor could relate. It did not, because it is expressly
restrained to a Presbyter: but a Presbyter, as Presbyter was never deputed to
that office, nor was it ever held necessary for a catechist to be a Presbyter.
I find indeed the catechumens enjoined by two several councels (...), to give
an account q Leodicen. can. 46. Trul. 4.
of their faith to the Bishop or Presbyters, on the fifth day of the week, yet
does it not follow that therefore the Bishop or Presbyters were catechists,
(...) properly so called, they being only appointed for that time to receive
that account from them, because it was great reason that they, who regularly
had the only power to baptize, should be well assured that they should confer
that seal, upon none but persons qualified with knowledge sufficient for it.
Catechists were usually, if not constantly laymen. In Scripture dialect, I
take them to be those which pass under the name of Doctors (...), such were the
Doctors amongst whom our Savior was found in the Temple disputing, that is,
questioning and answering like a Cateohumen. Such was St. Paul who, as I said
before, was a catechist calls himself (...); 1 Timothy 2. 7. 2 Timothy 1. 2. a
teacher or catechist of the Gentiles; so I am certain they were termed in the
times succeeding. The supposed Constit. Apost. l. 8. c. 32.
Clemens discoursing of catechizing, says (...). He that is a catechist,
though he be a layman, yet if he be skilful, and able for the place, and of
good behavior, let him teach the Novices, where not only (...) imports a
Catechist, but also there is an impli'd toleration for him to be a Layman. So
St. Cyprian, Optatum inter lectores doctorem audientium consti^^imus, Optatus
one of the Readers, I have constituted a Doctor ^Epist. 24.
(there is doctor again) of the Hearers. This Optat^s was not then in the
Clergy, inter lectores, one of the Readers, and therefore the Father says he
was only, clero proxin^us, ad clerum paratus, the next remove bexeath, and
ready to be ordained of the Clergy, Indeed De Catech. Rud.
St. Augustine gives us an account of a Deacon who performed this Office. Petis
a me frater, Deogratias, ut aliquod ad te de Catechizandis rudibus, quod tibi
usui esset, scriberem. Dixisti enim, quod apud carthaginem, ubi Diaconuses,
adte saepe adducuntur, qui fide Christiana primitus imbuendi sunt. Thou did
desire of me, Deogratias that I should write to thee something concerning the
catechizing of novices. For thou say that at Carthage. where thou art
Deacon, many are brought to thee to be instructed in the principles of
Christianity. All this time no mention of any Presbyter-catechist in the
Affrican Church. But it might be otherwise at Alexandria. Not at Alexandria to
be sure, where a Marco Evangelista semper Ecclesiastici fuere Doctores, ^
Hierom. Script. Ecclesiast. Catul.
Even from the time of Mark the Evangelist, there were always successively
Ecclesi astical Doctors, that is catechists; where this very Clemens was one,
and so was Origin, (once his scholar) at eighteen years of age, as both
Eusebius and St. Hierome witness, too young to be ordained a Clergy man. And
for other parts, St. Cyril Bishop of Jerusalem was there a Catechist, and
wrote his Catecheses, in Adolescentia, in his youth, as St. Hierome tells us;
if so, then probably he was no Presbyter at that time, a Presbyter or Elder,
(as the word imports) and a youth being terms contra-distinct. But there is
still behind an other argument, an infallible one, that Clemens his Presbyter
here mentioned could not be a Catechist. For his question has evident
reference to women. Inveighing against such women as wore false hair, he
frames this expostulary argument, (...). Upon whom shall the Presbyter impose
his hands, whom shall he bless? Not the adorned woman her self, but her false
hair, and thereby another head. Women being then the subject of his discourse,
the Presbyter cannot be a Catechist. It is most undoubtedly true, what the most
famous Grotius has delivered in this particular. Foeminae per foeminas primi
Christianismi cognitione imbui, et sic ad Ecclesias pertrahi debebant. Women
were by women (meaning Diaconisses, and Sanctimonials) to be taught the
principles of Christianity, and so Annot. in Phil. 4.
to be brought into the Churches. And though he quoteth no one Authority for
it, yet for Greece he yields a very persuading reason, that it was so. In
Graecia clausa Gynaeconitis, the fashion was in Greece, for the Gyneceum or
women's chamber to be kept private, inaccessible to men. To which known custom,
this very Clemens elsewhere refers: giving us an account what those women
were, which the Apostles made their synodites and, companions in their
journeys, he calls them (...), fellow ministers with Stromat. l. 3.
them toward women which kept close at home, (...), by whom (viz. as
Catechists) christian instruction might freely, without reproof, enter the most
retired chambers allotted for women. Much to the same purpose the other
supposed Constit. Apost. l. 3. c. 15.
Clemens, who showing cause why Diaconisses must be chosen says, (...). It
hapeneth sometimes that for the speech of unbelievers, you cannot send a Deacon
to women, and then you shall send a Diaconisse. The Geneceum, or women's room
being so (...), and inaccessible to men, no marvel if Diaconisses were
appointed for the service. Nay further, clear it is, even in other places where
they were not so strictly mued up, within the Latin jurisdiction, the practice
was the same, as appears by the fourth council of Carthage. Can. 14.
Sanctimoniales quae ad ministerium Baptisandarum mulierum eliguntur,
instructae sint ad officium ut possint apto et sano sermon docere imperit as
et rusticas m^lieres, tempere quo Baptisandae sint qualiter Baptisatori
interrogatae respondeant. Sanctimonials which are chose to officiate about
women to be baptized, are to be instructed and fitted for the place, that they
may be able with edifying and wholesome doctrine to teach ignorant and unskilful
women, what to answer to such interrogatories as shall be administered unto
them, when they came to be baptized. Thus have I evidently manifested that
Clemens his Presbyter could not in this place be a Catechist, in the persuing
of which proof I hope my discourse has not seemed tedious, because not
impertinent: upon the whole matter all that I can make out concerning
Catechists is, that in the deputation of persons for that office, regard was
rather had to their abilities, and qualifications, then to the degrees or
orders whereby they were distinguished from others.

To come now to Catechumens, they were, to speak properly, such as were
desirous to be instructed in the mysteries of the Christian profession, such as
had their Catechumenium or distinct place in the Church assigned for their
station; such as were admitted not only to hear the word read and preached, but
were permitted also to be present at some prayers. Learned men generally
describe them by Audientes, as if they were altogether the same persons. And
they may, it is true, promiscuously so pass one for another, but not in their
sense, that is, not taking Audientes for such as were Hearers of the word in
public Assemblies. Such Audients and Catechumens being not terms convertible,
but evidently in all antiquity distinct. The council of Nice concerning lapsed
persons resolvs thus. Can. 14.
(...), that three years they should continue as Hearers only, and after, that
to pray with the Catechumens. So also in the L. 8. c. 12.
Constitutions ascribed to Clemens, (...), etc. Let the Deacon proclaim, away
Infidels, begone Hearers, and silence being made, let him say, pray ye
Catechumens. In both which places a remarkable real, as well, as nominal,
difference is to be discerned between the (...), hearers, and the (...),
catechumens; these staying behind, when they were sent away. Audientes, in
their large sense, were in truth all persons, the faithful only excepted, who
were permitted to be present at the lessons read, and the sermon preached. as
appears by the fourth council of Carthage. Can. 85.
Episcopus nullum prohibeat ingredi in Ecclesiam et audire verbum Dei, sive
gentilem, sive haeriticis sive Judaum usque ad Missam Catechumenorum. Let the
Bishop forbid none from coming into the Church, to hear Gods word, be he
heathen, be he heretic, be he Jew, and there to abide until the service of the
Catechumens. Grant I do that Cyprian calls the same persons Catechumeni in one
Ep. 3.
Epistle, and Ep. 13.
Audientes in another: But these are called Audientes upon a clear other
account, not in reference to their attention to the word of God in public
assemblies, but (as Xenophon is called Diog. laert. vit. Xenoph.
(...) Socrates his hearer) in relation to their being taught by such whom this
Father called even now, Doctores Audientium, Instructers of the hearers, and
were no other then Catechists, So that the error and mistake lies in the
notion and application, not in the word it self.

Having hitherto discoursed what Catechists and Catechumens were, it will next
be seasonable to inquire into the time anciently set apart for this sacred
exercise, which was the 40 days of Lent. Consuetudo apud nos ejusmodi est, ut
his qui baptisandi sunt, per quadraginta dies public trademus sanctam, et
adorandam Hieronym. adv. Johan. Hierosolym.
Trinitatem. The custom with us is such, that all Lent long we teach persons
to be baptized the mysteries of the Blessed Trinity: whereby it is discernable
that catechizing was then antecedent, which with us is subsequent to Baptism;
and reason good it should be so, men of ripe years then coming to the font, who
were not allowed their Proxies, but were to give an account of their own
belief. Nevertheless though Catechumens were by such instruction fitted for
Baptism, yet did they not always enter the Font so soon as they were prepared
for it, but delayed their admission to this Sacrament as long as they pleased,
some not for a few years, as is evident by Arnobius, and St. Augustine, who,
both wrote many pieces of Divinity when they were Catechumens, and before they
were baptized. When any purposed to receive this holy seal, the fashion was for
them to give in their names (that the Church might know who they were which
desired to be initiated) the week before Easter, and Whitsunday, and from that
time of entering their names, they were called competentes August. de cura pro
mortuis c. 12.
Appropinquabat Pascha, dedit nomen inter alios competentes, i. e. the feast of
Easter was at hand, he gave in his name amongst the rest of the competents. So
Ambrose Epist. 13. ad marcellin.
Ambrose, dimissis Catechumenis Symbolum aliquibus competentibus tradebam, i.
e. the Catechumeni being sent away, I delivered the creed to certain
competents. Now although competents came thus to be distinguished from the
Catechumeni, as one remove above them, yet was this nominal difference, not
always punctually observed by the Ancient Fathers, but sometime they gave the
name of Catechumen to such an one as was ready to be baptized. So the very
forementioned Authors, Ambros. de iis qui mister. initiantur.
St. Ambrose, Credit etiam Catechumenus in crucem Domini Jesu qua et ipse
signatur. i. e. The Catechumen believes also in the cross of the Lord Jesus,
wherewith he is signed, that is when he gave in his name for Baptism, this
ceremony being then applied to him. St. Augustine, Aug. in Psalm. 41.
Quando Catechumeni ad gratiam sancti lavacri festinant solemniter cantatur,
Psalmus 41. i. e. When the Catechumens are hastening to the holy laver, this
forty first Psalm is usually sing. This may suffice to be delivered concerning
the Cateehumens, the candidates of the christian faith, as St. Hierome calls
them, as they are represented in the writings of the Primitive times.

As to the make and form of a Catechism, our first Reformers more consulted
the condition of their own, then the practice of the Primitive times, who
required in persons to be baptized, no other prae cognita, or things to be
foreknown then the Articles of the Christian faith, and in some places the
Lords Prayer: Our Reformers adding the Decalogue, with very edifying
explanations of them. But these being thought defective, as to the Doctrine of
the Sacraments, it was by King James Conference at Hampton Court. p. 43.
appointed, that the Bishops should consider of an addition to it in that
concernment, which was done accordingly in that excellent frame we see, being
penned at first by Bishop Overal, then Dean of Paul's, and allowed by the
Bishops: So that therein, indeed throughout the whole frame of our Churches
Catechism, that Golden Rule of that Judicious Prince is punctually observed,
viz. the [avoiding of all odd, curious, deep and intricate questions] no
Magisterial determination of the Priorities, or Posteriorities, of the
Absoluteness, or Respectiveness of Gods Decrees, points (...), i. e.
inscrutable to the most illuminate Doctor of the Gentiles, and which put him to
his (...), i. e. O the depth of the Wisdom of God, Romans 11. 33. nor of any
thing less then fundamental being there taken notice of: Happy were we, did all
Practitioners in Theology, they especially who pretend on high honor to our
Church, conform to her example.

Or laying on of hands.] As the Tongue is to the Heart, such is the Hand to
Caeterae parts (says the excellent Quint. Orat. lib. 11. c, 3.
Orator) loquentem adjuvant, haec (prope est ut dicam) ipsae loquuntur: In
demonstrandis personis atque locis adverbiorum atque pronominum obtinent vicem:
Other members do help the Speaker, but the Hands I almost say speak themselves:
In demonstrating Places and Persons, they serve instead of Adverbs and
Pronouns; Adverbs for Place, and Pronouns for Persons. So according to the
ancient mode of Renuntiation in Baptism, the party to be Baptized was
commanded, Cyril Gatech. 1.
protensa manu, (...), Satanae renunciare, to renounce Satan, by stretching out
his hand as to one present; where the protending of the Hand toward the West,
that Quarter of the Heaven whence darkness begins, the Prince of Darkness by
this Prosopop^ea was indigitated: So also, according to the universal mode of
all Nations, the Hands in Prayer are lifted up toward Heaven, the place
whether our Prayers tend: So when our Prayers are limited and restrained to any
one peculiar thing, or person, the manner is to lay the hand upon that Object
relative to the Invocation: So the Paternal Benediction given by Jacob to the
Children of Joseph was performed by laying his hands upon their heads, Genesis 48.
14. After the same manner also did persons of remarkable Sanctity bless such
Infants as were upon that account brought to them, as our Savior, Mark 10 16.
And in Analogy, or resemblance of that practice, is the Ceremony of Imposition
of hands in this office of Confirmation, whereby the Church, using the
ministration of the venerable Fathers, the Bishops, Invocateth the Divine
Benediction upon her Children, now entering their adult state and riper years.

Then the Bishop shall lay his hands upon, etc.] Our Savior being near his
Ascension, In my Name they shall cast out Devils, they shall speak with
tongues, they shall take up Serpents, and if they drink any deadly thing it
shall not hurt them, they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover,
Mark 16. 17, and 18. Which Miracles, though Believers did afterward perform,
yet were not those operations the mere results of Faith, nor did they do them
as Believers; but the Power enabling them thereto, was conveyed to them by the
Gift of the Holy Ghost, which Gift not only imported an extraordinary
Collation, upon new regenerated Converts, of the invisible Graces of Gods
Spirit, confirming their Faiths daily more and more, and assisting them in the
exercise of an holy and sanctified Life and Conversation: But also in outward
Qualifications, suitable to the exigent of those times for the working of
Miracles. Nor were those Believers to expect or receive those Gifts by any
other Prayers, or any other Hands, then of the Apostles, that the World might
know God had a more then ordinary value for their Function, and consequently
would require the highest Honor deferred to it; upon this very account, the
Apostles, hearing that Samaria had received the word of God, and were Baptized
by Philip the Evangelist, they sent Peter and John from Jerusalem to them to
pray for them, that they might receive the Holy Ghost, implying thereby, that
though Philip had commission to Baptize and Preach, yet could he not give Acts
8. 15.
the Holy Ghost. And when Simon Magus perceived what strange feats were done by
those Believers, after such prayer and Imposition of hands of those Apostles,
he thinking it would prove a money matter, bad liberally for it, till he
understood he was in the wrong. And though in tract of time, and by degrees,
whole Nations being converted to the Christian Faith, the main cause of those
Miracles ceasing, they themselves began to abate both in number and quality,
and so Confirmation was not practiced much upon that pretense; yet it being an
Apostolical usage, and instituted also for another end, viz. An Invocation of
Gods inward sanctifying the Person new Baptized, by the Grace of his holy
Spirit, a Petition necessary at all times. The Bishops, succeeding the Apostles
in the Government of the Church, thought fit to continue it still, retaining
it, as the Apostles did, to themselves alone, and not communicating it to any
of the inferior Clergy: Qui in Ecclesia Baptisantur Praepositis Ecclesiae
offeruntur, says Oypr. Epist. Joviano.
Cyprian, They who are Baptized in the Church, are straightways presented to
the Presidents of the Church, Ut per nostramorationem ac manus impositionem
Spiritum Sanctum consequantur, That by our Prayers and Imposition of Hands they
may obtain the Holy Ghost. The reason whereof is this, that whereas the Bishop
had condescended and delegated the Power of Baptizing to Presbyters, which was
originally resident in himself, as has been said already, yet seeing requisite
it was that Gods Blessing should be implored upon those Neophites by them, and
Blessing is an Act of Paternal Authority, it was convenient it should be
reserved to himself, ad honorem sacerdotii, as St. Hierome says, in honor of
his Priestly Superiority. Other Imposition of hands have been performed, some
by Presbyters and Bishops indifferently, as that in receiving Penetents to the
peace of the church, as that in consecrating of Marriage, some by Presbyters
with Bishops jointly, as that of Ordination: But never any mere Presbyter
assumed this of Confirmation, nor was it ever in the Primitive Church permitted
to any but to the Bishop alone: To the contrary whereof, never was there
produced any Testimony Authentic: Authentic I say, for that Ambrose upon the
Ephesians, whom some urge against it, is by the men who cite him confesled
supposititious and a counterfeit: But be he who they please, what says the man?
Apud Aegyptum Presbyteri consignant, si praesens non sit Episcopus, In Egypt
the Presbyters consign if the Bishop be not present. Now if consignant here
should prove not to import confirming, this shadow of a Father will stand them
in little stead. And who dares positively say it? not Blundellus I am certain,
and yet he would as gladly have it so as another, for he is put to his sive's,
either ^ Apol. p. 57.
Confirmation, or blessing of Penetents, or consecrating Persons by Ordination,
not knowing in which to fix: So that this they know not who, speaks they know
not what. And of all these sive's which stand in competition, that of
Confirmation is least like to prevail, for the words are Apud Aegyptum, in
Egypt. Now in Egypt, and the Patriarchdom of Alexandria, of all places in the
World Presbyters were, for their fellow-Presbyter Arius his sake, in most
disgrace; so as it was not allowed them in Alexandria, so much as to Preach,
and therefore they there the most unlikely to be indulged so great a favor as
Confirmation; whence we may conclude, Confirmation is not to be understood ^
Socrates Hist. l. 6. c. 21.
by Consignation, and if not, no matter to this dispute which of the other two
carry it; and if it were, yet is there odds against them too, for a Learned
Power of the Keys, p. 38
Doctor is positive, that neither Blessing of Penetents, nor Consecration of
Persons to be Ordained, can rationally be meant in this place, but that
Consignant is equivalent to Consecrant, and so has reference to consecrating
of the Elements; which even Blundellus himself does also elsewhere admit as
probable, and the Doctor proves it by a parallel place of the same supposed
Author. Script. Anonym Quaest. in V. and N. Test.
In Alexandria, and pro totam Aegyptum si desit Episcopus consecrat Pr^sbyter,
In Alexandria, and all over Egypt the Presbyter consecrates in want of a
Bishop; where Consignant in the former passage is changed into Consecrant: And
if both these pieces has one Father, be he Hillary, as some conjecture, or any
other, the Doctors sense is passable enough: But if they were the issues of
several persons, then this Author might intend somewhat more then has hitherto
been apprehended, and what the word consignare in its native and genuine sense
imports, viz. Chrismation, not Confirmation: For though Unction was more
anciently annexed to, as a continued Act with, Confirmation; yet at that moment
of time when Ambrose or Hillary wrote, if this piece be theirs, it was
abstracted and separated from imposition of Hands, and (upon what account,
shall be seen anon) transmitted to Presbyters: And because it was constantly
applied with the sign of the Cross, the joint Act of both Ceremonies was very
properly called Consigning, answering what the Greeks called (...), to seal
with Unction: And so this nameless Author will be interpreted thus: In Egypt
if the Bishop be absent, the Presbyters a^oint u Just. Martyr
the person Baptized, signing him with the Cross, which was not only true in
Egypt, but elsewhere also, as shall presently be made manifest; which
notwithstanding, the essential and perficient Act of Confirmation, viz.
Imposition of hands, was reserved as a peculiar of Episcopacy.

Confirm them with the inward Unction of thy Holy Ghost.] This Prayer looks
like the Ruins of a famous Structure, whose super-Edifice is demolisht: any
one may see it was formed in relation to Confirmatory Chrism and Unction, which
kept in the Primitive times, here its proper station, and was applied with this
or the like Prayer, as St. Ambrose will inform you: The Unction is fled, and
the Prayer left behind only to demonstrate whence her Companion w De iis qui
initiantur, ul. 7
removed: But what caused this divorce? that is in truth worth our inquiry, and
I hope it is our hap to have found it: Confirmation was, in conformity to
Apostolical usage, to follow Baptism close at the heels, Tortullian.
Egressi de Lavacro Acts 19. 8. 5, and 6
perungimur Benedict a Unctione de pristina disciplina, dehinc manus imponitur,
As soon as we come out of the Water, we are anointed with the consecrated
Unguent, according to the ancient Order, then hands are imposed upon us: To
this end Easter and Whitsuntide were set apart for this Ordinance, that the
Bishops might attend it. But Christianity beginning to spread it self into
larger Precincts, and the persons Baptized growing very numerous, that such as
were sick, or lay in extreamis, and therefore could not resort to the Bishop,
nor he to them, in convenient time, might not totally be deprived of all
Spiritual Fortifications, which Confirmation was conceived to afford; an
expedient was contrived for their solace and satisfaction; viz. That the
Presbyter or Minister, who was qualified by the Bishop to Baptize, should have
liberty to anoint the Neophite, but with these two Cautions. First, That the
Chrismal Unguent should be first consecrated, as was the use of those times, by
the Bishop. Secondly, that he should anoint without Imposition of hands: By
this course the Bishop parted from the shell, and kept the kernel, reserving to
himself the true Apostolical Ceremony of Imposing of hands, and also the sole
power of consecrating the Unguent, to teach Presbyters their distance and
eminence of their Order: This course thus settled, the Bishops kept their wonted
usage of confirming at Easter and Pentecost in their Cathedral Cities; and for
such as were Baptized abroad in the Country, their manner was, to give notice
of their intentions of being at some convenient place, upon a day prefixed, and
to summon all persons whom it concerned to resort to them, there to be
Confirmed. Now to make proof of what I have delivered, I shall need no more
then the first Canon of the first Arausican Synod: Nullum Ministrorum qui
Baptisands recepit officium sine Chrismate usquam debere progredi quia inter
nos placuit semel Chrismari, That no Minister who has taken the office of
Baptizing ought to go abroad without Chrism, for we have agreed it should be
used once. This Chrism the Minister was to have of the Bishop of his Diocese,
Presbyters being interdicted themselves to consecrate it, by the sixth Canon of
the Council of Carthage, decreeing, (...), i. e. That Chrism be not made by a
Presbyter: In case of necessity, if the party Baptized was not anointed, then
the Bishop at Confirmation was to be warned of it, as it follows in the same
Canon: De eo autem qui in Baptismate quacunque necessitate faciente non
Chrismatus fuerit sacerdos commonebitnr, But concerning him who shall happen
not to be anointed in Baptism, in regard of some necessity, the Bishop must be
put in mind of it: But why so? That he may sorbear confirming him, as Aurelius
supposes? No, but that he may anoint him, which else he would not; for the
Bishops fashion was only to impose hands without Unction, unless he was told
the party was not anointed before. True it is, Aurelius contends for two
Unctions, one Baptismal, the other Confirmatory, that by the Presbyter, this by
the Bishop; this he endeavors to prove, first by the last sentence of this
Canon, Ut necessaria habeatur Chrismatio repetita, i. e. That repeted Unction
be held necessary: Secondly, By a Decretal of Innocent the first, Presbyteris
seu extra Episcopuni, seu present Episcopo Baptisant, Chrismate Baptisatos
ungere licet non tamen frontem ex eodem oleo signare, quod solis debetur
Episcopis cum tradunt sanctum Paracletum, i. c. Presbyters, be the Bishop
absent or present when they Baptize, may anoint whom they have Baptized, but
not their foreheads with the same Unguent which only belongs to Bishops when
they give the Holy Ghost: The words of both are express enough; the question
is, whether they be the words either of that Council, or this Pope, and I
conceive it without question they are not. As for the Canon, Syrmondus the
Jesuit concludes it thus, Ut non necessaria habeatur repetita Chrismatio, i.
e. That repeted Chrismation be not held necessary: This Particle Non reverseth
all, and Syrmondus pleads that in his Edition he had followed the best and most
ancient Copies: But Aurelius says no, and this is not only become a dispute,
but a serious quarrel betwixt this Sorbonist and that Jesuit, a Quarrel that
has provoked between them a great Volumn to decide it: Having heard them both,
I must pronounce for Syrmondus, that the Negative Syllable must stand, and that
there was then at that moment but one anointing in use, which both Authority
and Reason will confirm. Authority Adv. Lucise. rian.
Hierome, who lived near that time: Non abnuo hanc esse Ecclesiarum
Consuetudinem, ut ad eos qui long in minoribus urbibus per Presbyteros and
Diaconos Baptisati sunt, Episcopus ad invocationem Spiritus Sancti manum
impositurus Excurrat, i. e. I deny not but the Custom of the Churches is this,
that the Bishop rides forth into the Country, for an Invocation of the Holy
Ghost, and Imposition of hands upon those who far off, in Country Towns, have
been Baptized by Presbyters and Deacons. He does not say the Bishops were to
anoint, but only to impose Hands; and yet afterward he tells us, the
Presbyters were to Baptize with Chrism. Again, it is evident by reason, there
being then no supposed necessity enforcing the use of Episcopal Chrismation,
which came in long after upon another, not then dreamt on, account; for before
confirmation came to be entertained under the Notion of a genuine Sacrament,
which was not till near a thousand years after Christ no other Ceremony was
required to the necessity of it, then laying on of hands; but when it took a
degree higher then the ancient Church meant it, when it became in the corrupt
opinion of superstitious men, to gain the reputation of a Sacrament, it was
observed that Imposition of hands only would not constitute it such, unless
also Chrism for the Element and material principle thereof were re-granted it:
And this is the true original of the two Chrismations, Baptismal or
Presbyterian, and Confirmatory or Episcopal, now in use in the Romish Church.
Now as what has been said in defense of Syrmondus his Edition of that Canon, I
conceive is sufficient to overthrow the Opinion of Aurelius to the contrary, so
also may it serve to render Pope Innocents decretal counterfeit, as indeed most
are, if not all. And were this Decretal that Popes, and Popes the men they are
cried up for, it was a strange boldness in this Council to decree, Inter nos
placuit semel Chrismari, we are agreed that Chrism be used once, when Innocent
had before ordered it should be twice.

Then the Bishop shall cross him on the fore-head] This signing was a constant
consectary of Unction, and therefore the Unction having been translated, this

And whenever the Bishop shall give knowledge,] Such was the Primitive
Practice, as is evident by that testimony of Hierome lately cited.

The names of all the children of his Parish] It is not here, nor any where
else, viz. Anno 1230. De Baptism.
Edmundus Cantuariensis in Speculo Ecclesiae, as he is cited by Vice comes,
delivers the then English practice to be this, Infra quinque Annos ad ultimum
postquam natus fuerit infans potest confirmari. Within five years after his
Birth, a Child may be confirmed: In elder Antiquity, little do I find, only
that the child was a Catechumen at seven: So the first. Apud Baleamon.
Interrogatory put to Timotheus Alexandrinus, mentions, (...), a child
catechized of about seven years of age.

And there shall be none admitted, etc.] The Participation of the blessed
Eucharist was anciently an immediate consequent of Confirmation or Baptism: His
obluta Plebs dives insignibus, ad Christi contendit altaria, dicens, and
introib^ b De iis qui inuiantur. c. 8.
ad Altar Dei, says Saint Ambrose (speaking of the white Vestments) The now
baptized flesh, decked wish this bravery, makes haste to the Altar of Christ,
saying, And I will go up to the Altar of God.

It is here said, That none shall communicate until they can say their
Catechism and be confirmed,] But shall they be admitted to the Eucharist always
when they can say their Catechism, and have been confirmed? This Rubric
seems to imply as much, but then withal it may be interpreted to intend that
Confirmation be delayed until Children come to years of better understanding
that is nigh unto 14.

CHAP. X. (A) The form of solemnization of Matrimony.
First the banes must be asked three several Sundays or holy days, in the
time of service, the people being present, after the accustomed manner.

And if the persons that would be married, dwell in diverse parishes, the banes
must be asked in both parishes, and the Curate of the one parish, shall not
solemnise Matrimony betwixt them, without a certificate of the banes being
thrice asked, from the Curate of the other parish. (B) At the day appointed for
solemnization of Matrimony, the persons to be married, (C) shall come into the
body of the Church, with their friends and neighbors: and there the Minister
shall thus say.

DEarly beloved (friends,) we are gathered together here in the sight of God,
and in the face of his congregation, to join together this man and this woman
in holy Matrimony; which is an honorable estate, instituted of God in
Paradise, in the time of man's innocence, signifying unto us the mystical union
that is betwixt Christ and his Church: which holy estate Christ adorned and
beautified with his presence and first miracle that he wrought in Can^ of
Galilee, and is commended of Sant Paul to be honorable among all men, and
therefore is not to be enterprised nor taken in hand unadvisedly, lightly, or
wantonly, to satisfy men's carnal lusts and appetites, like bruit beasts that
have no understanding: but reverently, discreetly, advisedly, soberly, and in
the fear of God, duly, considering the causes for which Matrimony was ordained.
One was the procreation of children, to be brought up in the fear and nurture
of the Lord, and praise of God. Secondly it was ordained for a remedy against
sin, and to avoid fornication that such persons that have not the gift of
continence might marry and keep themselves undefiled members of Christ's body.
Thirdly for the mutual society, help, and comfort, that the one ought to have
of the other, both in prosperity and adversity, into the which holy estate
these two persons present come now to be joined. Therefore, if any man can show
any just cause, why they may not lawfully be joined together: let him now
speak, or else hereafter for ever hold his peace.

And also speaking to the persons that shall be married, he shall say.

I Require and charge you (as you will answer at the dreadful day of judgment
when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed) that if either of you do
know any impediment why ye may not be lawfully joined together in Matrimony,
that ye confess it. For be ye well assured, that so many as be coupled
together, otherwise then Gods word does allow, are not joined together by God,
neither is their Matrimony lawful.

At which day of marriage, if any man do allege and declare any impediment why
they may not be coupled together in Matrimony, by Gods law or the laws of this
Realm, and will be bound, and sufficient suerties with him, to the parties: or
else put in a caution to the full vallue of such charges, as the persons to be
married does sustain, to prove his allegation: then the solemnization must be
deferred unto such time as the truth be tried. If no impediment be alleged,
then shall the Curate say unto the man.

N (D) Will thou have this Woman to thy wedded wife, to live together after
Gods ordinance, in the holy estate of Matrimony? Will thou love her, comfort
her, honor and keep her, in sickness and in health? And forsaking all other,
keep thee only to her, so long as you both shall live:

The man shall answer.

I will.

Then shall the Minister say to the woman.

N Will thou have this man to thy wedded husband, to live together after Gods
ordinance, in the holy estate of Matrimony: will thou obey him and serve him,
love, honor, and keep him in sickness and in health, and forsaking all other,
keep thee only unto him, so long as you both shall live:

The woman shall answer.

I will.

Then shall the Minister say.

(E) Who gives this woman to be married unto this man?

And (F) the Minister receiving the woman at her father or friends hands, shall
cause the man to take the woman (G) by the right hand, and so either to give
their troth to other: The man first saying.

I N. take thee N. to my wedded wife, to have and to hold from this day
forward, for better, for worse, for richer, for poorer, in sickness, and in
health, to love, and to cherish, till death us depart, according to Gods holy
ordinance: and therefore I pledge thee my troth.

Then shall they loose their hands, and the woman taking again the man by the
right hand, shall say.

I N. take thee N. to my wedded husband, to have and to hold from this day
forward, for better for worse, for richer for poorer, in sickness and in
health, to love, cherish, and to obey, till death us depart, according to Gods
holy ordinance: And thereto I give thee my troth.

Common Prayer. 1 B. of Edw. 6. Then shall they again loose their hands, and
(H) the man shall give unto the woman a Ring (I) laying the same upon the book
with the accustomed duty to the Minister and Clerk. And the Minister taking the
Ring shall deliver it unto the man to (K) put it upon the fourth finger of the
woman's left hand. And the man taught by the Minister, shall say, Then shall
they again loose their hands, and the man shall give unto the woman a Ring, and
other tokens of spousage, as gold or silver, laying the same upon the Book, and
the Priest taking the Ring etc.

With this ring I thee wed, (L) with my body I thee worship, and with all my
worldly goods I thee endow: In the name of the Father and of the Son* and of
the holy Ghost, Amen.

Then the man leaving the ring upon the fourth finger of the woman's left hand,
the Minister shall say.

Let us pray.

O Eternal God, creator and preserver of all mankind, giver of all spiritual
grace, the author of everlasting life: send thy blessing upon these thy
servants, this man and this woman, whom we bless in thy name, that as Isaac
and Rebecca [1 B. of Edw. 6. after braslets and Jewels of gold given of the one
to the other for tokens of their Matrimony] lived faithfully together, so these
persons may surely perform and keep the vow and covenant betwixt them made,
whereof this ring given and received, is a token and pledge, and may ever
remain in perfect love and peace together, and live according unto thy laws:
through Jesus Christ our Lord Amen.

Then shall the Minister join their right hands together, and say.

Those whom God has joined together, let no man put asunder.

Then shall the Minister speak unto the people.

FOrasmuch as N. and N. have consented together in holy wedlock, and have
witnessed the same before God and this company, and thereto have given and
pledged their troth either to other, and have declared the same by giving and
receiving [1 B, of Edw. 6. Gold and silver] of a ring, and by joining of hands:
I pronounce that they be man and wife together, in the name of the father, of
the son, and of the holy Ghost. Amen.

(M) and the Minister shall add this blessing.

GOD the father [1 B. of Edw. 6. + God the son, God the holy Ghost, bless,
preserve, and keep you, the Lord mercifully with his favor look upon you, and
so fill you with all spiritual benediction and grace, that you may so live
together in this life, that in the world to come, you may have life
everlasting, Amen.

Then [1 B. of Edw. 6. shall they go into the Quire and the Ministers or Clerks
shall say etc.] the Ministers or Clerks going to the Lords table, shall say or
sing this psalm following.

BLessed are all they that fear the Lord: and walk in his ways. For thou shall
eat the labor of thy hands: O well is thee, and happy shall thou be.

Thy wife shall be as the fruitful vine: upon the walls of thine house.

Thy children like the Olive branches: round about thy table.

Lo, thus shall the man be blessed: that fears the Lord.

The Lord from out of Slou shall bless thee: that thou shall see Jerusalem in
prosperity all thy life long.

Yea that thou shall see thy childrens children: and peace upon Israel.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son. etc,

As it was in the beginning, is now. etc.

Or else this Psalm following Deus misereatur.

GOD be merciful unto us, and bless us: and show us the light of his
countenance, and be mercifully unto us. Psalm. 97.]


That thy way may be known upon the earth: thy saving health among all nations.

Let the people praise thee, O God: yea let all the people praise thee.

O let the nations rejoice and be glad: for thou shall judge the folk
righteously, and govern the nations upon the earth.

Let the people praise thee O God: let all the people praise thee.

Then shall the earth bring forth her increase: and God even our God, shall
give us his blessing.

God shall bless us: and all the ends of the world shall fear him.

Glory be the Father and to the Son. etc.

As it was in the beginning, is now. etc.

The Psalm ended, and the man and the woman kneeling before the Lords table, the
Minister standing at the [1 B. of Edw. 6. Altar] table, and turning his face
toward them, shall say.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Answer.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Minister.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Our Father which are in heaven etc.

And led us not into temptation.

Answer.

But deliver us from evil Amen.

Minister.

O Lord save thy servant and thy handmaid,

Answer.

Which put their trust in thee.

Minister.

O Lord send them help from thy holy place.

Answer.

And evermore defend them.

Minister.

Be unto them a tower of strength.

Answer.

From the face of their enemy.

Minister.

O Lord hear our prayer.

Answer.

And let our cry come unto thee.

Minister.

O God of Abraham, God of Isaac, God of Jacob, bless these thy servants, and
sow the seed of eternal life in their minds, that whatsoever in thy holy word
they shall profitably learn, they may indeed fulfill the same: Look O Lord
mercifully upon them from heaven, and bless them. And as thou did send thy
blessing upon Abraham and Sarah to their great comfort: so vouchsafe to send
thy blessing upon these thy servants, that they obeying thy will, and always
being in safety under thy protection, may avide in thy love unto their lives
end, through Jesu Christ our Lord, Amen.

Omitted This prayer next following, shall be omitted, where the woman is in
Bucer. past child birth.

O Merciful Lord and heavenly father, by whose gracious gift mankind is
increased: we beseech thee assist with thy blessing these two persons, that
they may both be fruitful in procreation of children, and also live together so
long in Godly love and honesty, that they may see their childrens children,
unto the third and fourth generation, unto thy praise and honor, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, Amen.

O God, which by thy mighty power have made all things of naught, which also
after other things set in order, did appoint that out of man (created after
thine own image and similitude) woman should take her beginning, and knitting
them together, did teach that it should never be lawful to put a sunder
those, wham thou by matrimony had made one, O God which have consecrated the
state of matrimony to such an excellent mystery, that in it is signified and
represented the spiritual marriage and unity betwixt Christ and his Church:
look mercifully upon these thy servants, that both this man may love his wife,
according to thy word (as Christ did love his spouse the Church, who gave
himself for it, loving and cherishing it even as his own flesh) and also that
this woman may be loving and amiable to her husband as Rachel, wise as Rebecca,
faithful and obedient as Sarah, and in all quietness sobriety, and peace, be a
follower of holy and Godly matrons. O Lord bless them both, and grant them to
inherit thy everlasting kingdom, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Then shall the Minister say.

ALmighty God, which at the beginning did create our first parents Adam and
Eve, and did sanctify and join them together in marriage: pour upon you the
riches of his grace, sanctify and [1 B. of Edw. 6. ] bless you that ye may
please hun both in body and soul and live together in holy love unto your lives
end, Amen.

[Then shall begin the Communion] and after the Gospel shall be said a Sermon,
The words included thus [] Omited in the 1. B. of Edw. 6.
wherein ordinarily (so often as there is any marriage) the Office of man and wife
shall be declared, according to holy Scripture. Or if there be no Sermon, the
Minister shall read this that follows.

AL ye which be married, or which intend to take the holy estate of Matrimony
upon you, here what holy Scripture does say, as touching the duty of husbands
toward their wives, and wives toward their husbands.

Saint Paul (in his Epistle to the Ephesians the fifth Chapter) does give this
commandment to all married men, ye husbands love your wives even as Christ
loved the Church, and has given himself for it, to sanctify it, purging it in
the fountain of water, through the word, that he might make it unto himself a
glorious congregation, not having spot or wrinckle, or any such thing, but that
it should be holy and blamlesse. So men are bound to love their own wives as
their own bodies. He that loves his own wife, loves himself. For never did
any man hate his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it, even as the Lord
does the congregation. For we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his
bones. For this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and shall be joined
unto his wife, and they two shall be one flesh. This mystery is great: but I
speak of Christ and of the congregation. Nevertheless, let every one of you so
love his own wife, even as him self.

Likewise the same saint Paul (writing to the Colossians) speaks thus to all
men that be married. Ye men love your wives, and be not bitter unto them.
Colos. 4.


Hear also what Saint Peter the Apostle of Christ, which was himself a married
man, says unto all men that are married, ye husbands dwell with your wives
according 1 Pet. 3.
to knowledge, giving honor unto the wife, as unto the weaker vessel, and as
heirs together of the grace of life, so that your prayers be not hindered.

Hitherto ye have heard the duty of the husband toward the wife. Now likewise
ye wives hear and learn your duty toward your husbands, even as it is plainly
set forth in holy scripture.

SAint Paul (in the forenamed Epistle to the Ephesians) teaches you thus, Ye
Ephesians. 5.
women submit your selves unto your husbands, as unto the Lord: for the husband
is the wives head, even as Christ is the head of the Church. And he also is the
savior of the whole body. Therefore as the Church and congregation is subject
unto Christ so likewise let the wives be also in subjection unto their own
husbands in all things. And again he says, let the wife reverence her husband.
And in his epistle to the Colossians) saint Paul gives you this short Lesson,
Ye wives submit your selves unto your own husbands, as it is convenient in the
Lord.

Saint Peter does also instruct you very godly, thus saying, Let wives be
subject to their own husbands, so that if any obey not the word, they may be
won without the word, by the conversation of the wives, while they behold your
chaste conversation coupled with fear. Whose apparel let it not be outward with
braided hair and trimming about with Gold, either in putting on of gorgeous
apparel: but let the hid man which is in the heart, be without all corruption,
so that the spirit, be mild and quiet, which is a precious thing in the sight
of God. For after this manner (in the old time) did the holy women which
trusted in God, apparel themselves, being subject to their own husbands: As
Sara obeyed Abraham, calling him Lord, whose daughters ye are made doing well,
and not being dismayed with any fear.

The new married persons (the same day of their marriage) (N) must receive the
holy Communion.

(O) The order for the visitation of the Sick.
The Minister entering into the sick persons house, shall say.

Peace be in this house, and to all that dwell in it.

Common Prayer. 1. B. of Edw. 6. When he comes into the sick persons presence,
he shall say, kneeling down. When he comes into the sick persons presence he
shall say this Psalm. Hear my prayer O Lord, and consider my desire, hearken
unto me for thy truth and righteousness sake. etc.

Glory be to the Father and to the Son etc.

As it was in the Beginning. etc.

With this Anthem.

REmember not Lord our iniquities, nor the iniquities of our forefathers: spare
us good Lord, spare thy people whom thou have redeemed with thy most precious
blood and be not angry with us for ever.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Our father which art in heaven. etc.

And lead us not into temptation.

Answer.

But deliver us from evil Amen.

Minister.

O Lord save thy servant.

Answer.

Which puts, his trust in thee.

Minister.

Send him help from thy holy place.

Answer.

And evermore mightily defend him.

Minister.

Let the enemy have none advantage of him.

Answer.

Nor the wicked approach to hurt him.

Minister.

Be unto him (O Lord) a strong tower.

Answer.

From the face of his enemy.

Minister.

Lord hear our [1 B. of Edw. 6. my] prayers.

Answer.

And let our [1 B. of Edw. 6.] cry come unto thee.]

The Minister. [1 B. of Ed. 6. Let us pray.]

O Lord look down from heaven, behold, visit and relieve this thy servant, look
upon him with the eyes of thy mercy, give him comfort and sure confidence in
thee, defend him from the danger of the enemy, and keep him in perpetual peace
and safety, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

HEar us almighty and most merciful God and Savior, extend thy accustomed
goodness to this thy servant, which is grieved with sickness, visit him (O
Lord) as thou did visit Peter's wives mother, and the Captains servant, So
visit and restore to this sick person his former health (if it be thy will) or
else give him grace so to take thy visitation, that after this painful life
ended, he may dwell with thee in life everlasting, Amen.

Then shall the Minister exhort the sick person after this form, or other like.

DEarly beloved, know this, that Almighty God is the Lord of life and death,
and over all things to them pertaining, as youth, strength, health, age,
weakness, and sickness. Wherefore, whatsoever your sickness is, know you
certainly that it is Gods visitation. And for what cause soever this sickness
is sent unto you, whether it be to try your patience for the example of other,
and that your faith may be found in the day of the Lord laudable, glorious, and
honorable, to the increase of glory and endless felicity, or else it be sent
unto you to correct and amend in you whatsoever does offend the eyes of your
heavenly Father: know you certainly, that if you truly repent you of your sins,
and bear your sickness patiently, trusting in Gods mercy, for his dear Son
Jesus Christ sake, and render unto him humble thanks for his fatherly
visitation, submitting your self wholly to his will, it shall turn to your
profit, and help you forward in the right way that leads unto everlasting
life.

If the person visited be very sick, then the Curate may end his exhortation in
this place.

Take therefore in good worth the chastisment of the Lord. For whom the Lord
loves, he chastises: Yea (as St. Paul says) he scourges every son which he
receives. If ye endure chastisement, he offers himself unto you, as unto his
own children. What son is he that the Father chastises not? If ye be not under
correction (whereof all true children are pattakers) then are ye bastards, and
not children. Therefore, seeing that when our carnal fathers ^o correct us, we
reverently obey them: shall we not now much rather be obedient to our spiritual
Father, and so live: And they for a few days do chastise us after their own
pleasure: but he does chastise us for our profit, to the intent he may make us
partakers of his holiness. These words (good brother) are Gods words, and
written in holy scripture for our comfort and instruction, that we should
patiently and with thanksgiving, bear our heavenly Fathers correction,
whenever by any manner of adversity it shall please his gracious goodness to
visit us. And there should be no greater comfort to Christian persons, then to
be made like unto Christ, by suffering patiently adversities, troubles, and
sicknesses. For he himself went not up to joy, but first he suffered pain, he
entered not into his glory before he was cru^ified. So truly our way to eternal
Joy, is, to suffer here with Christ, and our door to enter into eternal life,
is gladly to die with Christ, that we may rise again from death, and dwell with
^^m in everlasting life. New therefore taking your sickness (which is thus
profitable for you) patiently, I exhort you in the name of God, to remember the
profession which you made unto God in your Baptism. And forasmuch as after this
life, there is account to be given unto the righteous Judge, of whom all must
be judged without respect of persons: I require you to examine your self, and
your state both toward God and man, so that accusing and condemning your self
for your own faults, you may find mercy at our heavenly Fathers hand for
Christ's sake, and not be accused and condemned ^i^ that fearful Judgment.
Therefore I shall shortly rehearse the Articles of our Faith, that you may know
whether you do believe as a Christian man should, or ^o.

(P) Then the Minister shall rehearse the Articles of the Eaith, saying thus,

Do thou believe in God the Father Almighty.

And so forth as it is in Baptism.

Then shall the Minister examine (Q) whether he be in charity with all the
world: exhorting him to forgive from the bottom of his heart, all persons that
have offended him; and if he have offended other, to ask them forgiveness. And
where he has done injury or wrong to any man, that he make amends to the
uttermost of his power. And if he have not before disposed his goods, let him
then make his will. But men must be often admonished that they set an order for
their temporal goods and lands when they be in health, and also declare his
debts what he owes, and what is owing unto him, for discharging of his
conscience, and quietness of his executors.

These words before rehearsed, may be said before the Minister begin his
Prayer, as he shall see cause.

(R) The Minister may not forget nor omit to move the sick person (and that
most instantly) to liberality toward the poor. Omitted in Bucer.


(S) Here shall the sick person make a special confession, if he feel his
conscience troubled with any weighty matter. After which confession the
Minister shall absolve him after this sort. [1 B. of Edw. 6.] and the same form
of Absolution shall be used in all private confessions.

OUr Lord Jesus Christ, who has left power to his Church to absolve all
sinners which truly repent and believe in him, of his great mercy forgive thee
thine offenses, and by his authority committed to me, I absolve thee from all
thy sins, In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost,
Amen.

And then the Minister shall say the Collect following.

Let us pray.

O Most merciful God, which according to the multitude of thy mercies, do so
put away the sins of those which truly repent, that thou remembrest them no
more: open thine eye of mercy upon this thy servant, who most earnestly
desires pardon and forgiveness. Renew in him (most loving Father) whatsoever
has been decayed by the fraud and malice of the devil, or by his own carnal
will and frailness, preserve and continue this sick member in the unity of thy
Church, consider his contrition, accept his tears, assuage his pain, as shall be
seen to thee most expedient for him. And forasmuch as he puts his full trust
only in thy mercy, impute not to him his former sins, but take him unto thy
favor, through the merits of thy most dearly beloved Son Jesus Christ, Amen.

Then the Minister shall say this Psalm.

In thee O Lord have I put my trust,]

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son. etc. In to Domine speravi Psalm. 21.


As it was in the beginning, is now. etc.

Adding this. [1 B of Edw. 6. Adding this Anthem.]

O Savior of the World save us, which by thy cross and precious blood have
redeemed us, help us we beseech thee O God.

Then shall the Minister say.

THE almighty Lord, which is a most strong tower to all them that put their
trust in him, to whom all things in heaven, in earth, and under the earth do
bow and obey, be now and evermore thy defense, and make thee know and feel that
there is none other name under heaven given to man, in whom and through whom
thou mapest receive health and salvation, but only the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, Amen.

1 B. of Edw. 6.

If the sick person desire to be (T) anointed, then shall the Priest anoint
This Rubric and Prayer omitted in Bucer.
him upon the fore head, or breast only, making the sign of the cross saying
thus.

As with this visible oil thy body outwardly is anointed: so our heavenly
father, Almighty God, grant of his infinite goodness that thy soul inwardly
may be anointed with the holy ghost, who is the spirit of all strength, comfort
relief, and gladness. And vouchsafe for his great mercy (if it be his blessed
will) to restore unto thee thy bodily health, and strength,, to serve him; and
send thee release of all thy pains, troubles, and diseases, both in body and
mind. And howloever his goodness (by his divine and unsearchable providence)
shall dispose of thee: we his unworthy Ministers and servants, humbly beseech
the eternal Majesty, to do with thee according to the multitude of his
innumerable mercies, and to pardon thee all thy sins and offenses committed by
all thy bodily senses, passions, and carnal affections; who also vouchsafe
mercifully to grant unto thee ghostly strength by his holy spirit, to withstand
and overcome all temptations and assaults of thine adversary, that in no wise
he prevail against thee, but that thou may have perfect victory, and triumph
against the, Devil, sin, and death, through Christ our Lord, who by his death
has overcome the Prince of death, and with the Father and the holy Ghost
evermore lives and reigns, God world without end. Amen.

How long will thou forget me Lord. etc.

Glory be to the Father. etc. Psalm. 13.


As it was in the beginning. etc.

Edition Lat. Buceri. Si videtur commodum, dicatur etiam hic Psalmus, pro
usitata, ante haec tempora, unctione. usque qu^ Domine. etc.

(V) The Communion of the sick.
FOR as much as all mortal men be subject to many sudden perils, diseases, and
sicknesses, and ever uncertain what time they shall depart out of this life:
Therefore to the intent they may be always in a readiness to dye, whenever
it shall please almighty God to call them, the Curates shall diligently from
time to time, but specially in the plague time, exhort their Parishioners to
the often receiving (in the Church) of the holy Communion of the body and blood
of our Savior Christ: which (if they do) they shall have no cause in their
sudden visitation to be unquiet for lack of the same. But if the sick person be
not able to come to the Church, and yet is desirous to receive the Communion in
his house then he must give knowledge over night, or else early in the morning
to the Curate, signifying also how many be appointed to Communicate with him: 1
B. of Edw. 6. And if the same day there be a celebration of the holy Communion
in the Church, (W) then shall the Priest reserve (at the open Communion, so
much of the Sacrament of the Body and Blood, as shall serve the sick person,
and so many as shall Communicate with him (if there be any) And so soon as
conveniently he may, after the Communion ended in the Church, shall go and
Minister the same, first to those that are appointed to Communicate with the
sick (if there be any) and last of all to the sick person himself. But before
the Curate distribute the holy Communion, the appointed general Confession must
be made in the name of the Communicants, the Curate adding the Absolution with
the Comfortable sentences of Scripture following in the open Communion, and
after the Communion ended, the Collect. Almighty and and everliving God we most
heartily thank thee. etc.

But if the day be not appointed for the open Communion in the Church, then
(upon convenient warning given) the Curate shall come and visit the sick Person
afore-noon.

Common Prayer. 1 B. of Edw. 6. And having a convenient Place in the sick man's
house where the Curate may reverently Minister, and a good number to receive
the Communion with the sick person, with all things necessary for the same, he
shall there minister the holy Communion. And having a convenient place in the
sick man's house (where he may reverently celebrate) with all things necessary
for the same, and not being otherwise let with the Bublick service, or any
other just impediment: he shall there celebrate the holy Communion, after such
form, and sort as hereafter is appointed.

The celebration of the holy Communion for the sick.

O praise the Lord all ye nations: laud him all ye people: for his merciful
kindness is confirmed toward us, and the truth of the Lord endures for ever.

Glory be to the Father etc.

Lord have mercy upon us. [without any more repetition] [] Omitted by Bucer.
Christ have mercy upon us. Lord have mercy upon us. The Priest. [Omitted by
Bucer. The Lord be with you. Answer. And with thy Spirit Mm

Common Prayer. The Colect. [1 B. of Edw. 6.

Let us pray.

ALmighty everliving God, maker of mankind which do correct those whom thou
do love and chastisest every one whom thou do receive, we beseech thee to
have mercy upon this thy servant visited with thy hand, and to (...) he may
take his sickness patiently, and recover his bodily health (if it be thy
gracious will) and whenever his soul shall depart from the body it may
without spot be presented unto thee: through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Epistle.

MY son despise not the correction of the Lord, neither faint thou when thou
art rebuked of him, for whom the Lord loves, him he corrects, yea and he
scourges every son whom he receives.

The Gospel.

VErily, verily, I say unto you; he that hears my word, and believes on him
that sent me has everlasting life, and shall not come unto damnation, but he
passes from death unto life.

1 B. of Edw. 6. The Preface.

The Lord be with you.

Answer.

And with thy spirit.

Lift up your hearts etc. unto the end of the Canon.]

Common Prayer.

At the time of the distribution of the holy Sacrament, the Priest shall first
receive the Communion himself, and after minister to them that be appointed to
communicate with the sick [1 B. of Edw. 6. if there be any] and then to the
sick person: and the sick person shall always desire some either of his own
house, or else of his neighbors, to receive the holy Communion with him, for
that shall be to him a singular great comfort, and of their part a great token
of charity.

And if there be more sick persons to be visited the same day that the Curate
does celebrate in any sick man's house, then shall the Curate there reserve so
much of the Sacrament of the Body and blood; as shall serve the other sick
persons, and such as be appointed to Communicate with them (if there be any)
And shall immediately carry it and minister it unto them.

But if any man [either by reason of extremity of sicknese, or for lack of
warning Editio Lat. Buceri sed si sub vesperam aut noctu subito quls in agone
positus petit communionem, is docetur a Curato. etc.
in due time to the (X) Curate, or for lack of company to receive with him, or
by any other just impediment] do not receive the Sacrament of Christ's body and
blood: then the Curate shall instruct him, that if he do truly repent him of
his sins, and steadfastly believe that Jesus Christ has suffered death upon the
cross for him, and shed his blood for his redemption, earnestly remembering the
benefits he has thereby, and giving him hearty thanks therefore: he does eat
and drink the body and blood of our Savior Christ profitable to his souls
health, although he do not receive the Sacrament with his mouth.

Common Prayer. 1 B. of Edw. 6. When the sick person is visited, and receives
the holy Communion all at one time: then the Minister for more expidition shall
cut of the form of the visitation at the Psalm; (In thee O Lord have I put my
trust) and go straight to the Communion. When the sick person is visited and
receives the holy Communion all at one time then the Priest for more
expedition shall use this order at the visitation.

The Anthem.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Our Father which art in heaven etc.

And lead us not into temptation.

Answer.

But deliver us from evil. Amen.

Let us pray.

O Lord Look down from heaven etc.

With the first part of the exhortation and all other things unto the Psalm.

In thee O Lord have I put my trust etc.

And if the sick person desire to be anointed, then shall the Priest use the
appointed prayer without any Psalm.

Common Prayer.

In the time of plage, sweat, or such other like contagious times of sicknesses
or diseases when none of the Parish or neighbors can be gotten to Communicate
with the sick in their houses for ^ea^ of the infection; upon special request
of the diseased the Minister may alo^^ Communicate with him.

The order for the burial of the dead.
(Y) The Minister meeting the Corpse at the Church style, shall say. Or else the
Ministers and Clarks shall sing. And so go either unto the Church, or toward
the grave.

(Z) I Am the resurrection and the life (says the Lord) He that believes in
me, John 9.
yea though he were dead, yet shall he live. And whosoever lives, and
believes in me, shall not die for ever.

I Know that my redeemer lives, and that I shall rise out of the ^arth in the
Job. 19.
last day, and shall be covered again with my skin, (...) shall see God in my
flesh, yea, and I my self shall be hold him, not with other, but with these
same eyes.

WE brought nothing into this world, neither may we carry anything out of 1 Timothy 7.
this world. The Lord gives, and the Lord takes away. Even as it pleases the
Lord, so comes things to pass: Blessed he the name of the Job. 1.
Lord.

When they come at the grave, whiles the corpse is made ready to be laid into
the earth, the Minister shall say, or the Minister and Clerks shall sing.

MAn that is born of a woman, has but a short time to live, and is full of
misesery, he comes up, and is cut down like a flour. He flees as it were a
shadow, and never continues in one stay. In the midst of life we be in death.
Of whom may we seek for succor but of thee, O Lord, which for our sins justly
are displeased? Yet O Lord God most holy, O Lord most mighty, O holy and most
merciful Savior, deliver us not into the bitter pains of eternal death. Thou
know Lord the secrets of our hearts, shut not up thy merciful eyes to our
prayers: But spare us Lord most holy, O God most mighty, O holy and merciful
Savior, thou most worthy Judge eternal, suffer us not at our last hour for any
pains of death to fall from thee.

Common Prayer. 1 B. of. Edw. 6. Then while the earth shall be cast upon the
body, by some standing by, the Minister shall say, Then the Priest casting
earth upon the Corpse, shall say, Forasmuch as it has pleased almighty God, of
his great mercy, to take unto himselfthe soulof our dear brother here departed,
we therefore commit his body to the ground, earth to earth, ashes to ashes,
dust to dust, (Z) in sure and certain hope of resurrection to eternal life,
through our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile Body, that it may be
like to his glorious Body, according to the mighty working, whereby he is able
to subdue all things to himself. I commend this soul to God the Father
Almighty, and thy Body to the ground, etc.

Then shall be said, or sung.

I Heard a voice from Heaven, saying unto me, Write from henceforth, Blessed
are the dead which die in the Lord: Even so says the Spirit, that they rest
from their labors.

1 B. of Edw. 6.

Let us pray.

WE commend into thy hands of mercy, (most merciful Father) the soul of, this
our Brother departed, N. And his body we commit to the Earth, beseeching thine
infinite goodness to give us grace to live in thy fear and love, and to die in
thy favor; that when the Judgment shall come which thou have committed to thy
well-beloved Son, both this our Brother, and we, may be found acceptable in thy
sight, and receive that blessing which thy well-beloved Son shall then
pronounce to all that love and fear thee, saying, Come ye blessed Children of
my Father, Receive the Kingdom prepared for you before the beginning of the
world. Grant this merciful Eather, for the Honor of Jesus Christ our only
Savior, Mediator, and Advocate. Amen.

This Prayer shall also be added.

ALmighty God, we give thee hearty thanks for this thy servant, whom thou have
delivered from the miseries of this wretched world, from the body of death and
all temptation: And as we trust, have brought his soul, which he committed into
thy holy hands, into sure consolation and rest: Grant, we beseech thee, that at
the day of Judgment his soul, and all the souls of the elect departed out of
this life, may with us, and we with them, fully receive thy promises, and be
made perfect altogether, through the glorious resurrection of thy Son Jesus
Christ our Lord.

These Psalms, with other suffrages following, are to be said in the Church,

either before or after the burial of the Corpse.

I am well pleased that the Lord, etc. Psalm. 116.

Glory to the Father, etc. Note that this Psalm is to be said after the order
that follows.


As it was in the beginning, etc.

Praise the Lord, O my soul, etc. Psalm 146.

Glory to the Father, etc.

As it was in the beginning, etc. [omitted by Bucer.]

O Lord thou have searched me out etc. Psalm. 139.

Glory be to the Father. etc. As it was in the beginning. etc.

Then shall follow this Lesson, taken out of the 15 Chapter to the Corinthians,
the first Epistle.

CHrist is risen from the dead, and become the first fruits of them that slept.
For 1 Cor. 15. 10.
by a man came death, and by a man came the resurrection of the dead. For as by
Adam all die, even so by Christ shall all be made alive, but every man in his
own order. The first is Christ, then they that are Christ's at his coming. Then
comes the end, when he has delivered up the kingdom to God the Father, when
he has put down all rule, and all authority and power. For he must reign till
he have put all his enemies under his feet. The last enemy that shall be
destroyed, is death. For he has put all things under his feet. But when he
says, All things are put under him, it is manifest that he is excepted which
did put all things under him. When all things are subdued unto him, then shall
the son also himself be subject unto him that put all things under him, that
God may be all in all. Else what do they which are baptized over the dead, if
the dead rise not at all? Why are they then baptized over them? yea, and why
stand we always then in jeopardy? By our rejoicing which I have in Christ Jesu
our Lord, I die daily. That I have fought with beasts at Ephesus after the
manner of men, what advantageth it me, if the dead rise not again? Let us eat
and drink, for to morrow we shall die. Be not ye deceived, evil words corrupt
good manners. Awake truly out of sleep, and sin not. For some have not the
knowledge of God. I speak this to your shame. But some man will say, How arise
the dead? With what body shall they come? Thou fool, that which thou sowest, is
not quickened except it die. And what sowest thou? thou sowest not that body
that shall be, but bare corn, as of wheat or some other: But God gives it a
body at his pleasure, to every seed his own body. All flesh is not one manner of
flesh: but there is one manner of flesh of men, another manner of flesh of
beasts, another of fishes, another of birds. There are also celestial bodies,
and there are bodies terrestrial. But the glory of the celestial is one, and
the glory of the terrestrial is another. There is one manner glory of the sun,
another glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars. For one star
differs from another in glory: So is the resurrection of the dead. It is sown
in corruption, it rises again in incorruption: it is sown in dishonor, it
rises again in honor: it is sown in weakness, it rises again in power: it is
sown a natural body, it rises again a spiritual body. There is a natural body,
and there is a spiritual body: as it is also written, The first man Adam was
made a li^ing soul, and the last Adam was made a quickening spirit. Howbeit,
that is not first which is spiritual, but that which is natural, and then that
which is spiritual. The first man is of the earth earthy: The second man is the
Lord from Heaven, heavenly. As is the earthy, such are they that be earthy. And
as is the heavenly, such are they that are heavenly. And as we have born the
image of the earthy, so shall we bear the image of the heavenly. This say I
brethren, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God, neither does
corruption inherit incorruption. Behold, I show you a mystery. We shall not all
sleep, but we shall be changed and that in a moment, in the twinkling of an
eye, by the last trump. For the trump shall blow, and the dead shall rise
incorruptible, and we shall be changed: For this corruptible must put on
incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality. When this corruptible
has put on incorruption, and this mortal has put on immortality, then shall
be brought to pass the saying that is written, Death is swallowen up Into
victory: Death where is thy sting? Hell where is thy victory? The sting of
death is sin, and the strength of sin is the law: but thanks be unto God, which
has given us victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. Therefore my dear
brethren, be ye steadfast and unmovable, always rich in the work of the Lord,
forasmuch as ye know how that your labor is not in vain in the Lord.

The Lesson ended, the Minister shall say,

Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Our Father, etc.

And leav us not, etc.

Answer.

But deliver us from evil. Amen.

1 B. of Edw. 6.

Priest.

Enter not, O Lord, into Judgment with thy servant.

Answer.

For in thy sight no living creature shall be justified.

Priest.

From the gates of hell.

Answer.

Deliver their souls, O Lord.

Priest.

I believe to see the goodness of the Lord.

Answer.

In the land of the living.

Priest.

O Lord graciously hear my Prayer.

Answer.

And let my cry come unto thee.

Let us pray.

O Lord, with whom do live the Spirits of them that be dead, and in whom the
souls of them that be elected, after they be delivered from the burden of the
flesh, be in joy and felicity. Grant unto this thy servant, that the sins which
he committed in this world be not imputed unto him, but that he escaping the
gates of hell, and pains of eternal darkness: may ever dwell in the region of
light, with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the place where is no weeping,
sorrow, nor heaviness, and when that dreadful day of the general resurrection
shall come, make him to rise also with the just and righteous, and receive this
body again to glory, then made pure and incorruptible; set him on the right
hand of thy Son Jesus Christ, among thy holy and elect, that then he may hear
with them these most sweet and comfortable words, Come ye blessed of my Father,
possess the kingdom which has been prepared for you from the beginning of the
world. Grant this, we beseech thee, O merciful Father, through Jesus Christ our
Mediator and Redeemer, Amen.

Minister.

ALmighty God, with whom do live the spirits of them that depart hence in the
Lord, and in whom the souls of them that be elected, after they be delivered
from the burden of the flesh, be in joy and felicity: we give thee hearty
thanks, for that it has pleased thee to deliver this N. our brother out of the
Miseries of this sinful world, beseeching thee that it may please thee of thy
gracious goodness, shortly to accomplish the number of thine elect, and to
hasten thy kingdom, that we with this our brother, and all other departed in
the true faith of thy holy name, may have our perfect consummation and bliss
both in body and soul, in thy eternal and everlasting glory, Amen.

The Collect.

O Merciful God, the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is the resurrection
This Collect is in the Communion office in the 1. B. of Edw. 6.
and the life, in whom whosoever believes, shall live, though he die, and
whosoever lives, and believes in him, shall not die eternally, who also
taught us (by his holy Apostl^ Paul) not to be ^or^y as men without hope, for
them that sleep in him: We meekly beseech thee (O father) to raise us from the
death of sin, unto the l^^e of righteousness, that when we shall depart this
life, we may rest in him, as out hope is this our brother does: and that at the
general resurrection in the last day,

1 B. of Edw. 6. We may be found acceptable in thy sight, and receive that
blessing which thy well beloved son shall then pronouce to all that love and
fear thee, saying, come ye blessed children of my Father, receive the kingdom
prepared for you from the beginning of the World: grant this, we beseech thee,
O merciful Father, through Jesus Christ our Mediator and Redeemer. Amen. Both
we and this our Brother departed, receiving again our bodies, and rising again
in thy most gracious favor may with all thine Elect saints obtain eternal joy.
Grant this, O Lord God, by the means of our Advocate Jesus Christ: which with
thee and the holy Ghost, lives and reigns one God for ever, Amen.

1 B. of Edw. 6.

(BB) The Celebration of the holy Communion when there is a burial of the dead.

Like as the heart desires the water brooks etc. Psalm. 42.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

As it was in the beginning etc.

The Collect.

O merciful God etc. as in the last Collect of the Common Prayer.

The Epistle.

I would not brethren that you should be ignorant etc. 1 These. 4.

The Gospel.

Jesus said unto his Disciples and to the Jews etc. John 6.

Annotations upon CHAP. X.
(A.) The Matrimoniael Office very necessary. Marriage ought to be blessed by a
Minister. Our Savior and the Primitive Fathers did it. Set forms anciently
used. (B.) Times prohibited for Marriage upon what Law founded. The Directory
as guilty of Popery therein as our Church. (C.) Marriage anciently celebrated
ad ostium Ecclesiae. (D.) Mutual consent of both Parties necessary. Espousals
what. (E) The giving of the Woman ancient. (F.) The excellence of the English
mode in receiving the Wife from the Priest. (G.) The right hand a Symbol of
fidelity. (H.) A Ring why given by the man. The ancient use of Rings. (I.) Why
the Ring is laid upon the Book. (K.) Why the Ring is put upon the 4th. finger,
the usual reason rejected. (L) With my Body, I thee worship, what meant by it.
(M.) The blessing ought to be by imposition of hands. (N.) why the married
couple to communicate. (O.) The visitation of the sick a necessary Office. (P.)
A sound faith how necessary. (Q.) Charity very necessary to a dying man. (R.)
So also Almes-giving. (S.) Absolution how commendable and comfortable. The
several kinds of absolution. (T.) Extreme unction why laid aside. (V.)
Communion of the sick vindicated. Calvin for it. (W.) Reservation of the
consecrated Elements anciently very laudable. (X.) The various customs of
bearing the Corpse to Church, Copiatae what. Why Hymns sung all along as the
corpse was born. (Y.) The Resurrection of our bodies ought to be the chief of
our Meditations upon funeral occasions. (Z) In sure and certain hopes, etc.
What meant by it. (AA.) Prayer for the Dead in the Romish Church implies not
Purgatory. The mind of the Breviary opened. Trentals what. (BB.) Communion at
Burials ancient, why now laid aside. The Original of Oblations, Doles at
Funerals, and Mortuaries.

THe solemnization of Matrimony. In all solemn Leagues, and federal Pacts, even
Ethnique Theology has always interested and engaged Vid. Smyrn. and Magnes.
Faed, apud Seld. Marm. At.
oaths, than by seals affixt; and where made between one King, and one Common
wealth and another; the counter-parts were usually deposited in the Temples of
their Gods. What contract, what confederacy can be imagined more noble, more
sacrosanct, than that between Man and Wife? Other leagues are the products of
reason of State, self, and earthly interest. That which constitutes this, is a
congenial disposition, and harmony of hearts: wherein natures grand intention
of specifical propagation is limited, knit, and restreined to one, by an
indissoluble tie of Love. But what can be said more in honor of it than this?
That though it be not a Sacrament in the most proper sense, it is yet made by
the Apostle, the relative parallel of that (...), great mystery, Ephesians. 5. 32.
and superlative Sacrament of (...) union with his Church. If then this
Ordinance be a league so supereminent; if all purposes of high consequence, are
to be blessed by the Word of God and Prayer; How can they answer it at the Bar
of Reason, which did proscribe from Matrimony (the Paramount of all earthly
concernments) Divine Invocation, and Saterdotal Benediction; without which
never was any initiation into that honorable State, thought duly performed?
Upon this very account, the place where it was celebrated amongst the Jews, was
styled Beth-Hillulah, The House of Praise; and amongst the Heathen there were
(...), Prayers preparatory to Marriage. The very score it was upon which our
Savior was bidden to the Marriage in Cana. if Haeres. 67.
Epiphanius deceives us not: (...); How honor able is wedlock, when our
Savior was invited to a mar^^ (...), to bless the married couple? And as he did
really bless marriage (...), with a fruitful womb, as the same father
conceives, so did he all Nuptials to come, by honoring with his presence, and
showing his first of Miracles in Cana of Gal^lee at a Wedding Feast. This
opinion of Epiphanius will be the more passable, if it be considered, that
Blessing, being one of the choicest of Ministerial Acts, was always dispensed
by the chief of Ministers, or persons of the most eminent note for sanctity. So
Melchisedech, the Priest of the most high God, blessed Abraham, Genesis 14. 19.
Upon the same account the typified Melchisedech, Christ, was desired to bless
little children, Math. 19. 13. As the famous Annor, in Loc.
Grotius supposed. And upon the same account, in the Primitive times, the
Bishop, and, if present, none but he, was to bless the people in public
Assemblies: who as he was for that very cause principal in the administration
of Matrimonial Ben^d^ction, so was he also most concerned in the approbation,
(...), says Epist. ad Polycarp. Tertull. de Monogamo.
Ignatius, it is ^^ that the married couple betroth themselves with the advice
of the Bishop. So a Virgin in Tertullian is said, petere maritum ab Episcopo,
to ask an Husband of the Bishop. Indeed as the condition of the times then was,
it could not in prudence be otherwise. The inconveniences of an unequal yoke,
or marrying of a Christian with an infidel, were innumerable; the society and
conversation could not be so mutual between them, the Christian woman could not
keep those correspondences which were of the interest of her Religion; and
possibly the secret meetings, which with much ado were then contrived might
thereby be betrayed, or unhappily discovered, to the ruin and destruction of
the Professors of Christianity.

Seeing then, no avoidance, the solemnization of this Ordinance must be granted
to have been performed by such a consecration; it is also next in order to be
supposed, that in this consecration set forms were used, considering withal,
that they were assigned to undergraduate concernmenrs; and considering that
such forms are still extant some, and others are presumable to have been so by
collateral implication. Under the Law, in the story of Ruth, two forms occur.
First, The Lord grant thee rest in the house of thy Husband, Chapter 1. 9. and 3.
1. Secondly, all the People and Elders said, The Lord make the woman that is
come into thine house, like Rachel and like Leah, which two did build the house
of Israel; and do thou worthily in Ephrata, and be thou famous in Bethlehem,
and let thy house be like the house of Pharez, (whom Tamar bare unto Judah) of
the seed which the Lord shall give thee of this young man, Chapter 4. v. 12. The
People and Elders could not certainly conspire so exactly in every syllable of
this Benediction, had it not been a known and usual form amongst them. Under
the Gospel, in the Primitive times I mean, told we are that such forms were,
though not what they were. In the Council of Can. 103.
Carthage decreed it is. Ut preces, vel Orationes seu missae, quae probatae
fuerint in Concilio, sive Praefationes, sive Commendationes, sive Manuum
Impositiones, ab omnibus celebrentur. That those forms of Prayers or Masses,
be they Prefaces, or Offices for interments, or of imposition of hands, which
have been allowed of by the Council, shall be celebrated b^ all. Where
Imposition of hands, must undoubtedly denote all Sacerdotal Benediction,
whether in Ordaining of Priests, or in absolving of penitents, or in confirming
of persons new baptized, or in the solemnization of matrimony, or whatever else
was performed that ceremony applied.

At the day appointed, etc.] The appointment of the day is left to the election
of the persons to be married, provided it be not from Advent Sunday until eight
days after the Epipha^y: from Septuagesima Sunday, until eight days after
Easter: from Rogation Sunday, until Trinity Sunday. These times being
prohibited. But by what Authority? Not by the Common Prayer, not by the
Calendar, not by any Homily, not by any Article, not by any Canon of our Church
since the Reformation. And therefore if there be any Popery, as is pretended by
Mr. Pryn, in this restraint, our Reformed Church is not to bear the blame. By
what Law then? By a Canon certainly, and of some General Council of this
Nation; for else all Manuals, and Linwood our famous Canonist, would not have
agreed so punctually in all the days prefixed. True it is this Canon is not, to
my reading, extant, but before the Reformation it was undoubtedly. And this is
the reason why our prohibition exceeds that of the Council of Trent, in the
last clause, viz. from Rogation Sunday, until Trinity Sunday, that Council
being confirmed by Pius 4th. far up into the State of Reformation. But were not
former Canons all made null upon our Reformation? No, in the Statute 25. H. 8.
c. 19. it is expressly provided, That such Canons as were made before that Act,
which be not contrariant, nor repugnant to the Kings Prerogative, the Laws,
Statutes, and Customs of the Realm, should be still used and executed, as they
were before the making of the Act. Now of these Canons this I take it was one:
but whereas it is charged with Popery, I consess I apprehend not where that
Popery is resident. Is it as the restraint relates to times of solemn
Humiliation? Then the Fathers of the Council of Laodicea, a Council to which
Popery is post-nated above three hundred years, stands guilty of Popery as well
as we, for that Council interdicted marriages for the whole time of Lent, as
has been showed before. Nay more, the Directory it self is guilty of Popery
too, for this excepts from this Ordinance, Days of public Humiliation. Is it
as it relates to Festivals? Mr. Dr. Cosens Cousening Devotions.
Pryn indeed says, Marriage is a Festival and joyful thing, and so most
seasonable, and suitable, for Festival and joyful times and seasons. But the
Directory says nay, and therefore interdicts the celebration of it upon all
Holy Days of the year, in these words, And we advice that marriage be not
solemnized on the Lords day; and the Lords day is the only Festival enjoined by
that Directory. The result of all is this, That the Assembly of Divines are, in
Mr. Pryns judgment, as guilty of Popery in these particulars, as Dr. Cozons.

Shall come into the body of the Church, etc.] The former mode was this, Church
door; where the Priest did both join their hands, and dispatch the greatest
part of che Matrimonial Office. There by the Ancient Law of this land, the
Husband, or his Parents, were to endow the Woman, his intended Wife, with the
portion of land precontracted for, provided it exceeded not a third of his
Estate, which was therefore called, Dos adostium Ecclesiae, D^we assigned at
the Church door. And though this usage was laid aside long before the
Reformation; yet did the Rubrique relating to it remain long after in some
Churches of this Kingdom. For in the Manual after the usage of York, after
these words, With this ring I wedd thee, and with this gold and silver I honor
thee, and with this gift I honor thee. Presently is subjoyned. The Priest
shall ask the Dow^y of the Woman. But this custom expiring so long ago, our
Reformers discreetly ordered this whole Office to be performed within the
Church, where the fuller congregation might afford more numerous witnesses of
the fact.

Will thou have this woman, etc.] This, with its parallel place, admits of a
Balsam. in Basil. ad Amphiloch.
(...). Whenever marriage ^^ performea, as it ought to be, of necessity the
consent of the parties to be joined must be had, be they free or under the
power of others. So Rebeccahs mother and brother demanded her consent, Genesis 24.
57. Secondly it is a pattern of the ancient form of Espousals, which regularly
did antecede the Nuptials: after these Espousals the woman in some places
presently co-habited with the man, as did Rebeccah; but continued untouched
until the marriage day. Digest. Tom. 1. l. 23. Tit. 1. de Sponsal. l. 2.
Sponsalia, Espousals they were called, a Spondendo, from promising. Nam mos
fuit veteribus stipulari and spondere sibi uxores futuras; For it was the
manner anciently for men to stipulate and contract a promise of the wives they
were to marry. So also the Canonists; Balsam. in Synod. 6,
(...). Espousals are the Promises of future marriages. And though these
Espousals were but promises, being made in the future sense, I will take; yet
did they anciently so far oblige, as neither part could, the consent of the
other obligee not first obtained, recede from that promise without the
undergoing a severe penalty.

Who gives this Woman, etc.] This custom of giving the woman to the Euripid.
in Androm.
Hermione answered Orestes, (...). Of my Nuptials my Father has the sole
governance, of such things I take no cognizance. So St. Paul is very express,
He that gives his daughter in marriage, does well, 1 Cor. 7. 38. This was done
upon three considerations, especially; First, as a Recognition of Parental
authority in their disposal. Secondly, as a submission of that weaker sex to
the direction and guidance of the stronger. Lastly, as an Argument of Maiden
modesty; for Ambrose de Abrahamo. l. 1. c. 9.
Non est virginalis pudoris eligere maritum. It sorteth not with the
bashfulness of a Virgin to choose her Husband.

The Minister receiving the woman, etc.] The admirable both wisdom and Dictum
nollem, I must now recant; to speak properly the woman, according to this rule
of our Church, is not given by man to man, but by man to God, that is to his
Minister, who is deputed by him to receive her; and by the same Minister God
bestows her upon the man; So that to the demand, Who gives this woman to be
married to this man? The answer is ready, God. The same God who gave Eve to
Adam in Paradise; he who was the first (...), who lead the first Bride, does by
this order of our Church, lead all who are comformable to it; yea who will
conform to the Primitive Institution. And as is the practice, so is the reason,
the same, viz. to instruct us to a sursum corda, to lift up our both hearts and
eyes thither, whence every good and perfect gift proceeds, especially this
Noble Donative, a good wife, which Solomon says, is from the Lord.

By the right hand,] The right hand, says Virg^l.
Servius, was dedicated by Numa Pompilius to Faith, En dextra fidesque, here is
my right hand, and with that my Faith so the Poet; the Orator alike, Cic.
Philip. 2.
Dextrae fidei testes esse solebant. Right hands were wont to be the great
evidences of fidelity.

The man shall give unto the Woman a Ring,] The giving of the Ring may ultim
act of marriage: for the old mode of Espousals, as of all other Contracts, was
by subarration, or giving of earnest betwixt the Parties contracting, by which
consideration and Assumpsit, each party was obliged to all the particulars of
the bargain; this Arra or pledge, in Sponsal-leagues, was from the man to the
woman a Ring. This is evident by what is cited out of Hostiensis. Hostiens. in
sum de Spons. and Matrins.. quot funt species.
Annulo suo subarravit me Dominus meus. My Husband when he espoused me
betrothed himself to me by this Ring. Conformably Apologet^ c. 6.
Tertullian; Aurum nullum norat praeter unico digi to, quem Sponsus
oppignorasset pronubo Annulo. In those days no woman was acquainted with more
gold, then what she more upon one finger in a Ring, where with her Husband
plighted his Troth to her when he espoused her. Now though according to the
ancient manner, the Ring were more proper at the espousals, yet considering
that the espousals and marriages are united in the Office of our Church, and
made as one continued Act, the Ring is pertinently enough disposed here.

But here incidently two questions encounter me, neither of which I may
decline. First, Why is not the subarration, the giving of earnest, reciprocal
and mutual? Why does not the woman give somewhat to the man by way of (...) and
exchange, as he the Ring to her? To which Mr. Uxor. Hae^ br. l. 2.
Seldom lends me this answer: That this is a relic of that very ancient
custom, whereby the man was wont to buy the woman, laying down as the price of
her a certain piece of money; which piece of money might be supplied by any other
thing equivalent to it: and therefore when the use of the Ring was introduced,
solemn inquiry was made, whether or not it did answer the value of that money,
without which the marriage proceeded not. Though this answer may seem to some
very retrograde, and far fetched, yet may it pass for default of a better.
Secondly, it is enquired, why a Ring rather than any other thing is given in
marriage? The general account which Ritualists render us, is to signify the
continuity of affection, and that true Love has no termination: but Paedag^g.
l. 3.
Clemens Alexandrinus assigns another reason far more probable, (...); To
seal up within aoors such things as being more precious required strict (...);
the woman having the chief charge of household affairs. Whereby it not only
appears that anciently these Rings were as well as others, formed with
impressions, but that they served instead of keys which probably might be the
reason why Laert. in Solon.
Solon enacted by Law (...) That an engraver should not keep by him the
impression of any Seal-Ring he sold; because, I conceive, else he might cut
another by it, to the prejudice of the first buyer.

Laeying the same upon the book,] The judgment of Learned Bu^or is much in
Censur. p. 48.
Admodum commodus hic Ritus esse videtur, quod Annulus, and caetera dona,
quibus spousus sponsam ornare vult, prius in librum Sacro^um deponuntur, and a
Ministro sponso rursus traduntur tribuenda ab eo sponsae; significans, oportere
nos nostra omnia priusquam illis utamur, offerre Deo, cujus sunt and
consecrare, and illa tanquam ex ipsius manu accipere ad illius gloriam
usurpanda. This is a very becoming rite, that the Ring and other gifts (for his
censure was upon the first Liturgy) wherewith the Husband intends to adorn his
Bride, are first laid upon the Book, then delivered back by the Minister to the
Man^ to be bestowed upon the Woman; intimating that it is our duty to offer up
all is ours to God, as to the true proprietary, before we use them our selves,
and to receive them as from his hand, to be employed toward his glory.

Shall put it upon the fourth finger of the woman's left hand,] Why Election is
left, and of this finger of that hand the fourth, rather than any other, the
Rubrique of the Sponsal Order in the Romish Church (and Ritualists from thence)
assigns this reason, Quia in illo digito est quaedam vena procedens usque ad
cor. Because from that finger there is a vein which leads to the heart. But
seeing that Church has not yet pretended to an infallibility in Anatomy, as
well as in Faith, we may be the holder to question the truth of this assertion,
and the rather, because the Learned and most ingenious Inquirer into vulgar
errors, has evidently demonstrated the vanity of this fiction, and that in
truth no one finger has any vein differing, in either number or origination,
from another. And that Macrobius his opinion is most probable, viz. that it was
disposed there upon principle of frugality, the better to preserve it from
attrition, or wearing: to which I may add, to secure it also from slipping off,
being guarded on every side with others.

With my Body I thee worship] A great question it is what may be the true
Dictionaries, or new intellectuals to understand them. In certain Prayers at
the end of King Henry the eighth his Primer, (from whence those at the end of
our Psalter are extracted) amongst other very odd oppressions, take this for
one, My five wits (i. e. senses) have I foully misspent. How innocent was in
those days the word Knave? which later times have animated with a mind, so
various from the former, as to apply it now to such as the early Translation of
the Bible has done, would look like an odious blasphemy. Thousands of
instances might be produced, as the Ballad of Ballads for the Canticles, they
have thrils and stink not, etc. would the ^emolument pay the freight. The
inference from all this is, that seeing words are not now in the mind they
were; this of worship must not be bound to abide what sense our curious and
subtle ones shall award it; if therefore, as we use it now, it denotes an
address of special-honour, either divine, or civil, to that wherein we
acknowledge an excellency above us; it does not therefore follow, that the first
contrivers of this form so meant it. I rather think they aimed at nothing,
either more or less, but that of the Apostles. The Husband had 1 Cor. 7. 4.
not power over his own head, but the Wife: which is as much as to say, that he
resigheth up all the power and jurisdiction he has over his own body, to his
wife, so, as it shall be entirely at her devotion; and this I conceive is
evident by the syntax and frame of this grant, or deed of gift, whose design
being to impart and communicate to the wife, those great proprieties of his
Person and Estate, (all that social League can decently desire) the investure
is made in such formal words, as may best specify and denote what he intends
to pass: to this end, when he says, with his body he does her worship, that
is, bow to her, he thereby signifies the submitting and yielding of it up to
her alone dispose: and when he says, he does endow her with all his worldly
goods, he thereby enstateth her in an usu-fructuary right in his worldly
fortune, that is such a right as (the Main indemnified) provideth her of
alimony, and all accomodations suitable to her degree. As for the words, This
Gold and Silver I thee give, in all likelihood, they were left out because some
men had none to give. Which omission notwithstanding, the ancient custom is
almost generally observed in the Northern parts of this Kingdom to this day.

And the Minister shall add this blessing,] This blessing should regularly be
Clemens lexandrinus, reproving such Women as ware false-hair. demands.
Paedagog. l. 3.
(...) Upon whom shall the Pres^yter in that case ^ay his hands? Whom shall he
(...), not the woman in the Peruque, but another head of hair.

Must receive the Communion,] And reason good, if the solemnity be, as
L^ve-feast, such was the primitive custom, appears by Tertullian. Tertull. ad
uxor. l. 2.
Unde sufficiam ad enarrandam foelicitatem ejus matrimonii, quod conciliat
Ecclesia, and confirmat oblatio. How shall I be able to declare the happiness
of that marriage, whose k^ot the Church does tie, and the blessed Eucharist
does confirm? Whence the Order of Marriage Benediction, whereof the Communion
bare its part, is called in Novella Leonis 112. Apud Casaud. p. 551.
(...), the Connubial Initiation. In order to this Communion I conceive it is
that the Office is restreined to the forenoon, which in ancient times was
performed in the evening, for which service, lights and torches, were part of
the solemnity, as Learned In Mar. 25.
Grotius has noted. Confess I do, that between the Customary excess of riot
and licentious dissoluteness, frequently attending Nuptial solemnities, and
this most dreadful Mystery, there seems to be impar congressus, a mis-becoming
greeting, that they are of very different complexions, and suit not well
together: Yet why should the Church in her most solemn and decent
establishment, give place to, or be justled out by, accessory abuses? Why not
rather the abuses themselves reformed, so far as they stand separate from the
rules of sobriety and Religion? Such I am certain was the discipline of the
Ancient Fathers, Council. Laodic. can. 53.
(...). It is not fit that Christians at weddings should use Balls and Dancing,
but to dine or sup temperately as becomes Christians.

The Order of the visitation of the sick.] The Method and Essentials of this
James, who directs that, in case of sickness, the Presbyters should be sent
for: the intention of our Church is that they should come both sent for, and
unsent for, and so was Epist. ad Philip.
Polycharpus his Order (...); Let the Presbyters visit all such persons. A duty
of all most necessary at that time, when both body and soul cry aloud for help,
and present help too, or both must perish everlastingly. The Minister must help
to ransack all the sluts-corners of his patients soul, to search narrowly into
all his sins, which unrepented of, defile and pollute that consecrated Temple
of the Holy Ghost, help him he must by making spiritual applications of
exhortation, reproof, consolation, congruous with, and suitable to, his
particular necessities: and no time fitter for those applications, than this,
when the carnal lusts, and unruly passions languishing with the body, they have
all advantages for operation upon the soul.

Then the Minister shall rehearse the Articles of his Faith.] It is an
excellent Augustine, Male vivitur si de Deo non recte creditur; We live ill yea
and dye so too if of God we believe amiss. Against male-fidians, as well as
against nulli-fidians, and so^i-fidians, Heaven gates are certainly kept close
barred. A most sad speculation it is to cast a reflex upon many myriads of men
in their exterior morals very splendid, which pass away into e^ernity, and
miscarry for default of a true belief in the main fundamentals of their
salvation.

Whether he be in Charity.] There is not any duty more enforced in the Gospel,
than that of Brotherly reconciliation; Christ's aphorism enforces it. If you
forgive not men their trespasses, no more will your heavenly Father forgive you
your trespasses; Where mercy and forgiveness are made the condition annexed to
Gods pardoning our sins. Again, Christ (whose followers we must be) his
practice enforces it. Father forgive them, Luke the 23. 34. Acts 7. 60.
So he to his very Persecuters, and to Steven, Lord lay not this sin to their
charge; what were his last and dying words, should properly be ours. Lastly,
The Parable of that servus nequam, that unjust and implacable servant enforces
it, his doom it was, and will certainly be ours, to be delivered to the
tormenters, the Devil and his Angels, unless we totally, and cordially forgive
all that have wronged us.

The Minister may not forget, etc.] Charity stands upon two legs, forgiving,
giving; the Church having endeavored by her Minister to raise the first part
of this grace in the sick persons, comes now to the second, showing mercy and
compassion to the poor. This is called doing good, and they in whom this grace
has abounded, are said to be Rich in good works, 1 Timothy 6. 17. And the better
to excite worldlings to it, it is called, laying up in store. If then our deeds
of Charity to the Poor, are our goods works, and good works are our only
movables, which shall follow us to another world, no time more seasonable for
them than sickness, when we are packing up to be gone.

Confession and Absolution.] Here the Church approves of, though she does
Auricular confession. Many times poor souls lie laboring under the pangs of
an horrid reflex upon the number or greatness of their sins, and the dreadful
wrath of God deservedly expected for them. In this case, no remedy comparable
to an humble and sincere confession at large, common to all, and sometimes
restreined to some one particular predominant sin, of whose pressure he finds
the greatest weight: upon which confession, mixed with a vehement and earnest
plying the Throne of God, for mercy, it becomes the Minister instantly to
interpose, to lay before him the inexhaustible treasure of Gods infinite
mercies, to assure him of his interest therein, and upon the hypothesis of his
contrition to be serious and unfeigned, to give him Absolution. Not that at the
moment of such Absolution, and not before, the sinners pardon is sealed in
Heaven, which is done at the very first minute of his repentance, if to the
great Critic of hearts, (as he calls himself) the All-seeing God, it appears
cordial: but that, that Pardon be evidenced to him, and manifested by
unspeakable comforts, usually flowing into a disconsolate soul upon the
pronouncing of such Absolution, God thereby countenancing and giving reputation
both to his word and Ministry. But there being two Absolutions mentioned in
the former Offices, one at Morning Prayer, and the other in the Communion
service, it may be demanded, why only this is in the first person, I absolve
thee? The answer is, there are three Opinions concerning Absolution. The first,
entertained by a few, conceive it Optative, precarious, or by petition only, as
praying for the pardon of the sins of the Penitent. The second think it
Declaratory only, that is pronouncing the Penitent absolved, by applying Gods
promises to the signs of his cont^ition. Lastly, some contend that it is
Authoritative, as deriving power and commission from God, not to declare the
party absolved, but for the Priest to do it in words denoting the first Person.
All these three opinions our Church seems in part to favor, the first under
these words, Almighty God have mercy on you, pardon, and deliver ^ou, etc.
(Absolution for the Communion) The second, under these words, Has given charge
and command to his Ministers, to declare and pronounce to his people, being
Penitent, the Absolution and Remission of their sins. The last by these words,
I absolve thee. Which Authoritative Absolution is rather proper here, because
where the Priest absolves in his own person, his Absolution is not fitly
applicable to any, but such, as have given him evident tokens of hearty sorrow
for their sins, such as Divine chastisements usually causes: Extendible it is
not to whole Congregations (as in the former instances) where the confession is
too general to be conceived in all real: and a confession at large can at most
pretend but to an Absolution at large, effectual only to such as truly and
sincerely repent.

If the rich person desire to be anointed*] Constat hunc ritum nec vetustum
esse, Censur. P. 486.
Bu^er. It is clear this Rite is neither ancient, nor commended to the Churches
practice by any, either precept of God, or example of the Primitive Fathers.
Most true. Confessed it is as to matter of Fact Apostolical, those holy men,
(...), anointed many infirm persons, Marc. 6. 13. So also, as to matter of
precept, that St. James appointed the Elders to anoint the sick person, but
both the one and the other was in order to a miraculous operation in the cure
of the diseased, and therefore not practicable in these times, which pretend to
no such gifts. Nor was it interpreted then to be a rite so necessary, but that
the miracle of healing could proceed otherwise, and without it, as may be
instanced in several cures mentioned in the Acts. And for times succeeding the
Apostles, no one example occurreth in any genuine Father of any so cured, but
only of Severus the Emperor, by Proculus the Toparch, related by Ad Scapulam.
Tertullian. And were that command of Saint James obligatory to succeeding
ages, yet can it no ways authorize the unction of the Church of Rome, which is
designed for other ends, viz. to be a viaticum in the moment of expiration.

The Communion of the sick.] The administration of this Sacrament to
Christians, in extremis, and their fatal farewell, was reputed by the Primitive
Fathers so necessary a dispensation, as they indulged it, even to such as were
excommunicated by the censures of the Church, and were not, no not in case they
recovered, admitted to communicate until their full time was elapsed. Can. 13.
So the first Council of Nice decreed, (...). Concerning Lapsed persons and
Penitents, (...) out of the world, let the ancient and Ca^onical rule be
observed; that if any ^e in that extremity, let him by no meant be deprived of
his last most necessary viatieum, and provision for a better world. As to this
Office of our Church, Scripta est ad Divinarum Scripturarum regulam quam (...),
says Censur. P. 487.
Bucer. It is framed most agreeable to the rule of holy Scripture. The
Argentine or Strasburgh exiles, had in their Liturgy an Office entitled, De
Eucharistia ministranda aegrotis. Of administering the Eucharist to sick
persons. Yea Calvin himself pleads much for it, Epist. 361.
Cur caenam Aegrotis non arbitror negandam esse mul^ae and graves causae me
impellunt. Many and weighty causes move me to think the Communion should not be
denied to sick persons. True it is he tells Olivian, scis frater alium esse
apud nos morem, Our usage here, at Geneva, is otherwise; but then adds withal,
Epist. 363.
fero, quia non est utile centendere. I endure it, because I know not how to
h^^p it. So that Geneva her self, by Calvin's confession, was not so well ordered
in all things as he wished.

Then shall the Priest reserve.] Though circumstances of time, place, persons,
though passionately indulgent toward, and tender of their sick brethren in
granting them their spiritual viaticum: yet always took a care that the
Elements should be consecrated in the Church. And indeed if Consecration be of
any import, if with God it prevails any thing effectual toward the making
those Elements the body and blood of Christ, if in us it creates any greater
reverence to those dreadful mysteries, then certainly that Consecration must
needs excel all others, which is made in the full Congregation, Chrysostom.
(g) (...), where there is (...) ^o^course of Reverend Saints, plying the
Throne of Grace so ardently, and so unanimously for a blessing upon those
Elements. This Rubrique therefore being so consenant to antiquity, and passing
the censure of Bu^er without the least reproof, had a fair plea for its
continuation, had not the Eucharist so reserved been abused; by superstitious
carrying it about in solemn procession, and the habitual adoration frequented
in the Romish practice, moved our Reformers to expunge it. This
notwithstanding, I observe in a Latin Translation of our Liturgy, Anno 2. El^^,
this Rubrique exactly set down according to the first Liturgy of Edward 6.
enjoining the Minister to reserve, t^ntum quantum sufficit ^groto; sufficient
for the sick person. The wonder i^ not great, if consideration be had of the
Primary Relatives of that Translation. This is clearly exhibited in the
Proclamation prefixed to it; (for it was set forth by Supreme Authority)
Constituimus per praes^ntes licitum esse etc per^^ssum (...) author^tate and
privilegio regali tam Decano and sodalitio Ecclesiae Christi, in Academia
nostra Oxoniae, quam Praesidibus, Custodibus Rectoribus, Magistris and
Sodaliratibus omnium and singulorum Collegiorum Canta^ri^^ae, Oxoniae,
Wint^niae and Etoniae, noc modo precandi Latin uti public^ in Ecclesiis and
farellis suis. We ordain by these presents, that it shall be lawful and (...)
^or Authority and Princely Privilege, as well for the (...) Christ, in our
University of Oxford, as for the (...), (...), (...), Master and Fellows of
all, and singular the Colleges of Cambridge, Oxford, Winchester and Eaton, to
use this form of Latin (...), publicly in their Churches and Chapels. Whereby
it is most evia^nt the Translation was made peculiarly for the service of the
Universities, and two Colleges of Winchester and Eaton. And this is the reason
that the Matrimonial Office ^ as also the other two of Baptism, and Churching
of Women (...) it, are totally omitted in that Translation, the state of
Matrimony being (...) consistent with the fundamental Statutes of those
Societies. Now this Translation being framed particularly for those Learned
Societies, they might be the better trusted with the Elements reserved, upon a
rational presumption that the greate^ light they enjoyed, the less prone and
disposed would they be to error and superstition.

The Priest (...) the Corpse.] The rites of funeral exportation appear in Can.
18.
Carthage it was decreed, Ut mortous Ecclesiae Paenitentes efferant. That the
Penitent, which were under excommunication, should carry the bodies of
Christians (...). Where Expos. Fidei.
Epi^hanius lived, others were ^eculiorly designed for this Office, these were
called (...), whose care conversant about the disposal of dead bodies. Whether
voluntary charity inclined these Copiates to this Office, or whether they were
hirelings, and mercenary, I can not determine, the labor they underwent makes
me suspect them servile, and of the lowest row. On the contrary In laud. Basil.
Na ianzene, speaking of St. Bazils funeral, says (...). His body was taken up
and car^ (...) by the Saints. Which Saints may very well be esteemed the
eminentest of Christians, especially when this St. Gregory's Scholar, St.
Hierom, tells us, that his famous Paula was Epitaph. Paulae.
Translata Episcoporum manibus, and servicem feretro subjicientibus, carried by
the Bishops supporting the Bier with their hands and shoulders. Whereby the
Office was not it seems so servile, nor of such disparagement as the first
Authorities would pretend to render it. To bring these ends nearer together,
and yet not to depreciate and undervalue the credit of the witnesses; I
conceive the best way is to yield up all for true, and that the Bishops, and
eminent Persons did assume this Office only at the first egress from the
house, and also at the last ingress into the Church; and that the great toil
and drudgery between both was undergone by Penitents, as part of their
Canonical penance, or by the Copiastae, who therefore gained the name of
Laborers, because they contracted a lassitude by bearing the Corpse to Church.
But by these, all, or which you will, the Corpse went Nazianz. in laud. Caeiarii.
(...), in state with Psalmodies one after another. (...). What Is the matter,
what means this singing of Psalms? (expo^tulateth St. In Hebr. Hon. 4.
Chrysostom; and then makes answer) Do we not praise and glorify God, because
at length he has given the deceased a Crown of Glory? The body being in this
solemn Pomp brought to the Church, was placed Hierom. Epitaph. Paulae.
in media Ecclesia, in the midst of the Church; over which before interment,
there was usually made; in praise of the Dead, a funeral Oration, and sometimes
more than one. For as I said before of Sermons upon other occasions, so at
funeral solemnities, Orations were performed by many, the first at the end of
his Harangue, or Speech, usually, raising up another. So St. Basil in his upon
St. Barlaam, (...), etc. But why do I by my childish stammering disparage this
Triumphant Martyr? Let me give way for more eloquent tongues to resound his
praise; let me call up the louder Trumpets of more famous Doctors to set him
forth. Arise then, I say, etc. And so In funere Patris.
Nazianzene bespeaketh St. Basil, being present at his Fathers Funeral, (...),
Strike up with thine own voice.

I am the Resurrection.] Our solemn attending on the hearse of a deceased 1
Thessal. c. 4. v. 13.
That ye be not sorrowful at all, at the loss of your friends; not so, the
tears our blessed Savior shed at the death of Lazarus, legitimate and warrant
ours; but we must not be sorrowful, (...), as others are, some Jews as the
Sadduces and all Heathens: how that? (...), that are without hope. They give
all for lost, if some few dreamed of I know not what Elisian fields for the
soul, yet generally concerning the body they were of opinion with the Seneca.
Tragedian, post mortem nihil est; after death, nulla retrorsum, no hope that
ever the body should recover life, and be reunited with the soul. So that upon
such occasions Hope is our Christian duty; our duty I say, not our complement,
not what we may do, or leave undone; but what we must do. Now the proper object
of this Hope is the Resurrection of the Body, which follows in the next
verse, Them which sleep in Jesus, will v. 14.
God bring with him. So then here is cause of great comfort as to the state of
our departed friend: what though for the present, and an inconsiderable moment,
his flesh shall rot and waste to dust, yet shall it rise again, and be restored
to a state of Glory; and as this meditation is of singular consolation in
respect of the dead, so is it no less applied to the living. That spectacle of
mortality, presented to the eyes of the beholders, is lecture enough to assure
them of their like change; and what must they do in the interim? The Apostle
bidds them Hope; for what? for temporal benefits and accommodations? 1 Cor. 15.
19.
for things of this life? No. If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we
are of all men most miserable. Of the Resurrection of their flesh unto glory
and eternal life? this undoubtedly. So then funeral solemnities ought to excite
in us Hope, that is, a certain expectation of the General Resurrection: Nor
will closet soli-loquies, and private contemplation of that day serve our
turns; it is a sociable duty, for so the Apostle makes it, Comfort your selves,
one another with these words, 1 Thessalonians. c. 4. v. 18. What words? With discourses
concerning the Resurrection. (The premised context certainly implies as much)
as if he should say, that they who are laid into the earth, and nothing said at
their interment, declaring the mystery of the Resurrection; Let their bodies be
never so decently treated, human they may, Christian burial they cannot have.
From all this which has been said the excellency of our Church her burial
Office, and the true conformity it bears to Canonical Scripture, will
evidently appear. Of the whole Service three parts of four are nothing else but
pure Canonical Scripture, the choicest parcels thereof being collected thence
to declare the Doctrine of the Resurrection, agreeable to the Primitive
Practice; (...). Dionys. Areopag. Eccles. Hier. c. 7.
The Ministers reading those undoubted promises, which are exhibitea ^^ Sacred
Scripture, concerning our holy Resurrection, next devoutly sung such of the
Sacred Psalms, as were of the same subject and argument. For the rest, the
praying part; what is it but the application of that Doctrine to the benefit of
the living, and a desire that they with all the faithful departed, may at that
day have perfect consummation and bliss both in body and soul.

In sure and certain hope of the Resurrection.] These words have not, as shall
change our vile bodies, where the plural excludes the restraint to a singular
number.

From the gates of Hell.] These Versicles with their Responses, from hence
Reformation. The Breviary, established by the Council of Trent, varieth thus.
First, it begins Verse. Requiem aeternam da eis Domine. Lord give thy people
eternal rest. Resp. Et lux aeterna luceat illis. And light perpetual shine on
them. Secondly, instead of I believe, etc. Verse. Requiescat in pace. Let him
rest in peace. Resp. Amen. Now it is very observable, that these Versicles and
Answers, according to the Roman mode, bear their part in three Offices. First,
in that which is called, Commendatio Animae. The Commendation of a soul
departing into the hands of God. Secondly in Exequiis, The Burial Service.
Thirdly, in Officio Defunctorum, The Office of the Dead. This Office of the
Dead was performed on several Trental is clearly derived from Trigintal, not as
Ministers from the Council of Trent, the word being ancienter than the Council.
days after the burial. The third, the seventh exclusive, or eighth inclusive.
The thirtieth (called therefore in Latin Trigintalis, in old English the
Months-mind, in after times the Trental.) And lastly the Anniversary. Now in no
one of these three Offices is there the least mention of Purgatory, and this I
take it makes as much against the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, as can be
wished; for take away Purgatory, and the Romanists themselves will grant vain
and unprofitable is all their Prayer for the deceased, vain is a Requiem sung
for them who are gone directly to either Heaven or Hell. But if so, what then
do these Versicles and Responces in those Offices? How came they thither?
Considering that, disposed as they are, they clearly imply prayer for the Dead.
I answer. The first Original of these Versicles, and other ejaculations of like
nature, was exceeding innocent, as being relative to the soul passing out of
the body, and the proper service belonging to the Commendation of the Spirit
into the hands of God, For when the agonies of Death seize upon our dear
Relations, what can better testify our Christian charity to them than the
accompanying their souls in their transmigration with our most ardent prayers?
I his being then the practice of the Ancient Fathers, at the separation of the
soul from the body; G^^g. Nozianz in laud. Gorg^a.
(...). To favor it with ushering Prayers, and devout wi^^ (...) gales to
bring it to its desired port: not long after they thought sit to repeat the
same Prayers at the Funeral of the deceased, supposing the soul still as a
passenger, and moving toward its last home, and not being fully assured that
having so lately left the body, it had yet arrived at its journeys end. This
consideration led these Prayers into the Burial Office, where being once
admitted, superstition carried them one stride farther, viz. into the Trental
and Anniversary service, but still upon the same account, as believing the soul
in transitu. And this is ingenuously confessed by De Purg. l. 2. c. 5.
Bellarmine himself. Ecclesia ita pro destinctis orat, ac si tum morerentur.
The Church prays so for the dead, as if they were but then dying.

The celebration of the holy Communion.] In the Primitive Church the fashion
Can. 44.
Carthage. If there happen to be a burial in the afternoon, whether of a Bishop
or any other, let it be only dispatched with Prayers, without the Eucharist, if
they which are present have dined before. Where first it is evident that
Commendatio signifies the Exequial Office, and so is to be understood in the
106. Can. of this Council. Secondly, (w) Balsamon clearly mistook this Canon,
which speaks not (...), of those who dye, but of those who are buried in the
afternoon; their time of death being in no capacity to create the diversity
which this Canon intends. Innocent was this rite whilst it preserved its
first intention, but degenerating from its original purity, by Masses and
Dirges, sung for the souls of the dead; wisely was it done of our second
Reformers to remove, not only the evils themselves of such heterodox opinions,
but even the occasions of them also, viz. the Communion used at Burials. Which
being so evident as to matter of Fact, it may seem a wonder why in the Liturgy
established by Parliament, and translated into Latin 2. Eliz. and this done by
Regal Authority, this Communion Order is postliminiated into that Burial
Office. It could not certainly be done by mis-chance, nor yet by clandestine
practice, for the Proclamation it self takes notice of it; Peculiaria quaedam
in Christianorum funebribus and exequiis decantanda adjungi praecepimus statuto
de Ritu Publicarum precum anno primo Regni nostri promulgato, in contrarium non
obstante: Some things peculiar at Funerals and Burials of Christians we have
added and commanded to be used. The Act far uniformity set forth in the first
year of our Reign to the contrary notwithstanding. So that some other reason
must be assigned, which I take to be this: The Office it self consists but of
four parts, the Introite, Collect, Epistle and Gospel, three whereof are
Canonical Scriptures, and the other (the Collect) is so inoffensive, as it
bears a part of our Reformed L^turgy. So that the materials being so harmless,
nothing could be faulted but the framing them into an Office; and not this
neither, but by accident in reference to the Popish abuse. The error for whose
sake it was at first expunged, was imbibed by few but the vulgar, ready to
interpret actions according to their former habits. As for Societies of
Literature the two Universities and Colleges to which this translation was
directed, they being men of more discerning spirits, better might they be
trusted with this Office, which it was expected they would consider in its pure
principles, separated from the foggy medium of ignorance and superstition.

Altogether (...) and impertinent it will not be, to cast an eye upon some late
appendants to this Burial Office, viz. Oblations and Doles; these still very
frequent, and they continued all along Queen Elizabeth her reign; and to give a
brief account whence they issued. When once the Prayers of the living began to
be believed available for the Dead, no action was thought more expedient for
this end than the blessed Eucharist, wherein the Church might invocate an
application of Christ's merits and passion, then offered in the Symbols of bread
and wine, to the benefit of those souls departed. And because even the
Eucharist it self was conceived languid in its usual effects, when destitute of
Offerings and Alms, they therefore who were nearest allied to the party
deceased, did usually freely both offer somewhat toward the scod or ^aiment of
the Priest who did officiate, and also give Alms for the relief of the Poor.
This being at first arbitrary, and at will, about the year 1000. began to be
rated at a certainty. A King, a Duke, a Bishop, etc. being taxed at what sums
should be offered at their respective Funerals, as also to what number of poor
people their Alms should be distributed: but this course contracting an ill
savor toward the Clergy, as if they rejoiced at the death of Christians, which
brought them such a booty, it was ordered that no Priest should exact any thing
upon such occasions, but take he might what was freely offered him. This was
the first original of these Oblations and Doles, which were not only peculiar
to the Burial Office, but were repeated at the eighth Day, Trental and
Anniversary commemoration of the Dead. All which being proscribed at the
Reformation, these donatives and largesses waited still upon the Funerals, and
so continued in some places until very late years. As for Mortuaries, which
must not be forgot, as being still in force by the Statute 21. H. 8. c. 6. they
became due upon a general presumption that the deceased party did fail in the
payment of the personal Tithes, says Sir Edw. Cook, and Mr. Seldom, but the M.
S. Tit. de Mortuariis.
Constitutions of the Synod of Exeter, before cited page in the Library of the
late Learned Sir Henry Spelman says, pro decimis majoribus, and minoribus, ac
caeteris juribus Parochialibus per ignorantiam non solutis, For Tithes as well
great, as small, and other duties through ignorance unpaid to the Curate, They
were assigned as recompense: which because they were usually presented with the
Corpse at the Burial, were therefore called Core-presents. He that desires
further satisfaction concerning Mortuaries, let him consult my Learned friend
Dugdale his description of Warwickshire. P. 679.


I must not yet hence, till I take notice of a small Office here inserted in
the Latin Edition 3. Elizab. mentioned before, as a lean-to and appendix to
the Burial Service, but peculiarly accommodated to the two Universities, and
the Colleges of Eaton and Winchester. The form is this:

In Commendationibus Benefactorum. In the Commemoration of Benefactors.
ADcujusque termini sinem, commendat^o fiat Fundatoris, aliorumque clarorum
virorum quorum beneficentia Collegium Locupletatur. AT the end of every Term,
there shall be made Commemoration of the Founder, and other eminent Persons, by
whose liberality the College has been made rich.

Ejus haec sit forma. After this form. Primum recitetur clara voce Oration
Dominica. First shall be rehearsed, with a distinct voice, the Lords Prayer,
Pater noster qui^^ in coelis, etc. Our Father which art in heaven, etc. Dei^de
Recitentur tres Psalm. Ex^^^ (...) it De^s. Ps. 144. Then shall be read three
Psalms. The 144. (...) ani^^ (...) Domin^^^. Ps. 145. The 145. (...) Dominum.
Ps. 1^^. The 146. Post ^ac (...) Ca^^^ 44. Ecclesiastict. After these shall be
read the 44. Chapter of Ecclesiasticus. Hiis sinitis, sequ^^^ C^^^i^, in qua
Cr^^ionator (...) si^ (...) ^su^ (...): quantis (...) qui (...) s^^di^
beneficentia su^ exci^^^^: quantum fit ornament^m. Regu^ E^ct^^ viro^ habere,
qui de r^b^^ c^^^^oversis ve^^ judicare poss^^^ (...) sit Seri(...) la^^, and
(...) humanae anter^^^ (...); (...) ejus doctri^^ in (...) quam late P^^^^:
qu^^^ (...) and regi^^^ sit ((...) suae c^ram (...)) (...) ministror^^ ver^i
l^^^^r are, (...) hii ut honesti atque (...) sint curare; at qu^ alia (...),
quae p^i and docti viri cum (...) are possint. These being ended, a Sermon
shall follow, where^^ the Preacher shall publish the great munificence of the
Founder: he shall declare the great use of Learning: how commendable they are
who by their bounty advance it: what an ornament it is to the Realm that it is
furnished with men able to j^^ge in controversies: how great is the worth of
the Scriptures, how much they excel human authority: how great is the profit,
and how far it extends, of communicating the doctrine of them to the people:
how noble and princely a thing it (...) for him whom to whom God has committed
the supreme care of his people; to see that there be a sufficient number of
Ministers of Gods word, and that they be Learned and of holy life. And such
like things which Godly and Learned men may laudably set forth. Hac Concione
fi^ita, decantetur, The Sermon ended, shall be sung, Benedictus Dominus Deus
Israel. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel. Adextremum haec adhibeantur. And at
last shall be added. Minister. The Priest. In Memoria ^terna erit justus. The
just man shall be had in everlasting remembrance. Responsio. Answer. Ab auditu
malo non timibit. He shall not be afraid of any evil tidings.

Minister. The Priest. Justorum ^nima in (...) Dei sunt. The souls of the just
are in the hands of the Lord. Responsio. Answer. Nec atting at (...) cruciatus.
The torments of hell shall not come near them. Oremus. Let us pray. Domine
Deus, Resurrectio and vita credenium, qui semper es laudandus ^am in vivent
thus quam in defunct is, ag^mus cibi arati^^ pre fundatore nostre. Ni coeteri^
qu^ benefactoribus nostris, quorum beneficiis hic in pietatem and studia
literarum alimur: roga^tes, ut nos hiis donis ad gloriam tuam recte utentes una
cum illis ad Resurrectionis gloriam immortalem perducamur; per Christum Dominum
nostrum. Amen. Lord God, the Resurrection and life of them that believe, who
art always to be praised both in the living and in the dead, we give thee
thanks for. N. our founder, and all others our Benefactors, through whose
bounty we are here maintained, for the exercise of piety and increase of
learning. Humbly beseeching thee, that we employing these gifts to thy glory,
may at length with them be brought to the everlasting glory of the
Resurrection. Through Christ our Lord. Amen.

This Office being contrived Anno 2. Eliz. was, I conceive, rather at first
commended than commanded; and being so, it may be questioned whether it
prevailed to an universal practice in the first publication of it; but leaving
that as dubious, of this certain we are, it was ten years after positively
imposed by the Statutes of that Queen, then dated, and since that constantly to
this very day observed at the end of every term, as the Rubrique enjoyneth,
that is, thrice in the year.

CHAP. XI.
Common Prayer.

(A) The Thanksgiving of women after Childbirth, commonly called the Churching
of women.

1 B. of Edw. 6.

The order of the (B) Purification of women.

The women shall come into the (C) Church, and there shall kneel down in some
convenient place, nigh [1 B. of Edw. 6. unto the Quier door] unto the place
where the table stands: and the Minister standing by her, shall say these
words, or such like, as the case shall require.

Forasmuch as it has pleased almighty God of his goodness to give you safe
diliverance, and has preserved you in the great danger of childbirth: ye
shall therefore give hearty thanks unto God, and pray.

Then shall the Minister say this Psalm. [Scot. Lit. or else the Psalm. 27.]

I Have lifted up mine eyes unto the (D.) hills from whence comes my help.

My help comes even from the Lord: which has made heaven and earth.

He will not suffer thy foot to be moved: and he that keeps thee will not
sleep.

Behold he that keeps Israel: shall neither slumber nor sleep.

The Lord himself is thy keeper: the Lord is thy defense upon thy right hand.

So that the sun shall not burn thee by day: neither the moon by night.

The Lord shall preserve thee from all evil: yea it is even he that shall keep
thy soul.

The Lord shall preserve thy going out, and thy coming in: from this time forth
for evermore.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son. etc.

As it was in the beginning, is now. etc,

Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Our father which are in heaven. etc.

And lead us not into temptation.

Answer.

(E) But beliver us from evil. Amen.

Minister.

O Lord save this woman thy servant.

Answer.

Which puts her trust in thee.

Minister.

Be thou unto her a strong tower.

Answer.

From the face of her enemy.

Minister.

Lord hear our prayer.

Answer.

And let our cry come unto thee.

Minister.

Let us pray.

O Almighty God, which have delivered this woman thy servant from the great
pain and peril of child birth: grant we beseech thee (most merciful father)
that she through thy help, may both faithfully live and walk in her vocation,
according to thy will, in this life present: and also may be partaker of
everlasting glory in the life to come, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Common Prayer. Sotch Lit. 1 B. of Edw. 6. The woman that comes to give
thanks, must offer accustomed offerings: and if their be a Communion, it is
convenient that she receive the holy Communion. The woman that comes to give
her thanks: it is convenient that she receive the holy Communion if there be
any at that time. The woman that is purified, must offer her chrysom and other
accustomed offerings. And if there be a Communion, it is convenient that she
receive the holy Communion.

Common Prayer. 1 B. of Edw. 6. A (F) Comination against sinners, with certain
prayers to be used diverse times in the year (Scot. Lit. and especially on the
first day of Lent commonly called Ash Wednesday. The first day of Lent commonly
called Ash Wednesday.

After Morning Prayer, the people being called together by the ringing of a
Bell, and assembled in the Church, the English Letany shall be said, after the
accustomed manner: which ended, the Minister shall go into the Pulpit, (G) and
say thus. [Scot. Lit. The People sitting and attending with reverence.]

BRethren in the Primative Church there was a godly Discipline, that at the
beginning of Lent, such persons as were notorious sinners, were put to open
peuauce, (H) and punished in this world, th^^ their souls might be saved in the
day of the Lord: And that other admonished by their example, mig^^ be more
afraid to offend. In the stead whereof, until the said discipline may be
restored again, (which thing is much to be wished) it is thought good that at
this time in (your presence) should be read the general sentences of Gods
cursing, against impeuiten^ sinners, gathered out of the xxvii Chapter of
Deuteronomy, and other places of scripture: And that ye should answer to every
sentence Amen. To the intent that you being admonished of the great indignation
of God against sinners, (...) rather be called to earnest and true repentance,
and may walk more warily in these dangerous days, fleeing from such vices, for
the which ye affirm ^^th your own mouths, the curse of God to be due.

Cursed is the man that makes any carv^d or (...) imag^, an a^^mination to the
Lord, the work of the hands of the cr^^ts-man, and puts it in a secret place
to worship it.

And the People shall answer and say.

Amen.

Minister.

Cursed is he that curses his father and mother.

Answer.

Amen.

Minister.

Cursed is he that removes away the mark of his Neighbors Land.

Answer.

Amen.

Minister.

Cursed is he that makes the (...) to go out of his way.

Answer.

Amen.

Minister.

Cursed is he that ^^^teth in Judgment the right of the Stranger, of them that
be fatherless, and of widows.

Answer.

Amen.

Minister.

Cursed is he that smites his neighbor se^^^tly.

Answer.

Amen.

Minister.

Cursed is he that lies with his Neighbors wife.

Answer.

Amen.

Minister.

Cursed is he that takes reward to stay the soul of innocent blood.

Answer.

Amen.

Minister.

Cursed is he that puts his trust in man, and takes man for his defense,
and in his heart goes from the Lord.

Answer.

Amen.

Cursed are the unmerciful, the fornicators, and adulterers, and the covetous
persons, the worshippers of Images, slanderers, drunkards, and extor^oners.

Answer.

Amen.

Minister.

NOw, seeing that all they be accursed (as the Prophet David bears witness)
Psalm. 118.
which do err and go astray from the Commandments of GOD: let us (remembering
the dreadful Judgment hanging over our heads, and being always at hand) return
unto our Lord God, with all contrition and meekness of heart, bewailing and
lamenting our sinful lite, knowledging and confessing our offenses, and seeking
to bring forth worthy fruits of penance. For now is the ax put unto the Matthew.
iii.
root of the trees, so that every tree which brings not forth good fruit, is
hewn down and cast into the fire. It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands
of the living Hebr. x.
God: He shall pour down ram upon the sinners, snares, fire and brimston, storm
Psalm x.
and tempest, this shall be their portion to drink. For lo, the Lord is commen
out of Esai xxvi.
his place, to visit the wickedness of such as dwell upon the earth. But who
may Malac. iii.
abide the day of his coming? Who shall be able to endure when he appears?
Matthew. iii.
His fan is in his hand, and he will purge his floor, and gather his W^eat into
his barn: but he will burn the chaff with unquenchable fire. The day of the
Lord comes, i These. v.
as a thie^ upon the night: And when men shall say peace, and all things are
safe; then shall suddenly destruction come upon them, as sorrow comes upon a
woman traveling with child, and they shall not escape. Then shall appear the
wrath Romans ii.
of God in the day of vengeance, which obstinate sinners, through the
stubbornness of their heart, have heaped unto themselves, which ^^spised the
goodness, patience, and long sufferance of God, when he called them continually
to repentance. Then Prove. i.
shall they call upon me, (says the Lord) but I will not hear, they shall seek
me early, but they shall not find me, and that because they hated knowledge,
and received not the fear of the Lord, but abhorred my counsel, and despised my
correction. Then shall it be to late to knock when the door shall be shut, and
to late to cry for mercy, when it is the time of justice. O terrible voice of
most just judgment, which shall be pronounced upon them, when it shall be said
unto them, Go ye cursed into the Mat. xxv.
fire everlasting, which is p^epared for the Devil and his angels. Therefore
brethren, ii Cor. vi:
take we heed be time while the day of salvation lasts, for the night comes
John ix.
when none can work: But let us while we have the light, believe in the light,
and walk as the children of the light, that we be not cast into the utter
darkness, where is weeping and ^nashing of teeth. Let us not abuse the goodness
of GOD, which Mat. xxv.
calls us mercifully to amendment, and of his endless pity promises us
forgiveness of that which is past, if (with a whole mind and true heart) we
return unto him. For though our sins be as red as scarlet, they shall be as
white as snow: And though they be like purple, yet shall they be as white as
wool. Turn you Esai i.
Eze. xxviii.
clean (says the Lord) from all your wickedness, and your sins shall not be
your destruction. Cast away from you all your ungodliness that ye have done,
make you new hearts and a new spirit. Wherefore will ye die, O ye house of
Israel, seeing that I have no pleasure in the death of him that dies, says
the Lord God? Turn you then, and you shall live. Although we have sinned, yet
have we an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous, and he it is
that obtains grace for i John ii.
our sins. For he was wounded for our offenses, and smitten for our wickedness.
Let us therefore return unto him, who is the merciful receiver of all true
penitent sinners, assuring our selves that he is ready to receive us, and most
willing to pardon us, if we come to him with faithful repentance, if we will
submit our selves Esai liii.
unto him, and from henceforth walk in his ways: If we will take his easy yoke
Matthew. xi.
and light burden upon us, to follow him in holiness, patience, and charity,
and be ordered by the governance of his holy spirit, seeking always his glory,
and serving him duly in our vocation with thanksgiving. This if we do, Christ
will deliver us from the curse of the Law, and from the extreme malediction
which shall light upon them that shall be set on the left hand, and he will set
us on his right hand, and give us the blessed benediction of his Father,
commanding us to take possession of his glorious kingdom, unto the which he
vouchsafe to bring us all, for his infinite mercy. Amen.

Then shall they all kneel upon their knees, and the Ministers and Clarks
kneeling (where they are accustomed to say the Letany) shall say the Psalm.

HAve mercy upon me, (O God) after thy great goodness: according to the
Miserere mei deus. Psalm. li.
multitude of thy mercies, do away mine offenses.

Wash me thoroughly from my wickedness, and cleanse me from my sin.

For I knowledge my faults: and my sin is ever before me.

Against thee only I have sinned, and done this evil in thy sight: that thou
might be justified in thy saying, and clear when thou art judged.

Behold I was shapen in wickedness: and in sin has my mother conceived me.

But lo^, thou requirest truth in the inward parts: and shall make me to
understand wisdom secretly.

Thou shall purge me with hysope, and I shall be clean: thou shall wash me, and
I shall be whiter then snow.

Thou shall make me hear of joy and gladness: that the bones which thou have
broken may rejoice,

Turn thy face from my sins: and put out all my mis-deeds.

Make me a clean Heart (O GOD:) and renew a right Spirit within me.

Cast me not away from thy presence: and take not thy holy Spirit from me.

O give me the comfort of thy help again: and stablish me with thy free Spirit.

Then shall I teach thy ways unto the wicked: and sinners shall be converted
unto thee.

Deliver me from blood-guiltiness (O God) thou that art the God of my health
and my tongue shall sing of thy righteousness.

Thou shall open my lips, O Lord: my mouth shall show thy praise.

For thou desire no sacrifice, else would I give it thee: but thou delightest
not in burnt-offering.

The sacrifice of God is a troubled spirit; a broken and a contrite heart, O
God, shall thou not despise.

O be favorable and gracious unto Sion: build thou the walls of Jerusalem.

Then shall thou be pleased with the sacrifice of righteousness, with the
burntofferings and oblations: then shall they offer young bullocks upon thine
altar.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, etc.

As it was in the beginning, is now, etc.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Our father which art in heaven. etc.

And lead us not into temptation.

Answer.

^^t deliver us from evil. Amen.

Minister.

O Lord save thy servants.

Answer.

Which put their trust in thee.

Minister.

Send unto them help from above.

Answer.

And evermore mightily defend them.

Minister.

Holy as O God our savior.

Answer.

And for the glory of thy names sake deliver us. be merciful unto us sinners
for thy names sake.

Minister.

O Lord hear our prayers.

Answer.

And let our cry come unto thee.

Let us pray.

O Lord we ^eseech thee mercifully hear our prayers, and spare all those which
confess their sins to thee, that they (whose consciences by sin are accused)
by thy merciful pardon may be absolved, through Christ our Lord, Amen.

O Most mighty God and merciful Father, which have compassion of all men, and
hate nothing that thou have made, which would not the death of a sinner,
but that he should rather turn from sin and be saved: mercifully forgive us our
trespasses receive and comfort us, which be grieved and wearied with the burden
of (...). Thy property is to have mercy, to thee only it appertains to
forgive sins: Spare us therefore good Lord, spare thy people whom thou have
redeemed. Enter not into judgment with thy servants, which be vile earth and
miserable sinners: but so turn thine ^re from us, which meekly knowledge our
vileness, and truly repent us of our faults: so make have to help us in this
world, that we may ever live with thee in the world to come, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, Amen.

Then shall the people say this that follows, after the Minister. [1 B. of
Edw 6. Then shall this Anthem be said or sung.]

TUrn thou us, O good Lord, and so shall we be turned: be favorable (O Lord)
be favorable to thy people, which turn to thee in weeping, fasting, and
praying: for thou art a merciful God, full of compassion, long suffering, and
of great pity. Thou sparest when we deserve punishment, and in thy wrath
think upon mercy. Spare thy people good Lord, spare them, and let not thine
inheritage be brought to confusion: hear us (O Lord) for thy mercy is great,
and after the multitude of thy mercies look upon us.

After this in the 1 B. of Edw. 6. follows the Declaration concerning
Ceremonies why some are abolished and some retained. Then

Certain notes for the more plain explication and decent Ministration of things
contained in this book.

In the saying or singing of mattens etc. as in the Rubric before morning
prayer.

And whenever the Bishop shall celebrate etc. Ibid ubi supra.

As touching kneeling, Crossing, holding up of hands, knocking upon the breast
and other gestures: they may be used or left, as every man's devotion serves,
without blame.

Also upon Christmas Day, Easter Day, the Ascension day, Whitsunday and the
feast of the Trinity, may be used any part of the holy Scripture hereafter to
be certainly limited and appointed, in the stead of the Litany, if there be a
Sermon, or for other great cause, the (I) Curate by his discretion, may leave
out the Litany, Gloria in Excelsis, the Creed, (K) the Omely and the
Exhortation to the Communion.

(L) Imprinted at London in Fleet Street, at the sign of the Sun over against
the Conduit, by Edward Whitchurch the 7. day of March in the year of our Lord
1549.

Annotations upon CHAP. XI.
(A) The grounds of Thanksgiving after Childebirth, why, rather for this than
other deliverances. (B) Our Church does not Judaize. Difference betwixt our
practice and Jewish Purification. (C) What meant by the word Church, into which
the woman is to come. (D) The woman not enjoined a veil. (F) The 121 Psalm not
abused (E) But deliver us from evil, why returned by way of response (F)
Commination, how often used in the year. (G) Why read in the Pulpit. A
discourse of reading-Desks, none, settled by Rule before the Canons 1603. upon
what occasion devised. (H) A Discourse of public Penance. By whom it was
imposed, and how long to continue. The several motions of it in the Greek
Church. What meant by (...) what, and what (...). Errors noted in the Editions
of Zonaras and Balsamon. (...) what. Penitential customs in the Western
Church. Africa, most severe, and why. The ancient mode of Excommunicating of
notorious offenders, out of Gratian: Discourse upon it, Adgeniculi charis Dei
in Tertullian, Penitents, when reconciled in the Latin Church. The Ancient
Discipline commended, and Vote for its restoration. (I) What meant by the word
Curate in our Liturgy (K) Homilies, whither part of our Churches Service. And
whither the Doctrine of our Church. (L) Calvin's Epistle to the Protector
misdated in all Editions.

THE Thanksgiving of women after Childebirth] when holy Scripture a woman in
travail. If this sorrow be so excessive, how great must the joy be to be
delivered from that sorrow? commensurate certainly, and of adequate proportion:
and no less must the dues of thankfulness be to the Benefactour, the Donor of
that Recovery; whence a necessity of Thanksgiving of women after chide-birth.
But cannot this as well be done in private, at home in her family, or in her
closet, without putting the Church to the cost of contriving a solemn Office
for it, considering, there are other personal deliverances, wherein the
dispensations of Gods mercy are as manifest, whereof she takes no notice? I
answer, Other Deliverances present themselves in so many scheames, some being
from fire, some from water, some from the casual ruin of houses, and other
things endangering us, some from our own precipitations, some in war, some in
peace, etc. as it is scarce possible to frame forms enough to suit all
emergences, and were they framed, rarely would they be made use of, in regard
the occasions to which they relate so seldom occurr, and then what would they
prove but an unnecessary cumber: whereas this Preservation out of Childe-bed
pangs observes one constant shape, so as one form is applicable to all, and
almost daily provokes to the duty. But it may be further opposed, that
Thousands are seized with corporal maladies, which are accompanied with as
great periclitation, whom God sometimes, even to miracle, restores to their
former strength, that those demonstrations of his protection appear very
frequent, that one form of Thanksgiving would commodiously enough agree with
all, yet has the Church appointed no such Form. I answer, that our Church in
this offer, did not so much take measure of the peril, as accomodate her self
to that note of separation which God himself had put betwixt this and other
maladies; To conceive, and bring forth in sorrow was signally inflicted upon
Eve, and in her upon all Mothers, as a penalty for her first disobedience;
Multiplying I will Genesis 3. 16.
multiply thy sorrows, and thy Conception, the very breeding fits, and
nauseous qualmes constitute a part of this chastisement. In sorrow shall thou
bring forth children, i. e. the very fruit of thy womb, which by an almighty
Power, thou should otherwise have been delivered of, without the least sense
of pain, shall, henceforward, in the very act of parturition, put thee to
extremity of Torment: so that, the sorrows of childe-birth have, by Gods
express determination, a more direct, and peculiar reference to Eves
disobedience, then any other disease whatsoever, and though all maladies are
the product of that first sin, yet is the malediction fixed and applied in
specification to this alone. Now, when that which was ordained primarily, as a
curse for the first sin, is converted to so great a blessing, God is certainly
in that case more to be praised in a set and a solemn Office.

Churching of women.] The former word was Purification, worthily expunged by
our second Reformers; this notwithstanding, we are charged by some weak
Opponents to Judaize in the office, a slander certainly, a great, a senseless
one, and it will appear no less to any, who shall compare the Jewish or
Levitical, and the English practice together. First, the Jewish woman was
interdicted the Sanctuary forty days at least. The English woman withdraws
but her month, No Judaizing there. Secondly, The Jewish woman was forbidden,
because unclean, expressly so; the English woman abstaineth not upon any such
account. If she did, First, the customary circuit of the same cause would
operate, at every return, the same effect (sequestration from the Congregation)
in her, as it did in the Jewish; but our Church commands no such mensurnal
forbearance. Again, the same pollution would as long debar her Infant also (as
it did the Jewish) which must needs take part of the Mothers impurity, but our
Church not only a^mitteth, but commands all Infants (where necessity
interposeth not) into the Church within a week at the farthest. So No Judaizing
there. Thirdly, the Jewish woman was interdicted, that is excluded by necessity
of Law, the English woman not so, her separation is voluntary, not constrained
by any Law of our Reformed Church, no nor by the Canon Law, Nunc statim post
partum Ecclesiam ingredi non prohibetur: Now under the Gospel, she may, if she
please, there is no prohibition to the contrary, enter the Church as soon as she
is delivered: No Judaizing here. Lastly, the Jewish Did. 5. c. Haec q^ae.
woman was bound to Legal offerings a Lamb, Turtles, or Pigcons. The English
woman is tied to none of these, only enjoined Evangelical Oblations, poor
pittances, and inconsiderable retributions, yet such as God graciously accepts
by the hands of his Ministers, as evidences of a grateful heart, for so eminent
a blessing. This, if any, is all the resemblance this Office bears to the
Jewish rite, which cannot certainly be blamed, but upon a false Hypothesis,
that we are obliged not to be thankful to God for this mercy, because the Jews
were so. Now if it be demanded upon what motives this months abstinence from
Church is founded, I answer, upon Custom and uninterrupted Practice, Practice
that had strong inducements to it. First, Some reasons of convenience latent,
and not so fit to be declared. Secondly, A provident regard to the woman's
personal safety. The whole structure of her body suffers a kind of luxation
through her labor, and therefore requires no few days to knit and
reconsolidate, she becomes feeble in her strength, wasted in her spirits, and
such decays of nature are not repaired on the sudden. The pores of her skin
by exsudations are relaxed, and when so many wind-dores are open, the cold air
(deaths usual harbinger) is ready to enter. So that her stay at home is of
medical prescription.

Shall come into the Church] If the woman come no further than into there kneel
nigh unto the Table, or the Priest stand by her, when both Priest and Table are
at the East end of the Chancel? Therefore to reconcile this Rubrique with the
constant practice of Churching the woman in the Chancel nigh unto the holy
Table, you must understand that in this place the word Church, comprehends
all the consecrated fabrique, both the Body and Chancel; no novel l. 1. c. de
Off Archidia coni. v. Fabric. Eccl.
notion, considering that Provincial in Lindwood, where the Archdeacons are
enjoined in their visitations, diligently to take into their care fabricam
Ecclesia the fabrique of the Church; upon which word Lindwood makes this gloss,
Ex hoc quod dicit Ecclesiae, comprehendit Ecclesiam integram videlicet navem
cum cancello: [where it is here said the Church, the whole structure of the
Church; that is, its Nave and Chancel are comprehended.]

I have list up mine eyes, etc.] The trifling objection of the abuse of This
Psalm teaches that the faithful ought only to look for help from God.

But deliver us from evil,] It has been long inquired, why all the residue
Response. In satisfaction to which doubt, the consideration of the Praxis of
former times, will contribute very much. The manner you must understand was
then for the Priest, who did officiate to rehearse it as our Office directs;
And this last Positition was not returned by the People, but by the Quire or
Chorus, and that with an elevated voice. The design whereof was to give notice
to the People, that the Lords Prayer was drawing on to an end, that they might
be the more ready to aford their Amen. For the Service being all in Latin, a
tongue unknown to them, all their business at Church was only to join in the
close of Amen, and for this they had no other queve to direct them, then the
loud pronunciation of the forgoing member by the Chorus: in the Lords Prayer,
But deliver us from evil was their Directory, in other Prayers, in saecula
saeculorum, or per omnia saecula saeculorum.

A Commination] Cum primis salutaris est caeremonia says Bucer, a very
wholesome ceremony it is. Sed non video cur debeat exhiberi solum uno die and
non saepius. But I see no reason why it should be restrained to one day (for so
it was by the first Liturgy of Edward the sixth) and not exhibited oftener:
whereupon it was appointed to be used diverse times in the year. In our Church
before the Reformation, its Antecessor, Excommunication or the great curse, was
pronounced four times in the year: on the first Sunday in Advent, the first
Sunday in clean Lent, on Trinity Sunday, and the next Sunday after the
assumption of our Lady. The appointment of these diverse times, is not settled by
any precise rule of our Church, but in the visitation Articles of Archbishop
Grindal for his Province of Cantrebury Anno 1576, as a learned Collector
informs me; it seems there are three days mentioned, as relating to this
Office.

1. One of the three Sundaies next before Easter, one of the two Sundaies next
before Pentechost, one of the two Sundaies next before Christmas. These, I take
it, were added to Ash Wednesday, not exclusive of it, by cause the following
Preface seems to have a peculiar relation to it.

The Priest shall go into the Pulpit.] But why not rather into the Desk. Edward
the sixth or Queen Elizabeth, none in any Orders or Ad, vertisements set forth
by the supreme Authority, none in any Canons Ecclesiastical, and to the best of
my inquiry, none in any visitation Article until the year 1603. when by the 82.
Canon, it is ordained, that a convenient seat be made for the Minister to read
Service in. Indeed the Pulpit, was at first designed not only for preaching,
but also for other things tending to the edification of the People: there, even
before our Liturgy established, and while the Romish Mass stood entire in
practice was Injunct. Edw. 6. 22. Anno 1547.
the Epistle and Gospel, and one Chapter of the New Testament in the forenoon,
and one Chapter of the Old Testament in the afternoon, as also the ibid. 4. and
Injunct. 1 Elis. 5.
Pater Noster, the Creed, and the Ten Commandments, appointed to be read. All
these in the time of Edward the sixth, and the three last in the time of (c)
Queen Elizabeth. This being thus, it will be worth the inquiry, what it was,
that did first dictate to us the necessity of the Reading-desk. The satisfying
of which doubt, will reside in reminding you of what I discoursed upon the
Rubrique before Morning Prayer, viz. that the service was to be said in the
Accustomed place of the Church or Chancel. That this place regularly, was the
Quire or Chorus; now because in some Churches, a belfery interposing, or over
great distance impeding the voice, the People would bear too slender a part in
those Orations, it was therefore in such cases left to the Ordinaries
discretion to vary from the former course, and to assign such a place as he
should think meet for the largeness and straightness of the Church and Quire
(for so are the words of the Advertisements). Now this liberty was as readily
taken as freely indulged. The Ordinaries flexible at the solicitations of
their subordinate Ministres, allowing them in several places to supersead their
former practice, settling the Morning and Evening Service in the Church, as a
place more edifying, and in order to it tolerating the frame of a Reading-desk,
which dispensation begun at first by some few Ordinaries, became in process of
time to be recommended from one to another, until it amounted to a general and
universal practice.

In the stead] This Office being erected in default of public and Penance,
it may here seem pertinent to give an account of the ancient practice, and the
most material concernments thereof. viz. by declaring what it was, upon whom,
by whom imposed, how long, by what degrees, and with what ceremonies, persons
in that state were restored to the Communion of Believers, and received
absolution. First, it was an Ecclesiastical censure, by which some persons were
ordered (...) to be cast out of the Church, that is, interdicted not only the
participation of the Lords Supper, but all sociable converse in Divine Offices,
being not admitted to Common Prayers. Imposed it was upon such as Apostatized
in the times of persecution, were convicted of heresy, schism, contumacy,
adultery, drunkenss, or such notorious crimes. They who inflicted this censure,
were the (...) in St. Paul, 1 Timothy 5. 7. The Ruling Elders, the Probati
seniores in Tertullian, Apologet. c. 39. Epist 75.
the majores natu in St. Cyprian, not Lay Elders, as some most erroneously
suppose, but those Elders, qui baptizandi and manuum imponendi, and ordinandi
habuerunt potestatem: who had power to baptize, to confirm, to ordein, as the
same Father assures us, no one whereof was ever pretended to by Lay Elders.
Nor were they mere Presbyters, as distinct from Bishops, but both Bishops and
Presbyters. Bishops in chief, and Presbyters in a fraternal consociation: for
though some words in St. Cyprian sound in favor of his acting alone, and
exercising a sole Epist. 6.
power in Excommunication, yet when I hear him profess to his Presbyters, A
primordio Episcopatus mei, statui nihil sine consilio vestro privata sententia
genere, [I resolved from my first instalment in Episcopacy, never to act any
thing of mine own head without your advice,] I cannot but conceive that his
Presbyters were admitted joint Commissioners with him, though the definitive
sentence passed, it is like, in his name when he was present.

As for the time how long, this Penance was to continue, as the Greek and
Latin differed each from other, so was neither at unity l. 2. c. 16.
without it self, but varied with the times in an arbitrary course, protending
and contracting it (...) according to Constable. ubi supra.
the rate and assise of the Office, as the Constitutions have it. In the Greek
Church at first, the party censured was separated from the Congregation (...),
three, five, or seven weeks, according to the nature of the Office. A very
gentle and mild procedure, if the severity of after times be considered, which
in stead of those weeks appointed years, nay and more, then so extending the
censure sometimes even to twelve years, as shall be seen anon. The time once
perfixt and determined, the Bishop or his Penetentiary, upon evident tokens of
sincere contrition, had power notwithstanding to abbreviate and shorten it at
pleasure; So the Council of Ancyra decreed, (...). Can. 5.
[That Bishops examining the demeanor of Penitents, shall have power to use
more clemency toward such as shall deserve it.] So in the Nicene Council
liberty is given likewise to the Bishop, where he observes men truly penitent,
(...), to deal more favorably with them.

Persons lapsed lying under the censure of the Church thus, and so long, it
will not be amiss to enquire how they spent their time in this interim, and by
what degrees they were repristinated and rendered in their former state. The
most clear and most satisfactory account whereof is given us by Gregorius
Neocaesariensis, commonly called Thaumatergus; Can. 11.
Upon their first expulsion, says he, they were assigned their stations (...),
without in the Churcb-yard, where they were enjoined, as says S. Basil also,
(...) to beseech the prayers of the Faithful, as they entered. This place
therefore Ad Amphiloch. Can, 22.
called (...), from their weeping, mourning, and howling; there most commonly
they spent three years. Their next step was into the Porch, (...), this place
was called (...), because there they stood amongst the Audients, to hear the
Sermon preached, and holy Scriptures read, where they tarried three years more.
Their third remove was (...) into the very nave and body of the Church, close
up to the Catechumenium. This place was called (...) Substration, because there
they did (...), throw themselves down to receive the Priests blessing (...),
Chrysostom.
casting thenselves all along prostrate, and even knocking the floor with their
foreheads, whilst the Priest prayed, and holding his hand over them, gave them
his benediction. And from this very familiar custom of Prostration, or
Penitential incurvation, at length the word (...) came, after to be usually
applied to Adoration, as in the Liturgy, ascribed to S. Chrysostom, (...),
imports the doing of Reverence by Adoration: He who was in this Classis S.
Gregory tells us, was to go out with the Catechumens, (...): by which there
seems an evident difference betwixtt he practice of this time, being about 260,
and that of the times succeeding the Council of Laodicea: For, by that Council,
it was expressly ordered, that the Catechumens, and Penitents, should be
dismis'd apart, for the words Can. 19.
are (...) after the Catechumens are dismissed, (...), The prayer of the
Penitents must succeed. And here give me leave to note further to you, that the
(...), So often mentioned in the Greek Church, are properly to be understood
only of those penitents in this third degree, and not in a general notion of
all such as were under the Churches censure. And this is manifest by S. Basil,
who setting down the order to be observed in the four years Excommunication
imposed upon for fornicatours, says, (...), Ad Amphiloch. Can. 22.
The first year the fornicator must be turned out of the Church, and ly howling
at the door. In the second, he shall be admitted to hear the word. In the
third, he shall be received among the order of Penitents. In this condition,
the censured persons, according to S. Gregory were to continue other three
years. Their fourth advance was into the Congregation of the Faithful, which
caused a change of posture as well as place (...), prostration, being turned to
(...) standing and to a standing with the faithful, joining prayers with them,
and being present at the celebration, but (...), abstaining from the oblation.
Where the word (...) has a double signification. First, the Eucharist it self
is intended by it, whereof they were not to participate, though they were
present at the Receiving of it: this was anciently called (...) Communicating
without the Eucharist, or the Communion, (...), of Prayer only, and therefore
Zonaras, upon the words of the Fifth Canon of the Counsel of Ancyra, (...),
says, (...). The Council calls here communication, not the participation of
the consecrated Elements, but only a standing together with the faithful. And
so it must be, for the Ganon adds, (...). That in the fourth year they may come
to the Sacrament of Perfection. Where, by the way, take notice, that the
Edition of Balsamon reads (...) in stead of (...), evidently false; and though
the Edition of Zonaras presents it right in the Greek, yet it erreth as much in
the Latin, translating (...) triennio, in stead of quadriennio, as that of
Dionysius Exiguus has it more truly. But though they did not participate of
the blessed Eucharist it self, yet was there bestowed upon them the (...), or
blessed bread, which being consecrated by Prayers, though not for the service
of the Eucharist, was given says Balsamon to persons (...), which might not
participate of the blessed mysteries. The second import of the word (...), as
Dr. Hamond In Syn. Antioch. can. 2.
truly observes, the very Offerings whereof the Eucharist was constituted, and
so the sense of the place must be, that they were in no capacity, neither to
offer themselves, nor partake of others oblations. In this state they abode
their last three years, at the determination whereof they were admitted to
(...) Participation. This is the description which St. Gregory has delineated
as the usage of his days. After him following Councels, as that of Nice and
Ancyra, present us with a different scheam, limiting Penitents to three years
continuance in the Portch, and seven years in Substraction, observing no
uniformity in all cases, but varying as the quality of the Crime directed.
Hitherto I have insisted only upon the Eastern custom, now I come to the
Western, where we must meet with no such gradation, no medium betwixt the
portch and the Chancel. This notwithstanding, we may observe they, the Africans
especially, proceeded more severely against offenders than did the Churches of
the East; uniform rule amonst them of the earlier time there is none to be
found; for before General Councels stated and determined the practice, every
Bishop ordered as he thought meet in his own Diocese, Actum suum disponit and
dirigit unusquisque Episcopus, says Cyprian; and again, statuit quod putat
unusquisque Praepositus, every President establishes what be please. Whence
Epist. 52. Epist. 76.
it is, that some of Cyprian's Predecessors Dandam pacem maechis non
putaverunt, and in totum paenitentiae locum contra adulteria clauserunt;
decreed that adulterers should never be received into the place of the Church,
but forever shut out of her Communion. And though S. Cyprian disliked this
discipline as over-rigid, yet was his own clemency to such as proved Apostates
to Idolatry little more visible, only dispensing in exitu subveniri,
Absolution to them at the last gasp, nay in some cases not then neither: viz.
if ibid.
they did not exhibit evident tokens of contrition before they were cast upon
their death beds. So that if the Greek Church be thought severe, the African
may be called cruel. The truth is, the Africans being kept in awe by the
faction of Novatus and Novatianus, were forced to carry a stricter hand in
discipline than otherwise they would, and therefore when their adversaries
declined in their reputation, they relaxed and grew gentler toward
delinquents, tendering the peace of the Church to all indefinitly, who did on
their death beds desire it; as did the Clergy of Rome, also in the vacacy of
that Sea determine, cum spes vivendi secundum hominem nulla substiteret, caute
and solicit subveniri, then to afford Absolution, when the offenders are
given over as dead men. As the Latin Church outwent Inter op. Cyp. Epist. 31.
the Greek in protracting absolution; so was her procedure more austere in the
very Act of exclusion and Excommunication. Her mode, as Gratian represents it
was this. Upon Ashwednesday, all Penitents were to present themselves before
the Bishop, at the Church-door, clothed in sackcloath, Distinct. 50. c. 64.
their feet bare, and visages dejected to the ground. Then were they by the
Arch-Presbyters or Penitentiaries (who were to proportion their penance) led
into the Church, the Bishop with the whole Clergy lying prostrate on the floor
and bewaylig their offenses, sung the seven Penitential Psalms.

Then the Bishop raising himself from prayer, laid his hands upon them,
sprinkled holy water and cast ashes upon their heads, covering them with
sackcloath, with sighs and sobs denounced against them, that as Adam was
expelled out of Paradise, so were they thrust out of the Church for their
iniquities; then he commanded the doores-keepers to drive them out, all the
Clergy persuing them with this Responsory, In the sweat of thy brows shall thou
eat thy bread. Thus Gratian, from the Council of Agatha. Confessed it is, this
Canon is very justly suspected for an imposture, nor do I further urge this
Testimony, then as Authors of unquestionable credit furnish us with most of the
same parcells scattered here and there, without method. To begin with the last,
the comparing persons Excommunicated with Adam's expulsion out of Paradise;
Epiphanius speaking of the Adamiani, (...). If any man chance to be taken in an
offense, they suffer him Haeres. 52.
not to assemble with them: for they call him Adam, as one that has eaten of
the forbidden fruit, and therefore adjudge him to be cast out of Paradise,
meaning thereby their Church. Now though true it is, these Adamiani were
accounted Heretics, yet Epiphanius mentions this as their opinion, not as
their heresy. Heresy it could not be which was embraced by the Orthodox Fathers
of that Church, who looked upon their Hierom. in Hoseam. l. 2. c. 6.
Penitents under the same notion Praevaricati sunt pactum Dei in Ecclesia;
sicut praevaricatus est Adam in Paradiso, sic isti ejiciantur de Ecclesia,
says Hierome of the excommunicated persons of his days. They have broken the
Covenant of their God in the Church, as Adam transgressed in Paradise, and
declare they are his followers, that, as he out of Paradise, so are they thrust
out of the Church. Augustine to the same purpose, In hoc Paradiso, id est
Ecclesia, solent a Sacramentis Altaris visibilibus homines disciplina
Ecclesiastic a removeri. In this Paradise I mean the Church Ecclesiastical In
Genes. ad lit. lib. 11. c. 40.
discipline is wont to shut out some men from the visible Elements of the
Altar. A thing so clear, as some derive the very institution of Ecclesiastical
service from that President; Now if any shall say, that this expulsion was
only a sequestration of the Person excommunicated from the outward Communion
and society of the faithful in Sacris, and though these Testimonies firm the
comparison betwixt such persons and Adam, yet speak they short of the rite
mentioned by Gratian: viz. the driving them out of the Church, as it denotes
the place of Gods worship. I answer, that there is no absolute necessity to
limit the Interpretation to one which is appliable to both, especially
considering, that the one so naturally results from the other. And did these
passages speak short, yet others there are home enough, that especially of St.
Hierome who speaking of his Fabiola, her not entering Epist. Fabiola.
the Church says, Sacerdos ejecerat, the Priest had cast her out, where is
full evidence both for the act of Expulsion it self, from the Church, and for
the person expelling, the Priest, which according to the idiome of Antiquity
always imported none inferior to the Bishop. As for the restraint of this
solemn exclusion to Ashwednesday, Gratian's word must be taken; and for ought
I see, well it may, considering nothing can be urged against it, as laboring
of any irrational absurdity. As concerning Penitents presenting themselves at
the Church door, it is Ubi supra.
undoubtedly true, there they were to stand during the time of Divine Service,
Fabiola before mentioned, Non est ingressa Ecclesiam, did not enter into the
Church. So the Roman Clergy writing to St. Cyprian in the Inter op. Cyprian. 31.
vacancy of that Sea. Adeant ad limen Ecclesiae sed non utique transiliant, The
Penitents, may come to the threshold of the Church, but step beyond they must
not. And this helps us to the reading of Tertullian's Adgeniculari charis Dei,
where it was aris Dei before. If Penitents might not set so much as a foot over
the threshold of Gods house, they could not properly be said adgeniculari aris,
to kneel at the Altar. There was indeed a great enmity between Altars and
persons of that State, so great, as he who was absolved was said to be
reconciled to the holy Altar, Divino Altari. And this reconciliation was not to
the Altar it self neither, Council. Carthag. Can. 7. Council. Tolet. 1. Can. 2.
but to the Sacramental Symbol consecrated at the Altar, and then his
postliminiation gave him liberty to approach no nearer the Altar then the
Cancellum, and consequently no Adgeniculation at the Altars indulged to the
very faithful themselves, and if not to them, much less to Penitents. Their
stations being then assigned them without doors, there did they adgeniculari
charis Dei, supplicate the dear Saints of God as they entered the Church: there
did they beg patrocinium sanctae plebis ad Deum obsecrandum, the assistance of
the holy Congregation to entreat God Tertullian. de Penitent.
in their behalf, according to the Greek form mentioned before. As for the
Ceremonies related by Gratian, which were indicative of interior humiliation,
and, as it were, silent Confessions, cause I have to think, they were rather
Spontaneous Compliances with the received Fashions of those times, then the
Result of any Ecclesiastical Canon; but whither so, or not so; certain it is in
use they were. S. Cyprian describing Penitents in their splendid Formalities,
sets them out thus, that they de lapsis.
did, stratos solo adhaerere cineri, in cilicio and sordibus volutare (or, as
Tertullian, solio and cineri incubare,) cast down upon the floor, wrap
themselves up in filthy and course sachin. So S. Hierome, Fabiola saccum
induerat, ut errorem public fateretur, had put on saccloth, that she might
testify to all the world, she had fallen: Nor is this all; he adds, she
stood in Ordine Poenitentium, in the row of Penitents, Discalceatis pedibus,
barefoot, with her shoes off, which Gratian makes another rite appendant to
Solemn Penance: In this posture and habit, illoti, and sordulenti, and extra
laetitiam, to use Tertullian's phrase, nastily defiled with dirt, abandoning
all signs of joy, continued they all the time of sacred Offices, until that
of the Eucharist was finished; which being done, and the Congregation risen, as
they were coming forth out of the Church, the Penitents, Sozomen tells us, with
howling and great lamentation fell grovelling before them, and the Bishop,
coming up to them, cast himself prostrate Hist. Eccles. l. 7. c. 16.
also, with great mourning, the Congregation all be-drenched with tears; then
the Bishop, rising up first, and the rest after him, he sent up his Prayers to
God for them, and so dismissed them.

Having thus laid down the several Scheams and Fashions of both Primitive
Churches, during the time of Penance, it will be now proper to survey, how
they recovered those Rites from which they fell. For which work, it is very
probable in both Churches, One peculiar day; though not in both, One and the
same; was set apart: what that day was in the Greek Church, I am not yet
satisfied, what in the Latin, all those Ancient Rituallists published by
Hittorph, with Durandus, Durantus, and others of Later Edition, who constantly
fix it precisely upon Mandy-Thursday, seem to put it out of question, which
possibly was exactly true in reference to the times wherein they wrote, and not
very wide from the more ancient limitation; For S. Hierom giving us an account
of Fabiola's Reception into the Comumon of the Faithful, says, It was sub
diem Paschae, very near Easter, and must consequently fall into the holy week;
But S. Ambrose is most express in his epistle to Marcellina, who sending her a
kind of Journal of Epist. 53. l. 5.
that great Tumult about his not delivering up of the Church, he gives it this
date, Erat autem Dies, quo sese Dominus sese pro nobis tradidit, quo in
Eccelesia Poenitentia relaxatur. Now it was the Day whereon our Lord delivered
himself for us, whereon public Penance is released in the Church. Nor was
this a day of general release, but restrained only to such as had gone their
full time of Penance, and had completed it, as it was prefixed. As for the
rites belonging to this Reconciliation, they were in both Churches conformably
two, one proper to the Absolved, the other to the Absolving Person: the
Absolved being produced in the face of the Congregation, made there public
Confession of his sins, then called, Exhomologesis, whereupon he was absolved
with imposition of hands; in which, the Bishop, as he ought, did preside. And
this is that very Imposition of hands intended by the Apostle 1 to Timothy, 5.
22. where he commands him to lay hands suddenly upon no man, as the learned
Annotator of late, and Tertullian of old has observed, to my apprehension,
most truly.

Thus stood the discipline of the Ancient Church for the first six hundred
years, she keeping therein a decent medium, between two extremes. To cut off
lapsed Persons from all hope of one single Pardon, would have abetted the rigid
humor of Novatus. Again, on the other side, Medicina vilis minus utilis esset
aegrotis; A medicine too cheap and easy to Augustine. Ep. 54.
be come by, would make it the less effective in operation: To avoid therefore
that contempt, which an over frequent, and too familiar Lenity would create,
this indulgence Once, and but once she granted, there being, sicut unum
Baptisma, ita una Penitentia quae public agitur; As but one Ambros. de Poenit.
l. 2. c. 10.
Baptism, so but one public Penance in the Church.

That this most laudable, most edifying way of Christian Reformation by
Ecclesiastical Censures; should, in a Church assuming the Style of Reformed, be
so almost totally abandoned: That a Discipline, so Apostolical, so Primitive,
should, in a Church, justly pretending to be the very Parallelogram, and true
Representation of those excellent Copies, be so very near invisible: That the
restoration thereof should hitherto become the Vote of so many, and Endeavor
of so few, is to me a very great wonder. Perhaps, some will say, that this
strict discipline seemed rather to magnify the Power of the Keys, and
Authority of the Clergy, then the mercies of God, Mercies so inexhaustible as
all our sins are in comparison of them, but (...), as a drop to the Ocean: To
which, it may be returned, in excuse of Chrysostom. de Poen. Hom. 3.
those rigorous proceedings. First, that Christianity was but then in the bud,
the Profession thereof thinly despersed in the crowd of Pagans, where the least
moral Scandal would have been a great blemish to the whole party, and
consequently impeded the gaining of Proselites. For it is a rule infallible,
that No Sect whatsoever can thrive and prosper, whose Professors do not
exhibit a fair front of Moral Virtues in their outward Actions: Upon this
account it was expedient, that, the Church, under the penalty of the deepest of
her Censures, should require, from all her subordinates, such a practical and
exemplary purity, as might render her most resplendent, even in the opinion of
her greatest enemies. Again, Emperors and Supreme Magistrates had not then
embraced Christianity, and consequently, no Laws established to punish such
crimes as were of mere Ecclesiastical relation, and, in default of such Laws,
the Church had all the reason in the world to exercise that spiritual
Jurisdiction Christ had empowered her with, to those intents for which it was
given: And though since Christian Magistrates have taken the Church to nurse
Political Laws, take cognizance of, and punish all notorious offenders, and so
her Censure now less necessary, yet considering that co^rcive power operates
most upon the outward act, and really reforms the inward habit. I question not
but this spiritual discipline might be used still in some degrees, to the
greater advancement of Piety and an holy life. Sure I am with learned Casaubon,
Huic revocandae in usum operam impendisse, res futura sit Deo gratior, quam de
fidei dogmatis subtiliter disputare extra scripturas, and omnes dissentientes
ferro, and flamma persequi, in quae hodie summus pietatis apex ponitur: The
endeavor of recalling this Discipline into practice, would be time better
spent, and to God much more acceptable, then without Scripture, to dispute
nicely about points of Faith, and to prosecute with fire and sword, all
contrary judgment, which is now adays made the great point of Christian Piety.

The Curate] It is rightly observed by Mr. Sparrow, that the word Temporalis
Vicarius, a Vicar at will. But the Person, Rector, or Incumbent of the Church,
and thence Beneficium curatum is described by Provinc. l. 3. c. de Prebend. v.
cur Animarum.
Lindwood to be a Benefice, quod parochiam habet in qua est cura animarum non
pervicarios, sed per Rectores aut ministros ipsius Beneficii, vel ipsorum
temporales Vicarios exercenda: which has a Parish wherein is the cure of souls
to be exercised not by Vicars, but by the Rectors or Ministers of the Benefice,
or by their Stipendiaries.

The onely] Two considerable Questions there are conerning the Homilies. After
the Creed shall follow one of the Homily's, and the Preface to the first Book
of Homilies commands all Parsons, Vicars, Curates, etc. every Sunday and
Holyday in the year, etc. after the Gospel and Creed, in such order and place
as is appointed in the Book of Common Prayer, to read one of the said Homilies,
evidently implying they were no more to be omitted then any other part of the
Service, but where the Rubrique gives a toleration. As for the second, The
aforesaid Preface tells us, they were set forth for the expelling of erroneous
and poisonous Doctrines. More fully the Orders of King James, [The Homilies are
set forth by Authority in the Church of England,] not only for a help of
non-preaching, Anno 1622,
but withal as it were a pattern for preaching Ministers.

Imprinted at London, etc. the 7. day of March 1649.] Observing the Calvin's
Letter to the Protector, which some Editions date October 20. 1646. other
October 22. 1648 Both false even to Mira^^e. This Letter was occasionally wrote
upon some offense taken at several parcels of this Liturgy; So that by
consequence infallible, This must antidate That. This is demonstrable, first,
the very words of that Letter it self. Audio recitari istic, in caenae
celebratione Orationem pro defunctis: I am informed, that in the Communion
Office there (speaking of England) a Prayer for the dead is rehearsed. This
clearly relates to the later end of the Prayer for the whole state of the
Catholic Church in this Liturgy. Secondly, it is evident by another Epistle of
Calvin to Bucer, then here in England, referring to the former Letter. Dominum
Protectorem ut volebas conatus sum hortari. I have used my endeavor, as thou
did wish me, to persuade the Protector. Whence manifest it is, that Letter
was wrote at the instance of Martin Bucer then in England. Now Bucer arrived not
in England, until Anno 49. though Mr. Fox erroneously renders him here Anno 47.
This is apparent by the occanon of his leaving Strasburgh. In the year 1548.
Charles the fifth, then Emperor, caused at the diet of Ausburgh a form of
Religion to be drawn up, so modified in accommodation to the both Romish
Catholics and Protestants, as he expected both Parties would subscribe unto
it: and because it was only intended as the standard of Belief, until the
Council of Trent should add to the points contraverted, a final determination,
and no longer, it was therefore called the Interim. Bucer being called to
Auspurgh (by the Electors Palatine and Brandenburgh with the Emperors leave)
to submit to this Interim, declared he could not with a safe conscience do it.
He well know that this declaration once past, Strasburgh would be no place of
security to him, especially taking notice Sturmii Epist. Fr. Walsinghamo.
that the Emperor had an old pique and grudge against him, as a principal
Actor in the Collen Reformation. Being thus necessitated to abandon Strasburgh,
he intimated his condition to a friend of his in England, that Friend acquaints
the Bishop Cranmer therewith, who presently by an express of his own, dated
October 2. 48. and after by his Secretary Peter Alexander, March 14. 49. gives
him an earnest invite to England, with promises of ample promotion. To this
friendly call Bucer listens and visits England in the Spring. Cum primum
venissem are his own words, as soon as he came over, he caused the Liturgy to
be translated for him, that he might judge whither or not, he might conform to
it: So that the Liturgy was certainly published before he came over, and that
was not until 49. Being here, and observing some Ceremonies boggled at, by
nicer palates, that Summer he gives Calvin an account thereof, desiring him to
move the Protector, they might not be so strictly urged. This was the genuine
and true impulsive to Calvin, to write that Letter, which if dated in October,
as all the Impressions of his Epistles render it, and the context of all
circumstances seems to persuade belief, it must then of necessity be in October
1549.

THE PROCLAMATION.
EDward by the grace of God King of England, France, and Ireland, defender of
the Faith, and of the Church of England and Ireland, in earth the supreme head.
To all and singular our loving Subjects, greeting. For so much as in our high
Court of Parliament, lately holden at Westminster, it was by us with the
consent of the Lords spiritual and temporal, and Commons there assembled, most
godly and agreeably to Christ's holy institution enacted, the most blessed
Sacrament of the body and blood of our Savior Christ, should from henceforth
be commonly delivered and ministered unto all persons, within our Realm of
England and Ireland, and other our Dominions under both kinds, that is to say,
of bread and wine, (except necessity otherwise require) least every man
phantasying and devising a sundry way by himself, in the use of this most
blessed Sacrament of unity, there might thereby arise any unseemly and ungodly
diversity: Our pleasure is by the advice of our most dear Uncle the Duke of
Somerset, Governor of our person, and Protector of our Realms, Dominions, and
Subjects, and other our Privy Counsel, that the said blessed Sacrament be
ministered unto our People, only after such form and manner as hereafter, by
our authority with the advice before mentioned, is set forth and declared.
Willing every man with due reverence and christian behavior, to come to this
holy Sacrament and most blessed Communion, lest that by the unworthy receiving
of so high mysteries they become guilty of the body and blood of the Lord, and
so eat and drink their own damnation: but rather diligently trying themselves,
that they so come to this holy table of Christ, and so be partakers of this
holy Communion, that they may dwell in Christ, and have Christ dwelling in
them. And also with such obedience and conformity to receive this our
Ordinance, and most godly direction, that we may be encouraged from time to
time, further to travel for the reformation, and setting forth of such godly
orders, as may be most to Gods glory, the edifying of our Subjects, and for the
advancement, of true Religion. Which the thing, we (by the help of God) most
earnestly intended to bring to effect, willing all our loving Subjects in the
mean time to stay, and quiet themselves, with this our direction, as men
content to follow authority (according to the bounden duty of Subjects) and not
enterprising to run before, and so by their rashness, become the greatest
hinderers: of such things, as they more arrogantly than godly would seem (by
their own private authority) most hotly to set forward, we would not have our
Subjects so much to mislike our Judgment, so much to mistrust our zeal, as
though we rather could not discern what were to be done, or would not do all
things in due time: God be praised, we know both what by his Word is meet to be
redressed, and have an earnest mind, by the advice of our most dear Uncle, and
other of our Privy Council, with all diligence and convenient speed, so to set
forth the same, as it may most stand with Gods glory, and edifying and
quietness of our people: Which we doubt not, but all our obedient and loving
Subjects will quietly and reverently tarry for.

God save the King.
The order of the Communion.
FIrst the Parson, Vicar or Curat, the next Sunday or Holyday, or at the least
one day before he shall minister the Communion, shall give warning to his
Parishioners, or those which be present, that they prepare themselves thereto,
saying to them openly and plainly as hereafter follows, or such like.

DEar friends, and you especially upon whose souls I have cure and charge, upon
day next I do entend by Gods grace to offer to all such as shall be thereto
godly disposed, the most comfortable Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ,
to be taken of them in the remembrance of his most fruitful and glorious
passion: by the which passion we have obtained remission of our sins, and be
made partakers of the kingdom of heaven, whereof, we be assured and
ascertained, if we come to the said Sacrament, with hearty repentance of our
offenses, steadfast Faith in Gods mercy, and earnest mind to obey Gods will, and
to offend no more: wherefore our duty is, to come to these holy mysteries with
most hearty thanks to be given to Almighty God, for his infinite mercy and
benefits, given and bestowed upon us, his unworthy servants, for whom he has
not only given his body to death and shed his blood, but also does vouchsafe,
in a Sacrament, and mystery, to give us his said body and blood spiritually, to
feed and drink upon. The which Sacrament, being so divine and holy a thing, and
so comfortable to them which receive it worthily, and so dangerous to them that
will presume to take the same unworthily: my duty is to exhort you in the mean
season, to consider the greatness of the thing, and to search and examine your
own consciences, and that not lightly, nor after the manner of dissemblers with
God: But as they which should come to a most godly and heavenly banquet; not to
come, but in the marriage garment required of God in Scripture, that you may,
so much as lies in you, be found worthy to come to such a table. The ways and
means thereto is.

First, that you be truly repentant of your former evil life, and that you
confess with an unfeigned heart to almighty God your sins, and unkindness
toward his Majesty committed either by will, word, or deed, infirmity or
ignorance, and that with inward sorrow and tears, you bewail your offenses,
and require of Almighty God, mercy and pardon, promising to him, from the
bottom of your hearts, the amendment of your former life. And amongst all
others, I am commanded of God, especially to move and exhort you, to reconcile
your selves to your neighbors, whom you have offended, or who has offended
you, putting out of your hearts, all hatred and malice against them, and to be
in love and charity with all the world, and to forgive other, as you would that
God should forgive you. And if there be any of you, whose conscience is
troubled and grieved in any thing, lacking comfort or counsel, let him come to
me, or some other discreet and learned Priest, taught in the Law of God, and
confess and open his sin and grief secretly, that he may receive such ghostly
counsel, advise and comfort, that his conscience may be relieved, and that of
us as a Minister of God, and of the Church, he may receive comfort and
absolution, to the satisfaction of his mind, and avoiding of all scruple and
doubtfulness: requiring such as shall be satisfied with a general confession,
not to be offended with them that does use, to their further satisfying, the
auricular and secret confession to the Priest, nor those also, which think
needful or convenient for the quietness of their own consciences, particularly
to open their sins to the Priest, to be offended with them which are
satisfied with their humble confession to God, and the general confession to
the Church: But in all these things to follow and keep the rule of Charity: and
every man to be satisfied with his own conscience, not judging other men's minds
or acts, whereas he has no warrant of Gods Word for the same.

The time of Communion shall be immediately after that the Priest him self has
received the Sacrament, without the varying of any other rite or ceremony in
the Mass (until other order shall be provided) but as heretofore usually the
Priest has done with the Sacrament of the body, to prepare less, and
consecrate so much as will serve the people, so it shall yet continue still
after the same manner and form, save that he shall bless and consecrate the
biggest Chalice, or some fair and convenient cup or cups full of wine, with
some water put unto it. And that day not drink it all up himself, but taking
one only sup or draught, leave the rest upon the Altar covered, and turn to
them that are disposed to be partakers of the Communion, and shall thus exhort
them as follows.

Dearly beloved in the Lord, ye coming to this holy Communion, must consider
what S. Paul writes to the Corinthians, how he exhorts all persons
diligently to try and examine themselves, or ever they presume to eat of this
bread and drink of this cup; for as the benefit is great, if with a truly
penitent heart, and lively faith, we receive this holy Sacrament, (for then we
spiritually eat the flesh of Christ, and drink his blood: Then we dwell in
Christ, and Christ in us; we be made one with Christ, and Christ with us): So
is the danger great, if we receive the same unworthily, for then we become
guilty of the body, and blood of Christ our Savior, we eat and drink our own
damnation, because we make no difference of the Lords body; we kindle Gods
wrath over us, we provoke him to plague us with diverse diseases, and sundry
kinds of death. Judge therefore your selves (brethren) that ye be not judged
of the Lord. Let your mind be without desire to sin: Repent you truly for
your sins past, have an earnest and lively Faith in Christ our Savior, be in
perfect Charity with all men, so shall ye be meet partakers of these holy
Mysteries: But, above all things, you must give most humble and hearty thanks
to God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, for the Redemption of the
world, by the death and passion of our Savior Jesus Christ, both God and man,
who did humble himself, even to the death, upon the Cross, for us miserable
sinners, lying in darkness, and the shadow of death, that he might make us the
children of God, and exalt us to everlasting life: And, to the end, that we
always should remember the exceeding love of our Master and Savior Jesus
Christ, thus doing for us; and the innumerable benefits which by his precious
blood shedding he has obtained to us, he has left in these holy Mysteries, as
a pledge of his love, and a continual remembrance of the same, his own blessed
body and precious blood, for us spiritually to feed upon, to our endless
comfort and consolation. To him therefore, with the Father and the Holy Ghost,
let us give, as we are bound, continually thanks, submitting our selves wholly
to his holy will and pleasure, and studying to serve him in true holiness and
righteousness, all the days of our life. Amen.

Then the Priest shall say to them that be ready to take the Sacrament.

If any man here be an open Blaspemer, Advouterer, in malice, or envy, or any
other notable crime, and be not truly sorry therefore, and earnestly minded to
leave the same vices, or that does not trust himself to be reconciled to
Almighty God; and in charity with all the world, let him yet a while bewail his
sins, and not yet come to this holy Table, least, after the taking of this
most blessed bread, the Devil enter into him, as he did into Judas, to fulfill
in him all iniquity, and to bring him to destruction, both of body and soul.

Here the Priest shall pause a while, to see if any man will withdraw himself:
and if he perceive any so to do, then let him commune with him privily at
convenient leisure, and see whether he can, with good exhortation, bring him to
grace: and after a little pause, the Priest shall say.

You that do truly and earnestly repent you of your sins, and offenses
committed to Almighty God, and be in love and charity with your neighbors, and
intend to lead a new life, and heartily to follow the Commandments of God, and
to walk from henceforth in his holy ways, draw near, and take this holy
Sacrament to your comfort, make your humble Confession to Almighty God, and to
his holy Church, here gathered together in his name, meekly kneeling upon your
knees.

Then shall a general Confession be made, in the name of all those that are
minded to receive the holy Communion, either by one of them, or else by one of
the Ministers: or by the Priest himself, all kneeling humbly upon their knees.

Almighty God, father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Maker of all things, Judge of
all men, we acknowledge and bewail our manifold sins and wickedness, which we
from time to time, most grievously have committed, by thought, word, and deed
against thy divine Majesty, provoking most justly, thy wrath and indignation
against us, we do earnestly repent, and be heartily sorry for these our
misdoings: The remembrance of them is grievous unto us, the burden of them is
intolerable, have mercy upon us, have mercy upon us, most merciful Father,
for thy son our Lord Jesus Christ's sake: Forgive us all that is past, and grant
that we may ever hereafter, serve and please thee, in newness of life, to the
honor and glory of thy name, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Then shall the Priest stand up, turning him to the people, say thus.

Our blessed Lord, who has left power to his Church, to absolve penitent
sinners from their sins, and to restore to the grace of the heavenly Father
such as truly believe in Christ, have mercy upon you, pardon and deliver you
from all sins, confirm and strengthen you in all goodness, and bring you to
everlasting life.

Then shall the Priest stand up, and turning him to the people, say thus.

Hear what comfortable words our Savior Christ says to all that truly turn to
him.

Come unto me all that travail, and be heavy laden, and I shall refresh you. So
God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, to the end, that all
that believe in him, should not perish, but have life everlasting.

Hear what S. Paul says.

This is a true saying, and worthy of all men to be embraced and received that
Jesus Christ came into this world to save sinners.

Hear also what S. John says.

If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous, he it is that obtained grace for our sins.

Then shall the Priest kneel down and say, in the name of all them that shall
receive this Communion, this Prayer following.

WE do not presume to come to this Table (O merciful Lord) trusting in our own
righteousness, but in thy manifold and great mercies, we be not worthy so much
as to gather up the crumbs under thy Table: But thou art the same Lord, whose
property is always, to have mercy: Grant us therefore, Gracious Lord, so to
eat the flesh of thy dear Son Jesus Christ, and to drink his blood in these
holy Mysteries, that we may continually dwell in him, and he in us, that our
sinful bodies may be made clean by his body, and our souls washed, though his
most precious blood. Amen.

Then shall the Priest rise, the people still reverently kneeling, and the
Priest shall deliver the Communion first to the Ministers, if any be there
present, that they may be ready to help the Priest, and after to the other; and
when he does deliver the Sacrament of the body of Christ, he shall say to every
one these words following.

The body of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was given for thee, preserve thy body
unto everlasting life.

And the Priest delivering the Sacrament of the blood, and giving every one to
drink, once and no more, shall say.

The blood of our Lord Jesus Christ which was shed for thee, preserve thy soul
unto everlasting life

If there be a Deacon or other Priest, then shall he follow with the Challice,
and as the Priest ministers the bread, so shall he, for the more expedition,
minister the wine, in form before written.

Then shall the Priest, turning him to the people, let the people depart with
this Blessing.

The Peace of God which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds
in the knowledge and love of God, and of his son Jesus Christ our Lord.

To the which the people shall answer.

Amen.

Note, that the Bread that shall be Consecrated, shall be such as heretofore
have been accustomed. And every of the said consecrated Breads shall be broken
in two pieces, at the least, or more, by the discretion of the Minister, and so
distributed. And men must not think, less to be received in part, then in the
whole, but in each of them the whole body of our Savior Jesu Christ:

Note that, If it does so chance, that the wine hallowed, and consecrate, does
not suffice or be enough for them that do take the Communion, the Priest, after
the first cup or Chalice be emptied, may go again to the Altar, and reverently
and devoutly prepare and consecrate another, and so the third, or more
likewise, beginning at these words, Simili modo postquam coenatum est, and
ending in these words, Qui pro vobis, and pro multis effundetur, in remissionem
peccatorum, and without any levation or lifting up.

Imprinted at London, the 8th day of March: 2o EDW. 6ti by R. Grafton. Anno
1548.

Addenda.
PAge 22. after line 12, begin another Division, Thus. Chancellors,
Commissaries, etc. As much is it for the both honor and Interest of
Christianity, That the Professors of that Religion live, as well as believe,
answerable to her Rule: Upon this account, in the Infancy of the Church, for
the first three hundred years, the first care taken was, That moral scandalls
should not be committed at all; the next was, That when committed, they should
not be known amongst, or taken notice of by the Heathens, to the infamy of
Christianity: To this end, all Offenses, of what nature or degree soever,
Ecclesiastical or Civil, had their audience before the Bishop, and his Bench of
Elders: which consistory, according to the merit of the cause, did admonish,
correct, censure. Nor did it take notice of crimes only, but if any contention
or brabble chanced to happen between Party and Party, the matter was so
ordered, as it was amicably composed by Arbitration, and in case any were
refractory and stubborn, they were cast out of the Society of Christians. Such
was the Clergy Discipline before the Supreme Magistrates entertained the
Christian Faith. And although, Clem. Constit. l. 2. c. 46.
after Constantine, Lay-Courts took off Civil Laws from the Church, nisi
alteruter Litigatorum aliter postularet; unless one of the litigant parties
should request to have the cause tried in the Bishops Consistory: Yet did the
ca. quaecunque 11. q. 1. c. Novit. de Jud.
Bishop notwithstanding keep up his Court, for the cognizance of crimes
Ecclesiastical; by which, I intend not only such as are committed by persons
Ecclesiastical, contrary to Canons, but also, such others as were of mere
Ecclesiastical audience, and which were not punishable by the Civil Law, as
perjury, fornication, usury, etc. But in process Duarenus de Sac. Eccles.
Minist. l. 7. c. 2.
of time, the accumulation of Canons creating daily a multitude of questions,
too intricate for the Bishop to determine; Placuit, ut petant ex nomine
Provinciarum omnium Legati porrecturi Vincentius and Fortunatianus a
gloriosissimis Imperatoribus, ut dent facultatem defensores constituendi
Scholasticos, qui in actu sunt, vel in munere defensionis causarum ut more
Sacerdotum Provinciae, iidem ipsi quidem (legendum qui) Defensionem Ecclesiarum
susceperint, habeant facultatem pro negotiis Ecclesiarum, quoties necessitas
flagitaverit, vel ad obsistendum Obrepentibus, vel ad necessaria suggerenda,
ingredi judicum secretaria. It is decreed, (says the Council of Carthage) that
Vincentius and Fortunatianus the Legates which are to be sent in the name of
all the Provinces petition the most Glorious Emperors, Can. 97. apud Dionys.
Exig.
that they would give way for the choice of Scholastical Advocates, who are
professed pleaders of causes, that, after the manner of the Principalls of
Provinces, these who shall undertake the Protection of the Churches, may have
leave, in affairs of the Churches, as necessity shall require, to enter the
seats of Judicature, either to oppose evils creeping in, or to represent things
necessary. From these Defensores Ecclesiastici, or, as the Greeks called them,
(...), learned men think, the Chancellors or Officialls Ecclesiastical took
their beginning, and probably so it might be in the African Church; but
elsewhere Socrates seems to set forth a worse Reason, speaking of Sylvanus
Bishop of Troas, Cum clericos ex litigantium controversiis Hist. l. 7. c. 36.
quaestum facere videret, deinceps neminem ex clero judicem esse permisit, sed
unum ex fidelibus laicis causarum cognitioni praefecit. When he once perceived
the Clergy made an advantage to themselves from others quarrels, he suffered no
Clergyman to be Judge, but appointed a Layman, selected out of the Faithful,
to preside in hearing causes. Take both, or which you like, and assign another
as probable as any: viz. the not diversion of the Bishops and Chergy-men from
sacred duties more proper to their calling, the Institution speaks reason
enough to vindicate it against all exceptions.

Ibid. Ordinaries. Ordinaries says Lindwood, are those quibus competit
jurisdictio Ordinaria de jure Privilegii, vel consuetudine, who of Right either
by Privilege or Prescription have ordinary Jurisdiction, and therefore
Chancellors, Commissioners, Officials and Archdeacons, are Ordinaries as well
as Bishops.

Page 25. line 3. Begin another division thus. Some following Salisbury use,
upon inquiry into the ancient Practice of this Church of England, I find it
most apparent, that every Bishop in his Dlocesan or Episcopal Synod, had full
power to constitute such Canons to make such Ecclesiastical Orders, to frame
such services for the respective Diocese, as he and his Clergy should think
most convenient. And from hence arose those varieties of uses mentioned in this
Preface. In truth such was the custom of the Primitive Church, unusquisque
Episcoporum quod putat facit: Every Bishop in his own Diocese does what he
judges meet. And Ciprian. Epist. Jubaiano.
S. Ambrose under the Popes nose at Millain, compiled an Office, not only
differing from, but standing in competition with, that of Rome. But though here
are many uses mentioned, yet for the Province of Canterbury, that of Salisbury
in estimation so far surpast the rest, as it became almost of universal
observation. Compiled and digested it was, by Osmund Bishop of Salisbury, about
the year 1099. The reason given by Harpsfeild is. quoniam singulae fere
Dioceses in statis and precariis horis dicendis variabant ad hanc varietatem
tollendam, ut quasi absolutum quoddam precandi, quo omnes uti possent, exemplar
extaret: That because almost almost all Dioceses had their seveal ways and
uses in their services and Canonical hours, to take away that diversity, this
should be as a standing form for all to follow. But this reason I cannot assent
unto: for what had Osmund to do, to give the rule to other Dioceses? Nothing
certainly. Nor did he (...), mind or regard what others did. No, he had the
same design, neither more nor less, which was incident to the power of the
Bishop. Evidently this, In a Counsel held at London Malmsbur. de Gestis Pontif.
l. 1.
Anno 1075. decreed it was, according to ancient Canons, that Bishops Seas
should no longer be held in Villages, but removed to Cities. Thereupon
Hermanus translated his chair from Shirburn to Salisbury, where he began to
edify a Cathedral, but died before he finished it. Next him succeeded this
Osmund, who having completed the structure, Clergymen most eminent for
learning from all parts were invited, by a liberal allowance there to reside.
The Church being built, and furnished thus with so gallant a College of
Prebendaries, Osmund took it into his next care, that Divine Service might
there be performed with equal splendour. Hereupon he contrived the Office called
the Course of Salisbury, and provided such a set of excellent Malmsb. ubi supra
l. 2.
Singing-men to officiate it, that Emicabat (so are the words of my Author) ibi
magis quam alias canonicorum claritas cantibus nobilium: The Canons thereof
could nowhere else be matched for their Art in Music. This Service of
Salisbury being now cried up as a most noble model. The rest of the Bishops (of
the Province of Canterbury especially) not having learning enough (for pene
omnes tunc temporis illiterati, they were then almost all arrant dunces) to
frame a better, conformed their Dioceses in it; So that what Osmund intended
peculiarly for his own use, became exemplary to others. And perhaps upon this
very score his Sea obtained from posterity as a mark of honor, that
preeminence whereof Lindwood gives this account. Episcopus Sarum in Collegio
Episcoporum est praecentor, and tomporibus quibus Archi-Episcopus Cantuariensis
solemniter celebrat Divina, praesente Collegio Episcoporum, Chorum in Divinis
Officiis regere debet, de Observantia and consuetudine antiqua. The Bishop of
Salisbury in the College of Bishops is to be the Praecentor, and at such times
as the Archbishop of Canterbury officiateth all the College of Bishops being
present, he ought to govern and direct the Quire insacred Offices. And this he
is to do by ancient custom and observation. And perhaps upon this very score
(if it be true as some Romanists affirm) the Bishop of Salisbury was before the
Reformation constantly and of course Dean of the King's Chapel, and chief
appointer of the Rites and Ceremonies.

Page 79. line 26. At these words, The first mention, Add, is in Proclus he
declaring it to be a daily Hymn, says, (...). All the world over every O^at. 5.
day is re-sounded. All the works of the Lord, bless the Lord.

Page 98. line 47. Begin another Paragraph, thus. The Priest shall say] But
when? At the beginning of Evening Prayer? I confess I have known the Practice
so, and have heard it has been positively enjoined by a Learned Bishop and
great Ceremonialist, that Evening Prayer should begin with the Lords-Prayer.
But the rule of the Church is express to the contrary; for in the Rubrique
before Morning Prayer, it is ordered thus. At the beginning both of Morning
Prayer, and likewise of Evening Prayer (note that) the Minister shall read with
a loud voice, some one of these Sentences that follow, etc. So that, clearly,
the Sentences, Exhortation, Confession, and Absolution, must begin the Evening,
as well as the Morning Prayer.

Page 99. line 49. after these words it is anoient, add. This Creed was
formerly appropriated to high Festivals only, but that by repeating it every
month, it might become the more familiar to the People, these days of the
Apostles, and St. John Baptist were inserted.

Page 157. at the end of the Paragraph W. add thus. In the Latin Translation of
our Liturgy, Anno 2. Eliz. I find a Collect for St. Andrew, different from the
English, which I shall here set down:

Omnipotens Deus, qui dedisti beato Andreae Apostolo tuo, ut acerbam and
ignominiosam crucis mortem duceret sibi pro magna gl^ria: Tribue ut omnia nobis
adversa pro nonomine tuo, ducamus prefitura ad aeternam vitam conducibilia per
Christum Dominum nostnum. Almighty God, who did give to thy holy Apostle S.
Andrew, to account it his great glory to suffer the bitten and ignominious
death of the Cross. Grant unto us, that what we endure for thy sake, we may
also esteem profitable and conducible to eternal life, through Jesus Christ.

Page 177. line 17. after these words violation of them, add thus. Though true
it is, the contriving of the Decalogue into a way so edifying toward Piety,
and making it parcel of Gods Public Worship, be a peculiar of our Church, yet
somewhat not much unlike it, is to be found in that Manual of Prayers, composed
by Gilbertus Cognatus, P^ecum. page 302.
for the private use of his Kinsman, about the year 1553. whose words I shall
here set down. Having recited the Decalogue, he then subjoyneth Hic nos praemit
aeterna mors O Deus, hic futurum justum judicium tuum, and commeritam nostram
condemnationem. Sed hic miserere nostri, O Jesu Christ, ne pereamus. Tu quoque
O Sancte Spiritus inscribe hanc legem cordibus nostris, ut secundam eam alacri
animo ambulemus, teque revereamus diebus vitae nostrae universis. Amen. Here O
Lord we ly ^bnoxious to eternal death. Here we can expect nothing but the most
just sentence to come upon us and our deserved condemnation. But here O Jesu
Christ have mercy upon us least we perish. And then O Holy Ghost write this Law
in our hearts we beseech thee, that we may walk conformable to it, and that we
may reverence thee all the days of our life. Amen.

In stead of the form of Bidding of Prayers set down Page 181. give me leave to
commend unto you that which follows, being sent me by a learned Friend from
Cambridge, with his Scholler-like address which will spare me the pains of any
further Preface.

The Transcriber, To the Perusers of the follwing Transcript.
I think it may well be named Instructions for the Laity'^ Devotions: but as I
met with no Rubric, nor title in the Copy: so I count it modesty (...), and to
refer my self to better judgments. I found it written in a Court-hand,
indifferently fair and legible, though full of abreviations: but because I am
not at all exercised in the Calligraphy of that hand, I have transcribed it in
the same, which I use in my private studies, with a great exactness of letters
and syllables, though not of the character. Thus much I thought good ^o
intimate, that in a piece of this rarity, there might not be any suspicion of a
counterfeited record, or the faithfulness of the transcriber be called in
question. For indee^, as I cannot but commend that pious design of the noble
Author in honor of our famous, though now distracted, Church of England: So I
must needs glory, that I am any ways instrumental to the producing of that
which may prove so serviceable, however of so great antiquity. In testimony of
which, I desire it may be lawful to produce my own conjectures. I am conscious
to how skillful hands this paper may come; and therefore the more willingly
produce them: Since they may carry a torch for those judicious eyes, whose
honor will be augmented by the discovery. They were wrote upon a spare
parchment before the sums of Guilielmus de Pag^a,, extant in the
University-Library of Cambridge: which notwithstanding are not there so well
known by the Author's name, as by that of Both Bale and Pits say there was writ
by G. Parker a book bearing that title: so that it seems not clear whether of
the two was the Author.
their title, which is Dextra pars oculi sacerdotum and sinistra. This I
mentioned the rather, because from hence some small light may happily arise to
the true time of their original antiquity. For since the forenamed Author,
both b^ the testimony of reverend Bale in his Centuries, and the learned Pits
in his Catalogue of English writers, is to be reckoned in the thirteenth
Century after Christ: I see not how we can with reason suppose this to be
ancienter; except we object its transcription thither for an older copy.
Somewhat indeed it may be, that in those days they had not parchment so rife
or cheap as paper now in ours; whereof they might compose their Adversaria, but
what ever their next reading or more deliberate judgment proposed as worthy of
notice taking, they commonly transcribed (if my observation fail not) upon
those parchments the Book-binders had bestowed upon their books to defend them
from the injury of the covers. But this argument perchance is not so valid, as
that which may follow. Wherefore I adjoined that Constitution, which bears the
Rubric of Dies festi: since from that a greater light may accrue to what bears
the precedence. In that I find the Archbishop of Canterbury, (who is otherwise
nameless then by his title in the instructions, for so I call them to be
Christened Simon; of which praenomen I find but four through the whole Catalogue
of the Prelates of that S^e, and all of them in the 14. Centurie current, and
(if I mistake not) within the compass of fifty years: to wit, Mepeham, Langham,
Islip, and Sudbur^, who fell a Sacrifice to that Idol of the Clowns (as
Walsingham calls him) Tyler. To this later I should rather ascribe both the
Instructions and that Constitution concerning Holy Days: though indeed I have
no other ground for the conjecture then my private fancy. But from the same
Major a stronger consequence will follow, if it be backed with the testimony of
that learned Knight Sir Henry Spelman, in those Tomes (for which whole
Christendom stands indebted to him as well as England) concerning the English
Councils; and besides him you may, if you please, at leys re see what William
Linwood will afford you to this purpose both in his collection and his comment
of the Provincial Constitution; neither of which I have at present by me, or
the opportunity of inspection. It would be needless to tell you the
Instructions were calculated to serve indifferently for the whole Nation, but
transcribed for the Meridian of the Worcester Diocese; since it were but to
forestal your observation, which that I prevent not my former conscience checks
me, and makes me blush at this uncivil, though dutiful, information: which as I
cannot but account useless, when I consider your own judgment, so it is but
the pledge of my integrity and readiness to serve both your self and the public.

Ye shulle stand up and bydde your bedys in the worshepe of our Lord Jhesu
Transcriptoris conjectanea.
Christ, and his mother Saint Marye, and of all the holy Company of Heaven, ye
shulle also bydde for the Stat of Holy Cherche, for the Pope of Rome and his
Cardinalis; For the Patriarch of Jerusalem, for the holy Land, and for the holy
Croys, that Jhesu Crist sends it out of i. e. Heathen.
hedne mennys hand into Cristinmennys hond. Ye shulle bydde for the
Erche-Byscop of Canturbury, for the Byscop of Worssetre our ghostly fader and
all oder Biscopis. Ye shall bydde for Abbotis, for Prioris, for Moonks, for
Chanouns, for Freris, for Ancris, for Heremytis, and for all Religiouus. Ye
shulle bydde for all the Prestys and Cleerks that heerinne servit and havyty
servit. Ye shulle bydde for the pees of the Land that Jhesu Crist holdit that
it is, and send it there it nys. Ye shulle bydde for the King of Engeland, for
the Queen, and for all here childryne, for the Prince, for Dukes, for Yerles,
for Baronnis, and for the Knycts of this Land, and for all her good consaile,
and her true servantis. Ye shulle bydde for tham that the Stat of Holy Cherche
and of this Land Videtur de* esse, be.
well mentanid. Ye shulle bydd for the wedering and the cornis, and for the
frutys that beet icast on herd and on earth growing, and for all the true
earth tylyaris, that God send swic wedering fro hevene to earth that it be him
to convening, and mankind to help of lif and sanation of hour sawlys. Ye
shulle bydde for the persown of this Cherche, and for all his Parischoners that been here, other else war in Land, other in Water, that our Lord Jhesu Crist
tham shilde and ward from all misaventuris, and grant tham part of all the
bedys and good dedys that me deed in holy Church. Ye shulle bydde for them
that in gwood ways beet ywent other wendyt, other thenkit to wenthe here
sennys to bote, that our Lord Jhesu Crist ward and shilde Deest them ni fallor.
from all mis^ventryes, and gront them so go on and comen that it be him to
worship and Forsan legendum having.
ham in remission of here sinnys, for tham and for oos and all Cristine folk.
Pater noster. Deus misereatur nostri, etc. Kirie eleeson, Christ eleeson,
Kirie eleeson. Pater noster, and ne nos. Ostende nobis Domine m. and sal.
Sacerdotes tui induantur justitia and Sancti tui. Domine salvum fac regem and
exaudi nos. Salvos fac servos. Salvum fac per gratiam Sancti Spiritus Forte,
tuum.
tuorum populum, etc. Domine fiat pax in Virtute tua, etc.
vert. t. Domine exaudi orationem meam and clamorem. Dominus vobiscum. Oremus.
Domine qui charitatis dona cordibus fidelium infundis, da famulis and famulabus
tuis pro quibus tuam deprecamur clementiam, salutem mentis and corporis ut te
tota virtute diligant and quae tibi placita sunt tota dilectione perficiant,
and pacem Abundat in autographo.
tuam tuam nostris concede temporibus per Christum Dominum nostrum.

Tunc conversus ad populum dicat sacerdos, (sed quidam dicunt sie hic, Dominus
vobiscum.) Oremus. Ecclesie tue quesumus Domine preces placatus admit ut
destituta adversitatibus and erroribus universis secure tibi serviat libera.

Omnipotens sempiterne Deus qui facis mirabilia magna, pretend super famulos
tuos pontifices nostros and super cunctas congregationes illis commissas
spiritum gratie salutaris and ut in veritate tibi complaceant and perpetuum eis
rorem tue benedictionis infunde. Deus a quo Sancta desideria and recta consilia
justa sunt opera, da servis tuis illam quam mundus dare non potest pacem, ut
and corda nostra and corpora mandatis tuis dedita and hostium sublata formidine
tempora sint tua proteccione tranquilla per Dominum nostrum Jesum Cristum.

Also ye shulle bydde for the gwode man and the good wife, that the charity hid
brought to pay, and for tham that it first Fors: vowen.
voonden and lengest holden. Ye shulle bydde for tham that this Cherche honor
with book, with bell, with westiments, with Quaenam v^x ista?
twayte, oder with light, oder with any oder ournaments to roof, oder to ground
with land, oder with rent wherethrough God and our Lady, and all Holies, i. e.
Saints.
halhen of hevene beth the fairer inservit her, oder elliswar. Ye shulle bydd
for all thilk that bet in good lyve, that God therein tham hold long, and for
thilk that bet in evele lyve oder in dedlicke senne ybound, that our Lord Jhesu
Crist tham outbring and give tham Swic. i. e. such.
sure grace here har sennes bote. Ye shulle bydde that for thilke that to God
and holy Cherche trouly Tithenth.
tethegenth that God ham wite and ward fro all mis-auntre, and for all thilk
evil tethength that God ham give grace of amendment that They.
hij ne fall not into the great Sentence. Ye shulle bydde for all the seake
of this Parische that our Lord hem give swic heel that it be ham to
convenient, and hem to help of body and of soul, for ham and for us and for
all Cristmen and wymen Fors. Pour charity, Pater noster. Of your charity a
Pater noster.
pour charity. Pater noster.

Deinde vertat se sacerdos and dicat Psalmum Levavi oculos^m. Et ne nos. Salvos
foc servos tuos and mitte Domine auxilium. Esto eis Domine turris. Domine
exaudi Orat. Dominus vobiscum. Oremus. Deus qui charitatis dona per gratiam
Sancti Spiritus tuorum cordibus fidelium infundis, da famulis and famulabus
tuis pro quibus tuam deprecamur clementiam, salutem mentis and corporis, ut te
tota virtute diligant and que tibi placita sunt tota dilectione Leg. perficiant:
perfici.

In lingua materna conversus ad populum dicat. Ye shulle kneelen down and bydde
for fader sowl, for mother sawle, for God-fader sawle, for Godmoder sawle, for
children sawles, and for all the sawlys of our bredryn and soosters sawles,
and all the sawles that we bet in debt for the bydde for, and for all the
sawles that beet in Purgatory, that God ham brenge the radyr out of har peynys
there the byseechying of our bone. Ye shulle bydde for all the sawlys hwos
bonys rest in this place, oder any oder holy place, for all sawlys hwos
Maundy-dayes.
mendedays beet yholde in this Cherche, oder any oder by the year.

Deinde revertat se and dicat Psalmum. De Profundis. Kyrie Eleeson, Christ
Eleeson. Kyrie Eleeson. Pater noster. Et ne nos. Requiem aeternam. A porta
inferm. Credo videre. Dominus vobiscum. Oremus.

Absolve quesumus Domine animas famulorum famularumque tuarum fratrum nostrorum
sororum parachianorum and omnium fidelium defunctorum ab omni vinculo
delictorum ut in resurrexionis gloria inter Sancto, and electos tuos
resuscitati respirent. 2. * Misere quesumus Domine animabus famulorum Leg.
Miserere.
famularumque tuarum pro quibus supplicandi debitores sumus and animalus omnium
parentum nostrorum ac benefactorum ut pro beneficiis que nobis largiti sunt in
terris, premia eterna consequantur in celis. Fidelium Deus omnium Locus
corruptus.
per benedicite Dominus Deus nos custodiat and ab omni malo defendat and ad
vitam eternam perducat.

Amen.
A Rubric.
Dies festi.
Cum secundum sacros canones tempera feriandi in missis sunt laicis intimanda
venerabilis in Christo Pater and Dominus Simon Dei gratia Cant. Archiepiscopus
de frat rum suorum Cant. Ecclesie suffraganeozum dies festos quibus ab
uniuersis popularium operibus and rei, public utilitatibus, per suam Cant,
provinciam abstinendum fuerit nobis per suos literas patentes publicandi
distinctius injungendo mandavit. In primis videlicet sacrum diem dominicum ab
hora diei Sabbati vespertina incoandum, non ante ipsam horam preveniendo, ne
Judaice professionis participes videamur, quod in festis suas vigilias
habentibus observetur. Item festa Nativitatis Domini, Sancti Stephani, S.
Johannis Evangeliste, Innocencium, Thome Mar. Circumcisionis Epiphanie,
Purificacionis S. Marie, S. Mathie Apostoli, Annunciacionis S. Marie,
Parasceves Paschatis cum tribus diebus sequentibus, S. Marci Evangeliste
Apostolorum, Philippi and Jacobi, Invencionis S. Crucis, Ascensionis, Penrecost
cum tribus diebus sequentibus, Corpus Christi, Augustini Anglorum Apostoli,
Nativitatis S. Johannis Baptiste, Apostolorum Petri and Pauli, Translacionis
Thome Mar. S. Marie Magdalene, S. Jacobi, Assumpcionis S. Marie, S. Laurencii,
S. Bartholomei, Nativitatis S. Marie, Exaltacionis S. Crucis, Mathei Apostoli,
Michaelis Archangeli, Luce Evangeliste, Simeonis and Jude, Omnium Sanctorum,
Andree, Nicholai, Concepcionis S. Marie, S. Thome Apostoli, Dedicacionis
Ecclesie and Sanctorum quorum Honori.
honor parachialis Ecclesie dedicantur.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 31. l. 23. for profess r. possess. p. 57. l. 49. r. in-disposeth. p.
58. l. 9. r. ceil. ib. l. 16. for humiliations r. humi-cubations, p. 60. l. 37.
r. there are, p. 75. l. 4. r. confidents. p. 76. l. 35. for Prayers r. Praises.
p. 77. l. 10. r. became. p. 98. l. 4. for cucure^^ r. lucernis. ib. l. 22. for
at one. r. at our. ib. lin. ult. who comment. p. 175. l. 45. for, be at one, r.
be at strife one. p. 176. l. 28. for supposed r. se-posed. p. 178. l. 10. for
stand so, r. stand up. ib. l. 33. r. when there was a transition from one part
of divine service to another. p. 187. l. 47. for Prayers, r. praises. p. 188.
l. 50. for prescribe, c. proscribe. p. 191. l. 47. for and Anni, r. an Anni. p.
215. l. 3. for Tables, r. Labels. p. 304. l. 40, Mr. Dugdale. p. 322. l. 32.
for service, r. censure.


