Considerations of Importance TO IRELAND, In a LETTER to a Member of Parliament
there; upon Occasion of Mr. Molyneux's late Book: Entitled, The Case of
Ireland's being Bound by Acts of Parliament in England, Stated. Printed Anno
School.
MR. Molyneux has, I think, demonstratively proved the Independence of the
Kingdom of Ireland from the Kingdom, though not from the King of England,
because he is also King of Ireland; as of Scotland, though without any
Subjection of the Kingdom of Scotland to the Kingdom of England: I say, he has
proved this, by undeniable Matter of Fact, through all the ancient Precedents,
down to the Reign of K. Charles II.

But from the Time he produces Precedents of some Acts of Parliament in
England, which have bound Ireland. Against which he complains as Innovations:
And which therefore ought not to destroy their Ancient Liberties and Freedoms.
And he has besides Three Arguments, by which he would avail the force of these
late Precedents, from being any binding Law to Ireland, so as to dissolve their
Original Independency upon England.

The first is, That there has been no occasion of Executing those Laws in
Ireland; as he Instances, p. 103. upon occasion of the Tobacco Act, i. e.
forbidding Tobacco to be Planted in Ireland; For there is none Planted there:
And therefore there has no Case happened, to dispute the Validity of that Act
made in England; and consequently to know whether Ireland has Subjected it self
to that Act?

Secondly, That Private Persons may obey an English Act which relates to
Ireland, for their own Security, and to avail Trouble or Charge to themselves:
But that this does not infer the Consent or Submission of the Kingdom of
Ireland, whereby it may be bound by such Precedents.

This may be Pleaded in Relation to the English Act of Navigation, which
obliges Irish Ships, Importing any Goods from our Foreign Plantations, to Touch
first at England. And the English Acts Prohibiting the Exportation of Wool from
Ireland, to any Country, except to England. These Mr. Molyneux mentions, p.
103, 104.

The Third Argument he has, is, That some Acts have been made in England,
Relating to Ireland, in the Times of such Wars and Confusions in Ireland, that
a Parliament could not be held there: And yet that it was thought Necessary, at
least Beneficial, to provide for the Safety of the English Interest there, by
Acts of Parliament in England, till such Time as Regular Parliaments could be
had in Ireland. Upon this Head, he endeavors to salve some Acts of the English
Parliament, made since this Revolution, which relate to Ireland. As the Act for
the Protestant Irish Clergy, p. 107. And the Act for Security of the
Protestants of Ireland, p. 109. Both made in the first Year of W. and M.

But p. 111. He comes to a very hard Case; which is, The Act of the English
Parliament, Abrogating the Oath of Supremacy in Ireland, and Appointing other
Oaths. 3 and 4 W. and M. c. 2. And, To this (says he) the Parliament Convened
at Dublin, Anno 1692. under Lord Sydney; and that likewise Anno 1695. under
Lord Capel, paid an entire Obedience. And by this (continues he) it is alleged,
we have given up our Right, if any we had; and have for ever acknowledged our
Subordination to the Parliament of England. And believe it, it seems to be a
very shrewd Allegation. For none of the former Salvos will serve in this Case.
First, was not in time of Wars, and such Confusions, as to hinder a Parliament
to be held in Ireland: For there was a Parliament held there the same Year,
Anno 1692. Secondly, This was not the Compliance of Private Persons, but of Two
succeeding Parliaments, Anno 1692. and 1695, in Ireland. Thirdly, It cannot be
said, That there had been no Occasion of Executing these Laws in Ireland. For
this Act has been Executed to the uttermost; By this all Roman Catholics are
Disabled to sit in either House of Parliament there. By this, all the Popish,
and one Protestant Peer have been thrust out of their Seats in the House of
Peers. And, by the same Rule, all the rest, and of the Commons too, who had not
taken Care to qualify themselves, pursuant to the English Act, had forfeited
their Right to sit in Parliament; and consequently, left Ireland without the
Possibility of any Parliamant at all. By this one Bishop, and others of the
Inferior Clergy have been Deprived. By this Act several Penalties and
Disabilities are imposed upon Persons of all Ranks and Conditions; which has
been exacted upon all the Non-Compliers to the said English Act.

Now, if a People can give up their own Rights (which according to Mr. Lock,
etc. (from whom Mr. Molyneux takes it) upon Trust) is the Original and
Foundation of all Government; what more Authentic Method can be taken, than to
have them Surrendered by the Cession and Submission of the Representatives of
the People in Parliament.

This is a Material Point which, if not cleared, makes an end at once, of all
the Pretensions that can be set up in behalf of the Kingdom of Ireland, for its
being Independent upon the Kingdom of England; and not bound by the Acts of
Parliament in England, even without having any Representatives in the English
Parliament. That is, That the English, as well as Irish, in Ireland, are in the
Condition of Slaves; and to be disposed of, both as to their Lives and
Fortunes, without any Consent of their own, by Themselves, or their
Representatives. For such they have rendered themselves, by the entire
Obedience which Two of their Parliaments Successively have paid to the English
Act enjoining the Oaths there; and by Executing the same, even in the
Qualifications for Members to serve in Parliament, which are prescribed in the
said English Act.

Therefore, it will be worth the while, to see what the Ingenious Mr. Molyneux
has to say, in order to Ward off so Fatal a Conclusion.

He says, p. 111. 112. That this Submission of the Irish Parliament is to be
deemed as purely Voluntary, and not at all proceeding from the Right which they
conclude thereby in the Legislators. If a man (says he) who has no Jurisdiction
over me, Command we to do a thing that is Pleasing to me, and I do it; it will
not thence (...), that therefore he obtains an Authority over me, and (...)
ever hereafter I must Obey him of Duty* If I Voluntarily give my Money to (...)
Man when I Please, and think it Convenient for me; this does ^^t Authorize him
at any time to Command my Money from me when he Pleases. Thus he: ^ut, under
favor, this is a very Lame put off; and the Case is not stated aright. The
Case is not of one who has no Jurisdiction over me; that is, who Claims none.
For then, there is no Dispute: But the Case should be put, of one who Claims a
Jurisdiction over me; and then it ought to be considered, how far my Submission
is to be Construed a Yielding up to him that Right over me, which he Claims.
And such sort of Submission no doubt there is; and has been so Ruled in all
Ages and Cases. Therefore the present Enquiry is, Whether this Submission of
the Parliament of Ireland be of this sort or not? And what should hinder it?
For here is a Submission and entire Obedience of Two Parliaments in Ireland, to
a Right and Jurisdiction which the Parliament of England does Claim over the
Kingdom of Ireland. And what can be an Owning of this Claim of the Parliament
of England, if this be not? Here is no Caveat, or Reserve, put in by the
Parliament of Ireland, to save this Jurisdiction now Claimed, and put in
Practice by the Parliament of England, from being a Precedent for the Time to
come: But (as Mr. Molyneux Words it) an entire Obedience paid to the
Jurisdiction of the Parliament of England.

Suppose a Man Claims a Paramount Right to my House and Estate; and Pretends,
That I am but his Steward or Baily, and hold only at his Pleasure: And, in
pursuance of their pretended Right, shall issue his Orders to me, Limiting me
what Servants I shall keep, and Admit such and such for Tenants, and no other.
And if I pay entire Obedience to these Orders, without the least Interposition
in behalf of my own Right; and should Execute these Orders, as his Orders, and
not at all as my own, or as deriving any Authority from me; will it serve to
say afterward, That this was purely Voluntary in me; and that I only did what
I had a mind to do my self? Would such an Excuse pass? Would it not appear
extremely Ridiculous: But especially, if I durst not make any such Excuse for
my self; only another pretended this for me. The Parliament of Ireland has not
Adventured to say any Thing of this, in their own Behalf; to enter the least
Protest, or Salvo for their own Rights and Independency upon the Parliament of
England. Therefore what is said on their Behalf by others, not any way
Authorized by them, cannot be taken as a keeping up of their Claim. It is none
of their Act; and as they are not Answerable for it, neither can they keep any
Advantage by it.

The next Thing Mr. Molyneux Advances, in Behalf of the People of Ireland, to
save their Rights from the Consequences of this Act, is Page 113. Where he
says, That the Right of being Subject only to such Laws to which Men give their
own Consent, is so inherent to all Mankind, and Founded on such Immutable Laws
of Nature and Reason, that it is not to be Alien'd or Given up, by any Body of
Men whatsoever.

This strikes at the Power of the Irish Parliament, to Give up the Rights of
the People of Ireland, as they have done, by their entire Obedience to this Act
of the English Parliament. And this, upon two Considerations. First, As
supposing that the People never meant to Give up their Rights so entirely to
their Representatives in Parliament, as to Empower them to Betray them, and
Deliver them up to whom they thought ^it: And therefore, That any such Act or
Concession of the Parliament is Void, and not to be Owned by the People.
Secondly, That supposing the People had Granted their Representatives such a
Power, yet that the Grant was Void; because that it was not in the Peoples
Power to make such a Grant, as being against the Immutable Laws of Nature and
Reason. I will not enter upon the Disquisition of these Topics, as being
equally against the Power of all Parliaments, as well in England as in Ireland.
And the Recurring to the Original Rights of Mankind, antecedent to all
Constitutions and Frames of Government, carrys with it such long Consequences,
as I am not willing to meddle with at present: But shall content my self with
this, which seems to be granted by this Argument, That as far as it is in the
Power of a Parliament to Give up the Rights of a People, so far has the present
Parliament of Ireland Given up the Rights of that People, to the Parliament of
England, by their entire Obedience to this Act. And what Other or Better way
there is for a People to Give up their Rights, than by their Representatives in
Parliament, I leave it to the Learned to Dispute.

I am sure it is a more Authentic way, than what Mr. Molyneux does next lay
the Stress upon, p. 114. viz. The general Application of the Chief part of the
Irish Protestants, that were at that time in London, to the Parliament at
Westminster, for obtaining these Laws: Which he would improve to infer a
Consent of the People of Ireland: But this can never do.

For, First, This can, in no Sense, be Construed so Regular and Authorized a
Representation of the People of Ireland, as a Parliament freely Chosen, and
sitting in Ireland. Secondly, The Application of these Irish Protestants in
London to the Parliament at Westminster, for obtaining of these Laws, was a
Giving up of the Cause, and Acknowledging this Contested Right of the
Parliament of England over Ireland; as much as was in these Irish Protestants
Power to do it. And I am sure some of them were minded of it, at the same time.
And withal told, That it was to no manner of Purpose: For that, if K. James (of
whom they were afraid) should Return; and should think fit to Assert the Laws
made in in that Parliament he held in Ireland, the Repeal of them by a
Parliament in England, which he did not Acknowledge, would signify nothing. And
till he did not Return, they were in no Danger of those Laws made to their
Prejudice, in his Parliament. But they have Verified the Proverb, Too Fast, too
Loose. And would not Rest, till they had Given this Precedent against
Themselves.

The rest that Mr. Molineux says, to save this Act Appointing the New Oaths,
from being a Surrender of the Rights and Liberties of Ireland, is only by way
of Complaint. P. 114, 115. That if some such Considerations as these,
(beforementioned) may not Plead for Us, (says he) we are of all his Majesty's
Subjects the most Unfortunate. Then he Appeals to the King's Justice, to
Protect the Rights and Liberties of Ireland, and of their Parliaments, as of
England and Scotland, etc. But he may be told, That Justice does not Relieve
any but Infants, and Idiots, against their own Act and Deed. And that the
Question is not now, What Rights the Parliaments of Ireland had Formerly,
(which Mr. Molineux has made appear Plain enough) but whether they have not
Surrendered them? Particularly, by their entire Obedience to this Act of the
English Parliament Appointing the New Oaths, and Abrogating the Old, Enacted by
Acts of Parliament in Ireland.

Let me here take Notice of the Difference betwixt the Two English Acts; the
one for Imposing the Oaths in England, and the other for Imposing them in
Ireland. This Latter has set such Prodigious Penalties more than the Former, as
plainly show the Difference they make twixt the Condition of Subjects, and of
Slaves. In the Act for Ireland, it is Enacted, That if any Member of Parliament
there, whether of the Lords or Commons, shall presume to Sit or Vote in
Parliament, without first Qualifying himself, as Prescribed in that Act, or any
other, shall Offend against the said Act, they shall be thereby Incapable of
any Office, Place, or Trust, Ecclesiastical, Civil, or Military, in Ireland, as
well as England. And shall be Disabled from thenceforth to Sit or Vote in
either House of Parliament, of the said Realm of Ireland, or make a Proxy in
the House of Peers there; or to Sue or Use any Action, Bill, Plaint, or
Information in Courts of Law, or to Prosecute any Suit in any Court of Equity;
or to be Guardian of any Child; or Executor or Administrator of any Person; or
Capable of any Legacy, or Deed of Gift; and shall sorfeit for every wilful
Offense against this Act, the Sum of Five hundred Pounds, to be Recovered and
Received by him, her, or them, that will Sue for the same -- in any of their
Majesty's Courts of Record at Dublin, etc. Here the Courts of Law in Ireland
are Commanded to Execute this English Act, as the Law of Ireland. This Act,
which Abrogates former Acts of Parliament in Ireland, and makes New for them,
without Asking their Consent! But it may be said, That it is now too Late. That
the Fault is committed. The Surrender is made of all the Liberties of Ireland,
by the Submission of Two succeeding Parliaments: And therefore not Now to be
Recalled.

I Answer: That there is a Great Difference betwixt a Free and Formal
Surrender, upon valuable Considerations; and that Surrender which is only so
Constructively, or by Consequence. The First, if made Validly, operates
Immediately; is a Transferring of Right; and Bars all after Claim. But the
other Case is Disputable: And Allowances must be made, for Inadvertencies, for
Force, or Craft, or any sinister Dealing. And if Nullum Tempus occurrit Regi,
the same Reason will hold as to a Parliament; because they Act for Others, in a
Public and General Capacity. Mr. Molyneux, p. 152. quotes out of Mr. Hooker
this Maxim, viz. To be Commanded we do Consent, when that Society whereof we
are Part, has at any time before Consented; without Revoking the same after,
by the like Universal Agreement. To this Power of Revocation, he Limits no
Time. I will not take upon me to Determine the Punctum, when a Prescription
does Commence: Or what Force it has; especially in Matters of Government; we
know Great Use is made of it: And in no one thing more than in the Privileges
of Parliament, for which Prescription is the Chief Rule to which they Appeal,
in their daily searching for Precedents, when any Dispute happens concerning
their Rights and Powers.

But this Late Act concerning Ireland, has not yet Age enough for a
Prescription: And therefore there is yet Time for the Irish Parliaments to
Assert their Right, if any they pretend to have. They may, if they so think
fit, Disown that English Act, which Abrogates Oaths Enjoined by former
Parliaments of Ireland, and Requires New Oaths. And they may Restore those who
have been Forfeited by it. This, by Mr. Hooker's and Mr. Molyneux's Rule
before-quoted, the Irish Parliament may yet do. But, by the same Rule, till
they do it, they are Concluded. And they cannot make any Pretense of Claim for
their Independency from the Parliaments of England, while they Continue to Pay
Obedience to this Act. And such Obedience they do Pay, while they Continue any
under Forfeitures Incurred by that Act. For that is Executing of the Act: And
that is the most Authentic Manner of Owning it. And if they continue such,
under these Forfeitures till they Die, I cannot tell but the Occasion will be
Lost. However, I am sure the Longer that Irish Parliaments continue to Pay
Obedience to this English Act, the Precedent grows the stronger, and works
still more toward a Prescription. The Prospect of this made Mr. Molineux thus
Passionately Expostulate, P. 169. If the Religion, (says he) Lives, Liberties,
Fortunes, and Estates of the Clergy, Nobility, and Gentry of Ireland, may be
Disposed of, without their Privity and Consent, What Benefit have they of any
Laws, Liberties, or Privileges granted unto them by the Crown of England? I am
loath to give their Condition a Hard Name; but I have no other Notion of
Slavery, but being Bound by a Law to which I do not Consent.

May it not now be worth Enquiring, How this Single Act, this only, of Imposing
the New Oaths, should Prove such a Millstone to the Kingdom of Ireland, as to
Carry with it All the Rights and Freedom of that Country into the Bottom of the
Sea! Shall we say, That this is only by Chance? Some Men Refer All to that. But
I think there is a much more serious and substantial Reflection which this will
Afford Us; And, if it be not yet Quite out of Fashion to use that Word, a
Christian Consideration.

By this Act, and by this Only, one Bishop, and several Clergymen of Ireland,
are Deprived.

Now if it be Sacrilege to Rob God's Church, how much more His Priests? There
is nothing Good or Holy but God. But there is a Relative Holiness, as things
belong more Peculiarly to Him. Thus Israel was called an Holy (though otherwise a
very wicked) Nation; that is, in Comparison of other Nations, who were not in
Federal League or Covenant with God. And Jerusalem was called the Holy City,
more than All the other Cities of Israel: The Temple was more Holy than
Jerusalem: And that Part of it within the Veil, more Holy than the Rest of the
Temple; therefore called, The Holy of Holies. Not that Stones or Lime are in
themselves Holy, or one Holier than Another; But only as they Related more
nearly to the Service of God. Thus Israel was more Holy than other Nations: The
Levites more Holy than the People of Israel: The Priests more Holy than the
Levites: And the H. Priest more Holy than the other Priests. Not that the H.
Priest must necessarily be a more Holy Man in himself than All or Any of the
other Priests; That the Priests must be more Holy than the Levites; or Every
Levite, than All the Rest of the People of Israel: But this was in regard to
their Office, and more near Designation so the Service and Worship of God.

Now Sacrilege is not the Robbing of God in His Person, for that is Impossible:
But in those Things that Relate unto Him. And the Sacrilege Rises Higher, as it
comes Nearer to what is Near unto Him* Therefore, as the Holiness of Inanimate
Things; as of Temples, etc. is not so Great as the Holiness (though Relative) of
Persons: So the Sacrilege is Greater of Robbing Holy Persons, than Holy Things.
It had been Greater Sacrilege to have Robbed Aaron of his Holy Vesements, than
the Temple of its Vtensils: And Greater Sacrilege (as of Korah, etc) to have
Robbed Aaron of his Power and Authority, than of his Vestments.

Now this Act of Deprivation Robbs the Bishops and Clergy of their SPIRITVAL
Power and Authority: And therefore is a Greater Sacrilege than the Robbing of
Churches, or Altars.

And is it not worth our serious Reflection. That this is the Act which
Deprives Ireland of All their Civi^ Rights, as a People, past all Help of those
Excuses, by which they avoid the Precedents of other English Acts, that seem to
Bear hard upon them? And, by this, if Ireland will stick to that Sacrilege,
which has been Imposed upon them by the Parliament of England, they must Accept
of Slavery into the Bargain. But if they had rather be Slaves to their
Neighbors, than Servants to God; If they will Choose to Forfeit all Right and
Title to their Estates, Lives, and Liberty (not to speak of their Religion) and
to hold them Precariously, at the Will and Pleasure of those* who have a
different Interest from them, and are already Grown Jealous of them, and
Declare they must find Ways to Humble them; and not suffer them to enjoy the
Common Benefit; and (by the Rules of Liberty) the Right of Mankind, which is,
To make the Best Use of their Labors -- If they will Choose this, Rather than
do Justice (as I may so say) to God, by Restoring what they have Robbed from
Him; or so much as Acknowledging that they have done Amiss therein; This
Liberty they have still left to them: And they may Go on, and Try, whether They
or God are the strongest.

If they say, That it is no Sacrilege for Laymen to take upon them to Divest
the Priests of God of their Purely Spiritual Authority: And that too upon
Purely Secular Accounts. I Refer them to what has been already wrote upon that
Subject: And which has yet Received no Answer.

But take it as they will, if they still remain Insensible as to the Point of
Conscience: Yet if they will not Rivet their Slavery, by their own Consent,
they must Disown that English Act Appointing the New Oaths; which (as said
before) they cannot do, without Restoring those who suffer Forfeitures by it.

If they will not do this; Then let them Remember, at least, Others will, That
their Slavery Commences with their Sacrilege. And it will not be thought
Superstition hereafter to observe, That the Providence of God has so ordered
it, as that this very Act which Involves them in Sacrilege, Proves the Only Act
which Unanswerably Destroys their Freedom and Civil Rights.

If we Believe not that there is a Providence, we cannot be Christians, no, nor
good Deists: And if there be an All-seeing Providence, Nothing can Escape its
Ga^e, or Get out of its Reach. In short, if there be such a thing as Providence
in God, there can be no such thing as Chance; for the one does necessarily
Destroy the other: We only call that Chance where we know not the Cause.

Since therefore we are Obliged to Confess, That there is a Providence, without
which a Sparrow does not fall to the Ground; surely it may be Permitted, nay,
it must become our Duty seriously to contemplate so very Legible a Character of
Divine Providence, in the Falling down of a whole Nation from Freedom to
Slavery: And that in such a Remarkable Manner as in the Present Case; That
their Liberties and Freedom went out, and Slavery came in at the same Door,
which they Opened to let in Sacrilege; at least, which they Durst not Shut
against it. They are not barely Passive herein, as in relation to the Act of
Navigation, etc. before mentioned, wherein England bears Hard upon them: But
their own Hands and Tongues have made them to Fall; insomuch that whosoever sees
them, shall Laugh them to scorn: And all Men that see it, shall say, This has
God done; for they shall Perceive that it is his Work. These Words are in one
of the Psalms, for the Day of the Month on which the Deprivation of the Irish
Protestant Clergy then in England did Commence, by that English Act we have
been speaking of, which was the 12th Day of Feb. 1691/2 Which as often as it has
Occurred, afforded me Matter of Meditation, and Adoring the Divine Providence,
in so Remarkable an Instance of it, as was shown That Day: And I have
Adventured to let others Partake of my Thoughts herein. What Use they will make
of it, is in the Hands of God to Dispose. But if this Prompt them not to
Consider their Case, in Relation both to God and Man, it will stand as a
Witness against them, of their having Robbed God: And in the same Act Betrayed
the Rights and Liberties of their Country, who Entrusted them as their
Representatives: And Delivered up Themselves, and their Posterities, as
Absolute S^aves, by the Methods they have taken to Assert their Freedom;
contrary to their own Laws, as well as the Laws of God. But God will be
Magnified, if we will not suffer it in His Mercies and Protection upon our
Obedience, yet by His Judgments for our Rebellion against Him.

Dec. 26. School.
Liberavi Animam Meam.
FINIS.
ERRATA: Page 1. l. 12. and p. 2. l. 2. f. avail r. avoid, l. 29. r. it was. p.
4. l 6. f. their r. this. l. ^1. f. keep. r. reap.


