Liturgy's Vindicated BY THE DISSENTERS: Or, the Lawfulness of Forms of Prayer
and Liturgies; PROVED From the very Texts of Scripture urged against them, by
John Bunyan and the Dissenters.

By the Author of the Religious Conference between a Minister and his
Parishioner, about Infant Baptism.

2 Pet. 3.16. In which are somethings hard to be understood, which they that
are unlearned and unstable wrest, as they do also the other Scriptures, to
their own Destruction.

LONDON. Printed for C. Brom, at the Gun, at the West end of St. Paul's. 1700.

THE CONTENTS.
A PREFACE, giving an Account of the Undertaking, and secret Juggle of some, in
pretending to Pray by the Spirit; how they are mere Deceivers, and Men-pleasers
in it.

Chap. I. Showing Jo. Bunyan's Imitation of Satan, not only in urging
Scripture, and suppressing so much thereof, as makes against him, as
particularly 1 Cor. 14.15. which is Explained, and Vindicated from the false
Glosses he puts upon it, and turned full upon him; but also in his intolerable
Pride, impudent Calumnies, and railing Accusations against us; and a Question
is asked; How poor Creatures shall Pray in their Families, who have not this
pretended Gift of Prayer? Which his Party are desired to Answer some better
way, than by bidding them to Groan. Chap. II. Returning an Answer to his
Objections against the Common Prayer Book, and clearing it from the Imputation
of Popery, there being nothing thereof in it, but Composed by Protestant
Martyrs; together with sundry Scripture Authorities, for the Lawfulness of
Forms of Prayer, and our Observation of Christmas, Easter, and other Holy Days,
in Memory of the Saints. Chap. III. Concerning his evasive Answers to our
Savior's Command for the use of the Lord's Prayer, Luke 11.2. which is briefly
Explained and Confirmed, with some Reflections on his Rules for Prayer, as also
on the Presbyterian Directory, wherein, they as much limit the Spirit, as we do
by a Form; as also concerning the falseness of his Assertion; That none but
Saints ought to say the Lord's Prayer, from the known Examples of the Prodigal
Son, and Rich Man, the one calling God, and the other Abraham, Father, and from
that Relation which God bears to us by Creation and Redemption, he being on
both accounts, the Father of all Men. Chap. IV. Of the Anabaptists Persecuting
Spirit and Cruelty toward other Protestants, and particularly toward King
Charles the Martyr, and his Loyal Subjects; and their Canonizing such
Persecutors for Saints and Martyrs, contrary to the Practice of those that
deserved and had that Name among the Primitive Christians, whose only Weapons
were Prayers and Tears; and of that Persecuting Passage in the solemn League
and Covenant, where they are Sworn to Extirpate us. Chap. V. Of some Texts of
Scripture, Jo. Bunyan brings for the Prohibition of the Common Prayer Book,
which are all shown to prove no such thing, but rather the Lawfulness of using
it. Chap. VI. Of two other Places of Scripture, which he produces to the same
purpose, as Zach. 12.10. and 2 Timothy 3.5. which rightly Explained, do both
conclude against him, and for the Lawfulness of Praying by a Form. Chap. VII.
Of his two Scripture Arguments, for Praying by the Spirit, as 1 Cor. 14.15. and
Romans 8.26. showing them to be impertinently Alleged, and clearing them from the
silly Exposition and Paraphrase he makes upon them; and proving, that one at
least, if not both of them, establish Forms of Prayer, and overthrow his
Pretenses of Praying by the Spirit. Chap. VIII. Of two plain Proofs, that Jo.
Bunyan and his Party, have not the Spirit which they pretend to; viz. 1st. The
Schism which they have made, and continue in the Church, with the Rebellions
they have raised and carried on against the State. 2dly. The scurrilous and
unchristian Language they utter against us, which is exemplified in some
farther Instances than were given in the first Chapter. Chap. IX. Of another
Proof to the same purpose, from his evil Counsel about the Education of
Children, whom he would rather have to live without Praying at all, than to be
taught it by any Form whatsoever, which does not savor of the Spirit of God;
no more does his Beastly Expression, in calling this, a Nuzzling them up in a
Form. Chap. X. An Apology for the Author, least his Book be Condemned, as
undervaluing the Holy Spirit; and the Assistance which he affords, is farther
Explained and Stated, and Proved not to consist in the Groans, or extempore
Effusions of Men, but in Godly Motions within us, and the fervent Desires of
the Heart; the Life and Soul of Prayer, being Faith, Hope, and Charity; and
such an Assistance of the Holy Spirit, our Church admits, and teaches us to
Pray for.
The Conclusion. An Address to all the Members of our Orthodox Church of
England, not only to Pray, but also to Live according to the Common Prayer
Book, even a Godly, Righteous, and Sober Life, to the Glory of God's holy Name.
Amen.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
BEing sensible, that some Men will censure, me for entering the Lists with such
a Combatant, where it will be no Credit to Conquer, but a mighty Disgrace to be
overcome, I think my self obliged to give this Account of the Undertaking, to
reconcile the Reader, to what I have hereafter Written, least otherwise,
looking only on the Title Page, he should grow Angry, and Impatient, and throw
away the Book.

The Discourse I here Answer, was sent me from an Anabaptist of my Parish, and
(as I have reason to believe) by the Order and Direction, of one of their
Teachers, as a choice Piece, which might take me off from the use of the Common
Prayer Book (whose Morning and Evening Service, I wish were constantly offered
up entire in all other Families as well as mine, when it cannot be performed in
Public, and I am confident, they will receive no little Comfort and
Satisfaction in so doing) but having read it over, I found so much Railing,
Wresting, and Mis-applying of Scripture, almost in every Page, and so little
Reason and Truth in any thing he said; I once thought his reviling, impertinent
Discourse unworthy of any other Answer, but what the Archangel returned to
Satan, Jud. 9. The Lord rebuke thee, Bunyan: But when I considered the high
Value the whole Party set upon such slight scurrilous Pamphlets; how this was
Bequeathed as a Legacy, by the last Will and Testament of one of them, to a
surviving Friend, to convince the World, That whether Living or Dying, they
have no Charity for us; and how they are contented, that themselves and subtle
Books, should be let alone, to Creep into Houses, and lead silly Women, (I may
add Men too) Captive, (who are sooner caught and seduced, with crafty and
incoherent Reasoning, than with close and sound Arguments) and when they have
gained them for Proselytes, and drawn them into the wild Mazes of their
numerous Errors, it is very hard to reduce and bring them back into the way of
Truth: On all these Accounts, I judged it needful to wipe off the soul
Aspersions he casts on our Common Prayer Book, and all that use it, and to
Examine and Confute his Pretenses to Pray by the Spirit, as St. Paul did; which
I have done in the ensuing Treatise, wherein I have shown, the Vanity and
Sophistry of all his Arguments for himself, and against us, especially those
that are fetched from Scripture, and returned them with their genuine Force,
upon his own Head; I have there also Proved, that the Spirit does not now
Invent and Dictate the very Words of our Prayers, as they pretend he does, though
all their Pretenses of this Nature, are mere Cant, and a Device how to please
Men more than God, for Almighty God, who is the same Yesterday, to Day, and for
Ever, is not delighted with Novelty, Variety, and change of Words; and
therefore our Lord Jesus, in his last Agony, Prayed Thrice in the same Words,
Mat. 26.44. and without doubt, in the use of that short pithy Form, (for so it
was to him, having said it Twice before) he was as fervent in his Desires the
Third time as he was at First; it is mortal Man only, (who has itching Ears)
that loves to have them Tickled with new Expressions; and in Compliance with
this vain Humor, I fear it is, that these Men decry all Godly Forms, even that
of Christ's own Composing, and set up their Praying by the Spirit; which yet is
but a mere Artifice, the effect of a good Memory, and great Confidence; and to
cast a Mist before the Peoples Eyes, they Chop and Change the very same
Prayers, beginning where they ended, and ending where they began, in such a
Dexterous manner, that their ignorant Hearers perceive it not, but believe
their Prayers are always New, and the Product of the Spirit; but more knowing
Persons, (who often hear them) discover the Cheat, and that they are the very
same Prayers still, with some little Alterations, and so they continue in the
use of Forms themselves, whilst yet, they are so Presumptuous, as to Condemn it
in others for an Antichristian Practice.

I shall say no more, but refer the Reader to the serious Perusal of the
following Discourse, where I shall leave him to determine how well or ill I
have Managed it, thinking it no less vain than improper, to attempt the Byasing
of his Judgment, by a Complemental Preface; only, I Pray a Blessing may attend
him, in the judicious Reading what, I assure him, I have Written for no other
end, but God's Glory, and his Churches good; and so I bid him heartily Farewell.

A DEFENSE OF THE LITURGY Against the Dissenters, etc.
CHAP. I.
IT IS Observable of Satan that when he temped our blessed Savior to throw
himself Headlong from the Pinnacle of the Temple, he urges Psalm 91.11, 12. He
shall give his Angels charge concerning thee; and in their Hands they shall
bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy Foot against a Stone; but the
Devil leaves out part of the Verse which made against him, To keep thee in all
thy ways, i. e. the ways of God, but not in all thy wanderings from them;
wherein it would have been Presumption to expect the Divine protection; the
like Course does John Bunyan take, when he urges 1 Cor. 14.15. I will pray with
the Spirit, and I will pray with the Understanding also; he omits the later
part of the Verse, I will sing with the Spirit, and I will sing with the
Understanding also; and he does not only omit this in the Title Page, but in
six or seven Repetitions afterward, which no doubt was designedly done,
because if he had once mentioned this, it would have been a plain and full
Confutation of his Argument deduced from the former part of the Verse, and
indeed of his whole Book; for if we may Sing with the Spirit, when we have a
form of Words and a Tune also to observe, which is supposed and allowed in our
present Practice of Psalmody, Why may we not as well Pray with the Spirit when
we have a form of Words before us? Is there not the same Reason for Praying as
for Singing with the Spirit, when both are done in a form of sound Words? This
is such a convincing Proof of the lawfulness of Forms of Prayer, and that those
who devoutly use them, may be assisted by the Spirit of God, that it overthrows
all his Cavils and Exceptions against them, and strikes his Cause dead; thus
the Author stumbles in the Threshold, and discovers the cloven Foot in the very
entrance, and almost in every Page of his Book, as is evident from his
intolerable Pride and uncharitableness which he shows therein; of which I shall
give you a taste, for to mentionall would be to Transcribe his whole Discourse,
Page 14 he says, That Ignorance, Profaness and the Spirit of Envy reigns in the
Hearts of those Men that are so hot for Forms of Prayers, etc. scarce one in
Forty of them knows what it is to be born again, to have Communion with the
Father through the Son, etc. they still live Cursed, Drunken, Whorish and
Abominable Lives, full of Malice, Envy, Decit, Persecuting of the dear Children
of God; Oh what a dreadful after-clap is coming upon them! Which all their
Hypocritical assembling themselves together with all their Prayers shall never
be able to help them against, or shelter them from, and p. 43, 44. he says,
Every cursed Whoremaster, Theif, and Drunkard, Swearer and Perjured Person,
they that have not only been such in times past, but are even so still, these I
say, by some, must be counted the only honest Men, and all because with their
Blasphemous Throats, and Hypocritical Hearts, they will come to Church and say,
Our Father: Nay farther, these Men, though every time they say to God, Our
Father, do most abominably Blaspeme, yet they must be compelled thus to do; and
p. 45, 46. says he, Give me leave to Reason with thee thou blind ignorant Sot;
it may be thy great Prayer is to say, Our Father which art in Heaven, etc. Is
not the Devil thy Father? And dare thou say to God, Our Father, etc. But as
the Devil presented himself among the Sons of God, Job 1. when they were to
present themselves before the Father, even our Father, so is it now, because
the Saints are commanded to say our Father, therefore all the blind ignorant
Rabble in the World, they must also use the same Words, Our Father.

These are some of the base, scurrilous and unchristian Reflections he every
where bestows on the Members of the Church of England, without excepting any
out of that number, making them, as St. Paul affirms himself, and his holy
Brethren were accounted in his time, 1 Cor. 4.13. As the filth of the World,
and the offscouring of all things unto this day; and I appeal to all sober and
good Men, whether this be not the Language of a pround and uncharitable Spirit,
and of a Tongue set on fire of Hell? Jam. 3.6. and as his Malice and
Uncharitableness appears in calling us the Children of the Devil, so does his
Pride also, in calling himself and his Party Saints, as is manifest from the
last Passage I quoted out of him, Before the Father, even our Father; to whom
the Saints, i. e. such as themselves, may thus address, but none of the blind
ignorant Sots, (as we are) of the World besides.

Page 73, he starts a Question, What would you have us poor Creatures to do
that cannot tell how to Pray? etc.

Where, before I give you his Answer, I cannot choose but take notice again of
the subtilty of the Man, in suppressing so much of the Objection, as would have
made it unanswerable, if he had but fairly proposed it, and that is this; How
shall we poor Creatures Pray in our respective Families, since we have not the
Gift of Prayer, which you and others pretend to? If it be an evil thing to make
use of Forms, to have Prayerless Families is much worse, and that ours must be,
if we are denied such needful helps; Now what would John Bunyan say to this
untoward Objection? Would they advise these poor Creatures, as I am credibly
informed, a Nonconformist did a Neighbor of his, when he was desired to
compose a form of Prayers for him to use in his Family, viz. that he had better
sit down and Groan, I suppose by what follows in my Author, that such poor
Creatures must kneel down, for that is a more humble posture than sitting, and
groan awhile, and that must for as good a Family Prayer, as if he had said one
out of the Practice of Piety; but alas! This will not serve the turn, for what
Edification is this to the Family, although they should all groan with him? What
reasonable Service is this to present to Almighty God? or, Wherein is this
better than the Quakers Silent-Meetings? And if Groaning with ones Family,
instead of Praying with them be Absurd and Ridiculous, I would fain know what
other course such ignorant Masters must Steer, who have not this pretended gift
of Prayer? Certainly there is no other Remedy for them but to use the help of
some Pious Form, in Praying with their Family, or else they must forbear
Praying with them, till they have attained this pretended Gift, which perhaps
may not be so long as they live; and then they must never Pray with them at
all; and so fall under the Curse denounced against such Families as call not on
the name of the Lord, Jer. 10.25. Where those that cannot pray in their
Families without it, and yet despise the assistance of a Form, have a form of
Prayer made to their Hands, but it is a dreadful one, that Woes and Vengeance
in it; which I desire all concerned therein seriously to consider, lest it fall
one day upon their Guilty Heads; But in Answer to this Query, as our Adversary
has mollified it, what would you have us poor Creatures do, that cannot tell
how to Pray etc. he say, poor Heart! Thou can not, (thou complainest) Pray;
can thou see thy Misery? Has God showed thee that thou art by Nature under
the curse of his Law? If so, do not mistake, I know thou do Groan, and that
most bitterly; I am persuaded thou can scarely be found doing any thing in
thy Calling but Prayer breaks from thy Heart; Have not thy Groans gone up to
Heaven from every corner of thy House? I know it is thus, and so also does thine
own sorrowful Heart Witness thy Tears, thy forgetfulness of thy Calling, etc.
is not thy Heart so full of desires after the things of another World, that
many times thou do forget the things of this World?

What abominable Pride and fulsome Flattery is this? He is persuaded of his own
Party that Prayer breaks from their Heart in every thing they are doing, though
he does not hear them utter one Word to that purpose; he knows they groan most
bitterly in every corner of their House, as if he were by, and heard, and saw,
and followed these poor Creatures from one Room to another; he has the
Confidence to say more than once; I know it is thus with them; but when he is
speaking of some of our People, he has the impudence to say, scarce one in
Forty of them knows what it is to be born again, and to have Communion with God,
and this he is as sure of as he is of the Heart breaking Prayers and bitter
Groans of his own dear Brethren, and as if he had seen and read the Book of
Life. John Bunyan can tell how few of us, scarce one in Forty, and how many of
them, yea, all his own poor Creatures have every one of their Names written
therein; and he lays down one Mark whereby to discern it, viz. that their
Hearts is so full of Desire after the the things of another World, that they
forget many times the things of This, tho this is a very fallible one, as is
clear from Balaam, who had sometimes such eager Desires as these, Let me Die
the Death of the Righteous, and let my last End be like his, Number. 23.10. yea he
was a Prophet, and had his Visions and Trances, wherein without doubt he
thought and spoke so much of another World, that he sometimes quite forgot
this; and yet notwithstanding his Gift of Prophecy, (which surely equaled if
not exceeded Jo. Bunyans Gift of Prayer) notwithstanding his Raptures,
Revelations, and Heavenly Desires, Balaam was a very wicked Man, giving that
pernicious Council to the Moabites to seduce the Israelites to Idolatry, by the
Temptations of their Beautiful Women, Number. 31.16. he also loved the Wages of
unrighteousness, and is Branded for his Iniquity in several places of the Old
and New Testament, and in this evil and wretched Condition he lived, and so in
all likelihood he dyed, Josh. 13.22. And this I the rather mention to show that
for all their Pretenses to Pray by the Spirit, and to other extraordinary
Gifts, this Man and his Party, may be as bad as Balaam was; but God forbid, I
should think so of all of them, and be so uncharitable to them, as they are to
us; I hope better things of the worst among them, but I speak this to prove
that if they had greater Gifts than they pretend to, they may notwithstanding
this, be very wicked Men, for so was Balaam, and so was O. Cromwell, so was
Major Weir of Scotland, and so were some Witches and Wizards, who could all
Pray in a wonderful manner, and were believed by their Followers, to Pray by
the Spirit, and far more Powerfully too than any Tinker Preacher of this Age;
for we must carefully distinguish between the miraculous Gifts, and saving
Graces of the Spirit, wicked Men may, and sometimes have the former, but the
latter fall to the Share of none but good Men; and the Praying with the Spirit,
which St. Paul speaks of, 1 Cor. 14.15. was such an extraordinary and
miraculous Gift, it was Praying in an unknown Tongue, in such a Language as a
Man had never learnt, and neither the Congregation, nor perhaps himself
understood, tho he could speak it, for ver. 14. he says, If I Pray in an
unknown Tongue, (which in the next verse he calls a Praying with the Spirit) my
Spirit Prays but my Understanding is unfruitful, being not able to Interpret
what he said, which was another extraordinary Gift of the Spirit, and which he
that had the Gift of Tongues sometimes wanted; and therefore the Apostle
intimates in this place, that there may be a separation between them, between
Praying with the Spirit, and Praying with Understanding, and when there is, the
latter is to be preferred before the former; ver. 19. in the Church I had
rather speak five words with my Understanding, that by my Voice I might Teach
others, than Ten thousand words in an unknown Tongue. i. e. in the Spirit which
bestowed that Gift; so that in St. Paul's Judgment, Praying with the Spirit, is
not always to the Edification of the Church, not always performed with
Understanding: And so much my Author owns, p. 58.59. This distinction was
occasioned through the Corinthians not observing, that it was their Duty to do
what they did to the Edification of themselves and others too, whereas they did
it for their own Commendations, so I judge, for many of them having
extraordinary Gifts, as to speak with diverse Tongues, therefore they were more
for those mighty Gifts, than they were for the Edifying of their Brethren,
which was the cause that Paul wrote this Chapter to them, to let them
understand, that though extraordinary Gifts were excellent, yet to do what they
did was more excellent, for (says the Apostle) If I Pray in an unknown Tongue,
my Spirit Prays but my Understanding is unfruitful, and also the
Understanding of others; therefore I will Pray with the Spirit and I will Pray
with the Understanding also; but (as I observed in the beginning of this
Chapter) he stops short here, without adding (which I shall therefore add) I
will Sing with the Spirit and I will Sing with the Understanding also; the
plain meaning of which Phrase, is this, viz. that in the Apostles Days, some
were enabled by a miraculous Gift of the Spirit, not only to Pray in an unknown
Tongue, but also to Sing in an unknown Psalm or Hymn, as appears farther from
ver. 26. When ye come together, every one of you has a Psalm, has a Tongue,
etc. both these were extraordinary and miraculous Gifts, by the Confession of
our Adversary, and he may as well pretend to Sing as Pray extempore from this
Text of Scripture, but unless he can Sing and Pray in an unknown Tongue, he
does not Sing and Pray as St. Paul and the Corinthians did; and if
notwithstanding this, devout Christians may Compose Spiritual Songs and Hymns,
and Sing them according to the Rules of Musical Notes, and yet all that while
be assisted by the Spirit; so may they also Compose Prayers and Praises
beforehand, and read them in the Congregation, who are to join with them
therein, and yet all that time be assisted by the same Spirit, for Praying and
Singing with the Spirit; are expressed, (as Discourse of extempore Prayer p. 13.
Dr. Tailor observes) in the same Place, in the same manner, to the same end,
and I know no Reason why there should be differing Senses put upon them to
serve purposes.

CHAP. II.
HAving cleared the Scope and Meaning of this mangled, divided and abused Text,
and detected the Authors Pride in Sainting himself, and his own Party, and his
Diabolical Slanders, in making Devils Incarnate of us; I shall next, consider
the malicious Reflections he casts on our Churches Liturgy, in the Prosecution
of his Discourse: Page 11. he says, Our Common Prayer Book is taken out of the
Papistical Mass Book, being the Scraps and Devices of some Popes, some Friars,
and I wot not what; and this he repeats Page 29. Paul and his Companions, were
as able to have made a Common Prayer Book, as any Pope or Prelate in the Church
of Rome, and could as well have made a Common Prayer Book, as those who first
Composed this, etc.

But I have these things to offer, to show the Falseness, and Senselessness of
such Suggestions.

1st. That our Common Prayer Book was not Compiled by any Pope or Prelate of
Rome, but by some Reformed Protestant Divines, who suffered Martyrdom for the
Protestant Religion, Sealing it with their Blood; and how can that savor of
Popery, that was the joint and unanimous Work of Protestant Martyrs, who,
without doubt were assisted therein, with the same Holy Spirit that enabled
them to resist unto Blood? and one of them ( See Fox's Martyrol. p. 1524. They
with weeping Eyes Prayed together, and Kissed one another, and he gave unto her
a Book of the Church Service set out by K. Edward, which in the time of his
Imprisonment he daily used.
Doctor Rowland Tailor) made use of the Common Prayer Book when he lay in
Prison, and a little before his Martyrdom, commended it to his Wife, as the
last Token of his Love. 2d. If it were true, that the Common Prayer Book were
taken out of the Mass, that is no Proof of its Unlawfulness, if there be
nothing else Sinful in it, the Papists using some such Prayers as we do, does
not render them Unlawful: They use to anoint Sick and Dying Persons with Oil,
and so do the Anabaptists; and when urged with this, that theirs is a Popish
Practice, their Answer is, that it is never the worse for all that, if it be
according to the Word of God; and may not we return the same Answer? That our
Prayers are never the worse, though some of them should be found (yet in another
Language) in the Mass Book, so long as they are agr^^able to the Holy
Scriptures, and pursuant to those excellent Forms Recorded there. 3dly. The
Papists are so far from likeing and favoring the Common Prayer, that the first
thing they did after Queen Mary ascended the Throne, was to abolish and cast it
out of the Church, which they would never have done, if they had thought it
conducing to the advancement of their Cause; but they knew it was the best
Defense and Buswark we have against Popery, and therefore demolished and took
it away, and so did the Dissenters again, in the Cromwellian Days, and we may
on their own grounds, conclude them to be Popishly affected, because they
showed the same Enmity and Spite to the Common Prayer Book, and with disdain
laid it aside, as the Papists had done before; and if these Men are never the
worse for doing the same things the Papists did; Why is our Common Prayer Book
the worse, for having some things in it, which the Mass Book has? Especially if
it be considered, that all their Prayers are in Latin, which (...) a Language
unknown to the common People; all our Prayers are in English, which is our
Mother Tongue, and understood by the Vulgar; most of their Prayers are
presented to the Virgin Mary, and to other Saints and Angels; all our Prayers
are offered up to God, through the Mediation of Jesus Christ; and with how many
and (to say no worse) burdensome Ceremonies, Baptism and the Lords Supper is
Administered among them? And with how few and Significant ones those Sacraments
are Celebrated by us; (all which, make a vast Difference, between the Common
Prayer and Mass Book) any one will easily find, that has leisure and
opportunity to Compare them both together. 4ly. How does J. Bunyan know that
St. Paul never composed a Form of Prayer? The sound Words he commands Timothy
to hold fast, 2 Timothy 1.13. might (for ought he can prove to the contrary) be
such a Form; himself allows the Form of Godliness, which the same Apostle
speaks of, 2 Timothy 3.5. to have respect to a Form of Prayer, as I shall show
hereafter, and is there not as good reason that this Form of sound Words should
likewise regard Prayer? And if it does, we may thence infer, that St. Paul made
such a Form for the Church, and commanded Timothy to hold fast the same by
using it therein; however this be, we may be sure St. Paul used a Form of
Prayer himself, even that of Christ's own composing, Luke 11.2. when ye pray
say, our Father, etc. and he taught others to use it also; or else he could not
have kept a Conscience void of Offense toward God and toward Man, neither
would he have declared unto his People the whole Council of God, as he protests
he had done, Acts 20.27. and Chap. 24.16. and if St. Paul and the rest of the
Apostles used no other Form of Prayer, it was because they were assisted by the
immediate inspiration of the Holy Ghost, and had miraculous Gifts bestowed upon
them, such as the gift of Tongues, of Prophecy, of Healing, etc. and so did
not stand in need of it; and let John Bunyan and his Party prove they have the
like wonderful Gifts, and can work the like stupendous Miracles, and they
shall be dispensed with in the use of the Common Prayer Book; but if none of
those extraordinary Gifts and Miracles can be truly pretended to by them, then
I think they need the help of such a Form of sound Words as well as we; and
this has been the constant Judgment of the Church of God in all Ages since
those Miracles ceased; and therefore did she at first establish Liturgies, and
has always used them, if not in, at least ever since the Apostles Days.
Page 31 our Author is very witty and says, But here the wise Men of our Days
are so well skilled, as that they have both the Matter and Manner of their
Prayers at their Fingers end; setting such a Prayer for such a Day, and that
twenty Years before it comes, one for Christmas, another for Easter, and six
Days after that; they have also bounded how many Syllables must be said in
every one of them at their public Exercises; for each Saints Day also they
have them ready for the Generations yet unborn to say.

All this (which is mere Banter) must pass for an invincible Argument to
overthrow our whole Liturgy at once, and every Collect therein; but such as it
is we will examine it, and show the absurdity and folly of it.

1st. This Man does not show his wisdom in pretending we make Prayers for
certain Days twenty Years before they come; since those very Days happen all
within the compass of One Year, and therefore there cannot be the distance of
twenty Years between them, and the making such particular Prayers; and if it be
said that these Prayers are repeated for more than twenty Years one after
another; we may answer, there is good reason for it, that as often as such
solemn times return, we should suit our public Prayers and Praises according
to such solemn Occasions, having the Example of God himself, and his Servant
Moses, to justify our Practice; for by the Divine appointment, the Priests
under the Law, were confined to a Form of Words in blessing the People, which
they were always to pronounce when they dismissed the Assembly; Numb. 6.22, 23,
24, 25, 26. the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying, speak unto Aaron and his Sons,
saying, on this wise ye shall bless the Children of Israel, saying unto them;
the Lord bless thee, and keep thee; the Lord make his Face to shine upon thee;
and be gracious unto thee; the Lord lift up his Countenance upon thee, and give
thee Peace; in which one Blessing, wherein the name of Jehovah or Lord is
thrice repeated, we are taught the great mystery of our Christian Faith, even
the Trinity in Unity, or the three Persons and one God, it being the peculiar
property of God the Father to bless and keep us, of God the Son to be gracious
unto us, and of God the Holy Ghost to give us Peace, as See his Com. on Number.
page 109.
Dr. Patrick has observed; to the like form of Words was Moses himself confined
as often as the Ark moved and rested in the Wilderness, Numb. 10.35, 36. When
the Ark set forward, Moses said, rise up O Lord, and let thine Enemies be
scattered, and let them that hate thee flee before thee; and when the Ark
rested he said, return O Lord to the many thousands of Israel; and by the same
divine Institution the Jewish People were obliged to a set form of Words in
praying to God, and praising his Name, when they offered their first Fruits,
Deuteronomy. 26.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Thou shall speak and say before the Lord thy God, a
Syrian ready to perish was my Father, and he went down into Egypt, and
sojourned there with a few, and became there a Nation great, mighty, and
populous; and the Egyptians evil entreated us, and afflicted us, and laid upon
us hard Bondage; and when we cried unto the Lord God of our Fathers, the Lord
heard our Voice, and looked on our Affliction, and our Labor and our
Oppression; and the Lord brought us forth out of Egypt with a mighty Hand, and
out stretched arm, and with great terribleness, and with Signs and with
Wonders, and he has brought us unto this Place, and has given us this Land,
even a Land that flows with Milk and Honey, and now behold I have brought the
first Fruits of the Land which thou, O Lord, have given me. The like Form of
Words were they obliged to use in the Offering of their Tithes, Deuteronomy. 26.13,
14, 15. Thou shall say before the Lord thy God, I have brought away the
hallowed things out of my House, and also have given them unto the Levite, and
unto the Stranger, to the Fatherless and to the Widow, according to all thy
Commandments which thou have commanded; I have not transgressed thy
Commandments, neither have I forgotten them; I have not eaten thereof in my
Mourning; neither have I taken ought thereof for any unclean use, nor given
ought thereof for the Dead; but I have harkened to the Voice of the Lord my
God, and have done according to all that thou have commanded me; look down from
thy holy Habitation from Heaven, and bless thy People Israel, and the Land
which thou have given us, as thou swearest unto our Fathers, a Land that
flows with Milk and Honey; And both these Forms of Prayer and Thanksgiving,
were the Jewish People constantly to observe twice every Year in all succeeding
Generations when they offered their first Fruits and Tithes before the Lord;
but according to John Bunyan's bantering way he would expose them thus; The
Wise Men of Moses his Days, with himself the Priests and People, were so well
skilled, that they had both the matter and the manner of their Prayers at their
Fingers end, seting such a Prayer for such a Day, and that twenty Years before
it comes, one for the Day wherein they Offered their First Fruits, another for
the Day wherein they Offered their Tithes; they have also bounded how many
Syllables must be said in every one of their Prayers, at their public
Exercises, for each of these Offering Days, they have them ready for the
Generations yet unborn to say; so that if there be any weight in this way of
Arguing, it will cast as much disgrace upon the Prayers of Moses, (which yet
were Dictated and Directed by the infinite Wisdom of Almighty God) as upon the
Prayers of the Church of England, which were also Composed by the same Spirit.

If it be said, that Moses, the Jewish Priests and People had not the
assistance of the Holy Spirit, as we have, and therefore they were tied to
Forms, from which we are now set free: I Answer, (or rather John Bunyan does it
for me, p. 53) You do not find any Words of Prayer that we read of, come out of
the Mouth of Moses, when he was going out of Egypt, and was followed by
Pharaoh, Ex. 14.15. and yet he made Heaven ring again with his Cry, but it was
the inexpressible and unsearchable Groans and Cryings of his Soul, in and with
the Spirit; And this he repeats p. 75. so that by our Adversaries own
Confession, Moses had the Spirit, and could Pray by it, even in their Sense as
well at least as any Gifted Brother of them all; and yet this very Moses,
sometimes used a Form of Prayer himself, and also prescribed a Form of Prayers
for others, even the Jewish Priests and People, to be constantly observed by
them on solemn Occasions, and on such particular Days, and Seasons of the Year.

2dly. Those two great solemn Festivals, which my Author mentions as observed
by our Church, Christmas and Easter, have good Authority for their Observation,
even in the New Testament; for can we have better Warrant for our keeping
Christmas Day, than the Holy Angels keeping of it in a full Quire, as they did
Luke 2.13. and suddenly there was with the Angel ( i. e. who brought the
Shepherds the joyful News of Christ's Birth) a Multitude of the Heavenly Host,
Praising God, and saying, (and they did it all in the same Form) Glory to God
in the highest, and on Earth Peace, and good Will toward Men. Now, What other
Reason can there be given, why so many (if not all) the Angels should be
present on Earth at this time, and unanimously Worship God, except it were to
teach us to set apart this Day in all future Ages, for a Day of Thanksgiving to
God, for the greatest Mercy was afforded the World since the Creation, even the
Birth and Incarnation of the Savior of it? Well may we keep Christmass-Day,
our Humane Nature being assumed into the Godhead, and a Savior being Born to
us upon it, which is Christ the Lord: When the Holy Angels kept this Day, whose
Nature he did not assume, and to whom he was not Born a Savior, as he was to
us.

I shall say no more in behalf of this great Festival, but Transcribe a Passage
out of the Assemblies Annotations on this portion of Scripture, Luke 2. 13. See
the Assemblies Annotations on Luke 2.13.
Thus God would (say they) have this public Service (for so their Multitude
made it) performed by all who have Knowledge of, and Interest in the Birth of
Christ, as to manifest his Mercy and Truth, so to Condemn their stupid
Ingratitude, who perversely refuse to join in this Duty; as if general Precepts
in Gods Word, right Reason, and the Examples of Men and Angels inspired by Gods
Spirit, chosen Witnesses of of our Saviors Nativity, and for this same purpose
sent by God himself from Heaven, that they might thus Celebrate that Day; were
not sufficient Warrant to lead them to Imitation, and joining in an Holy
Harmony with them.

And as for our keeping Easter Day, can we have better Authority than St. Paul's
Command for it? 1 Cor.. 5.7, 8. Christ our Passover is Sacrificed for us,
therefore let us keep the Feast; i.e. Easter, which is our Christian Passover,
that comes in the room of the Jewish; not with the old Leaven, neither with the
Leaven of Malice and Wickedness; which is a plain Allusion to some of the
Typical Ceremonies wherewith the Israelites kept their Passover, and proves
that we Christians should keep Easter with the substance of those Types, even
the unleavened Bread of Sincerity and Truth; i. e. in a pious Preparation for,
and devout Participation of the Lords Supper, in a Death to Sin, and a
Resurrection to newness of Life.

Yet besides this Scriptural Argument, I shall add one Consideration more, and
that is King Charles the Martyrs Quaery propounded to the Parliaments.
Commissioners at Holdenby, April 23. 1647.

I desire to be resolved of this Question.

Why the new Reformers discharge the keeping of Easter?

The Reason of this Quaery it;

I conceive the Celebration of this Feast, was Instituted by the same
Authority, which changed the Jewish Sabbath into the Lords Day, or Sunday; for
it will not be found in Scripture, where Saturday is discharged to be kept, or
turned into the Sunday; wherefore it must be the Churches Authority that
Changed the one, and Instituted the other; therefore my Opinion is, that those
who will not keep this Feast, may as well return to the Observation of
Saturday, and refuse the weekly Sunday; when any Body can show me that herein I
am in an Error, I shall not be ashamed to confess and amend it; till when you
know my Mind.

C. R.


Lastly, As to the Observation of Saints Days, those Men have no Reason to
upbraid us with it, who every Year keep their Festival Days, in Memory of the
Seiges, and prosperous Rebellion, they raised and maintained against their
rightful Sovereign: Indeed, had they Fought for him, and been preserved and
delivered in so Just and Loyal a Cause, to have kept an Anniversary Day in
Remembrance of it, would have been a justifiable Practice; and so it is to
observe those few Saints Days, whose Memory our Church requires us once a Year
to Celebrate, having the like Authority in the Holy Scripture, for their
continual Observation, as Psalm. 116.15. Precious in the Sight of the Lord is
the Death of the Saints, and it is the Days of their Death and Martyrdom, and
not of their Birth, which we Commemorate, not their first Days in which they
were Born into the World, but the last Days, in which they were Born into an
happy Eternity; and on these Days, we do not only Bless God for those eminent
Virtues and Graces which Shone in them, but also, we desire him to enable us to
follow their good Examples; that being compassed about with so great a Cloud of
Witnesses, we may run with Patience the Race that is set before us, looking
unto Jesus their Captain General, who with them has endured the Cross, and
received a Crown in Heaven; and by this means we do what we can to perpetuate
their Memory on Earth, as God expects we should, Psalm. 112.6. The Righteous
shall be had in everlasting Remembrance. And this the Primitive Christians
began, by first keeping the Day of these Saints Martyrdom at the very Place
where they suffered; and this after Ages followed, by Celebrating it in all
other Places where Christianity was professed; and I doubt not but it will be
continued in all future Ages, even unto the end of the World, among all
Orthodox Christians.

CHAP. III.
HAving in the former Chapter, detected the Sophistry and Fallaciousness of
John Bunyans Arguments, against Forms of Prayer, and shown how they rather
conclude for them, and against his Pretenses to Pray by the Spirit: I shall now
proceed to discover the Weakness and Folly of his Answer to that convincing
Proof for the Lawfulness of Forms, even our Savior's Command for it, Luke
11.2. When ye Pray, say our Father, etc.

To this he says, p. 80. I cannot think that Christ intended it as a stinted
Form of Prayer, because he lays it down diversely: But how diversely? Mat. 6.9.
our blessed Lord says, After this manner Pray ye, Our Father. etc. the plain
import of which is, that this ought to be the Pattern by which we should
Compose all our Prayers; but least his Disciples (who had desired their Master
to teach them a Form of Prayer, as John Baptist had taught his Disciples)
should think it well enough to have an Eye only to this Pattern in Composing
all their Prayers by, though in the mean time they never made use of this very
Form it self, therefore in Luke 11.2. our Savior said unto them, When ye Pray,
say Our Father, etc. i. e. do not content your selves to Pray after this
manner, in other Prayers of your own, Composing them according to it; but also
use this very Prayer it self, together with your own of the like Nature, that
putting up your Petitions to Almighty God, with a good Heart in Christ's own
Words, ye may be sure to be heard; and let any honest Christian but Read and
Compare these two Evangelists together in this Point, and I am confident he
will acknowledge, that Christ must needs intend this Prayer of his should it
self be daily used, and also the true Standard of all our Devotions; and
consequently, he must needs intend it for a Form, or else his Words and
Intentions would not agree, which is Blasphemy to imagine.

But out Author answers farther, p. 81. We do not find, that the Apostles did
ever observe this Form as such, neither did they admonish others so to do;
search all their Epistles, etc. But did not the Apostles do many things which
are not written there? As St. John says, there are also many other things which
Jesus did, which are not written every one of them in the Gospel, Joh. 21.25:
For, were not all the Apostles Baptized? And yet we do not Read in the New
Testament, of the Baptism of any one of them; so the Apostles might, and
without doubt did make use of the Lords Prayer, though there be no mention of it
in their Epistles; otherwise how were they Faithful in keeping Christ's
Commandments themselves, this being one of them? When ye Pray, say, Our Father,
etc. and this doubtless they taught others to use also, or else they were not
Faithful in executing Christ's Commission, who at the delivery thereof, speaks
thus; Mat. 28.19.20. Go ye therefore, and Proselyte all Nations, Baptizing them
in the Name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; teaching them to
observe all things whatsoever I have Commanded you; and this being one thing
that Christ had Commanded them, when ye Pray, say Our Father, etc. we cannot
suppose that they failed to teach others to observe this also, as well as
Baptism, or any other Gospel Duty.

But after all his trifling Answers to this invincible Objection, Jo. Bunyan
confesses, p. 81. That Christ by these Words, Our Father which art in Heaven,
does instruct his People, what Rules they should observe in their Prayers to
God: And if it is a Rule for all our Prayers; is not this as great a
Confinement of the Spirit, as the limiting of it to this, or any other Form of
sound Words? This Author, p. 75. and those that made the Directory, (though they
are Enemies to all Forms of Prayer, and therefore abolished our excellent
Liturgy) yet lay down certain Rules, which we must observe in Praying to
Almighty God; which is indeed, to do that thing themselves, which they condemn
in us, and call a Restraining of the Spirit; for to dictate to the Spirit the
Heads of Prayer which he must insist upon, and leave him at liberty only in the
choice of Words, is every whit as much, if not more a restraining of the
Spirit, than only to appoint the Words, and leave him at liberty in the choice
of the Sense; the Matter of Prayer being more considerable than Words, and the
Sense more valuable than Language: If therefore the Spirit must be left free,
why do they themselves confine him, in imposing on him the Heads of his Prayer?
As if he needed help for Invention, (as our See his excellent Book, p. 686.
Royal Martyr observed) though not for expression; or as if Matter did not as
much stint and obstruct the Spirit, as if it were clothed in, and confined to
fit Words, (so slight and easy is the Leger-de-main which will serve to delude
the Vulgar) And from hence any one may well conclude, that these Men instead of
being inspired with the Spirit of God, are possessed with the Spirit of Pride
and Singularity; what else is the meaning of their taking away the Book of
Common Prayer, and yet establishing a Directory in its room, which is as much a
restraining of the Spirit as the other? What else is the meaning of that
Passage in the entrance of the Directory, p. 5? Let all enter the Assembly, not
irreverently, but in a grave and seemly manner, taking their Seats or Places
without Adoration, or Bowing themselves toward one Place or other: But that
because when we enter the Church (the Place of Gods gracious and more immediate
Presence) we solemnly Worship God, by Bowing our Bodies and Knees before him,
therefore the Dissenters when they enter the Church will not Worship God at
all, being required by the Directory to take their Seats without Adoration;
though herein they act contrary to David, who says, Psalm. 95.6. O come let us
Worship and Bow down, let us Kneel before the Lord our Maker: They act contrary
to St. Paul's Converts, of whom he says, That coming into the Church, they will
fall down on their Face and Worship God, 1 Cor. 14.25. They act contrary to
those Pious Souls that came to Christ to obtain a Cure for themselves or
Friends; who did not approach or address themselves to him, without a solemn
act of Adoration, they always first Worshipped him, by Kneeling, Bowing, or
Prostrating their Bodies before him; as you may see, Mat. 17.14. Mar. 5.22.
Luke 5.12. And if those good People paid Christ's Corporeal Presence so much
Reverence in the Days of his Humiliation, certainly we ought not to give his
Spiritual Presence less Honor in his Exaltation, since he is now advanced to
the Right Hand of God; but when we approach him, should Worship him with our
Bodies, as well as Souls; but the Directory in opposition to the Practice of
these Holy Men, Commands the People to enter the Assembly (where they suppose
Christ Spiritually present, or else, What make they there?) without Adoration,
or Bowing their Bodies toward one Place or other; and consequently they must
not Bow their Bodies or Knees to Adore God at all; for if they do so, it must
be toward some Place, it being impossible to Worship God with our Bodies
without it

But to return from the Presbyterian Directory, (whither I have a little
digressed, presuming it would be a Pardonable Digression) to our Anabaptistical
Director of Spiritual Prayer, John Bunyan; p. 45. 46. he affirms, That none but
such as are Regenerate, can truly with allowance, say Our Father, etc. and yet
even these must go no farther, nor venture to say out the Lords Prayer, because
it is a Form, and to use any such Forms, is as bad as setting up, and
Worshipping Jeroboams Calves, which was downright Idolatry; and p. 110. What is
this (says he) less than that accursed Abomination of Jeroboam, which kept many
from going to Jerusalem, the Place and Way of Gods appointment to Worship?

But if this be less than Blaspemy, I know not what can be called by that Name;
for if the use of godly Forms of Prayer (not excepting the Lords Prayer it
self) be as abominable Idolatry as Jeroboam's Calves, then our Lord in
commanding us when we Pray, to say, Our Father which art in Heaven, etc. must
Command the Practice of Idolatry; which is to Charge God not only Foolishly,
but Presumptuously; and in so doing, to fall himself into Jeroboams great Sin,
in devising another way of Praying, than that revealed in the Word of God, and
in slighting and despising that Form of Prayer which Christ has given us; a
Practice which we justly detest and abhor, and therefore in our Morning and
Evening Service, we always use the Lords Prayer, and all our other Prayers are
Composed according to this divine and admirable Pattern; and Mr. Baxter, (whose
Authority may have great Influence on the Presbyterians, if it should have
little on John Bunyan and his Party) was so much for the use of the Lord's
Prayer, that (I am credibly informed) he constantly concluded his own with it,
and on his Deathbed, earnestly See Mr. Baxters Funeral Sermon, by Dr. Bates.
Recommended the like Practice to all his Dissenting Brethren, and wondered that
any of them should lay aside the Lord's Prayer; assuring them he always found
much Comfort in the use of it, and his Heart raised and lifted Heaven-wards, in
the frequent Repetition thereof; which I mention on purpose to silence the
Clamours of these Men against our Church, for using the Lord's Prayer twice,
and sometimes more in our daily Devotions; for why may not our People receive
as much Spiritual Comfort (as Mr. Baxter says he did) in such Repetitions? And
can a good thing be repeated too often? They say, it cannot, when they require
their Followers to attend the Repetition of their Sermons; and I presume, they
dare not say that the very best of their Discourses, are so good as the Lord's
Prayer, or that the Words of uninspired Men, are equal to the Words of Jesus
Christ; besides, the Lord's Prayer being delivered by the two Evangelists, with
some little Alteration, the one reciting the Doxology, the other omitting it,
therefore also we repeat this Prayer once with and once without it; in the one
ending thus; Deliver us from evil, Amen, as St. Luke Chap. 11.4. and in the
other thus; for thine is the Kingdom, and the Power, and the Glory, for ever
and ever, Amen: Our Church enjoining all its Members to make use of both Forms,
that none may fail to comply with our Lords Commands, who requires us to Pray
thus, and after this manner; and this I think is enough to satisfy the
Scruples of any reasonable Person, that may be offended with the Repetition of
the Lords Prayer in our Churches Liturgy.

But if Jo. Bunyan cannot dissuade Christians from using the Lords Prayer, (and
'twill be hard to do so, so long as they find it in their Bibles) he invents
such shifts to limit and confine this Divine Form, that he will allow none but
Saints, i. e. such as himself and his own Party to use it; (though I believe few
have ever heard it from their Teachers) and sometimes he will not permit the
Saints themselves to make use of it, as p. 41. I tell you, (says he) however
Hypocrites may think, yet the Christian that is so indeed, (and that surely
must be one of the Saints) finds all the difficulty in this very thing, he
cannot say God is his Father.

But certainly the Author of the Pilgrims Progress, had here forgotten the
Parable of the Prodigal Son, who before he was a Saint, and a great way off
from God, and in the far Country of Sin, whither he had fled from him, he said;
I will arise and go to my Father, and will say unto him, Father I have sinned
against Heaven and before thee; and am no more worthy to be called thy Son.
Luke 15.13. 18.20. But had Jo. Bunyan heard this Prayer, he would have Schooled
him thus; Thou Poor Blind Prodigal Sot; thy great Prayer is to say; Father I
have sinned against Heaven and before thee: Do thou know the meaning of the
first Word of this Prayer? Can thou indeed with the rest of the Saints, cry
Abba Father? Art thou truly Born again? Have thou received the Spirit of
Adoption? Do thou see thy self in Christ? And can thou come to God as a
Member of him? Or art thou ignorant of these things, and yet dare say Father?
Is not the Devil thy Father? And do thou not do the Deeds of the Flesh? Have
thou not been a Prodigal Spend-thrift, wasted thy Substance with Riotous
living, and devouerd thy Estate among Harlots, and yet dare thou say to God,
Father?

Thus Rudely, Unchristianly, and Uncharitably, would Jo. Bunyan treat the
Prodigal Son, as the elder Brother would have had him treated; but God himself
treats him far otherwise; even as a dear and tender Child; for when he was yet
a great way off, his Father saw him, and had Compassion on him, and ran and
fell on his Neck and kissed him; and his Reception and Entertainment was
extraordinary, ver. 22.23. The Author of the Pilgrims Progress, had likewise
forgotten the Parable of Dives and Lazarus; the former, though in Hell, called
Abraham Father, Luke 16.24. But Jo. Bunyan would for this alone, have called
him, Damned Wretch, and Child of the Devil, and demanded of him, What have thou
to do cursed Man, to call Abraham Father? But Abraham has better Language in
his Mouth, and is so far from reproving even this Damned Rich man for calling
him Father, that he gives him a mild Answer, and the Title of Son, perhaps,
because he was one of his Offspring, though much degenerated from him that was
the first Root and Stock of them; Son remember that thou in thy life time
receivedst thy good things, etc. In like manner the most wicked Person in the
World may call God Father; he being the God and Father of all Men by Creation,
who are therefore said, to be all his Offspring, Acts 17.28, 29. So on the
Account of their natural Being, which they received from God, all Mankind may
truly call God Father; as all the Children of an earthly Parent, though of far
different Natures and Behavior, may yet call him their Father; 2dly. God is
the Father of all Men by Redemption which is universal, and extended to all
that will sincerely accept and lay hold of it, as is clear from 1 John 2.1.2.
If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but
also for the sins of the whole World: So that Jesus Christ dyed for all Men,
even the most profligate Wretches in the World, or else they were not bound to
Repent and Believe the Gospel; for to what purpose should they do either, since
none can be saved, but those for whom Christ dyed, and then all their
Repentance and Faith would be in vain: So that on the account of Creation and
Redemption, we may all call Almighty God Father; although we were never so
wicked, even as Satan's Children, as this Author supposes us to be; and by
consequence, may safely use the Lords Prayer, without being guilty of Lying or
Blasphemy; although none of us were Saints, at least not one in Forty did deserve
that Name: Indeed William Pen and his Party, upbraid us for saying in our
Prayers; Lord have Mercy upon us miserable Sinners; and, We have erred and
strayed from thy Ways like lost Sheep: And John Bunyan and his Party, upbraid
us for saying, Our Father which art in Heaven, etc. So that if we should
hearken to these Men, we must not Pray at all, neither address our selves to
God as Saints, nor as Sinners; neither say Our Father, nor, God be merciful to
me a Sinner; but the truth is, we may, and on good Grounds do say both, having
the Examples of David and St. Paul, to justify our Practice, whom I presume
our Author will allow in the number of Saints, and that they might truly call
God Father; and yet one of them says in his Prayer to God; I have gone astray
like a lost Sheep, O seek thy Servant, Ps. 119.176. the other says; Jesus
Christ came into the World to save Sinners, of whom I am chief, 1 Timothy 1.15.
and if after their Examples, and that of the penitent Publican we come to
Church, and confess our Sins, and desire God to be Merciful to us Sinners; and
also after the Example of the poor Prodigal, we arise and go to our Father, and
say unto him, Father we have sinned against Heaven and before thee, and are not
worthy to be called thy Children; we may hope to go back again to our Houses
justified before the envious Elder Brother, and proud Pharisee, that Censure
and condemn us for our Humility and Faith.

CHAP. IV.
AS nothing is more usual than for Heretics and Schismatics to propogate
their false and pernicious Doctrines by Fire and Sword, and all the studied
Arts of Cruelty and Violence, that what is wanting of Truth on their side, may
be made up with blind furious Zeal, and ungovernable Rage, so none are more
forward to shift the Odium of such bloody Proceedings, and cast it upon others
that are not guilty thereof, and to make loud Outcries of Persecution and
Oppression, which in reality must be charged upon themselves, and laid at their
own Doors. Thus of old the Arians dealt with the Orthodox Christians,
complained of hard Usage from them, and of their great Sufferings for
Conscience sake, and yet none were more bloody Persecutors than themselves, as
the Orthodox found by sad Experience, when these Men had gotten the Power into
their own Hands, from whom they suffered more than ever they did from the most
barbarous Nations, or under the worst Heathen Persecutions. And thus their
Successors the Anabaptists have carried themselves toward the Churches of
Christ, where they have had means and opportunities to show the Savageness of
their Natures and Dispositions, witness the dismal Tragedies they acted at
their first rise in Manster, and other Parts of Germany, which were so
barbarous and inhumane, that the Modern Anabaptists pretend to be ashamed of
them, and of the levelling carnal Principles, which their first Founders held:
However this by the way shows their Religion to be very bad, whose Foundation
was laid in Rebellion and Blood, and so indeed has it been propogated ever
since, when any fair occasion has been offered for the discovery of their
Intentions; witness their Persecuting King Charles the Martyr, and some of his
loyal Subjects, to the very Gates of Death, and some of them to strange Cities,
in which these Men had a great Hand, being some of the worst, though most potent
in Cromwell's Army, who with their assistance ruled all, and accomplished those
Villianies, which are a Scandal to our Nation, and Reproach to the Protestant
Religion.

And yet Page 45, speaking to a member of our Church, John Bunyan says, art not
thou a desperate Persecutor of the Children of God? He is their Father whom
thou Persecutest; Strange confidence indeed! that this Man should not be
ashamed to complain of Persecution, who was himself a great Persecutor, as this
very Book of his shows; wherein he treats us with bitter Words and railing
Language, which is one kind of Persecution, and not the least neither, even
that of the Tongue; for what Moses calls Ishmaels mocking, St. Paul styles his
Persecuting of Isaac, Genesis 21.9. compared with Gal. 4.29. and I doubt the
Persecution of the Hand would soon follow, if it lay in these Men's Power this
way to hurt us; and perhaps they might think it meritorious, and that they
should do God good Service in destroying us, as the mad Jews did when they
killed Christ's Disciples, Joh. 16.2. This is certain, that the Anabaptists and
other Dissenters, who now cry out so much of Persecution, have proved
themselves desperate Persecutors, as often as they have had Opportunities to
show it, witness their Ejecting, Decimating and Sequestrating, their
Imprisoning, Banishing, and Beheading so many of the Loyal party in Cromwell 's
Days, who by these Men's advice and assistance, acted all those Villainies upon
his faithful fellow Subjects, and imbrued his Hands in his gracious Sovereign's
innocent Blood, in the shedding whereof all the Sectaries concurred, but
especially the Anabaptists, who some of them sat as his Judges, and condemned
him; (...) See the Life of King Charles the First p. 55.
interrupted him in his last Devotions, and offered Affronts to him in his
dying Moments and Agonies, not suffering him to Pray or Dye in quiet, without
disturbing his Charitable Soul with unusual rudeness and injuries, witness
their Rebellion likewise against King James the Second, under the Conduct of
the Duke of Monmouth, a considerable part of whose Commanders, Officers and
Soldiers were Anabaptists, and this resistance of their rightful Sovereigns
though contrary to Romans 13. and the practice of all the Primitive Christians; yet
these Men Justify, Defend and Canonize such for Saints and Martyrs as died in
it, and were executed for it, as may be seen in a Rhiming Pamphlet of Benjamin
Keach's entitled See distressed Sion relieved. p. 25, 26, 27. etc. where some
that were Rebels to two if not 3 Kings are named as Saints and Martyrs.
Distressed Sion releived or the Garment of Praise for the Spirit of Heaviness,
wherein are to be found diverse instances of such Army Saints and Fighting
Martyrs, though I dare say, the first the Christian Church ever heard of since
the Foundation of it, all the Martyrs in Queen Mary's Days, and under the Ten
Persecutions, being Strangers to Carnal Weapons, and accustomed only to
Spiritual ones, even Prayers and Tears, thinking the other unlawful to be used
against their Sovereign, or for Christ's sake, whose Kingdom is not of this
World, nor are his Servants to fight for him, as himself expressly affirms, Joh.
18.36. So contrary to the Gospel and the holy Christian Martyrs is these
pretended Protestants Practice, and so is that passage in the solemn League and
Covenant, the Presbyterian Idol, to which they would have all Hands lifted up,
and all Knees to bow, we shall in like manner, without respect of Persons,
endeavor the extirpation of Popery and Prelacy, (that is Church Government by
Archbishops, Bishops, their Chancellours and Commissaries, Deans, Deans and
Chapters, Arch Deacons and all other Ecclesiastical Officers depending on that
Hierarchy) we shall also with all Faithfulness endeavor the discovery of all
such as have been or shall be Malignants, etc. by hindering the Reformation of
Religion, etc. or making any Parties, etc. amongst the People contrary to this
League and Covenant, that they be brought to public Trial, and receive condign
Punishment, as the degree of their Offense shall require or deserve; by which
Clauses they are bound to destroy our Church Root and Branch, and all others
too that shall help us, or hinder them in this reforming Work, which any one
would think could not be done without a bloody Persecution, unless therefore
John Bunyan and his Party renounce the solemn League and Covenant, and their
other Persecuting Oaths and Books, and also all their violent and cruel
Practices, in this and other Countries, let them not for shame complain of
Persecution, who have been, and are themselves the great Accusers and grand
Persecutors of their Brethren.

CHAP. V.
OUR Author (I suppose) being sensible of the small success his railing against
the Common Prayer may have to withdraw any rational Persons love from it, or to
raise his hatred thereof, bethinks himself of better and stronger Arguments
against it, and endeavors to persuade the World, that the holy Scriptures are
on his side, and do in several places manifestly condemn it, which indeed would
effectually do his Business, if he could but prove this vainglorious Assertion;
but how well that is done, we come next to examine, for p. 35, 36. Jo. Bunyan,
says, The Common Prayer Book is a mere humane Invention and Institution, which
God is so far from owning of, that he expressly forbids it, with any other such
like, and that by manifold Sayings in his most holy and blessed Word; and one
of the Texts he quotes is Prove. 21.9. It is better to dwell in the corner of
the House top than with a brawling Woman in a wide House, which perhaps is a
mistake of the Printer, being nothing at all to his purpose; but all the other
Texts he produces being altogether as Impertinent, and this a second Edition of
the Discourse, I am tempted to think this is no error of the Press, but what
the Ignorant Author might imagine a good Proof of the unlawfulness of Forms of
Prayer, and as good Proof indeed it is, as those that follow, which he there
inserts, as Mark 7.7, 8. In vain do they worship me, teaching for Doctrines the
Commandments of Men, for laying aside the Commandment of God, ye hold the
Tradition of Men, as the washing of Pots and Cups, and many other such like
things ye do, where it is plain our Savior condemned the Hypocritical Scribes
and Pharasees for preferring their vain Tradations (of which they had a great
many, and particularly the Corban, mentioned ver. 11.) before the Commandment
of God, i. e. they forbad Children to help their Parents when they were in
want, if they had either rashly made a Vow never to do it, or had devoted their
Substance to pious uses, contrary to the Fifth Commandment, which requires
Children to relieve their Parents when they need it; that being one way of
honoring them; and thus those Hypocritical Scribes and Pharasees were very
curious in cleansing their Pots and Cups, lest themselves should be polluted
with any Legal uncleanness; but yet they notoriously neglected those great
Moral Duties which were plainly Commanded, and also signified by them, even the
cleansing their Hearts and Lives from the filthiness of Sin; as is evident from
ver. 20, 21, 22, 23. and Luke 11.39. And the Lord said unto him; Now do ye
Pharisees make clean the outside of the Cup and Platter, but your inward part
is full of Ravening and Wickedness: But how does the Jewish Corban, and their
superstitious Washing of Pots and Cups, conclude against the use of the Common
Prayer Book? Do we equal or prefer it to the Bible, as the Pharisees did these
things to the Commandments of God? And what Commandment do we break in the use
of the Common Prayer Book, as they did the Fifth in the Practice of their
Corban? Certainly if this place has any respect to Prayer, it more forceably
concludes against their extemporary Prayers, which they constantly use in their
Meetings, whilst in the mean time, they reject that excellent Form which Christ
himself has Commanded, Luke 11.2. When ye Pray, say Our Father, etc. So that
with more reason any one may think they themselves are the modern Scribes and
Pharisees, that are here Condemned by our Savior, of whom he says, ver. 9.
Full well ye reject the Commandment of God, even that concerning the Lords
Prayer, that you may keep your own Tradition, even that of extemporary Prayer,
which is a mere Invention of Men, and no where commanded in the Holy
Scriptures: But in our Common Prayer Book, we retain that Divine Prayer; and
all our other Prayers are Composed according to it; it is after that manner we
Pray in all the rest, Mat. 6.9. so that in the use of the Common Prayer, we
keep the Commandment of Christ, and they in despising thereof reject it; and
then, these Words which they urge against us, turn upon themselves; and so does
that of Deuteronomy. 12.30, 31, 32. Take heed to thy self, that thou be not snared by
following them, after that they be destroyed from before thee, and that thou
enquire not after their Gods, saying, how did those Nations serve their Gods?
Even so will I do likewise; thou shall not do so unto the Lord thy God; for
every abomination unto the Lord, which he hates, have they done unto their
Gods, for even their Sons and their Daughters have they burnt in the Fire unto
their Gods; what thing soever I command you, observe to do it, thou shall not
add thereto, nor diminish from it. For, first, are we such heathen People as
these seven Nations were? Do we Worship the Host of Heaven, Sun Moon and Stars
as they (...) Do we Sacrifice our Children to Idols as they did? If this were
true, they might have some pretense for urging these Texts of ^^^ture, and from
them also might (...), that they are bound to cut (...) Branch, (as by the
Covenant they are S^or^ to do) even as the Israelites were obliged to destroy
the seven Idolatrous Nations. But, if none of these things can be laid to our
Charge, who Worship the God of Heaven, and his Son Jesus Christ, and abhor
Idolatry, with what Face dare they produce such Scriptures against us, as
concern none but Idolaters? In the next place, How do we add to the Word of
God, or diminish from it, by the use of the Common Prayer Book? Do we thereby,
make more or less Canonical Books of Holy Scripture than the Church of God has
allowed and approved of in all Ages? Do we not acknowledge and believe every
tittle of the Holy Scriptures, and abominate the least addition or diminution
to them?

But some call it Divine Service, and the Common Prayer Book is Bound up with
the Bible, and is not this an adding to the Word of God? No, by no means; for
when we call the Common Prayer Divine Service, we give it that Title from the
Object thereof, which is Almighty God, to whom all our Prayers are directed and
offered up; and we are not so Presumptuous, as to intend thereby, that they are
of equal Authority with the Holy Scriptures, or that God himself, is the
immediate Author of them, (excepting that only of Our Father) but only that
Prayer being the Service of God, and our Churches Prayers Composed according to
the Rule of his Word, some on that account call it Divine Service, though that
Title be not to be found in the Book it self, and therefore can be no Objection
against it; and as for the Binding it up with the Bible, that does not make it
any part thereof, no more than the Contents of the several Chapters, and the
Marginal Notes can be said to be part of the Holy Scriptures, which yet are
Bound up with them; but to show the great value we have for the Word of God, it
is ordered by the Common Prayer Book, that in this solemn Worship of Almighty
God, some Psalms and Chapters out of the Old and New Testament, shall be read
every Morning and every Evening; wherein, we follow the Example of Christ and
St. Paul, the former of which, did read part of the Prophet Isaiah to the
People, and it was his Custom to do so, Luke 4.16, 17, 18, 19, 20. and the
latter after the reading the Law and the Prophets preached to the Congregation,
Act. 13.15, 16, 17. etc. a thing which is never Practiced (as I am credibly
informed) by John Bunyan and his Party, no more than it is by the Quakers,
which shows the little regard they both have to the Holy Scripture, and that
they prefer their own Extemporary Prayers and Preachments before it, with what
Forehead then can this Author pretend that we undervalue the Word of God,
either by adding to it, or diminishing from it? which not we but they
themselves are guilty of; for they never read the holy Scriptures to their
Congregations as we do; but instead thereof pretend that their Extemporary
Prayers and rambling Discourses are the immediate dictates of the Holy Ghost;
and then both must be as good Scripture as any in the Bible, which is truly to
add to the Word of God, and to break the foregoing Precept of Moses, and that
other to the same purpose, Deuteronomy. 4.2. Ye shall not add unto the Word which I
command you, neither shall you diminish ought from it, that ye may keep the
Commandments of your Lord your God, which I command you; which these Men thus
openly neglect and contemn, in rejecting that Form of Prayer which Christ
requires all his Disciples to use; and so those two other Texts he mentions, as
Rev. 22.18. and Prove. 30.6. concern themselves and not us, in that pretending
to pray in the very Words of the Spirit, they thereby add unto the Revelation
of St. John new ones of their own, and therefore have all the reason in the
World to fear the Plagues there threatened, and lest God should reprove them,
and they should be found Liars; lastly, as for Col. 2.16. to verse 24. how does
that effect the Common Prayer Book? Do we therein teach the Observation of new
Moons and Sabbaths, and the Worshipping of Angels? Or do we therein forbid to
touch, taste or handle those things which God has allowed, (as some of the
ancient Heretics did? as particularly Marriage, and unclean Meats, which they
held to be unlawful) but if nothing of all this can be fastened upon us, what
Impudence is it for this Man to produce this place of St. Paul against us?
especially when we may with better reason urge it against him and his
Adherents; for do not they forbid to touch, i. e. any Form of Prayer, even that
which our Lord Commanded? Do not they forbid to taste, i. e. any Meat that has
blood in it, which they hold unlawful to be eaten? do not they forbid to
handle, i. e. Psalms, Hymns and Spiritual Songs, which St. Paul has commanded
to be Sung? And what is all this but to subject others to their own Ordinances,
which are but the Commandments and Traditions of Men? Thus those very Texts of
Scripture, which these Men foolishly brandish against us, sometimes urging them
against Infant Baptism, sometimes against Sprinkling, sometimes against the
Cross, and other Ceremonies, and sometimes against our Common Prayer, (as our
Author here) do all turn upon themselves, and give them a deadly and incurable
Wound.

CHAP. VI.
BUT if none of the aforementioned Texts will serve the turn, but rather prove
mischeivous to him, Jo. Bunyan has Two in reserve that shall effectually
confute us; the first is Zachar. 12.10. I will pour upon the House of David and
Inhabitants of Jerusalem the Spirit of Grace and Supplication, etc. which being
Prophesied of the Gospel Days, he thence infers that the Spirit is the Author
of all our Prayers, and therefore must needs invent and dictate them to us; in
Answer to which, I say,

1st. That what we Translate the Spirit of Supplication, may as properly be
rendered the Spirit of Mercy, and so the Seventy render it, the Word in the
Original signifying as well to show Mercy as to Pray; and then the Argument
deduced from this Place, is of no force at all; that because God would have
Mercy upon the Jews, (who are here meant by the House of David, and Inhabitants
of Jerusalem) in bringing them out of Captivity, that therefore we Christians,
have a Promise here to Pray by the Spirit, in that Sense our Author would have
it.

2dly. If we allow the Vulgar Translation, in rendering it the Spirit of
Supplication, and that this Prophecy has respect to the Gospel Days, it was
fulfilled on the Day of Pentecost, when so many Thousands were Converted by St
Peter's Sermon, of whom it is said, they were first pricked to the Heart, Acts
2.37. i. e. for all their Sins, and particularly for that great one, of
Crucifying of Jesus Christ, and so, they looked on him whom they had pierced,
(as the Prophet foretold they should, in the same place) by the Eye of Faith
and Repentance, and received from him, the Spirit of Grace and Supplication, i.
e. such miraculous Gifts and Graces, as were bestowed upon the Apostles and
first Disciples of our Lord, and were confined to that Age; when was fulfilled
also that Prophecy of Joel, Chap. 2.28, 29. as St. Peter assures us, Acts 2.16.
This is it (i. e. those miraculous Gifts which you see us have) which was
spoken by the Prophet Joel.

3dly. The Holy Ghost is called, the Spirit of Supplication, because all those
Prayers in the Old and New Testament; which were made by the Prophets and
Apostles, and particularly that of our Lord, were immediately Inspired and
Dictated by the Holy Ghost, and they are left upon Record, as so many Patterns
for us to Compose our Prayers by them on the like occasions; and so the Spirit
helps our Infirmities, in teaching us to Pray according to these Scripture
Forms.

4thly. Because, the Holy Spirit stirs us up to this Duty, and assists us with
fervent Desires in the actual Performance of it; on this account also he may be
Styled The Spirit of Supplication, although he does not Dictate to us the very
words of our Prayer, (as he did to the Prophets and Apostles) and for any to
pretend he does, unless they can produce the like Miracles as the Prophets and
Apostles wrought, is the greatest vanity and Presumption in the World.

5thly. We may on as good, or better Grounds affirm, that he is called the
Spirit of Supplication, because, He assists us in the Composure and Devout use
of godly Forms of Prayer, since it is said, Zach. 12.11. In that Day shall there
be a great Mourning in Jerusalem, as the Mourning of Hadadrimmon in the Valley
of Megiddo; and how that was, we are given to understand, 2 Chronicles. 35.25. And
Jeremiah lamented for Josiah, and all the Singing-Men and Singing-Women spoke
of Josiah in their Lamentations to this Day, and made them an Ordinance in
Israel, i. e. the Jews had a Form of Prayer and Lamentations, to be Sung with
doleful Notes every Year to Condole the great Loss of that good King Josiah:
And if the Spirit of Supplication will cause us to Mourn in our Prayers before
the Lord as the Jews did, we must compose and use the like Form as they did;
and such a Form have we in our Common Prayer Book, wherein, on January the
Thirtieth, we Mourn for our English Josiah, I mean, King Charles the Martyr;
and therefore it ought to be continued as an Ordinance among us, like that of
Jeremiah 's among the Israelites; and it is to the Shame and Scandal of some of
our Clergy, that this Day is antiquated, and the Anniversary-Service disused in
several Places, and I mention it for no other Reason, but in hopes they may be
speedily Reformed, or exemplarily Punished.

John Bunyan's second reserved Proof, is, p. 112. How will the Favorers of
such a Practice, (i. e. Forms of Prayer) answer that Scripture, which
commands the Church should turn away from such as have a Form of Godliness,
but deny the Power thereof? 2 Timothy 3.5. and this he had urged before, p. 57.
The great Cheat that the Devil and Antichrist deludes the World withal, is to
make them continue in the Form of any Duty, the Form of Preaching, of Hearing,
of Praying, etc. These are they that have a Form of Godliness, but deny the
Power, from such turn away.

But this Text also, though he repeats it, and puts false glosses upon it, makes
nothing to his purpose, but rather against him; for, 1st. St. Paul does not
here Condemn a Form of Godliness, having Commanded it a little before, in the
very same Epistle, 2 Timothy 1.13. Hold fast the Form of sound Words, which thou
have heard of me: And surely the same Apostle who Commands us to hold fast,
cannot be supposed so changeable, as to Command us to turn away from a Form of
Godliness; that can never be the meaning of the Place, to make the same
inspired Penman, to Write Contradictions in the same Epistle: When therefore he
upbraids them, with having a Form of Godliness, it was only because it was
separated from the Power thereof; i. e. they had put asunder those things which
God would have united; as Almighty God upbraids the Jews with the Multitude of
their Sacrifices, their vain Oblations, Incense, new Moons and Sabbaths, as if
he did not require, but abominate them; and yet these things God himself had
strictly enjoined under great Penalties; Isa. 1.11, 12, 13. But the Reason why
he is there said to loath them, is, because their Hands were full of Blood,
they did not bring these Sacrifices and Oblations, with such pure Hearts, and
clean Hands, with which he commanded them to be Offered at his Altar, ver. 15,
16, 17. Now this Author might with as much or more reason from these Texts
infer, that God had forbidden the Jewish People to Offer any Sacrifice or
Incense, to keep any new Moons or Sabbaths; as from the other Text to pretend
that God forbids a Form of Godliness, whereas indeed nothing but the Abuse of
these Religious Duties is reprehended in either place; and when St. Paul
commands Timothy, 2 Epist. 3.5. (for this is spoken to him, to whom this
Epistle was sent) to turn away from such, the Apostle gives him Direction what
to do with such notorious Hypocrites, as had the Form of Godliness, but denied
the Power thereof; even to cast them out of all Christian Society, by the
Censures of the Church, and so to withdraw from them, but not from the Form of
Godliness, which was good still, and never the worse for these Men's abuse of
it: Turn away from such Men, but not from such a Form: So that this Text
likewise (as all the rest he has hitherto urged, if it has any respect to a
Form of Prayer, as this Objector insinuates) is a good Argument for the
Lawfulness of such a Form, and will justify us in the use thereof, provided we
let the Power of Godliness go along with it, and on this account St. Paul
commands Timothy, or the Church, (as this Man would have it) to hold fast that
Form of sound Words, which he had heard of him; and in another place to the
same purpose with this and the former, he says, 1 Timothy 6.3, 4, 5. If any man
teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome Words, even the Words of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and to the Doctrine which is according to Godliness, he is Proud,
knowing nothing, but doting about Questions, and strifes of Words; whereof
comes Envy, Strife, Railings, evil Surmisings, perverse Disputings of Men of
corrupt Minds, and destitute of the Truth, supposing that Gain is Godliness,
from such withdraw thy self; i. e. by passing the Sentence of Excommunication
upon them: Now do not all three places concern Jo. Bunyan and his Party, who
teach otherwise, and who condemn that Form of sound Words, which Christ himself
has taught us, and St. Paul commands us to hold fast? Are they not also Proud,
false Accusers, Traiterous, Heady, High-minded, and plainly deciphered under
the black Character the Apostle there gives of such as reject that Form of
sound Words, which is according to Godliness? And so we have hence also gained
another good Proof of the Lawfulness of the Common Prayer Book, as being a Form
of Godliness, and containing a Form of sound and wholesome Words; and if we
join the Power thereof with it, we may and ought to continue in the Devout use
thereof, and never to Teach or Practice otherwise, for fear of falling under
the black Character before given, and more at large set down in that Chapter.

CHAP. VII.
BUT our Author having had such bad Success in the choice of his Arguments
against Forms of Prayer, which prove no such thing, but rather the Lawfulness
of them, and the Unlawfulness of their withdrawing from them for the sake of
their extemporary Effusions; let us, in the next place, see what better
Arguments he advances to make good his Pretenses to Pray by the Spirit, and
that such extemporary Prayers are commanded in the Scriptures: As for his Text
out of 1 Cor. 14, 15, which is the chief Proof he brings, it is no Proof for
but against him, as I have already shown in my first Chapter, and shall now
farther make appear.

For, 1st. This is no Command but an Example, and that of an extraordinary and
miraculous Nature, even by the Confession of our Adversary, St. Paul's Praying
with the Spirit being accompanied with the Gift of Tongues, and therefore he
says, ver. 18. I thank God, I speak with Tongues more than you all; so that
unless Jo, Bunyan and his Party had the same miraculous Gift of Tongues, (which
I presume they have not the Confidence to pretend to) they cannot urge St. Paul
's Example for their pretenses to Pray by the Spirit, having it not in the same
extraordinary Measure which he had: They may as well pretend to Visions and
Revelations which were vouchsafed to that great Apostle in an high degree, he
being caught up into the third Heaven, and hearing there such Words as are not
lawful, i. e. not possible for a Man to utter, 2 Cor. 12.2, 3, 4. They may as
well say, I have been caught up into Paradise, as I will Pray with the Spirit
in the same manner that St. Paul did: But if these Words should (as I think
they cannot) refer to the ordinary Gifts of the Spirit, then we may from them
deduce, not only the Lawfulness, but necessity also, of using a Form of Prayer,
(as I have before observed) being so closely connected with the latter part of
the first, I will Sing with the Spirit, and I will Sing with the Understanding
also: Now since all Christians make use of Forms in Singing, or else the
Congregation can never join with them; and when they do, they may Sing with the
Spirit: What Reason can there be given, why they may not as well Pray by the
Spirit, although they Pray according to set Forms which are before them? So that
this is as unlucky a Text for his purpose, as the Author could possibly have
lighted upon; for instead of concluding against Forms of Prayer, it is such a
convincing Argument of the Lawfulness of them, as I believe neither be nor all
his Party will ever be able to Answer.

His next Argument, is from Romans 8.26. Likewise the Spirit also helps our
Infirmities, for we know not what we should Pray for as we ought, but the Spirt
it self makes Intercession for us, with Groanings that cannot be uttered;
which he sets down in the Title Page, and repeats and flourishes with several
times in his Book, and does thus Paraphrase upon it, p. 29. Consider first, the
Person speaking, even Paul, and in his Person all the Apostles; We Apostles, we
extraordinary Officers, the wise Master Builders, that have some of us been
caught up into Paradise; we know not what we should Pray for: And p. 31. The
Apostles when they were at best, yea when the Holy Ghost assisted them, yet
then were they fain to come off with Sighs and Groans, falling short of
expressing their Mind, but with Sighs and Groans which cannot be uttered. A
false and silly Paraphrase indeed; for first, When St. Paul says [We] or [I] we
are not to understand it always as spoken of himself; but he takes upon him the
Person of others, and sometimes such as are unregenerate, even after his own
Conversion, as Romans 7.8, 9.14.23.25. where he says, Sin wrought in me all
manner of Concupiscence; Sin revived and I dyed: I am carnal sold, under Sin; I
see another Law in my Members, warring against the Law of my Mind, and bringing
me into Captivity to the Law of Sin and Death; with my Flesh I serve the Law of
Sin: All which Expressions by no means agree to St. Paul, who was Converted
before this, being quite contrary to the Nature of a Regenerate Man, who is
said in other places of this Epistle, to be free from Sin, and the Servant of
Righteousness, Romans 6.18. That the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ, has
made me free from the Law of Sin and Death, Romans 8.2. That he has crucified the
Flesh, with the Affections and Lusts, Gal. 5.24. That Sin does not Reign in his
mortal Body, that he should obey it in the Lusts thereof, Romans 6.12. So that
unless we can twist Contradictions, we cannot suppose St. Paul to speak of
himself, in that seventh Chapter, but only of a Judaising Christian, or a
Convinced but not Converted Person, and nothing is more usual, than for
Prophets and Apostles, to speak in the Person of others, when they say [I] or
[We] did so or so; for we cannot suppose St. Paul and the rest of the Apostles,
or indeed any sensible Christian so very Ignorant, as not to know to whom, and
through whom, and for what to Pray; and therefore the, we know not etc. must have
respect to other Men, and such as were Heathens and Unconverted, who had not
before heard of Christ, or seen the Gospel, where there are Rules laid down,
and those Dictated and written by the Holy Spirit, how they and all Men ought
to Pray, even to our Father which is in Heaven, through his beloved Son Jesus
Christ, for such Lawful things as are according to his Will: And when Men Pray
thus, according to that excellent Form which Christ has prescribed, his Holy
Spirit will also assist them with good Desires, so that they shall Heartily
wish and long for those things for which they Pray, with submission to the Will
of God; and thus the Spirit helps our Infirmities, in revealing to us the
Holy Scriptures, where those that were Ignorant before, are taught how to Pray
as they ought.

But our Author goes on with his Paraphrase, p. 30.31. The Apostles when they
were at best, yea when they were assisted with the Holy Ghost, yet then they
were fain to come off with Sighs and Groans, etc. Mark here, (says he) they
could not so well and fully come off, in the manner of performing this Duty, as
these in our Days think they can.

But is not this another good Argument for Forms of Prayer, when the Apostles
themselves stood in need of them, and therefore desired Christ to teach them
such a Form as John had taught his Disciples, Luke, 11.1. Lord teach us to Pray
as John also taught his Disciples: And certainly they had need to be taught
such a Form to help them out, if they were such Bunglers at Prayer as J. Bunyan
represents them, viz. That they were not able to make an end of the Prayer they
had begun in the Congregation, but were forced to break off abruptly, perhaps
in the midst thereof; which must needs cause Shame to themselves, and
Disappointment and Confusion to the whole Assembly, which all their Sighs and
Groans, would never be able to compensate; but no Man of Sense, can believe,
the Apostles ever Prayed at this rate in the Church of God, where they command
all things to be done Decently and in order, and to the Edification of the
People, 1 Cor. 14.26.40. For, what Order, Decency, or Edifying is there in
Sighs and Groans, which Hypocrites may utter, as well as Sincere Christians?
And when either does it, who can tell the meaning of them? And may not a Man
edify as much by the Quakers Silent-meetings, as by such Sighs and Groans,
which have no certain and determinate Signification as Words and Speeches have?
And yet if we may believe Jo. Bunyan, these were a good part of the Apostles
Prayers, even in their publik Assemblies; but the Proof which he brings for it,
is Simple and Ridiculous, viz. [For the Spirit it self, makes Intercession for
us, with Groanings which cannot be uttered] Whereas these are not the Groanings
of the Apostles, or of any Man else upon the Face of the Earth, but the
Groanings of the Holy Ghost himself in Heaven, where together with the Lord
Jesus, he makes Intercession for us, at the Right Hand of God, and that in a
very fervent and powerful manner, which St. Paul calls his Groanings which
cannot be uttered, and therefore can never be applied to the Groanings of Men,
which are always heard, and make a sound in their very utterance: So foolish
and presumptuous is this Man in Expounding and Applying this Text; especially
in endeavoring to prove from it, that the Holy Spirit does invent and dictate
to us, the very words of Prayer; for here are no Words at all proceeding from
the Spirit, but only Groanings; How then can this place prove, that the Spirit
suggests to us the Words of our Prayer, when he interceeds for us without
Words, even with Groanings, (but pray mistake not) not with such Groanings as
Jo. Bunyan and his Party makes, and may be heard in every corner of the House,
and in the very Streets, but with Groanings that cannot be uttered: And that
these are the inexpressible Desires of Christ and the Spirit of God in Heaven,
is plain from Romans 8.27. He that searches the Hearts, (i. e. Almighty God,
whose Prerogative it is) knows what is the Mind of the Spirit, because he
makes Intercession for the Saints according to the Will of God. So that this
Text also, as all the rest, turns upon the Objector, and proves, that the
Spirit does not put Words into their Mouths, nor cause those Groanings, which
are so loud and frequent in their Meetings; the Spirits Groanings here, being
said to be without noise or sound, without utterance or expression; they are
such as cannot be uttered: Whence I may well conclude, that Jo. Bunyan 's
extemporary Prayers, his dismal Groans, and those Fits and Agonies of the
Spirit, which (he says) he was sometimes in, when he was strongly persuaded to
leave off, and to seek the Lord no longer, p. 71. I may conclude, (I say) that
this is a great Cheat of the Devil and Antichrist, by which he does delude and
deceive the World, by which Men would persuade themselves and others, that they
Pray with the Spirit, that they Preach with the Spirit, and Hear with the
Spirit, even with the same extraordinary Spirit which St. Paul had, when there
is no such thing, but they are rather possessed by an evil Spirit, which makes
them think and speak so highly and vain-gloriously of themselves, and so
contemptibly and uncharitably of others; their Mouth speaks great swelling
Words, having Men's Persons in admiration because of advantage: These be they
that separate themselves, Sensual, having not the Spirit, Jud. ver. 16.19.

CHAP. VIII.
HAving said in the Conclusion of the former Chapter, that J. Bunyan and his
Party, have not the Spirit to which they so much pretend, I come now to prove
this Charge against them, from two substantial Arguments.

1st. Their Disobedience to their Lawful Superiors in Church and State: The
Spirits of the Prophets, are Subject to the Prophets, 1 Cor. 14.32. And the
Spirit of God, persuades and commands Men to Obey every Ordinance of Man, for
the Lord's sake, and to be subject to our Civil and Ecclesiastical Governors,
not only for Wrath, but also for Conscience sake, Romans 13.5. 1 Pet. 2.13. But
these Men by their causeless and sinful Separation from our Church, make a
Schism in it, as by their frequent resistance of our rightful Kings, they have
made Rebellions in the State, a thing which the Apostles and primitive
Christians, were never guilty of, under the most bloody Persecutions, but
always abhorred it as contrary to the good Spirit of God. 2dly. The base
Railing, and filthy Language, which this Author and his Party do aften bestow
upon us; a brief account of which, I have before given, and shall now give an
instance or two more of it, to fill up the Measure of his Iniquity, p. 44.
speaking of Men that use Forms of Prayers, (by which without doubt he marks out
us) he says; They in Person appear as Hypocrites, and their Prayers are an
abomination; when they say, they have been pouring out their Souls unto God, he
says they have been Howling like Dogs, and for this he quotes Hos. 7.14. tho
it is plain, he here adds to the Word of God, there being no mention of Dogs in
that place, but only of the Children of Ephraims Howling upon their Beds; and
this bold Man adds thereunto, like Dogs, to render us more odious in the
application. But if we should take the same liberty, and say, that these Men in
their Conventicles, Groan and Grunt like Hogs, and Snarl and Bark like Dogs,
though they cannot Bite and Devour us, I believe they would Proclaim us for the
most Wicked and Uncharitable People in the World: For this very Man, on the
Score of our slighting his Praying by the Spirit, (as I think I have
sufficiently proved we have Reason to do) breaks out into this strange and
horrid Exclamation: Is it not the Mark of implacable Reprobates? O fearful! Can
you not be content to be Damned for your Sins against the Law; but you must Sin
against the Holy Ghost? Good God! That we should be accused of the Sin against
the Holy Ghost, only for Vindicating his Honor, and exposing such Men as would
father their Nonsense and Blasphemies upon him! But in Truth, it is these are
the Blasphemers of the Holy Spirit; it is these are the Corahs and Balaams of
the Age, that Rebel against our Moses and Aaron, and Curse God's People to
their Face, even with bitter Words, and venomous Expressions, which shows them
to be acted by the Instigation of another Spirit, even that of Satan and
Antichrist, who are all for Railing and Reviling, but the good Spirit of God,
is all for mild, gentle and charitable Speeches, Jud. 9. Michael the
Archangel, when contending with the Devil, he Disputed about the Body of
Moses, durst not bring against him a railing Accusation, but said, The Lord
rebuke thee. The good Spirit of God, wherever he rests, produces kind Thoughts,
and charitable Expressions, both which, Jo. Bunyan is a Stranger to, as is
evident from p. 89. When Men Pray for a show to be heard, and thought some body
in Religion; there are two sorts of Men, that Pray to this end, 1st. Your
Trencher-Chaplains, that thrust themselves into great Men's Families, pretending
the Worship of God, when in truth, the great Business is their own Bellies,
which were notably Painted out by Ahab's Prophets, 1 K. 18. and also
Nebuchadnezzar's Wisemen, Dan. 2. who, though they pretended great Devotion, yet
their Lusts and their Bellies, were the great things aimed at by them in all
their pieces of Devotion.
Now can there be a greater Incharitableness shown, than is couched in these
few Words? Wherein all the Chaplains of great Men, without any exception, are
represented as a Company of gormandizing Epicures, that make their Belly their
God, and to be as bad as Ahab's false Prophets, which fed at Jezabel's Table,
and as bad as Nebuchadnezzar's Magicians, who were initiated into the
Black-Art, and in a solemn League and Covenant with the Devil: Good God! That a
Man should publish to the World, such Base and Scandalous Reflections, on some
Divines, who, for ought he knows to the contrary, may be as good Christians and
pious Persons as any in the Nation; But if they call the Master of the House
Beelzebub, how much more shall they call them of his Household? Mat. 10.25.

May we not with more Truth, call this Author a Corner-Chaplain? That follows
his poor Creatures, that are deluded by him, into every Corner of the House,
and there makes them Groan most bitterly, or else he could not say as he does
p. 73. I know it is thus with them; their Groans go up to Heaven, from every
Corner of the House; I know they do Groan, and that most bitterly: Of this sort
are they, that creep into Houses, and lead Captive silly Women, laden with
Sins; and that is enough to make them Groan indeed, 2 Timothy 3.6. But if this
does not please him, he must be contented to enjoy the Title of Tinker
Chaplain, as most agreeable to his old Trade, though after all, for want of
Charity, he proves to be but as sounding Brass, or a tinkling Cymbal.

CHAP. IX.
FOR a farther Proof that Jo. Bunyan's Pretenses to the Spirit are vain, I
shall produce his own Words in Evidence against him, where he advises Parents
not to teach their Children to Pray by any Form, no not so much as the Lord's
Prayer; and then being not of themselves able to Pray extempore, they must not
Pray at all Evil Council indeed, and which never came from the good Spirit of
God; it is p. 77.78. My Judgment is, (says he) that Men go the wrong Way, to
learn their Children to Pray, in going about so soon to teach them a set
company of Words, as is the common use of poor Creatures to do: For to me it
seems to be a better way, for People betimes, to tell their Children what
cursed Creatures they are, and how they are under the Wrath of God, by reason
of original and actual Sin, as also to tell them the nature of Gods Wrath, and
the duration of the Misery; which if they conscientiously do, they would sooner
learn their Children to Pray than they do.

But though this Author gives his Judgment, in the Style of St. Paul, yet does he
show by it, that he has not the Spirit of God, as St. Paul had; for that
Apostle advises Parents thus, Ephesians. 6.4. Ye Fathers provoke not your Children
to Wrath; and to tell them, they are all cursed Creatures, in a damnable
Condition, and obnoxious to Hell torments, which shall last for ever; one would
think, were the ready way to provoke them to wrath indeed, but St. Paul says,
provoke them not by any harsh Speeches at all, as these certainly are, which
may sooner drive them to Despair, than persuade them to Pray; but (as he
immediately subjoyns) bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord;
and what can that import, but to teach them to say the Creed, Lord's Prayer,
and Ten Commandments, which contain the Sum and Substance of the Christian
Religion, even what we ought to believe and do, and how to Pray, in order to
Salvation? But especially to teach our Children to Pray according to that
perfect and complete Form, which our Lord Jesus has taught us, and left upon
Record in the Gospel, this is to Breed them up in the Nurture and Admonition of
the Lord; and not the next way to make them cursed Hypocrites, and puff them up
with Pride, as our uncharitable Author says it will, p. 78. I am confident, to
tell little Children of Hellfire and Damnation, and their own Wretched and
Miserable estate, (if they understand what we say) is the next way to cast them
down into the Gulf of Despair; and therefore our blessed Savior took a quite
contrary Course with them, Mark 10.14. Suffer little Children to come unto me,
and forbid them not, for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven; and v. 15. Whosoever
shall not receive the Kingdom of God as a little Child, he shall not enter
therein, and ver. 16. He took them up in his Arms, puts his Hands upon them,
and Blessed them, which without doubt he did by some short Form of Prayer, and
so by that taught little Children to Pray also: Our Lord Jesus to encourage
little Children to be good betimes, says, of such is the Kingdom of Heaven, but
J. Bunyan to discourage them, says, of such is the Kingdom of Hell. Christ
proposes them as a Pattern of Meekness, Innocence, and Humility, Mat. 18.2, 3,
4, 5, 6. But John Bunyan exposes them as the Objects of Gods Wrath and
Vengeance, and so many Brands of Hellfire; and this he says, will make Tears
run down your sweet Babes Eyes, and hearty Groans to flow from your Hearts,
though any one else would imagine this would swallow them up with overmuch Grief,
and sink their tender Spirits into downright Despair; and here I cannot choose
but take notice how much this Man is for Groaning, since he would have Children
to learn it, instead of their Prayers; Why? according to his way of Expounding
Scripture, Romans 8.26. the Childrens Groanings may be as acceptable to God, as
the best of our Prayers, for, (as I observed before, Chap. 7.) he says, The
Apostles could not so well come off, in the manner of performing this Duty,
etc. When the Holy Ghost assisted them, yet even then, they were fain to come
off with Sighs and Groans, falling short of expressing their Minds, but with
Sighs and Groans which cannot be uttered. ( But how then could they express
their Minds by them, if they were unutterable?) and cannot Children as well
express their Minds this way as the very Apostles themselves, if they can but
Groan lustily, as he supposes the other to have done? So that our Author has
found out a new Way, to teach Children to Pray, as well as their ungifted
Brethren, it is but for them to Groan well, and often, and loud, and the Work is
done, and they may be said to Pray as well as the Apostles ever did; and this
Groaning will save them the labor of Reading the Bible, or Learning any
Catechism that has the Lord's Prayer in it: O poor sweet Babes! The Lord open
your Eyes, and make you see, and shun the wicked and pernicious Counsel, of
such groaning Hypocrites.

And I must farther observe, that J. Bunyan, does not in all his Advice here,
put Parents upon Teaching their Children to Read the Holy Scriptures, though
Timothy had done it from a Child, and St. Paul commends him for it, 2 Timothy
3.15. And I doubt, the true Reason why he does not mention the Reading their
Bibles, is for fear they should meet with the Lord's Prayer in it, and so have
a mind to learn by Heart, that excellent Form, which Christ himself has made,
and enjoined all his Disciples to use; yet p. 79. he Quotes a Passage out of
Psalm. 34.11. which is this, Come ye Children, hearken unto me, and I will
Teach you the fear of the Lord: Which after his silly way, he Paraphrases thus,
David does not say, I will Nuzzle you up in a Form, but I will Teach you the
fear of the Lord. Where, if the words refer to Children, and not Men, as they
seem to do from the next Verse, ver. 12. What Man is he that desires Life?
Yet, 1st. Jo. Bunyan uses a Beastly Comparison, in calling our Teaching
Children, a Form of Prayer, a Nuzzling them up in it; which is an Expression
belonging to Hogs, whose young ones are said to be Nuzzled up by them; and it is
a piece of Profane Wit, to compare the Teaching our Children Godly Forms of
Prayer, to the rearing up young Pigs; this is to offend and despise not only
one, but all these little ones, though we are cautioned against it, at the Peril
of our Souls; and least their Angels Revenge the Contempt we throw upon them:
Mat. 18.6.10. Whosoever shall offend one of these little ones which believe in me,
it were better that a Millstone were hanged about his Neck, and that he were
Drowned in the depth of the Sea: Take heed that ye despise not one of these
little ones; for I say unto you, that in Heaven, their Angels do always behold
the Face of my Father which is in heaven.

2dly. It Is plain, that David was for Educating Children in a Form, or else he
had not kept the Commandment of the Lord, who required him to do it, as is
evident from Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. And these Words which I command thee this Day shall
be in thine Heart, (which relates chiefly to the ten Commandments mentioned in
the 5th. Chapter) And thou shall teach them diligently unto thy Children; and
shall talk of them when thou sit in thy House, and when thou walk by the
Way; and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up: And Deuteronomy. 31.12.13.
Gather the People together, Men, Women, and Children, and the Stranger that is
within thy Gates, that they may hear, and that they may learn, and fear the
Lord your God, and observe to do all the Words of this Law: And, What was all
this, but the Teaching their Children Forms? So that David himself, ( according
to this Fellows unseemly Comparison) did Nuzzle up Children in Forms, or else
he had disobeyed God, which required it; and the Teaching them such Forms, is
here called, the Teaching them the fear of the Lord; so unhappy still is this
Man, in urging Texts of Scripture, that they all conclude against him, and for
that very thing against which he produces them.

CHAP. X.
NOW after all, least any should censure me for speaking too lightly of these
Men's Groanings, and Pretenses to Pray by the Spirit, I have this (which I
presume will be thought sufficient by all Honest and Impartial Christians) to
offer in my Defense and justification.

1st, That when I reflect on Jo. Bunyan's Groanings, I do it only to show his
false and absurd Interpretation of Romans 8.26. where he misapplies the Groanings
the Apostle there speaks of, to himself and other Men, which plainly belong to
the Spirit of God, being such as cannot be heard or uttered; as the Groanings
of Men are, and I do not hereby condemn the Sighs and Graans which good People
out of a deep Sense of their Sins, and Sorrow for them, may, and often do utter
in their Closet, Devotions, and private Ejaculations, which though none but God
sees and hears, yet he approves and accepts them the better, and merely for
their being Sincere and Secret, he will one Day, Reward them openly, Mat.
6.4.6.18. but as for such Sighs and Groans, which are vented in the
Congregation, ( a thing constantly practiced among the Quakers, as well as J.
Bunyan and his Party, and other Dissenters) we have no Precept or Example for
them, either in the Old or New Testament. We read or hear of no such thing in
all their Religious Assemblies; and particularly those three great ones,
wherein the Spirit of God assisted in a more extraordinary manner, than he has
ever done since that time; I mean when the Apostles and Disciples, to the
number of an Hundred and twenty met together, and Prayed to God to direct them
in the choice of a Successor to Judas; Acts 1.15.24. and when they were
assembled on the Day of Pentecost, Acts 2.1. when Three thousand were Converted
by St. Peter's Sermon, ver. 14.41. when the first great Council was assembled
at Jerusalem, Act. 15.7.12. and when St. Paul Preached his farewell Sermon at
Troas, continuing his Speech till Midnight, Acts 20.7. in all which places we
read, that the People either kept Silence, or were sorrowful and pricked to the
Heart, or else spoke in diverse Tongues, the wonderful Works of God; but we do
not find there was one Soul that Groaned among them; which I the rather
mention, because all these were wonderful Conversions, and extraordinary
Effusions of the Holy Ghost; so little Authority from the Scripture, have any
Dissenters for the frequent Groanings which are heard among them, in their
respective Meetings; or for their making these Groanings, an infallible Mark of
their having the Spirit of God; they are rather sometimes a Mark of Hypocrisy;
and that those that Delight and Pride themselves in them, do this (as the
Scribes and Pharisees did of old) only to be heard and seen of Men; Mat. 23.2.
And therefore whatsoever good Men may do in private between God and their own
Souls, when none sees or hears but God alone; yet in public, they are careful
to avoid such loud and frequent Groans, at least to be very sparing in them,
least instead of passing for Saints, they should be taken for vainglorious
Hypocrites.

2dly. As for my slighting J. Bunyans and the Dissenters Pretenses to Pray by
the Spirit, I must confess I do so in that Sense they intend it, who imagine
and say, That the Holy Spirit Invents and Dictates all the Words of their
Prayer unto them; which is to make Almighty God, to multiply Miracles without
necessity, and to make also, the Words of their Prayer as True, Infallible, and
Divine, as the very Words of Scripture, being both equally Inspired by the Holy
Ghost; a thing that has not been known since the Apostolic Age, and then, it
was always accompanied with the Gift of Tongues; and the different and
contradictory Prayers of the Quakers Anabaptists, Independents, and
Presbyterians, (who all confidently pretend to Pray thus by the Spirit, and yet
Pray one against another) is a sufficient Confutation of it; for the Holy
Spirit is one, and not contrary to himself; and all his Intercessions for the
Saints, are to the same end, in the same manner, and according to the same good
Will and Pleasure of Almighty God; but all this is Performed in a Secret,
Invisible, and Unutterable way; and so is the Assistance which he affords to
good Men, even by godly Motions, and holy Desires, which are kindled within
them, and which they can only feel in their Hearts, but not hear with their
Ears, or express with their Tongues; and such an Assistance of the Holy Spirit,
our Common Prayer Book allows of, and teaches us to Pray for it; in the
beginning of Morning and Evening Service, after Confession of our Sins, the
next Prayer (which is in Form of an Absolution) runs thus; Wherefore let us
beseech him, to grant us true Repentance, and his Holy Spirit, that those
things may please him, which we do at this present, and that the rest of our
Life hereafter may be Pure and Holy, etc. Before the repetition of the Ten
Commandments, the Collect has these words in it, Cleanse the Thoughts of our
Hearts by the Inspiration of thy Holy Spirit, that we may perfectly love thee,
and worthily magnify thy Holy Name, etc. In the Litany, one of the Petitions
is; That it may please thee to give to all thy People, increase of Grace, to
hear meekly thy Word, and to receive it with pure Affection, and to bring forth
the Fruits of the Spirit.

And it is worth our Observation, that what some are pleased to call the Gift of
Prayer, is not mentioned among the Fruits of the Spirit, which are all
particularly set down, Gal. 5.22.23. as, Love, Joy, Peace, long Suffering,
Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance; neither is it reckoned among
the Gifts of the Spirit, which are recounted, Isa. 11.2. as, Wisdom,
Understanding, Counsel, Might, Knowledge, [Godliness] and the Fear of the
Lord,; nor yet in, 1 Cor. 12.8, 9, 10. where they are placed in this Order; The
Word of Wisdom, the Word of Knowledge, Faith, the Gifts of Healing, the working
of Miracles, Prophecy, discerning of Spirits, diverse kinds and Interpretation
of Tongues; in both which places, there is no mention of the Gift of Prayer,
though in one of them, there is of the Gift of Prophecy; and therefore these Men's
Pretenses to Pray by the Spirit, as a peculiar Gift of his, has no Foundation
in Holy Scripture; indeed, for any to express themselves well on a sudden, and
to Pray with variety and fluency of Words, is, and may be called a Gift of God;
and so is Speech, Memory, and Invention, which nevertheless, are all common to
good and bad Men, and capable of being improved by industry and use, and more
apt to Puff up than Edify, and to make such as have them, despise and decry all
that use Forms, as Formal Superstitious and Graceless Men, that want the Life,
Spirit, and Power of Prayer, and yet I doubt not, but many good People can
testify this by their own Experience, that some notorious Hypocrites have this
Gift of Prayer, and some devout and sincere Christians continue in the use of
Forms, and reap the Comfort and Benefit of it: And it is farther observable,
that all the Gifts of the Spirit enumerated by St. Paul, were of an
extraordinary and miraculous Nature, as the Gift of Healing, diverse kinds of
Tongues, working Miracles; and the Faith there mentioned among them, was not
such as is ordinary and saving, even to believe that Jesus Christ is the true
Messiah and Savior of the World; but it was a Faith of an extraordinary and
miraculous Nature, even to believe that God would enable them to Work the
Miracle they were about to perform before the People; for the Apostles never
attempted to work a Miracle, till they had this extraordidinary Faith wrought
in them first, by some Divine impulse from the Spirit, which assured them, that
they should certainly perform the Miracle they undertook; for had the Apostles
at any time failed in such attempts, and set about a Miracle, which they were
not able to work, it would have exposed them mightily to the World, and given a
great Blow to the Christian Religion, and made them and it, to be looked on as
an Imposture; and therefore they had always first a strong and infallible
Impulse upon their Minds, (which St. Paul calls also Faith) to assure them they
could and should be able to work the Miracle before ever they attempted to do
it; but this and the other Gifts he there reckons up, were not ordinary and
saving, which every good Christian may now hope for, but they were
extraordinary and miraculous, as is farther evident from 1 Cor. 12.11. But all
these works that one and the selfsame Spirit, dividing to every Man severally
as he will; i. e. no one Person had all these miraculous Gifts before
mentioned, but they were variously distributed among them; one had this,
another had that, another a third, and so on, and they all ceased in that Age;
which cannot be said of the saving Gifts and Graces of the Spirit, where he
that has one in truth, has certainly all of them; as he that truly has saving
Faith, has also Hope and Charity, Patience and Meekness in some measure; they
being all knit together, as so many Links in the same Chain, that there can be
no Separation made between them, and these shall never cease; and the not
understanding and considering this, is the main Cause I doubt, that many in
this Age, expect and pretend to those extraordinary and miraculous Gifts of the
Spirit, which are long since ceased, as St. Paul declares they should, 1 Cor.
13.8.13. Charity never fails; but whether there be Prophecies they shall
fail, whether there be Tongues they shall cease; whether there be Knowledge it
shall vanish away; and now abides Faith, Hope, Charity, these three, but the
greatest of these is Charity: But little or nothing of this, is to be found in
all Jo. Bunyan's Book, which I have here Answered, as I believe any one will
find, that does not think his Labor lost to read it.

The CONCLUSION.
AND thus having with his own Weapons, Vanquished this Anabaptistical Goliath,
that is Armed Capa-pee with Brass, I shall close all with this short Address to
the Armies of our Israel; That they would every one of them get a Common Prayer
Book, that is able to use it; and think himself Naked and Unarmed without it,
as a Soldier does that is without his Sword; and that they would not only have
their Common Prayer Books about them, but also make use of them in their daily
Devotions; and not only use them, but put them also in Practice by their daily
Conversation, in living a Godly, Righteous, and Sober Life, as they are therein
taught to do; without this, though our Prayers are never so good, and we make
never so many of them, they will signify nothing, they will do us no more
Service, than the Ark of God did the Israelites, when they relied on it only
for their Deliverance and Preservation, and did not take care to walk worthy of
the Divine Presence which resided therein, and dwelt among them; 1 Samuel 4.3.
Let us fetch the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord out of Shiloh unto us, that
when he comes among us, it may save us out of the Hand of our Enemies. Thus
they thought, and earnestly expected, but were soon convinced of the contrary,
by the overthrow of their Army, and the taking of the Ark it self, and carrying
it in Triumph, into the Philistines Camp, ver. 10, 11. And thus has it fared
with our Common Prayer Book, when we too much rested in it, and made use of it
with Formality, Lukewarmness and Indifferency, and not with a suitable Zealand
Devotion; it was twice thrown out of the Church, and taken from us, and carried
Captive by our Adversaries of Geneva and Rome, who, though they seem to stand at
a distance, and defy one another, yet they both agree in this, to Hate our
Common Prayer Book, and to do what they can to destroy it; and nothing but our
walking unworthy of it, nothing but the Sins of our Priests, and the Iniquity
of our People, can give them once more, their desired Success against it;
wherefore, let all the Members of our Orthodox Church, show their Soundness and
Sincerity, by something else, than the bare use of the Common Prayer in their
respective Families; by something else, than Drinking numerous Healths to the
Prosperity of both; for I must needs say, such numerous Healths as these, are
one of the Diseases she at present labors under, and there is no hopes of a
Cure, till all her Sons grow wise unto Sobriety; till they all show themselves
sincere Christians, and sound Protestants, by something else than bare Names,
and mere outward Professions; even by living Godly, Righteous, and Sober Lives,
as our Common Prayer Book teaches us, to Pray every Day, in its general
Confession, and we are bound to Practice in our daily Conversation; in short,
our leading reformed Lives, and our Walking, as well as Praying according to
the Common Prayer Book, is the best, the only way to Preserve it, and the
Reformed Religion among us.

FINIS.

