THE Emperors New Declaration AGAINST The Most Christian King: OR, THE Further
Avocatoria and Inhibitoria against the Crown of FRANCE. Published by the Diet
at Ratisbon.
WE Leopold, by the Grace of God chosen Roman Emperor, always the enlarger of
Empiros; King in Germany, of Hungary, Bohemia, Dalmatia, Croatia, and
Sclavonia, etc. Archduke of Austria; Duke of Burgundy, Stiria, C^riinthia,
Crain, and Wirtemberg; Count of Tyrol, etc. send Our Imperial Grace to all Our
and the Holy Empire's Electors. Princes, and States. Vassals, Inhabitants,
Citizens, and Subjects, and to all and every Superior and Inferior Officers
and Common Soldiers of Horse and Foot. All and every of the same, may easily
call to mind, how that We, by the Crown of France's Invasion of the Holy Empire
in the last Year 1688. contrary to all Treaties of Peace, and without any just
Appearance and Cause, and through the Barbarous Hostilities attending that
Invasion, were induced not only to send out Our Imperial Mandata Avocatoria and
Inhibitoria through the Empire, but also by the Unanimous Consent and Advice of
the joint Electors, Princes, and States, out of an Absolute Necessity to
publish a General War of the Roman Empire with that expressly, powerful, and
binding Command, that no State, Vassal, Inhabitant or Subject of the Holy Roman
Empire, should engage himself in the Service or Pay of the Crown of France, or
its Adherents and Abettors, or their Abettors, or keep any Correspondence or
Commerce with the same, much less suffer its Ministers and Emissaries, or
afford any Assistance or Retreat to any such like Persons, but to be
Industrious to do them all sort of Injury; all which is more at large expressed
in the aforesaid Avocatoria, and the thereupon ensuing Declaration of War, to
which We anew graciously refer Our selves. Now considering that daily
Experience teaches Us, that the Crown of France does not only at present
continue its Hostile Enterprises, but also fills the Holy Roman Empire, Our
beloved Country of the German Nation, with such barbarous and dismal Tyranny,
and inhumane Cruelties, as were never heard of in any Heathen or Turkish Wars,
and which ought to be passed oven in silence in a Christian. History; So that
it seems that the French endeavor as much as in them lies, not so much to
reduce the German Nation under their Y^ak, as utterly to destroy and root it
out; of which a clear and unanswerable mark is, that contrary to all Faith, and
Word, and Promises past, they have made that horrible Desolation and
Destruction of the Ancient Cities of Spiers, Worms, Manbey^, Offenb^rg, and
several others; wherein some have behaved themselves with that Rage and Fury,
that besides the burning and pulling down of Houses, they also opened the very
Graves and Tombs, and not so much as excused the Bones of the Roman Emperors
and Kings, who had there rested for some hundreds of Years; nay, have not so
much as lest one stone upon another of the Ancient Religious Houses. Wherefore
We have, so much the more carefully to prevent that neither directly, nor
indirectly any help be given to such wicked and Unchristian Undertakings, after
mature Deliberation held, and with the Consent and Advice of the joint Electors
and States, thought it necessary to augment and exrend Our abovementioned
Mandata Avocatoria and Inbibitoria, which We here renew in their whole
Contents, in the following manner. And first, We herewithal do afresh earnestly
Command, Will, and Require, by the Roman, Imperial, and Absolute Power Invested
in Us, that not only the Inhabitants, Subjects, and all such as belong to Us
and the Roman Empire, that are in Civil and Military Services of the French
King, or his Allies, and privately and openly are Abettors, or assisting to
their Abettors in any Part whatever, that they immediately after the
Publication of these Our Imperial Avocatoria, upon the Penalties and
Punishments expressed in Our former Avocatoria, repair into the Holy Roman
Empire, Our Hereditary Kingdom and Territories, but also that they from this
time forward, and as long as the present War shall last, shall not suffer
themselves to be employed for any other, whoever it may be, than their Country,
and its presentand future Allies, who actually are in the present War against
the declared Enemy of the Empire, upon pain of incurring the same Punishments;
much less suffer them to List them, but wholly to forsake all Foreign Services.
On the other side, they who shall willingly Obey these Our Mandata Avocatoria;
and repair in due time to Us or their Princes, Lords, and Superiors, shall be
accommodated and assisted according to Justice and their Quality. In the second
place, We Command, by virtue of the same Imperial Power, with the Unanimous
Consent of the aforesaid Electors and States, that no French Ambassadors,
Envoys, Ministers, their Retinue and Emissaries, nor any of the same nor other
Nation, not only may not be suffered by any Electoral, Princely, or other
Courts and Cities in the Empire; but also that no Frenchman, nor Frenchwoman,
Spiritual or Secular, of high and low Degree, be for the future admitted into
Religious Benefices, Cloisters, and Colleges, or into Service, and such as are
in already, to be dismissed, upon pain of incurring Punishment, saving that so
far as concerns the Spiritualty, their Heads, Superiors, and Ordinaries, will
undertake and answer for them, that they shall not attempt any thing injurious
or disadvantagious to Our Interest, and that of the Empire, by Correspondence,
or in other kinds: excepting nevertheless such Secular French, as have resided
many years in the Empire, or withdrew thither through Motives of Conscience and
Religion, and have been received into the Protection of some of the States of
the Empire, and have hitherto in all Places industriously paid the usual Duty
and Submission to their Lords and Superiors, and have further lived according
to the present and other Ordonnances of Us and the Empire. In like manner, in
the third place, no Germans, whoever they may be, or under whatever Name,
Denomination, or Pretext it is, shall have leave, or be at liberty to Travel in
France. And We likewise, in the fourth place, shall immediately account for
Enemies of the Empire all and every such Foreign Power, as shall, to the
Advantage of France, under whatever color or occasion it may be, Attack any
State or Allie of the Empire, at present, or in the future, during this War;
and as they are to be immediately reputed Enemies of the Empire, so shall no
German serve the same, but much more be bound immediately to forsake such
Service. and repair to and be employed for his Country against the Common Enemy
of the Empire. We Will and Command, in the fifth place, That all Trade and
Traffic, Exchange, Correspondence, in whatever manner it may be, as well by
Water as by Land, shall be wholly and universally broken off with the Enemies
of the Empire without the least Connivance; and not only the States of the
Empire, according to the Oath whereby they are bound to Us and the Empire,
shall steadfastly and strenuously adhere hereunto, but also Our and their
Subjects are in like manner by their Duty bound thereunto; and then further,
Ours, the Empire's, and each Places respective Fiscals are to proceed
summarily, and in high Fines, and bodily Punishments against the transgressors
and neglecters of the same. And if any Commodities, Ships, Wagons, Horses, and
other Carriages shall be caught in the Fact, all the same, as also the
Money-fine, shall be forfeited, one half to the Informer, and the other to the
Prosecuting Fiscal. We likewise forbid, in the sixth place, the Importation of
all Manufactures of France, and suchlike Toys; as also French Wine, Brandy,
Oil, and other Products and things, whether that they are brought immediately
from thence, or through other Lands into the Empire in all Places, and
particularly in the Maritime and Trading Towns, upon incurring the severest
Penalties, and with Confiscation; nay, and after Discovery, severe bodily
Punishment; and require that to this end, in all Passages on the Borders, as
also in the Toll and Custom Places, where Merchants and their Goods are wont to
pass, they proceed with astrict and thorough search, without Respect of
Persons, or further by other means establish such convenient Order, that this
Prohibition may thoroughly, and without Exception, be observed for the future,
especially in the Principal Maritime, and trading Towns, that so for the
avoiding of all Deceit, no such Commodities may pass, otherwise than upon the
Credible Attestation of the Magistracy of the Place where the same were made,
or whither they were carrying, from the second, third, or fourth hand, upon
producing and knowing the first Atteslation. Wherefore We also seriously and
earnestly Command all and every Generalities of War, Colonels, and other
Commanding Officers, who are in Our Service, and that of the Holy Empire, or
its Electors, Princes, or States, that they as little as other Superiors,
shall go about to grant any Protectoria, or Letters of Leave to any Domestic
and Foreign Traders, who shall solicit and insinnate into them for the
liberty of Tradicking with French Commodities for a short time, or only for
some days: Nor shall the same be granted by any Ambassadors, or other Foreign
Ministers, residing by Permission in the Empire; but in case they be already
granted, they shall ipso facto be esteemed void, and of no use, and no notice
is to be taken of them. But so far forth as concerns French Commodities that
were in the Empire before the Publication of the first Imperial Inhibitoria,
the same shall be used in the following manner: That, whereas in some Circles
in those matters due Preparations have not been already made, which if so, then
to be disposed of for the Public Use, each Merchant or Shopkeeper shall be
bound after the day of the Publication of these Additional Imperial
Inhibitoria, in eight, or at the farthest in fourteen days, to give in and
deliver to his Magistracy, a Catalogue and Register, upon Oath, of all such
French Commodities and Manufactures he has by him, upon pain otherwise of
Confiscation of the same, and then to expect what Term, which without weighty
cause, shall not easily be prolonged shall be granted him for his selling of
the same in the Land or City where he inhabits; which he is obediently to
perform: And what he shall still have lest after the expiration of the Term, he
shall in a short time export out of the Empire, also Sub poe^a Confiscationis,
or free himself of the same b^ consignation, or making them over to the
Magistracy till time to come. Wherefore We Command all the Superior Land
Regencies to take in hand, and go about the (...) Observance, by Money-Fines,
or bodily Punishments, against their Transgressing Subjects, Citizens, and
Persons enjoying Protection; and so proceed to make such further praiseworthy
and sufficient Preparations, that this wholesome Design may tend to the Profit
of Our Country and immediate Damage of the declared (...) of the Empire; and
also that the like Decrees be ^nuously and steadfastly executed. But pa(...)
Admonish and Command in the seventh Place, (...) every the Superior Land
Regencies, to (...) most Diligence, that no Corn, Horses, Po(...) Brimstone,
Saltpeter, and all other counter(...)modities be carried and transported out
of the (...) wherever it be, nay, not so much as into F^ Neutral Countries,
without leave granted upon ^tant Considerations. We also admonish in the (...)
Place, as well all Spiritual as Temporal Re^ earnestly to Command their
Subjects, Citizens, (...)tection-men, that they, particularly the Merch^ and
Trading People, do not forward suspected (...) and Packets addressed to them,
but deliver the (...) their Regency and Magistracy, and they to take care (...)
them, according to their Place and Duty; as also (...) Ours, and the Empire's
Post-Masters, Post-Officers (...) others, Commissioned to carry Letters, are
hereby (...) Commanded that they each with his own Name (...) stamp the Letters
and Pacquets they receive; and if (...) harbor any Suspicion, immediately, and
without any (...) and no less to the performance of their aforesaid Duty (...)
up such Letters and Packets to the Regency of the Pl(...) in case also, in the
Ninth Place, any of the States or ^bers of the Empire, not being under the
Enemy's (...) shall not perform his bounden Duty, according to (...) and other
Imperial Conclusions, or is already in a ^lity, or in particular Treaties with
France, or shall (...) hereafter; he or they so offending, shall be pro^
against with all Severity, by depriving them of all (...) and Benefices holding
of the Empire, according to (...) Tenor of Executions, and other Imperial
Ordon^ and also the Common Laws. As also no less, in the (...) Place, against
all others, who act contrary to this Ordnance, either through manifest
wilfulness, or the p^ of Public Good, shall be stripped of all their ^tances and
Lands, Prerogatives, Rights, Substance, Go^ and Wealth, Offices and Dignities;
and also if they (...) ^ken, be punishined Body and Life, and the absent Offi^
in their Effigies, and they and their Posterity make (...) capable of bearing
any Title, and their Arms (...) defaced, as also incapable of
Church-Preferments, (...) Gentility, and Knighthood, nay, and liable: any
Punishment directed by the Regency proclaimed through the whole Empire, and the
same shall be ^ted upon due notice given in all the respective Parts (...)
likewise finally Command all Superior and Inferior, (...) well Ecclesiastical
as Temporal Regencies, Ancients, ^veditors, and other Overseers, to make known
all ^said to whom it may concern, and enjoin them to ^dience. And since it is
very difficult, nay, wholly ^possible to make such General and Particular Ordo^
as may provide for all Occasions that may happen, (...) before could not be
foreseen, all and every Some Regency, in their Respective Countries, are free
and ^powred, according to the juncture of Times, Persons, (...) other
Circumstances, to enlarge these Avocatoria inhibiteria, and so to apply them to
such un-sore-seen ^casions, as shall promote the Public Welfare, and the true
intention to do Damage to the Enemy of the ^pire; but not to take them away
wholly, or in part, (...) so to complete and fulfill them as far as lies in
each (...) Power, and as shall show his Fidelity and Love to his (...) Country;
and lastly, avoid the abovementioned P^ and Punishments. According to which,
each one is to ^gulate himself, and that we earnestly enjoin. Given i^ Our and
the Holy Imperial City of Augsburgh, the (...) of October, Anno 1689. Of Our
Roman Reign 32. ^garian 35. and the Bohemian 34.

LEOPOLD, Vt Leopold William. Count of Conings E^ (LS.) Ad Mandatum Sac. Caf.
Majestatis proprium. C.F. Co^bro^

LONDON: Printed for Richard Baldwin in the Old Bailey. 1689.


