THE EMPERORS ANSWER TO THE French King's MANIFESTO.

Translated from the LATIN.

LONDON, Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons in Cornhill, over
against the Royal Exchange, MDCLXXXVIII.

THE EMPERORS ANSWER TO THE French King's MANIFESTO.
IT is known to the whole Christian World that when the Peace of Numigen,
within a little after its Conclusion, was by the French King, many ways
violated, and large Countries and Provinces, contrary to the Express Tenor of
the said Peace, were, under the new and strange Pretenses of Re-unions and
Dependencies and the like, torn away from the Roman Empire, (there being a kind
of a Mock Court of Justice Erected at Metz and Brisac; in which the French
Ministers acted the parts at once of Pleaders, Wit^^sses, and Judges) that it
was at last agreed in the Year 1684 upon the 15th of August, between His Most
Sacred Majesty the Emperor on the one part, and the Most Serene King of France
on the other, that there should be a Mutual Cessation from all Acts of
Hostility, to be Inviolably observed for Twenty Years: And that, for the Honor
of God, and the security of the Christian Religion which was in Danger, and not
without great Advantage to the French Affairs: It being permitted in the mean
time to the French, that they should have quiet and peaceable Possession of
almost a Sixth part of the Provinces which after the Peace of Numigen remained
of right to the Empire.

It is known also, with what strictness in the mean time, and Confidence in the
King's Word, and favorable Interpretation of all suspicious Actions, and
Injuries, which His Majesty the Emperor suffered, and which the Princes and
States of the Empire often complained that they suffered from the Crown of
France, the said Peace on the Emperors side was observed; And how His Majesty
the Emperor trusting in the Faith of this League, was unmoved at every thing,
insomuch that His Subjects as well as Foreigners did wonder, that He seemed
not to be in any Fear, though His Frontiers lay open every where to the French,
if they would break their Faith, there being scarce above one or two Legions to
defend such a large open Country, the Confederates themselves being called away
to Hungary, and the Frontier Carrisons such as Philipsburg, Constance, and the
rest, being in a manner neglected and disregarded: And all to the intent that
His Imperial Majesty might defend the Christian Religion in Regions far remote,
though He saw in the mean time the French Forces unreasonably increased, new
and unnecessary Garrisons made on the bank of the Rhine, which belonged not to
the French King: and that Fraud and Violence was every where to be feared from
Him.

Certainly to this day there has not been any one Action on the Account of
which the King might justly accuse the Emperor of so much as attempting to
break His Eaith, much less of actually doing it. Nay those little suspicions
which France loved to make to it self, as if Caesar had in Thought, or in his
secret Wishes inclined to any such Thing, were by him immediately discussed,
and the Matter fully cleared, by his great Moderation, in that he let alone
what he might lawfully have taken, and generously omitted advantageous
Opportunities, lest he might seem by any the least spark, to kindle the Flame
of the French Jealousy.

Yet behold now again that Flame breaks out on a sudden which the French Court
unwillingly covered over for a time. The French seize on the Diocese of
Cologne, Invade the Palatinate, Besiege Philipsburg, and without observing any
Law or Article of the Peace, or so much as the Ancient Manner of King's going
to War one with another, the French King falls most unjustly upon the Emperor
and the Empire, like one that had been long secretly a contriving it: And at
last forsooth in His smooth-tongued fashion, not when He denounced War, but
when He had already begun it, He orders His Fallacious Memorial to be presented
us, in which He does not Excuse but openly Avow the Violence and Injustice of
His Arms, as if He had been provoked to a War, and did not bring it on a
sudden, upon those who thought nothing of it.

In those His Letters (or that His Manifesto) He publishes those which the
Compiler of 'em calls the Causes, whereby the Most Christian King is induced to
take Arms again against Caesur and the Empire, and by which He says the
Christian World ought to be convinced of His sincere desire of the public
Tranquillity thereof; That forsooth His Sacred Majesty the Emperor intends to
make a Peace with the Turk, that He may turn His Arms against France.

This He will have to appear, First, In that presently after the Peace
concluded, the Emperor sought new Alliances, which by diverse Artifices and
Craft were transacted at Ausburg, and Norimburg, contrary to the French
Interest.

Secondly, For that, Although the Emperor were persuaded even by the Popes
Ministers, to turn the Twenty Years Truce into a perpetual Peace, yielding only
thus much to France, that what the French now enjoyed for so long, by virtue of
the Truce, they should enjoy for ever, by this Peace, yet Caesar would by no
means yield to it.

Thirdly, For that the Most Serene Elector Palatine has violently invaded and
taken possession of diverse Goods, moveable and immovable, which belong to the
Duchess of Orleans, by Inheritance, from the deceased Lords, her Father and
Brother; and hitherto detains 'em, finding means to elude by diverse Arts the
Patience both of the King and His Brother, but depending all the while upon the
protection of the Emperor, whom He therefore has persuaded to make peace with
the Turk, and to bring back His Arms to the Rhine, having entered into diverse
Leagues for that purpose.

For that in the fourth and last place, The Cardinal of Furstenburg contrary to
the Holy Canons, the freedom of the Chapter, and the Instrument of peace, His
former Faults which by the Emperor had been pardoned, being brought into
remembrance, and alleged against Him by the Emperors Ambassador before a
Session of the Chapter, is openly and expressly excluded from the Electoral
Dignity, and the Most Serene Prince Joseph Clement of Bavaria by base Arts, the
Pope Himself being seduced, and a Brief of Eligibility, as they call it,
obtained from Him, to the scandal of all People, and the Forces of the
Protestants being brought into the Electorate of Cologne, is violently thrust
in, in His stead; with this malicious Intention, that he the said Clement of
Bavaria, being by entering into Orders, hindered from Marrying, if the Most
Serene Elector of Bavaria should happen to dye, as he is at present, without
Issue (which may easily be, he exposing himself continually to so many dangers
in the War) then a Family suspected always by the House of Austria should be
taken out of the way.

By all which ('it is said) it may appear clearer than the Sun at Noonday, that
the Emperor not regarding the desolation of the Archbishopric of Cologne,
and the oppression of the Catholic Religion, does endeavor to have War made
upon France at the Charge and Hazard of the Electors, Princes and States of the
Empire, that so the Roman Diadem may at last settle on the Head of the King of
Hungary (now a Child) and all Germany, large as it is, being torn away from the
Kings Friendship, may fall under the most miserable Tyranny and Servitude of
the House of Austria? Even as these things are more largely and invidiously set
forth in the foresaid Writing.

When His Sacred Majesty, the Emperor, Read this infamous Libel, (infamous not
to Him, but to the Author or Authors of it) and saw in it not so much as a
shadow of Reason, but the most impudent Slanders wickedly forged, both against
His Sacred Person and the Popes, as also against the Most Serene Elector
Palatine, He easily persuaded Himself, that it was quite contrary to the Sense
of the Most Christian King, and therefore far from having been Read or Approved
by Him, but that rather it was Compiled by some Malicious French Minister of
State; for that He believed the French King would not suffer willingly, that
His Imperial Majesty, in a way so unusual betwixt Crowned Heads, should be so
unworthily Reproached, which matters he certainly knew in His Conscience to be
False, or that the Reason of His own Actings, such as they are, should be
written in such an impudent style, and with such venomous reflections and
interpretations of things: And therefore His Imperial Majesty doubted a great
while whether He should think it worthy of an Answer, and not rather pass it
over in silence: But forasmuch as the French Court is not ashamed, irreverently
to Publish it, by its Ministers as well in the Emperors own Court, as at
Ratisbone in the Diet, and endeavors by such False and Contumelious Reasons to
justify Their bringing on Us a Cruel War, in a way little better than
downright Treachery and Perfidiousness, without so much as denouncing it before
hand, as the Law of Nations does Require, and has been often Agreed; and
without leting us know what injury they had to complain of, but even deceiving
us all by their fresh Assurances of constant Friendship, and pretended
Kindness* Therefore His Imperial Majesty thought it necessary to demonstrate to
the World the vanity and insignificancy of all those undeserved Imputations.

To begin therefore with that which is the Foundation, on which all the French
Reasoning stands, viz. That the Emperor had resolved to make a Peace with the
Turk, that He might fall upon France, that can with no more Truth be charged
upon Him now, than it was the last Year at Rome in a Proposition made by
Cardinal D' Estree. And as Impartial Judges will hardly believe, that so
Religious a Prince, supported by Gods help in the present War, and having all
the success He desired, forced by no necessity, would so much as think of
making a Peace with the Turks; without the Privity of His Allies, thereby to
defile His Conscience with the rash Breach of a League made against the Ottoman
Empire, and at the same time to incur the Just Censures and Complaints of the
Pope, the King and Senate of Poland, and the Commonwealth of Venice; so how
vain a suggestion the other is, that His Imperial Majesty should have an intent
to make War with France, (when He has neither an Army nor Provisions at hand,
nay when all His strong Places, Cities and Provinces, as the event shows, by
too much trusting the Kings Word, are left in a manner destitute of Soldiers,
and of all kind of Necessaries for Defense, and His whole Strength gone against
the Enemy of Christianity) every one will easily see who will but take the
pains even slightly to consider, upon how weak and frivolous Arguments that
surmise is grounded.

Those Arguments certainly amongst those that know nothing of the matter will
scarce seem to bear the weight of a thin and brittle Conjecture; but to those
who do understand it they will appear to be mere Fictions, which yet if they
were true, would prove nothing to this purpose. For who is there that can draw
so much as a probable consequence from hence, that because the Emperor favors
the innocent in defense of Himself, and of the Alliances which His Friends have
made, because He refuses to turn a Twenty Years Truce into a perpetual Peace,
without first hearing those that are concerned in it, and without any
discussion of the matter, because by His Counsel and Help he sustains His
Father in Law, the Elector, that France may not have the deciding of his Cause:
Because Lastly, He removes Furstenburg, the Man that has been so fatal to his
Country, and promotes to the Bishopric of Cologne a Prince of great
Expectation, of the Family of the Dukes of Bavaria, which has deserved very
well both of their Country, and of that Archiepiscopal See: Who I say can hence
draw but a probable consequence, that therefore the Emperor intends to take the
first opportunity to make War with France.

Nay France it self, if it would but remember what was remonstrated in Letters
to the Pope, and to His Most Christian Majesty both by Words and Writing the
last Year, by the Count Lobcowitz the Emperors Ambassador, would doubtless
acknowledge, that all the other superadded Arguments, and especially that drawn
from the League Established at Ausburg, were vain and frivolous. For this
League brought on nothing that was New, but only Established some Ancient
Agreements betwixt the Emperor and some of the Circles of the Empire: It
Renewed what was necessary betwixt the Princes and States of the Empire, for
the Circumstances of the present time: It tended to the hurt of none, but only
to that which is most innocent, and allowed by all Law, their mutual Defense:
And besides it took in but a moderate number of Heads, and a small Strength
into it: And therefore the Mighty Crown of France did not need to be afraid of
it.

Truly the forgetfulness of the Compiler of this Libel is very wonderful, that
he will not so much as remember that his own King, to prevent all just occasion
of quarrelling with the Emperor and Empire upon that account, before the
Signing of the Truce, did Promise, that after it was Signed He would not be
against the Empires Consulting the best ways for its own Safety. Nay, and it
was expressly Declared in the very League of Truce, that such Agreements of the
Empire might be strengthened by any kind of Guaranty of Foreign Princes. But
the same Authors ignorance is yet much more to be admired, that he should not
know, that there is nothing more Anciently Received in the German Empire, nor
nothing more Agreeable to its Laws, then that the Members should always most
closely adhere to the Head for the Preservation of the whole Body. And Lastly,
his Arrogance or his Folly is greatly to be admired, that whilst he presumes it
Lawful for his own King to make vast Preparations of War in His Kingdom, nay
and under pretense of a League unjustly made with some of the Chapter of
Cologue, to send His Forces into that Archbishopric, He supposes the Emperor
in the mean while to have so little to do in the Empire, that He may not so
much as meet with the Princes and States thereof to consult about the Peace of
their Country, without doing such an injury to France as must be revenged by
Force of Arms.

His second Argument has much the same degree of Force and Validity in it, viz.
That the Emperor refused to turn the Truce into a Peace: If He had wholly
refused it, and that upon other Conditions, that were not so unworthy of the
Emperor, and noxious to the whole Empire, as those which at that time happened
to be prescribed rather than propounded by the Court of France, had that been
any Crime? The Twenty Years Truce ought certainly to have been stood to, and
during the continuance of that a Peace should have been Treated of, which His
Most August Majesty never refused, provided the King would agree to a Peace
that was Honorable, maturely considered and Just: There ought therefore to
have been a Meeting appointed, and both sides heard, and all the Chief
Controversies concerning matters of right, in those things which were attempted
by France as well before as after the Truce, should have been Examined; and
then might have ensued a Peace, every one having their own restored to 'em, by
common consent, and such as might have been likely happily to continue.

The Most Christian King might remember, that at His desire the Truce was
lengthened out to Twenty Years, both that there might be time enough to discuss
and determine all Controversies, as it was fir, and that the Electors, Princes
and States of the Empire, might with the greater security take Arms against the
Common Enemy of the Christian Name: And therefore that it cannot be without the
French Kings breaking His Agreement, and violating His Word; that when scarce
Two Years of the Twenty are gone about, and while the Turkish War yet lasts, He
should so change His Mind, that nothing now forsooth should remain to be
discussed or determined, but a sixth part of the Provinces of the Empire, must
at once by a full and irrevocable Right be made over to Him. Now this is what
the Emperor could not Lawfully have done, if He would: It would have been
contrary to Right, and to the Tenor of the Truce, and they who had thought
themselves injured would doubtless have withstood it.

Therefore His Imperial Majesty excused Himself as to this matter; and lest any
the least suspicion should remain, He not only declared several times by His
Letters to the Pope, and by a Writing exhibited to the French King by the Count
Lobcowitz then Resident in the French Court, that He would keep inviolably the
Twenty Years Truce, as well after the end of the Turkish War, as during its
Continuance, but also if the King thought it necessary, He would confirm it by
an Oath, to be deposed in the hands of the Pope: In which when the French King
did then acquiesce, and with all did obtain that His mighty Building of
Fortifications, which He had begun and desired to finish, though contrary to
the Articles of the said Truce (and of the Peace of Westphalia and Nimegen)
should not be looked on as a just Cause to break it, He promising over and over
again the most sincere and constant Friendship during the whole Twenty Years:
Any one may hence easily gather how frivolously this same pretense is made for
the French infraction of their League, and what lasting Peace can be expected,
if such idle Reasons may serve, to break His Faith, and overthrow His
Agreements, so that a Twenty Years Truce can hardly last Four.

As for the Third Argument taken from the Succession in the Palatinate, His
Imperial Majesty do'es not so espouse the Cause of the Most Serene Elector
Palatine, as to defend it at all Adventure without its coming to a fair Trial:
But it is most evident that that Prince (who is famous all over the World for
the Nobility of His Blood, the Probity of His Behavior, and His great Wisdom
and Prudence) did not violently Invade the Countries of the Palatinate, but
entered peaceably, observing all Forms of Law. Whatsoever things did
undoubtedly belong to the Duchess of Orleans by Inheritance, he willingly let
her have. As for what was doubtful not being willing to be blindly prodigal of
what He had, He thought fit to retain it, till the Matter were cleared by a
Competent Judge.

The French King has undertaken the Cause of the Duchess of Orleans, and given
notice to the Elector Palatine to yield up what she pretends to: He appeals to
the Court of Judgment, the Court Palatine of the Empire: This the King refuses.
What if the Emperor should undertake the Cause of the Duke of Lorrain's claim
to his Inheritance, for the sake of his dear Nephew, and should refuse to let
it be tried in France? Has the French King more right in the Empire, than the
Emperor has in France? Afterward there being a proposal of referring the
matter to the Pope, the Elector Palatine admitted him as Mediator (Arbitrator)
whom he could not allow of as a Judge without giving Offense to His own Court,
by whom it should be tried, and without the consent of his Kindred, He sent a
Minister to Rome fully instructed and informed. The Duchess of Orleans sent
never a one. The Pope sent a Monition to her, but all in vain; so that at last
after a whole years stay the Palatine's Ambassador was dismissed by the
deluded Pope. And yet very lately the French King's Ambassador here at Vienna
the Count De Lusignan assures the Emperor that His Master was resolved not to
depart from the Arbitration of the Pope, though he was very averse and
unfriendly to Him. Thus the French King drills it on with vain Pretenses, till
me falls in with His Arms upon the Palatinate. And this is the true series of
the matter.

That which is added concerning the Emperors being solicited by the Elector
Palatine to make War upon France, and a League made to that purpose, is all a
Fiction. Neither is the Most Serene Elector so imprudent as to seek any gain by
War, when, fall how it will, it will be sure to be most pernicious and fatal to
His own Country.

The last Argument remains concerning the business of Cologne for the putting
out of Furstenburgh, and thrusting in the Bavarian, which is so stuffed with
Calumnies, that from thence it may appear how destitute Frunce is of any
Reason, or shadow of Reason to cover the Injustice of their breach of Faith.

What the Emperor did at Cologne He did according to Right, and agreeable to
the Laws of Justice, and His Imperial Office, and the Patronship of all
Churches, thereunto annexed. He did exhort the Chapter to choose him that was
best and fittest for the Church, giving Reasons why those Qualifications were
not to be found in the Cardinal of Furstenburg. He alleged his former Crimes
upon no other account, but as they have been increased by new ones. And the
Emperor would willingly have forgotten all old Faults if Frustenburg would have
laid aside his old evil Temper, and were not found still plotting worse things
than he was guilty of before. But He left every one of the Chapter their entire
Liberty as well in as after the Election, He corrupted none of 'em by promises
of Reward, much less did He Threaten, or use any Violence; He did neither stir
up any Foreign Forces to enter the Archbishopric, nor did He send in His own,
but remitting the whole Controversy to the Holy Apostolic See, the only
Competent Judge in this Matter, He quietly expected a Decision of it. Thus did
the Emperor in the Empire: Did France do the same? But it may be the French
King has more Authority not only in His own Kingdom, but in the German Empire.
He violated not the Holy Canons, nor the Articles of Peace, nor the Liberty of
Voting, whilst without advising with, yea against the Will of the Pope, first
by secret Arts, and afterward by a great Sum of Money He got the Cardinal of
Furstenburg into the Coadjutorship, by the help of such Voices as He had
bought, whilst He made an unlawful Agreement or League at Luxemburg, Seventeen
Months ago, and promised that He would not only send, but at His own Charge
maintain a strong Army in the Archbishopric whereby he that was thus
pretendedly postulated to the Coadjutorship, being not confirmed but rejected
by the Vicar of Christ, should be upheld even against the Will of God, whilst
lastly He terribly threatened the Greatest Princes of the Empire if they offered
to come, or so much as to matter a Word against Him. It was His Offenses
against the Apostolic See, and the Rashness of His Actions, and not any hatred
against France, nor any Intercessions of other Princes, nor any Conspiracies
that Men may dream of, that made the Emperor zealous against Furstenburg, and
inclined Him to prefer the Prince of Bavaria, one already Bishop of Frising and
Ratisbone, a Young Man indeed, but of great Virtue and pregnant Hopes, and
whose Family has highly deserved of the Church. Is this a Scandalous thing? Let
the People of Rome say, who at the Doors of the Consistory in great numbers did
most highly applaud it, when they understood that Joseph Clement that most
innocent and good Prince, by the unanimous Vote of that Assembly, was to be
Archbishop of Cologne. Let Italy speak, let Germany, yea let England and
Holland, where Men that hated the very Name of the Pope, at once both Learned
and Taught others on this occasion highly to commend Pope Innocent.

His Imperial Majesty does willingly acknowledge that He was glad when so great
a Prince appeared as a Competitor in the Cologne Election, and that He most
readily consented to the Desires of Him, and the most Serene Elector of
Bavaria. But that this should be done out of a wicked and base Design, that the
whole Bavarian Family, suspected by the House of Austria, might the sooner be
Extinct, this, as it is a great Wickedness but to imagine it, so the Boldness,
Impudence, and Rashness of this Author, who durst to write, and publicly
object this against the Emperor deserves to be punished by the Hangman. The
Imperial Court does not think of, much less practice such Wickedness. What the
French Court does they know best. No body will believe such things can be done
any where else. But all will easily believe, that which is indeed the truth,
that this most Impudent French Writer had a mind to make the House of Bavaria
jealous and suspicious of that of Austria, as it is the Custom of these paultry
French Politicians, to poison all Courts with the Seeds of Discord that being
divided they may fall the easier.

Thither to be sure that tends, that according to the French Fashion in a
tedious digression He endeavors to whisper it into the Ears of the Electors,
Princes, and States of the Empire, that the Empires design is to make War at
their Cost, and by the Ruin of the Archbishopric of Cologne, and Oppression
of Religion to obtain the Roman Crown for His Son, that is yet but a Boy, and
to bring all Germany, being withdrawn from its Alliance with France into a
dishonorable and miserable Slavery.

He endeavors to amuse their minds with such Stuff lest they should agree and
join together for their true Honor and common Security, thinking that the
French King will easily rout 'em all severally, though if all should join
together, they would quickly drive Him away. And therefore He strives all He
can by Fraud and Craft, to cause Germany to forsake the Patronage and
Auspicious Conduct of the House of Austria. But the House of Bavaria is not so
Weak, nor the German Nation so silly, as not to understand these Artifices
which cannot easily be hid. And as the Most Serene Elector of Bavaria does
gratefully acknowledge the kind Offices which the Emperor at his Request did
for his House in the Election at Cologne, so according to its usual Wisdom, it
will but laugh at such little Sparks of Suspicion, as it has done already,
having had experience of these prating Sowers of Dissension; And will easily
see, that there is nothing to be hoped for from the French who seek but what
they can get. But the German whoever he is, that is free from the Iron Yoke of
the French, may easily see by the Oppression of the People even in Germany it
self where they come, and from the Condition even of their own Nobility and
Gentry in France, whether comes nearer to Tyranny, the Governor of the House
of Austria, or the French manner of Ruling; And will rejoice truly that the
Roman Crown does not fall that way, whither the French Court has often shown
that they have designed it, and then especially, when after their Ancient
Fashion without any regard to Honesty, to their Faith, their good Name, or to
Conscience, they have not only cherished the Rebels in Hungary, followers of
the Turk, by sending 'em Captains, Messengers, Arms, Money and large Promises,
but also, as it is done even at this day, have stirred up and encouraged the
very Enemies of the Christian Name to War against His Imperial Majesty. As it
may be manifestly proved by the Authentic Letters of the French Emissaries and
of the Rebels and others, which are ready to be produced.

And this is that which His. Imperial Majesty has ordered to be answered with
as much brevity as possible, to that Contumelious Libel or French Manifesto,
not to injure the Reputation of the Most Christian King, whom He believes to be
induced to this unjust breach of the Peace, by the malicious and false
Suggestions of those, who seek Gain by these Troubles, and who He believes
would not approve of such ill Language and unjust Railing against His Sacred
Person, but to wipe off all the Scandal which this Impudent Writer has
endeavored to fix upon the House of Austria, and which the Ministers of France
do every where scatter about, and to defend His own Innocence.

And moreover that this His Cause may be more and more publicly known and
testified to all the Christian World He does publicly declare and call the
Omniscient God to Witness, that He never thought any thing of breaking the
Truce, but that He was always firmly resolved, and it is still His true and
serious purpose to keep it inviolably, if it will at last please His Most
Christian Majesty to stand to the Covenant of Truce, and the Declarations which
He made and reiterated but the last year from Paris, and not to endeavor to
make any alterations. But as for passing this Truce into a firm and perpertual
Peace, He persists in that, that He will most heartily and willingly show forth
all readiness in endeavoring it, provided that a Commission being appointed
for the dividing of the Borders, and discussing the Controverted Rights, may
proceed in that Manner and Order as is agreeable to the Laws made betwixt
France and the Empire. Wherefore if there be any regard to Justice in the Most
Serene K. of France (as it is hoped) His Imperial Majesty has good Reason to
believe and trust, that He will of Himself Chastise and Correct the Calumnies
and Slanders of this Scandalous French Print, will withdraw His unjust Arms,
restore Damages, bring back all into its Primitive State, permit the Most
Serene Prince Clement, long since Legally Confirmed by His Holiness, to enjoy
quietly the Electorate and Archbishopric of Cologne, and will remit the Cause
of the Prince Palatine to a competent Court of Judicature, in which His
Imperial Majesty does promise that Justice shall be Faithfully and Impartially
done: And Lastly, That He will suffer the Peace which He says He wishes for,
to be procured in the time, manner and order as is set down in the Truce.

But if He be not willing to do these things, none can then suppose there is
any other cause for the French King thus to revive the War, then that the
singular favor of the Divine Providence, and the wonderful defense it has
afforded to the House of Austria, are things displeasing to Him, or that He
fears the great increase and enlargement of that August Family, by their, late
Victories which have carried the Empire beyond Belgrade; or that He has a
desire to raise up again the beaten and depressed Turks by diverting our Arms,
as it is said He has promised them. Or Lastly, That through too greedy a desire,
not only of assuring to Himself for perpetuity, what He has got for a time by
the Articles of the Truce, but also of Conquering the whole Roman Empire, He
thinks Himself not obliged by any Pacts or Covenants, but that He may break
them at any time at His Pleasure. Whatever it is, the Most Glorious King of
France shall not escape the Infamous Mark of a Perfidious Prince that violates
His Faith. And therefore His Most Sacred Imperial Majesty does protest before
God and the whole Christian World, that the said King is free to stretch forth
His Hands either to the Fire or the Water, and either to abuse the felicity of
His present Power, or in time to fear those Adversities which he provokes the
Omnipotent God (...) Anger to send upon Him. But as for Himself, being driven
to the necessary Defense as well of His Provinces, as of the Sacred Roman
Empire, the Electors, Princes and States thereof, He shall be blameless and
free from all the guilt as well of the calamities like to follow from the War,
and the effusion of Christian Blood, as of the Mohammedan Superstition
continuing still in Europe, and of the destruction of so many Christian Souls
miserably groaning under the Yoke of the Turk.

The Author indeed of this Print boasts and glories that His Most Christian
Majesty's Arms are proved just from Heaven by their success wheresoever He
moves 'em; but with what Truth let him show if he can. His Imperial Majesty
being fully satisfied of the goodness of His Cause, is resolved if it shall
please God in this occasion to give prosperous success to the French Arms, He
will never the less adore and Magnify the secret Counsels of God, who has
sometimes Chastized and Corrected even those whom He Loved, by such as Attilas:
But He is glad that He has cause to hope better in this World. The Most High
has thrown down and humbled the Turk that broke his League but a little before
it was ready to empire: And He will also throw down and humble the French
Violater of a League, which should have held Sixteen Years longer.

Vienna, October. 18th 1688.
FINIS.

