ARTICLES OF PEACE Between the EMPEROR and EMPIRE, AND FRANCE, Concluded in
the Royal Palace of RESWICK in Holland, October 30. 1697.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by E. Whitlock in Stationers Court, near
Stationers' Hall. 1697.

ARTICLES OF PEACE, Between the Emperor and Empire, AND FRANCE, Concluded in
the Royal Palace at Reswick in Holland, October 30. 1697.
In the Name of the Holy Trinity. Amen.

BE it known unto all and every individual Person whom it may concern, That
seeing there has been for some Years past a Cruel War, waged with great
Effusion of Christian Blood, and the Desolation of diverse Provinces, between
the most Serene, and most Potent Prince and Lord, the Lord Leopold, Elect
Emperor of the Romans, always August, King of Germany, Bohemia, Dalmatia,
Croatia, and Slavonia, Archduke of Austria, Duke of Burgundy, Brabant, Styria,
Carinthia, Carniola; Marquess of Moravia, Duke of Luxemburg, of the Upper and
Lower Silesia, Wirtemburg, and Tecka, Prince of Suabia, Count of Habsburg,
Tyrole, Kyburg and Goritia, Marquess of the Sacred Roman Empire, of Burgovia,
and of the Upper and Lower Lusatia; Lord of the Mark of Slavonia, Port Naon,
and the Salt Pits, etc. on the one part, and the most Serene and most Potent
Prince and Lord, Lewis XIV. the most Christian King of France, and Navar, on
the other part; and that their Imperial and Most Christian Majesty's have been
very intent upon the terminating, as soon as might be, those Evils daily
increasing to the prejudice of the Christian Religion: It has, by the Blessing
of Almighty God, been at length so brought to pass, by the Endeavors of the
Most Serene and most Potent Prince and Lord, Charles XI, King of the Swedes,
Goths, and Vandals: Great Prince of Finland, Duke of Schonen, Esten, Livonia,
Carelia, Bremen, Verden, Stetin, Pomerania, Cassubia, and Vandalia: Prince of
Rugen, Lord of Ingria and Wismar, and also Count Palatine of the Rhine, Duke of
Bavaria, Juliers, Cleve, and Berghen, etc. of famous Memory, who from the very
beginning of these Commotions, has not ceased, with great Earnestness, to
persuade the Christian Princes to a Peace, and was at length received by all
the Parties to be a Mediator for composing the same as soon as possible, and
labored most graciously therein to the day of his Death: That a solemn Treaty
to that end, has been set on foot in the Royal Palace of Reswick in Holland,
and after his Decease, brought at last to an End, with the like Application of
the most Serene and most Potent Prince and Lord, the Lord Charles XII. King of
the Swedes, Goths, and Vandals; Great Prince of Finland, Duke of Schonen,
Esten, Livonia, Carelia, Bremen, Verden, Stetin, Pomerania, Cassubia, and
Vandalia; Prince of Rugen, Lord of Ingria and Wismar, as also Count Palatine of
the Rhine; Duke of Bavaria, Juliers, Cleve, and Berghen, who succeeds his
Father with equal Care for the public Tranquillity. For the Extraordinary
Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries, authorized in due Form, having appeared on
both sides in the said place, viz. On the part of his Imperial Majesty, the
most Illustrious and most Excellent Lords, the Lord Dominick Andreas, Count of
the Sacred Roman Empire, and of Kaunitz; hereditary Lord of Austerlitz,
Hungarishbrod, Marischprus, and of the greater Orzechan, Knight of the Golden
Fleece, Councellor of State to his Imperial Majesty, ^^amberlain, and
Vice Chancellor of the Sacred Empire: The Lord Henry John, Count of the Sacred
Roman Empire, of Straatman, and Peurbach; Lord of Orth, Shemiding, Spatenbrun,
and Carlsberg; of his Imperial Majesty's Court Council, and Chamberlain: And
the Lord John Frederick, free and Noble Baron of Seilern, Counselor to his
Imperial Majesty, and Authorized Commissary in the Dyets of the Empire: And in
the Name of the Most Christian King, the most Illustrious and excellent Lords
the Lord Nicholas de Harlay, Knight, Lord of Bonnevil, Count of Cely,
Consellour in ordinary to his Majesty, in his Council of State: The Lord
Ludovic Verjus, Knight, Counselor in Ordinary to the King in his Council of
State, Count of Crecy, Marquess of Freon, Baron of Couvay, Lord of Boullay, of
the two Churches in Fortille, and in other places; and the Lord Francis
Callieres, Knight, Lord of Callieres, Rupischelle and Gigny, by the
intervention and Endeavors of the most Illustrious and most Excellent Lords,
the Lord Charles, Bond, Count of Biornoo, Lord of Hesleby, Tyresio, Toftaholm,
Graffsteen, Gustafsberg, and Rezitza, Senator to his Swedish Majesty, and Chief
President of the Court of Dorpaten in Livonia; and of the Lord Nicholas Fell,
Baron of Lillieroot, Secretary of State to his Swedish Majesty, and Ambassador
Extraordinary to their High and Mightinesses, the States General of the Uunited
Provinces, who have discharged the Office of Mediators with much Integrity,
Diligence and Prudence, with the Consent and Suffrages of the Plenipotentiaries
of the Electors, Princes and States of the Sacred Roman Empire, after having
invoked the Assistance of the Divine Majesty, and in due form Exchanged the
full Powers, have to the Glory of God, and good of Christendom, mutually agreed
on the following Conditions of Peace and Friendship.

I. That there be a Christian, Universal, and perpetual Peace and true
Friendship between his Imperial Majesty and his Successors, the Sacred Roman
Empire, his Hereditary Kingdoms and Dominions, Subjects and Vassals on the one
part, and his Most Christian Majesty, and his Successors, Subjects and Vassals
on the other part; and that the same Peace be so sincerely observed and
cultivated, that neither Party shall contrive or promote any thing to the
Damage or loss of the other, under any pretense whatsoever; or give any Aid or
Assistance to any Person or Persons, that would design or put in Execution any
thing to the detriment of either, under what denomination soever it be; or
receive, protect, or assist the Rebellious or Seditious Subjects of each other,
upon any account whatsoever; but rather that each Party shall seriously promote
the Honor, Advantage and Interest of the other, notwithstanding any Promises
made to the contrary, and any Treaties and Leagues, which way soever made, or
to be made, which are hereby annulled.

II. Let there be a perpetual amnesty and oblivion of all Acts of Hostility
committed on either side, in any place, or by any way whatsoever, so that the
one shall not because of them, or under pretense of any other thing either
directly or indirectly, offer any Violence or Injury to the other, or suffer
any to be done by Deed or Writing, but that all offered Injuries and Violences
be so utterly abolished, without any respect of Persons or Things; that
whatever upon that account the one may pretend against the other, shall be
buried in perpetual oblivion: All and every the Vassals and Subjects of each
Party shall also partake and enjoy this Amnesty, and the Benefit and Effect of
it; so as that it be a Prejudice and a Crime in none of them to have followed
this or that Party, so as not to be restored to the full Enjoyment of their
former State, in respect to Honor and Goods, as it was before the War began;
excepting in those things, which upon account of Ecclesiastical Benefices,
Movables and Incomes, are particularly specified in the following Articles.

III. And for as much as the Peace of Westphalia and Nimeguen, is to be the
Basis and Foundation of the present Peace; the same shall forthwith, after the
exchange of the Ratifications, be fully restored and Executed both in Sacred
and Civil Matters, and hereafter be preserved inviolable, saving in such Points
as derogate from them expressly in the present Treaty.

IV. In the first place, his most Christian Majesty does restore to his
Imperial Majesty and the Empire, and to the States and Members thereof,
whatever places and Jurisdictions that have been taken, as well during the War
by way of Fact, as by the Name of Unions and Re-unions which are situated
without Alsatia, or whatever have been expressed in the Inventory of Re-unions
exhibited by the French Ambassador, revoking and making void all the Decrees,
Arrests, and Declarations, which upon that account have been put forth by the
Chamber of Metz, and Besancon, as also by the Council of Brisac; and all things
to be restored into the same Condition they were in before those Seizures,
Unions, and Re-unions were made, and at no time hereafter to be disturbed, or
molested, but that the Roman Catholic Religion do remain in these Places thus
restored, in the same state it is now in.

V. And though from these general Rules it may be easily judged what Places they
are, and how far the things that are to be restored do extend, yet at the
instances of some, and for some other particular Reasons, it has been thought
fit to make special mention of some things; but yet in such a manner, that
those that are not expressly named, are not to be taken as left out, but to have
the same place altogether with the others named, and to enjoy the same Right.

VI. The City of Treves shall be Restored to the Elector of that Name, and
Bishop of Spires, in the same state it is in at present, without any farther
demolishing of Places, or any detriment done to either public or private
Buildings, together with the Artillery that was found therein, at the time it
was last taken. And that all that has been agreed on in respect to Seizures,
Unions, and Re-unions in the Fourth Article preceding, ought also to be
esteemed to extend to the benefit of the Churches of Triers and Spire, as if
particularly specified.

VII. The Elector of Brandenburg also shall enjoy all the benefits of this
Peace, and be fully comprehended in it, with all his Dominions, Possessions,
Subjects, and Rights, and those by name which belong to him, by virtue of the
Treaty Concluded on the 29th of June, in the Year 1679. as if each Particular
had been specified herein.

VIII. The most Christian King shall restore to the Elector Palatine of the
Rhine all his Dominions possessed by him, whether they appertain to him alone, or
in common with others, however denominated, especially the City and Prefecture
of Germersheim, and the Prefectures and Subprefectures comprehended therein,
with all the Castles, Cities, Towns, Villages, Lands, Feudships and Rights, as
they were restored by the Treaty of Westphalia; as also all the Writings or
Records taken out of the Archive, Chancery, Foeudal Court, Chamber of Accounts,
Prefectures, and other Palatine Offices that have been taken away, without
exception of any Place, Thing, Right, or Record. And as to what concerns the
Rights or Pretensions of the Duchess of Orleans, it is agreed, after the
abovementioned Restitution be first made, that the thing be decided according
to the form Compromised between his Imperial and most Christian Majesty, as
Arbitrators in the Matter, according to the Laws and Constitutions of the
Empire; but if they shall not be able to agree it, then the same shall be left
to the Arbitration of the Pope: But that in the mean time there be no less
endeavor used to procure an amicable Agreement between the Parties; and until
the said Matter be fully decided, that there be the yearly Sum of two hundred
thousand Livres, or an hundred thousand Florins paid by the said Elector to the
Duchess of Orleans, upon that account and condition, as the same is expressed in
a particular Article, of the same force with the present Peace; reserving every
way at the same time the right of each Party, as well in the possessed as
sued-for part, as also the Rights of the Empire.

IX. The Ancient Duchy of Deuxponts shall be Restored freely and wholly to the
most Serene King of Suedeland, as Count Palatine of the Rhine, Count of
Spanheme, and Veldenz, with all its Appurtenances and Dependances, and with
those Rights that the Predecessors of his Swedish Majesty, the Count Palatines,
and Dukes of Deuxponts have enjoyed, or could have enjoyed, according to the
Tenor of the Westphalian Treaty; so that all things under what Title soever
pretended to, possessed, and reunited by the Crown of France hitherto, either
in whole or in part of the said Duchy, shall return in full right to his
Swedish Majesty, and his Heirs the Counts Palatines of the Rhine. All Records
also belonging to the said Duchy shall be restored, together with the
Artillery that were found in the same at the time it was first possessed by
France, and all other things concerning which it has been agreed upon in the
preceding Articles, in favor of things to be Restored.

X. As for the Principality of Veldenz, and what the deceased Prince Leopold
Lodowick Count Palatine of the Rhine possessed under the name of the said
Principality, or the Principality of Lautereccen, they shall be restored as far
as the fourth Section; and the Inventory exhibited by the French Embassage,
reserving still entire, the pretensions as well of the possessed as suing Party.

XI. France shall also fully restore to the Grand Master of the Teutonick
Order, and Bishop of Worms, Prince Francis Lodowick Palatine, all the
Commendums Consecrated to or Possessed by that Noble Order, Places, Profits, and
Rights; and the said Order shall enjoy, in respect to the Commendums, and other
Goods situated under the French Dominion, as well upon account of Collation as
Administration, the same Usages, Privileges and Immunities which they have
enjoyed heretofore, according to the Rules and Statutes of the Order, and what
the Order of St. John of Jerusalem was wont to enjoy.

XII. The City and Castle of Dinant shall be restored to the Elector of
Cologne, as Bishop and Prince of Liege, in the same state wherein it was, when
assumed into the hands of France, with all its Rights and and Dependances, as
also Canons and Records found at that time therein. And moreover, all that is
comprehended in the Fourth Article, concerning Seizures, Unions, and Re-unions,
are esteemed in a particular manner, to extend to the advantage of the Churches
of Cologne and Liege.

XIII. As for the House of Wirtemburg, and particularly Duke George, the
Principality or Country of Mompelgard shall be restored to him, for himself
and Successors, in the same state, with the same Rights and Prerogatives; and
especially into the same immediety toward the Sacred Roman Empire, as
heretofore he has enjoy*d it, and as the rest of the Princes of the Empire do,
or ought to enjoy it; that Recognition of Vassalage that has been made to the
Crown of France in the Year 1681. being utterly annulled hereby. And the said
Princes shall from henceforth freely enjoy all the Profits both Secular and
Ecclesiastical appertaining to the same, which they enjoyed before the Peace of
Nimeguen, as well as the Feudships, which during the time of the French's
detention of them, or at any other time, did belong, and had not been granted
by them to others, excepting the Country of Baldenheim, with its
Appurtenances, which the most Christian King has bestowed upon Monsieur de
Chamlay, Camp-Master General, and which ought to remain firm to him, but yet
so, as he is obliged to do homage to the Duke of Wirtemburg, as his direct
Lord, and to his Successors; and to seek the renewing of his Feudship at his
hands. They shall be restored also into the full and free possession both of
their Feudships in Burgundy, Clerevall, and Passavant, as also of their
Dynasties, or Lordships of Granges, Herricourt, Blamont, Chatelot, and Clemont,
and of the rest that are situated in the County of Burgundy, and Principality
of Montpelgard, together with all their Rights and Incomes, in the very same
manner as they possessed them before the Peace at Nimeguen; all those things
being utterly abolished which were done, or pretended to at any time, by what
Title any way distinguished, and in any manner whatsoever to the contrary.

XIV. The House or Marquisate of Baden shall also enjoy all the Right and
Benefit of this Peace, and at the same time of the Peace of Westphalia, and
Nimeguen; but more especially the Fourth and Fifth Articles of this Treaty.

XV. In the same manner the Princes and Counts of Nassaw, Hanaw, and Leinigen,
and all the other States of the Sacred Roman Empire, who by the Fourth Article
of this Treaty, or any other, are to be restored, shall be re-posiest in all
and singular their Dominions or Rights, and in all the Profits belonging to and
Incomes arising from them, and in all other Rights and Benefits, by what name
soever called, or distinguished.

XVI. But seeing for the better Establishment of this Peace, it has been
thought fit to make an Exchange of some Places, his Imperial Majesty and the
Empire, yield up to the most Christian King and his Successors, the City of
Strasburg, and whatever belongs to the said City, on the left side of the
Rhine, with all the Jurisdiction, Propriety, and Supreme Dominion which has
hitherto appertained, or could appertain to him and the Roman Empire, and
transfer all and singular of them to the most Christian King and his
Successors, so that the said City, with all its Appurtenances and Dependencies
situated on the left side of the Rhine, without any reservation, with all
manner of Jurisdiction and Superiority and Supreme Dominion, do appertain from
this time and for ever, to the most Christian King, and his Successors, and be
understood to be incorporated with the Crown of France, without any
contradiction from the Emperor, Empire or any other whatever; and for the
greater validity of this Cession or alienation; the Emperor and the Empire, by
virtue of the present transaction expressly derogate from all and singular the
Decrees, Constitutions, Statutes and Customs of the preceding Emperors, and
the Sacred Roman Empire, tho confirmed by Oath, or to be Confirmed hereafter,
and particularly from the Imperial Capitulation, so fas forth as any manner of
alienation of the Goods and Rights of the Empire is prohibited; all which they
expressly renounce, and discharge the said City, with all the Magistrates,
Officials, Citizens and Subjects thereof, from the Oaths and Obligations by
which they have been hitherto bound to the Emperor and the Empire, and remit
the same under the subjection, obedience and fidelity of the most Christian
King, and his Successors, and so constitute the most Christian King in the full
and just Propriety, Possession and Sovereignty thereof, and renounce all
Jurisdictions and pretentions in the same from henceforth and for ever; and to
that end are pleased to expunge the said City of Strasburgh out of the Body of
the Empire.

XVII. But it shall be free to all and singular the Inhabitants of the said
City and its dependancies, of whatever condition they be; if they are minded to
remove, to transfer their Dwellings from thence elsewhere, together with all
their moveable Goods, without any let, detraction, or exacting any thing from
them, within one Year after the Ratification of this Peace, and after five
Years, having first performed the Conditions that have long since been in usage
there; and either to sell or retain their movables, and to manage the same
either by themselves or others. The same Power also of retaining, and either by
themselves or others, of managing or alienating them, shall remain to all the
other Members or Subjects, whether mediate or immediate of the Empire, who have
Goods, Profits, Debts, Actions, or Rights in the said City, or its
appurtenances, whether they have always retained them, Or that during the War,
or before it, they have been Confiscated or taken away, and granted to others,
by what Name soever called, or wheresoever they may live, reserving still the
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction to those to whom of old it did belong, which
Jurisdiction, or the exercise thereof, it shall be never lawful to obstruct.

XVIII. On the other hand his most Christian Majesty shall restore the Fort of
Kehl built by him on the right side of the Rhine whole, together with all its
Rights and Dependencies, within Thirty days after the Ratification of this
Treaty; but for the Fort called the Pile, and the rest of them that have been
built within the Rhine it self, or any of its Islands, they shall be rased down
to the ground, within one Month after, or sooner, if it can be, at the Charge
of the Most Christian King, and never to be rebuilt by neither Party
hereafter; and the Navigation of the River, or other Use thereof, shall be
alike free to the Subjects of both Parties, or to any other that will repair
thither, Sail, or carry Goods thereon; neither shall there be any thing done by
either party there, or any where else toward turning the River, whereby to
render the Course thereof, or its Navigation, or other Use, the more difficult
upon any account whatsoever, much less shall any new Customs, Impost, or Toll
be exacted, or the old ones increased, or the Ships which pass it to and fro,
be forced to come to the one side of the River more than the other, or to
unlade their Merchandise and Burdens or take them in; but that always ought to
be left to every ones own freedom and liberty.

XIX. His most Christian Majesty does also give up to his Imperial Majesty, and
the most Serene House of Austria, the City and Castle of Friburg, and also the
Fort of St. Peter; and the Port called the Star, and whatever other
Fortifications that have been anew erected or repaired there or elsewhere,
through the Hercynian Forest, and the other District of the Brisgow in the
Condition they are now, without any manner of Demolishing or Impairment,
together with the Villages of Lehen, Metzbausen and Kirchzarth, and with all
the Rights of the same, as they were yielded to his most Christian Majesty, or
possessed or exercised by him; as also the Archives, and all the Writings or
Records found there at the same time, of his occupation of them, whether they
remain there still, or have been carried elsewhere, with a reservation always
of the Rights of the Diocese, and other Rights and Profits of the Bishopric of
Constans.

XX. In like manner, his most Christian Majesty entirely resigns to his
Imperial Mujesty, and the House of Austria, the City of Brisac in its present
state, with the Granaries, Armories, Fortifications, Works, Walls, Towns, and
other public and private Edifices, with all its dependencies on the right side
of the Rhine; those on the West side of the said River, and among the rest, the
Fort called the Mortier, being reserved to his most Christian Majesty; but that
called the New City, standing on the same left side of the Rhine, as also the
Bridge and Fortification built there, in an Island of the Rhine, shall be
totally demolished and laid flat with the ground, and are never to be rebuilt
by either Party at any time; Moreover the same liberty of removing from Brisac,
as has been agreed upon in respect to Strasburg, is allowed here as full as if
the same were repeated.

XXI. The said Places, Cities, Castles and Forts, with all their Districts,
Appurtenances, and Dependencies, given back to his Imperial Majesty by the most
Christian King, shall be restored and delivered up without any reservation,
exception, or retention, sincerely and without any delay, hindrance or
pretense, to those who after the Ratifications of this Peace shall be appointed
and particularly deputed from his Imperial Majesty for that end. And for that
reason, the French chief Magistrates, Governors and other Officials shall be
obliged to evacuate the Places, so as that the said Cities, Castles, Forts and
Places, with all their Prerogatives, Profits, Incomes and Emoluments, and
whatsoever is comprehended under the same, shall return under the Jurisdiction,
actual power, and every way to the Dominion and Soveraingty of his Imperial
Majesty, and the House of Austria, and remain in the same at all times, as they
have heretofore appertained thereunto, and hitherto been possessed by his most
Christian Majesty; and no manner of Right or pretensions to the said places, is
meant to remain or be reserved to the Crown of France. Moreover nothing shall
be required in consideration of the Expenses and charges that France has been
at, either upon the public or private Buildings, and the plenary restitution
of them shall not be retarded upon any account whatsoever, within Thirty Days
after the Ratifications of the Peace, so that the French Garrisons shall
forthwith withdraw from thence, without any Trouble, Loss or Oppression of the
Citizens and Inhabitants, or of any other of the Subjects of the House of
Austria whatsoever, under Title of Debts or other pretensions of any kind;
neither shall it be lawful for the French Soldiers, in evacuating of the
places, or any other where not belonging to his most Christian Majesty, to make
any longer stay, to fix their Stations or Winter Quarters; but be obliged,
without delay, to hasten to the proper Dominions of the Crown of France.

XXII. In the same manner Phillipsburg shall be delivered up to his Imperial
Majesty and the Sacred Roman Empire undamag'd, with the Fortifications
adjoining to it on the right side of the Rhine, and all the Cannon that were
there the last time it was taken by France; reserving every way the Rights of
the Bishop of Spire, and to that end the Fourth Article of the Treaty of Peace
at Nimeguen shall be accounted as expressly repeated in this place, but the
Fortifications that have been raised on the left side, together with the Bridge
built by the most Christian King since his possessing himself of it, shall be
destroyed.

XXIII. The most Christian King, at his own Expenses shall be obliged to
demolish the Fortifications over against Hunningen, built on the right side and
in an Island of the Rhine, the ground, together with the Buildings thereof, to
be restored the House of Baden, and the Bridge built there over the Rhine,
shall be destroyed also.

XXIV. In like manner the Fortification that is built on the right side of the
Rhine, over against Fort Lovis, shall be destroyed, the said Fort to remain
together with the Island to the most Christian King, but the ground of the
demolished Fortification, to be restored to the Marquess of Baden, and part of
the Bridge shall also be destroyed, which reaches thither from the Island, and
not repaired hereafter by either Party.

XXV. Besides, the most Christian King is obliged to demolish the Works that
have been added to the Castle of Trarback since the Peace of Nimeguen, as also
the Fort of Montroyal upon the Moselle, which are to be rebuilt by none
hereafter; but the Castle of Trarback is to be left in its former state, and
together with the City and its Appurtenances, shall be fully restored to their
former Owners.

XXVI. Upon the same account also shall the Fortification, added to the Castle
of Kurburg by his most Christian Majesty be demolished, which being done, this
Castle with the City of Reinleft, as well as the rest of the Goods belonging to
the Prince of Salm and his Kindred, Rheingraues and Wildgraues, as also the
Principallity of Salm by name, and the rest shall be restored to them; to be
possessed by them altogether in the same manner, and with the same Right, as
before their Deprivation, and as is agreed in this Peace.

XXVII. The same thing also is agreed upon for the Demolishing of the New Works
added to Castle of Eberenburg, by the most Christian King, and the same, with
what ever else belongs to them, shall be restored by both Parties to the Barons
of Sickingen.

XXVIII. Whereas the Duke of Lorrain has been engaged with his Imperial Majesty
in this War, and would be comprehended in the present Treaty, he shall be
restored for himself, Heirs and Successors, into the free and full Possession
of their Estates, Places and Goods which his Uncle Duke Charles possessed in the
Year 1670 (when they were assumed into he Hands of the most Christian King)
except such Alteratious as are ^o be explained in the following Articles.

XXIX. In the first Place, his most Christian Majesty shall restore to the Duke
the old and new Citys of Nancy, with all Appurtenances, and with the Cannon
that were found in the old City at the time of its falling into the Hands of
France, but upon this Condition, that all the Works and Fortifications of the
old City shall be left whole, as also the Gates of the new City, whose Works
and Fortifications shall, at the Charge of his most Christian Majesty, be
levelled with the Ground, and are to be repaired at no Time thereafter, unless
it be that the Duke and his Successors are free to enclose the new City with a
single Wall, without any Angles, when ever they please.

XXX. His most Christian Majesty shall also evacuate the Castle of Bitsch, with
all its Appurtenances; as also the Castle of Homburg, having first ruined their
Works, which are no more to be repaired; but yet so, as that these Castles, and
the Towns adjoining to them be no way damnified, but be preserved altogether
unhurt.

XXXI. Moreover, all things agreed on in the fourth Article concerning Unions
and Re-unions, shall be so far extended to the Duke, as if they were here
repeated Word for Word; where, or which Way soever these Unions on Re-unions
have been made.

XXXII. But his most Christian Majesty reserves to himself the Fort of Saar
Lovis, with half a League round it, to be marked out by Commissioners appointed
by the King and Duke of Lorrain, to be possessed by him for ever, with all right
of Sovereignty and Supreme Dominion.

XXXIII. The City also and Mayoralty of Longwy, together with their
Appurtenances and Dependencies, shall, with all Sovereignty and Supreme
Dominion, remain under the Custody of the most Christian King, his Heirs and
Successors for ever; neither shall the Duke, and his Heirs and Successors
pretend any Right unto them for the future: But in Exchange for the said City
and Mayoralty, his most Christian Majesty will grant another Prefecture to the
said Duke in one of the three Bishoprics, of the same Extent and Value with
the others, which shall be fairly agreed on between the same Commissioners; and
that same being thus yielded up, and transferred by the most Christian King
into the hands of the Duke; both the Duke himself, as well as his Heirs and
Successors, shall enjoy it for ever, with all Right of Sovereignty, supreme
Dominion and Propriety.

XXXIV. The Country shall always be open to the Kings Soldiers marching to the
Frontiers, or returning from thence, without any Let or Hindrance, through the
Duke's Dominions, he having always timely Notice given him of the same, and
that the Soldiers marching do not straggle, nor turn out of their Road, but
keep to the common and shortest Way, and make due haste in their March, without
any Delay, offering no violence nor Detriment to the Places and Subjects of the
Duke, and pay for their Provision with ready Money, and for other Necessaries to
the Duke's Commissioners that are to provide them; abollishing again, and fully
restoring the Way and Places under the Power of the Duke, without any
Exception, which were reserved to the most Christian King by the Peace of
Nimeguen.

XXXV. The Ecclesiastical Benefices, which to the Day of the Present Treaty,
have been conferred by the most Christian King, shall be left quietly to the
now Possessors, who obtained them of his most Christian Majesty.

XXXVI. It has besides been agreed on, that all Processes, Sentences and
Decrees, made by the Council, Judges, and other of the most Christian King's
Officials, as well between the Duchy of Lorrain as others, in the time when
the most Christian King possessed these States, shall take place, and have as
full and plenary Effect, as if his now Christian Majesty remained Posser of
them, neither shall it be lawful to call the said Decrees into Question, or to
annul, or retard and hinder the Execution of them; but it shall be free for the
Parties, according to the Order and Disposition of the Laws and Constitutions,
to have tecourse to the reviewing of such Acts, but the Sentences are in the
mean time to remain in their full Force and Vigor:

XXXVII. The Archives and Records which were kept and taken away from the
Treasury of Naney and Bar, and both Chambers of Accounts, and elsewhere, shall
be restored forthwith to the Duke, after the Ratification of the Peace.

XXXVIII The Duke may presently after the Ratification of the Peace, send
Commissioners into the Duchy of Lorrain, and Bar, who shall look after his
Affairs, administer Justice, take care of the Customs, Salt Pits, and other
Rights belonging to him, settle the Post, and do all other Things which may
appertain to the Government, which the Duke at the same time is to take upon
him.

XXXIX. As for Imposts and Customs, or the Immunities of them as to Salt, and
Wood Carriage, whether by Land or by Water, the same Manner and Custom shall be
kept, as was in the Year 1670, without any manner of Innovation.

XL. The Ancient Usage and Liberty of Commerce shall remain between Lorain, and
the Jurisdiction of Metz, Toul, and Verdun, and shall be exactly observed for
the Benefit of both Sides, for the future.

XLI. In like manner the Agreements made between the most Christian Kings and
the Dukes of Lorrain, shall be kept inviolably in their former Force and Vigor.

XLII. It shall be free for the Duke and his Brethren, after the Restitution of
them, to prosecute their Right in the ordinary way of Justice, which they
affirm to belong to them in diverse Cases, notwithstanding the Sentences that
may have been past in their Absence, and without their being heard against them.

XLIII. As to those Things which otherwise are not expressly agreed on here,
those Matters which are contained in this Treaty especially the Section, The
Vassals of both Parties shall be restored, etc. that Section, As soon as the
Treaty of Peace, etc. and Section, And as to the Subjects, etc. shall be
observed in respect to the Duke, his Dominions, and Subjects, as if they had
been particularly specified herein.

XLIV. The Lord Cardinal de Fustemburg shall be Restored to all his Rights,
Feudal Goods, Freeholds, Benefices, Honors, and Prerogatives which belong to
the Princes and Members of the Sacred Empire, as well upon account of his
Bishopric of Strasburg, on the right side of the Rhine, as of the Abbey of
Stavelon, or others, and shall enjoy with his Kindred or Relations who have
adhered to him, as also his Domestics a full Amnesty and Security from all
Acts, and Deeds, and whatever Decrees else have been made against him, or them;
neither shall he be liable himself, and his Heirs, or his Relations or Kindred,
and Domestics, to be called to an account for the Inheritance of the deceased
Elector Maximilian Henry, by the Electors of Cologne, and Bavaria, their Heirs,
or any other, As the said Cardinal, his Kindred or Relations, and Domestics,
or any having power from them, shall not be at liberty neither to demand any
thing any manner of way of the Electors out of that Inheritance, or for the
Legacies left them, or things bestowed upon them, all right, pretension, or
personal and real action being utterly abolished hereby, the same amnesty and
security shall such of them be made partakers of, and enjoy the same right
altogether, who being Canons of Cologn, took part with him, and were deprived
of their Canonships and Benefices; who shall be restored, with all the Rights
of Canons, Benefices and Dignities, into the same Places and Order of the
Cathedral Chapter and Collegiate Churches they were in before they were
deposed; but yet so, that the Profits do remain to the present Possessors;
these as well as the restored ones, shall enjoy the common Titles and Function
of Dignities and Benefices, but the restored ones to have the preference, but
that after the death of the Possessors, or their voluntary resignation, the
restored Canons alone shall enjoy the Dignities and Profits. In the mean time,
according to the Order they have among themselves, each of them shall receive
the new Prebends next vacant as they fall in course, and that this also will be
pleasing to the upper Ecclesiastics, to whom it may belong, is not at all
doubted of. The Heirs also of those Canons, who being in like manner in a
destitute state, withdrew themselves during the War, whose Goods, Estates and
Rights were Sequestered, and adjudged Forfeited, toward the recovery of these,
they shall fully enjoy the benefit of Section, And all the Vassals of both
Parties shall be restored, etc. with the addition of this express Condition,
that the Legacies which have been left by the Deceased for Pious Uses, shall be
paid according to their Wills, out of the Estates assigned for them.

XLV. The Landgraves of Hess Reinfield also shall be particularly included in
this Amnesty, and be put into the same state, in respect to the Castle of
Rheinfeld, and all the lower County of Catzenellabogen, as their. Father
Landgrave Ernest was before the beginning of this War, reserving however in all
Places those Rights belonging to the Landgrave of Hess-Cassel.

XLVI. All the Vassals and Subjects of both Parties, both Ecclesiastical and
Secular, Bodies Politic, Universities and Colleges shall be restored to the
Honors, Dignities and Benefices they enjoyed before the War; as also to all
Rights, Goods, Movables, and Immoveables, Estates also or Incomes, that can be
recovered, and such as have determined with the Life of any (provided their
Offspring be not extinct) that have been seized and detained in the time and by
reason of the War, together with the Rights, Actions, and Successions which
fell to them during the War; but yet in such a manner, as they shall have power
to demand nothing upon the account of returns or products of the Estates they
have quitted, till the day of the Ratification of the Peace. In like manner
they shall no more be able to demand those Debts, Merchandises, and Movables,
that in the time, and by reason of the War have been forfeited, or by public
Authority put to any other use; and so neither the Creditors of the said Debts,
nor the Owners of those Merchandises or Movables, and their Heirs, or any
having power from them, shall ever be free to prosecute the same, or to pretend
to any Satisfaction, or Restitution. These Restitutions shall also be extended
unto them that have sided with the contrary Party, or have been suspected upon
that Account; and to those who after the Peace of Nimeguen had their Goods,
Incomes or Rights taken away from them, because they dwelt elsewhere, or did
not do homage, or for the like Causes and Pretenses, and who hereafter by
virtue of this present Peace shall return to the Favor of their own Prince, as
also into their ancient Rights and respective Goods, such as these have been at
the time of the Conclusion of this Treaty; and all these things shall be put in
execution forthwith, after the Ratification of the Peace, notwithstanding any
Gifts, Grants, Alienations, Declarations, Confiscations, Commissions, Charges,
Improvements, Interlocutory and Definite Sentences past for Contumacy, in the
absence of the Parties, and unheard; which Sentences and adjudged Cases shall
be deemed void, and thenceafter so esteemed, as if they had never been adjudged
or pronounced; there being a full and entire Liberty reserved to them, to
return into their Country, or to those Goods, as also for them to enjoy them,
either there themselves with the Returns and Incomes therefrom, or elsewhere,
wherever they please to fix their Habitation or Abode, according to their
choice, without any manner of Exaction, or Violence. And then it shall be free
for them by unsuspected Agents to manage their Estates, and Incomes, as also
to enjoy them, but yet with an exception as to Ecclesiastical Benefices that
require the Parties residency, which ought personally to be Administered and
looked after. Lastly, it shall be free for the Subjects of either Party to
Sell, Change, Alienate and Transfer their moveable and immovable Goods,
Incomes and Returns which they have under the Dominion of either, or otherwise
to dispose of them while alive, and by last Will, so that any Person, be he a
Subject or Foreigner, shall be free to buy or acquire them, without being
obliged to sue for any other or farther leave of his Superior, besides what is
contained in this Article.

XLVII. If some mediate or immediate Ecclesiastical Benefices have been
conferred during this War by either Party in the Lands or Places then subject
to him, to such as were Capacitated for the same, according to the Rule of the
first Institution, and general or particular legal Statutes made concerning
them, or according to any other disposal or provision, though Canonically made by
the Pope, those as well as the other Ecclesiastical Benefices which before this
War were conferred in like manner in Places that are to be restored by this
Peace, shall be left to the present Possessors, so as that they shall not and
ought not to be sued, convened, or upon any account molested and disquieted,
neither in the possession or lawful administration of them, nor in receiving of
the Profits thereof, nor be disturbed and hindered therein, upon the account of
them, or for any past or present Cause, provided still they perform those
Duties incumbent upon them in relation to those Benefices.

XLVIII. Whereas it will be conducive to the Public Tranquillity, that the
Peace concluded at Turin, Aug. 29.1696. between his most Christian Majesty and
the Duke of Savoy, be exactly observed, its thought fit to confirm and
comprehend the same in this Peace, so as that it is and shall always remain in
the same force with this Peace; those things besides are particularly
confirmed, which have been agreed on for the House of Savoy, by the Westphalian
and Nimeguen Treaties above confirmed, and they are esteemed so, as if repeated
here by name; but yet so, as that that Obligation can in no part thereof be
lesned or altered by the restitution made of Pignerol, and its Dependances,
which his most Christian Majesty has taken upon himself, of paying 400 and 94
thousand Crowns to the Duke of Mantua for the discharge of the Duke of Savoy,
as is declared at large in the Articles of the Westphalian Treaty; and that
they may the more fully and firmly be corroborated, all and every the Princes
concerned in the General Peace, give the same sponsions or Guarantees, as they
have stipulated among themselves for their greater security, to the Duke of
Savoy, and receive the same reciprocally from him.

XLIX. But upon the rendering up or restitution of any Places, Persons, things
or Jurisdictions made, or to be made by France, there shall no new right be
acquired over the things restored, or to be restored; but, and if others have
pretensions against them, these pretensions after such restitution made, which
for that reason, shall by no means be delayed, shall be propounded, examined,
and decided in a convenient place.

L. As soon as the Instrument of this Peace shall be Subscribed, and Signed by
the Extraordinary Ambassadors, and Plenipotentiaries, all manner of Hostility
and Violence shall cease, and the ruining of Buildings destroying of Vineyards
and Woods, or cutting down of Trees; and the Forces on both sides shall
forthwith, after the Ratifications are Exchanged, be withdrawn from unfortify'd
places belonging to the other Party: But as for Fortified places that are to be
restored by Virtue of this Peace, they shall be delivered up within Thirty Days
after the Ratifications are made or sooner, if it can be, to those who are
named in the foregoing Articles; or if they have not been expressed, to such as
were immediately before the Deprivation made, in possession of them, without
ruining any of the Fortifications, public or private Buildings, or worsting of
the condition they are now in, or by claiming of any Charges they have been at,
upon, or concerning them, or by any exactions of Soldiers, or in their Name,
or any other alleged cause, or by the taking away of things belonging to the
Inhabitants, or left them by this Peace: And as for the demolishing of those
places before agreed on, that shall be fully done, and finished without the
Expense and trouble of the other Party, the lesser ones to be done within the
space of one Month, and the greater in two Months, or sooner, if it can be
done: Besides all Archives or Records, and not only those which belong to the
places that are to be restored, and left to his Imperial Majesty, the Empire
and the States and Members thereof, but also all those which have been taken
away from the Chamber and City of Spire, and elsewhere in the Empire, shall be
sincerely restored, presently after the Exchange of the Ratifications, though
there be no particular mention made thereof in this Agreement; the Prisoners
also that have been made on both sides, upon account of the War, shall be set
at full liberty without any Ransom, especially such as have been committed to
the Galleys, or elsewhere to public Works.

LI. And to the end the Subjects of either Party may the sooner participate of
the fruits of the Peace, it is agreed, That all Contributions, Money, Corn,
Wine, Hay, Wood, Cattle, or any thing else otherwise denominated, though they
have been already required from, or by Agreement engaged for by the Subjects of
either, as also forraging of any Kind in the others Dominion, shall immediately
after the Day of the exchange of the Ratifications totally cease; And what
shall then remain due as unpaid, or the like, or any other Contributions,
Impositions or Exactions shall be utterly abolished, and so remain; the
Hostages also, what cause soever they have been given for, or taken away, shall
without delay, or any money paid be given up, and freely dismissed into their
Country.

LII. The Commerce also that during the War has been prohibited between his
Imperial Majesty and the Empire's Subjects and those of his most Christian
Majesty, and the Kingdom of France, shall immediately after the subscribing of
the Peace, be restored into the same freedom as before the War; and all and
every of them of both sides, particularly the Citizens and Inhabitants of the
Imperial Cities and Hanse-Towns, both by Sea and Land, shall enjoy the fullest
security, their Ancient Rights, Immunities, Privileges, and Emoluments, that
have been obtained by Solemn Treaties, or Ancient Custom; any farther agreement
therein being left alone 'till after the Peace.

LIII. All things agreed on by this Peace shall be of force, and remain always
firm, observed and put in execution, notwithstanding any thing or things that
may ever be believed, altered or thought on to the contrary, which are hereby
abrogated and made void, tho they may be such things, whereof a more particular
and ample mention ought to be made, and of which, the Abrogation or Annulling
might seem to be said to be null and invalid.

LIVE. It shall be free for the Parties on both sides to strengthen this Peace,
and the Observation of it by Leagues, making and enlarging Fortifications on
their own Ground at their Pleasure, but without the Places excepted before by
Name, and by other means tending to their Defense; all other Kings, Princes,
and Republics, and especially his Swedish Majesty, or the Mediator, shall also
have a right to be Guarrantees of this Peace between his Imperial Majesty and
the Empire, and the most Christian King, as well as to claim the same by Virtue
of the Westphalian Treaty.

LV. And seeing his Sacred Imperial Majesty, and the Empire, and his Sacred
most Christian Majesty, do gratefully acknowledge the unwearied Endeavors and
Offices which the most Serene King of Swedeland has used for the bringing
about of the Public Tranquillity; it is agreed by both Parties, that he with
his Kingdoms and Provinces shall by Name be comprehended in this Treaty, in the
best manner that can be.

LVI. Moreover in this Peace made in the Name of his Imperial Majesty and the
Empire, are comprehended, besides the Members of the Empire already mentioned,
the rest of the Electors, Princes, States and Members of the Empire, and among
them particularly the Bishop and Bishopric of Basil, with all their
Jurisdictions, Prerogatives and Rights; as also the Thirteen Swiss Cantons with
their Confederates, particularly the Republic and City of Geneva and its
Dependencies, the City and County of Neufchassel upon the Lake, the Cities of
St. Gall, Mulhausen, and Bienne, the three leagued Rhoetia, or the Grisons',
the upper and lower Vallesia, and the Abbot of St. Gall.

LVII. In like manner the thirtee^n Swiss Cantons and their Confederates, and
particularly the Republic of Valesia, are in the Name of his most Christian
Majesty comprehended in this Peace.

LVIII. All others also shall be included in this Peace, who shall be named
with common Consent, by one or other of the Parties, before the Exchange of the
Ratifications, or within six Months after.

LIX. The Peace being thus concluded, the Ambassadors extraordinary, and
Plenipotentiaries of both Parties do promise that the same shall be ratified in
the Manner mutually agreed on, by the Emperor and Empire, and the most
Christian King, respectively; and to take effectual Care that the Ratifications
be within the space of seven Weeks, to be computed from the Day of the signing
hereof, or sooner if possible, reciprocally exchanged.

LX. And for the greater Strength and Validity of all Things contained in this
Treaty of Peace, as well the Ambassadors extraordinary and Plenipotentiaries of
his Imperial Majesty, as those of his most Christian Majesty, together with the
Plenipotentiaries of the Electors, Princes, and States of the Empire deputed to
this end, have subscribed the same with their Hands, and sealed them with their
own Seals.

Done at the Palace of Reswick in Holland, the 30th. of October, in the Year of
our Lord 1697. (L. S.) D. A. C. a Caunitz. (L. S.) Henr. C. de Stratman. (L.
S.) J. F. L. B. a Seilern. (L. S.) de Harlay Bonneiiil. (L. S.) Verjus de
Crecy. (L. S.) de Callieres.
In the Name of the Elector of Mentz.
(L. S.) M. Frederic Baron de Scanborn Emb. (L. S.) Ignatius Antonius Otten
Plenipotentiary. (L. S.) Georgius Vilhelmus Moll Plenipotentiary.
In the Name of the Elector of Bavaria.
De Prielmayer, Extraordinary Emb. and Plenipotenitary, (L. S.)
In the Name of the House of Austria.
(L. S.) Francis Rudulphus of Halden, L. Baron of Trazberg, etc.
In the Name of the Grand Master of the Teutonick Order.
(L. S.) Charles B. a Lo, Knight of the Teutonick Order.
In the Name of the Most High Prince and Bishop of Wertzberg.
(L. S.) John Conrad Phillip Ignatius de Tastunge.
In the Name of the Most High and Most Eminent Elector of Triers, as Bishop of
Spire.
(L. S.) John Henric of Kaysersfeld, Plenipotentiary.
In the Name of the Most High Prince and Bishop of Constance.
(L. S.) Frederick a Durheim.
In the Name of the Most Reverend and Most High Bishop and Prince of HIldesheim.
(L. S.) Charles Paul Zimmerman, High Chancellor, Privy Councellor, and
Plenipotentiary.
In the Name of the Most Serene and Most Reverend Elector of Cologn, as Bishop
and Prince of Liege.
(L. S.) John Conral Norff, Deputed Plenipotentiary.
In the Name of the Most Reverend and Most High Bishop and Prince of Munster.
(L. S.) Ferdinand L. B. a Plettenbergexlenhausen, of the Cathedral-Church,
Monastery, Dean, and Chapter of the same.
In the Name of the Most Serene Elector Palatine, as Duke of Newburg.
L. S.) John Henric Hetterman, Plenipotentiary.
In the Name of the most Serene Duke of Wirtenburg.
(L. S.) Jo. George Noble of Kulpis S. R. Knight of the Empire, Counselor of
State, Privy Counselor and Director. (L. S.) Anthony Gunter of Hespen,
Counselor in the Superior Council, and Plenipotentiary to the Most Serene
Duke.
In the Name of the Most Serene Prince of Baden.
(L. S.) Charles Ferdinand L. B. of Pliffersdorff, saving the order of
Succession.
In the Name of the Abbey College of Swaben.
(L. S.) Joseph Antony Eusebius. of Halden in Neidtberg, L. B. of Autenreidt,
Plenipotentiary.
In the Names of the Counts of Wetteraw.
(L. S.) Charles Otto, Count de Solms. (L. S.) F. C. de Ecclesiastein,
Counselor of Hanaw, and Plenipotentiary.
In the Name of the free and Imperial City of Cologn.
(L. S.) Hermen Joseph Bullingen, Syndic, and Plenipotentiary.
In the Name of the City of Ausburg.
(L. S.) John Christopher de Dierheim, Plenipotentiary.
In the Name of the Imperial City of Franckford.
(L. S.) John Jacob Muller, Plenipotentiary. (L. S.) John Melebior Lucius. J.
V. L. Syndie and Plenipotentiary,


[Here follow the Full Powers]
The Emperor's Full Powers.
WE Leopold by the Grace of God Elect Emperor of the Romans, always August; and
King of Germany, Hungary, Bohemia, Dalmatia, Croatia, Sclavonia, etc. Archduke
of Austria, Duke of Burgundy, Brabant, Styria, Carinthia, Carniola, etc.
Marquess of Moravia, Duke of Luxemburgh, and of the Upper and Lower Silesia,
Wirtemberg and Tecka, Prince of Swaben. Count of Hapsburg, Pifrt, Kyberg, and
Goritia, Marquess of the Sacred Roman Empire, of Burgovia, and of the Upper and
Lower Lusatia, Lord of the Mark of Sclavonia, Port Naon, and of the Salt Pits,
etc. Declare and make known, That seeing we have desired nothing more ardently,
than that the present War wherewith Christendom has for some Years been
afflicted, might as soon as possible be converted into a Just and Honorable
Peace, and that it has been agreed among the several Parties at War, that a
Treaty and Conferences of Peace should be set on foot in a Place chosen by them
with common Consent; we therefore being very ready to contribute what in us
lies, for promoting the Tranquillity of the Christian World; and being
possessed of the Fidelity, Prudence, and Experience of Ours and the Sacred
Roman Empire's faithful and Beloved Counselor of State, Chamberlain and
Vice Chancellor of the Empire, the Lord Dominick Andreas Count of Caumitz,
Hereditary Lord of Austerlitz, Hungarischbrod, Mahrisprus, and of the Greater
Orzechan, Knight of the Golden Fleece; and of the most Illustrious and
Magnificent Henry John Count of Straatman, Lord of Peurbach, Orth, Schmiding,
Spatenbrun, and Carlsberg, of our Council and Bedchamber; as also our Beloved
Councellor and Authorized Commissary in the Diets of the Empire, John Frederick
Free Baron of Seilern, etc. We have Named, Chosen, and constituted them, as we
do by these Presents Name, Choose, and Constitute them to be Our Extraordinary
Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries for the said Assembly and Treaty of Peace.
Whom therefore we entrust and particularly command, That they repair as soon as
possibly they can to the Place agreed upon by the Parties, and set on foot the
Conferences of Peace, and there either directly, or by the Intervention of the
Mediator, accepted of on all hands, with the Ambassadors, or such as are
deputed with sufficient Power from the most Serene, most Potent, and most
Christian Prince Lewis King of France, etc. our Kinsman and most dear Brother,
for terminating the present War and Controversies relating thereunto, by a good
and firm Peace. We also give a full and absolute Power, with all the Authority
and Command that is necessary thereunto, to our abovenamed Ambassadors
Extraordinary and Plenipotentiaries, whether all Three conjunct, or any two of
them in the absence of the third, or through other Impediment, or else to any
one of them alone and apart, in the absence in like manner of the other two, or
through other Impediment, to enter upon, conclude, and sign the Treaty of Peace
for Us, and in our Name, between Us and the foresaid most Serene, most Potent,
and most Christian King of France; and also to negotiate, dispatch, and finish
all Instruments that may be required for that end, and so universally to act,
promise, stipulate, conclude, and sign Acts, Declarations, to change
Agreements, and to do all things that belong to the said Negotiation of Peace,
as amply and freely as if we our selves were present and did it, or might do,
though any thing therein should require more particular Order than is contained
in these Presents. We do moreover promise and declare, in the Faith, and upon
our Imperial Word, to observe and fulfill whatsoever our said Ambassadors
Extraordinary and Plenipotentiaries, all three conjunctly, or any two of them
in the absence of the third, or through other Impediment, or one of them only,
in like manner through the absence of the other two, or other Impediment, shall
act, conclude, sign, deliver, and exchange, obliging our selves by these
Presents to dispatch away the Instrument of our Ratifications, in decent and
solemn form, within the Time agreed upon.

In Witness and Confirmation whereof, we have commanded these Presents,
Subscribed with our own Hand, to be Confirmed by our Imperial Seal, the Third
Day of February, in the Year 1697. of our Reign over the Roman Empire the
Thirty Ninth, over Hungary the Two and Fortieth, and Bohemia the Forty First.
Leopold. (L. S.) Sebastian Wunibaldus, Count of Zeyll. By his Imperial
Majesty's particular Command. Gaspar Florentius Consbruch.

The full Powers of the Empire.
FOrasmuch as the Holy Roman Empire, Electors, Princes, and States have thought
fit to choose amongst them such as they thought sitting to treat between his
Imperial Majesty, our most Gracious Lord, the Empire, and the rest of the High
Allies of the one Part, and the Crown of France on the other Part; upon the
Foundation of the Westphalian Treaty at Nimeguen, to assist at the Treaty to be
held at Riswick, and his Interest to maintain therein. And so out of the
Ellectoral College Chur Mayence, Chur Baviere, Chur Saxony, Chur Brandenburg,
and on the Parts of the Catholic Princes Austrich, Saltzburg, High Master of
the Teutonnick Order, Wortzburg, Spire, Costantz, Hildershiem, Liege, Munster;
salvo alternationis ordine, Psaltz Neubourg, Badden-Baaden, Suabiche, Prelates:
And further more, A. C. having Relation thereto, Magdeburg, Sweden, Bremen, or
Pfatz Zweybrucken, Saxon-Coburg, Saxon-Gotha, Brandenburg-Collenbach,
Brunswick-Zell, Brunswick-Wolfenbutel, Hessen-Cassel, Wurtenburg, salva
alternatione, Holstein-Gluckstat, Anhalt, the Wetteravith Counts; and on the
Part of the Imperial Catholic Cities, Cologn and Ausburg; and A C. on the Part
of Frankfort and Nuremberg, to be chosen and nominated to it. Therefore is
given to them from the whole Empire full Power to the aforesaid End; that they
may send their own Ministers with full Power, and without Delay, to the
appointed Place, and there to appear with their most excellent Lords
Plenipotentiaries, and according to the Contents of their Instructions, to
consult and treat juxta stylum Imperii, that it may conduce to the restoring of
an honest, sure, happy, and common Peace; and to the Ease of the oppressed
States of the Realm, and the restoring their desired Rights and Privilege, as
in Reason may be required, to the common Ease and Welfare of the Fatherland. In
Case of Absence of any Minister by Sickness or otherwise, (that then they shall
have Power to vote by a Proxy of their own Religion.) Furthermore, whatsoever
shall be concluded by their aforesaid Excellent Imperial Ambassadors according
to the aforesaid Instructions, shall be ratified and confirmed on all Sides by
the Deputies of the Realm, an I Satisfaction given, accepted and kept without
Breach; also the deputing States, as is proper on such Occasions, shall at all
times be firmly kept.

The 15th of June, 1697. Signatum. RATISBONE. (L. S.) Churfurstle Maintz,
Chancellor

The French full Powers.
LEwis, By the Grace of God, King of France and Navarre, to all that shall see
these Presents, Greeting: As we have desired nothing more ardently than by a
good Peace to see the War ended, were with Christendom is at this time
afflicted, and that by the Endeavors and Mediation of our most Dear, and most
Beloved Brother, the King of Swedeland, the Towns of Delph and the Hague, have
been agreed upon by all the Parties to hold their Conferences in, to that end;
we with the same Desire of putting a stop as much as in us lies, and with the
Assistance of Divine Providence, to the Desolation of so many Provinces, the
effusion of so much Christian Blood, do make known, that we reposing an entire
Confidence in the Experience, Capacity and Fidelity of our trusty and
well-beloved the Sieur de Harlay, de Bonneuill, Counselor in Ordinary in our
Councils of State, and of our well-belov'd the Sieur Verjus, Count of Crecy,
Baron of Courcy, Lord of Boulay, of the two Churches of Menillet, and other
Places, as also of that of our Well-beloved the Sieur de Callicres, de la
Rochechellay and de Gigny, who is actually in the Town of Delph, by the
advantageous Proofs he has given us thereof, in diverse important Employments
wherewith we have entrusted him, as well within as without the Kingdom. For
these Causes and other good Considerations moving us thereunto, we have
constituted, ordered, and deputed the said Sieurs de Ha^lay, de Crecy, and de
Callieres, and do by these Presents signed with our own Hand, constitute,
order, and appoint, and have given and do give them full Power, Commission and
especial Command to go to the said Town of Delph in Quality of our Ambassadors*
Extraordinary, and Plenipotentiaries for the Peace, and to confer either
dir^^^ly, or by the Interposition of the Ambassadors, Mediators respectively
received and agreed upon by all the Ambassadors, Plenipotentiaries and
Ministers, as well of our most Dear and Most-beloved Brother the Emperor of the
Romans, as of our most Dear and Most-Beloved Brother and Cousin the Catholic
King, as also of our most Dear and great Friends the States General of the
United Provinces of the Low Countries, and of all the other Princes their
Allies, all furnished with su^fici^nt Powers, and these to treat of the Means,
to terminate and pacific the Differences which cause the War at this Day: And
our said Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries, may all Three together, or Two of
them in Case of the absence of the Third through Sickness, or other Impediment,
or One only of them in the Absence of the other Two in like Case of Sickness,
or other Impediment, agree thereupon, and conclude, and sign a good Peace, and
generally make, negotiate, promise and agree to all that which they shall think
necessary for effecting the said Peace, with the same Authority as if we our
selves might or should do, if we were Personally present, though any thing
therein should require more particular Order than is contained in these
Presents; promising in the Faith and upon the Word of a King to observe and
fulfill whatever the said Sieurs de Harlay, de Crecy, and de Callieres, or Two
of them in case of the Absence of the Third, through Sickness or any other
Impediment, or any One of them in the Absence of the other Two, upon the like
Account of Sikcness, or other Impediment, shall stipulate, promise, and agree
unto, and to cause our Letters of Ratification to be dispatched within such
time as they shall promise in our Name to produce them; for such is our
Pleasure, in Witness whereof we have set our Seal to these Presents.

Given at Versailles the 25th Day of February in the Year of our Lord, 1697.
Signed Lewis,
and upon the Fold by the King, Colbert, and sealed with the Great Seal in
Yellow Wax.
A Separate Article.
FOR the further explaining of the Article, The most Christian King shall
restore to the Elector Palatine, etc. 8. It has been thought convent to add
further to the Treaty of Peace signed this Day, That in proposing and deciding
the Pretensions or Rights the Duchess of Orleans has against the Elector
Palatine, this Method shall be observed. When the two Arbitrators shall agree
upon the Place of meeting, within the time prefixed in the Ratifications of the
Peace, each Party shall have notice given him of the said Place, and thither
within the space of two Months, to be reckoned from the full Restitution made
to the Elector Palatine, according to the same Article, the Delegates of the
Arbitrators shall be sent. There then within one Month's space, shall be
exhibited an entire Declaration of the Pretensions or Requests of the Duchess
of Orleans against the Elector, and the same shall be communicated within eight
days to the Elector. Let the Grounds that both Parties go upon be drawn from
thence, and delivered there to the Delegates of the Arbitrators within four
Months more, the day to be assigned by them; and of this let there be four
Copies, whereof the Arbitrators are to keep one a-piece in their Custody, the
third shall be put to the Common Acts of Arbitration, and the fourth shall be
communicated to each of the Parties within eight Days. Answer shall be given in
the same manner, and there shall on the same Day be exhibited to the Delegates
of the Arbitrators the Answer of each Party, whereof there shall be also four
Copies, and the same Answer is mutually to be delivered to the respective
Parties again within the space of eight days. Progress shall be made on both
sides during the four following Months, toward the Conclusion of the Cause,
which shall also be submitted to the Sentence of Arbitration; and of this
Conclusion and Submission, Information shall be given to the Parties, and the
Acts shall be enrolled by the Procurators of the Parties which are present.
Having therefore seen and examined the Right of each Party within the space of
six Months, Sentence shall be publicly passed by the Arbitrators, or their
Delegates sworn in the Place of Meeting, according to the Laws and
Constitutions of the Empire, and where it shall be agreeable thereunto shall be
fully executed. But if the Arbitrators of their Delegates, shall disagree in
their Sentences, the Common Acts of the Arbitration shall within two Months
space, to commence from the day of Sentence, at the Common Charges of the
Parties, be transferred to Rome, and exhibited to the Pope as Chief-Arbitrator,
who shall also commit the thing to be examined to Delegates suspected to
neither of the Parties, and sworn within two Months, and these upon the former
Acts shall pass the last Sentence without allowing to the Parties any farther
deduction of the Matter, within six Months hereafter to follow, as has been
said, according to the Laws and Constitutions of the Empire, from which
Sentence there shall be no revocation, but the Lords Arbitrators shall put the
same in Execution, without any Delay or Contradiction. But and if either Party
in proposing, handling, or proving their Pretensions and Rights, shall make any
delay, it shall be free however for the other Party, within the appointed
times, which ought never to be extended, to exhibit and set forth their Rights,
and for the Arbitrators, as well as Super-Arbitrator, to proceed according to
the Method agreed on, and to pronounce Sentence according to the Acts and
Proofs that are exhibited. But notwithstanding this way of Procedure, both the
Parties themselves, as well as the Arbitrators, shall endeavor to find out an
Amicable Way of Agreement, and omit nothing that can tend to terminate the
Controversy in a Friendly Manner. And seeing it is agreed on in the Article of
Peace now cited, that until this Controversy be ended, the Yearly Sums of two
hundred thousand Livres, or an hundred thousand Horins, shall by the Elector
Palatine be paid to the Duchess of Orleans; moreover it is particularly agreed
on in respect to that Payment, and the time from which it ought to commence,
that the same shall begin and take place, after that according to the Tenor of
the said Article there mentioned, there be plenary Restitution made to the
Elector. And that the Duchess of Orleans may be so much the more secure as to
the payment of the said Sum, the Elector shall name so many of his Agents or
Collectors in the Prefecture of Germershein, or other places of the Palatinate,
before the Ratification of the Peace, as will be enough, who shall take upon
them to perform the same to the Duchess or her Agent at Landaw every year, the
one half to be paid every Half-year; and who, if they do not satisfy it, may
be forced to pay it by the ordinary Course of Justice; and if there be any
further necessity for it, even by the most Christian King himself by Military
Execution. But this Payment shall be made upon that Condition, That what is
paid upon Account of the said Annual Sum to the Duchess of Orleans, while the
Decision of the Matter stands before the Arbitrators, shall be compensated with
the Pretensions, if any of them be adjudged by the Arbitrators to her, or if
nothing or less be decided to be owing her, they shall be restored, and this
Compensation or Restitution, shall as well as the Difference it self, be
determined by the Sentence of the Arbitrators. But and if the Duchess of
Orleans shall not satisfy the compromised Form, in exhibiting a Declaration of
her Pretenses, in giving Instructions in the Cause, and making Answers to those
exhibited by the Elector, but shall delay, the Course of that Annual Payment
shall be stopped for that space of time, the Proceedings in the Cause going on
according to same compromis'd Formula.

Done in the Palace of Reswick, October. 30. 1697. (L. S.) D. A. C. of Caunitz.
(L. S.) Henr. C. de Straatman. (L. S.) J. F. L. B. a Seilern. (L. S.) de Harlay
Boneuil. (L. S.) Verjus de Crecy. (L. S.) de Callieres.
In the Name of the Elector of Mentz.
(L. S) M. Frederick Baron de Schonborn Emb. (L. S.) Ignatius Antonius Otten.
Plenipotentiary. (L. S.) Georgius William. Moll. Plenipotentiary.
In the Name of the Serene: Duke of Bavaria.
de Prielmyer, Extraordinary Em. and Plenipotentiary. (L. S)
In the Name of the House of Austria.
(L. S.) Fran is Rodulphus of Hald^n L. Baron of Trasherg.
In the Name of the great Master of the Teutonic Order.
(L. S) Charles B. a Lo^, Knight of the Teutonick Order.
In the Name of the most high Prince and Bishop of Wertzburg.
(L. S.) John Conrad, Phil^^^gnatius de Tastungen.
In the Name of the most high and most Eminent Elector of Trier, as Bishop of
Spire.
(L. S.) John Henry de Kersersfeld, Plenipotentiary.
In the Name of the most high Prince and Bishop of Constance
(L. S.) Frederick a Derheim.
In the Name of the most Reverend, and most High Bishop and Prince of
Hildersheim.
(L. S.) Charles Paul Zimmerman, Chancellor and Counselor to his Highness,
and his Plenipotentiary.
In the Name of the most Serene and most Reverend Elector of Cologn, as Bishop
and Prince of Liege.
(L. S.) John Conrad Norf. deputed Plenipotentiary.
In the Name of the most Reverend, and most High Bishop and Prince of Munster.
(L. S.) Ferdinand L. B. of Plettenberg of Lenhansen, D. and Capit. of the
Cathedral Church of Braderb. etc.
In the Name of the most Serene Elector Palatine as Duke of Newberg.
(L. S.) John Henry Hetterman, Plenipotentiary.
In the Name of the most Serene Margiss of Baden.
(L. S.) Charles Ferdinand, L. B. d^ Plittersdorff, saving the Order of
Succession.
In the Name of the Abbey-College of Swaben.
(L. S.) Joseph Anton. Eusebius. de Halden in Neidberg F. B. de Autenriedt.
Plenipotentiary.
In the Name of the Free and Imperial City of Cologn.
(L. S.) Herman Joseph Bullingen, Syndic and Plenipotentiary.
In the Name of the City of Ausberg.
(L. S.) John Christopher a Dierheim Plenipotent.


FINIS.

