AN ANSWER TO A LETTER TO A DISSENTER, Upon Occasion of His Majesty's Late
Gracious DECLARATION OF INDULGENCE.

By Sir ROGER L' ESTRANGE, Knight.

LONDON, Printed for R. Sare at Grays-Inn-Gate in Holborn, 1687.

AN ANSWER TO A LETTER to a Dissenter, etc.
AFter many a Thought upon a Late Paper, Entitled [A Letter to a Dissenter,
etc.] I am come to This Resolution within my self: First, That it both
Requires, and Deserves a Thorough-Answer. 2ly. That No man can so Properly
Speak to it, as a True Son of the Church of England; for I take it to be his
Province, and Duty, in so Peculiar a manner, that such a Person, if Competently
Qualified for That Office, can hardly Expect his Mothers Blessing, without
saying somewhat upon This Subject, in her Vindication. By a Thorough-Answer, I
mean, the Taking of the Letter Paragraph by Paragraph, and speaking to the
Whole, and to Every Part of it, all under one. My Course, I know, lies betwixt
Two Rocks; where it is Odds, that a man either dashes Upon One of them, or is
Crushed to pieces Betwixt them. But He that is in his Duty, is never out of his
Way. So that being Fully Satisfied already in the Main, my Next Care must be,
not to Transgress in the Manner of my Proceeding: Wherein I Propose to Deliver
my Thoughts, Plainly, and without Disguise; And not to Depart, in the Least
Scruple, from the Rules of Charity, Moderation, Truth, and Candor; Nor (so far
as my Understanding will serve me) from the Dignity and Character of my
Profession. I will not go behind the Door neither, to Conceal my Name; for I
have lived Open and Barefaced a Long Time, and, by the Grace of God, I will not
Dye in a Disguise. Briefly, I shall take the Freedom to Speak what I Think,
without either Vanity, or Insolence; and make as Modest an Use of a Common
Liberty, (with leave for the Comparison) as any Other of His Majesty's Subjects
whatsoever. And when I shall have done with the Public Part of This
Discourse, I shall bestow a Few Pages upon a Postscript for my self.

The Letter it self is Addressed to a Dissenter; and why may not My Answer be
Addressed to a Dissenter too? For there is a Parity of Reason, Indifferently, in
Both Cases, where the Two Parties Respectively Concerned, are not Both of a
Mind. Beside, that by This Means, I have an Introduction, ready to my hand here
over and above: for the First Paragraph will serve the Answerers Purpose, as
well as it did the Authors; And since I cannot Greet him in Better Words, I
shall do it so far in his Own.

A Letter to a Dissenter, etc.
SIR,
Since Addresses are in fashion, Letter.
give me leave to make one to you. This is neither the Effect of Fear,
Interest, or Resentment; therefore you may be sure it is sincere: and for that
reason it may expect to be kindly received. Whether it will have power enough
to Convince, depends upon the Reasons, of which you are to judge; and upon
your preparation of Mind, to be persuaded by Truth, whenever it appears to
you. It ought not to be the less welcome, for coming from a friendly hand, one
whose kindness to you is not lessened by difference of Opinion, and who will
not let his thoughts for the Public be so tied or confined to this or that
Sub-division of Protestants, as to stifle the Charity, which besides all other
Arguments, is at this time become necessary to preserve us.

I Can with a very Good Conscience put my hand to This Preface; Answer.
for I have really All Those Peaceable and Compassionate Dispositions about me,
at This Instant, that the very Author of the Letter would be thought to have;
so that we may proceed, I think, without any more Ceremony.

I am neither surprised nor provoked, Letter.
to see that in the condition you were put into by the Laws, and the ill
circumstances you lay under, by having the Exclusion and Rebellion laid to your
Charge, you were desirous to make your selves less uneasy and obnoxious to
Authority. Men who are sore, run to the nearest Remedy with too much haste, to
consider all the consequences: Grains of allowance are to be given, where
Nature gives such strong Influences. When to Men under Sufferings it offers
Ease, the present Pain will hardly allow time to examine the Remedies; and the
strongest Reason can hardly gain a fair Audience from our Mind, whilst so
possessed, till the smart is a little allayed.

There Is a Plain, Answer.
and a Short Proverb, that may serve for a Paraphrase upon This Clause. [Out of
the Drying Pan into the Fire.] The Dissenters, it seems, were Uneasy under the
Penal Laws; Unsafe under Certain Criminal Imputations; And, in This Distress,
like Drowning Men, they laid hold of Any thing that came next to Hand; Mistook
their Way and their Measures, for want of Time to Look before they Leapt. The
Author of the Letter fancies them in a Straight; And then to Deliver them from
a Calamity of his Own Creating, Charitably puts in, and Pities them; Supposes
some very Dangerous Miscarriage; Assigns the Reason of it, and at the Same Time
Furnishes the Excuse. The Innuendo of the Whole is Briefly This, that Matters
are in an Evil State, and that the Severities of the Government have been the
Cause on it; which are Two Dangerous Points to be Injected into Peoples heads at
This Time of the day: But, This is only an Artificial Preparatory to make way
for somewhat more Considerable that is to follow. He speaks of the Dissenters
running to the Nearest Remedy; which, Under favor, is a Mistake, if he Means
the King's Declaration of Indulgence; for That Remedy came to Them. And so in
his Following Allegory. If it holds in State, as it does in Physic, the
Patient is not to Examine the Remedy, but to Observe the Prescription. And now
to the Next Paragraph.

I do not know whether the Warmth that naturally belongs to New Friendships
may not make it a Harder Task for me to persuade you. Letter.
It is like telling Lovers, in the Beginning of their Joys, that they will in a
Little Time have an End. Such an unwelcome Style does not easily find Credit:
But I will suppose you are not so far gone in your New Passion, but that you
will Hear still; and therefore I am under the Less Discouragement, when I offer
to your Consideration Two Things. The First is, the Cause you have to suspect
your New Friends. The Second, the Duty incumbent upon you, in Christianity and
Prudence, not to Hazard the Public Safety, neither by Desire of Ease, nor of
Revenge.

WE are here Past Insensibly, Answer.
and in the Course of Six Lines from the Present Compliances of the Dissenters,
Purely for the Sake of Ease and Security, to the Warmth of a New Friendship,
and of a New Passion; which is such a kind of Leap, as if a Cripple, for being
delivered from the Lash, should fall in love with the Beadle. I must needs take
Notice now, in This Place, by Anticipation, of a Passage in the Next Clause,
where the Gentleman tells the Dissenters, that [These New Friends did not make
them their Choice but their Refuge;] Which Implies, that the Roman Catholics
have not half the Kindness for the Dissenters, that the Dissenters have for the
Roman Catholics: For at the rate of [the Warmth of This New Friendship] and
This [New Passion,] the Dissenters must be understood to make the Roman
Catholics rather their Choice, than their Refuge. So that according to this
Proportion of Reasoning, the Dissenters must Relinquish, both their Interest
and Inclination, or there is No Good to be done upon them. But however, If they
be not either too Sturdy, or too Stately, to Hearken to Reason, Here are Two
Proposals laid before them: The One, of Caution, Founded upon [the Cause they
have to suspect their New Friends:] The Other, of Duty, both in Christianity
and Prudence, not to Sacrifice the Public Peace, either to their Ease, or
Revenge. Here is, in these Two Propositions, not only Subject Matter for the
kindling of Jealousies, and for the Irritating of Fears, and Apprehensions in
the Consequences of Things; But Misunderstandings Dictated, and Inculcated in
Express Terms, which cannot possibly fail of moving Unquiet Thoughts, and of
Dissolving the Common Ties of Faith, Friendship, and Allegiance, by making
Parties and Factions; and stirring Animosities among the Kings Good Subjects.

To speak One Word now to the Duty of Consulting the Public Safety, the
Question will be shortly this, Whether the Blessed end of Peace, with a Respect
to Civil Matters, (for here is no talk of Religion) be not more likely to be
Compassed and Preserved, by Uniting His Majesty's Liege People, than by
Dividing them? It is time now to go forward to the Animadversions, and
Reasonings that the Ingenious Author shall be pleased to Pass upon his Two Last
Heads.

To the First: Letter.
Consider, that notwithstanding the Smooth Language which is now put on to
Engage you, These new Friends did not make you their Choice, but their Refuge:
They have ever made their First Courtships to the Church of England; and when
they were rejected there, they made their Application to you in the Second
Place. The Instances of This might be given in All Times. I do not Repeat them,
because whatsoever is Unnecessary, must be Tedious; the Truth of this Assertion
being so Plain, as not to admit a Dispute. You cannot therefore reasonably
Flatter your selves, that there is any Inclination to You. They never pretended
to Allow You any Quarter, but to Usher in Liberty for Themselves, under That
Shelter. I refer you to Mr. Coleman's Letters, and the Journals of Parliament,
where you may be Convinced, if you can be so Mistaken, as to Doubt. Nay, at
this very Hour, they can hardly forbear, in the height of their Courtship, to
let fall Hard Words of you. So little is Nature to be restrained: It will start
out some times, disdaining to submit to the Usurpation of Art and Interest.

WE are left mightily in the Dark here, Answer.
how to understand his [Smooth Language] and his [New Friends;] Where we are to
Look for the One, and How we are to Distinguish the Other. If his Meaning be,
that the Roman Catholics are making Fair Weather with the Dissenters, and
withal, that the Dissenters are to Blame to Close with them, he should do well
to have a Care of his Characters; for a Man can very hardly Reflect a Scandal
upon the Whole Party, without wounding their Head and Master. I would fain
know, if the King Himself does not fall within the Compass of One of Those New
Friends; or rather how it is possible it should be Otherwise, without a
Particular Saving and Exception out of That Number. He speaks of Those New
Friends that have ever made their First Courtships to the Church of England. I
would he had but told us Where, When, and How; Or what Commission they had for
the making of These Overtures from One Community to Another: But whether they
Did, or whether they did Not, comes all to a Case, tho for the sake of Truth
and Justice, I must needs say that [EVER] goes a little too far: For in That
Great Revolution of the Long Rebellion, the Members of the Church of England
Joined in a Common Act of Prudence, Interest, and Conscience, to Meet them Half
Way: Or if there were any Priority of Respect in the Matter, it was on the
Church of England's Side. I speak of the Old Rebellion, when the Members of
Both Churches fell by the Sides One of Another in the Common Defense of their
Prince, and their Country; their Honor and their Allegiance.

But when the Roman Catholics were rejected there, they made their
Application to the Dissenters in the Second Place, he says; and made them not
their Choice, but their Refuge, without any Inclination for them at all. Well!
And whether the Church of England-Men Reject the Roman Catholics, or the
Roman Catholics Reject the Church of England-Men, it is Just as Broad as it is
Long; for Whethersoever of the Two stands in need of a Third Interest; It Is not
the Orthodoxy of the Persuasion, but the Strength of the Allye that He
considers: And what matters it for an Inclination of Kindness, where Necessity
Creates an Inclination that does the Office of an Inclination by Nature? What Is
more Ordinary, than for Two Mortal Enemies to Join in a Common Defense, for the
Mutual Preservation One of Another? And I never met with any Man yet since I
was born, that made it a Casuistical Moot-Point, Whether a Man might Lawfully
submit, to have his Life, Liberty, and Fortune, Preserved by a Man of Another
Opinion. This Gentleman tells the Dissenters that the Papists have No Kindness
for them, and that they are not their Choice, but their Refuge. Now if This be
Our Author's Own Case, (as by the Air of his Paper it appears to be) the
Argument that he has Advanced against the New Friends, as he Calls them, holds
Every Jot as good against Himself: And the Dissenters, with whom he has to do,
have All-out as good Reason to Suspect the One, as the Other. He is pleased to
Appeal to Coleman's Letters, and the Parliament Journals, though the One makes
not at all for him, and the Other seems in some Respects to be Point Blank
Against him. Coleman's Business was a Common Liberty, without Meditating any
Act of Violence or Subversion. And then if the Journals be set One against
Another, and a Design of Uniting Protestants in a General License, opposed to
the Uniting of Protestants, in a strict Conformity to the Rubriek and Canons,
they will do the Cause that This Gentleman has a-foot, at least as much Hurt as
Good. What signifies the following Objection, that [the Papists can hardly
forbear in the height of their Courtships to let fall Hard Words of the
Dissenters,] If this Gentleman, even in the Height of his Courtship, finds
himself apt to Speak, or to Think Hardly of them too? He says Extremely Well at
last, in Contemplation of the Difficulty of Restraining Nature, [She Disdains
(he says) to submit to the Usurpation of Art and Interest.] This he Says, and
This he Proves, in the same Breath, and Paper; for in despite of All the Art,
and Interest of This Discourse, his Inclination shows it self, and his Nature
breaks through the Disguise.

This Alliance between Liberty and Infallibility, Letter.
is bringing together the Two most contrary things that are in the World. The
Church of Rome does not only dislike the allowing Liberty, but by its
Principles it cannot do it. Wine is not more expressly forbidden to the
Mahometans, than giving Heretics, Liberty, is to Papists: They are no more
able to make good their Vows to you, than Men Married before, and their Wife
alive, can confirm their Contract with another. The Continuance of their
Kindness would be a Habit of Sin, of which they are to Repent, and their
Absolution is to be had upon no other Terms, than their Promise to destroy you.
You are therefore to be Hugged now, only that you may be the better Squeezed at
another time. There must be something Extraordinary, when the Church of Rome
sets up Bills, and offers Plasters, for Tender Consciences: By all that
has hitherto appeared, her Skill in Surgery lies chiefly in a Quick Hand,
to cut off Limbs; but she is the worst at Healing, of any that ever pretended
to it.

Here Is a Splendid, Answer.
and a Fallacious Amusement, in the First Line; and it is Plausibly enough
Pursued too; but Inevitably attended with the Fate of All Things that are Built
upon a False Bottom. Supposing [LIBERTY,] and [INFALLIBILITY,] as the Matter is
here set forth, and Assumed, to be the Present Point before us, upon a Question
of Competition, or Consistence. Upon this Supposal, I say, All the Following
Cost, and Figure, for the Dazzling of Weak Eyes, and the Transporting of
Impotent Affections, is very well Bestowed upon it: But if Liberty and
Infallibility shall fall out in This Case, to be Nothing akin; The One, to be
a Civil Point; The Other, a Religious; And the One, in short, to Differ as much
from the Other, as Doctrine does from Practice, or the Exercise of a Secular
Power, from a Theological Persuasion; Why then This Liberty, and Infallibility,
Truly Understood, and Rightly Distinguished, may very well stand together, and
the Holding of the One Opinion, does not at all Clash with Permitting the
Exercise of the Other. This Specious Sparkling Way of Reasoning will have
little more in it at last, than what we see Every Day in the Skill and Address
of Bird-catching, where the Twinkling of the Glass brings the Lark Dancing down
into the Net.

A Man that would put his Thoughts, and his Wits upon the Stretch, might
Enlarge till Doomsday, upon the Text of LIBERTY and INFALLIBILITY. But I am for
speaking Plain, Home, and in Few Words, to the Stress of the Subject in hand,
rather than squandring away more Time and Paper than needs, in Talking it out
at Length.

The Roman-Catholique-INFALLIBILITY, and the Dissenters LIBERTY are the Two
Hinges of the Controversy here in Debate. Put them On, Right, and the Door
Opens, or Shuts, with All the Ease in the World; But if This Gentleman will
needs set them on Across, and then Exclayme against them as [the most Contrary
Things in the World] when it is the Fault of the Workman, not of the Hinges,
that the One Hinders the Other, from doing its Proper Office. What help for it!
This is an Error in the Speculation of the Thing, that we see Daily Disproved,
and Contradicted, in Fact; And it must be a very Gross Partiality, that shall
take upon it self to support Fancy against Experiment. Now if the Liberty, and
Infallibility here Represented, Intended, and Designed, be quite Another Thing
than the Liberty, and Infallibility that lies Naturally within the Compass of
This Question, all the Flowers that are here Employed for the Recommending, and
the Garnishing of This Topique, how Artificially soever, must not be Allowed to
come up yet to the Least Color of a Conclusion, or an Argument, for any thing
that hitherto appears.

The First Query toward the Discussing of This Question, will, in One Word, be
This. What does This Gentleman mean by [LIBERTY?] Why does he not give some
Standard of it? Is it a Determinate, or an Unlimited Liberty? Why is it not
Ascertained, that a Body may see Thorough it? For how shall any Man take upon
him to make a Reasonable Discourse, upon an Unknown Meaning? If he Means
Liberty of CONSCIENCE, with a Respect to the Present Circumstances of the
Dissenters; His Majesty's Gracious Declaration of April the 4th. Last Past,
will most Explicity Adjust That Point, in These Following Words:

We have thought fit, by Virtue of our ROYAL PREROGATIVE, to Issue forth This
our Declaration of Indulgence.

So that it is a Liberty, Granted by Virtue, and in the Right of His Majesty's
ROYAL RREROGATIVE: A Civil Liberty to Meet for a Religious Worship; Or in the
Words of the Declaration it self, For [the Free Exercise of their Religion.]
The Plain English of the Case is This; The Dissenters find themselves Aggrieved
for want of Liberty of Conscience: And why? But because they cannot Meet to
Worship God in their Assemblies, as they say, they reckon themselves Bound to
do. This Restraint makes them Uneasy; The Law lies Heavy upon them; and they
have no Means of Relief but by the Kings Suspending the Execution of the
Penalties in That Case Provided, and Exerting His Sovereign Authority in Their
Favor. Now Every Body knows it for a Principle that is Rooted in the very
Foundations of Government it self, That All Public Assemblies; That is to
say, the Indicting, the Inhibiting, the Adjourning, Proroguing, Continuing, or
Dissolving of them, are Entirely, and Incommunicably, at the Will, and Pleasure
of the Supreme Magistrate. The King, in the Right of This Power, Allows his
People to Meet, to the End that they may Worship. The Dispensation respects the
Freedom of Assembling, not the Articles of every Particular Congregation's
Faith, or Creed. His Majesty Grants so much, as by His Prerogative he May, and
not One Jot more; for All Humane Acts whatsoever, are, to All Purposes Void,
when they come to break in once upon the Laws of God, and Nature: So that
here is neither Ground, Place, nor Pretense, for an Immoral, or an Unrighteous
Liberty: And if the Gentleman, in This Paragraph, speaks of a Boundles, and of
an Indefinite License, it neither IS, neither CAN it be, neither can it be
SVPPOSED to be, the Case that is here in Agitation. It Involves a Nullity, to
Imagine it so; and it Imports a Tacit Censure of Authority, even so much as to
Insinuate that it was ever Intended so: For No power upon Earth Can either
Discharge, or so much as Suspend, the Overruling Dictates, and Sentences, of
Equity, and of Right Reason Now it is no Wonder, if the Church of Rome will
never Endure a Liberty of This Latitude; for neither will any Christian Church
that ever was upon the Face of the Earth, Endure it; for it would be All one
with the Overruling both of Law, and Gospel; and the Destroying of Religion it
self, as well as Christianity at a Blow.

Now if a Liberty, in This Extent cannot so much as be Imagined, without a most
Uncharitable, and a Dangerous Scandal; it must, in Common Honesty, be taken for
Granted, that the Author of This Letter speaks only of a Liberty, within a
Reasonable, and a Christian Compass: So that to Acquit him of the Calumny, I
find my self Obliged to Mind him of a Seeming Contradiction. There is a
Liberty, that is Evil in it self, with a Respect to the Matter that it is
Conversant about: And there is a Liberty, that is Evil, because it is
Prohibited. The Former is Indispensable; and All the Powers under the Sun can
never make it Warrantable. The Latter was left Indifferent, till Authority
Restrained it; and the same Authority may set it at Liberty Again. So that the
Liberty here spoken of, is an Allowable Liberty; That is to say, a Liberty
totally Depending upon the Political Judgment of the Sovereign Magistrate;
Whether to Grant it or Not; How Far; In What Cases; To what Parties; Under What
Limitations of Time, or Conditions: But whether Allowable, or Not Allowable;
Protestants, it seems, may set up their Rest upon it, that Heretics are to
expect No Quarter; No Liberty, from Papists: Nay our Author is of Opinion, that
they esteem Themselves under a most Conscientious Obligation to Destroy Us. The
Late Havoc that has been made among the Protestants in France, Concludes
Nothing against the Judgment of the Church of Rome, concerning the Liberties
and Privileges that they Enjoyed there in Former Times. To say nothing of the
Freedom they are Allowed in Diverse Other Places, where they live Intermixed.

There will be No Great Difficulty, I hope, to bring the Gentleman to Yield,
that the Fact is clearly Against him; but if upon the Penning, and the Couching
of This Clause, he had not so Totally Indulged his Inclination, as not to Look
Forward into the Tendency of his Discourse: If, I say, he had not so eagerly
Pressed and Pursued the Point he had in his Eye, without Considering Whither he
was a-going, or the Precipices that he had before him, he might have seen more
Hazards than One, that were likely to Ensue upon his taking of This Biass. And
God Grant, that the Author of This Paper, may not be found to have been One of
the Number that has formerly fallen upon Me, without Mercy, for a Doctrine,
Injuriously laid to My Charge, and which he himself does Manifestly Enforce,
and Suggest, in this very Paragraph. It made a Heavy Noise for One While, since
the Coming of His Sacred Majesty to the Crown, that I should hold forth in an
Observator, That [All Subjects were Bound to be of their Princes Religion]
which I never Wrote, Said, or Thought, since I was Born: But I have been, and
am still, and I doubt not but that I shall ever be, fully Persuaded, that the
Conscience of Obedience is the same upon All Subjects, let the Religion of
their Lawful Sovereign be what it will: And I say further, that there is a
Religion of Allegiance, as well as of Faith. But to what I was about to say.

Here is a Point Agitated betwixt the Church of Rome, and the Dissenters, with
an Eye to the Liberty that the Latter, at This Time pretend to, and Enjoy. Now
This Liberty is an Act of State; And the Church of Rome can have Nothing to do
with it, any further, than by the Influence, which our Author possibly Supposes
they may have upon His Majesty: So that there can be No Vnfair Dealing in the
Matter; but in such a Manner, that, some way or other, Our Master must be made
a Party to it. The Dissenters have a Common Right to the Equity of His Majesty's
Gracious Promises, and Assurances, Exhibited in the Aforesaid Declaration: So
that they are All as safe, as the Word of a King in a Royal Act of Grace,
Signed, Sealed, and Delivered in the Presence of God, Angels, and Men, can
Make'em. If This be the very State of the Business, how Vain, how Ungrateful,
and how Unprofitable, is it, for Any Subject but to Grumble, as if he Doubted
the Performance! Nay, and how Foolish, Over and Above; for One Meddling
Protestant, to Provoke the Ruin, and the Inconvenience of All the Rest! I will
hope after All, that a Good Part of This Matter dropped from the Author in his
Sleep: For if That which he Delivers in This Place, for the Conscientious
Doctrine of the Church of Rome, he, in Truth, so as he Affirms it to be, the
Inference Undeniable that Results from it, is This; That His Majesty thinks
himself Bound in Conscience, to Destroy All Religions but his Own; Which would
be certainly One of the most Pernicious Impressions, if it should once take
Root among the Common People, that was ever thrown into the Mouths of the
Multitude; and the most Destructive of All Communities. But we have (God be
praised for it) for our Infallible Security, not only the Solemnity of
Assurances, and Declarations, but the Immovable Character of a Great, a Just,
and a Wise Prince, whose Internal Honor, Generosity, and Prudence are Ten
Thousand Guards upon him: Beside, a Merciful, a Powerful, and a Protecting
Providence Above, to Watch over, both King, and People.

There lay a Great Stress upon This Section; and I had rather be Tedious, than
speak to it by Halves. As for Hugging and Squeezing, it is no more than a Common
Trick of Policy, and State: A Man helps his Friend up the Ladder; And has his
Teeth Dashed out for his Pains.

[There must be something Extraordinary (he says) when the Church of Rome
sets up Bills, and offers Plasters for Tender Consciences.] And truly I
am content to Agree with the Metaphorical Author, that there Is something in it,
that is very Extraordinary; And I Will speak Freely to it, when I come to it: But a
Word by the Way; If this Gentleman be a True Son of the Church of England (as
by the Air and Humor of his Discourse he would appear to be) there is
something Extraordinary in the Church-of-England-Man's-Case, as well as in the
Papists; And it is No Ordinary Thing for Him, to be Billing of it Neither:
Beside that it is not Fair, for One Man to find Fault with what Another does,
and yet do the Same Thing Himself. As to the Church of Rome's Skill, or No
Skill, either in Cutting or in Healing, I can say little more, than that some
of Our Good People have showed themselves Master-Operators, within the Memory
of Man, in the very way of Amputation too; wherever they learnt the Trade:
though the PRETENDED Murder of a JUSTICE, by the Papists, has put the ACTVAL
Murder of a PRINCE, quite out of Countenance. What shall I do now? for This
Chapter hangs yet upon my Fingers; and I cannot get off, without another Touch
upon the Subject of Liberty; By which LIBERTY, I mean TOLERATION.

No man perhaps, has Spoiled more Paper upon This Argument, than my self; No
man has been more for the Upholding of the Rubric, and Canons; No man more for
the keeping of People up to the Stated Articles, and Conditions of our
Communion; And I am the same Man in my Principles at This Day, that ever I was;
Though upon a Change of Circumstances, I have likewise Varied my Judgment, with
a respect to Hic, and Nunc, as to That Particular: For I take it to be Mightily
Another Case, under a Prince of the Communion of the Church of Rome, from what
it was under a Prince of the English Communion. My Religion is in every Point
the Same; But That which Was the Interest of That Religion, in Former Times, is
in some Innocent Respects, no Longer so. The Strictness, and Rigor, that was
Laudable, and Meritorious, in the One Case, would be Unmannerly, and Provoking,
in the Other. If I had had my Option, upon the late Mighty Change, the
Church-of-England-Men, as an Acknowledgment, as a Respect, and for Twenty
Reasons Beside, should have Presented His Majesty with All Honorable
Assurances of Freedom for his Own People, even without so much as Capitulating
for Themselves. First, as an Act of Necessary Prudence; For Authority had the
Better End of the Staff; And there was Nothing to be Gotten, by Contesting and
Struggling; but much to be Lost by it. 2ly. As a Testimonial of Reverence, and of
Thankfulness; for it would have been no more than what was Due, from a Subject
to a Prince, upon the Matter of Deference, and Resignation. There would have
been No Point of Religion Yielded; Not the Least Scruple of any Nicety of
Conscience Departed from; but it would have made the King, and the King's
Friends of the same Communion, Easy, and Happy. It would also have been a
Retribution of Gratitude; and a Verification of the Kings Opinion of the Church
of England, by their Practice. The Words ought, not only to be Recorded in the
Journals, both of the Parliament, and of the Council; but likewise in the
Hearts of all his Majesty's Subjects.

I know the Principles of the Church of England are for Monarchy; and the
Members of it have showed themselves Good, and Loyal Subjects; Therefore I
shall always take Care to Defend and Support it.

These were his Present Majesty's Words at his First Sitting in the Privy
Council, after the Death of the Late Blessed King: And These Words are to be
made Good, in Honor, Duty, and Acknowledgment, without Deliberating, or
Starting, by Every Man that Professes himself a Member of That Church. 3ly We
could not better have Consulted our own Peace, Freedom, and Security; for it is
the Natural Reason, and Condition of the Thing, to Allow, as we would be
Allowed; and not to Do Any thing to Others, that we should be Unwilling to see
Turned upon our selves.

There is likewise a Fourth Reason, over and above All Those before mentioned,
to Oblige us as Christians, and as men of Tenderness, Humanity, and Common
Justice. It is now a Long Time since, that we have found the Pretended Popish
Conspiracy to be an Imposture, and a Subornation; And I would put it to the
Conscience of Every man, that has either by the Press, the Bar, the Pulpit,
(or I could go Higher if I pleased) Contributed to the Credit of the Villainy,
Whether he be not Bound to make his Repentance, and his Retractation, as
Public, as ever his Seduction was? If he has Caused Many People to Believe a
Lie; a Sanguinary Lie; a Lie that has drawn Innocent Blood after it; He is No
True Church-of-England-Man, if he does not Openly Confess it; Declare it; and
make All the Public Satisfaction for it that the Matter will bear; If he does
not Endeavor the Setting of as many People Right again, as his Example,
Authority and Doctrine had led out of the Way; He Is No True Penitent; No Right
Honest Man; and I might add to it, that he is no True-Christian; An Hypocrite of
Blood is the Worst of Hypocrites; and the Guilt of it Sticks to his Conscience,
as well as the Gore of it to his Chops, 'till he has Washed his Mouth. And it
is not enough neither, where Men have been Falsely Sworn out of their Lives, for
the Believers of those Perjuries, and Consequently the Promoters of the Credit
of them; and Consequently yet once again, the Accessoryes (with leave of the
Lawyers) to the Murders that Ensued; (for Murders they Were, to the False
Witnesses.) It is not enough, I say, for a Man under These Circumstances,
Barely to Clap his Hand upon his Breast, and say The Lord Forgive me; for I
have Innocent Blood to Answer for. No, not if he should make Proclamation of it
in Gath, and tell it in the Streets of Askalon; without doing a Right to All
Persons concerned, in some Proportion, to the Injury; In fine, without Atoning,
in some Degree, for Past Indignities, by Future Kindnesses, and Respects: As
who should say, [Gentlemen, we have been Imposed upon by Perjured Villains, to
the Loss of many of your Lives and Liberties, and the Ruin of your
Reputations, Families, and Estates: We have Made you, and we have Used ye like
Traitors; For the Love of God let us Live hereafter, like Loyal Subjects,
Friends and Christians.] In a Word, After One so Criminal, and so Mortal a
Mistake already, Men should be very Wary, how They Hazard the Following of it
with Another of the same kind. Prepossessions and Jealousies can never Warrant
us in the Violation of Christian Charity: And so at the Long Last, I Will go a
Step Further now.

To come so quick from another extreme, Letter.
is such an unnatural motion, that you ought to be upon your Guard; the other
day you were Sons of Belial, Now, you are Angels of Light. This is a violent
change, and it will be fit for you to pause upon it, before you believe it: If
your features are not altered, neither is their opinion of you, whatever may be
pretended. Do you believe less than you did, that there is Idolatry in the
Church of Rome? sure you do not. See then, how they treat both in Words and
Writing, those who entertain that Opinion. Conclude from hence, how
inconsistent their favor is with this single Article, except they give you a
Dispensation for this too, and by a Non Obstante, secure you that they will not
think the worse of you, p. 2.

Where there is Reason for a Change for the Better; Answer.
Where there is Manifest Interest to Induce That Change; a Profession, that
such a Change is Wrought; and a Charitable Place left to hope the Best of
things; Where Is the Crime, or the Folly of Inclining to the Belief of such a
Conversion? If it be the Dissenters Interest, it is a Great Weakness, in That
Respect, not to come about. If they Declare, and Promise more then they Intend
to Perform, they Cut their Own Throats, by Playing the Knaves, to their Ruin;
and by Acting against Common Honesty, as well as against Common Sense. Their
Interest it is, most Undenyably; for they get Remission, Ease and Favor by it.
If the Papists think Better of the Dissenters then they deserve, it is an Error
on the Right Hand: But the Dissenters, it seems, that but The Other day were Sons
of Belial, are now, all of a sudden, in the Opinion of the Papists, become
Angels of Light. And is it not just the very same Thing, (at least if the
Author of This Letter Judges Aright) from the Dissenters to the Papists, that
it is from the Papists to the Dissenters? And where is the Hurt on it, if they
are Both Agreed to think Better One of Another, then they were used to do? Or,
according to our Author's Opinion, then Effectually they have Cause to do?
Well! But he gives to Understand, that though the Papists have Changed their
Style, they have not yet Changed their Thoughts of them: And Then, in comes a
Philosophical Caution, not to give Credit to Unnatural Motions that pass from
One Extreme to Another at a Stride. If he had looked Both ways, he would have
found as great a Leap of State, on the One Side, as he does of Inclination on
the Other: For let a Man's Thoughts, and Purposes, be never so Sound, and
Reasonable, it is No Unreasonable Thing yet, to Change Those Thoughts, and
Purposes upon Change of Accidents, and Occasion. He says that the Dissenters
Features are not Altered; but I shall take leave to say, that the very Cause it
self is Altered; and that During his Majesty's Suspension of the Penal Laws,
they are, in a Fair Equity of Construction, no longer Dissenters. But whether
this Gentleman hits the Papists Thoughts, or Not, is the teast Part of the Care
of This Paragraph: For the Author seems much more sollicitous, for fear the
Papists, and the Dissenters should agree upon it to think Well of One Another,
then for fear that the Crafty, Juggling Papists should put a Trick upon the Poor
Innocent Lambs on the Other side. And I would, in One Word more, now put it to
the Authors Conscience, Whether the Papists, and his Own, with a respect to the
Dissenters, be not the very same Case, and the very same Trick. He would have
them stand upon their Guard, he says; but against What? And what to do? As if
Good Discretion, and Good Nature could not stand together: As if People could
not be Prudent, without being Inhumane. It was such Hints, and Touches as
These, that turned the Hearts, and the Brains of the Common People into Wax, to
stamp Forgeries upon: But God forbid, that the same Scene should Open Once
again, and that the Epilogue to One Sham, should prove the Prologue to Another.

It is Worthy of Observation, that in All Officious Discourses of This Quality,
there are Certain Words of Commonplace, Interspersed up and down, that when
the Pen grows Dull, are made use of, as a Butcher does of his Steel when his
Knife is Blunted, to give it a New Edge: As here is [IDOLATRY] brought in, p. 2.
of the Sheet-and-Half-Edition. And then p. 9. he he is pleased to give it
Another Whet, upon the Word [TRANSVBSTANTIATION.] Now I do Previously Declare
my self to be Perfectly a Church of England Man, upon These Two Points: And
yet, saving all Possible Veneration to my Mother, and Reverence to my
Profession, I cannot Imagine any other End, or Reason, for the very Mention of
[IDOLATRY] in This Place, then to stir the Blood of the Protestant Reader, and
to Brand the Romanists, with a Mark of Odium, and Reproach. Here Is a Civil
Question started; Not so much betwixt Roman Catholics, and Dissenters, with
regard to their Differing Persuasions in Religion, as with a Respect to the
Interest of the Common Peace, and Safety, in the Agreement, or Disagreement of
These Two Bodies of His Majesty's Subjects. And what is This to the Polemicks
betwixt the Two Churches? The Roman Catholics Believe as they Did; And the
Dissenters Believe as they Did; So that [the Papists Favor, he says, is
Inconsistent with this Single Article:] And is not the Dissenters Favor, on
the other side, as Inconsistent with the same Article? So that there is no more
hope of favor on the One side, then there is on the Other. Now if they are
Resolved, on Both Sides, not to Yield, what are All These Elaborate
Disswasives, but only so many Fine Words thrown into the Air?

Think a little, Letter.
how dangerous it is to build upon a Foundation of Paradoxes. Popery now is the
only Friend to Liberty, and the known Enemy to Persecution: The Men of Taunton
and Tiverton, are above all other eminent for Loyalty. The Quakers from being
declared by the Papists not to be Christians, are now made Favorites, and
taken into their Particular Protection; they are on a sudden grown the most
accomplished men of the Kingdom in Good Breeding, and give Thanks with the best
Grace, in double Refined Language. So that I should not wonder, though a Man of
that Persuasion, in spite of his Hat, should be Master of the Ceremonies. Not
to say Harsher Words, these are such very New Things, that it is impossible not
to suspend our Belief, till by a little more Experience we may be informed
whether they are Realities, or Apparitions: We have been under shameful
Mistakes, if these Opinions are true; but for the present we are apt to be
incredulous; Except we should be convinced, that the Priests Words in this Case
too, are able to make such a sudden and effectual Change; and that their Power
is not limited to the Sacrament, but that it extends to Alter the Nature of
all other things, as often as they are so disposed, p. 3.

IT would be Good Advice to the Author, Answer.
as well as to the Dissenter, to Consider the Danger of Building upon
Paradoxes: For it is to My Thinking, Extremely Paradoxal, to draw Arguments of
Inclination from Results of Necessity; and to make it an Act of Friendship, for
Two Bodies, or Divisions of Men, that have Need, One of Another, to shake Hands
upon Certain Terms and Articles of Composition. The Papists would be at
Liberty; and so would the Dissenters; And I think they should deserve to be
Chronicled for Idiots, and Madmen, not to Unite in any Common Medium, with
Justice, Honor, and a Good Conscience, toward their Joint-Ease, and Relief.
And what is the Papists Friendship now, to Liberty; but that they would fain be
out of their Shackles, Themselves? And what is their Enmity to Persecution, but
a Desire to stand upon Even Ground, with the rest of the Kings Subjects?
Especially, as they are Entitled to it by the Kings Late Indulgence. God
forbid, that any Honest English Man should Envy any of his Fellow Subjects the
Benefit of the Kings Mercy; because (in Effect) a man can hardly do it, without
some sort of Reflection upon his Sacred Wisdom and Goodness. To proceed now from
the Irony upon Popery, to the Men of Taunton, and Tiverton; and so to the
Quakers. It is not Good to Discourage men that do but so much as look toward
Loyalty; and though Every body Cannot come up to the Good Breeding that This
Gentleman is pleased to make himself so merry withal; we might Yet Methinks
Arrive at such a Degree of Moral Civility, as to give his Majesty leave to
Dispose of his Own, without calling him to Account for it. The Quakers, (he
says) are the Papists Favorites. And are not the Dissenters, (at least as This
Letter would have it Thought to be) the Favorites of the Author? And so he
goes on still, sporting himself with these People, as [the Men that give Thanks
with the Best Grace.] Well! And when his Hand was In, Why did he not take
Notice, of Those too, that with a very Ill Grace, give No Thanks at all? He
Cautions the Dissenters, to suspend their Belief till they know whether the
Papists are in Jest, or Earnest: And why not Suspend, as well, 'till they can
have the same Security for the Good Faith of the Author too? [We have been
under shameful Mistakes (he says) if These Opinions are True.] And I say, that
we have Seen, Felt, Heard, and Understood Mistakes much more shameful then any
of These. Nay, and we have had True-Protestant Oaths for them too, in the same
Case, and about the same People; And All yet found to be a Cheat at last. To go
Thorough with him, he calls in the Sacrament once again to his Aid, at the End
of This Clause. I wish the Period had been handled with a little more
Solemnity; for I never loved the Hocus-Pocussing of Hoc est Corpus Meum.

Let me now speak of the Instruments of your Friendship, and then leave you to
judge, Letter.
whether they do not afford matter of Suspicion. No Sharpness is to be mingled
where Healing only is intended; so nothing will be said to Expose particular
men, how strong soever the Temptation may be, or how clear the Proofs to make
it out. A word or two in general, for your better caution, shall suffice:
Suppose then, for Argument's sake, that the Mediators of this new Alliance,
should be such as have been formerly employed in Treaties of the same kind, and
there detected to have Acted by Order, and to have been Empowered to give
Encouragements and Rewards. Would not this be an Argument to suspect them? P. 3.

WE have had Suspicious FRIENDSHIPS; Answer.
Suspicious COVRTSHIPS; Suspicious BILLS, and PLASTERS; Suspicious CHANGES;
Suspicious PARADOXES; (with Caution upon Caution over and above) and we are now
a coming to Suspicious INSTRVMENTS: But [Where Healing is only intended, there
must be no Sharpness] he says; And so he goes forward Supposing and Supposing,
in General, without Exposing Particular Men.

I am sorry with all my Heart that this Healing Humor; Or at least This
Healing Intention did not take our Author sooner; for so far hitherto, as the
Public has been the Question, we have had Sharpness beyond Measure: But he is
Resolved, from Henceforward, to Illustrate, by John-a-Nokes, and John-a-Styles;
and so to Proceed putting of Cases and Cases almost to the End of the Chapter.
Suppose (says he) that the Present Mediators, etc. should be found to have been
Factors of Old, and Commissioned to give Encouragements, and Rewards, in
Treaties of the same Kind.

I Answer, First, that Supposing is not Proving. 2ly. That the Supposed CASE on
the One-side, till it be made out, is as Suspicious as the Supposed PRACTICE on
the Other. For the Supposition of such a Practice may be a Fiction; or it may
be Enflamed, and rendered Bigger then the Truth. 3ly. The Supposition, Thus
Represented, Works Equally, whether it be True or False, without Farther
Evidence. 4ly. What if it were True, so long as it Is not the Character of the
Instrument, but the Reason of the Proposition, that is to Govern? 5ly. It Is the
Authority that must bear out the Instrument; and not a Prejudice to the
Instrument, that shall Disparage the Authority: And if we cannot pay a Respect
to the Man, it is yet Due to his Commission. 6ly. If the Suspecting of Any man,
shall Extend to the Taking away, or to the Lessening of his Credit. It Is in the
Power of any One Man, to suspect any Other, and No man can be Safe in his
Innocence: Beside that, the Stress of this Insinuation will put All men out of
Capacity for Public Trust, if it shall but be Proved, nay, or so much as
Suggested, that ever they made a False Step, in their Lives. The Next, and Last
Point, Expounds the Letters soft way of Proceeding, to have had more in it of
Prudential Caution, then of Tenderness for Particular Persons: For they must be
Detected, to have Acted by ORDER; and [ORDER] runs up Stairs the Lord knows
whither.

If they should plainly be under Engagements to one side, Letter.
their Arguments to the other, ought to be received accordingly; their fair
Pretenses are to be looked upon as part of their Commission, which may not
improbably give them a Dispensation in the case of Truth, when it may bring a
prejudice upon the Service of those by whom they are employed. p. 3.

THE Short of This Supposition, Answer.
is, that their Arguments are to be Judged by their Dependences; and that they
are Commissioned to Lie, and Juggle for the Service of their Masters. These
[IF's] are Delivered with the Air of a Patriote, and with the Spirit of a
Free-born-English-man; Like a Censor Morum in fine. If the Gentleman has an
Ambition to be a Devote, for the Saving, or the Redeeming of his Country, he
will Vnriddle the Mystery; Lay Open the Confederacy; and bring All These
Monsters out of Their Holes, into Open Daylight: Without which, we are so far
from being the Better; that in Truth, we are much the Worse for his
Suppositions: And without This, the Whole Pretended End of his Letter to a
Dissenter, is Entirely Disappointed.

If there should be men who having formerly, Letter.
had Means and Authority to persuade by Secular Arguments, have in pursuance of
that Power, sprinkled Money amongst the Dissenting Ministers; and if those very
men should now have the same Authority, practice the same Methods, and
Disburse, where they cannot otherwise persuade: It seems to me, to be rather
an Evidence then a Presumption of the Deceit. P. 3.

If there should be Ministers amongst you, who by having fallen under
Temptations of this kind, are in some sort engaged to continue their Frailty,
by the awe they are in lest it should be exposed: The persuasions of these
unfortunate men must sure have the less force, and their Arguments, though
never so specious, are to be suspected, when they come from men who have
Mortgaged themselves to severe Creditors that expect a rigorous observation of
the Contract, let it be never so unwarrantable. P. 3.

If these, or any others, should at this time Preach up Anger and Vengeance
against the Church of England; may it not without Injustice be suspected, that
a thing so plainly out of season, springs rather from Corruption than
Mistake; and that those who act this Choleric part, do not believe themselves,
but only pursue higher Directions, and endeavor to make good that part of
their Contract which obliges them, upon a Forfeiture, to make use of their
inflaming Eloquence? They might apprehend their Wages would be retrenched if
they should be Moderate: And therefore whilst Violence is their Interest, those
who have not the same Arguments, have no reason to follow such a Partial
Example. P. 4.

Here Is Supposition upon Supposition, Answer.
More, and More sill. What if there should be Money in the Case, among the
Dissenting Ministers, as there has been formerly? And what if the Agents of
Former Times should be now at their Old Trade again? Why truly, for My Part, it
shall be either So, or Not so, as the Author pleases; and even let him take his
Choice. If there has been No Money given, the Author is out in his History; And
if there Has been Money given, the Single Question is, Whether the Thing was
Honest, or Dishonest; Warrantable, or Unwarrantable; that was to be done for
That Money. I do not find that there were any Bravo's, or Church-Robbers
employed in This most Important Commission. I do not hear of any Murder or
Sacrilege, in the Question: But when it shall be Proved, that a Wicked Thing
was ORDERED, and a Wicked Thing DONE, Then, (and not till Then) will be the
Time for This Supposition to take Place. Now if it was a Lawful, or a
Righteous Business, I have very Good Authority for it, that the Labourer is
Worthy of his Hire; And it is the Wisdom, and the Justice of All Well-Ordered
States, to Reward Public Services, without Suffering Good Subjects to be
Called Mercenaries, for Touching the King's Money; and likewise for the Credit,
and the Vindication of the Honor of the Government, not to suffer the Bountyes
of the Prince to be Scandalously Represented to the People, under the Odious
Names of Corruption, Bribery, or Subornation: Insomuch, that the Presumption of
Fraud, seems to lie much stronger on the Supposers side, then it does on the
Other.

The Letter is [IFFING] of it now again too; with a [What if the Mercenary
Ministers Before supposed, should be kept in Awe, for fear of telling of
Tales?] They are gotten into Hucksters Hands, and there is No coming off without
a Scratched Face. Now am I, the very Same Indifferent Man, to This Supposition,
that I was to the Former; and believe it, upon the Whole Matter, to be a
Fiction: But I do not yet, either Pretend to Know, or to Pronounce upon it; and
whether it be a Truth, or a Figment, it is to Me All of a Price: So that for
Quietness sake, I am content to Reason with the Gentleman upon his Own Askings;
His Own Presumptions; Nay, and I care not if I say, upon his Own Affirmations
too; For This way of Casing a Matter, has the Force of Asserting it. If, in
Good Earnest, such a Thing has been; and that they dare not come off for fear
of being Laid Open; it is the Case (that I have had somewhere before) of a
Gentleman that lay given over by his Physician, in a Desperate Fit of Sickness.
A Friend and Companion of His, made him a Visit; laid his Condition before him,
and Advised him, by All means, while he had Life yet, to Call upon God, and
Repent. Why Ay, (says he) If I were sure to Dye, I Would Repent with all my Heart;
But then, if I should happen to Live, the Rogues would so Laugh at me. Here Is
the Perfect Image of the Author's Thoughts, upon the Supposed Dissenter in the
Second Period, Body and Soul. He Is Afraid to Repent, for fear the Rogues
should Laugh at him. I do not know how far This Bashful Argument may Work upon
the World; but I am persuaded that the Plea will hardly be admitted at the Day
of Judgment. And then he lays the Stress of the Case, upon a Point that is Never
to be Cleared; 'till we have All of us Windows in our Breasts, and Eyes, to See
and Read the Thoughts of one Another in our very Hearts. And where is the Result
at last, but that we are to Draw Conclusions from the Bare Possibility of
Things, to the Infallibility of a Demonstration! Let This be Granted, and the
Supposition stands Firm; but Nothing Less then This, will be ever able to
Support it.

And the Case-putting-Humour goes on still too; though the Author succeeds no
Beeter in his Third Supposition, then he did in the Two Former. By [These, or
Any Others Preaching up Anger, and Vengeance against the Church of England] He
can mean Nothing in the World, but Popish Priests, or Dissenters; unless he
should Imagine, that the Church-of-England Ministers will lay Violent Hands
upon Themselves. Such Preaching, he says, is [plainly out of Season] with a
regard, he means, to the Timing of it: Which seems to Imply, that at some other
time, it might do well enough. Now if it be an Ill Thing to do at Any time, it
will be ALLWAYS out of Season; for it is not with Sermons, as it is with Mackrel,
to be IN, and OVT: But if Such Preaching may be Now Out of Season; Why may not
some Ways of Writing be out of Season too? And why may it not be a Thing of as
Dangerous Consequence, to set the Dissenters and the Papists, as to set the
Dissenters, and the Church-of-England-men together by the Ears? Not but that
This Way of Conduct, Wounds the True, and the Genuine Church of England under
the Bare Denomination of a Church-of-England-Cause, more then it does Either of
the Other Two Parties, as I shall show when it comes before me. But the
Corruption goes on still. The Choleric Part (he says) is but Acted; Higher
Directions msut be Pursued, or the Contract is Void. Nay, the Dissenters are in
Pay too, and they have Wages. The Design is to Work Violence, and There he Pins
the Basket. If the Choleric Part be (as he says) but Acted, the Dissenters and
the Church-of-England-Men Understand One Another, before hand it seems, and the
Whole Story of the Letter is but a Banter: That same Expression of [Higher
Directions] is a Bugg Word or Two; and from Higher to Higher, there will be No
Resting Place found for this Oraculous Innuendo, till we come to the Highest of
all. Now I am not Lawyer enough, to know, What such a Charge of CONTRACT,
CHEAT, and VIOLENCE, in such a Train of Connection may amount to. This is [a
Partial Example] he says; And truly Mythinks, This Letter has a very Partial
way of Proceeding; for it makes War, and Peace, in the same Breath; Rips up Old
Wounds under the Color of Healing them: And I appeal to the indifferent World,
whether a Choleric Writer may not be as Dangerous, as a Choleric Preacher;
and if the One Example be not as much to be Avoided as the Other. Wherefore I
think it would not do Amiss, if the Dissenter should Counter-Advise his
Remembrancer upon Two or Three of these Last Points: For the Letter deals
altogether by Secular Arguments too; and there may be Money Walking on the One
Side, as well as on the Other. And then again, the Disuniting of the Kings
Subjects, of what Religion soever they are, is a Point as Suspicious, As any
that we have yet Before us: And it is a Thing, every jot as much out of Season
certainly, to Endeavor the making the Romanists Odious (As Romanists) under a
Prince of That Communion, as it is to Endeavor the Conciliation of a
Friendship betwixt the Roman Catholics, and any other sort whatsoever of the
Kings Liege People. It Is a Rash, an Irreverent, a False, and a Seditious
Insinuation, to Possess Subjects with an Opinion, that there is No Faith,
Truth, Honor, or Justice, to be Expected from the Religion of That Church,
whereof their Sovereign is a Member. And so to the Next Supposal.

If there should be Men, Letter.
who by the Load of their Crimes, against the Government, have been bowed down
to comply with it against their Conscience; who by incurring the want of a
Pardon, have drawn upon themselves the necessity of an entire Resignation: Such
Men are to be Lamented, but not to be Believed: Nay, they themselves, when they
have discharged their Vnwelcom Task, will be inwardly glad that their forced
Endeavors do not succeed; and are pleased when Men resist their Insinuations;
which are far from being voluntary or sincere, but are squeezed out of them by
the Weight of their being so Obnoxious. P. 4.

BEfore I speak to the Case, Answer.
I cannot but do a Gentleman's Right to the Author, and say; that [If Troy
could have been Defended, This was the Hand to have done it.] In one Word more,
It is Cleanly, and Artificial; but still it makes his own Saying Good, at last;
that [It is a Dangerous Thing to Build upon a Foundation of Paradoxes.]

What Credit (says he) is to be given to Criminals, that are forced to Compound
for their Necks, against their Consciences? Nay, they will be Inwardly Glad, not
to be Able to Succeed in their Endeavors; for it is All Force without the least
Pulse, or Stroke, of Nature, or Inclination. If these Men will Act AGAINST
their Consciences, for a Pardon, will they not much more Act ACCORDING to their
Consciences for the Continuance of that Security? That is to say, upon
Conviction that they were in an Error: But if the Dutiful Conscience of
Preserving the Public Peace, Works One way; And if the Letter will Suppose a
Conscientious Obligation (either so in Truth, or so Understood) for the
Destroying of a Lawful Government, on the Other, it is a kind of a Scandal upon
the very Rebellion, to call it a Crime; In Opposition to the Text here that
Implies it to be a Matter of Conscience. Here Is the Present Case, in short,
Stated, and Read upon; And so we will Proceed.

If in the Height of this great Dearness by comparing Things, Letter.
it should happen, that at this Instant, there is much a surer Friendship, with
those who are so far from allowing Liberty, that they allow no LIVING, to a
Protestant under them. Let the Scene lie in what part of the World it will, the
Argument will come home, and sure it will afford sufficient Ground to suspect.
Apparent Contradictions must strike us: Neither Nature nor Reason can digest
them: Self-Flattery, and the desire to deceive our selves, to gratify a
present Appetite, with all their Power, which is great, cannot get the better
of such broad Conviction, as some things carry along with them. Will you call
these vain and empty Suspicions? Have you been at all times so void of Fears
and Jealousies as to justify your being so unreasonably valiant in having none
upon this Occasion? Such an extraordinary Courage at this unseasonable Time, to
say no more, is too dangerous a Virtue to be commended. P. 4.

THere may be Time, Answer.
Place, and Occasion, for the Private Entertaining, and the Secret Apprehending
of Fears and Jealousies; And there may be Just Ground, Powerful Inducements,
and Necessary Prudence, so to do: But for the Propagating, the Publishing, the
Spreading, and the Irritating of Those Jealousies, where the Honor of the
Prince, The Dignity of the Government, and the Peace of the State, are All
wrapped up in the Consequences of Moving That Distemper, there can be No Time,
Place, or Occasion, to Warrant such a Practice. I could Wish, that This Letter
had been kept Clearer of the very Word [SVSPECT;] Or, that where the Author has
thought sit to make Use of it, the Suspicion had not been Carried further, then
I am willing to understand it was Intended. For Jealousy, Naturally runs into
the most Implacable Hatred; and to tell Protestants that there is No LIVING,
under Papists; is to tell them at the same Time, that there is no Suffering of
Papists to Live under Them; and so to set All the Believers of This Doctrine
Immediately upon the Cutting of One Another Throats. He puts the Case, of a
Possibility of a Surer Friendship, at This Instant; but then Cloggs it with
such After-Claps, that Nothing but Future Damnation for a Present Disobedience,
can be more Dreadful, then the Course of the Impendent Calamities that he has
set before us. Apparent Contradictions must strike us, (he says:) And is it not
an Apparent Contradiction, to Vest Subjects with the Authority of Governors?
To Invert the Order of Reason and Nature? and to take the Office of Rule, out
of the Grown, and cry Hail King to the Multitude? Neither Nature, nor Reason,
can Digest the turning of the Ordinance of Power, Topsy-Turvy: And the Case is
not Appetite, (as he says) but Duty. Let Convictions be never so Broad, the
Proper Judge of 'em is the Person that God has appointed to Judge of 'em; and
the Slandering of Gods Anointed, on the One hand, is Worse then the very
Supposed Maladministration, on the Other. The People are Happy where a Prince
Governs Well: But still in Case, even of a Mis-Government, there is No Remedy,
but what is Worse then the Disease.

Toward the Close of This Paragraph, he draws an Inference from the Dissenters
Behavior under Past Fears and Jealousies, to their Behavior under Fears and
Jealousies, at Present. Now if he had taken into This Calculation, an Account
of the Artifices that Raised Those Fears and Jealousies; an Account of the
Design; and the Application of them; the Misery and Desolation, that they
brought upon the King, and Three Kingdoms; he would not have Advised them, I
hope, to the saying of the Same Lesson, and to the doing of the Same Things
over again. And whereas he calls Courage, a Dangerous Virtue, at This
Unseasonable Time; It is the most Daring, and the most Dangerous of All
Courages, that he Himself now Practices; That is to say; the Courage of Reading
such a Lecture to the Common People, as, if they were not Thoroughly Possessed
with a Confidence, and Assurance of their Own Safety, in the Hands where the
Mercy and Providence of God has Placed them, might Endanger the Springing of a
Mine, that would, most Infallibly, Bury the Engineer Himself in the Common
Ruin.

If then for these, Letter.
and a thousand other Reasons, there is cause to suspect, sure your new Friends
are not to Dictate to you, or Advise you. For instance, etc. p. 4.

THE Author is so Intent upon the Matter of his Discourse, Answer.
that I am afraid he has almost forgotten the Title of it. He calls it [A
Letter to a Dissenter, etc.] and He Himself Personates a Church-of-England-man,
in the Manage of it: Now if there be (according to his own reckoning) a
Thousand Reasons and Odd, for the Dissenters Suspecting their New Friends; and
against the Entertaining of these New Friends, for Dictators, and Advisers;
Never any Mortal had a Clearer Cause on it; and These New Friends are not, upon
any Terms, to take upon them to Dictate, and to Advise. Upon This
Joynt-Concession, I have a Civil Question or Two to put to the Magisterial, and
Fore-casting Author of this Letter. First; Is he, in Very Very Deed, a True
Church-of-England-man, according to the Standard of That Communion? If Not, Why
does he tell the Dissenters that he is one? Nay, and I Will Abate him somewhat of
the Heights, and Pontificalibus'es too, into the Bargain. Secondly: Admitting
him to be the Man that he Professes to be, we shall see presently what comes
on it That way too: And so let him even stick to which of the Two He pleases,
either the Church, or the Separation. If he be a Dissenter, Himself, he should
have called his Papers A Letter from a Dissenter to a Dissenter: And in that
Case, It Is Ten to One, he has some Part to Play; Or some such ORDER, I Warrant
ye, as (he was a saying) the Dissenting Ministers have; How to Tread the Stage,
How to Govern themselves; and who knows but he may have [HIGHER DIRECTIONS too]
as well as some Others of his Brethren? Warrants, Commissions, and Instructions
for the Composing of his Words, Countenances, and Designs: Nay, and
Dispensations too, for Dissembling, and Equivocating, according to the Supposed
Case Again, of his Fellow Brethren? If, (as he suggests) All These Things have
been Done, and Acted, in Man's Memory, and may be likewise Supposed to be Done,
and Acted over again; it is the World to a Nut-shell, if he be One of That
Party, that he is likewise One of Those Managers, Himself; And it is not Fair,
to Garry Two Faces under One Hood: For, at this Rate, the whole Business is
Nothing but Person, and Disguise. However, for the Author's Reputation, I would
rather find a Failing in his Argument, then in his Integrity; for if he should
chance to be found a Dissenter, or as a body may say, but a Dissenters Fellow,
it would be enough to bring the Credit of his very History, Matter, Cause, and
Design, in Question, to be taken Halting under a Borron'd Character.

But Allowing him now to be Aliqualiter, (with leave of the Critics) a man of
the Church of England, (though not so Consummated, and Canonical, as a Body
would Wish) he is Manifestly Hampered in his Own Net. For the
Church-of-England-Men are to the Dissenters, upon the Strictness of a Civil
Point, to All Purposes, as New Friends, as the Papists are: That is to say,
according to the Authors Notion, and Intent of This New Friendship. I speak
This ad Hominem. He professes a Good Will, and a Friendship to the Dissenters;
The Papists do the Li^^* and their Friendships bear much the same date. Now
(says he) Your New Friends are to be Suspected; He Himself is in the same
Classis, and as Liable to be suspected, in the Quality of a New Friend, as the
Other. Nay, and a man might yet lay a little more weight upon it; It is a
Separation in Discipline that makes our Dissenter, and it is the Dissent, so
Distinguished and Restrained, that is here the Question: So that the Papist has
no Quarrel to the Dissenter, but as a Member of the Reformation; for in the
Matter of Country, and Allegiance, they do Both fall under the Common CASE of
All the King's Subjects.

The Addresses that fly abroad every Week, Letter.
and Murder us with Another to the same; the first Draughts are made by those
who are not very proper to be Secretaries to the Protestant Religion; and it is
your part only to Write them out fairer again. Strange! that you who have been
formerly so much against Set Forms, should now be content the Priests should
Indite for you. p. 4.

THE Murdering Addresses that are here Complained of, Answer.
in a much more Murdering Letter; are a Certain sort of Murder, that the Law
neither of God, nor of Man, takes any Notice of; and a Murder, that perhaps was
never Heard of, 'till it came to be set up for a Figure, in This Rhetorical
Paper. They fly abroad, it is True; We Read them in the Gazettes; and the Letter
takes upon it self, to set forth by Mysterious Hints, and Intimations, from
what Hands they come too. Now This is Matter of Fact; and where there is No
Evidence Offered, there is No Place for a Disproof. He gives to Understand, as a
Thing of Practice, and Reproach, that the Addressers only Write after the
Dictates, and Copies of Other People; and pleasantly Reproves them for
Admitting Set Forms in These Addresses, (and Set-Forms drawn by Priests too;)
though they will have None in their Public Devotions. Now here is not One
Syllable of the Fact in sight; and the Stress of All, he says, comes to no more
then This; The People do not draw up their Own Addresses; To which I Answer;
that there was never any Body of Addressers, upon the Face of the Earth, that
did not Stand Liable to the same Exception, in having their Addresses Drawn up
for Them: Neither is it so properly the Form of Words; but the Assent, and the
Subscription, that makes the Address: And it is enough for the People to O^n,
and Sign the Matter of the Address; without any Pretense to a Hand in the
Wording of it. I do insist a little the more upon the Privelege of a Commoner
of England, to have him Excused from writing his own Addresses, because it may
so fall out, that very Honest Man's Skill in Letters, may go no further,
perhaps, then the Bare Writing of his Name, or the making of his Mark: Beside,
that a Body does not know the Danger of such a President, if our Author should
Carry this Point: For the very same Exception will hold against him upon a Suit
in Chancery, because, forsooth, his Bill, or Answer, was not of his Own Drawing.

The nature of Thanks is an unavoidable consequence of being Pleased or
Obliged; Letter.
they grow in the Heart, and from thence show themselves either in Looks,
Speech, Writing, or Action: No man wa^^ever Thankful because he was bid to be
so, but because he had, or thought he had some Reason for it. If then there is
cause in this Case to pay such extravagant Acknowledgments, they will flow
naturally, without taking such pains to procure them; and it is unkindly done,
to tire all the Posthorses with carrying Circular Letters to solicit that
which would be done without any trouble or constraint: If it is really in it
self such a Favor, what needs so much pressing men to be Thankful, and with
such eager circumstances, that where Persuasions cannot delude, Threatenings are
employed to fright them into a Compliance? Thanks must be voluntary, not only
unconstrained, but unsollicited, else they are either Trifles or Snares, they
either signify nothing, or a great deal more then is intended by those that
give them. p. 5.

THe Author comes now to Enlarge himself upon the Text of Thanksgiving; Answer.
but he forgets, I fear, that there are Thanks of Good-Manners, and Respect, as
well as of Passion; Thanks for Protection in the Enjoyment, and Possession of
Benefits, as well as for Actual Bounties in the Collation of them. Many stand
in need to be Taught to be Thankful, which he calls [Bidding] to be so, and
they had never Thought on it perhaps, if they had not been Admonished so to be.
As to the [Such Extravagant Acknowledgments] which he speaks of; I do neither
Understand, the [Such] nor the [Extravagant;] Unless he Means, that in the
Testimonials of the Peoples Loyalty and Affections to his Majesty, as they are
set forth in so many Addresses, [the Play is not worth the Candle.] His Conceit
of Tiring Posthorses, is an Allegation, without any Proof, or so much as
Probability to Back it: But I hope, if it were True, he would have the Charity
to Allow the Government (for That Is the Innuendo of it) a Liberty to do the
same Thing which he Practices Himself. For (to his Honor be it spoken) never
any Man, perhaps, made more Work for Posthorses, with Two or Three Sheets of
Paper, then the Author has done with This Letter; And never any Letter perhaps,
was more Universally Circular, then This has been. And to What End, but to
Solicit, to Persuade, to Threaten, to Fright People (These are his own Words)
into a Compliance with his Dictates. He is against Pressing Men to be Thankful.
Nhw Gratitude is a Duty, both toward God, and our Neighbor: And certainly, a
Duty, that may be Pressed, and Inculcated in the Moral Offices of a Civil Life,
as well as in the Chair, or the Pulpit. To make an End of This Clause, Either
he is gone off from his Text of Thankful Addresses, or else he does a Worse
Thing in making either Trifles, or Snares of Those Applications; which, in
Common Justice, and Modesty ought to receive a Fairer Construction.

If an Inference should be made, Letter.
That whosoever Thanketh the King for his Declaration, is by that engaged to
Justify it in point of Law; it is a greater Stride than, I presume, all those
care to make who are persuaded to Address, etc. p. 5.

IT must not be Forgotten, Answer.
that though the Author of the Letter has Changed his Battery, from Invention
to Rhetorique, from Rhetorique to Calumny; and, now at last, from Calumny to
Law; That he is still Constant to his First Design, and to the Two Main
Topiques, viz. of the King's Declaration of Indulgence, and of the Addresses
that have followed upon it: But Whether for Decency, Affection, or Good
Company, it Matters not to Our Present Business. He enters upon his Subject,
with a kind of an Exposition, Ex post facto, of the Addressers Meaning; After
the Addresses were Presented; and without much Regard to What they thought,
either Before, or upon the Spot, at the very Presenting of them. This is much
after the President of the Protestation of Forty. First they made the People
Take it; and when they had once gotten it down, the Imposers Published a
Comment upon the Meaning of it. The First Step that he Advances toward his
Law-Point, comes within a Hair's Breadth of Pronouncing the King's Declaration
to be a Nullity. But he brings it In, with an [IF,] and an [I PRESUME] And What
does he Presume? but that All the Addressers, are either Fools or Knaves, in
either Taking, or in Addressing Thanks, for that which they think in their
Consciences, the King has No Power to Give. If he can sink the Reputation of
the King's Power, and Prerogative, the Whole work is done at a Stroke. But he
is Resolved, to have, at least, Two Strings to his Bow, and to Try what is to be
done upon the Passions of the People, if he Cannot Captivate their
Understandings. And so he sets himself to the Driving of Another Nail.

If it shall be supposed, Letter.
that all the Thankers will be Repealers of the Test, whenever a Parliament
shall meet; such an Expectation is better prevented before, then disappointed
afterward; and the surest way to avoid the lying under such a Scandal, is, not
to do any thing that may give a Color to the Mistake. P. 5.

HIs First Attempt is to Invalidate the Kings Declaration it self; Answer.
and if he cannot Carry the Law-Point, he is now a Trying what he can do upon
the Poll, toward the Frustrating and Poisoning of it in the Operation and
Effect, upon the Meeting of Another Parliament. If it shall be supposed (says
he) that all the Thankers will be Repealers, etc. It Is Better Prevented, then
Disappointed: As who should say, Let the Next Choice be made according to our
Authors Measures, and the Members must be neither Church-of-England-Men, nor
Papists, nor Dissenters, but a sort of Amphibious Republicans, according to
This Letter-Model, and the Government will be, then, most blessedly brought to
Bed of a Representative Wisdom.

These Bespoken Thanks are little less improper then Love Letters that were
solicited by the Lady to whom they are to be directed: Letter.
so that besides the little Ground there is to give them, the manner of getting
them, does extremely lessen their Valne. P. 5.

HE will not allow [Bespoken Thanks] in This Case, Answer.
or in This Manner, to have either Ground or Value. If there be such a Fatality
in the Matter, that there is No keeping the Author of the Letter out of
Harms-way, I had much rather that he should fall upon his Own Weapon, then by
Any Malicious Practice, or Address of Mine: So that for a Dish of Coffee, These
Thanks shall be BESPOKEN, or NOT Bespoken, whether of the Two He pleases: For
they are never the More, or the Less due, for Being, or Not Being, either the
One, or the Other: And if they be Due, with a respect to the Person, to the
Occasion, to the Prudence, Good Manners, or to Twenty other Circumstances that
Enter into Offices of This Quality, it is Enough, to give them both Ground and
Value. The King speaks to All his People, in This Declaration, and are they too
Stout to make him a Leg for it? He speaks Kindly to them too; and shall That
Gracious Goodness not receive so much as an Acknowledgment? He does it at a
Time too, when Peoples Hearts, and Heads, are Tampered with Jealousies, for
fear of Popery, and Arbitrary Power; when the very Season Elevates the
Character of the Mercy; And is All This to pass for Nothing now, in Our Authors
Opinion? [Set your Souls at rest, Every Man, and Every Sort of You; for your
Freedoms, your Lives, and your Religions Are, and shall be secure, Under My
Government, and Protection.] If His Majesty had done any Particular Person,
apart, the Honor to Single him out for such an Instance, or Declaration of his
Tenderness, and Bounty, what a Brutality would it have been Accounted, to have
failed of a Return of Submission, and Acknowledgment, suitable to the Dignity
of the Descension. And are not All the Kings Subjects under the Same Tie of
Gratitude, when His Majesty speaks to them All Together, as Every Man of them
would have been, Severally, and One by One?

Neither is it, in Truth, Only the [BESPOKEN Thanks,] at last, that lies so
Hard in our Author's Stomach; for This Letter of His will not Brook Any Thanks
at all; And his Aversion lies to the very Duty of Thanksgiving: But however,
our Late Tumults, Insurrections, and Rebellions, well Weighed, and Considered,
are, Themselves, a sufficient Ground for BESPOKEN Thanks; Not only in Wisdom,
and in Justice, but in Mercy too: It Is Worth the Experiment to Try an
Obstinate, and a Preverse Age, whether Liberty will Quiet it or no: How far it
will be Sensible of a Royal Clemency. A Prince that is wholly made up of
Generosity, and Goodness; Let him have never so Great a Mind to Exercise it,
cannot, in some Instances, find an Honorable Place for it: And in Those Cases,
it is no Departure from the Glory of his Sacred Function, not only to Bespeak,
but to Solicit Thanks, and Dutiful Applications; which sounds no more, upon a
Candid Interpretation, then if he should have made Interest, and Friends, to
Prevail upon his Own Subjects, that they would but Qualify themselves as Fit
Objects of their Princes Care and Protection, and put their Sovereign into a
Capacity of making them Happy. And so forth.

It might be wished that you would have suppressed your Impatience, Letter.
and have been content for the sake of Religion to enjoy it within your selves,
without the Liberty of a Public Exercise, 'till a Parliament had allowed it;
but since that could not be, and that the Artifices of some amongst you have
made use of the Well-meant-Zeal of the Generality to draw them into this
Mistake; I am so far from blaming you with that Sharpness, which, perhaps, the
Matter in Strictness would bear, that I am ready to Err on the side of the more
Gentle Construction. P. 5.

WE have been upon the Subject of Mercy, Answer.
and in the Turning of a Hand, our Author has here, of his own Proper Motion,
Issued out a General Act of Indemnity to the Dissenters. They have been Fooled,
he says, [by the Artifices of some amongst them] but for [Well-meant Zeal] sake
he is Content to Pass it Over. He seems a little Troubled at their Acceptance
of Liberty, upon the Terms of the Kings Declaration; for they might have kept
on their Conventicles [within Themselves] he says, till the Parliament should
have Eased 'em. From whence, I Gather This Doctrine; that the Gentleman is
Heart and Hand for the Dissenters Breaking of the Laws, though he is against
the Kings Dispensing with them.

There is a great Difference between enjoying quietly the Advantages of an Act,
Letter.
irregularly done by others, and the going about to support it against the Laws
in Being: the Law is so Sacred, that no Trespass against it is to be defended:
Yet Frailties may in some Measure be excused when they cannot be justified. p.
5.

HEre is an Admirable Title set a-foot, Answer.
to the Lawful Enjoyment of Crown, and Church Lands, under Oliver. But if he
speaks of the Declaration of Test; the Laws in Being would be of no Force at
all, if that Law of Test should Prove Repugnant to the Law of God. I do not say
that it Is so; but if it should be found to Be so, our Author's Positive
Judgment for the Obligation of the Laws in Being, would be one of Those General
Rules that in Tract of Time, Practice, and Experiment, would meet with a
Thousand Exceptions. The Law of the Land is Sacred, and so is the Law of the
Prerogative, which is the Law of the Land as well as the Other, and nothing
ought to be Called a Trespass against a Humane Law, that is Authorized by the
Indispensable Equity of a Law Divine.

There are several Snatches in This Paper, that are either Founded, or Pretend
to be Founded upon the Resolution, and Obligation of Laws. I shall spend my
Thoughts too much upon Fractions, to take them One by One, as they fall in my
way; but I shall even do as a Country Gentleman did at an Ordinary. The Company
was set round the Table, Waiting for Dinner; and in the Interim, some
Particular Acquaintances Entertained the Time with Toying, and Throwing Crumbs
of Bread One at Another: My Country Gentleman, that knew not so much as One
Face at the Table, Picked his Man, and fell to the same Sport too: The Other
took it up still, and Threw it over his Shoulder: But at last very civilly told
him, Sir, (says he) I beseech you, will you keep your Account, and when it
comes to a Loaf, you shall have it All together. I must Now desire My Author to
give me Credit too, 'till it comes to a Loaf, and I shall Then give him what I
have to say upon This Subject All at Once.

The Desire of enjoying a Liberty from which Men have been so long restrained,
Letter.
may be a Temptation that their Reason is not at all times able to resist. If
in such a Case some Objections are leap't over, indifferent Men will be more
inclined to lament the Occasion, then to fall too hard upon the Fault, whilst
it is covered with the Apology of a good Intention. But, etc. P. 5.

HEre is a very Friendly Apology for an Allmost-Irresistible Temptation. Answer.
The Author is of Counsel for the Defendent; and makes a Case of Equity on it,
to set the Fault against the Occasion. The Desire of Liberty might have been a
Plea for the Forbidden Fruit too. And now for Leaping over Objections, our
Author has showed himself as Good at it as any Dissenter of 'em All; For he has
been pleased to Exercise a Liberty in These Sheets, not only without any
Visible Temptation, but Against Any Visible Reason for so doing: But he is his
own Confessor, and Absolves Himself upon This Unaccountable Doctrine, that [The
Apology of a Good Intention Covers the Fault;] Which makes Every Man a Judge in
his Own Cause.

Where, Letter.
to Rescue your selves from the Severity of One Law, you give a Blow to All the
Laws, by which your Religion and Liberty are to be protected, and instead of
silently receiving the Benefit of this Indulgence, you set up for Advocates to
support it. You become Voluntary Aggressors, and look like Counsel retained by
the Prerogative against your Old Friend Magna Charta, who has done nothing to
deserve her falling thus under your Displeasure. P. 5.

IF the Supporting of this Indulgence be the setting of the Prerogative, Answer.
and Magna Charta together by the Ears; and that His Majesty has, in This Act,
Usurped upon the Laws of the Land, and the Liberties of the People; What Court
of Judicature will the Author of This Calumny fly to with his Appeal? Or what
is This Suggestion Less then an Arrow shot at the Heart of the Supreme
Magistrate; how speciously soever drawn by the Arm of a Pretended Patriot? It Is
well enough, ad Populum, to talk of the Dissenters giving a Blow to All the
Laws that Protect them, by Endeavoring a Rescue from One Law that Offends
them: But in Substance, and Effect, there is no more in it then the Cadence of a
Well-Turn'd Period. To take the Matter Aright; it is not the Law that Protects
Us (for Laws have neither Hands, nor Feet) but an Overruling Power that
Manages, Protects, and Actuates That Law. The Law is a Rule, it is True, to such
or such a Form, or Frame, of This or That Government: But it is yet No Further
a Rule, then as it Squares with the Divine, and Fundamental Rules of Government
it self; of which Rules and Measures, tho Supreme Magistrate is the Only
Moderator, and Judge.

If the Case then should be that the Price expected from you for this Liberty,
Letter.
is giving up your Right in the Laws, sure you will think Twice before you go
any further in such a Losing Bargain. P. 6.

IT will not be Denied that the Subject has a Right in the Benefit of the Laws;
but he has none at all Undoubtedly in the Interpretation, or the Administration
of them: So that our Authors Case, in This Expostulation is (Right or Wrong) an
Usurpation upon the Province of his Superiors; for there is no longer any Order,
or Reason, in the Works and Offices of Providence, and Nature, when Authority
and Subjection shall come to be Inverted, or Confounded. He seems extremely
Tender on the Behalf of the Dissenters, for fear they should give up their
Birthrights in a Composition for their Liberty. This is it which he calls
[their Right in the Laws;] but he hopes they will be Better Advised first. Here
is an Imperial Prerogative overruled by a Pamphlet; A Cause given against the
King by John-a-Styles; and First or Last, a whole Systeme of Republican
Consequences, Built upon it; and it is upon a Point too, that perhaps was never
Controverted till now, in any Settled State, and upon This Bottom. It is a Right
of the Crown Common to All Governments in the World, and so Essential to the
Maintaining of a Civil Polity, in Peace and Security, that No State can Subsist
without it: And Consequently, No Act of State can take it away. In one Word, I
speak of the Power of Calling, Forbidding, Continuing, or Dissolving Public
Assemblies. And the Exercise of That Power is the Point in Question upon This
Declaration: And without This Power he can neither Defend Himself, nor Protect
his People; neither Punish the Guilty, not secure the Innocent; Nor finally,
Discharge the most Necessary Duties of State and Justice.

After giving Thanks for the Breach of One Law, Letter.
you lose the Right of Complaining of the Breach of all the rest; You will not
very well know how to defend your selves when pressed; and having given up the
Question when it was for your Advantage, you cannot recall it when it shall be
to your Prejudice. P. 6.

HE takes the Case all the way for Granted, Answer.
and so Proceeds upon the Presupposal of an Imaginary Breach, and Right. He
makes a Mighty Business of the Peoples giving up That which they never Had, and
of their Losing Certain Privileges in the Future, that they have No Pretense
to: And, after All, not one Color of a Reason offered, why Sentence should not
be given against him. If it be Clear, that the People have Not This Right,
truly, to My Thinking, he Ventures his Person, and his Reputation upon a
Dangerous Position: Or what if a Man, for Arguments sake, should Yield, that
the People Have such a Right, the Authors Hand is yet in the Wrong Box, to
Commence a Suit against His Majesty in No Bodies Name; In a CIRCULAR LETTER
thus, and No Day, or Place set for a Hearing. Briefly, If there were no More
in it, the very Manner of the Proceeding would be enough to turn Justice it
self, Thus Communicated, into a Libel. To come now to the Merits of the
Question: There Is First, a Claim set a-foot without Any Foundation. 2ly. A
Right Supposed, and the Cause utterly Spoiled by Ill Management: But what if a
Body should give him his Uttermost Demands now; and take the Matter De bone
esse, as He Himself has set it forth: That is to say, Suppose his Challenge to
be Good; The Proceeding, Regular, and Modest; and the Subjects Right; in
Strictness of Law, as Clear, and as Vndubitable as He Affirms it to be; He will
find himself in a Worse Condition perchance This way, then he was Before: For
if Subjects will be standing upon their Terms; and by Vying Privileges against
Privileges with their Sovereign, Provoke him to Return Strictnesses for
Strictnesses upon them, by way of Reprizal; Our Author, I fear, is not Aware of
the Certain Consequences of such a Contest; If the KING shall come to take All
Advantages against the Subject, on the other hand, that the Rigor, and the
Letter of the Law will Allow him.

If you will set up at one time a Power to help you, Letter.
which at another time by parity of Reason shall be made use of to destroy you,
you will neither be pitied, nor relieved against a Mischief you draw upon your
selves, by being so UNREASONABLY Thankful. It is like calling in Auxiliaries to
help, who are strong enough to subdue you: In such a case your Complaints will
come too late to be heard, and your Sufferings will raise Mirth instead of
Compassion. p. 6.

Here Is the Supposition of a Power set up, Answer.
to Help the Dissenters, that shall be made use of to their Destruction: Now
say I on the Other Hand, that the Power here pretended to be set up, is a Power
over and over Recognized already; A Power Inherent in the Crown, and a Power
Inseparable from it: The English of his Caution, that they should not set it
up, Imports, the bidding of them to Disown it; and more then Insinuates the
Antimonarchical Doctrine of making the King's Power to be Radically in the
People: But here is a Bugbear started, and all long of themselves, it seems, for
being so [UNREASONABLY Thank full.] The King Grants them an Indulgence; They
Thank him for it; and That Unreasonable Thankfullness (says our Author) will be
their Ruin. I hope he does not mean the King, by that Destroying Power, though
I do not see any way in the World to keep his Majesty Clear of That Innuendo:
And Briefly; the Edge Strikes the Same Way thorough the Whole Course of the
Paper.

If you think, Letter.
for your excuse, to expound your Thanks so as to restrain them to this
particular case, others, for their ends, will extend them further; and in these
differing Interpretations, that which is backed by Authority will be the most
likely to prevail; especially when by the advantage you have given them, they
have in truth the better of the Argument; and that the Inferences from your own
Concessions are very strong, and express against you. This is so far from being
a groundless Supposition, that there was a late instance of it, in the last
Session of Parliament, in the House of Lords, where the first Thanks, though
things of course, were interpreted to be the Approbation of the King's whole
Speech, and a Restraint from the further examination of any part of it, though
never so much disliked; and it was with difficulty obtained, not to be excluded
from the liberty of objecting to this mighty Prerogative of Dispensing, merely
by this innocent and usual piece of good Manners, by which no such thing could
possibly be intended. p. 6.

I Find little more in This Paragraph, Answer.
(or in This Page, I might have said) then a Rhetorical Reading upon the Virtue
of INGRATITUDE;] and how Mortal a Sin it is, under the Highest Obligations to a
Prince, for Subjects to be THANKFUL. The Great Danger, and Inconvenience, that
appears in This Section, is the hazard of Misconstruction, for fear a man that
gives Thanks for Chalk, should be thought to give Thanks for Cheese. Now it was
my Opinion, that a man might be as Explicit in his Thanks, as upon Any Other
Subject; and if This Banter passes, I am Absolutely for keeping my Hands in my
Pocket, and my Tongue betwixt my Teeth, in my Own Defense: for if a body either
Speaks, or Writes, and Authority should make Treason on it, it might be as much
as a man's Life's Worth. His Instance of a Case last Session of Parliament, in
the House of Lords, is a Point too Hot for Me to Meddle with. But I may
venture yet without the Risque, I hope, of a Scandalum Magnatum, to take
Notice, of the Author's saying that the King's Speech was DISLIKED; A Term,
that I presume, he had no Commission for: And then for his Irony upon the
[MIGHTY Prerogative of Dispensing] it is a Flower not to be Passed over without
an Emphasis. In One Word more; it is a Wonderful Thing, that our Author's Head
should run so much upon the Differing Interpretations that would be Passed upon
his UNREASONABLE Thankfullness, in such a Case as This; and never so much as
Dream of the Constructions that would be made on the Other Hand, ^or
(certainly) a more Unreasonable Vnthankfullness.

This shows, Letter.
that some bounds are to be put to your good Breeding, and that the
Constitution of England is too valuable a thing to be ventured upon a
Complement. Now that for some time you have enjoyed the benefit of the End, it
is time for you to look into the Danger of the Means: The same Reason that made
you desirous to get Liberty, must make you solicitous to preserve it: so that
the next thought will naturally be, not to engage your self beyond Retreat, and
to agree so far with the Principles of all Religions, as not to rely upon a
Death bed Repentance. p. 6.

THis Paragraph, Answer.
does in some Measure make good the Suggestion of the Next before, concerning
the Danger of [Differing Interpretations;] for I cannot fully make out the
Secret of the Author's Meaning about [the Principles of All Religions,] and [a
Deathbed Repentance;] unless he intends by it, so Comprehensional a Charity,
that All Christians, in what Latitude soever, may go to Heaven, Hand in Hand,
in the way of a Holy Commonwealth. He would not have the Constitution of
England (according to his Popular Understanding of it) Complemented away, out
of Good Breeding; Neither would I have That Constitution, according to the
Legal, and Monarchical Frame of it, Coursly dealt withal, Calumniated, and
Disparaged, out of Ill-Breeding. He gives Advice about the Benefit of the End,
and the Danger of the Means; and so Conveys a Title over to the People, of
Entering into a kind of Joint Commission with his Majesty, for the Managing of
Public Affairs, and for Obviating the Political Consequences of Things. Take
him, in short, quite thorough, and he shows himself Directly an Advocate for a
Popular Liberty, without so much as One Salvo for the Rights of the Crown.

There are certain Periods of time, Letter.
which being once past, make all Cautions ineffectual, and all Remedies
desperate. Our Understandings are apt to be hurried on by the first heats;
which if not restrained in time, do not give us leave to look back, till it is
too late. Consider this in the Case of your Anger against the Church of
England, and take warning by their Mistake in the same kind, when after the
late King's Restoration, they preserved so long the bitter taste of your rough
usage to them in other times, that it made them forget their Interest, and
sacrifice it to their Revenge. p. 6. and 7.

Here Is a kind of a Predestinarian Foundation, Answer.
with Certain Philosophical, Political, and Historical Meditations, and
Reflections upon it. The Time Presses, and when it is too Late, it is too Late;
which is a Pithy way of Speaking a Great deal in a Little. His Council to the
Dissenters, of Moderation toward the Church of England, is Good and Seasonable;
but least the Church of England should grow Proud of being so much in our
Author's Good Graces, he gives her a Box of the Ear at the very Next Word, that
makes her Stagger again; and in the Same Period, makes as Arrant a Jilt of his
Beloved Clyent, as ever he did of the Whore of Babylon. Take Warning, says he,
by the Church-of-England's Mistake; And what was that Mistake (in his Opinion,
at last) but an Impotent Folly, and a Diabolical Revenge? So that, to the
Scandal of our Author's Profession; he has set up Two Churches of England; The
One of them a Desperate, Hair-brained, Vindictive Wretch, as He would Represent
Her; The Other, a Good, Peacemaking Gentlewoman; Whereof He Himself takes upon
him to be a Son, and a Member. And now to show that he is all of a piece; and
as Faithful an Historian, as a Canonical Church-of-England-Man; Nothing can
ever so Effectually Terminate THis Dispute, as the Issue of the Conference at
the Savoy, (soon after his Majesty's late Return) toward a General
Accommodation. I forget Names; But they Brake, upon This Point: Because the
King's Commissioners would not agree [That the Enjoying of Things Lawful, by
Lawful Authority, if they may by Accident, be the Occasion of Sin, is Sinful.]
His Majesty, for the Purpose, bids the Asserter of that Doctrine, Light him a
Candle: No; (says he) if it should happen to be Blown out, and give Offense,
some bodies Throat may come to be Cut upon it. This is it now, that our Author
calls The Church of England's Sacrificing their Interest, to their Revenge;
because they would not Agree to a Principle, Absolutely Destructive of Human
Society.

Either you will blame this Proceeding in them, Letter.
and for that Reason not follow it; or if you allow it, you have no reason to
be offended with them: So that you must either dismiss your Anger, or lose your
Excuse, except you should argue more partially, then will be supposed of Men of
your Morality, and Understanding. p. 7.

This Method of Reasoning is just as if a Man should Raise a Building upon a
Foundation of Blown Bladders; Answer.
where there is nothing but Wind, and Blast, to Support the Fabric. He runs
away with the Fact, for Granted; Dilemma's upon it, and so leaves the Matter in
the Hands of Men of Morality, and Understanding.

If you had now to do with those Rigid Prelates, who made it a matter of
Conscience to give you the least Indulgence, Letter.
and even to your more reasonable Scruples continued stiff and inexorable, the
Argument might be fairer on your side; but since the common Danger has so land
open that Mistake, that all the former Haughtiness toward you is for ever
extinguished; and that it has turned the Spirit of Persecution, into a Spirit
of Peace, Charity, and Condescension; shall this happy Change only affect the
Church of England? And are you so in love with separation, as not to be moved
by this Example? It ought to be followed, were there no other Reason then that
it is a Virtue; but when besides that, it is become necessary to your
Preservation, it is impossible to fail the having its Effect upon you.

This Party-per-Pale-Humour, Answer.
runs to the Tune of the Old Song: [And no body else shall Plunder but I;] For
the Quarrel does not lie to the Dissenters so much for any Animosity of Theirs
toward the Church of England, but for breaking in upon our Author's Patent of
Sole Privilege for the Abusing of them Himself. There was a Time, it is True,
when Prelates, (says he) were Rigid, Uncharitable, Unreasonable, Stiff, and
Inexorable, Haughty, and under the Power of the Spirit of Persecution, etc. But
All is turned now it seems [into a Spirit of Peace, Charity, and Condescension]
(Quere if it should not have been, Comprehension) As witness the Pacifick
Genius, and Tenderness of the Author here, and his Paper. Is the Church of
England so Reformed, (the Letter's Church of England, that is) and will none of
You, my Masters, come in, to take your Parts in the Blessing? Are you so in
love with Separation, that when We come down to You, you will be running away
from Us? (For That Is the Meaning on it.) It Is your Interest as well as your
Virtue, to Associate: And what is All This now, but the Downright Project of
Uniting into a Republique?

If it should be said, that the Church of England is never Humble, but when she
is out of Power, and therefore loses the Right of being believed when she
pretends to it: Letter.
The Answer is, First, it would be an Uncharitable Objection, and very much
miss-timed: An Unseasonable Triumph, not only Vngenerous, but Unsafe: So that
in These Respects, it cannot be Urged without Scandal, even though it could be
said with Truth. Secondly, This is not so in Fact, and the Argument must fall,
being built upon a false foundation; for whatever may be told you, at this very
Hour, and in the Heat, and Glare of your present Sunshine, the Church of
England can in a Moment bring Clouds again, and turn the Royal Thunder upon
your Heads; Blow you off the Stage with a Breath, if she would give but a
Smile, or a kind Word; the least Glimpse of her Compliance, would throw you
back into the State of Suffering, and draw upon you all the Arrears of
Severity, which have accrued during the time of this Kindness to you; and yet
the Church of England, with all her Faults, will not allow her self to be
rescued by such unjustifiable means, but chooses to bear the Weight of Power,
rather then lie under the Burden of being Criminal. p. 7, 8.

WE have here as Lewd a Charactor given (betwixt Hawk and Buzzard) of the True
Church of England from the Pen of a Pretended Church-of-England-Man, Answer.
as the Concurring Wit, and Spite of the Greatest Enemy she has upon the Face
of the Earth, could put together. Her Humility is made the Effect of her
Impotence; and therefore there is No Believing of her, (says the Comment.) But
then (says the Author Handy Dandy) That Is a little Uncharitable, and
Miss-timed; and it is neither Generous, nor Safe: So that at This Season it
could hardly be said without Scandal, tho among Friends, no more perhaps then
Truth; But then he Rubs up the Dissenters again, with a Politic Flint, that
the Church of England (Meaning ^his Church of England still) is not so Low, yet
neither, as People Imagine; and that she Could in the next Moment, Command
Clouds and Thunder; Turn Heaven and Earth Topsy-Turvj with [but a Smile, or a
Kind Word:] But Our Author's Church of England scorns to be Rescued by such
Vnjustifiable Means; (as giving the King Thanks;) and will rather bear the
Weight of Power, then the Burden of being Criminal; which is all one, as to
say, Let the King do what he will, he shall never make us Crouch, either to his
Authority, or his Power; like a Company of Sneaking, Sniveling, Loyal, Thankful
Rogues. But have His Church-of-England-Men a Power to do All This? (as he says)
Why then they have the Power to make the King Break his Word, and to Stop the
Sun in his Course. In fine, his Majesty's Faith, Honor, and Government, at the
rate of these Hussing Challenges, lie all at Mercy.

It cannot be said that she is Vnprovoked; Letter.
Books and Letters come out every Day to call for Answers, yet she will not be
stirred. From the supposed Authors and the Style, one would swear they were
Undertakers, and had made a Contract to fall at with the Church of England.
There are ^^shes in every Address; Challenges to (...) the Pen, in every
Pamphlet: In short, the fairest Occasions in the W^^ld (...) Quarrel; but she
wisely distinguishes between the Body of Dissenters, (...) will suppose to
Act, as they do, with no ill Intent; and these small (...) and sent out to
Picqueer, and to begin a Fray amongst the Protestants for the Entortainment as
well as the Advantage of the Church of Rome. p. 8.

THat there are Provoking Books, Answer.
and Letters, that Call for, and that Answer* is a Point readilly agreed upon
on My Part; and our Author will, I hope, upon Second Thoughts admit This letter
of his to be One of the Number: Nay, and the Writers, and the Managers of some
of those Pamphlets look like (...), or Sharpers, that make it their Trade to
start Quarrels, and then Scour away with a Hat, or a Cloak in the Interim. I
have seen several Addresses too, that seem to Extend Liberty of Worship to
Liberty of Reproach; and that think they Cann^^ Bless God sufficiently on the
One hand, without Treading upon their Neighbors (...), on the Other, There Is
no Denying of This* and what is the Issue at last, but that the True Church of
England Suffers for the Faults of our Authors Church of England, Falsely so
Called?

This Conduct is so good, Letter
that it will be scandalous not to applaud it. It is not equal dealing, to
blame our Adversaries for doing Ill, and not commend them when they do Well. p.
8.

SVbmission, Patience, and Resignation, Answer.
are Virtues, Undoubtedly, that Deserve Applause, and the Impartial
Distribution of Reward or Punishment, for Well, or Evil-doing, is but Writing
after the Copy of the Divine Justice: But then we must not call Evil, Good; nor
Good, Evil. Let us have no Stealing of Crowns in Canorica Habits; No doing of
Ill Things under False Names; No Writing of Letters to Disturb Government; to
Dishonor a Nation, as well as to Reproach any Religions Profession; And after
All These Contradictions to the Doctrine and Practices of the Apostolical
Church of England, let us have No Casting a Canonical Role over the Shoulders of
an Impostor, and leave the Tailor to Answer for the Character.

To hate them because they persecuted, Letter.
and not to be reconciled to them when they are ready to suffer, rather then
receive all the Advantages that can be gained by a Criminal Compliance, is a
Principle no sort of Christians can Own, since it would give an Objection to
them not to be Answered. p. 8.

THe Author sets up here for a Sufferer* Answer.
What would the World think of him now, if his Name should come to be found
among the Persecutors! Not among the Persecutors of the Dissenters; which he
(most Un son-like) Reflects upon in This Clause; but among the Persecutors,
even of Those pretended Persecutors Themselves! I Charge him with Nothing; for
I do not know him; but he takes a kind of a Wrigling Biass in this Letter, as
if he were Creeping into his Mother's Bells again. The Criminal Compliance, is
only the Conscientious Duty of Acknowledging His Majesty's Authority; which is
a Characteristical Diserimination, betwixt the Ligitimate, and the Illegitimate
Sons of the Church of England.

Think a little, Letter.
who they were that promoted your former Perseuetions, and then consider how it
will look to be angry with the Instruments, and at the same time to make a
League with the Authors of your Sufferings.

TO put this into English now; Answer.
the Papists were the Promoters, and the Protestants the Instruments of the
Dissenters Former Persecutions: And will you now make a League, says he, with
the Authors of your Sufferings? This is only a Paraphrase upon Otes's Epistle
before his Narrative; and a Story, so quite out of date, that a Man would as
soon put Pen to Paper, in Answer to a Canterbury Tale.

1. Have you enough considered what will be expected from you? Are you ready to
stand in every Borough by Virtue of a Conge d'essire, Letter.
and instead of Election, be satisfied, if you are returned? p. 8.

2. Will you in Parliament, justify the Dispensing Power, with all its
Consequences, and repeal the Test, by which you will make way for the Repeal of
All the Laws that were made to perserve your Religion, and to Enact others that
shall Destroy it?

3. Are you disposed to change the Liberty of Debate, into the Merit of
Obedience, and to be made Instruments to Repeal or Enact Laws, when the Roman
Consistory are Lords of the Articles?

4. Are you so linked with your New Friends, as to reject any Indulgence a
Parliament shall offer you, if it shall not be so Comprehensive as to include
the Papists in it? p. 8.

TO take these Four Heads as they lie: Answer.
The First Implies a Direct Practice, and Confederacy, both In, and With the
Sheriffs.

The Second Anticipates the Question, and Precludes the Freedom of a
Parliamentary Debate: It makes the Common People, Judges of State-Consequences,
and subjects the Wisdom, and Justice of the Government to the Censure of the
Multitude: Neither is the Test, so Sacred, as not to be liable to the Common
Conditions, and Limitations, that are Annexed to All Other Laws.

3ly. What is This Contemptuous Insinuation, but an Enflaming Bitterness,
Mockery, and Scorn, to the Highest Degree; while the Kings Declaration is made
the Ground of the Calumny, and the Incentive to it?

4ly. This is, as who should say, [Leave it to the Parliament to set you at
Liberty, but be sure you have nothing to do with the Kings Declaration; nor
with Any Indulgence, that shall include the Papists for Company.]

Consider that the employed Conditions of your new Treaty are no less, Letter.
then that you are to do every thing you are desired, without examining, and
that for this pretended Liberty of Conscience, your real Freedom is to be
Sacrificed: Your former Faults hang like Chains still about you, you are let
loose only upon Bayl; the first Act of Non Compliance, sends you to Jayl
again. p. 8, 9.

Here Is an Extravagance of Figure, Answer.
and Hyperbole, without the force of any Image of Reason, or Truth; but the
Author Bethinks himself what would be the most Provoking Thing in Nature, to be
Said, or Done, under our Circumstances, and then Throws it out to the Mobile,
as the Resolution and Design, of the King and his Ministers.

You may see that the Papists themselves, do not rely upon the Legality of this
Power, which you are to Justify, Letter.
since they being so very earnest to get it established by a Law, and the doing
such very hard things in order, as they think to obtain it, is a clear
Evidence, that they do not think, that the single Power of the Crown is in this
Case a good Foundation; especially when this is done under a Prince, so very
tender of all the Rights of Sovereignty, that he would think it a diminution to
his Prerogative, where he conceives it strong enough to go alone, to call in
the Legislative help to strengthen and support it.

THis Section is a piece of Art, Answer.
that only Differs from the Former Strokes of the same Pen, in that it Lashes
the Government with somewhat a Better Grace. The Pretext is Popular, but bring
it to the Touch, and it vanishes like a Mist before the Sun. The King Suspends,
by his Prerogative; but a Total Repeal, must be the Work of his Majesty in
Parliament; which does not yet hinder the Temporary Virtue of a Temporary
Suspension: But to give the Author his due, he has some sort of Justice, as
well as Wit in his Anger: For after the Crippling of the Prerogative, he
Furnishes a Crutch; and calls in the LEGISLATIVE Help to Support it; and so
drops the Government into a kind of Partnership betwixt King, Lords, and
Commons.

You have formerly blamed the Church of England, Letter.
and not without reason, for going so far as they did in their Compliance; and
yet as soon as they stopped, you see they are not only Deserted, but
Prosecuted: Conclude then from this Example, that you must either break off
your Friendship, or resolve to have no Bounds in it. If they do not succeed in
their Design, they will leave you first; if they do, you must either leave
them, when it will be too late for your Safety, or else after the squeaziness
of starting at a Surplice, you must be forced to swallow Transubstantiation. p.
9.

EIther This is the Fiction of a Case, Answer.
to serve a Present Turn, or it is True in Matter of Fact; but it is Clear,
that the Dissenters mean One Church of England, and that our Author speaks of
Another. But be it as it will, here is no Light of Evidence that I can see; nor
any Stress of Argument. The Charge that was Flat Popery formerly, is now
Dwindled down into a Bare Compliance: But how is This Church Deserted all this
while? How Prosecuted? In the Declaration that is made the Foundation of the
Controversy, it is Expressly Provided for, and Secured; and the Liberty that is
Given to the One side, is not Taken from the Other. But the Author's Church is
Teachy, and Froward; and the Answerer's Church is to bear the Blame on it* I am
at a loss too, at the supposed Stop here; How far did we Go? What was it we
Stuck at? A Body would take it to be some Article of Faith, at least, by the
Weight that is laid upon it; and that we were Halfway to Smithfield already, to
Burn at Stake for it. And what is the Whole Business at last; but Live, and let
Live: Give My People the Exercise of Their Religion, (says the King) and do You
Enjoy your Own: which, in our Case, is certainly a very Charitable, and a
Reasonable Medium. The Rest runs altogether upon State-Calculations; which is
the Worst way of Tampering Peoples Minds, and Spiriting away their Hearts from
their Sovereign, under the Countenance of Political Judgments. These
Fore-boders, are Undoubtedly the most Pernicious of Wizzards, and
Fortune Tellers.

Remember that the other day those of the Church of England were Trimmers for
enduring you, Letter.
and now by a sudden Turn you are become the Favorites: Do not deceive your
selves, it is not the Nature of Lasting Plants thus to shoot up in a Night: You
may look Gay and Green for a little Time, but you want a Root to give you a
Continuance. It is not so long since, as to be forgotten, that the Maxim was,
It is impossible for a Dissenter not to be a REBEL. p. 9.

There Is a Nest of Boxes in This Clause: The Author's Church of England, has a
Comprehension in the Belly of it, Answer.
and That Comprehension is Big again, with a Commonwealth. He makes Trimmer
here, to be a Name of Reproach, cast upon the Church of England, for Enduring
the Dissenters; whereas, the Temporizing Neutrality-Men Took up This Name to
Themselves, upon a Point of Vanity; as who should say; We are the Men that keep
the Beat (or the Government) Even: And, in This very Place, with the Scandal of
a Trimmer in his Mouth, he does the Office of a Trimmer. The Man seems to be
Dreadfully afraid of the Papists; and yet not Half so much, nor in half so
Good Earnest, as I am afraid of the Commonwealths-Men; and there is No way for
the doing of That Jobb, like the Binding up of a Hundred several Religions in
One Comprehension. There may be Good Faith, Conscience, and Moral Honesty, (and
I doubt not, but that in a Considerable Measure, there is so too) in the
Exercise of Every several Persuasion, Apart; but the Uniting of Things
Inconciliable, in One and the same Mass, can be nothing else then a Club of
Confederacy, to do Mischief: Beside, that the Gathering of Bodies, and
Societies together, after This manner, is one of the Peculiars of Sovereign
Power. It Is a strange Thing, how much a Greater Privilege This Unknown Person
Assumes to Himself here upon This Matter, then he will allow the King: And that
it should be so much a Greater Crime, to make the Papists and the Dissenters
Friends, then to Reconcile the Comprehension-Men, and the Dissenters: Nay, with
the Exclusion of a Third Party of his Majesty's Subjects, out of All Terms of
Agreement. He Is a little Dark in this Paragraph; but the Change of One Word
will make him as Clear as Crystal. Instead of [ Tou want a ROOT to give you a
Continuance] read it, [ You want a HEAD to give you a Continuance:] And That Is
the Natural Exposition of This Text.

Consider at this time in France, even the New Converts are so far from being
employed, Letter.
that they are disarmed: Their sudden Change makes them still to be
distrusted, notwithstanding that they are reconciled: What are you to expect
then from your dear Friends, to whom, whenever they shall think fit to throw
you off again, you have in other times given such Arguments for their Excuse?
p. 9.

THe Sense of this Period would have run every Jot as well in These Words.
Answer.
You see how the Protestants, nay, and the very Converts too are used in
France, and you must even Expect to be served with the same Sauce here. What
Color can be Pretended now for This Calumny, after so many Declarations,
Professions, and Instances, Every Day Fresh and Fresh, to the Contrary? But
This is the Fruit of a Restless, and an Insatiable Comprehension-Principle,
that Never in This World thought Any Thing enough, short of All.

Besides all this, You act very unskilfully against your visible Interest, if
you throw away the Advantages, Letter.
of which you can hardly fail in the next probable Revolution. Things tend
naturally to what you would have, if you would let them alone, and not by an
unr^asonable Activity lose the Influences of your good Star which promises you
every thing that is prosperous. p. 9, 10.

WHy This is directly a Calculating of the Kings Nativity, and an
Allmost-Vnheard of way of raising a Use of Consolation, Answer.
to the People, from the King's Mortality, if not the very Hope of his
Majesty's Death.

The Church of England, convinced of its Error in being severe to you; the
Parliament, Letter.
whenever it meets, sure to be gentle to you; the next Heir bred in the
Country which you have so often quoted for a Pattern of Indulgence; a general
Agreement of All Thinking Men, that we must no more cut our selves off from the
Protestants abroad, but rather enlarge the Foundations upon which we are to
build our Defenses against the common Enemy; so that in Truth, all things seem
to conspire to give you Ease and Satisfaction, if by too much have, to
anticipate your good Fortune, you do not destroy it. p. 10.

IF the Poor King (God Bless us All) should take Absolute Will and Pleasure
upon him, Answer.
at the rate of the Vnacountable Author of This Letter; and talk of
Parliaments, as if he had their Necks under his Girdle, there would be no
Living, for Popular Appeals and Letters to Dissenters. Why it is made little
less then Treason against the Majesty of the Multitude for an Imperial Prince,
only to Recommend the Easing of his Subjects of his Own Communion, from the
Legal Scandal, and Imputation of being made Criminals by the Statute; and to
Exempt them from the Civil Snares of Tests, and Penalities, before any Immoral
Crime is committed. Mythinks his Majesty might be Allowed one short Word, For
the Defendent, as well as any Private Letter-Writer a Thousand Against him; and
to Feel the Pulse of a Parliament before hand, what they Intend to do, as well
as the Other, to Direct Pronounce, and Appoint Beforehand, what they Are, and
Ought to do: But Who, o^ What can be Innocent, when it shall be a Crime to be
Thankful? And for a Sovereign Prince, even in a Protestant Cause, to Grant
Liberty to a Protestant Party?

But to take him together now, Here Is the Church, crying Peccavi; Security
given for the Good Behavior of the Next Parliament: And so away for Holland;
[That Pattern of Indulgence;] (Witness their Taxes and Oppressions Innumerable,
as well as Intolerable:) And what is his Business at last, but Treating of
Allyances, (b^ what Authority I know not) and Enlarging the Protestant
Foundations, upon which (he says) we are to Build our Defenses against the
COMMON ENEMY.] His Majesty (God Preserve him) being one of the Number, against
whom, These Defenses are to be Built. His Conclusion is (in Truth) Pithy, and
Pathetical; [Not too fast, my Masters, and your Work will do it self.]

The Protestants have but one Article of Humane Strength, Letter.
to oppose the Power which is now against them, and that is, not to lose the
Advantage of their Numbers, by being so unwary as to let themselves be divided.

HE is All, Answer.
Poltiques here, up to the Hilts: He has Erected a Scheme; Found out a
Propitious Star; Ensur'd upon a Parliament; Proposed an Alliance; Enlarged
Foundations, and he is now come to Muster up his Troops. He finds, upon his
Books, that the Protestants have the Advantage of Numbers: Well! And what are
Those Numbers to do? They are to Oppose the Power which is now Against them:
So! And what is the Power that is Against them? Why the Power of the Papists,
Every Mother's Son of 'em. One and All is the Word; That is to say, You must
not suffer your selves to be divided.

We all agree in our Duty to our Prince; Letter.
Our Objections to his Belief, do not hinder us from seeing his Virtues; and
our not complying with his Religion, has no effect upon our Allegiance; We are
not to be Laug'ed out of our Passive Obedience, and the Doctrine of Non
Resistance, though even those who perhaps owe the best part of their security
to That Principle are apt to make a jest of it. p. 10.

THis is one of the Trimmest Periods we have had yet: Answer.
Men may Agree in their Duty to their Prince, and yet mistake That Duty; And
neither Judge of it, nor Practice it Aright. If by This Duty, he means a Duty
so Qualified, as that is which runs thorough This Paper, the Lord Deliver his
Majesty from his Subjects Agreement in a Duty of That Complexion. A Man may see
his Princes Virtue, without loving him ever the Better for it. And what is it to
say, that the Kings Religion does not Operate upon My Allegiance, when my
Allegiance may be Rotten, as well without it, as with it. A Man may be
Debauched, and Corrupted out of his Passive Obedience, without being Laughed
out of it; And the Practice of Non-Resistance is Deaf to the Doctrine of it. So
that this is All, Fast, or Loose, as he pleases Himself.

So that if we give no Advantage by the fatal mistake of mis-applying our
Anger, by the natural Course of Things, Letter.
this Danger will pass away like a shower of Hail; Fair Weather will succeed,
as lowering as the Sky now looks, and all by this plain and easy Receipt; Let
us be still, quiet, and undivided, firm at the same time to our Religion, our
Loyalty, and our Laws; and so long as we continue this method, it is next to
impossible, that the Odds of Two Hundred to One should lose the Bett; Except
the Church of Rome which has been so long barren of Miracles, should now in
her Declining Age, be brought to Bed of one that should out do the best she can
brag of in her Legend. p. 10.

IF he had but Preached This Doctrine by his Example, Answer.
and Practiced the Counsel that he Gives, he should never have Hampered Himself
in the Difficulties, and Non-Sequiturs of This Discourse. Arger misapplied, is
a Fatal Mistake, he says, and he has given us a Long Letter here, in Proof
on it: But why does he bid us be [Still] and lie Wrangling himself? Why does he
Advise [Quiet] and Create Disquiet? How comes he to Press Unity, and at the
Same Time to raise [Divisions?] Religion, Loyalty, and Laws, are Gay Words; but
they have been Applied, we know, to the License of the most Atheistical,
Rebellious, and Dissolute Times. If his Counsel be General, the Advice of This
Clause Overthrows the Drift, and Contradicts the Design of All that Went
before; for the Papists are excepted out of the Conditions. If he Restrains it
only to the Protestants, What Color of Right can any One Part of his Majesty's
Subjects Pretend to, for the Excluding of any Other? He closes the Section with
an Allegory upon Midwifry, which I have No Skill in.

To conclude, Letter.
the short Question will be, Whether you will join with those who must in the
end run the same Fate with you. If Protestants of all sorts, in their Behavior
to one another, have been to blame, they are upon the more equal terms, and for
that very reason it is fitter for them now to be reconciled. Our Disunion is
not only a Reproach, but a Danger to us; those who believe in modern Miracles,
have more Right, or at least more Excuse, to neglect all Secular Cautions; but
for us, it is as justifiable to have no Religion, as wilfully to throw away the
Human Means of preserving it. p. 10.

HEre is indeed, Answer.
as Short, and as Wild a Question, as a body would Wish, without Any
Qualification, either Expressed, or Implied, for the putting of a man in the
way toward a Reasonable Solution. If he had but Confined the General Expression
of the [Same Fate,] to Matter of Religion, Life, Limb, Liberty, or Estate; or
to any other Determinate Point, that a body might have known what to speak to,
One might have made a Bolt or a Shaft on it; but to talk of the [Same Fate] at
Large: why who knows, but he may Carry it to Election, Reprobation, or What
not? And, under favor, it was a Great Oversight in him, to lay the Stress of
the Persuasive upon the Train of the Company, that goes the same Way, rather
then upon the Reason of the Thing: Especially Considering, that the Same
Argument holds stronger for the Broad Way, then it does for the Narrow. It Is
true, he Proposes an Union here, which is neither Better, nor Worse, then an
Association.

There remains yet One very Extraordinary Point behind, that is not, upon Any
Terms, to be Passed over without some Animadversion. That is to say, A
Resolution upon the Case, betwixt the Comprehensional-Church-of-England-Men,
and the Dissenters, as it is Determined by the Author of This Letter.

Resolved, That it is as Justifiable to have No Religion, as Wilfully to throw
away the HUMANE MEANS of Preserving it.

In the First Place, What is That Man's Religion, that is of a Hundred and
Fifty Religions, according to the Case here in Hand? Or has That Man Any
Religion, or No, that Compounds All These into One?

2ly. Had not a man better be Careless, or Improvident, then Atheistical? and
better be Guilty of a Failing in his Duty toward God, in This or That
Particular, then of a Blasphemous Defyance of him in the Habit of an Impious
Life?

3ly. What does the Author intend by [HUMANE MEANS?] For Conspiracies, Force of
Arms, Seditious Practices, and All the Methods of Overturning Governments, fall
properly enough under the Classis of [Humane Means.] Now if a man may take the
Liberty with This Paper, that the Fathers of the Church do with the Holy Bible,
i. e. of Expounding One Text by Another: Here is Anti-Monarchical Doctrine
in it; Project of Confederacy; Force of Numbers, and Dint of Calumny; which do
all fall Naturally under the Topique of [Humane Means.] The Word [Willfully]
(even if the Other Law words, Advisedly, and Maliciously, had been added to it,)
amounts to no more then what is Necessarily Involved, and Implied in the Rest.
Now to Conclude; Humane Means for Preserving a Religion, can Operate no further
then in Cases where Religion may be Taken away; And I never heard of a Religion
yet, that was taken away by Actual Violence. I have now done with the Letter it
self; and the Authors Last Words, shall be the Answerers too. I am,

Dear Sir, Your most Affectionate Humble Servant.

IN the Course of This Letter and Answer I have dealt Faithfully in every
Particular both of Text and Comment; but I have somewhat yet more to add upon
the Whole Matter, touching the Judgment, Candor, and Design of the Author,
together with the Conduct, and Argument of the Paper it self.

The Author Writes himself a Church-of-England-Man, but it must be by a Second
Venture then; for he gives his Orthodox Mother most Bloody hard Words, even in
his Pretended Zeal for the Interest of That Communion. A Papist is his
Aversion: And Then he is No Dissenter neither; for it is the Main Drift of his
Discourse, to Cluck the Dissenters over to him, and Gather them under his Wing:
Only by showing what he is Not, he gives in some measure to understand what he
Is. If one may Judge of his Persuasion, by his Letter, it is an Hundred and
Fifty Diversities, of Opinion, Kneaded together according to the Amsterdam
Dispensatory, into one Sovereign Composition, under the Nick Name of
[PROTESTANT:] So that a Body may say of the Religion of This Pamphlet, as the
Wench in the Comedy said of her Bastard, It Is the TROVP'S Religion, it is the
TROVP'S Child; and there went a great many People to the Making of it. In one
Word; it is a Coalition of so many Nominal Religions into One State-Faction;
for though there may be Conscience in the Particular Opinions, Severally, and
Apart; it is yet Impossible for the Agreement to be any thing but a
Confederacy, in the Conjunction; Tha being the Only Medium wherein they can
Unite. As to the Candor of the Writer, and his Design; It is as Clear as Day,
that he has taken up a False Pretense, as well as a False Person; and that he
neither is a Genuine Son of the Church of England, nor a True Friend to it; for
Light and Darkness are not more Contrary One to Another, then his Practice is
to his Profession: Insomuch, that his own Words and Works are a Thousand
Witnesses against him.

The Church of England, he says, upon the Late Kings Restoration, Sacrificed
their Interest to their REVENGE. RIGID PRELATES that kept People at an
UNCHARITABLE Distance: STIFF and INEXORABLE to Reasonable Scruples: HAUGHTY,
and Governed by the Spirit of PERSECUTION. Letter to a Dissenter, p. 7.

Is not This a Gracious Church-of-England-Child now, to talk at This Rate of
his own Mother? And then to show that he has every Jot as little Reverence for
his Civil Parent, as he has for his Ecclesiastical; take his Papers from End to
End, and he has not so much as One Line in 'em that looks kindly upon the
Government; for what is the Drift of them, but to Debauch the Dissenters from
their Duty; to Possess the Multitude with Desperate Positions against the
King's Power; Calumnies against his Administration, and Downright Slanders
upon his Honor and Justice! To Hair Them out of their Wits, with Croking, and
Ill-boding Presages; Fill their Heads with Enflaming, and Implacable
Jealousies, Alarm them with Visionary Dangers; Stir them up to Outrages, by an
Ostentation of their Numbers; Flatter them into a False Opinion of their Right
and Privileges! And who but the Mobile, all this while, for the Judges of the
Controversy! What Is the Whole Discourse, in fine, but a Lecture of Civil Power
betwixt King and People, upon the Text of PROTESTANT and PAPIST! And in One
Word; A Paradox of Conscience Dodg'd into a Popular Scheme of Government! But
All, under the Pretext still, of a Church of England Letter too; though Blood
was as much a Church of England Doctor, when he Stole the Crown; And I would
the Resemblance of This Pamphlet did not look like the same Character Assumed
again, for the same End.

This Letter, they say, has made some Proselytes. (as they call them:) but
Secret Friends, and Abetters it has, in Abundance, though, most Infallibly,
whoever is a Friend to the Intent, and Matter of it, is an Enemy to the True
Church of England, as well as to that of Rome: to the Honor of his Majesty,
and to the Peace of his Dominions: And therefore People should do well to
Consider the Doctrine and the Biass of This Letter, before they take upon them
to Judge of the Merits of it. I reckon it My Duty however, not to let the
Scandal of so Undutiful a Practice rest at the Door of the Church of England,
if I know how to remove it.

I have one Word more to say yet, upon a Fancy, that has taken People in the
Head upon this Occasion: First, That no Church of England man will Answer This
Letter. 2ly. L'Estrange, of All Others, that has ever been so Bitter, and so
Violent against Liberty of Conscience, is the Unfittest Man in Nature, to take
upon him to Defend it: In Contradiction to his Toleration Discussed, his
Observators, and Twenty Pamphlets more upon This Subject. Generals prove
Nothing; Beside that they are commonly the Refuge of Shufflers, and Cheats. But
I am content however, to put the Matter to This Issue: Let but any man that
Charges Me with such Contradictions, submit to pass for a Fool, if he does not
particularly Prove them; and let me Wear the Reputation of a Knave, if (in a
Fair and Reasonable Equity of Construction) he makes his Accusation Good.

I have now but One Point more to speak to; And That Is the Subject of the
King's Power; It Is no more then what the Letter Requires, and what I have
Promised to do; And in Conclusion, a Right that I Owe, both to the Cause, and
to my Word.

The Author of the Letter to a Dissenter has several Dangerous Doctrines and
Passages, p 5, 6, 8, a. upon the Argument of the King's Prerogative, and the
Duty of a Subject. He Questions the Kings Late Declaration, in point of Law, p.
5. And lays down for a Maxim, that No Trespass against the Laws in Being, is to
be Defended: Though Universal Practice, and Opinion are agreed upon it, that the
Obligation of All Humane Laws, is in some sort, Conditional. He makes
Addressing of Thanks, upon That Declaration, to be the Giving up of a Right in
the Law, p. 6. He supposes the King himself, Doubtful of his own Power, p. 9.
He Reasons all he can against the Dispensing Power, and Repealing the Test, p.
8. And he calls Submission to That Declaration, the Setting up of a Power to
HELP the People, that will DESTROY them, p. 6.

These Positions are Communicated; in at Least Twenty Thousand Copies perhaps,
to his Majesty's Subjects, in All Quarters of the Kingdom; and the Doctrine,
For^t'd with the most Artificial Colors that the Matter will bear. Upon the
whole Business, there is Nothing to be done in such a Case as This, but by
Encountering Industry with Industry and Opposing Truth to Error. There will be
No Need of a Distinct, and a Particular Answer to This and That Clause, or
Period, but rather to speak to the Whole Question, at Once, in a Clear, and an
Effectual Reply.

TO begin at the Root of the Controversy; The King puts out a Declaration of
Indulgence: The Author of the Letter to a Dissenter, Denies his Dispensing
Power; makes the very Acceptance of it Criminal in the Subject; and a Giving up
of their Rights; and Positively Pronounces the Law to be so Sacred, that No
Trespass against it is to be Defended. It rests now to Prove, that This
Doctrine, and Practice is not only Erroneous, and Pernicious, with a Respect to
our Present Case, and Constitution, but Utterly Destructive of Humane Society,
and of the very Foundations of Government it self. To say nothing how
Artificially the Writer of That Letter has shamm'd upon the People his
Majesty's Act of Grace in favor of the Dissenters, for a Matter Concerted
betwixt Them, and the Papists, without which Pretense, the Incidians Part of
the Pamphlet falls to the Ground.

Now for the Clearing of This Question, He that would take the Just Measures of
the Prerogatives of Power, should properly look back into the Original of
Government; and from thence Trace the Wisdom, and the Providence of Almighty
God, through the Means to the End; and through the Causes to their Effects;
There are, it is true, Certain Prerogatives Peculiar to This, or That Frame of
State and Differing in One Place, from what they are in Another: But These are
of a Humane Make, and may be Laid down, as they were Taken up, at pleasure.
They are Local, Temporary, Personal, Conditional, Occasional Privileges
perhaps, and not of the Number of Those Sacred, Unchangeable, and
Incommunicable Essentials, that we are here speking of.

It was the Work of an Omnipotent Power, to make the World out of Nothing; As
Order was the Work of the Divine Wisdom, and Government consequently, of a
Divine Institution* and Appointment. This Government was Ordained for the
Regulation of Men in Society; And That Ordinance would have been utterly Vain,
and of No Effect, without a Competency of Powers, and Faculties, for securing
of All the Ends of it. Now if Government it self was immediately from God Those
Eminences of Privilege and Authority without which That Primary Power Cannot
Work, must needs be of Divine Right too; And Kings are so less Answerable to
their Principal, for the Maintenance of the Power, with which they are
Entrusted, then they are for the Exercise of it: So that if Rulers cannot
Depart from These Fundamentals of Government without Breach of Faith; If Humane
Laws shall be found Insufficient to Answer all the Emergencies, and Variations
of Humane Affairs; And if the Reserve of a Power to Dispense with those Humane
Laws, in case of such and such Exigencies, shall be likewise found of Absolute
Necessity for the Support of Government; the Sum of the Question will be
brought into a Narrow Compass; and no more then This: Shall a Prince, in favor
of an Imperfect, Humane Law, Dispense with an Vndispensable Duty to a Law
Divine? And in so doing, Dispense with God's Law, rather then Dispense with his
Own? It is a Thing past Dispute, that many Laws have been Nullities in the very
Creation of them: And it is Impossible to make Any Positive Law of Man so
Extensive, as to Answer All Circumstances of Time, Place. Condition, Change, or
Occasion: The Force and the Frequency of Overruling Necessities, is Granted on
All Hands, and that wherever the Government is, there is the Judgment. If the
People may Judge, they may Censure; If Censure, Punish, If Punish, they Govern:
And the Yielding of One Point to a Popular Usurpation, does in Effect, Tacitly
Entitle them to the Rest. Neither is there Any other Limit set to this Power,
then the Honor, the Conscience, and the Justice of the Governer; For the Bare
Admittance, of a Check, or Control, Implies a Superior Power: Men are
Corrupt, Frail, Short-sighted, and their Works, Imperfect. Bills may be Carried
by Passion, Interest, Power; and there may be likewise Inadvertency, or
Sinister Consideration in the Passing of them; but the Laws of Nature, and of
Equity, are Sacred, and Certain; for That which Nature does, God does.

This is Chiefly intended of Laws that were Well enough, or perhaps, Excellent
Provisions, at the First making of them; but in Tract of Time, upon some
Unexpected Revolution; or in such or such a Case perchance, may be found
Inconvenient. These, I say, may be Suspended; but then there are Laws of
Another Sort, that are Void, ab Initio, and upon No Terms to be either
Defended, or Executed; As I have Instanced formerly somewhat to this Purpose in
the Case of the Proceedings, under Charles the First against the Papists. That
Excellent Prince according to all Reasonable, and Humane Presumption, lost his
Crown, and his Life, in Complement to a Void Act of his Own, in pretending to
Bar himself the Use, and Service of his Subjects: As if an Act of State could
Supersede a Fundamental of God and Nature. I have the Authority of Great Man
(Bishop Sanderson) to Back me in the Casuistical Stress of This Instance: [God
(says he) has given to his Vicegerents here on Earth, a RIGHT In, and a POWER
Over the Persons of ALL their Subjects, within their several Respective
Dominions, even to the spending of their Lives in their Countries Service;
WHENEVER they shall be by Their Authority called thereunto. Five Cases, p.
71.] Now if they have These Privileges of RIGHT, and POWER, from GOD; and
Extending to ALL, and WHENEVER, without Exception, either to Time, Number, or
Distinction of Persons: What Earthly Power shall dare to Control This
Commission? And I have One Word more to Offer now (that I have formerly spoken
to) which comes a little Closer yet to the Point.

The Precept of [Honour thy Father and thy Mother] is undoubtedly of Divine
Authority; and a Command, of an Immutable, and Indispensable Obligation: And it
has Catholic Assent to it, that it Extends, as well to our Civil, and
Political, as to our Natural Parents. By This Law, All Subjects are Bound in
Conscience to Attend the Call, and the Service of their Prince; for the Precept
is Positive; without Any Qualification, Limitation, or Condition whatsoever.
The Question will be Shortly This now; Whether Any King, can by any Act of
Civil Authority, Divest himself of This Right, over the Persons of his
Subjects? I do not say but he may Choose whether he will Command them, or Not;
but he Cannot Discharge his People of their Duty of Obedience, in case he
Requires their Service; That is to say; In any case, which is not Contrary to
the Will, and Word of God. No Humane Law Can Absolve them from That Office of
Allegiance: So that in the Conclusion, either Those Subjects are Clear before
God, that serve their Prince, when by him thereunto required, notwithstanding
any Law of Man to the Contrary; Or the Ten Commandments may be turned to Waste
Paper; If the Law of the Land shall Forbid upon a Penalty, That which the Law
of God, Commands upon a Penalty.

This is enough for my Present Purpose; and if it be not so for Common
Satisfaction, My Third Volume of Observators, has Fifty Times as much upon this
Subject.

FINIS.

