A DISCOURSE Proving The Divine Institution OF Water Baptism: Wherein The
Quaker-Arguments Against it, Are COLLECTED and CONFUTED. With as much as is
Needful concerning The Lord's Supper.

By the Author of, The Snake in the Grass.

If ye Love me, keep my Commandments,

Joh. xiv. 15. LONDON: Printed for C. Brom, at the Gun, at the West End of St.
Paul's. W. Keblewhite, at the White Swan, in St. Paul's Churchyard. And H.
Hindmarsh, at the Golden Ball, over against the Royal Exchange, in Cornhill.
M.DC.XC.VII.

THE PREFACE CONTAINS.
I. A Short Proof for Infant Baptism. II. The several sorts of Contemners of
Baptism amongst us. III. The Presbyterians in Scotland. IV. In Ireland. V. In
England. VI. Too many of the Communion of the Church of England. VII. Whence
this Discourse useful to others besides Quakers. VIII. The Particular Occasion
of Writing this Discourse.
The Contents of This Discourse.
Sect. I. THat Matthew. xxviii. 19. was meant of Water Baptism. Page 1. Sect. II.
That Christ did Practice Water Baptism. 2. That the Apostles did it after Him.
3. That the Catholic Church have done it after Them. p. 3. Sect. III. That
Baptism must be Outward and Visible, because it is an Ordinance appointed
whereby to Initiat Men into an Outward and Visible Society, which is the
Church. p. 7.
The Arguments of the Quakers against the Outward-Baptism.
Sect. IV. 1. That the Baptism Commanded Matthew. xxviii. 19. was only the
Inward, or Spiritual Baptism. p. 11. Sect. V. 2. That Water Baptism is John's
Baptism, and therefore Ceased. p. 12. Sect. VI. 3. That Christ and the Apostles
did Baptize with John's Baptism. p. 14. Sect. VII. 4. That Paul was not sent to
Baptize, 1 Cor. i. 14. 17. p. 21. Sect. VIII. 5. That Baptism is not the
putting away the Filth of the Flesh; but the Answer of a Good Conscience, 1
Pet. iii. 21. Therefore that it is not the Outward but the Inward Baptism,
which the Apostles Preached. p. 33. Sect. IX. 6. That there is but One Baptism,
Ephesians. iv. 5. therefore not both Outward and Inward. p. 35. Sect. X. 7. That the
Outward Baptism is to be left behind, and we to get beyond it, Heb. vi. 1. p.
38. Sect. XI. 8. That there are no Signs under the Gospel. p. 45. Sect. XII.
The Conclusion. Showing the Necessity of Water Baptism. p. 59.
Erratum. P. 5. l. 14. r. Act. x. 47.

There will soon be Published a Discourse, by the same Author, showing whom
Christ has Ordained to Administer the Sacraments in His Church. And another,
wherein it is proved, That the Chief of the Quaker-Heresies were Broached, and
Condemned, in the Days of the Apostles, and in the first 150 Years after Christ.

A PREFACE.
AS Baptism is putting on Christ, giving up our Names to Him; being Admitted as
His Disciples; and a Public Profession of His Doctrine: So the Renouncing of
our Baptism, (...) as Public a Disowning of Him; and a Formal Apostasy from
His Religion.

Therefore the Devil has been most busy in all ages (but has prevailed most,
in our latter Corrupt times) to Prejudice Men, by many false Pretenses, against
this Divine Institution. Having been able to persuade some quite to throw it
off, as Pernicious and Hurtful: Others to think it only Lawful to be done, but
to lay no great stress upon it, and so use it, where it is Enjoined, as a thing
Indifferent. Others deny it to Infants, upon this only Ground, That they are
not supposed Capable of being Admitted into the Covenant of God, which He has
made with Men: For, if they are Capable of being admitted into the Covenant,
there can be no Reason to deny them the outward Seal of it.

But this being Foreign to my present Undertaking, which is to Demonstrate to
the Quakers the Necessity of an Outward or Water Baptism, in the General (for
as to Persons capable of it, we have no Controversy with those who deny it to
All) therefore, I have not digress'd into another Subject, which is, that of
Infant Baptism, in the following Discourse.

I. Yet thus much I will say of it, in this place, That Infants are Capable of
being admitted into the Covenant, and therefore that they cannot be Excluded
from the outward Seal of it. The Consequence the Baptists cannot deny. And that
they are Capable, I thus prove. They were Capable under the Law, and before the
Law, of being admitted as Members of the Covenant in Christ to come, made with
Abraham, by the Seal of Circumcision, at the Age of Eight Days: And therefore
there can be no Reason to Exclude them from the same Privilege, to the same
Covenant, now that Christ is come; unless Christ had debarred them from it: The
Law standing still, as it was, where He has not Altered, or Fulfilled it. But
He has not debarred them. Nay; on the contrary, He has yet further confirmed
their being within the Covenant. He called a Little Child, ( Mat. xviii. 2, 3,
5.) and set him in the midst of His Apostles; and Proposed him as a Pattern to
Them, and to all Adult Christians. And said, That none should enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, except those who should become as little Children. And that
whoever did Receive a Little Child in His Name, did Receive Christ Himself. And
( ver 10.) in Heaven, their Angels (says Christ) do always behold the Face of
my Father which is in Heaven. And therefore He bids us Take heed that we
despise not one of these Little Ones; by which term tho Adult Persons are
sometimes meant, yet in the Texts before quoted, it is expressly applied to
Little Children. And what greater Despising of them can be, than to Reject them
as no Members of Christ's Body, and consequently unworthy of the outward Seal
of His Covenant?

Christ was displeased with His Disciples ( Mar. x. 14.) for hindering young
Children to be brought unto Him. And will He be pleased with the Baptists for
the same thing? He took the little Children up in His Arms, put His hands upon
them, and blessed them. Did He Bless those who were not Capable of being within
His Covenant? He said, Of such is the Kingdom of God, (which is a term our
Savior used, to Express the Covenant of the Gospel) Are they not then within
the Covenant of the Gospel? The Apostle says, that where either of the Parents
is a Christian, (1 Cor. vii. 14.) the Children are Holy: That is, within the
Covenant of Christ. And pursuant to this, when any man was Converted, his
Children were Baptized with himself. This is the meaning of what we read so
often in The Acts, that such a Man was Baptized with his Household. And it was
the Custom before with the Jews, that when they admitted any man as a Proselyte
to their Religion, they Baptized his Children with himself. Let this suffice
for the present. And Proceed.

II. When Rebellion had fully completed it self, in the Murder of the King,
1648. It soon spawned a multifarious Schism of 30 or 40 different Religions in
England, at the same time, of which Catalogues were then Printed, most of all
these threw away Baptism: And threatened an immediate and total Overthrow of
the Christian Religion, in this Island. But, by the great Mercy of God, the
Restoration of the Church, with the King, 1660. has extinguished the very
Names and Memory of these, all but 4 or 5 of the Principal Sects. The
Presbyterians, (Mother of all the rest) Independents, Ana-baptists, Quakers,
and Muggletonians. I am told of some Sweet-singers, got up of late. But they
are yet inconsiderable. They may Increase, and all the rest Revive, if warmed
by a Plenitude of Indulgence. The Socinians, or Unitarians, are already got
very high, who make nothing of the Sacraments, but as In-effectual Forms. So
think the Deists, who pretend to higher Quality than these. And the
Latitudinarians will quarrel with none of these. All Deists are
Latitudinarians; and, though they despise Baptism, and all Revealed Institutions,
yet they can submit to them, because they are Established by Law, as they would
to any thing else, rather than lose a Penny, or their Ease. But the Quakers and
Muggletonians have (more sincerely) Rejected Baptism, as not allowable, because
they think so.

III. The Presbyterians, Independents, etc. do indeed use Baptism; but as a
thing so indifferent, that many of them will suffer a Child to dye without it,
rather than Baptize it Privately, or not upon a Sermon or Lecture-day, or
before Sermon, rather than after it; And an Instance can be given, since this
late Establishment of Presbytery in Scotland, of a Child who dyed in the
Church, in Sermon-time; but the Minister suffered that, and the repeated
Requests of the Parents, rather than go out of his wonted method of Baptizing
after Sermon, he thought Baptism so little material!

But the People being used to a greater veneration of Baptism, under the
Episcopal Administration, and taking the Presbyterian contempt of it somewhat
uneasily, the Presbyterian Ministers there, to instruct them better, had
public Preachments, all over the Nation, to show the no Necessity of the
Outward or Water Baptism. I will not say the ENGLISH Presbyterians go so far;
they are one Degree further from the League and Covenant. I hear that they do
now Administer Baptism PRIVATELY, in and about London. Which the Independents
do still Refuse, (I have it from some of themselves) let the case be never so
urgent, even though the child should dye without it, before one of their Sermon
or Lecture-days. As for the other Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, I hear that
some Independent Congregations in London are come to use it Monthly. And the
Presbyterians more frequently than they used to do; or than they do in other
places. The frequency of Communion in the Episcopal Churches, in some manner
forcing them to it, that their people might not think themselves more neglected
by them, than others are. But their own Inclination, and the Value they have
for this Sacrament will better appear by their Behavior while they had the
Power in their own hands; and could Dictat to others, instead of Following or
Complying with them. And during their Government in the late Revolution, though
they did not downright (as the Quakers) declare War against it, and Extripate
it at once; yet they plainly seemed to have had a design to have Inch'd it by
Degrees out of the world, as far as it was in their power, by letting it fall
into Dissuetude, that so it might be Forgotten, and Dye. And they had almost
Effected it, among those Unhappy People that were led by them. For from the
Birth of their Covenant, A. D. 1638. they had not this Sacrament in many
Parishes in Scotland, some for 10, some for 12, some for 15 years; which was
almost their whole Reign. And in the Indulged and Connived at Parishes to the
Year 1683. many persons (who were not Debarred for any Exception against them)
some of 50, 60, 70, and 80 years of Age, never received this Sacrament once in
their lives: This I know from certain Information. And since their present
Establishment in this Revolution, their neglect of this Sacrament is likewise
Notorious. Four Years after which, viz. in the year 1693. it had not been
Administered in Edenbrugh; and but once a year, at the most, since. We may
imagine then how it has been observed in the Country Parishes.

IV. The Presbyterians in the North of Ireland, are a Sprig of the Scotch
Covenant Transplanted thither: Which in that change of Soil, has taken deep
Root, and spread Intolerably. And the Bishop of Derry, in his late Clear and
Rational Discourse concerning the Inventions of Men in the Worship of God, And
Two following Admonitions, has made it fully appear, That not One in Ten of
them do ever Receive this Sacrament in the whole Course of their Lives: And the
rest very rarely, even now since this last Revolution. And in the Former
Revolution of 41, he gives Undeniable Instances, that in several Churches, even
in Dublin, after the turning out of the Episcopal Ministers, the Lord's Supper
had not been Administered till the Restoration, 1660, that is, in some Churches
for Ten, in some for Twelve Years together.

V. These Presbyterians in Dublin, and in the South and West parts of Ireland,
were sent from England, and had learnt the Contempt of this Sacrament there.
Where, even in Oxford, it was not Administered in the whole University, from the
Ejection of the Episcopal Clergy, in the Year 1648. to the Restoration in
1660, as is observed in the Antiquit-Oxon. So that the Quakers have only taken
that out of the way, which the Presbyterians had worn into Dis-use.

VI. And from all these Enemies, and the subtle Insinuations which they have
broached in Prejudice of Christ's Holy Institution of Baptism, and likewise of
the Lords Supper (for both are slightedly the same Persons, and upon the same
Grounds) it is to be feared, that several, even of the Church of England, have
been wrought, though not into a Dis-use, or downright slight, yet into a less
Esteem and greater Indifferency as to these Holy Sacraments than they ought;
and consequently receive less Benefit by them; much less than if their
Knowledge, and their Faith were better rooted, and more sublime. Nay, there is
not any Degree of Indifferency, but what is Culpable, in this Case; and may
bring a Curse with it, instead of a Blessing: for, whatsoever, especially in
Religious Worship, is not of Faith, is sin. And according to our Faith, it is
to us, in all our Performances of Religion.

VII. For all these Reasons, though this Discourse was wrote wholly on Behalf of
the Quakers, yet, I hope, it will not be un-useful to many others, to see the
strong Foundation, Great Necessity, and In-estimable Benefits of Baptism and
the Lord's Supper, when Duly Administered, and Received with Full Faith and
Assurance in the Power and Love of God, that He will not fail to assist His own
Institutions, when we approach unto them, with sincere Repentance, and
undoubting Dependence upon His Promises. And many of the Objections hereafter
answered, though used by the Quakers, to Invalidate BAPTISM, are likewise
insisted on by several of the Sects, which I have named above, to Lessen and
Disparage it. In which sense, the following Discourse, though it respects the
QUAKERS Chiefly, yet not them Only, for it contains the joint Arguments of all
the several sizes of the Opposers, or Contemners of Baptism.

VIII. But as to the immediate Occasion, which engaged me in this Work, it was
upon the Account of a particular Person, who had been Educated from his
Childhood in the Quaker Principles, and Communion. And the Objections which are
here considered against Baptism, are these which, at several conferences with
other Quakers, to whom that Person brought me, were insisted upon. At l^ngth,
after more than Twelve Months consideration of this single Point, and
diligently Reading over, and weighing every particular, which Rob. Barclay had
wrote, in his Apology, against the Outward, or Water Baptism, it pleased God so
to open the Eyes, and persuade the Heart of this Gentleman, that, having
Informed himself in the true Principles of the Christian Religion, as contained
in our Church Catechism; he has lately with great joyfulness, and satisfaction,
Received the Baptism of Christ, as Administered in the Church of England. And it
was his Desire, that this Discourse (though wrote for his Private Use) might be
made Public, in hopes, that it may have the like Effects upon others, as it
has had upon himself, by the great Mercy of God. And I knowing several others
who have of late been Convinced and Baptized, in the same manner, as this
Gentleman; I have not Resisted his invitation to contribute my Mite toward the
Recovery of so many Thousand souls as now for 46 years, have thrown off the
Sacraments of Christ's Institution: and thereby, as one main Cause, have lest
the Substance, even Faith in the Blood of Christ, outwardly shed for our
Salvation, as I have elsewhere shown. The Lord accept my mean Endeavors; and
make them Instrumental to His Glory, and the Salvation of Souls. Amen.

A DISCOURSE, PROVING The DIVINE INSTITUTION OF WATER BAPTISM.
SECT. I. That Matthew. xxviii. 19. was meant of Water Baptism.
THE Words of the Text are these: Go ye, therefore, and Teach all Nations,
Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

The Quakers will not own that the Baptism here mentioned was the Outward, or
Water Baptism: Which I will endeavor to make very plain, that it was; and that
in the first place,

From the Signification and Etymology of the word Baptize.

1. The word is a Greek word, and only made English by our constant usage of
it: It signifies to Wash, and is applied to this Sacrament of Baptism, because
that is an outward Washing.

To Wash and to Baptize are the very same: and if the word Baptize had been
rendered into English, instead of, Go and BAPTIZE, it must have been said, Go
and WASH Men, in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.
So that the outward Baptism, with Water, is as much here commanded, as if it
had been expressed in English words, or as we can now express it.

But because the word Baptize was grown a Technical Term, in other Languages,
whereby to express the Holy Sacrament of Baptism, long before our English
Translation, therefore our Translators did rightly retain the word Baptize in
this Text, Matthew. xxviii. 19. and in other Texts which speak of that Holy
Sacrament.

But in other places they translate the word Baptize, as Mark vii. 4. When they
come from the Market (...), except they are Baptized, which we literally
translate except they Wash. And in the same Verse, (...), etc. The Baptisms of
Cups and Pots, etc. which we translate the Washing of Cups and Pots. and Heb.
ix. 10. speaking of these Legal Institutions, which stood only in Meats and
Drinks, and diverse Washings, and carnal Ordinances, etc. the word which we here
translate Washings, is, in the Original, (...), Baptisms: In Meats and Drinks,
and diverse Baptisms. And in the Vulgar Latin, the Greek word is retained in
both these Texts, Mark vii. 4. Nisi Baptizentur, non Comedunt. Except they are
Baptized, i. e. Wash their Hands, they eat not. And Baptismata Calicum, etc.
The Baptisms of Cups, etc. And Heb. ix. 10. In Cibis and Potibus, and variis
Baptismatibus; i. e. In Meats and Drinks, and diverse Baptisms. So that it is
plain that the word Baptism, and the word Washing, though not the same word, have
yet the self-same meaning.

2. It is true, that the word Baptism is often taken in a Figurative and
Allegorical Sense, to mean the INWARD BAPTISM, the Washing, or Cleansing of the
Heart: But so is the word Washing also, as often, as Jer. iv. 14, etc. And
there is scarce a Word in the World but is capable of many Figurative and
Allegorical Meanings. Thus Circumcision is very often used for the Inward
Circumcision or Purity of the Heart. And Fire is taken to express Love, and
likewise Anger, and many other things.

But it is a received Rule for the Interpretation of Scripture, and indeed of
all other Writings and Words, that the plain Literal Meaning is always to be
taken, where there is no manifest Contradiction or Absurdity in it; as when a
Man is said to have a Fire burning in his Breast, it cannot be meant of the
Literal Fire: so when we are commanded to Wash or Circumcise our Hearts, and
the like. But, on the other hand, if any Man will take upon him to understand
Words in a Figurative Sense, at his own will and pleasure, without an apparent
Necessity from the Scope and Coherence, he sets up to Banter, and leaves no
Certainty in any Words or Expressions in the World. Therefore I will conclude
this Point of the natural Signification and Etymology of the word Baptize: And,
unless the Quakers can show an apparent Contradiction or Absurdity to take it
in the Literal Signification, in this Text, Matthew. xxviii. 19. then it must be
meant of the OUTWARD WASHING or BAPTISM, because that is the only True, and
Proper, and Literal Signification of the Word.

And it will be further Demonstrated in the next Section, that there can be no
Contradiction or Absurdity to take it in a Literal Sense, because the Apostles,
and Others thereunto Commissionated by them, did Practice it, in the Literal
Sense.

SECT. II. I. That CHRIST did Practice Water Baptism. II. That the Apostles did
it after Him. III. That the Catholic Church have done it after Them.

I. THat Christ did Practice Water Baptism. It is written, John iii. 26. And
they came unto John, and said unto him, Rabbi, He that was with thee beyond
Jordan, to whom thou barest witness, Behold, the same Baptizeth, and all Men
come to Him.

That this was Water Baptism there can be no Doubt, because,

1. The Baptism with the Holy Ghost was not yet given: For that was not given
till the Day of Pentecost, fifty Days after the Resurrection of Christ, as it
is Recorded in the Second of the Acts. This Spiritual Baptism was promised,
John xiv. 16, 26. xv. 26. xvi. 7. And the Apostles were commanded to tarry in
the City of Jerusalem till it should come upon them, Luke xxiv. 49. 2. The
Quakers allow that John did Baptize with Water, and there is no other sort of
Baptism here mentioned, with which Christ did Baptize; and therefore, these
Baptisms being spoke of both together, there can be no Reason to interpret the
one to be with Water, and the other not. It is said John iv. 1. The Pharisees
heard that Jesus made and baptized more Disciples than John. How could the
Pharisees hear of it, if it was not an Outward and Visible Baptism? For, as
before is said, the outward and miraculous Effects of the Baptism with the Holy
Ghost were not then given. And since it Was an Outward, it must be the
Water Baptism, for there was then no other.

Obj. But the Quakers start an Objection here, That it is said John iv. 2.
Jesus himself baptized not, but his Disciples.

1. Ans. Tho Jesus himself baptized not, yet it is said in the Verse foregoing,
that He made and baptized, i. e. those whom His Disciples, by His Order,
Baptized. For, if it had not been done by His Order, it could not be said that
he had Baptized those whom his Disciples Baptized. But because, He that does a
thing by Another, is said to do it Himself, therefore Christ himself is said to
have Baptized those, whom his Disciples, by his Order, did Baptize.

2. Answ. That Baptizing which Christ is said to have Administered himself, John
iii. 26. might have been at another Time than that which is mentioned in the
4th Chapter: And then the consequence will only be this, That, at some Times,
Christ did Baptize Himself; and at other Times, he left it to his Disciples.
Tho, as to our Argument, it is the same thing, whether he did it Himself, or
commanded his Disciples to do it. For, either way, it is his Baptism, his
Only; his Disciples did but Administer what he commanded.

II. As Christ himself did Baptize with Water, and his Disciples, by his
Commandment, while he was with them upon Earth; so did his Apostles, and
Others, thereunto by them commissionated, after his Death, and Resurrection, by
virtue of his Command to them, Matthew. xxviii. 19. after he was Risen from the
Dead.

What is said above of the Etymology and true Signification of the word
Baptize, is, of itself, sufficient to prove, that by Baptism in this Text, the
outward Baptism with Water is meant: especially till the Quakers can show any
Contradiction or Absurdity in having the word taken in the proper and literal
sense, in this, and the other Texts which speak of it.

And this will be very hard to do, since, as it is just now proved, that Christ
did Baptize with Water, as well as John. And what Absurdity, or Contradiction
can be alleged, that his Apostles should Administer the same sort of Baptism,
after his Death, as he had Practiced and Commanded during his Life? Nay rather,
what Reason can be given, why they should not be the same, since the same word,
i. e. Baptize, is used in Both, and no new Sense or Acceptance of the word is
so much as hinted? And therefore to put any new sense or acceptance of the
word, must be wholly Arbitrary and Precarious.

But, as I promised, I will Demonstrate yet more fully and plainly, that the
Apostles did Practice the Outward, i. e. Water Baptism after CHRIST's death.

Acts x. 27. Can any Man forbid Water, that these should not be Baptized?

Acts viii. 36. As they (Philip and the Eunuch) went on their way, they came to
a certain Water, and the Eunuch said, See here is Water, what does hinder me to
be Baptized? -- And (Verse 38.) they went both down into the Water, hoth Philip
and the Eunuch, and he Baptized him: And when they were come up out of the
WATER, etc.

Acts xxii. 16. And now why tarriest thou? Arise and be Baptized, and wash away
thy sins.

And, to save more Quotations, the Quakers do own that the Baptism of the
Corinthians, mentioned 1 Cor. i. 14 and 17. was Water Baptism.

Therefore I will conclude this Point, as undeniable, That the Apostles did
practice Water Baptism.

And the Argument from thence will lie thus: The Apostles did practice that
Baptism which Christ commanded Mat. xxviii. 19. But the Apostles did practice
Water Baptism; therefore Water Baptism was that Baptism which Christ commanded
Matthew. xxviii. 19.

III. And, as the Practice of the Apostles is a most sure Rule whereby to
understand the meaning of that Command which they put in execution; so the
Practice of those who immediately succeeded the Apostles, who were
Cotemporaries with them, and learned the Faith from their Mouths, is as certain
a Rule to know what the Practice, and what the Sense of the Apostles were. And
thus the Practice of the present Age, in the Administration of Water Baptism,
is an undeniable Evidence, that this was the Practice of the last Age; the same
Persons being, many of them, alive in both the last and the present Age. For
one Age does not go off the World all at once, and another succeed all of
perfect Age together; but there are old Men of the last Age, and young Men and
Children growing up to another Age all alive upon Earth the same time; and
Mankind being dispersed into far distant Countries and Climates, who know not
of one another, nor hold any Correspondence: It is, by these means, morally
impossible for any Man or Men, to deceive us in what has been the Universal and
Received Practice of the last Age, to which the present Age is so linked, that
it is even a part of it: I say it is impossible for all the Fathers of the
World, to be supposed willing, or if they were, to be capable of imposing upon
all younger than themselves, namely, That they had been all Baptized, and that
this was an universally received Custom; and of which Registers were always
kept, in every Parish, of all who had been, from time to time, Baptized; and
that such Registers were public, and to be recurr'd to by all that had a mind
to it: Every Man's reason will tell him that it is utterly impossible for such
a thing to pass upon Mankind.

And as certainly as the present Age is thus assured of the Practice of the
last Age, in a Thing of so public and universal a nature; so certainly, and by
the same Rules, must the last Age know the Practice of the Age before that; and
so backward all the way to the first Institution, to the Age of Christ, and the
Apostles.

The public nature of this Water Baptism, as now practiced, being an outward
matter of Fact, of which Men's outward Senses, their Eyes and Ears are Judges;
not like Matters of Opinion, which sort of Tares may be privately sown, and
long time propagated, without any remarkable Discovery; And to this so public
matter of Fact, adding the universal Practice of it, through all the far
distant Nations of Christianity: I say these two Marks make it impossible for
the World to be imposed upon, nor was it ever, or ever can be imposed upon, in
any such public Matter of Fact, so universally practiced. All this makes it
undeniably plain. That the last Age did practice the same outward Water baptism
which is practiced in this Age; and that the same was, as certainly, practiced
in the Age before the last Age, and by the same Rule, in the Age before that;
and so onward, as abovesaid, to the Age of the Apostles. I have made more Words
of this than needed, but I would render it exceeding plain, considering with
whom I have to do. And I beseech them to consider, That all the Authority which
they have to Overbalance all these Demonstrations, is the mad Enthusiasm of a
Lay-Apostle, George Fox, a Mechanic so Illiterate, that he was hardly Master
of common Sense, nor could write English, or any other Language; and started up
amongst us in the Year 1650, (the Age of Schism and Rebellion) and Damned, as
Apostates, all Ages since the Apostles.

In all of which no One could be found (before G. Fox) to bear their Testimony
against this Water Baptism, though it was constantly and universally practiced;
and that Christians were then so Zealous as to contend against the least
Variation or Corruption of the Faith, even unto Death, and the most cruel sort
of Martyrdom.

Can any Man imagine, that if Water Baptism were a Human Invention, or
Superstitiously either Continued or Obtruded upon the Church, no One should be
found, for 1650 Years, to open his Mouth against it; when Thousands sacrificed
their Lives, for Matters of much less Importance?

But I have over-labour'd this Point, to any Man who will give himself leave to
make use of his Reason. Therefore I will proceed to the next Section.

SECT. III. That Baptism must be Outward and Visible, because it is an
Ordinance appointed whereby to Initiate Men into an Outward and Visible
Society, which is the Church.
THere goes no more toward the proving of this, than to show, 1st, That the
Church is an Outward and Visible Society, 2dly, That Baptism was appointed and
used for Initiating or Admitting Men into the Church.

1st, That the Church is an outward and visible Society. Our Savior calls it,
A City that is set on a Hill, (Matthew. v. 14.) The Quakers themselves are an
outward and visible Society; and so are all those who bear the Name of Churches
upon Earth. They could not otherwise be Churches. For that implies a Society of
People; and every Society in the World, is an outward and visible Thing.

And, as it is so, has an outward and visible Form of Admitting Men into it:
For otherwise it would not be known who are Members of it. Every Society is
Exclusive of all others who are not of that Society; otherwise it could not be
a Society: for that supposes the Men of that Society, to be thereby
distinguished from other Men: And that supposes as much that there must be some
outward and visible Form whereby to Initiate Men, and entitle them to be
Members of such a Society: otherwise it could not be known who were Members of
it, and who were not; and it would thereby ipso facto cease to be a Society;
for it could not then be distinguished from the rest of Mankind: as a River is
lost in the Sea, because it is no longer distinguished from it, but goes to
make up a part of it.

From hence it appears, that the Church, being an outward and visible Society,
must have some outward and visible Form to initiate Men, and make them Members
of that Society.

2dly, That Baptism was that outward Form. All the several Baptisms that were
before Christ's, were all meant for Initiating Forms. The Jews had a Custom
long before Christ, to initiate the Proselites or Converts to their Religion,
not only by Circumcision, but by Baptizing, or Washing them with Water. The
same was the meaning of John's Baptism, to make Men his Disciples. And the same
was the meaning of Christ's Baptism, to initiate Men into the Christian
Religion, and make them Disciples of Christ.

Hence Baptizing Men, and making them Disciples, mean the same thing. Thus John
iv. 1. it is said, That Jesus made and baptized more Disciples than John. That
is, be baptized them Disciples, which was the Form of Making them such. If any
will say, that he baptized them to be Disciples to John, that will be answered
Sect. VI. But as to the present Point, it is the same thing whose Disciples
they were made; for we are now only to show that Baptism, in the general, was
an Initiating Form.

And when Christ practiced it, as well as John, as this Text does expressly
declare, no Reason can be given that he did not use it as an Initiating Form,
as well as John; especially when the Text does express that he did make them
Disciples, by baptizing of them, as above is shown.

And pursuant to this, when Christ sent his Apostles to convert all Nations,
his Commission of Baptizing was as large as that of Teaching, Matthew. xxviii.
19. Go TEACH all Nations, BAPTIZING them, etc. i. e. Baptizing all who shall
receive your word. And accordingly it is said, Acts ii. 41. They that received
the word were baptized. Pursuant to what the Apostle had preached to them Verse
28. Repent and be baptized.

And accordingly we find it the constant Custom to baptize all that were
converted to the Faith. Thus Paul, tho miraculously converted from Heaven, was
commanded to be baptized, Acts xxii. 16. And he baptized Lydia, and the Jailer,
and their Households, as soon as he had converted them, Acts xvi. 15, 33. And
the Corinthians, Acts xviii. 8. And the Disciples of John, who had not yet been
made Christians, Acts xix. 5. Philip did baptize the Eunuch, as soon as he
believed in Christ, Acts viii. 37, 38. And Peter, immediately upon the
Conversion of Cornelius, and those with him, said, Can any Man forbid Water,
that these should not be baptized? Acts x. 47.

It would be endless to enumerate all the like Instances of Baptism, in the New
Testament. And it was always used as an Initiating Form.

3dly, Baptism was not only an Initiating Form: But it served for nothing else.
For it was never to be repeated. As a Man can be born but once into this World,
so he can be but once regenerated, or born into the Church; which is therefore,
in Scripture, called the New Birth.

It is said of the other Sacrament (of the Lord's Supper) as often as ye eat
this Bread, etc. I Cor. xi. 26. This was to be often repeated.

Baptism is our Admission, Initiation, or Birth into the Society of the Church;
and accordingly once only to be administered. The Lord's Supper is our
Nourishment and Daily Food in it; and therefore to be often repeated.

And as of our Savior's, so of other Baptisms, of John's, and the Jews, they
being only Initiating Forms, they were not repeated. The Jews did not baptize
their Proselites more than once. And John did not baptize his Disciples more
than once. So neither were Men twice baptized into the Christian Faith, more
than they were twice Circumcised, or Admitted into the Church, before Christ.

Thus having proved, 1st, That the Church is an outward and visible Society.
2dly, That Baptism was the Initiating Form of Admitting Men into that Society.
3dly, That it was only an Initiating Form. I think the Consequence is
undeniable, that this Baptism must be an outward and visible Form: Because
otherwise it could be no Sign or Badge of an Admission into an outward and
visible Society; for such a Badge must be as outward as the Society.

Again, Acts of inward Faith are, and ought to be often repeated: Therefore
this Baptism, which could not be repeated, could not be the inward, but the
outward Baptism.

And thus having proved that Baptism commanded Matthew. xxviii. 19. to be the
outward, that is, Water Baptism: 1st, From the true and proper Etymology and
Signification of the Word. 2dly, From the Practice of CHRIST, and his Apostles,
and the whole Christian Church after them. And, 3dly, From the Nature of the
Thing; Baptism being an Ordinance appointed only for Initiating Men into an
outward and visible Society; and therefore never to be repeated: Having thus
proved our Conclusion from such plain, easy, and certain Topics; I will now
proceed to those Objections (such as they are) which the Quakers do set up
against all these clear Demonstrations. And shall accordingly, in the first
place, take notice of their groundless Pretense in making that BAPTISM
commanded in the Holy Gospel, and proved an ORDINANCE external and visible, to
be understood only of the Inward and Spiritual BAPTISM, not with WATER, but the
HOLY GHOST.

SECT. IV. Quakers say, 1 st, That the BAPTISM commanded Matthew. xxviii. 19. was
only meant of the Inward and Spiritual Baptism, with the Holy Ghost.
THey say this; and that is all. They neither pretend to answer the Arguments
brought against them, such as these beforementioned; nor give any Proof for
their own Assertion. Only they say so; and they will believe it; and there is
an End of it.

And truly there should be an End of it, if only Disputation, or Victory were
my Design: For to what non plus can any Adversary be reduced beyond that of
neither Answering, nor Proving?

But because the Pains I have taken is only in Charity for their Souls, I will
overlook all their Impertinency, and deal with them as with weyward Children,
humor them, and follow them through all their Windings and Turnings; and submit
to over-prove, what is abundantly proved already. Therefore, since they can
give no Reason why that Baptism commanded Matthew. xxviii. 19. should be meant
only of the Baptism with the Holy Ghost; and would be content that we should
leave them there, as obstinate Men, and pursue them no further; but let them
persuade those whom they can persuade: By which Method (unhappily yielded to
them) they have gained and secured most of their Proselites, by keeping them
from Disputing or Reasoning; and by persuading them to hearken only to their
own Light within: To Rescue them out of this Snare, I will be content to
undertake the Negative (though against the Rules of Argument,) and to prove,
that the Baptism commanded Matthew. xxviii. 19. was not the Baptism with the Holy
Ghost. For,

1st, To baptize with the Holy Ghost is peculiar to Christ alone. For none can
baptize with the Holy Ghost, but who can send and bestow the Holy Ghost. Which
is Blasphemy to ascribe to any Creature.

Christ has indeed committed the Administration of the outward Baptism with
Water to his Apostles, and to Others by them thereunto ordained; and has
promised the inward Baptism of the Holy Ghost to those who shall daly receive
the outward Baptism.

But this cannot give the Apostles, or any other Ministers of Christ, the Title
of baptizing with the Holy Ghost; though the Holy Ghost may be given by their
Ministration. For they are not the Givers, that is Blasphemy.

And pursuant to this, it is observable, that none is ever said, in the
Scripture, to baptize with the Holy Ghost but Christ alone: The same is he who
baptizeth with the Holy Ghost, John i. 33.

And therefore, if that Baptism commanded Matthew. xxviii. 19. was the Baptism
with the Holy Ghost, it would follow that the Apostles could baptize with the
Holy Ghost, which is Blasphemy to assert.

2dly, It is written, John iv. 2. That Jesus himself baptized not, but his
Disciples. If this was not meant of Water Baptism, but of the Baptism with the
Holy Ghost; then it will follow, That Christ did not baptize with the Holy
Ghost, but that his Disciples did.

This, in short, may suffice in return to a mere Pretense, and proceed we next
to consider, if their main Argument also prove as unsupported and precarious.

SECT. V. The great Argument of the Quakers against Water Baptism is this:
John's Baptism is ceased: But John's Baptism was Water Baptism: Therefore
Water Baptism is ceased. This their Learned Barclay makes use of. But,
1st, IT is so extremely Childish, that if it were not His, no Reader would
Pardon me for Answering to it. Yet since they do insist upon it, let them take
this easy Answer: That John's Water Baptism is ceased; but not Christ's
Water Baptism. All outward Baptisms were Water-baptisms, as the word Baptism
signifies, ( See Sect. I.) The Jews Baptism was Water Baptism, as well as
John's. And by this Argument of Barclay's, the Jews and John's may be proved to
be the same. Thus. The Jews Baptism was Water Baptism: but John's Baptism was
Water Baptism: therefore John's Baptism was the Jews Baptism.

And thus, Christ's Baptism was John's, and John's was the Jews, and the Jews
was Christ's; and they were all one and the self-same Baptism, because they
were all Water-baptisms.

So without all Foundation is this great Rock of the Quakers, upon which they
build their main Battery against Water Baptism.

2 ly, It will be proper here to let them see (if they be not wilfully
ignorant) What it is which makes the Difference of Baptisms: not the outward
Matter in which they are administered (for that may be the same in many
Baptisms, as is shown.) But Baptisms do differ, 1. In their Authors. 2. In the
different Form, in which they are administered. 3. In the different Ends for
which they were instituted.

And in all these the Baptism of Christ does differ vastly from the Baptisms
both of John and the Jews, 1. As to the Author: The Baptism of the Jews was an
Addition of their own to the Law; and had no higher Author that we know of. But
John was sent by God, to baptize, John i. 33. And it was Christ the Lord who
was the Author of the Christian Baptism. 2. As to the Form: Persons were
baptized unto those whose Disciples they were admitted by their Baptism. Thus
the Proselites to the Jewish Religion, were baptized unto Moses. And Men were
made Disciples to John, by his Baptism. But the Christian Baptism alone is
administered in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.
This is the Form of the Christian Baptism, and which does distinguish it from
all other Baptisms whatever. 3. The End of the Christian Baptism is as highly
distant and different from the Ends of other Baptisms, as their Authors differ.
The End of the Jewish Baptism was to give the Baptized a Title to the
Privileges of the Law of Moses. And the End of John's Baptism was to point to
HIM who was to come; and to prepare Men, by Repentance, for the Reception of
the Gospel. But the End of CHRIST 's Baptism was to Instate Us into all the
Unconceivable Glories, and High Eternal Prerogatives which belong to the
Members of his Body, of his Flesh, and of his Bones, Ephesians. v. 30. That we might
receive the Adoption of Sons, Gal. iv. 5. Henceforth no more Servants, but Sons
of God! and Heirs of Heaven! These are Ends so far transcendent above the Ends
of all former Baptisms, that, in comparison, other Baptisms are not only less,
but none at all; like the Glory of the Stars, in presence of the Sun; they not
only are a lesser Light, but when he appears, they become altogether invisible.

And as a Pledge or Fore-taste of these Future and Boundless Joys, The Gift of
the Holy Ghost is given upon Earth; and is promised as an Effect of the Baptism
of Christ. As Peter preached, Acts ii. 38. Repent and be baptized every one of
you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye shall
receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. And Gal. iii. 27. As many of you as have
been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ.

This of the Gift of the Holy Ghost was not added to any Baptism before
Christ's: and does remarkably distinguish it from all others.

SECT. VI. That Christ and the Apostles did not Baptize with John's Baptism.
THis is a Pretense of the Quakers when they find themselves distressed with
the clear Proofs of Christ and the Apostles having administered Water Baptism.
They say that this was John's Baptism, because it was Water Baptism. And, as
before observed Sect. IV. they only say this, but can bring no Proof. But they
put us, here again, upon the Negative, to prove it was not.

As to their Pretense that it was John's Baptism, because it was Water Baptism,
that is answered in the last Section.

And now to gratify them in this (though unreasonable) Demand, I will give
these following Reasons why the Baptism which Christ and his Apostles did
practice, was not John's Baptism:

1st, If Christ did baptize, with John's Baptism; then he made Disciples to
John, and not to himself. For it is before shown Sect. III. Number. ii and iii.
That Baptism was an Initiating Form, and nothing else, whereby Men were
admitted to be Disciples to him unto whom they were baptized. Thus the Jews who
were baptized unto Moses said, We are Moses's Disciples. John. ix. 28. And
those whom John baptized, were called the Disciples of John. And there needs no
more to show that Christ did not baptize with the Baptism of John, than to show
that the Disciples of Christ and of John were not the same, which is made
evident from John i. 35, 37. where it is told that two of John's Disciples left
him, and followed Jesus. And Matthew. xi. 2. John sent two of his Disciples to
Jesus. And the Disciples of Christ lived under a different Economy, and other
Rules than either the Disciples of John, or of the Pharisees, to show that they
were under another Master. And the Disciples of John were scandalized at it,
Matthew. ix. 14. Then came to him (JESUS) the Disciples of John, saying, Why do
we, and the Pharisees fast often, but thy Disciples fast not?

Therefore the Disciples of Christ and of John were not the same: and therefore
Christ did baptize Men to be his own Disciples, and not to be the Disciples of
John: and therefore the Baptism of Christ was not the Baptism of John.

2dly, If Christ did baptize with John's Baptism, the more he baptized, it was
the more to the Honor and Reputation of the Baptism of John: But Christ's
baptizing was urged, by the Disciples of John, as a lessning of John, John iii.
26. Therefore the Baptism with which Christ did baptize could not be the
Baptism of John. Though it be said John iv. 2. That Jesus himself baptized not,
but his Disciples: (For so the Apostles and other Ministers of Christ have
baptized more into the Faith of Christ, than Christ himself has done:) Yet here
is no ground of Jealousy or Rivalship to Christ, because the Administration of
Christ's Baptism, is all to the Honor and Glory of Christ: And therefore
Christ's baptizing more Disciples than John, could be no Lessning of John, but
rather a Magnifying of him so much the more, if Christ had baptized with John's
Baptism.

3dly, When John's Disciples had told him of Christ's out rivalling him, by
baptizing more than he, John answered, He must increase, but I must decrease,
John iii. 30. But if CHRIST did baptize with the Baptism of John, than John
still increased, and CHRIST decreased. For,

4thly, He is greater who institutes a Baptism, than those who only administer
a Baptism of another's appointment: Therefore if Christ did baptize with the
Baptism of John, it argues John to be greater than Christ, and Christ to be but
a Minister of John.

5thly, All the Jews who had been baptized with the Baptism of John, did not
turn Christians; therefore John's Baptism was not the Christian Baptism.

6thly, Those of John's Disciples, who turned Christians, were baptized over
again, in the Name of Christ; of which there is a remarkable Instance, Acts
xix. to v. 7. But the same Baptism was never repeated (as is shown above, Sect.
III. Numb. iii.) therefore the Baptism which the Apostles did administer, was
not John's Baptism.

7thly, The Form of the Baptism which Christ commanded Mat. xxviii. 19. was, In
the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: But that was not
the Form of John's Baptism: Therefore that was not John's Baptism. See what is
before said Sect. V. Number. ii. of the Difference of Baptisms, as to the Author,
the Form, and the End of each Baptism: And, in all these Respects, it is made
apparent that the Baptism which was practiced by Christ and the Apostles, was
not the Baptism of John.

To all these clear Arguments the Quakers, without answering to any of them, do
still insist, That the Water Baptism which the Apostles did administer, was no
other than John's Baptism. That they had no Command for it; only did it in
Compliance with the Jews, as Paul circumcised Timothy, ( Acts xvi. 3.) And
purified himself in the Temple, ( Acts xxi. 21, to 27.) But this is all Gratis
Dictum; here is not one word of Proof: And they might as well say, That the
Apostles PREACHING was only in Compliance with the Jews, and that it was the
same with John's PREACHING; for their Commissions to Teach, and to Baptize were
both given in the same Breath, Matthew. xxviii. 19. Go ye -- TEACH all Nations,
BAPTIZING them, etc.

Now why the Teaching here should be Christ's, and Baptizing only John's, the
Quakers are desired to give some other Reason besides their own Arbitrary
Interpretations; before which no Text in the Bible, or any other Writing can
stand.

Besides, I would inform them, That the Greek word (...), in this Text, which
we Translate Teach, signifies to make Disciples; so that the literal, and more
proper reading of that Text is, Go, and Disciple all Nations, or make Disciples
of them, baptizing them, etc.

If it be asked, Why we should Translate the Word (...), Matt. xxviii. 19. by
the Word Teach, if it means to Disciple a Man, or make him a Disciple?

I Answer: That Teaching was the Method whereby to Persuade a Man, to Convert
him, so as to make a Disciple of him. But the Form of Admitting him into the
Church, and actually to make him a Disciple, to give him the Privileges and
Benefits of a Disciple, was by Baptism.

Now the Apostles being sent to Teach Men, in order to make them Disciples;
therefore instead of Go, Disciple Men, we Translate it, Go, Teach, as being a
more Familiar Word, and better understood in English.

Though if both the Greek words (...), and (...), in this Text, were Translated
Literally, it would obviate these Quaker-Objections more plainly: For then the
Words would run thus; Go and Admit all Nations to be my Disciples, by Washing
them with Water, in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost. (...), Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded
you.

Here the Word (...), i. e. Teaching, is plainly distinguished from (...), to
Disciple them; though our English renders them both by the Word Teaching, and
makes a Tautology: Go Teach all Nations -- Teaching them.

But, as a Child is Admitted into a School before it be Taught: So Children may
be Admitted into the Pale of the Church, and be made Disciples, by Baptism,
before they are Taught. Which shows the meaning of these two Words, i. e.
Discipling, and Teaching, to be different. Because, though in Persons Adult,
Teaching must go before Discipling; yet in Children (who are within the
Covenant, as of the Law, to be Admitted at eight Days old, by Circumcision; so
under the Gospel, by Baptism) Discipling goes before Teaching: And that
Discipling is only by Baptism.

But to return. The Quakers are so hard put to it, when they are pressed with
that Text, Acts x. 47. Can any forbid Water, etc? That they are forced to make
a Suppose, (without any ground or appearance of Truth) That these Words were an
Answer to a Question. And that the Question was, Whether they might not be
Baptized with John's Baptism? And that this proceeded from a Fondness the Jews
had to John's Baptism. And that the Apostle Peter only Complied with them out
of Condescension, as Paul Circumcised Timothy.

Ans. 1. Cornelius, and those whom Peter Baptized, Acts x. were Gentiles and
not Jews: They were Romans, and therefore cannot be supposed to have had any
Longing after John's Baptism; none of them having ever owned it, or having been
Baptized with it.

2. The Gentile Converts to Christianity, refused to submit to the Jewish
Circumcision, or any of their Law ( Acts xv.) And therefore it is not to be
imagined, that they would be fond of any of the Baptisms which were used among
the Jews.

3. Even all the Jews themselves, no not the Chief and Principal of them,
neither the Pharisees nor Lawyers did submit to John's Baptism, Luke vii. 30.

4. The Ethiopian Eunuch requested Baptism from Philip, ( Acts viii.) And it
cannot be supposed, that the Ethiopians had more knowledge of John's Baptism,
or regard for it, than the Romans, or great part of the Jews themselves.

5. There is no ground to suppose that St. Peter's words, Can any Man forbid
Water, etc? were an Answer to any Question that was asked him. The most
forcible Affirmation being often expressed by way of Question.

Can any Man forbid Water? That is, No Man can forbid it. And for the saying,
Then Answered Peter. There is nothing more familiar in the New Testament, than
that Expression when no Question at all was asked. See Matt. xi. 25. xii. 38.
xvii. 4. xxii. 1. Mark xi. 14. xii. 35. xiv. 48. Luke vii. 40. xiv. 3, 4, 5.
xxii. 51. John v. 17, 19.

6. Granting a Question was asked, and that Cornelius, as well as the
Ethiopian, had desired Baptism, why must this be construed of John's Baptism?
Especially considering, that Peter, in that same Sermon which Converted
Cornelius (Act. x. 37.) told them that the Gospel which he Preached unto them,
was that which was published, after the Baptism which John Preached. What
Argument was this for Cornelius to return back again to John's Baptism? Or, if
he had desired it, why should we think that Peter would have Complied with him;
and not rather have reproved him, and carried him beyond it, to the Baptism of
Christ: as Paul did ( Acts xix.) to those who had before received the Baptism
of John?

7. But as to the Compliance which the Quakers would have to John's Baptism;
and which they compare to Paul's Compliance in Circumcising Timothy: I will
show the great Disparity.

First, The Law was more universally received than John's Baptism: For many and
the Chief of the Jews did not receive John's Baptism, as above-observ'd.

Secondly, The Law was of much longer standing: John's Baptism was like a Flash
of Lightning, like the Day Star, which ushered in the Sun of Righteousness, and
then disappeared: But the Law continued during the long Night of Types and
Shadows, many hundreds of Years.

Thirdly, John did no Miracle ( John x. 41.) But the Law was delivered, and
propagated by many Ages of Miracles. 'Twas enjoined under Penalty of Death, to
them and their Posterities; whereas John's Baptism lasted not one Age, was
intended only for the Men then present, to point out to them the Messiah, then
already come, and ready to appear: And no outward Penalties were annexed to
John's Law; People were only Invited, not Compelled to come unto his Baptism:
But to neglect Circumcision, was Death, Genesis xvii. 14. Exodus iv. 24.

The Preaching of John was only a Warning; let those take notice to it that
would:

Whereas the Law was pronounced by the Mouth of God Himself, in Thunder and
Lightning, and out of the midst of the Fire, upon Mount Sinai, in the Audience
of all the People: And so terrible was the Sight, that Moses said, I
exceedingly fear and quake, Heb. xii. 21. For from God's Right Hand went a Fire
of Law for them, Deuteronomy. xxxiii. 2.

From all these Reasons, we must suppose the Jews to be much more Tenacious of
the Law, than of John's Baptism; and to be brought off with greater difficulty
from their Circumcision, which had descended down to them all the way from
Abraham, 430 Years before the Law, (Gal. iii. 17.) than from John's Baptism,
which was but of Yesterday; and never received by the Chief of the Jews. And
therefore there was much more reason for Paul's Complying with the Jews in the
Case of Circumcision, than in that of John's Baptism, as the Quakers suppose.

When Christ came to fulfill the Law, he did it with all regard to the Law,
(Matthew. v. 17, 18, 19.) He destroyed it not with Violence, all at once; but
fulfilled it leasurely and by degrees: Vt cum honor Matter Synagoga
sepeliretur. The Synagogue was the Mother of the Church; and therefore it was
fitting that she should be Buried with all Decency and Honor.

This was the Reason of all those Complyances with the Jews, at the beginning,
to wear them off, by degrees, from their Superstition to the Law.

Though in this some might Comply too far: And there want not those who think
that Paul's Circumcising of Timothy, (Acts xvi. 3.) was as faulty a Compliance,
as that which he blamed in Peter, (Gal. ii.) For that of Paul's is not
Commended, in the Place where it is mentioned.

And now I appeal to the Reason of Mankind, whether Objections thus picked up
from such obscure and uncertain Passages, ought to overballance plain and
positive Commands, which are both backed and explained by the Practice of the
Apostles, and the Universal Church after them? All which I have before
Demonstrated of Baptism.

8. But however the Quakers may argue from Paul's Compliance with the Jews, the
Reader has reason to complain of my Compliance with Them: For, after all that
has been said, there is not one single Word in any Text of the N.T. that does
so much as hint at any such thing, as that Peter's Baptizing of Cornelius, or
Philip's Baptizing of the Eunuch, was in any sort of Compliance unto John's
Baptism. This is a perfect Figment, out of the Quaker's own Brain, without any
Ground or Foundation in the World: And therefore there was no need of Answering
it at all, otherwise than to bid the Quakers prove their Assertion, That these
Baptisms were in Compliance with John's, which they could never, have done.

Whereas it is plain from the Words of the Text, ( Acts xvi. 3.) that Paul's
Circumcising Timothy, was in Compliance with the Jews: It is expressly so said,
and the Reason of it given, because, though his Mother was a Jewess, yet his
Father was a Greek; and therefore, because of the Jews which were in those
Quarters (says the Text) he Circumcised Timothy, that these Jews might Hear and
Receive him, which, otherwise, they would not have done. Now let the Quakers
show the like Authority, that the Baptisms of Cornelius, of the Eunuch, and of
the Corinthians, Acts xviii. 8. (For that too they acknowledge to have been
Water Baptism, as I will show presently) let the Quakers show the like
Authority, as I have given for the Circumcision of Timothy being in Compliance
with the Jews, let them show the like, Isay, that the foresaid Baptisms were in
Compliance with John's, and then they will have something to say. But till
then, this Excuse, or Put off of theirs, is nothing else but a hopeless Shift
of a desperate Cause, to suppose, against all sense, that these Gentiles, (
Romans, Ethiopians, and Corinthians) desired John's Baptism, who rejected all
the Laws and Customs of the Jews.

SECT. VII. The Quakers Master-Objection from 1 Cor. i. 14. I thank GOD that I
Baptized none of you, but Crispus and Gaius. And Ver. 17. For Christ sent me
not to Baptize, but to Preach the Gospel.
FROM this Passage they argue, That Water Baptism was not commanded by Christ,
because here St. Paul says, That he was not sent to Baptize; and that he thanks
God, that he Baptized so few of them. But,

In Answer to this, I will first of all premise, That a bare Objection, without
some Proof on the other side, does neither justify their Cause, nor overthrow
ours: For when a thing is Proved Affirmatively, it cannot be overthrown by
Negative Difficulties which may be Objected.

You must dissolve the Proofs which are brought to support it: Nothing else
will do.

For what Truth is there so evident in the World, against which no Objection
can be raised?

Even the Being of a God has been disputed against by these sort of Arguments;
that is, by raising Objections, and starting Difficulties, which may not easily
be Answered: But while those Demonstrative Arguments, which Prove a God, remain
unshaken, a thousand Difficulties are no Disproof.

And so, while the Command of Christ, and the Practice of his Apostles, and of
all the Christian World, in pursuance of that Command, are clearly Proved, no
Difficulty from an obscure Text, can shake such a Foundation.

But I lay down this, only as a General Rule; because this Method is so much
made use of by the Quakers (and others) who never think of Answering plain
Proofs; but by raising a great Dust of Objections, would bury and hide what
they cannot Disprove.

I say, that I only mind them at present, of this fallacious Artifice; for I
have no use for it as to these Texts objected, to which a very plain and easy
Answer can be given. And,

First, I would observe, how the Quakers can understand the Word Baptize to
mean Water Baptism, or no Water Baptism, just as the Texts seem to favor their
cause, or otherwise.

For there is no mention of Water in either of the Texts objected, only the
single word Baptize. And why then must they construe these two Texts only, of
all the rest in the New Testament, to mean Water Baptism? Why? but only to
strain an Objection out of them against Water Baptism?

But will they let the Word Baptize signify Water Baptism, in other places, as
well as in these?

They cannot refuse it with any show or color of Reason. They must not refuse
it in Acts xviii. 8. where the Baptizing of Crispus (mentioned in the first of
the Texts objected) is recorded. And there, it is not only said of Crispus,
that he was baptized, but that many of the Corinthians hearing, believed, and
were baptized. By which, the Quakers cannot deny Water Baptism to be meant,
since they construe it so, 1 Cor. i. 14.

Secondly, We may further observe, that in the Text, Acts xviii. 8. Crispus is
only said to have believed, which was thought sufficient to infer, that he was
baptized; which could not be, unless all that believed, were baptized: Which,
no doubt, was the Case, as it is written, Acts xiii. 48. As many as were
ordained to eternal Life, believed. And (Chapter ii. 41.) They that received the
Word, were baptized, And (V. 47.) The Lord added to the Church daily such as
should be saved.

So that this is the Climax or Scale of Religion. As many as are ordained to
eternal Life do believe: And they that believe, are baptized: And they that are
baptized, are added to the Church.

And to show this received Notion, That whoever did believe was baptized, when
Paul met some Disciples who had not heard of the Holy Ghost, Acts xix. 3. he
did not ask them whether they had been baptized, or not? He took that for
granted, since they believed. But he asks, Unto what were ye baptized?
Supposing that they had been baptized.

Thirdly, Here then this Objection of the Quakers, has turned into an
invincible Argument against them.

They have, by this, yielded the whole Cause: For if the Baptism, 1 Cor. i. 14.
be Water Baptism, then that Baptism, Acts xviii. 8. must be the same: And
consequently all the other Baptisms, mentioned in the Acts, are, as these,
Water-Baptisms also.

But, besides the Quakers Confession (for they are unconstant, and may change
their Minds) the thing shows it self, that the Baptism mentioned, 1 Cor. i. 14.
was Water Baptism; because Paul there thanks God, that he baptized none of them
but Crispus and Gaius. Would the Apostle thank God that he had baptized so few,
with the Holy Ghost? Or would he repent of baptizing with the Holy Ghost?
Therefore it must be the Water Baptism which was here spoke of.

Fourthly, But now, what is the Reason, that he was glad he had baptized so few
with Water Baptism? And he gives the Reason, in the very next words. (V. 15.)
Lest any should say, that I had baptized in mine own Name. What was the
occasion of this Fear? It is told from V. 10. That there were great Divisions
and Contentions among these Corinthians, and that these were grounded upon the
Aemulation that arose among them, in behalf of their several Teachers. One was
for Paul, another for Apollos, others for Cephas, and others for Christ.

This would seem, as if the Christian Religion had been contradictory to it
self:

As it Christ, and Cephas, and Paul, and Apollos had set up against one another:

As if they had not all taught the same Doctrine:

As if each had preached up himself, and not Christ:

And had baptized Disciples, each in his own Name, and not in Christ's; and had
begot Followers to himself, and not to Christ.

To remove this so horrible a Scandal, St. Paul argues with great zeal, (V.
13.) Is Christ divided? (says he) Was Paul Crucified for you? Or were ye
baptized in the Name of Paul? I thank God, that I baptized none of you but
Crispus and Gaius; lest any should say, That I had baptized in mine own Name.

There needs no Application of this, the Words of the Apostle are themselves so
plain.

He did not thank God, that they had not been baptized; but that He had not
done it.

And this, not for any slight to Water Baptism; but to obviate the Objection of
his baptizing in his own Name.

Fifthly, By the way, this is a strong Argument for Water Baptism: Because the
Inward Baptism of the Spirit, comes not with Observation and Show, but is
within us, Luke xvii. 20, 21. Nor is it done in any Body's Name, it is an
inward Operation upon the Heart.

But the outward Baptism is always done in some Name or other; in his Name
whose Disciple you are thereby made and Admitted.

Therefore it must, of necessity, be the outward Baptism, of which St. Paul
here speaks; because it was outwardly Administered, in such an outward Name. And
he makes this an Argument that he had not made Disciples to himself, but to
Christ; because he did not Baptize them in his own Name, but in Christ's.

Now this had been no Argument, but perfect Banter, if there had been no
outward Baptism, that the People could have both seen and heard. How otherwise
could they tell in what Name, or no Name they were baptized, if all was Inward
and Invisible?

But I need not prove what the Quakers grant and contend for, that all this was
meant of Water Baptism; because otherwise their whole Objection, from this
place, does fall.

VI. But they would infer as if no great stress were laid upon it; because that
few were so baptized.

I Answer. That there is nothing in the Text which does infer, that few of
these Corinthians were baptized.

St. Paul only thanks God, that he himself had not done it, except to a few,
for the Reasons before given: But Acts xviii. 8. it is said, That besides
Crispus, whom Paul himself baptized, MANY of the Corinthians were baptized.

Nay, they were all baptized, as many as believed, as before is proved. And, in
this very place, St. Paul taking it for granted, that all who believed, were
baptized, which I have already observed from his Question to certain Disciples,
Acts xix. 3. not whether they were baptized, but unto what, i. e. In what Name,
they had been baptized? So here 1 Cor. i. 13. He does not make the Question,
whether they had been baptized? That he takes for granted. But in what Name,
were ye baptized? Which supposes, not only that all were baptized, but likewise
that all who were baptized, were baptized in some outward Name; and therefore
that it was the Outward, i. e. Water Baptism.

VII. But the second Text objected, V. 17. is yet to be accounted for; where
St. Paul says, Christ sent me not to Baptize, but to Preach the Gospel. This he
said in justification of himself for having baptized so few in that place; for
which he blesses God, because, as it happened, it proved a great justification
of his not baptizing in his own Name.

But then, on the other hand, here would seem to be a Neglect in him of his
Duty: For if it was his Duty to have baptized them all, and he baptized but a
few, here was a great Neglect.

In Answer to this, we find, that there was no Neglect in not baptizing them,
for that, not a few but many of the Corinthians were baptized, Acts xviii. 8.
that is, as many as believed, as before is shown.

But then who was it that baptized those many? For St. Paul baptized but a few.

I Answer. The Apostle employed others, under him, to Baptize.

And he vindicates this, by saying, That he was not sent to Baptize, i. e.
principally and chiefly; that was not the chief part of his Commission: But the
greater and more difficult part was that of Preaching, to Dispute with,
Persuade and Convert the Heathen World. To this, great Parts, and Courage, and
Miraculous Gifts were necessary: But to Administer the outward Form of Baptism
to those who were Converted, had no Difficulty in it; required no great Parts,
or Endowments, only a lawful Commission to Execute it.

And it would have taken up too much of the Apostles time, it was impossible
for them to have baptized, with their own Hands, those vast Multitudes whom
they Converted. Christianity had reached to all Quarters of the then known
World, as far almost, as at this Day, before the Apostles left the World. And
could Twelve Men Baptize the whole World? Their Progress was not the least of
their Miracles: The Bread of Life multiplied faster, in their Distribution of
it, than the Loaves by our SAVIOR 's Breaking of them. St. Peter Converted
about three Thousand at one Sermon, Acts ii. 41. And at another time about five
Thousand, Chapter iv. 4. Multitudes both of Men and Women. Chapter v. 14. Many more
than the Apostles could have counted; much more than they could have baptized;
for which if they had stayed, they had made slender Progress. No. The Apostles
were sent, as loud Heralds, to proclaim to all the Earth, to run swiftly, and
gather much People; and not to stay (they could not stay) for the baptizing
with their own Hands, all that they Converted: They left that to others, whom
they had ordained to Administer it. Yet not so, as to exclude themselves; but
they themselves did Baptize, where they saw occasion, as St. Paul here did
BAPTIZE Crispus and Gaius, and the House of Stephanas, some of the Principal of
the Corinthians. Not that he was obliged to have done it himself, having others
to whom he might have left it: For he was not sent, that is, put under the
Necessity to Baptize with his own Hands, but to Preach, to Convert others, that
was his principal Province, and which he was not to neglect, upon the account
of baptizing, which others could do as well as he.

But if you will so understand the Words of his not being sent, i. e. that it
was not within his Commission, that he was not Empowered by Christ, to Baptize,
then it would have been a Sin, and great Presumption in him, to have baptized
any body.

Nay more. This Text, thus understood, is flatly contradictory to Matt. xxviii.
19. which says, Go, Baptize: And this says, I am not sent to Baptize.

These are contradictory, if by, I am not sent, be understood, I have not Power
or Commission to Baptize.

But by, I am not sent, no more is meant in this Text, than that Baptizing is
not the chief or principal part of my Commission. As if a General were accused
for Mustering and Listing Men in his own Name, and not in the King's, and he
should say, in Vindication of himself, that he had never listed any, except
such and such Officers; for that he was not sent to Muster, or Drill Men, or to
Exercise Troops or Regiments, but to Command the Army: Would it follow from
hence, that he had not Power to Exercise a Troop or a Regiment, or that it was
not within his Commission? Or if a Doctor of Physic should say, That it was
not his Part to compound Medicines, and make up Drugs (that was the
Apothecary's Business) but to give Prescriptions; would any Man infer from
this, that he might not Compound his own Medicines if he pleased?

Or if (to come nearer) a Professor of Divinity, or a Bishop' should say, That
he was not sent to Teach School; this would not imply that he might not Keep
School; nay, he ought, if there were no others to do it: So the Apostle of the
Gentiles was not sent to spend his Time in Baptizing, Visiting the Sick, or
other Parts of his Duty, (which others might perform) so as to hinder his great
Work in Converting of the Gentiles: All of whom he could not Baptize, nor Visit
all their Sick: Yet both these were within his Commission, and he might and did
Execute them where he saw occasion. As if all the Sick in London should expect
to be Visited by the Bishop of London; and all the Children should be brought
to be baptized by him; he might well say, That he was not sent to Baptize, or
to Visit their Sick, but to look after his Episcopal Function: And send them
for these Offices, to others, under him: And yet this would no ways imply, that
these Offices were not within the Episcopal Commission; or that he was not sent
both to Baptize, and to Visit the Sick: But only that he was not sent
principally and chiefly to Baptize, or to Visit the Sick.

And as to that Phrase of being sent; we find it used in this same sense, to
mean only being chiefly and principally sent. Thus, Genesis xlv. 8. Joseph said to
his Brethren, It was not you that sent me hither, but God. It was certainly his
Brethren who sent him, for they sold him into Egypt: But it was not They,
principally and chiefly, but God, who had other and extraordinary Ends in it.

Adam was not deceived (says the Apostle, 1 Timothy ii. 14.) but the Woman being
deceived, was in the Transgression. Adam was deceived, and fell as well as the
Woman; but the meaning is, he was not first, or principally deceived.

Again. As for you who stick so close to the Letter (when it seems to serve
your turn) Go ye and learn what that means, I WILL HAVE MERCY, AND NOT
SACRIFICE, Matt. ix. 13.

By which it cannot be understood, that God did not require Sacrifice; for he
commanded it upon Pain of Death. Yet he says, (Jer. vii. 22.) I spoke not unto
your Fathers, nor commanded them -- concerning Burnt-Offerings, or Sacrifices:
But this thing Commanded I them, saying, Obey my Voice, etc. according as it is
written, (1 Samuel xv. 22.) To Obey is better than Sacrifice.

By all which cannot be meant, that God did not Command the Jews concerning
Burnt-Offerings and Sacrifices (for we know how particularly they were
commanded) but that the outward Sacrifice was not the chief and principal part
of the Command; which respected chiefly the inward Sacrifice and Circumcision
of the Heart.

Which when they neglected, and leaned wholly to the Outward, then God detests
their Oblations; Isa. i. 14. Your new Moons, and your appointed Feasts my Soul
hates, I am weary to bear them. And he says, V. 12. Who has required this at
your Hand?

It was certainly God who had required all these things at their hands; but
these outward Performances, (though the Neglect or Abuse of them was punished
with Death) yet they were not the chief and principal part of the Command,
being intended chiefly for the sake of the Inward and Spiritual Part: From
which when they were separated, they were (like the Body, when the Soul is
gone) a dead and a loathsome CARCASS of Religion: And which God is therefore
said, not to have commanded, because he did not Command them without the other:
As he made not the Body without the Soul; yet he made the Body as well as the
Soul.

VIII. And as there is Soul and Body in Man, so (while Man is in the Body)
there must be a Soul and Body of Religion; that is, an outward and an inward
WORSHIP, with our Bodies as well as our Souls.

And as the Separation of Soul and Body in Man, is called Death; so is the
Separation of the outward and the inward Part of Religion, the Death and
Destruction of Religion.

The outward is the Cask, and the inward is the Wine. The Cask is no Part of
the Wine; but if you break the Cask, you lose the Wine. And as certainly,
whoever destroy the outward Institutions of Religion, lose the inward Parts of
it too.

As is sadly experienced in the Quakers, who, having thrown off the outward
Baptism, and the other Sacrament of Christ's Death, have, thereby, loft the
inward thing signified, which is, the PERSONAL Christ, as Existing without all
other Men, and having so Suffered, Rose, Ascended, and now, and for ever,
Sits in Heaven, in his true proper Human Nature, WITHOUT all other Men. This
the Quakers will not own, (except some of the New Separation) and this they
have lost, by their Neglect of those outward Sacraments, which Christ appointed
for this very End (among others) that is, as Remembrances of his Death: For it
had been morally impossible for Men, who had constantly and with due Reverence,
attended these holy Sacraments of Baptism and the Lord's Supper, ever to have
forgot his Death, so lively represented before their Eyes, and into which they
were baptized; or to have turned all into a mere Allegory, performed within
every Man's Breast, as these Quakers have done.

But the Enemy has persuaded them to break the Cask, and destroy the Body of
Religion; whereby the Wine is spilt, and the Soul of Religion is fled from
them: And by neglecting the outward Part, they have lost the whole inward, and
Truth of Religion; which is a true Faith in the OUTWARD Christ, and in the
Satisfaction made for our Sins, by his Blood OUTWARDLY shed; and in his
Intercession, in our Nature, as our High Priest, at his Father's Right Hand,
now, in Heaven; into which Holy of Holies, He has carried his own Blood of
Expiation, once offered upon the Cross, and presents it, for ever, as the
Atonement and full satisfaction for the Sins of the whole World; but applied
only by true Faith and Repentance, thereby, becomes fully Effectual to the
Salvation of every Faithful Penitent.

This is the only true Christian Faith: And from this the Quakers have totally
fallen; and that chiefly, by their Mad throwing off the OUTWARD Guards,
Preservatives, Fences, Sacraments, and Pledges of Religion. And those OUTWARD
Means of Grace, which Christ has commanded, and given us as the only OUTWARD
GROUNDS for our Hope of Glory. For how can that Man get to Heaven, who will not
go the way that Christ has appointed; who came down from Heaven, on purpose to
show and lead us the way thither; yet we will be wiser than he, find fault with
his Institutions, as being too much upon the Outward; and think that we can and
may Spiritualize them finer, and make the way shorter than he has done

IX. But to return, if the Quakers could find such Texts concerning Baptism, as
I have shown above concerning Sacrifices, as if it were said, That God did not
command Baptism; that he hated it, and was weary to bear it, that he would not
have it, etc. If such Texts could be found, How would the Quakers triumph! Who
would be able to stand before them! And yet, if such were found, they would
prove no more against the outward BAPTISM, than they did against the outward
SACRIFICES, i. e. That if any regarded nothing else in Baptism, than the
outward Washing, it would be as hateful to God, as the Jewish Sacrifices, when
they regarded nothing more in them but the Outward.

And it may be truly said, That God did not Command either such Sacrifices, or
such a Baptism; because he commanded not the outward alone, but with respect
unto, and chiefly for the sake of the Inward.

And, therefore, as all these, and other the like Expressions in the Old
Testament did not at all tend to the Abolition, only to the Rectification of
the Legal Sacrifices: So, much less, can that single Expression, 1 Cor. i. 17.
of Paul's saying (upon the occasion, and in the sense above mentioned) that he
was not sent to Baptize, but to Preach, much less can this infer the Abolition
of Baptism; being as positively commanded, as Sacrifices were under the Law,
and as certainly practiced by the Apostles, as the Sacrifices were by the
Levitical Priests.

X. Now suppose that I should deny, that OUTWARD Sacrifices were ever
commanded; or, that the Jews did ever practice them: And should Interpret all
that is said of Sacrifices, only of the Inward, as the Quakers do of Baptism;
and I should produce the Texts above quoted to prove that God did not command
Sacrifices, which are much more positive than that single one which is strained
against Baptism: I say, suppose that I should be so Extravagant as to set up
such a Notion, what Method (except that of Bedlam, which, in that Case, would
be most proper) could be taken to convince me? And suppose I should gain as
many Proselytes as G. Fox has done: And we should boast our Numbers, and Light
within, etc. would not this following Method be taken with us?

1st. To see how Sacrifices are actually used now in those Parts of the World
where they do Sacrifice. And being convinced that these do use outward
Sacrifices, and understand the first Command to Sacrifice, in that sense, to
inquire

2dly, Whether they did not receive this from their Fathers, so upward, to the
first Institution? And is not this the surest Rule to find out the meaning of
the first Command? viz. How it was understood and practiced by those to whom
the Command was first given; and from them, through all Ages since. Upon all
which Topics, the present Water Baptism, now used, may be as much demonstrated
to be the same which was practiced by the Apostles, and consequently, which was
commanded by Christ, as the outward Sacrifices can be shown to have been, at
first, commanded to the Jews, and practiced by them.

XI. And as for that precarious Plea, before confuted, of the Baptism which the
Apostles practiced, being only a Compliance with the Jews; there is more
Pretense to say, that the Jewish Sacrifices were in Compliance with the Heathen
Sacrifices, which were long before the Levitical Law.

I say, there is more Pretense for this, but not more Truth. More pretense,
because it has been advanced of late, by Men of greater Figure than Quakers,
That the Levitical Sacrifices were commanded by God, in Compliance with the
Gentile Sacrifices, which were before used.

But this is a Subject by it self. I now only show the Quakers, that there is
more ground to spiritualize away Sacrifices from the Letter, than Baptism; more
pretense for it from Texts of Scripture, and from some odd Opinions of some
Learned Men.

And if the Denial of OUTWARD Sacrifices would be counted (as the like of
Baptism was, when first started) to be nothing short of Madness, the
continuance of that Distraction for 46 Years together (as in the Case of
Baptism) might make it more familiar to us, but would abate nothing of the
Unreasonableness.

XII. I believe the Reader, by this time, cannot but think that I have taken
too much needless Pains, in Answer to that Objection of St. Paul's saying that
he was not sent to Baptize, but to Preach: But I speak to a sort of Men, who
are used to Repetitions, and will not take a Hint (unless it be on their side)
and therefore I enlarge more than I would do, if I were writing to any others.
But I think I have said enough, even to them, to show, that the Meaning of the
Apostle in this Text, was only to prefer the Office of Preaching, before that
of Baptizing. But I must withal desire them to take notice, that the Preaching,
that is, Publishing of the Gospel, at first to Heathens, was a very different
thing, and of much greater Necessity, than those set Discourses, which we now
call Preaching in Christian Auditories.

XIII. Let me (to conclude) add one-Argument more, from this Text, 1 Cor. i.
17. why that Baptism, mentioned Matt. xxviii. 19. cannot be meant of the
Baptism with the Holy Ghost. Because if when Christ sent his Apostles to
Baptize, the meaning was (as the Quakers would have it) to Baptize with the
Holy Ghost; then the Apostle Paul said in this Text, 1 Cor. i. 17. That he was
not sent to Baptize with the Holy Ghost. Which sense, since the Quakers will
not own, they cannot reconcile these Texts, without confessing, that that Text,
Matt. xxviii. 19. was not meant of the Baptism with the Holy Ghost, and then it
must be meant of the Water Baptism.

SECT. VIII. Objection from 1 Pet. iii. 21.
THE Words of the Text are these. The like Figure whereunto ( i. e. the Ark)
even Baptism, does also now save us, (not the putting away of the Filth of the
Flesh, but the Answer of a Good Conscience toward God) by the Resurrection of
Jesus Christ.

From whence the Quakers argue thus: That Baptism does not consist in the
outward Washing, but the inward.

And so far they argue right, That the inward is the chief and principal part;
and therefore, that if any regard only the outward Washing of the Skin, in
Baptism, they are indeed frustrated of the whole Benefit of it, which is
altogether Spiritual.

And it has been observed Sect. VII. latter part of Numb. vii. That if only the
outward Part of the Sacrifices, or Circumcision, and other Institutions under
the Law, were regarded, they were hateful to God, and he rejected them; though,
at the same time, he commanded the Performance of them, under the Penalty of
Death.

Thus it is in the Institutions of the Gospel. The Inward and Spiritual Part is
the chief; and for the sake of which only, the Outward is commanded: But this
makes the Outward necessary, instead of throwing it off; because (as it was
under the Law) the Outward was ordained as a Means whereby we are made
Partakers of the Inward: And therefore, if we neglect and despise the Outward,
when we may have it, we have no Promise in the Gospel to Entitle us to the
Inward: As he that neglects the Means, has no Reason to expect the End. It is
true, a Miracle may do it; but it is Presumption, and Tempting of God, to
neglect the Outward Means of God's Appointment, in expectation of his
Miraculous Interposition, against the Method which he has commanded. As if
provoking of God, did Entitle us the more to his Protection! Or, as if we were
Wiser than He, to mend and alter his Institutions, and dispense with them, at
our Pleasure!

Here let it be minded, that the Ark is put only as a Type of Baptism:
Therefore Baptism is the more worthy, and more necessary. And to neglect
Baptism, is to venture swimming in the Deluge, without the Ark.

SECT. IX. The Quaker-Objection from, Ephesians. iv. 5.
I. THE Words of the Text are these. One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism; whence
the Quakers argue thus. That Water Baptism is one Baptism, and the Baptism with
the Holy Ghost, is another Baptism; because the one is the Outward, and the
other the Inward Baptism; and outward and inward are two Things: Therefore that
these must be two Baptisms: which, they say, is contrary to this Text, that
says, the Christians have but ONE Baptism, as they have but ONE Lord, and ONE
Faith.

II. I Answer. Outward and Inward are Two things; but yet they hinder not the
Unity of that which is composed of Both. Thus Soul and Body are Two things, and
of Natures the most different of any Two things in the World; yet they hinder
not the Unity of the Man, who is composed of Both. Nay, it is the Composition
of these Two that makes up the One MAN; insomuch, that when these Two are
Divided, the MAN is no more; for it is nothing else which we call Death, but
the Separation of Soul and Body.

And (as before shown, Sect. VII. Number. VIII.) while there is Soul and Body in
Man, there must be a Soul and Body of Religion, that is, an Outward and an
Inward Part of Religion: And if we destroy the Outward, we shall lose the
Inward; because the Outward was designed for the Safety and Preservation of the
Inward.

It is true, that the Inward is the Chief and Principal Part, as of Man, so of
his Religion: But this does not infer, that the Outward is not likewise
necessary. We are commanded, Romans xii. 1. to Present our Bodies a living
Sacrifice, and this is called our Reasonable Service. For, is it not
Reasonable, that, since our Bodies are God's Creatures, as well as our Souls,
He should have the Adoration and Service of our Bodies, as well as of our Souls?

There is no Outward or Public WORSHIP but by our Bodies; we cannot otherwise
express the INWARD Devotion and Adoration of our Minds.

And this is so Natural, that whoever has a due Reverence and Awe of the Divine
Majesty, cannot help to Express it Outwardly, by the Adoration of his Body, in
his Approaches to God, even though in Private. As our Blessed Savior, in His
Agony, fell prostrate upon His Face to the Earth.

And whoever deny the Outward Worship to God, or perform it slovenly, and
carelessly, it is a full Demonstration that they have no True and Real Devotion,
or Just Apprehension of the Almighty.

Therefore the Outward Part of Religion must, by no means, be let go, because
the Inward certainly dies, when the Outward is gone.

But the Outward and the Inward WORSHIP of God are not Two Worships, but only
Two Parts of the same Worship. As Soul and Body are not Two Men, but Two Parts
of the same Man; so the Adoration of this One Man, Outwardly in his Body, and
Inwardly in his Soul, is not TWO Worships, but TWO Parts of the SAME Worship.

III. There is but one Faith, yet this Faith consists of several Parts. There
is a Faith in God, of which the Heathens do partake: There is a Faith in
Christ, which denominates Men Christians: Yet these are not Two Faiths in a
Christian, but TWO Parts of the SAME Faith. There is likewise a Faith in the
Promises of the Gospel; and that what is therein Commanded, is from God: And
there are Degrees of this Faith, of which one Christian does partake more than
another. And yet to Christians there is but One Faith.

The Belief of a God, and of Christ, are TWO Faiths or Beliefs, because many do
Believe a God, who do not Believe in Christ: Yet, in a Christian they are not
TWO Faiths, but ONE Faith; because the one, that is, the Faith in Christ, does
suppose the other, that is, the Belief of a God; it only Adds to it, and Builds
upon it. And this makes them no more TWO Faiths, than building an House a Story
higher makes it TWO Houses.

IV. There is but One Lord, that is Christ; yet He consists of an Outward and
an Inward Part, of Body and Soul. Nay more, of both the Divine and Human
Natures. I might urge the different Persons in the One Divine Nature; but this
will be no Argument to the Quakers, who Deny it. But they Deny not (seemingly
at least) the Divinity of Christ; and therefore, as this Lord is but One, though
consisting of several Natures; and His Faith and Worship but One, though
consisting of several Parts; why may not His Baptism be likewise One, though
consisting of an Outward and an Inward Part?

V. There was an Outward and an Inward CIRCUMCISION, as well as an Outward and
Inward BAPTISM; yet no Man will say, that there were TWO Circumcisions under
the Law. As little Reason is there to say, That there are TWO Baptisms under
the Gospel. See what is before said, Sect. VII. Number. X, and XI, of the stronger
Presumptions to deny the Outward SACRIFICES under the Law, than the Outward
BAPTISM under the Gospel.

VI. Let me add, that Circumcision was discontinu'd 40 Years in the Wilderness
( Josh. v. 5.) yet this was made no Argument against the Reviving and
Continuance of it afterward.

But Baptism has not been discontinu'd one Year, nor at all in the Christian
Church, since its first Institution by Christ.

If the Quakers could find such a Discontinuance of Baptism, as there was of
Circumcision, they would make great Advantage of it; though it could be no more
an Argument in the one case, than in the other.

But since they have not even this small Pretense against it, the Constant and
Uninterrupted Practice of Baptism, in all Christian Churches, through all Ages,
is an Irrefragable Argument against them; and shows them to be Dissonant from
the whole Church of CHRIST.

SECT. X. An Objection from Heb. vi. 1.
I. I Could not have imagined that this should have been made an Objection, if
I had not seen it urged as such, in a Book printed this Year, 1696. Entitled,
John Baptist's Decreasing, etc. By John Gratton. Where he urges mightily this
Text, as a plain Prohibition to the further Continuance of Baptism. He lays
great stress upon the Word Leaving. Therefore Leaving the Principles of the
Doctrine of Christ, let us go on unto Perfection. LEAVING (says he, P. 45.)
Mark, LEAVING the Principles, etc. And Baptism being named in the second Verse,
he infers, That the Apostle here Commands to leave off the Practice of Baptism,
which, he says, had been Indulged to the first Converts to Christianity, with
other Jewish Ceremonies. As to the supposed Indulging of Baptism, on account of
its being a Jewish Ceremony, it is answered before, Sect. VI. Page 19, 20, 21.
But now as to this Inference from Heb. vi. 1. John Gratton says, P. 47. That
this word LEAVING seems to entail the foregoing words in the Chapter before,
where he (the Apostle) had been telling them of their Childishness ( he
mentions the Doctrine of Baptism, which cannot prove the Imposing of
Water Baptism, any more than all the rest) and was now for bringing them on to
a further State, where they might know Perfection -- And it seems clear to me,
that there was some need for those things, they had so long lain like Children
weak, and Babes in, to be left. Therefore leaving these, let us go on to
Perfection; and says further; This will we do, if God permit: But if they had
been commanded by Christ, to have been used to the World's End, then why should
Paul have been so earnest at that Day, which was soon after Christ's Ascension,
to have had them then to leave them? These are his words, and a great deal more
to the same purpose. And in the same Page, he ranks Baptism with Circumcision,
Passover, and other Jewish Rites.

II. But it is very wonderful, how any Man could shut his Eyes so hard, as to
oversee not only the whole Scope, but the very Words of this Text. Can such a
Blindness be other than wilful? The Apostle was reproving some of the Hebrews
for their slender Proficiency in the Knowledge of the Gospel. And that he could
not lead them to the Higher Mysteries, they hardly yet being well fixed in the
very Rudiments and Fundamentals of Christianity: As if one should say, That he
would make an ill Doctor of Divinity, who had not yet learned his Catechism.

For the Apostle in the former Chapter having treated of the Mysterious
Parallel 'twixt Christ and Melchisedec, he stops short, Ver. 11, upon the
account of their Incapacity, of whom (that is, of Christ and Melchisedec) we
have many things to say, and hard to be uttered, seeing ye are dull of hearing:
For when for the time ye ought to be Teachers, ye have need that one teach you
again, which be the first Principles of the Oracles of God. Then he goes on to
provoke them to a further Proficiency in the words of the Text we are now
considering, Therefore (says he) leaving the Principles of the Doctrine of
Christ, let us go on unto Perfection, not laying again the Foundation of
Repentance from dead Works, and of Faith toward God, of the Doctrine of
Baptisms, and of laying on of Hands and of the Resurrection of the Dead, and of
Eternal Judgment. And this will we do, if God permit.

Here is the Doctrine of Baptism placed in the very Heart of the Fundamentals
of Christianity; yet the Quakers would filch it out from amongst all the rest,
and refer it alone to the Ceremonials of the Law spoken of in the former
Chapter. This was dropped at a venture; for the former Chapter treats only of
the Melchisedecal Priesthood, which was no Part of the Law; and there are none
of the Legal Types or Ceremonies so much as mentioned in it. Yet Baptism in the
next Chapter must refer to them!

There cannot be a greater Confession to Baptism than this Objection of the
Quakers; nor a stronger Proof for the Necessity of it, than to see it ranked
with these most-acknowledg'd Foundations of Christian Religion, and called one
of the First Principles of the Oracles of God.

III. And as to the word Leaving, upon which this Author lays so great a
stress, in this Text, as if it meant Forsaking and Abandoning, it is strange
that he should bring in the Apostle Exhorting to Leave off, and Forsake the
Principles of the Doctrine of Christ! But Leaving there is very plainly meant
of leaving or intermitting (as the Vulgar renders it) to treat further at that
time of these Principles, which the Apostle is so far from forsaking, that he
fixes them as the Foundation; which he says he will not lay again, as supposing
it laid already; but build further upon it, improve and carry up the
Superstructure. So that this Leaving, is only leaving or ceasing to Discourse
further upon these Principles, Intermittentes Sermonem, intermitting or
breaking off the Debate. Which is literally, according to the Greek (...),
leaving that Word or Subject of which he then spoke, he went on to discourse of
other things.

The Reader could not forgive this Trifling in me, to prove things which are
self-evident, if he did not see that I am forced to it.

However, this Advantage is gained by it, to see the very slender Foundations
upon which the Quakers build their Objections against Baptism; which they must
either grant to be one of the Principles of Christianity, or that Faith and
Repentance are not.

IV. But indeed (it is frightful to say it, I pray God they may seriously
consider of it) they have, together with Baptism, thrown off all the other
Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, which are mentioned in this Text. See The
Snake in the Grass, 1st Part, or Preface, p. 313, 314. 2d Part, p. 40, 41, 61,
62.
1. Repentance. Against this they have set up a Sinless Perfection, which
needs no Repentance. They never beg Pardon for Sin, supposing they have none;
and mock at us for saying, Lord have Mercy upon us; and upbraid our Liturgy for
having a Confession of Sin in it. Edward Borough, p. 32. of his Works, printed
1672, says, That God does not accept of any, where there is any failing, or who
does not fulfill the Law, and does not Answer every Demand of Justice. 2. Faith
toward God. This is the Christian Faith; or Faith in God through Christ. But
the Quakers say, Part 1. p 330, 331.
That they can come to God Immediately, without the Mediation of Christ, and
therefore they do not Pray to Christ, whom they utterly deny to be that Person
who suffered for them upon the Cross; as Mr. Penn in his Serious Apology, p.
146.

They make Christ to be nothing else than what they call The Light within;
which, they say, is sufficient of itself, without any thing else, to bring us
to God; and that whoever follows it, needs no other Help.

Now they say, That all the Heathen, every Man that is born into the World, has
this Light within, that is, Christ; and, that this Light within is sufficient
for his Salvation, without any thing else: Whereby they take away any Necessity
of an Outward Christ to dye for our Sins, and make the Heathen Faith as good as
the Christian: And therefore they have taken away that Christian Faith toward
God, which is the Second of the Principles mentioned in this Text. The Third is
Baptism, which they openly disclaim. The Fourth is, the laying on of Hands,
that is, the Ordination, Confirmation, and Absolution of the Church, which are
all performed by laying on of Hands. And how much soever the Quakers and others
do despise them, yet the Apostle here reckons them among the Fundamentals: For
the Government and Discipline of the Church are Essential to it, as it is a
Society, it could not otherwise be a Society. The Sin of Korah was nothing but
concerning Church Government. And Aaron's Rod that Budded, Number. 16, and 17 Chapter
in confirmation of his Priesthood, was ordained to be kept for ever in the
Ark, for a Token against the Rebels; so are they called, who Rebel'd against
that Priesthood which God had then appointed by Moses; and the Sin cannot be
less to Rebel against that Priesthood which Christ himself appointed. Which is
shown more at large in the Discourse mentioned in the Advertisement.

Now if Aaron's Rod, that is, Church Government, was one of the Three sacred
Depositums which were ordained to be kept in the Ark, why should we wonder to
see it here placed among the Fundamentals of Christianity?

The Pot of Manna, Aaron's Rod, and the Tables of the Covenant, Heb. ix. 4.
were all that was kept in the Ark.

Which shows Church Government to be Necessary next to our Manna, the very
Support of our Life; and the best Guard to preserve the Decalogue, i. e. our
Duty to God and Man.

V. And though the Quakers cry down Church Authority in others, yet they magnify
it as much in themselves as any Church whatsoever.

The Ingenious W. P. in his Judas and the Jews, writing against some Dissenters
amongst the Quakers, asserts the Authority of the Church very high, and the
Power of the Elders in the Church, p. 13. and presses that Text, Matthew. xviii.
17. Tell it unto the Church, to extend to Matters of Faith and Worship, as well
as to Private Injuries or Offenses amongst Christians. That Christ (says he) as
well gave His Church Power to Reject as to Try Spirits, is not hard to prove.
That notable Passage, Go, tell the Church, does it to our hand: For if in case
of private Offense betwixt Brethren, the Church is made Absolute Judge, from
whom there is no Appeal in this World; how much more in any the least case that
concerns the NATURE, BEING, FAITH, and WORSHIP of the Church her self?

But the Case was quite altered when he came to Answer that same Text, as urged
against the Quakers by the Church; which he does in his Address to Protestants,
p. 152, 153, and 154. of the Second Edition in Octavo, printed 1692. And then
that Text does not relate at all to Faith or Worship, but only to private
Injuries. For having denied the Authority of the Church in Matters of Faith, he
puts the Objection thus against himself: But what then can be the meaning of
Christ's Words, Go, tell the Church? Very well. I Answer (says he, p. 153.)
It Is not about Faith, but Injury, that Christ speaks; and the place explains
itself, which is this; Moreover, if thy Brother shall TRESPASS against THEE, go
and tell him his FAULT, between thee and him alone. Here is Wrong, not
Religion; Injustice, not Faith or Conscience concerned; as some would have it,
to maintain their Church Power. -- The words TRESPASS and FAULT prove
abundantly, that He only meant Private and Personal Injuries; and that not only
from the common and undeniable signification and use of the words TRESPASS and
FAULT, but from the way Christ directs and commands for Accommodation, viz.
That the Person wronged speak to him that commits the Injury, alone; if that
will not do, that he take one or two with him: But no man can think, that if it
related to FAITH or WORSHIP, I ought to Receive the Judgment of one, or two, or
three, for a sufficient Rule. -- Therefore it cannot relate to Matters of
FAITH, and Scruples of CONSCIENCE, but PERSONAL and PRIVATE INJURIES.

Thus he. But though the Judgment of one, two, or three, is not of itself a
sufficient Rule, (none ever said it was) yet may not one, two, or three
ADMONISH one another, even in Matters of Faith and Worship, as well as of
Private Injuries, and, in case of Refractoriness and Obstinacy, bring the Cause
before the Church? Thou shall in any wise Rebuke thy Neighbor, and not suffer
Sin upon him. Lev. xix. 17.
Yet was not the Judgment of every Man a sufficient Rule to his Neighbor. And
our Savior's commanding to bring the Cause finally before the Church, shows
plainly, that the Judgment of the one, two, or three, was not meant for a
sufficient Rule, that is, the ultimate Decision.

But in Answer to Mr. Penn's Argument, That this Text, Tell it unto the Church,
was meant only of Private Injuries, I shall repeat but his own words before
quoted, and grant, that as it was meant of Private Injuries, so, as Mr. Penn
very well infers, How much more in any the least Case that concerns the Nature,
Being, Faith, and Worship of the Church her self?

VI. But, to return. The fifth Article in that Enumeration of Fundamentals,
Heb. vi. 1, and 2. is, The Resurrection of the Dead; which the Quakers do
likewise deny; as it is fully proved in The Snake in the Grass, Par. 2. Sect.
13.

The last is that of Eternal Judgment, which depends upon the former, and may
be made one with it; and is likewise denied by the Quakers, that is, turned
into Hymeneus and Philetus's Sense, of an Inward only and Spiritual
Resurrection, or Judgment performed within us. I have frequently heard Quakers
say, that they expected no other Resurrection or future Judgment, than what
they had attained already, that is, the Resurrection of Christ, or the Light,
and the Judgment or Condemnation of Sin, in their Hearts.

George Whitehead, in his Book called The Nature of Christianity, etc. printed
1671, p. 29, thus ridicules it: Do thou (says he to his Opponent) look for
Christ, as the Son of Mary, to Appear outwardly, in a Bodily Existence, to save
thee? If thou do, thou may look until thy Eyes drop out, before thou will
see such an Appearance of him.

And now what Wonder is it, that these should throw off Baptism, who have
likewise thrown off all the other Fundamentals, which are reckoned with it in
this Text?

VII. But let us hence observe, and beware of Neglecting or Despising the
Outward Institutions of God; because these depending upon the Authority of God,
no less than the Inward and Spiritual, rejecting of the one overthrows the
Obligation and Sanction of the whole, and is a rejecting of God the Institutor;
who, in His just Judgment, suffers those to lose the one, that think themselves
too good for the other.

Men were made Partakers of Christ to come, by the Sacrifices which were
appointed, as Types of Him, under the Law: So now are we Partakers of Him, who
is come, by the Sacraments, which He has appointed in Remembrance of Him, under
the Gospel.

And as those who neglected or despised the Sacrifices, when they might be had,
from the Legal Priests, according to God's Institution, were made liable to
Death, and did forfeit their Title to the Participation of Christ the
Archi-Type: So those who neglect or despise the Sacraments which He has
commanded as the Means of Grace, and of our Inward Participation of Him, under
the Gospel, do thereby justly forfeit their Title to such Participation.

For, if we will not take God's Way, we have no Promise nor Reason to secure us
in the following of our own Inventions.

SECT. XI. The Quaker-Objection, That there are no Signs under the Gospel.
I. THE Quakers throw off all Outward Institutions, as not only Useless, but
Hurtful to the Christian Religion; which, they pretend, consists not only
chiefly (which is granted to them) but solely in the Inward and Spiritual Part.
They say, That all Figures and Signs are Shadows; and that when Christ, who is
the Substance, is come, the others cease of course. That they have attained to
Christ the Substance; and therefore these Shadows are of no use to them. That
Baptism and the Lord's Supper are some of these Shadows; and these were
Indulged to the Early and Weak Christians, but that the Quakers, who have
stronger Participations of the Spirit, are got beyond these Beggarly Elements,
etc.

II. This is settled as a Foundation-Principle, That no Figures, or Signs, are
perpetual; or of Institution, under the Gospel-Administration, when Christ, who
is the Substance, is come; though their Use might have been Indulged to young
Converts in Primitive Times. A Key, etc. by W. P. Printed, 1694. C. 10. of
Water Baptism, and the Supper, P. 24.


Ans. 1. To say they were not Perpetual, is one thing; but to say, That they
were not so much as of Institution under the Gospel, seems a strange Assertion,
when Christ gave the Institution out of his own Mouth, Matt. xxviii. 19. Go
Baptize. And of his Supper, said, This do, Luke xxii. 19.

2. The Reason why this should not be Perpetual, is very Precarious, to suppose
that the Holiness of any Person should exempt him from observing the
Institutions of God; whereas Christ himself submitted to them, and said, That
it became him to fulfill all Righteousness, Mat. iii. 15.
i. e. all the Righteous Institutions of God. This is the Reason which Christ
gave for his Baptism; yet the Quakers think that their Holiness will excuse
them from Baptism. Christ submitted to John's Baptism, saying, That we ought to
fulfill all God's Institutions: Yet the Quakers will not submit to Christ's
Baptism, saying, That they are got beyond it. All were required to submit to
John's Baptism, during his Ministry, because he was sent from God to Baptize;
therefore Christ also submitted unto it; and did receive his own Commission to
Baptize, by the visible Descent of the Holy Ghost, upon his receiving the
Baptism of John. All are yet more expressly commanded to receive the Baptism of
Christ. Go, Baptize ALL NATIONS. Mat. xxviii. 19.
Go ye into ALL THE WORLD, and Preach the Gospel to EVERY CREATURE: He that
Believes, and is BAPTIZED, shall be saved. Mar. xvi. 15.
But the Quakers and Muggletonians excuse themselves, as being too Good for it;
They truly feeling in themselves (as it is expressed in the Key before quoted,
p. 26.) the very Thing, which outward Water, Bread and Wine do signify, they
leave them off. But were they as Holy as they pretend, yet would not this
excuse them from observing the Institutions of Christ; nay, the greatest Sign
of Holiness, and true Humility, is, not to think our selves above his
Institutions, but obediently to observe them, after the Blessed Example of
Christ our Lord. And it is the greatest Instance of Spiritual Pride, and the
most Fatal Deception in the World, thus to overvalue our selves; it betrays
the grossest Ignorance of Spiritual things: For the more a Man knows of
himself, and of God, the more he discovers of his own Weakness and
Unworthiness; he appears less in his own sight, and frames himself the more
Obsequiously, with the most profound Humility and Resignation, Dutifully and
Zealously to observe every the least Command of God. They are Novices in the
Knowledge of God, who are lifted up with Pride; and these fall into the
Condemnation of the Devil, 1 Timothy iii. 6.

And what can be greater Pride, than to think our selves in an higher Condition
of Perfection, than the Holy Apostles, and all those Glorious Saints and
Martyrs, who were the First Fruits of the Gospel, called (in the Key above
quoted) by the Lessening Style of Young Converts, in Primitive Times?

St. Paul, though IMMEDIATELY Converted, and Enlightened MIRACULOUSLY from
HEAVEN, was commanded to go to Ananias to be Baptized. But our Quakers pass him
off as a Young Convert, they have got beyond him, and think themselves more
HIGHLY Enlightened than he was: And, for that Reason only, not to need that
Baptism, which was thought necessary for him.

And all the other Christians, from Christ to George Fox, were Young Converts!
Then it was that a greater Light was given than ever was known in the Church of
Christ before, to make the Outward Baptism cease, as of no longer use to those
who had attained the Substance! Or otherwise none of the Primitive Christians
knew their own Holiness; or were so Humble as not to own it, to that Degree as
to place themselves above all outward Ordinances!

These are the Grounds and Reasons of the Quakers, why Baptism, and the Lord's
Supper were not Perpetual!

Which, in the mildest word that I could frame, I have called Precarious. And
they must appear to be such, till the Quakers can give some other Proof besides
their own saying so, either that the Holiness of any Person can excuse him from
the Observance of Christ's Institution: Or, that they have a greater Degree of
Holiness than all others since Christ, who have been Baptized.

3. But the Perpetuity of Baptism, and the Lord's Supper, are fully expressed
in the Words of the Scripture. When Christ gave Commission to his Disciples to
Baptize, he promised to be with them, in the Execution of that Commission, even
unto the End of the World, Matt. xxviii. 20. which shows, that the Commission
was to descend after the Death of the Apostles to whom it was given. And it
tells how long; Always, even unto the End of the World. The like Perpetuity is
annexed to the Institution of the Lord's Supper, 1 Cor. xi. 26. Till Christ
come again. It was Instituted in Remembrance of him; and therefore to be
continued till his Coming again.

III. I know the Quakers do Interpret this, not of Christ's Outward and
Personal coming at the Resurrection, which (after Hymeneus and Philetus, 2 Timothy
ii. 18.) they say is past already, that is, Inwardly performed, by the
Spiritual Resurrection of Christ, or the Light in their Hearts. And they say,
That the Institution of the Lord's Supper was only to continue till that Inward
Coming, or forming of Christ in our Hearts; which they having obtained, (as
they presume) therefore they throw off the Outward Supper.

But was not Christ formed in the Hearts of the Apostles, to whom Christ gave
his Holy Supper, as much as in the Hearts of the Quakers now? Was he not Come
SPIRITUALLY to Paul, after his Conversion? And before his Command, above
quoted, of continuing the Practice of the Lord's Supper, till his Coming?

If they say, That this was only to have it continued to those weaker
Christians, who had not Christ thoroughly formed in their Hearts.

First, Who can say, That Christ is thoroughly formed in his Heart? May there
not be greater and greater Degrees of the Inspiration of Christ in our Hearts?
And can we ever come to the End of it, so as to need no further Inspiration, or
Coming of Christ within us? Therefore Christ's Inward Coming is always to be
expected. His further and further Coming and Inspiration.

But if that Coming, which the Quakers would make to be the Determination of
the Outward Institution of the Lord's Supper, be the Least Degree of his
Coming, then every Christian, nay, according to the Quakers, every Man in the
World, not only is, but always was exempted from the Observation of that
Institution; because the Quakers do own, That every Man in the World has, and
ever had the Light within, which they make to be Christ, at least, an Influence
and Inspiration from Christ; and so to be a Coming, or Presence of his in the
Heart: And therefore, by this Rule, Christ is Come to every Man, in some Degree
or other: And, if there be not some stinting, or ascertaining of this Degree,
then Christ was always so Come to All, as to make the Institution of the Lord's
Supper useless, at all Times, to All. Nay, it was ended, before it began. For,
if his Inward Coming does end it, it could never begin, because he was always
so Inwardly Come.

But if there are some Degrees of his Coming so weak as to need the Help of the
Outward Institution, to which God has annexed the Promise of his Grace, when
duly Administered, and Received, then these Degrees must be known, else those
may be deprived of the Benefit of it, who have most need of it: And those are
they who think that they need it least.

Secondly, The Quakers do not always pretend, all of them, to the same Degrees
of Perfection (if there be Degrees in Perfection) they must be sensible
sometimes (at least others are) of the many Weaknesses of some of their Number:
Why then do they not allow the Lord's Supper to those Weaker ones? Else they
must say, That it was not intended for the Weak more than for the Strong. And
so, that the Institution and Practice of it, by Christ and his Apostles, was
wholly useless, and to no purpose. And that all those high Things said of it,
That it is the Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ, 1 Cor. x. 16. And
Christ's own Words, This is my Body: And therefore, that the receiving it
unworthily, is being Guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord: That therefore
we should approach to it, with the greatest Reverence and Preparation, to
Examine our selves seriously and diligently, that we may receive it with pure
Hearts and Minds: And the Dreadful Judgments which do attend the Neglect, or
Abuse of it, not only sundry Discases, and diverse kinds of Deaths, but
Damnation, 1 Cor. xi. from Ver. 27. I say all these were Words thrown into the
Air, of no Meaning, nor Import at all, if the Quaker Interpretation be true,
which makes nothing at all of the Lord's Supper, but renders it wholly
Precarious and Insignificant, even at the time of its Institution; and now to
be hurtful and pernicious, as drawing Men from the Substance, to mere Shadows;
for they make of it no more!

IV. But I would beseech them to consider how much more highly God does value
it; and how Material a part of his Religion he does make it: For when St. Paul
was taught the Faith immediately from Heaven, and not from those who were
Apostles before him (as he tells us, Gal. i. 16, 17.) Christ took care to
instruct him as to this of the Lord's Supper particularly. And he presses it
upon the Corinthians, as having received it from God. For I have received of
the Lord (says he, 1 Cor. xi. 23.) that which also I delivered unto you, that
the Lord Jesus, the same Night in which he was Betrayed, took Bread, etc. and
so goes on to relate the whole Institution of the Lord's Supper, and the mighty
Consequences, the Benefits and Advantages of it; the Examination preparatory to
it; and the Vengeance both Temporal and Eternal, which was due to the Contempt
of it.

This shows, that Christ did not Institute this Holy Sacrament by Chance. It
was the last Act of his Life; and his Dying Bequest to his Church; filled with
all his Blessings, and carrying with it, to the Worthy Receivers, the whole
Merits, and Purchase of his Death and Passion, the Remission of our Sins, and
full Title to Heaven! Brethren, I speak after the Manner of Men; though it be but
a Man's Testament, yet, if it be confirmed, no Man disannulleth, or adds
thereto. Gal. iii. 15.
How much less then can any Man take upon him to disannul this last Will and
Testament of Christ's, which he has left to his Church; and Bequeathed it to
her with His Dying Breath!

This was the Reason that it was not only so particularly Recorded by the
several Evangelists in the Gospels; but when St. Paul was taught Immediately
from Heaven, this most Material Institution was not forgot, but Christ Himself
instructed him in it; to show the great Stress and Value which He laid upon it.

And let this suffice, to have said in this place, concerning this other
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. Its Institution is as Plain and Express as that
of Baptism. And the Practice of it, in the Days of the Apostles, and all Ages
since has been as Universal. And what has been said of Baptism, is of Equal
Force as to this: And the Quaker Arguments against this, are upon the same
Foundation as those against Baptism; only they have not so many Objections
against this: Therefore I have made Baptism the chief Subject of this
Discourse; yet so, as likewise to Include the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper.
Therefore we will go on to consider what remains of the present Objection
(which Militates equally against both) that there are no Signs under the Gospel.

V. And here let me observe,

First, That these Signs and Figures which the Quakers make Incompatible to the
Gospel State, ought only to be understood of the Signs and Figures in the Law,
which were ordained as Types of Christ. And of these it is truly argued, That
when Christ, who is the Substance, is come, they must cease of course; which
Argument the Quakers bring against the Signs and Figures which Christ did
Institute under the Gospel. But how foreign this is from their purpose, let any
one judge. For those Signs and Figures which were appointed by Christ, could
not be Types of Christ; because a Type is what goes before a Thing, and shows
it to come. And therefore, when that which it foreshews is come, it ceases.
But, as there were Types under the Law to foreshew Christ's coming in the
Flesh, and his Sacrifice upon the Cross, which therefore are ceased; so Christ
has appointed other Types to foreshew his second coming to Judge the World; and
which therefore must last till he shall so come, as the Types of his first
coming did last, till he did so come. The Sacrifices under the Law, did
praefigure the Death of Christ; but the Sacraments under the Gospel, were
Instituted in Remembrance of it; as well as for Types of our future Union with
him in Heaven. Therefore the same Reason which makes the Legal Types to cease,
does infer, That the Evangelical Types must not cease, till they likewise shall
be fulfilled; which will not be till we arrive at Heaven. Thus, as they are
Types. And then,

Secondly, As they are Remembrances of what is past, they are to last as long
as the Remembrance of that which they Represent ought to last with us. Christ
did not Institute his Supper, that we should thereby Remember his Death, a Day,
or a Year, but till his Coming again. His Death took his Personal Presence from
us; and therefore till that Return, we must continue the Remembrance, that is,
of his Absence, till the Glorious Return of his Visible Body, which was
separated from us by his Death.

Thus no advantage can be brought to the Quaker Pretenses against the Christian
Sacraments, from the Sacrifices and other Signs or Figures under the Law.

VI. We come now to Examine, what they set up against any Signs or Figures
under the Gospel, from another Topic; and that is, That the Gospel is all
Substance, and therefore that there must be no Sign or Figure at all in it.

Answ. By Substance here they mean that which is Inward, or Spiritual, that
every thing in the Gospel is Spiritual.

But this will overthrow all outward, or Bodily Worship. For that is
distinguished from Spiritual, or Inward Worship.

And, in one sense, all Bodily Worship is a Sign or Figure of the Inward, or
Spiritual; which is the Principal and Substantial Worship. Thus Bowing the
Knee, or Uncovering the Head at Prayer, are Signs or Figures of the Inward
Reverence and Devotion of the Heart.

And this the Quakers practice; therefore, by their own Argument, they have
Signs and Figures as well as others; only they throw off those of Christ's
Institution, and make new ones of their own.

It is impossible to be without Signs and Figures. For this whole World is a
Figure of that which is to come. We our selves are Figures of God, being Images
of him: And what is an Image but the Figure or Sign of a Thing? Christ is a
Figure of God, being the Express Image of his Person, Heb. i. 3. And we now
have the Knowledge of God in the Face of Jesus Christ. God is a Light
Inaccessible to Angels, as well as unto Men, without some Medium: His Essence
cannot be seen or known Immediately, by any but Himself. All Creatures partake
of him in Signs and Figures of him; each in their several Degrees; there are
Higher and more Noble Figures; but all are Figures. And God has, in all Ages,
through the World, Dispensed himself to Mankind in Signs and Figures; we could
not otherwise apprehend Him. Christ is the most Noble and Lively Figure of God:
Therefore his Dispensation is far beyond all others that went before him. Yet
even now, We see through a Glass darkly, 1 Cor. xiii. 12. or, in a Riddle; as
our Margent reads it, (...), in a Figure.

What is the Bible that we read, what are Words but the Signatures, the Signs
or Figures of Things? We can see the Essence of no one thing in the World, more
than of God. And what are all those Accidents of Color, Quantity and Quality,
by which we distinguish Things, but so many Figures, or Signs of them?

So very wild is that Notion, that there must be no Signs or Figures under the
Gospel!

It would be much Truer, if they had said, That there are nothing else but
Signs and Figures: There is nothing else without a Figure but God! For all
Creatures are Figures of Him, Christ, the Highest.

But have the Quakers no Figures? G. Fox in his Readiness Errand, p. 14. says,
That Christ's Flesh is a Figure. They call the Body of Christ generally, a
Figure, a Vail, a Garment. Then either they have none of it, or they have
Figures. Richard Hubberthorn wrote, Snake in the Grass, 1st Part, page 208.
That Christ's coming in the Flesh was but a Figure: He meant of the Inward
coming of Christ, or the Light in the Heart, which they call the Substance and
the Mystery; of which Christ's Outward coming in the Flesh, they say, was but a
Shadow, or the History (to use their own words.) G. Fox made a great Mystery,
or Figure of his Marriage, which, he said, 2d Part, p. 43.
Was above the State of the first Adam, in his Innocence; in the State of the
second Adam that never fell. He wrote, in one of his General Epistles to the
Churches, (which were read, and valued by the Quakers, more than St. Paul's,)
That his Marriage was a Figure of the Church coming out of the Wilderness.
This, if denied, I can Vouch undeniably, but it will not be denied, though it be
not Printed with the rest of his Epistles, but I have it from some that read it
often. But why was it not Printed? That was a sad Story. But take it thus. He
Married one Margaret Fell, a Widow, of about Threescore Years of Age; and this
Figure of the Church must not be Barren; therefore, though she was past
Childbearing, it was expected, that, as Sarah, she should miraculously
Conceive, and bring forth an Isaac; which G. Fox promised and boasted of, and
some that I know have heard him do it, more than once. She was called, The
Lamb's Wife. And it was said amongst the Quakers, That the Lamb had now taken
his Wife, and she would bring forth an Holy Seed. And Big she grew, and all
things were provided for the Lying in; and, he, being persuaded of it, gave
notice to the Churches, as above observed. But, after long waiting, all proved
Abortive, and the Figure was spoiled. And now you may guess the Reason, why
that Epistle which mentioned this Figure, was not Printed.

I would have brought nothing into this Discourse that looks like a Jest; but
they have compelled me. And it may be of use to them, to show them, that while
they throw off the Sacraments of Christ's Institution, upon the Pretense that
there must be no Signs or Figures under the Gospel, they, at the same time,
make Ridiculous Signs and Figures of G. Fox, and his Fantastical Marriage; and
of several other things; every thing almost among them, is a Sign or Figure of
something to come upon the World. How many of their Lying Prophets have called
themselves Signs to the Men of their Generation, as the Holy Prophets were in
their Day?

VII. There have been Outward Signs, in all the Institutions of Religion, since
the beginning of the World; as well before, as under the Law, and now under the
Gospel. Only they have been varied, or Ended according to what they
praefigur'd. Thus those Signs which had no further Tendency, than to point out
what Christ did or suffered upon Earth, are fulfilled and therefore Ended.

But there were some Signs, which, though they pointed to Christ upon Earth,
had yet a further Tendency: For Signs may be appointed to more Ends than one.
Thus the Institution of the Sabbath was appointed for the Commemoration of
God's Rest from the Works of the Creation, Genesis ii. 3. and Exodus xx. 11. and
likewise the rest of the Children of Israel (who were the Type of the Church)
from their Captivity and Slavery in Egypt, Deuteronomy. v. 15. (which expresses the
Servitude of Sin and Hell) and their final Rest in Canaan (the Type of Heaven)
after their forty Years wandering in the Wilderness, (which represent the
Labors of this Life.) But this was not the Ultimate Rest, or Sabbath, Heb. iv.
18. For if Joshua had given them Rest, then would he not afterward have spoken
of another Day; there remains therefore (...), the keeping of a Sabbath
(which signifies Rest) to the People of God. For he that is entered into his
Rest, he also has ceased from his own Works, as God did from his. Thus Christ,
as he suffered the 6th Day of the Week, the same Day that Man was created, and
fell; so, on the same Day on which God Rested from his Work of Creation, viz.
the 7th Day, did Christ Rest in his Grave, from his Work of Redemption. And
there is yet a farther Rest or Sabbath beyond this; and that is, the Eternal
Rest in Heaven, Heb. iv. 11. Let us labor therefore to enter into that Rest.

Now, though several Significations of the Sabbath are already past, as the
Deliverance out of Egypt; the Entrance into Canaan; and the Rest of Christ, in
his Grave: Yet there being one behind, that is the Sabbath of Heaven, therefore
do we still keep the Sabbath as a Type of it.

But there is another Reason for the Continuance of the Sabbath; and that is,
That it was not only ordained as a Type of Things to come; but as a
Commemoration of what was past, viz. Of God's Rest from his Works of Creation.
And, by the Alteration of the Day of the Sabbath, it serves likewise to us
Christians, as a Commemoration of the Resurrection of Christ, and his Conquest
over the Powers of Death and Hell. It was the first Day in which Light was
created; and Christ (who is our True Light, of which the Visible Light is but a
Shadow, and was ordained as a Type) Arose from the Dead, the same Day; and gave
Light to those who sat in Darkness, and the Shadow of Death, by the Joyful
Tidings of our Redemption from Hell, and Eternal Bliss in Heaven!

Now so long as the Works of our Creation and Redemption are to be kept in
Memory, so long is the Sabbath to continue, as a Commemoration of these
Inestimable Benefits.

And, by the same Reason, so long as we ought to commemorate the Death and
Passion of our Lord; so long ought the Sacrament of it to continue; which he
Instituted in Remembrance of it; and commanded it to be continued till his
Coming again.

Thus you see that there are Signs under the Gospel; not only the two
Sacraments of the Church (which flowed distinctly out of Christ's Side, after
his Death, upon the Cross) but that the Gospel does still retain the Signs of
Commemoration, which have descended down to us all the way from the Creation:
And likewise such Signs or Types as have yet a Prospect forward, and are not
wholly fulfilled.

And 3 dly, The Signs of Present Signification, as the outward Acts of Worship:
To which we are as much, nay more strictly obliged under the Gospel, than they
were under the Law. As St. Irenaeus argues, ( advers. Haeres. l. 4. c. 34.)
That the manner of Worship, as of Sacrifices, is changed: but not the Worship
abolished. Non Genus oblationis Reprobatum est, oblationes enim and illic,
oblationes autem and hic: Sacrificia in Populo, Sacrificia and in Ecclesia; sed
Species Immutata est tantum. i. e. The Kind or Nature of the Offering is not
Abolished; for there were Offerings under the Law, and there are Offerings also
under the Gospel: there were Sacrifices among the People of the Jews. There are
Sacrifices likewise in the Church: but the Species or Manner of them only is
changed, viz. That some Sacrifices under the Law were Bloody, as Praefiguring
the Death of Christ: and therefore that Sort or Manner of Sacrificing is
ceased, because Fulfilled in the Death of Christ: But their Vn-bloody
Sacrifices, and Oblations, as of Tithes, and other Offerings Remain still among
Christians: and are Signs, as much as they were under the Law. The outward
Worship of God must be by Actions proper and significant. Nihil enim Otiosum,
nec sine Signo, nec sine Argumento apud eum. Iren. ibid.
i. e. For there is nothing Empty, nor without a Sign, nor without
Signification in the Worship of God. And, in the very next words, he applies
this to Tithes. Et propter hoc illi quidem Decimas -- And for this reason the
Jews paid Tithes, viz. as a Sign of their Dependence upon God, and having
Received All from Him: And in Hopes of their Receiving More from Him. Sed nos
omnia -- But the Christians, instead of a Tenth Part, which the Jews gave, Give
All that they have, because (says he) they have a Better Hope. And, chapter 27.
showing how Christ did Heighten the Law, as, instead of Adultery, to forbid
Lust; instead of Murder, to forbid Anger; and, instead of giving the Tithe,
commanding to sell All: And this, says he, is not a Dissolving of the Law, but
Enlarging it. Matthew. v. 17, 18.
So that no Part of the Law is Destroyed; and All is not Fulfilled; and since
All must be Fulfilled, it follows, that what is not yet Fulfilled, must yet
Remain: And Many of the Signs in the Law not being Fulfilled in Christ's Death,
nor ever to be Fulfilled while we Live upon this Earth, consequently do Remain,
and must so Remain to the End of the World. So that the Gospel has Signs as
well as the Law; and, in Great Part, the same Signs; with other Sacramental
Signs added by Christ, which are those of which we now Treat, Baptism, and The
Supper of The Lord.

VIII. And let us Reflect, that ever since God made outward Things, and gave us
this Body, as the Soul does act by the Mediation of the Body; so has God
ordained, that his Gifts and Graces shall be conveyed to us by Outward Signs
and Means.

Christ used outward Signs and Means for his Miraculous Cures; to show, that
though the Virtue did not come from the Means, yet that they were of Use, and not
to be Despised.

But why do we say, that the Virtue does not come from the Means? We say so,
when we cannot tell the Reason and Manner how the Means work their Effect, and
can we tell it, in those which we call Natural Means? No surely, we know only
by Observation, and Experience; and what often comes to pass, we call it
Natural, as being the common Course of Things; not that we know the Reason of
it, more than of those Occurrences which we call Miraculous and Extraordinary.

Man does not live by Bread alone, but by every Word that proceeds out of the
Mouth of God.

Bread has no Virtue of its own to nourish; but only what it receives from God:
And if he give his Virtue (for it is His only) to a Stone; or any thing else,
it will nourish: And Bread will, and does cease to nourish, when he withdraws
his Blessing from it.

Therefore the Spittle of Christ and the Clay, the Waters of Siloam and
Bethesda, and the Brazen-Serpent had as great Virtue to Cure, when they were
Appointed by God, as Bread has to nourish; and the Virtue came as much from
Them, as it does from the Bread, in our Daily Food.

Now, if the Brazen-Serpent, which was but a Type of Christ, had Virtue to Cure
the Body; shall we deny that the Bread, which Christ blessed, for the Remission
of Sin, has Virtue to work that Effect?

He whose single Fiat made the Worlds, and whose Influence gives Power to all
Things, and makes them what they are; he said of that Blessed Bread, THIS IS MY
BODY. And his Holy Apostle said of it, The Bread which we break, is it not the
Communion of the Body of Christ? And do we doubt, how it works this Effect?
Dare we Reject it, because it seems strange to us, how it should work this
Effect, who know as little how our Daily Bread does nourish our Bodies? Do we
object our Ignorance how a Man can be Born of Water and the Spirit, who can
give as short an Account how we are formed, of a drop of Water, in the Womb;
and by what Ligaments such different Natures as Soul and Body, are compacted
and linked together? How can we pretend to have Faith in Christ, and yet not
believe his Words, because of the seeming difficulty to our Understandings (who
know nothing) of the Method and Manner, how He can bring them to pass?

According to our Faith it will be unto us. Therefore let us Humble our Souls
greatly, and imitate the Holy Angels (far more Enlightened than we are) who vail
their Faces before God; and presume not to dispute his Commands; or pretend to
understand all the Methods of his Power and Wisdom unsearchable! but desire to
look into those Things, 1 Pet. i. 12. those Glorious Mysteries of the Gospel,
which the Quakers despise, as below the Measure to which they have attained!
And the Principalities and Powers in Heavenly places, do submit to learn the
Manifold Wisdom of God, Ephesians. iii. 10. from that Church, which the Quakers do
vilify and trample under their feet; as thinking it incapable to teach them
any thing, or to administer to them the Sacraments which Christ has commanded.

But because the Dispute will arise which that Church is, in the miserable
Divisions of Christendom, and amongst the various sorts of the Pretenders to
it, I have in the Discourse mentioned in the Advertisement, I hope, given a
plain and sure Rule to guide all Honest and Disinterested Enquirers, in that
most necessary and fundamental Point.

The Conclusion. Showing the Necessity of Water Baptism.
THE Sum of what has been said, concludes in the great Necessity there is of
Water Baptism.

But before I say more of it, I will obviate an Objection, which may arise from
the word Necessary.

If it be Absolutely Necessary, then none can be saved without it: Which sort
of Necessity I do not plead for. This is plainly distinguished in the Catechism
of our Church, where this, and the other Sacrament (of the Lord's Supper) are
said to be Generally necessary to Salvation. Generally, that is, in the General
and Common Methods which are prescribed in the Gospel. For no Body will pretend
to Limit GOD; as if HE could not save by what Means and Methods HE pleases. But
we are tied up to those Rules which HE has Prescribed to Us: Yet We must not
Tie HIM up to those Rules, to which HE has Tied Us.

But who are they who have Reason to expect God's Extraordinary Mercies, out of
the Common Methods of Salvation; and to be made Partakers of the Inward,
without the Outward Baptism?

I. Those who being conscientiously concerned for the Outward, yet cannot
obtain it, through the Want of a Minister of Christ, Lawfully Ordained to
Administer it; as in Turkey, Africa, etc.

These are under an Invincible Necessity: And their Earnest Desires (I doubt
not) will be accepted by God; and the Spiritual Baptism be conferred upon them,
without the Outward.

II. Those who have been Baptized by Persons, not lawfully Ordained, and
consequently they have received no Baptism, having received it from those who
had no Commission to Administer it; but who were Guilty of the Highest
Sacrilege, in Usurping such a Sacred Commission, not Lawfully Derived to them
by a Successive Ordination from the Apostles: But yet, through a General
Corruption of the Times, such Baptisms are suffered to pass, whereby the
Persons so Baptized, swiming down the Stream, do think their Baptism to be
valid, and therefore seek not for a Re-Baptization from those who are truly
Empowred to Administer it. I say, Where no such Re-Baptization is taught, and
thereby the People know nothing of it; in such Case, their Ignorance is, in a
Manner, Invincible; and their Sincerity and Devotion in Receiving No
Sacraments, yet thinking them True Sacraments, may be Accepted by God, and the
Inward Grace conferred, and the Defects in the Outward and Visible Signs may be
Pardoned.

But neither of these Cases does reach those, who neglect the Outward Means,
upon Pretense of Inward Perfection without them. These Despise the Ordinance of
Christ, and make themselves Wiser than He; as if He had appointed Means either
Unnecessary, or Ineffectual to the Ends. for which they were intended!

And I desire these to consider the Great Necessity there is for Water Baptism,
as before Explained.

1. Because it is ordained as the Means whereby the Inward Baptism of the
Holy Ghost is given, as I before quoted, Acts ii. 38. Be BAPTIZED, and ye shall
Receive the Gift of the HOLY GHOST. By This Baptism, could not be meant the
Baptism with the Holy Ghost, because This Baptism is Here proposed as the Means
whereby to Receive the Inward Baptism of the Holy Ghost.

Again, Ephesians. v. 26. That He (Christ) might Sanctify and Cleanse it (the
Church) with the Washing of Water, by the Word. Here the Washing of Water is
the Means, though the Operation and Virtue is from the Word: And therefore the
Outward Washing or Baptizing (which means the same, as before told, Sect. 1.)
cannot be the same with the Word in this Text.

2. Christ having appointed this as the Means, you see what Stress He lays upon
it, and how Necessary He makes it.

John iii. 5. Except a Man be Born of Water and the Spirit, he cannot Enter
into the Kingdom of God. Here the Water and the Spirit are plainly
Distinguished, and Both made Necessary to Salvation, the Outward as well as the
Inward: As it is written, Romans x. 10. For with the Heart Man Believes, unto
Righteousness; And with the Mouth Confession is made unto Salvation. The Belief
of the Heart is Necessary unto Righteousness, i. e. to make Us Righteous before
God: But the Outward Confession of the Mouth is likewise as Necessary to our
Salvation. As Christ said, ( Matt. x. 32.) Whosoever shall Confess me before
Men, etc. We must Outwardly, and before Men, Confess to Christ, by the Due
Performance of His Outward Ordinances; without which our Inward Belief in Him
will not be sufficient to our Salvation. Baptism is an Outward Badge of
Christianity, by being the Outward Form, appointed to admit Men as Members of
the Church of Christ; and whereby they own themselves to be such, before Men:
But those who will not wear this BADGE, as a Confession to Christ, before Men;
Christ will not Confess them, before His Father, in Heaven.

Mark xvi. 16. He that Believes and is Baptized, shall be saved. Here both the
Outward and the Inward are joined together, and both made Necessary; For, by
Baptism, Here, cannot be meant the Inward Belief, that would make a Tautology
of the Text, and mean thus, He that Believes and Believes -- Thus it must be,
if by Baptism, in this Text, the Inward Baptism, or Belief of the Heart be
meant. But this being plainly meant of the Outward Baptism, the Consequence
from this Text is plainly this, That he who does not Believe, and is not
Baptized, shall not be Saved. Of which I adjure the Quakers to Consider most
seriously: For though they had the Inward Baptism as much as they Pretend to it,
yet were the Outward necessary. Peter thought Water necessary to give Outward
Baptism to those who had already Received the Inward Baptism of the Holy Ghost,
Acts x. 47.

And the Doctrine of Baptism is reckoned among the Principles and Foundations
of Christianity, together with Faith and Repentance, etc. Heb. VI. 1, 2.

But the Quakers, like Naaman, flout at the Means, as too easy to be
effectual; and call Baptism, in contempt, Water-Sprinkling, And I will answer
them with Naaman's Servants, (2 Kings V. 13.) If Christ had bid thee do some
great thing, would thou not have done it? How much rather then when He says
to thee, Wash and be Clean? And as necessary as the Waters of Jordan were to
the Cleansing of Naaman, so necessary are the Waters of Baptism to the
Cleansing of our Souls. None dare say, that GOD could not have Cleansed Naaman
otherwise: But GOD having, by his Prophet, appointed that Means, if Naaman had
neglected it, he had not otherwise been Cured. How much more, when GOD has
appointed the Means of Baptism, by his Son, if we Neglect it, shall we be Saved
without it? He that Despised Moses 's Law, dyed without Mercy: Of how much
sorer Panishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden
under foot the Institution of the Son of GOD, and counted it an unholy thing,
doing Despite to it, Inventing Contemptible Names for it, and Ridiculing the
Administration of it? But as the Spirit of God moved, at first, upon the Face
of the Waters (Genesis 1. 2.) to Impregnate them, and make them Fructisie; and
gave a Miraculous Virtue to the Waters of Jordan, of Siloam, and Bethesda, for
Healing of the Flesh; Why should we Doubt that the same Spirit can and will
Sanctify the Waters of Baptism to the Mystical Washing away of Sin, having the
Positive Institution and Promise of Christ for it? Acts II. 38. Repent and be
Baptized, every one of you, in the Name of Jesus Christ, for the Remission of
Sins, and ye shall Receive the Gift of the Holy Ghost.

This was not the Extraordinary Gift of Miracles, which is here Promised, (and
which all Baptized Persons did not Receive or Expect) but the Remission of
Sins. And let me add, That the Ordinary Saving Graces of the Spirit, which work
silently, without Observation or Show, are much Preferable, and more Desirable,
than the Extraordinary Gift of Miracles, which, for a time, were Necessary, at
the first Propagation of the Gospel; and held Men's Eyes in Great Admiration:
But were of Dangerous Consequence to the Possessors, and a Temptation often to
Vanity; which had almost over-set the Great Apostle, 2 Cor. xii. 7, 8, 9. and
threw others into the Pit of Destruction, Matthew. vii. 22, 23. 1 Cor. xiii. 2.
and therefore were not to be Prayed for, or Desired: We must be totally Passive
in this Case; and when sent, being for the Conviction of others, to Receive
such an Extraordinary Gift, with Fear and Trembling, lest it Hurt our weak
Minds, not capable, but by as Extraordinary an Assistance of Divine Grace, to
Bear such mighty Revelations, and not to let in with it a secret Pride in our
selves; which spreads our Sails so wide, that without a Proportionable Ballast
of deep Humility, we shall be driven from our Compass. The Enemy throws in this
strong Temptation, with those Miraculous Gifts; which vain Men do Ignorantly
Covet, and some falsely Pretend to, to their own Destruction. But much more
Valuable are those Saving Graces, which we are commanded Daily to Pray for, and
Daily to Endeavor: Much more Available to us, and Precious in the sight of
God, than all Miraculous Gifts, is that Gift of The Holy Ghost, the Remission
of Sins, which is Promised to the Due Reception of Baptism, and enrolls our
Names in Heaven. Behold (said Christ to his Disciples, who Boasted, that even
the Devils were subject to them, through His Name) I give unto you Power to
tread on Serpents and Scorpions, and over all the Power of the Enemy; and
nothing shall, by any means, hurt you; notwithstanding in this Rejoice not,
that the Spirits are subject unto you; But rather Rejoice, because your Names
are written in Heaven. Luke x. 17, 18, 19, 20.


To be added to the End of Sect. VIII. p. 34.
But R. Barclay argues in his Apology, That the Baptism, of which the Ark was a
Type, could not be the Outward, or Water Baptism, because that it self is a
Type, viz. Of the Inward or Spiritual Baptism. And he supports this Notion by a
Criticism upon the Word (...) in this Text, which he says is not rightly
Translated in our English by The like Figure. Because, he says, the Word (...)
signifies the thing Typify'd, and not the Type.

But, by his leave, it signifies the quite contrary. Heb. ix. 24. not the thing
Typify'd, but only the Type: For there the Holy Places made with Hands are
called the (...), the Figures or Types of the True. And that Word is not to be
found, except in these two Texts, in the whole New Testament. And therefore if
one of these Texts must explain the other, the Word (...), or Antitype, 1 Pet.
iii. 21. must be taken in the same Sense, in which it is used, Heb. ix. 24.
because there it cannot possibly be taken to mean the thing Typify'd, or the
Archi-Type; therefore neither ought it to be so strained, as Barclay does, to
mean the quite contrary, in the present Text. And our Translation is Justified,
which renders (...) the like Figure, as does the Vulgar, Similis formae. For
both the Waters of the Ark, and of Baptism, are the outward and visible Signs,
but not the thing signified, which is the Salvation of the Soul, by the
Re-generation and Washing of the Spirit. And they are like Figures, both
signifying the same thing, in a manner very like to one another. That as Noah,
etc. were saved in the Ark by Water from Corporal Death, so are the True
Believers saved by the Water of Baptism, from the Death of Sin and Hell. In
which Sense the Ark was a Type of the outward or Water Baptism, though both were
Types, but one nearer than the other. And because the Baptism mentioned in this
Text, 1 Pet. iii. 21. is an (...), a Type or Figure; therefore it must be the
Outward and Water Baptism, which is here meant. For the Inward and Spiritual
Baptism is not the Type or Figure, but the thing signified. And thus Rob.
Barclay's Argument and Criticism has turned into a full Demonstration of the
direct contrary of that for which he brought it: And has thoroughly Established
the Divine Institution of the Outward or Water Baptism.

July 17. 1696.
FINIS.

