HYMEN'S PRAELUDIA: Or, LOVES Masterpiece. Being the Ninth, and Tenth Part of
that so much Admired ROMANCE, ENTITLED CLEOPATRA.

Written Originally in French, and now Rendered into English, By J. D.

EVAND. Quid magis optaret Cleopatra, parentibus orta Conspicuis, comiti quam
placuisse thori? LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley at the Prince's Arms in
St. Paul's Churchyard, and for John Crook at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1659.

TO THE Most Excellently Accomplished Lady, THE LADY KATHARINE PHILIPS.
MADAME,
WHen I consider you a person so much above your Sex, in the command of those
Languages, wherein things of this nature have ordinarily their first birth, and
consequently, that what is intended for the entertainment of others proves
your trouble; a Translation being no less to one that has read the Original:
When I reflect on your curiosity to look into these things before they have
hardly taken English air, as it were to prevent the ear^^est applications of
those who labor in this kind: When, in fine, it runs into my thoughts, that
what I now bring your Ladyship will happily have the fate to be cast by, with, I
have long ^in^e read it in the Original, it is but poorly done into English; I
must confess my self guilty of a strange suspense of resolution, whether I
should venture on this Address or no.

You see then, Madam, with what deliberation I presume to interrupt your
divertisement, when, after all this foreseen and acknowledged, I offer you what
is likely to prove your importunity; but I hope you think this confidence the
effect of something more then the assistances of my own courage. For,
reflecting on your great affection and respects for the excellent CLEOPATRA,
your particular enquiries after her welfare and adventures, and the tenderness
which makes you wish the misfortunes of so great a Princess were at a period, I
can think it but just, that the person, from whom she had, unknown, received
those great Civilities, should accordingly be returned the particular
acknowledgments thereof. These, Madam, I thought motives strong enough to
remove all suspense, and to vindicate the Present I make you proper for your
acceptance; but heightened by a reflection on the particular favors I have
received from your Ladyship, it may happily have forced me to some excess, as
whence it might be inferred this confidence proceeded from a secret
encouragement, happily somewhat of esteem you are pleased to have for,

Madam, Your most humble and most devoted servant JOHN DAVIES.

HYMEN'S PRAELUDIA, Or, Loves Masterpiece.
PART IX. LIB. I.
ARGUMENT.
THe two Princesses, Cleopatra and Artemisa, compare their Misfortunes, and
compassionate and comfort one another. Artemisa, out of her Love to Alexander,
and the Desire she had to be acquainted with her future Relations, entreats
Cleopatra to give her an account of her Brothers and Sisters. Cleopatra relates
the History of Julius Antonius, Antonia and young Ptolomy. Julius Antonius,
riding a hunting one day, is thrown by his Horse, and relieved by an unknown
Lady, whom he falls passionately in love with. Lucius Scipio is in love with
Emilia, the Daughter of Statilius Scaurus. Being a friend of Antonius's, he
carries him to see his Mistress, where, by a fatal chance, he meets with the
unknown Lady, who proves to be Tullia, the Daughter of Cicero. She abhors
Antonius, as being the Son of Anthony and Fulvia, who had put Cicero to an
ignominious and cruel death. Tullia is courted by Cecinna, with the approbation
of her brother Quintus Cicero, who bringing her one day to the Amphitheatre, to
see the combats of certain beasts, Antonius has another sight of her, but is
much troubled at her kindness to Cecinna. (...) shows him a box; wherein was
her own picture, which he going to return her, it slips out of his hands into
the Area, where the beasts fought. Antonius, perceaving how much Tullia was
troubled at it, out of an extravagance of passion, leaps down into the Area
among the beasts, and takes it up: but bringing it to her, out of a confidence
she would take that expression of his love with civility, if not with
kindness, she, out of the horrid aversion she had for him, would not receive
it: whereupon he keeps it, protesting he would never restore it to any hands
but her own. Cecinna, meeting him afterward alone, demands the box of him,
which Antonius refusing to deliver him, it begat a duel, wherein Cecinna is
killed. Upon which accident, as also at the request of Tullia, that he would
not appear in her sight again, Antonius leaves Rome, and is never after heard
of.

CLEOPATRA. The Ninth Part.
BOOK I.
THe slumber of the two fair Princesses could not be long, not only because
the night was far spent before they fell asleep, but also because the
importunate resentment of their misfortune would not permit a rest of any great
continuance. They had hardly opened their bright eyes to receive in the light,
but they opened them withal to let out tears: and it could hardly be discerned
whether came out of their mouths first, or certain broken fighes, or some
mournful expressions. The dawning must needs be full of affliction, that was to
be delivered of a day so fatal to these two desolate Princesses: for neither
could the great courage of Cleopatra, nor the resignation of Artemisa fortify
them, so as to entertain with constancy, the first idaea that presented it self
to their imaginations, of the misery they were to expect. Artemisa, having been
awake some few minutes, and bestowed her first reflections on the memory of her
Alexander, turns to the Princess Cleopatra, and putting forth her arm to
embrace her, she felt her give a little start, and turning from her to the
other side with a certain action, wherein she observed no small disturbance;
Thinking her self obliged to be as tender of the concernment of that dear
Sister of hers, as of her own: she hastily asked her the reason of it; and the
fair Daughter of Anthony, ushering in her answer with certain sighs, Sister,
said she to her, the affliction I am in does not only disturb my reason, but
it is as unmerciful to my senses, and my deluded imagination; having while I
slept entertained me with the idaea of Coriolanu^, has brought into my ears,
the sound of his very voice, and caused me to hear certain words, which I
should be confident could proceed from no other mouth then his: were I not now
satisfied, to my confusion, that it is only to my imagination, that I must
attribute these deplorable effects of my affliction. Inexorable, and yet
unfortunate Princess, (says that known voice) I must then be content to loose
you for ever. These few words are all I heard, or, to say better, thought I
heard, but the sound, I have some time been so well acquainted with, has made
such an impression in my hearing, that, with all the assistance of my reason, I
can hardly be persuaded, that I have not heard the very voice of Coriolanus.
'Twas with that reflection that I started as you felt, and turning to you that
I looked wish'dly about me through that remainder of the impression, which my
error had left in my thoughts.

Such was the discourse of Cleopatra, and Artemisa approved her opinion: but it
was not long ere she fell into another imagination which might have added very
much to her affliction, had she fastened her thoughts on it: for she imagined
for some minutes, that Coriolanus, killed in the combat wherein she had left
him engaged; it might happily be that his spirit, wandering about that which he
had some time dearly loved, had entertained her with those passionate words.
This reflection found at first some little entertainment in her mind, and might
have done abundance of mischief there, had she afforded it any long
entertainment: but that being such in her, as was not capable of ordinary
weakness, that extravagance was soon dispelled by the light of her reason, and
communicated to Artemisa, who gave it more credit then she had done. For the
Armenian Princess was easily drawn in, to think the opinion very probable, and
soon persuaded, that if it were true, that Cleopatra had heard certain words
pronounced by a voice, like that of Coriolanus, 'twas, questionless, the
spirit of that unfortunate Prince, dead in the combat, wherein they had left
him with little assurance of his safety, that spoke them to the Princess he
had so dearly loved while he lived, and whom happily he still loved, even after
his death. From the opinion she had conceaved of the death of Coriolanus, she
derived all the affliction her virtue could give her for a Prince, whose
extraordinary endowment deserved a better fate, and the friendship she had for
Cleopatra, for a man, who (how angry soever she might seem to be, and how
highly soever she might disguise her sentiments) was much dearer to her, than
her life. Certain it is, that what sense soever she might have of her own
misfortunes, it abated nothing of what she conceaved for so great a loss, so
that to the tears she shed for her own unhappiness, she added some for the
death of Juba's son. But when, reflecting on her fortune, she passed from one
consideration to another, and was satisfied that she might mind her own
interest with those of others, without any breach either of friendship or
generosity, she thought, that, if Coriolanus were, for certain, dead, (an
accident she neither could nor would conceave, without an extraordinary
affliction) it might occasion no inconsiderable alteration in Cleopatra's
condition and her own, and that, it being not impossible, Cleopatra's
inclinations might change, when the object of her affections were in the grave,
if she could consider the love of the King her Brother, with other eyes than
she had done before, and be persuaded by time and necessity to marry him, that
Prince, how exasperated soever he might be against Artemisa sand Alexander,
would not only pardon them for Cleopatra's sake, but would, no doubt, confirm
their marriage, and suffer them to enjoy in quiet what they had sought with so
much trouble and danger. To this happiness would be added also that of having
Cleopatra, for whom she had a passionate affection, her Sister two several
ways: insomuch, that this reflection flattered her into a hope that was not
unpleasant. True it is, that she could not raise it to that height, as to
reflect on the death of Coriolanus without grief, but rather that she was
content to seek out some comfort in her misfortunes, without intrenching so
much as to the least wish, upon what she ought the virtue and friendship of
Cleopatra. Yet durst she not communicate this reflection to the desolate
daughter of Anthony, conceiving, not without reason, that such a Discourse
would not be delightful to her: but she felt her resolution growing stronger
and stronger by that glimpse of hope, betrayed in her countenance, more
setlednesse and less sorrow, then she had done the day, nay indeed, for some
minutes, before.

This little alteration happened in her thoughts, at the same time that those
of Cleopatra met with such another; for that fair Princess, out of motives
quite contrary to those of Artemisa, had just then fastened on resolutions
worthy the Cleopatra's. She had hardly well fixed on them, but, not able to
disguise them either by her countenance or her discourse, she embraced
Artemisa, with a gesture less sad than all the precedent; and letting her rend
in her eyes part of what passed in her soul, Sister, said she to her, Let us
not weep any longer, but rather hope, from the assistance of the Gods and our
own Courage, the remedy of our misfortunes; it may be our unhappiness will not
be so great as we were afraid it may; and if our hard fates reserve us for what
we fear us most insupportable, we shall not want the assistance of our virtue,
either to overcome, or to entertain it as we ought. For your part, Sister, I
hope it will be no hard matter to pacify the King your Brother, and I think it
not impossible, you and Alexander may come together^ and for me, I can easily
contemn whatever may happen to me, when I do life it self. Ever since the
cruel confidence I have had of the infidelity of Coriolanus, I value it so
little that I should not be much troubled to loose it, when ever it shall
please my ill fortune to put (...) into any such exigency; and if the King your
Brother violates the respect due to me, or do any thing that shall make my
captivity insufferable to me, I shall free my self by the same courses the
Queen my mother took to avoid it; and I have that example so much before my
eyes that I were unworthy the name I bear, should I seek for assistance any
where else while I have that of my own courage. This resolution once taken, I
no longer fear the King of Armenia, and since I hope no more of Coriolanus
whether dead or unfaithful, I look on whatever may happen to me in a manner
with indifference, and shall entertain it happily with a constancy whereof the
very example mayadde much to yours.

No doubt but Artemisa found some comfort in this discourse of Cleopatra, not
that she approved that hope, which the daughter of Anthony grounded only on a
contempt of life, but was glad to see her in a quieter posture then she had
been in before: and though she had not the confidence to discover to her the
reflection that had found her the entertainment of some few minutes, yet was
she of a belief that time might so dispose of her as to endure such a
discourse, and that in the mean time she might admit a conversation less
afflictive than that wherein they had already passed away so many cruel
hours. Accordingly, no sooner were these two Princesses resolved to submit to
what the uncertainty of fortune might cast upon them, but they seemed to be
quite changed from what they were; the current of their tears was dried up,
and by degrees they passed to some discourse different from that of their
present misfortune. Yet could not Artemisa give over disputing in favor of
Coriolanus, and would maintain against Cleopatra, that after the last
expressions he had given her of his affection, in his forsaking of his kingdom,
the trouble it was to him to wander up and down the earth to find her out, and
the late combat he was engaged in before their eyes, against those that would
have ravished them, she could not be persuaded he was unfaithful to her.
Cleopatra, who would gladly have been induced to believe Coriolanus innocent,
opposed what she said with the reasons before alleged, yet so as that through
her arguments, might be perceaved part of what Artemisa represented in his
favor. But at last this discourse of a person, of whose life there was much
uncertainty, adding to her grief, she would needs change it, and put Artemisa
upon some other.

The love which that Princess had for Alexander, made her desirous to know,
and willing to hearken to any thing that related to his family, as if she had
some concernment therein; and that consisting of diverse illustrious persons of
both sexes, Artemisa, who had seen only Alexander and Cleopatra, and young
Ptolomey, while yet a child, had the curiosity to desire some account of the
Sisters and Brothers of her beloved Prince. She had not the time to understand
the particularities of their lives and fortunes, (for what she had heard from
Alexander, related to the time while they were yet very young, and not what had
happened to them since his departure from Rome) but though she would gladly
have been informed of all, yet had she a more particular inclination for the
Princess Antonia, whom Cleopatra had mentioned very much to her advantage in
her own History, and young, Ptolomy, of whom she had heard such beginnings, as
gave many occasion to conceave very great hopes of him. Cleopatra satisfied her
as to all she desired; but afterward observing her design was to have a more
particular knowledge of them, and thinking it cruelty not to comply with the
affection she expressed toward her house: Sister, said she to her, I perceave
you are not satisfied with the account I have given you of our house, and if we
were in some other place, I had already entertained you with the discourse, you
would put me upon, of the fortunes of our nearest relations: but, Sister, the
likelihood I am in to engage in a long relation much disconsonant to our
present condit; on, and such as would require such a freedom of spirit as I now
have not as to narration, nor you to attention, deterres me.

Ah Sister, says Artemisa, for my part, what misfortune soever I am persecuted
with, I cannot want the attention I ought to have for the fortunes of our
Brethren; and if you can as well without inconvenience give me a particular
account of their lives and affairs, as I should bear it with passion, you would
make no difficulty to undertake a relation, that may prove the greatest ease to
my afflictions, that happily they are capable of. Not, Sister, that I dare,
without blushing, put you to that trouble, and if you thing it ^t that Camilla,
or any other of your Women, who happily can satis^e me as to what I would know,
supply your place, I should mike le^^ difficulty to abuse her patience than
yours, and should never ^^elesse receave the satisfaction I desire, Sister,
replies Cleopatra, no doubt but Camilla is able to acquaint you with part of
what you desire, and would entertain you with adventures, such as must needs be
known to the persons that were about us: but she cannot possibly give you an
account of some particularities, that happily went no farther then my knowledge,
since it was to me more than any one else, that the persons now to be spoken
of, communicated their most secret sentiments, and that it was in a manner in
my presence, that the greatest part of the things happened. The relation will
happily be somewhat long, (though it may not contain any great variety of
adventures, and that in all likelihood I shall not be able to leave off when I
would) but since I made a shift yesterday to continue that which I had begun,
of the History of my own misfortunes, I hope I shall be as able to go through
with this, and I shall endeavor all that lies in my power not to omit any
thing that may any way satisfy your curiosity. Whereupon Cleopatra, preparing
her self for the narration, the two Princesses thought it their best course to
lie still abed, because it was very betimes in the morning, and bid those that
waited on them, to prevent, as much as they could, any from coming to disturb
them. Camilla took that charge upon her, and so not long after, the fair
Cleopatra having bestowed some few minutes to recall into her memory the things
she had to say, began her discourse in these terms.

THE HISTORY OF JULIVS ANTONIUS, ANTONIA and PTOLOMEY.
BEfore I give you the account you desire of the adventures of Ptolomey and
Antonia, it will not be amiss, Sister, to make mention of an Elder Brother we
have had, and whom happily we have yet, though I said little of him in my own
History, in regard it is so long time since we have either seen or heard of
him, that we have acted hitherto as if there were no such person in the World.
His beginning discovered him not to be unworthy the blood of Anthony, and all
things in him were great enough to rescue him from the oblivion of his nearest
relations. But before I acquaint you with the first beginnings of his life, and
the strange accident whereby we lost him, I shall tell you what condition the
unfortunate Antony left his family in when he dyed, though I doubt not but you
have heard something of it from Alexander. I am easily persuaded, Sister, you
are not to learn how that Anthony left seven children by three wives, by
Fulvia, who was the first, Antillus, and Julius Antonius, by Octavia, Caesar's
Sister, the two Princesses, Agrippina and Antonia; and by Queen Cleopatra,
Alexander, Ptolomey, and my self. For the two daughters by Octavia, and for us,
the issue of Cleopatra, we all had our education together, in the house of that
Virtuous Princess, with all the civilities and kindnesses that could be
expected from a most affectionate mother; and as to the two children of Fulvia,
Antillus was killed not long after the death of our Father, by Caesar's
Soldiers, (his fate having proved not unlike that of our Brother Caesarion,
whose first eruptions, and the great inclinations he discovered, raised some
jealousy of him in Augustus, who for that reason took away his life) and
Julius Antonius was provided for as we were by the indulgent Octavia, and not
long after possessed of the house of Fulvia, and all the estate belonging
thereto, with an addition of somewhat out of Anthony's. To be short, his
condition was such, that he needed not envy the fortunes of any Roman
whatsoever, and though he had not those Kingdoms at his disposal, which had
been at his Fathers, yet did he keep up our house in the greatest luster it
ever was in before the death of Julius Caesar, and before Anthony and Augustus
made themselves Masters of the Empire. He was elder then Alexander and my self
by seven or eight years, insomuch, that within a short time after our
misfortune, and while we were yet brought up as children by Octavia, he was
numbered among the young Princes that pretended to employments and opportunities
of acquiring fame. He was certainly born to all the noblest and greatest
endowments, and though he were not so fair as Alexander, yet had he a high and
majestic look, was of a proper stature, and wanted not any of those
advantages, either of body or mind, which could rationally be wished in him.
With this, his inclinations were absolutely noble, he was wholly disposed to
the acquisition of virtue, and an earnest suitor to those opportunities which
lead a man to glory. We cannot indeed complain, but that he expressed as great
affection toward us, as we could expect from a Brother, and him a virtuous
one: but in regard we were of several venter's, lived in several houses, nay,
that ours was in some sort divided between him and us, and that even among the
kindred of Fulvia, there was no small aversion for the name of Cleopatra;
certain it is, that our familiarity was so much the less with him, and that he
concerned himself less in our Affairs, then if our family had not been
disunited, which is the reason that you have had so little mention made of him
in the first beginnings of the life of Alexander and mine. Whence yet I would
not have it thought, as I told you, that we can reproach Julius Antonius with
any backwardness to do all the civilities and good offices we could expect
from his friendship; but that when any great emergencies intervened, he was no
longer among us; and it is upon that account that I have been destitute of his
assistances in all those occasions which the love of Coriolanus has furnished
me with, to make use of them, and of which I have already made you a relation.

You have, I question not, understood, from Alexander, as also from me, all the
particularities of our younger years; but to give you an account of Julius
Antonius, I am to tell you, that after he had attained perfection in all those
exercises, that are proper to persons of his birth, he was no sooner arrived to
an age fit to bear arms, but he sought out the wars with much earnestness, and
engaging himself in the armies of Dalmatia, Pannonia, as also that which Marcus
Crassus conducted against the Basternae, and having gone through all
employments and charges suitable to his age, with all the good success
imaginable, he acquired a noble fame, and gave the World ground to conceave as
glorious hopes of him as of any other whatsoever. Being, after several years
spent in travel, returned to Rome, he settled there, and was honored by all,
nay wanted not from Caesar himself more then ordinary expressions of esteem and
affection. He was at first established at the Court among persons of the
highest rank, so far, that only Marcellus, and the children of Livia,
particularly favored by Caesar, seemed, by reason of the advantage of their
fortune, to aim at higher pretenses. His expense was noble and magnificent, his
disposition inclined to do civilities and to oblige, and his whole deportment,
such as all the World approved, and were satisfied with. Accordingly, he soon
got him a great number of friends, and, those only excepted, whom the
divisions of Rome, and the distractions of the Triumvirate had made
irreconcilable enemies to our house, there were very few of the Roman
Nobility, who had not a particular esteem for him, and courted not his
friendship. When he went to Augustus's Palace, he was attended by a gallant
retinue of young Gentlemen. In all public shows, and all Assemblies that met
either at the Empresses, or at the young Princess Julia's, he always had the
general acclamations, and it was already the ordinary talk in Rome, that, if
Fortune were any thing favorable to him, he would raise the house of Anthony
to the height of luster it had been in some few years before. But it was not
the pleasure of the gods, he should continue long in that condition, and the
quiet that he himself lost after a very strange manner, proved the occasion of
our losing of him, to our no small grief. Now, Sister, shall you hear something
which you will happily be astonished at, as to the parallel you will find there
is between the fate of Alexander and that of Antonius; whence you will happily
imagine, that Fortune treating them as Brothers, would needs have some
conformity between their adventures.

Among those exercises of the body he was most addicted to, Antonius was the
greatest lover of hunting, and used it very often. To that end being gone a
days journey from Rome on the Tusculum side, where the Country is very
pleasant, and very fit for that kind of divertisement, he passed away certain
days there, with abundance of satisfaction. The last of those he intended, to
bestow on that exercise, being, as he was hunting a Stagge, forced to cross
certain woods in the pursuit, he came into a very pleasant valley, where
putting on his Horse very negligently down a little descent, and along the
slippery grass, he stumbled, but so of a sudden, that he could not get his
feet out of the stirrops, nor prevent the horse from falling upon him so
violently, that having knocked his head against the root of a tree, he was not
only sense-lesse for the time, but received also a very considerable wound. A
further misfortune was, that none of his fellow-huntsmen being mounted
comparably to him, or having taken other ways, there was not any one of his
people near him, to afford him any assistance in that condition, so that he lay
grovelling on the ground, senseless, loosing blood; and being much in need of
help, when certain persons that passed by in a Chariot, in a way not far off,
drew nearer, and came out of the Chariot to relieve him. They were in number
three, and they women, without any man with them, but he that drove the
Chariot, and certain slaves that followed it. She of the women that seemed to
be of the greatest quality, perceaving my Brother to be in the sad condition I
told you of, was extremely troubled for him, and concluding otherwise by his
countenance, and the sumptuousness of his clothes, (though he had only a
riding-suit on) that he was of no mean condition, she seemed very much inclined
to do him all the good she could. She first looked on the wound in his head,
which she found not to be very dangerous, yet did she not think it amiss to
put some linen to it, which she tore off the clothes of her maids.

While she was thus employed, Antonius, whose greatest hurt proceeded from the
sense-lessenesse he had been in, comes to himself, and opening his eyes, saw
that he was under the hands of those fair and officious Surgeonnesses. He was
not a little astonished at the adventure, and though he were in some doubt of
the truth, nay, remembered that he had seen the Chariot as he came into the
Valley, yet could he neither forbear being surprised at the first, nor
afterward divert the amazement with the sight of so beautiful a person, as she
that stood by him, put him into. He cast his eyes upon her, yet without
speaking, and viewed her all over several times, in such a manner, as easily
betrayed his admiration. He had indeed some reason to look on her with a
particular attention, for there was both in her countenance and her person,
what might very well fasten the eye, and fetter the imagination. Her stature
was of the noblest, and her deportment discovered a certain grace that was
wholly particular. All the features of her face were regularly well drawn, her
mouth extremely handsome, her hair of the fairest slaxen that could be, and
her eyes were animated by something so sparkling, and with all so passionate,
that, among the greatest Beauties the earth affords, there is not happily any one
so fit to produce a sudden effect, and to imprint something of passion in a
soul capable thereof. In fine, whether she were truly such, or that the
inclinations of Antonius represented her as such, she seemed to him a very
Admirable Person, and he looked on her a long time with a certain astonishment,
without so much as being able to open his mouth to acknowledge the good office
she had done him. But at last he absolutely recovers himself as well of his
surprise, as the sense-lessenesse occasioned by his fall; and conceaving
himself to be in a very undecent posture, before a person he thought worthy all
possible respects, he would needs rise up, but he could not do it without some
difficulty, as having his leg a little crushed by the horse that had fallen
upon it; insomuch, that when he was got up, being not well able to stand, he
was forced to lean against a tree, where, minding not so much the pain he felt,
as the noble adventure he had met with, he at last broke forth, and looking on
that fair Lady, with an action that already spoke something that argued
abundance of passion, I know not, said he to her, fair, or rather, divine,
Lady, what acknowledgments I ought to return your Goodness, for words will be
but weak expressions thereof, if you do me not an absolute favor, by affording
me some occasion to return you part of what I owe you. The assistance you have
received from me, replies that excellent person, with such an accent as
discovered something full of charm, is no more then what we are obliged to do to
all those that stand so much in need thereof as you did, and particularly to
those, who, as you, carry about them what distinguishes them from the ordinary
rate of men. Your present condition is not, as far as I can judge, very good,
and therefore if you please to make use of my Chariot, I will bring you to a
place, where you may receave the helps you stand in need of, better then you
can here. These words came from her (as Antonius has related since) with so
much kindness, insinuation and majesty, that he was infinitely taken with it,
and felt at that instant, the sudden quickening of a passion, which till then
could never get entrance into his soul; insomuch that he began to consider her
again with a gesture that expressed part of what he felt, and thinking it a
dishonor not to return some answer to so obliging a Proffer. I have not been
able, said he to her, to resist the effects of your goodness, nor prevent your
hands from taking the pains they have, because I was in a condition that
allowed me not the knowledge of your favors; but how precious soever I ought
to account them, I shall not presume so far upon you as to abuse them, but be
content to preserve, till death deprive me of it, the glorious remembrance of
those I have received, without desiring any other of you, which, being
troublesome to you, might too much betray my incivility.

Thus did he endeavor to put off the civility of the Unknown Lady, wherewith
yet he was at last willing to comply, out of the violent inclination he had to
follow her: but just upon this comes in some of his people, and seeming to be
not a little frighted at that adventure, they came about their Master, viewing
him all over with much earnestness, and holding him up under the arms to help
him to walk. Antonius began to feel within him a wound, which took up his
thoughts more then the hurt of his body, and so was desirous, with the
assistance of his men, to get near that fair Lady, who was gone some few paces
form him: but at the same time one of her Maids, having before spoken to one of
Antonius his men, comes to her, and whispers something in her ear. She had no
sooner heard what she said, but her color changed. She seemed to be extremely
at a loss; insomuch, that turning her back on the Prince, after she had called
her slaves to her, she went to her Chariot, got into it, commanded it should be
made fast, and to make all have thence. Antonius, more surprised at this
accident then he had been at the former, it raised in him a certain vexation
and astonishment, so that being still between his people, he lift up his voice,
the better to be heard by that fair Lady: How, Madame, said he to her, do you
forsake me ere you afford me the time to return you my thanks? I forgive them
you, replied she a little smartly, and you stand no longer in need of my
assistance. The Prince was not able to master himself in the agitations, which
so unexpected a separation caused in him, insomuch, that his impatience was
such that he spoke then what he would not happily have the confidence to speak in
a long time, had he been in another condition. Ah Madame, cried he, the pain I
endure, is much greater than you imagine, and the wound you have seen is very
slight in comparison of that which you have given me. Alas, continued he,
seeing her departing, and following her with his eyes, while she made all the
have she could away, must I lose you so suddenly, and with so much cruelty,
without knowing either the cause of your departure, or my unhappiness? What
have I done? What have I attempted? Or what have I so much as thought, that
should in a moment work a change in those officious inclinations? Have you
perceaved in my heart the creation of your own eyes there? Or have you
discovered therein any thing so injurious to your self, as to arm, in an
instant, with so much disdain, a mind wherein I had found so much goodness,
and so much humanity? These words he scattered into the air, while the Chariot
drove on with all speed, till that, not long after getting into a Wood, he
quite lost the sight of it.

Antonius, over-pressed with affliction, sat him down on the grass, whereupon
reflecting on his adventure, he found so much matter to grieve at, that it was
with much ado that he admitted any the least mitigation thereof. He was
ignorant what motive could induce a person so officious, and one that had made
proffers to him so full of obligation, after she had assisted him with her own
hands, to exchange so much indulgence into so much disain; nay, he was to seek
who that fair, good-natured, and scornful person was, from whom he had received
so much good, and so much hurt; and what completed his affliction, was, that
he could not inform himself from any of his own people, who ingeniously
confessed they had not the curiosity to enquire, though one of her Maids had
come to them and learned his name, which it seems they made no difficulty to
tell her. Antonius blamed them a hundred times for their stupidity, though they
alleged by way of excuse, that the disturbance which his fall had put them
into, so took up their thoughts, that they could reflect on nothing else. Being
therefore desirous to do all that lay in his power to learn out the name of a
person, whose idaea was but too well engraven in his heart, he commanded one of
his men to get on horseback immediately, and ride after the tracks of the
Chariot, and without fail to find out some means or other to know the truth,
and to come and give him an account of it at a house of Servilius's, which he
named to him, that lay about two hours riding from that place, and upon the way
to Rome. Having given him this order, he, with the assistance of those that
were about him, got on horseback, and though it was with some difficultity that
he sat, yet he made a shift to ride on easily toward Cervilius's house.

It were a hard task for me to represent to you the different reflections that
exercised his thoughts all the way he rode; but certain it is, as he has
himself acknowledged since, that though he felt no small pain in his body, yet
he never so much as minded it; and that he had so deeply graven in his heart
the idaea of a person, one while kind and obliging, and another, cruel and
disdainful, and yet both in her mildness, and in her scorn ever fair, and ever
full of charm, that he was not one minute without it. What a fantastic
adventure is this of mine? said he, and what arms does Fortune intend to take
up against me? Ought I to see that accomplished person in a condition, wherein
her good offices had begun, what her fair eyes have completed? or could my
soul, prevented by the obligation, be insensible as to beauty? But when I had
seen her, when I was obliged to her for her assistance, when her beauty had
enflamed me with love, must I lose her after so strange a manner, contrary to
all probability, contrary to all rational order? and, what I think yet much
more insupportable, see her depart disdainful, incensed and exasperated, from a
place, where some few minutes before she had appeared with so much goodness?
By what action have I incurred her displeasure? or what could she discover in
my person, which should oblige her so of a sudden, to exchange her first
sentiments, for such as were absolutely opposite thereto? Or is it possible she
may have truly read in my eyes the love which I already feel for her, or could
she look on that unexpected influence of her beauty, as an injury worthy her
indignation, and this deportment of hers toward me?

Having thus for some time spent his thoughts on that part of his adventure,
and passing to the other; But is it possible, added he, I should commend, or be
dissatisfyed with any one, and not know whom I either commend, or am
dissatisfied with, and shall I be long ignorant whom I ought to return my
thanks to, for the assistance I have received, or whom I ought to complain of,
for the wound has been given me? For in fine, I feel, and that not without
some confusion, that I am really in love. It Is from the blood of Mark-Anthony,
who lived and dyed the most amorous of mankind, that I derive these ambrous
inclinations, for had I not been born of him, the charms of that Unknown Beauty
had not produced so unexpected an effect.

Amidst these reflections he comes to the house of Servilius, who chanced at
that time to be there himself, and who having understood the accident had
happened to him, caused him to be put into a bed, and to be attended with as
much care and affection as might be. The hurt he had gotten by his fall was not
so considerable, insomuch, that before he left Servilius's house, which was
about two or three days after, he had very well recovered himself: but that
which troubled him most, was, that he could not learn any thing of what he
desired from the person he had fent after the Chariot, who had brought him no
other account, then that having lost the track of it in the sand, he had never
been able to recover it again; and that, notwithstanding all the enquiry he had
made up and down the Villages thereabouts, yet could he not meet with any
tidings of it. So that my Brother, being still as ignorant as he had been
before, after he had described the place as well as he could to Servilius, and
given him all the marks whereby he might possibly know it, could not meet with
any satisfaction at all, though Servilius, the more to humor him, had sent for
several other persons, and had very diligently enquired of all the Ladies that
might have any habitation near the place where the accident had happened.

Antonius having taken a great deal of pains in this business to no purpose,
returns to Rome with as much melancholy, and happily with as much love as ever
man could be capable of. He dissembled the cause of his affliction, as thinking
it not fit to discover it, but to some few persons, that were his very intimate
friends, who were not a little astonished at the adventure, and assisted him
what lay in their power, to find out the name of the person, whose image he had
so deeply imprinted in his heart. Agrippa, to whom he had made a relation of
this story, and who was his very particular friend, had some discourse with him
of it, when ever they met together, and assisted him what he could, (though as
ineffectually as others) in the inquisition he was so much bent upon. His
melancholy was remarkable, and obvious to all the World: insomuch that those
who knew him to be naturally of a cheerful disposition, could not conceave upon
what grounds his humor was so changed of a sudden. It being about six or
seven years since what I relate to you happened, Alexander and I were too
young to be admitted of his Privy Council, so that it is since that I came to
the knowledge of these particularities.

In the mean time Antonius, as to point of magnificence, lived much after the
rate he was wont to do. He went daily to the Emperor's Court, who had a very
great esteem and affection for him; and whereas the generous Octavia, his
Sister, with whom we were; notwithstanding the ill treatment she might have
received from our Father, had nevertheless very great respects for his memory,
she was as earnest for the advancement of those children that he had had by his
other Wives, as she could have been for that of her own, and that merely out of
the excess of virtue that was in her. Thence was it that she had a design to
marry Antonius to one of the Daughters she had had by Marcellus her former
Husband, and who were brought up with us, without any distinction, as if we had
been really Sisters: as conceaving that she could not better dispose of her
Daughters then to bestow them on the Sons of her Husband, or rather, that she
could not do any thing more contributory to the advantage of the Son of Anthony
then, by making him her Son in law, to make him Caesar's Nephew, who was able
to raise his fortunes to the highest pitch of greatness. It was indeed an
admirable expression of the indulgence of Octavia, in regard that by way of
addition to the merit of their person, which yet is extraordinary, her
Daughters, whether we consider their birth or their fortunes, were such as
there were no men in the World, who would not have been proud to serve them,
upon the least appearance of any such pretention; nay, it might happily be
affirmed, that Julia only excepted, they were the best Matches in the World.

You may well imagine that Antonius being acquainted with that goodness of
Octavia toward him, entertained it with all manner of acknowledgement and
respect; but by reason of the misfortune whereby he was a little disordered, he
received it not with any great joy, but found it no small difficulty to
disguise his resentments as he was obliged to do. His love was not happily raised
to that violence which it might have arrived to, by a further knowledge of the
person beloved; yet was it strong enough to maintain the Garrison of his soul
against the assaults and eruptions of another passion, and to satisfy him,
though not without an extraordinary affliction, that, of necessity, he must
either prove ungrateful toward Octavia, and oppose the advantages were
intended him, or resolve to do a thing, which, how advantageous soever it were,
could not appear to be such, nay, not indeed supportable to his prepossessed
imagination. But it being withal certain, that he was a person of very great
endowments, and a noble education, he neglected not to do what he thought
requisite, to express his acknowledgements to Augustus's Sister, and forced
his inclinations so far, as to do all those devoirs and civilities, which he
thought might be expected from him by the Princess Marcella, so was called the
elder of the Daughters of Octavia by Marcellus her former Husband. It Was indeed
with abundance of prudence and discretion, that he overcame the violence he did
himself in that particular; but it was withal easy to observe, that he made
it not his business to assure himself of that good fortune so much as in all
appearance he should have done; or rather that he suffered those that were
employed about it, to bestir themselves, he doing little or nothing
contributory thereto. Those who made this observation were very much astonished
at the dis-activity he expressed in an affair of such concernment to him, and
instead of imagining the true cause, were persuaded that his indifference or
backwardness proceeded from the little inclination he naturally had to
marriage in general, against which he had been often heard to speak, and for
which it was known he really had some aversion.

But when he had done all he thought himself obliged to by way of sacrisice to
that violence he had done his inclinations, and had some hours freely to
dispose of, his discourse ran upon his misfortune, and his entertainment was of
the strange posture of his spirit, and the odd effects of his adventure. He
did indeed endeavor all he could, to force out of his thoughts the inevitable
Idaea which would have a place there, whether he would or no, and was so
prejudicial to his quiet and his establishment. Nay I know he did all that lay
in his power, to get it thence, and it may be his endeavors had, with the
assistance of time and his reason, proved effectual, if he had not afterward
met with something, that instead of contributing to his recovery, confirmed him
in his passion.

Among those friends whom he accounted his most intimate and familiar, Lucius
Scipio, of the illustrious house of the famous Scipio's, whose glory has
filled the universe, was the chiefest. He was a person not unworthy the name he
bore, as being one, that while he was yet very young, the hope generally
conceaved of him, was, that he would not degenerate from his Ancestors. He had
a violent passion for Emilia, the Daughter of Statilius Scaurus, and, being
very free and open to Antonius, he had given him a faithful account of the
progress of his love, and had carried him along with him to Emilia. But this
affection of his being of no long standing; Antonius's acquaintance at that
house was not very great, besides that it was happily the less, by reason it had
been contrary to our Fathers party; nay I think he had accompanied Scipio but
once thither. It is situated upon the Tiber, and the Garden, which is one of
the fairest about Rome, reaching down to the River side, which is kept off by a
Terrace with Pilasters, very magnificent, and very commodious for walking. It
being the fairest season of the year, Emilia came^down thither everynight to
take the fresh-air, and Scipio, out of a certain piece of gallantery, very
ordinary in Rome, taking a little boat, and driving along the River to
Scaurus's Garden, had often seen Emilia upon the Terrace, and, without quitting
the boat, had had in that manner several conversations with her. And whereas
the design he had upon the Lady, was approved by his friends, no body took any
offense at, or censured his so doing; for since the house was always open to
him, the conversation of the Garden was not forbidden him.

But meeting one evening with Antonius at Octavia's, he invited him to that
divertisement, and that he did the more freely, in regard he did not conceal
any thing from him of his amorous adventures. The melancholy Antonius was
content to accompany his friend to that walk, and being gotten into the boat
with him, they went down the River toward Emilia's Garden. Antonius, out of a
confidence not inferior to that of Scipio toward him, had discovered his mind
to him, and had fully acquainted him with that fatal adventure, whereby he came
to fall in love with that Unknown Beauty, and which had changed his natural
cheerfulness into so much cloudynesse and melancholy. Scipio had taken
abundance of pains to get him the acquaintance of that Excellent Person, but
his endeavors had proved as fruitless as those of other people. Now this
consideration being the ordinary employment of Antonius's thoughts, it proved
also the subject of his discourse with Scipio in the boat, and they talked of
the consequences of that accident, till they came in sight of the place where
Emilia was wont to walk. It being as fair and pleasant an evening as could be
wished, Emilia failed not to be walking upon the Terrace; where Scipio and
Antonius had no sooner discovered her, but they could perceave another Lady
walking with her. The Waves of the Tiber did continually wash the wall of the
Terrace, so that Scipio could cause the boat to be brought as near it as he
pleased, and the Terrace being of no great height, he could discourse with
Emilia, and not speak any louder then ordinary, and discern all objects with
ease, at a certain distance, which was not very great. As they drew near,
Scipio, who knew not the Lady that was with Emilia, would have asked Antonius
whether he had any acquaintance with her: and Antonius, whose thoughts were
otherwise taken up, and had not so much as looked toward her, thought to have
a fuller sight of her when the boat was come so near as that he might easily
discern her. But, at the same instant, she, not desirous it seems to be known,
lets fall her vail over her face, and deprived them of the sight of it; yet not
so suddenly, but that the prepossessed Antonius could perceave some few rays
of the same Beauty which he had so well engraven in his memory. This confused
and imperfect glimpse put him into such a disturbance, that he was no further
concerned in the first interview between Scipio and Emilia, then a submissive
salute to Emilia and her Companion amounted to, on the latter whereof his eyes
were so much the more fastened, out of that suspicion that raised no small
tempest in his heart. At last he dispersed that cloud which he thought his mind
overspread with so unseasonably, and with so little ground, and engaging
himself in the conversation that was between Emilia and her Friend, he
confirmed her by his discourse, in the good opinion she had conceaved of him.
Emilia's Companion seemed not at all concerned in their discourse, though she
were still in place, and it being her design not to discover her self, she
accordingly was resolved not to speak at all. But Scipio having a particular
curiosity to be acquainted with his Mistresses's Friends of her own Sex,
addressing his speech to her: Since you are a Friend of Emilia's, said he to
her, can you have so much cruelty as to conceal your self any longer from those
persons, who, of all the World, have the greatest honor that may be for
whatever is dear to Emilia? The Lady, who thought her self obliged not to be
altogether awanting in point of civility toward a person of so much worth as
Scipio, especially one she knew to be much in the affections of her friend; or
rather out of an imagination, that the accent of her voice would not be
discovered by a person, with whom she had not exchanged above three or four
words in her life, would needs put her self to the hazard of making him some
answer. Seeing him therefore in a great expectation of it; Though I am a friend
of Emilia's, said she to him, yet am I not any of those you have seen about her
before, and, for my face, it is so little known in Rome, that you would be
never the more satisfied, though you had your full sight of it.

Those few words were all they could get from her, but there needed no more to
discover her to my Brother, and the accent of that voice came so full into his
memory, that at the first syllables she uttered, he knew her again as perfectly
as if he had spent his whole life with her, and to the knowledge of her voice,
adding the great trouble she was in to conceal her self, and the little glimpse
he had had of her face when she covered, he was absolutely satisfied she was
the same person, that, in so few minutes, had raised such a combustion in his
soul. Whence it came that he was at such a loss at the rencounter, that he
continued in suspense for some minutes, between astonishment and joy; but at
last, not able to master his first resentments, which absolutely betrayed him
to the mercy of his passion, and crying out with an action full of
transportation; Ah Madam, said he to her, though, you are unknown to Scipio,
you are not to Antonius, and the fatal assistance you once afforded him, has
left an impression of you too deeply graven in his heart ever to mistake you;
however you may be pleased to conceal your self from him. It Is you that a
grateful inclination, and a soul over-flown with the tendrest passion seeks
every where; and it is you alone for whose sake I contemn all the Roman
Beauties, nay, whatever the earth affords besides.

He had said more, his passion it seems suggesting such words as he could not
forbear uttering, when that cruel Beauty desirous to avoid all further
discourse with him, whispered something to Emilia, and taking her by the arm,
drew her along with her, hardly affording her the leisure of a few words to
excuse her self to Antonius and Scipio, so that she was forced to leave them,
to conduct her friend, who pretended to be indisposed. If Antonius was
surprised at this unexpected meeting with his Unknown Mistress, he was no
less at her hasty departure; and if the one had raised a certain joy in him,
the other caused in him an equal affliction, as being not able, without an
excessive grief, to imagine that that very person, to whose service he had
devoted himself with so violent a passion, should have conceaved, for him, an
aversion great as the love he had for her. He would have run after her, had it
been in a place where he might have done it, but that s^tisfaction being not
allowed him, he pursued her with his eyes as long as he could, and being in the
boat he held his arms acrosse, the ordinary posture of a man in a confusion;
or, to say better, at an absolute loss. O ye gods, cried he at last, after he
continued some time in that condition, what fortune do you intend me, and with
what new kind of misfortune is Heaven resolved to persecute me! This he
seconded with a many other exclamations, which it were hard for me, and withal
to no purpose, to repeat to you: but at last having fixed on some resolution,
he turned to his friend, who was in a manner as much astonished at this
adventure as himself, and looking on him with an action absolutely passionate;
Dear Friend, said he to him, you are sensible of my present condition, and, I
doubt not, are much at a loss to see the strangeness of my fate. I, by an
unexpected accident, light upon what I seek I know not where, and what I love,
though it be unknown to me, and yet from this rencounter I derive no other
knowledge then that of my own inevitable misfortune, since I cannot but
apprehend, to my confusion, that I am no less hated then I am my self amorous,
and that this cruel Unknown Beauty abhors me so far, that to avoid me, she
forgets all Courtship and ordinary civility: It must needs be, that Nature has
put something that is odious in my person, that should cause so sudden and so
strange an antipathy between us, since I am confident it cannot proceed from
any of my actions.

Hereupon he sat still for some minutes, while Scipio, no less surprised then
he, could not find any thing to say to him upon that adventure: so that
reassuming the discourse: If you have any affection or respects for me, said he
to him, as I ought not to question but you have, you may do me a good office
which I should gladly return you in such an emergency. My cruel Unknown
Mistress is now at Emilia's, she may not happily stay there an hour; and if I
let slip this opportunity of knowing her, I shall not happily recover it while I
live again, it being not to be doubted but that, when she leaves Emilia, she
will oblige her to conceal from me what she would have me ignorant of. When
Emilia left us to follow her, she forbad us not to come to her house, and
consequently without any fear of displeasing her, you may bring me to that part
of the house where she lodges, where you have free admittance, and where we
shall find her yet, provided we afford her not the time to be gone: so I shall
see her through your means, I shall make acquaintance with her if I can, and
shall endeavor to learn the cause of this violent aversion. As you respect the
gods, Friend, deny me not this assistance, which you may not happily have the
opportunity to afford me while you live again, in an exigency wherein my quiet
is so much concerned.

He would have added other entreaties, when Scipio, who had abundance of
affection for him, not suffering him to proceed: There is no necessity, said he
to him, to use so much solicitation to work out a quiet which is as dear to me
as my own, let us go to Emilia' s, since you desire it; and let us hope, that,
in case she take any displeasure at this action, she may pardon it out of a
consideration of our friendship. Having taken this resolution, they caused the
boat to put off, and being brought as near as they could come to the street,
wherein was the great gate of Scaurus's house, they went about, and soon got
thither. Scipio being much acquainted in the house, went straight to that part
where Emilia had her lodgings, where those of the house were wont to see him
almost every day; and, as fortune would have it, they were no sooner come into
her Chamber, but they presently perceaved Emilia and her Companion; who,
standing near a window, with their backs turned to it, were fallen, as they
inferred from their gesture, into a very serious discourse. Antonius
immediately knew the beloved countenance of the cruel one that so much avoided
him, and the fresh flames, which at that moment found a passage quite into his
heart, heightened the fatal fire that was already kindled in his soul. He went
toward her very amazedly; but she immediately perceaving it, to avoid him, as
one would do, that they think most abominable, hastily leaves Emilia, and runs
into a closet, that lay hard by whereof the door was open. It happened, that
either by accident, or by reason of the fright she was put into, she forgot to
shut it; so that Antonius, whom the sudden transport of his passion had
deprived of part of his discretion, and smothered the respect he ought Emila,
followed her into the closet, and seeing her sat on a chair, runs to her with
such precipitation, that he was at her feet, and held her fast by the knees, in
a manner before she had had the time to perceave what he did. This beautiful
enemy of Antonius, being neither able to get away from him, nor yet to endure
his presence, whose importunate pursuit very much enflamed her indignation,
spent some few minutes in considering what resolution she should take,
discovering in her countenance the marks of an extraordinary agitation. At last
she thought fit to speak first, and endeavoring to force my Brother from her
knees, with an action, which though it expressed her sufficiently incensed
against him, yet made her not seem the less amiable. Upon what account is it,
said she to him, that thou dare thus violate the respect due to my sex and my
birth, and by what action is it that I have deserved to be exposed to thy
unmerciful persecution? Is it not enough that thou have received from me an
assistance which I was not obliged to afford my enemy? Or will thou in requital
force me once more to quit Rome to avoid what is to me, of all the earth
contains, most abominable? These words pronounced with a shrill voice, and
after a manner absolutely imperious, struck Antonius like a Thunderclap, and
put him for a while to such a loss of spirits, that he knew not what to say.
At last, rallying all the courage and resolution he had about him to stand out
this encounter. Adorable enemy, said he to her, whom I do adore, though, I do
not know, and to whom I am odious, yet am to learn the reason why, mistake not
for a persecution, or any want of respect for your Divine Beauties, those
effects that proceed from a cause absolutely contrary. No, these are the
expressions of my gratitude, and a passion full of veneration and respect,
which I fatally conceaved for you, at the very moment I became obliged to you
for your assistance. Then it was that I became yours, much out of a
consideration of the assistance you afforded me, but infinitely more through
the violent impression which your celestial beauties made of a sudden in my
heart, which thereupon absolutely yielded to be yours without the least
resistance. I have tenderly, nay indeed but too too tenderly for my own quiet,
preserved the memory of the obligation you put upon me, and the glorious wound
I received; and therefore you ought to be the less offended, if I am at some
pains to find out the opportunities both to acknowledge your goodness, and to
see again those fair eyes that had hurt me. If my eyes have done you any hurt,
replies the Unknown Beauty somewhat angrily, they have done me such an injury
as I shall never be able to pardon them: and if what you say be true, you will
find your self very unfortunate in your address to a person, who cannot,
otherwise then by hatred and aversion, make any return to your affection. I am
indeed easily persuaded, replies the amazed Antonius, that I deserve this cruel
aversion by reason of some defects in my person, since I am confident I could
never have merited it by any action, or thought I have ever been guilty of. I
see then, replied she much displeased with him, that I am still unknown to you,
and, were you not ignorant whom you speak to, I am confident you would not
speak to me at all. Certain it is, said he to her, with a very submissive
gesture, that I am to learn whom I speak to, and whom I have bestowed my self
on, unless there be no more requisite to know you, then to have well observed
the divine qualities of your admirable person: all the endeavors I have used
to gain a more particular knowledge of you, have proved ineffectual, so that I
am now at a loss what I ought to learn, or what I ought to desire, since the
knowledge of your person is of no less concernment to me then that of your
aversion. You shall know both together, replies the Unknown Beauty, and you will
be no longer to seek why I shun you, when I have told you that I am Daughter to
Cicero, and you remember, that you are Son to Anthony and Fulvia, his
Executioners. With these words she goes out of the Closet into Emilia's
Chamber, and out of that into another, where she locked up her self for fear of
further pursuit.

But indeed there was no necessity she should take all that pains, for he,
whose pursuit she was so much afraid of, was at such a loss, and so surprised
at the discovery she had made to him of her self, that he hardly knew where he
was. Not that, from his understanding that she whom he loved was Cicero's
Daughter, he felt any diminution in his love, nor yet that being his Daughter,
she appeared less amiable; but that all the hopes he might have conceaved
vanished away in an instant. And when it came into his mind, not only that
Anthony had caused Cicero to be put to death, but also that Fulvia, his Mother,
had caused his head and his hands to be fastened to the Rostra, where he used
to make his Orations, and had committed a thousand cruel indignities on the
relics of that great person, whose memory was so precious among the Romans,
he had no more to say for himself, and could not blame his Daughter for the
horror she had conceaved against the Son of Anthony and Fulvia. For, though
indeed diverse persons had lost their lives, during the proscriptions of the
Triumvirate, which yet occasioned not eternal enmities between families, yet it
is certain that in the death of Cicero, there had been some circumstances so
cruel, and Fulvia, naturally inclined to blood, had used him with so much
inhumanity, even after death, that my Brother, whose memory was of a sudden
burdened with all those things, and whose inclinations were absolutely
virtuous, could not think on them without horror, Woe is me, cried he at last,
rising up from the place where he had continued all this while, and turning to
Scipio and Emilia, who had been witnesses of all that was passed, the Daughter
of Cicero, has indeed reason to avoid the Son of Fulvia; but the son of Fulvia
has not his own destiny at his disposal, and cannot forbear loving, whiles he
lives, the Daughter of Cicero.

With these words he, at the entreaty of Emilia, sat down, and lay under such
a dark cloud of affliction, that for a good while he was not fit for any
conversation. During that time, he understood from Emilia, without any desire
of his to be informed, that Tullia was a near Kinswoman of hers, and that her
Mother Terentia was of the family of the Scauri, that the beauty and excellent
endowments of that young Lady had made no great noise in Rome, and that her
person had not been known there so much as in all probability it ought to have
been; by reason that while she was yet very young, and that during the time
the house lay under disgrace, her Mother had carried her to a Country House
near Tusculum, where she had spent her life in solitude, without ever returning
to Rome; and that happily she had not come thither so soon, if, upon occasion of
her Mothers death, which happened not long before, her Brother Quintus Cicero,
who lived at Rome after a very noble and high rate, and had been nominated
Proconsul in some part of Africa, had not some few days since sent for her.
Emilia further acquainted Antonius and Scipio, that Tullia, besides the
perfections of her body, had a many admirable endowments, that she had
cultivated an excellent disposition with an excellent education, and that,
during the time of her solitude, being addicted to the study of the nobler kind
of Sciences, she was grown perfect therein; that she discovered abundance of
courage and virtue, that she was not subject to the weakness of our Sex; and
that she was of a conversation infinitely pleasant, when she was among persons
to whom she was pleased to communicate her self.

To these Emilia added a many other things in commendation of Tullia, whereof
the effect was, that they made the wound of the unfortunate Antonius wider than
it was, and disarmed him of all the forces he had to oppose a passion, wherein
he expected not to find any satisfaction. Scipio was extremely troubled at it,
through those sentiments which friendship inspired him with; and Emilia, who
had that esteem for his virtue, as all others had that were acquainted with it,
had an extraordinary compassion for his misfortune, and would have been very
glad to find out any means to comfort and assist him. But knowing Tullia to be
a person constant and unchangeable in her resolution, especially in those,
wherein she thought her honor concerned, and that from what she already knew,
she foresaw that the passionate Antonius would find but little satisfaction in
his love, she endeavored to divert his thoughts from it, with the best
arguments she could make against it, and forbore not to tell him whatever she
imagined might put him into some doubt of the success, and fear of her friends
humor. My Brother heard her with abundance of patience, and great expression
of the resentment he had of her goodness in concerning her self so much in his
misfortune: but when all was done, he protested to her, that it was impossible
for him to make any advantage of her good advise, and that that unfortunate
passion was grown so predominant in his soul, that he was out of all hopes
ever to see himself free from it, what course soever he might take. Scipio
added his remonstrances to those of Emilia, and knowing, that, besides the
difficulties, which his friend might well fear in respect of Tullia, he was in
the ready way, by a fruitless love, to ruin his fortunes which seemed
absolutely to court him in the design which Augustus had to marry him to one of
his Neeces, he represented to him whatever his friendship could suggest that
were most rational, and most likely to prevail with him in that emergency: but
he took pains to as little purpose as Emilia, and that poor lover, too too
violently prepossessed, made them both such answers, as raised in them more
compassion to see him so resolute, then hope to see him of any other mind. I am
not to learn, said he to them at last, that in Tullia' s aversion I have a
terrible enemy to engage with, nay am further satisfied that the hatred she
has for our Family is so justifiable, that I should find it a hard matter to
find any pretense to condemn her for it. As to the design which Caesar and
Octavia have upon me, I know it amounts to those advantages, to which, the
posture of my Fortune considered, I could not raise my hopes: nor am I
ignorant, that by my importunate addresses to a person that shuns me, and will
happily shun me while she lives, I run the hazard of turning the Emperours's good
inclinations toward me into just resentments against me. But there is
something withal I know much better than I do all this, that is, that I am not
able to hear any reason in the wretched condition to which I am reduced; and
that whatever the most enforcing arguments might produce where there is freedom
of spirit, will have no effect at all upon a mind fatally and unfortunately
prepossessed. I am absolutely persuaded, added he a while after, that this
misfortune is an effect of the wrath of the gods against the memory of Anthony
and Fulvia, and that they could not revenge that of the unfortunate Cicero,
against his murderers, otherwise then by sacrificing their Son to the Daughter
of him whom they sacrificed to their rage and ambition. O Anthony, O Fulvia!
concluded he with a sigh, I refuse not to be the victime that must appease the
incensed Deities; and I cheerfully offer my self up to the fair Tullia, to
expiate the blood you have unjustly spilt. These were all the words Emilia and
Scipio could get of him; and a while after, out of a fear to displease Emilia,
by depriving her of the conversation of her friend, he took his leave of her in
so sad a manner, that it raised in her an extraordinary compassion for him, and
went out of the house with Scipio, who would not by any means leave him; but it
was in such a posture, and with a countenance so disturbed, that it was no
easy matter to know him.

From that day he grew more and more melancholy and affected solitude much more
then he had done; and if, while he knew not who was the object of his passion,
the desire to be acquainted with it, was his perpetual torment, the knowledge
he had of it troubled him also after a strange manner; and the less disturbed
and moved he was at it, the more he seemed to be afflicted and cast down. He
was seldom seen at the Emperors, at Octavias, or at the Princess Julias, or
in any of the noblest companies of Rome, and if any of his friends came to him,
where he ever entertained them with abundance of civility, they found him so
changed and different from what he was wont to be, that they had not the
patience to see him in that condition, without concerning themselves in his
affliction, though they knew not the cause of it. All his thoughts, all his
designs, aimed at nothing so much as to find out an opportunity to speak once
more to Tullia, out of an imagination, that, if he could but east himself at
her feet, and entertain her with the discourse which his mind perpetually ran
upon, though her soul were made of iron, he should soften it. In this
imagination he made a hundred passionate speeches, and his love inspired him
with the tendrest things any mind could be capable of: but when he had
sufficiently ruminated on what he would have said to her; he still was to seek
for the opportunity to speak with her.

Tullia had been in Rome but some few days, and her abode was at her
Brother's, Quint us Cicero, who lived after the rate of a Consular house,
suitably to the condition his Father had left him in; but there was no
likelihood Antonius should ever give her a visit at that house. The Son of
Cicero had for the family of Anthony a resentment which none could blame him
for; and though, by reason of Caefars authority, the factions of the
Triumvirate had been reconciled, and that the families among which the
difference of parties had produced very fatal effects, were content to be
quiet, and forbore openly to endeavor the revenge of past injuries, yet had
not that reconciliation, which had put a Period to the civil wars, so far
reunited their hearts, as to establish friendship, and secure the freedom of
visits: nay, though this had been effected among those whose enmities were
grounded on more inconsiderable injuries, yet those between the children of
Cicero and those of Anthony and Fulvia, amounted to some thing more bloody,
then to admit of any correspondence between them: Besides, young Cicero was a
person of a nature much different from that of his Father, he was stupid,
brutish and malicious, and though he smothered his resentments out of a fear
to discover them against a house of a far greater fortune than his own; yet is
it certain, that, if he could* have done us a mischief without any hazard to
himself, he would have embraced the opportunity to do it, and therefore it was
impossible Antonius should attempt the seeing of Tullia at her Brothers house,
without putting his life into manifest danger. Yet was it not this fear that
hindered him, for that of displeasing Tullia had a far greater influence upon
his spirit, then that of hazarding a life that could not be of much value to
him, considered with the misfortune that attended it: Nay, he would have
cheerfully ventured into that house, though his enemie's, without any
reflection on the danger that might ensue, had he observed in Tullia any
sentiments different from those of her Brother: but it was his unhappiness,
that after he had subdued the enemies he contemned, he should meet with one
that was terrible, against whom yet he had no arms to defend himself. A hundred
times did he cast himself at Emilia's feet, and made use of the interest Scipio
had in her, to obtain of Tullia the permission to see her but once more in his
life: in answer to which Em^lia, who had a great esteem for Antonius, as also
upon the intercession of his friend, did all that lay in her power to persuade
her Kinswoman to afford him that satisfaction. But Tullia was not only
inexorable as to that request, but fearing further that in her visits to
Emilia, she might meet with Antonius at her house either by accident, or out of
design, she entreated her not to take it amiss if she came not to her any
more, till she were confident that Antonius had quitted all inclinations for
her; insomuch that having earnestly entreated her pardon for that resolution,
she persisted in it so far, that she made no more visits to her, or, if she saw
her sometimes, it was at such hours that she was in no fear of finding my
Brother there.

This cruel obstinacy of hers to avoid Antonius had almost put him into
despair, and yet such was his unhappiness, that what would have recovered any
other out of an affection so much slighted, made his cure the more desperate.
All the discoveries of Tullia's cruelty signified, in his apprehension, so many
expressions of her virtue, and the respect she had for the memory of her
Father; and so bewayling his own misfortune, he thought he could not justly
charge her with any thing. He constantly visited all the places she was wont to
frequent: but she, being as careful to avoid him, as he was diligent to find
her out, forbore going thither as soon as she perceaved that he had discovered
so much: yet could not all her caution hinder, but that he saw her sometimes in
the Temple, but she either let fall her veyle as soon as she perceaved him, or
took up such places, and kept still such company that he could not come to her.
But one day above the rest, she having not been so careful as at other times,
and being gone to the Temple of Ceres, with the Maids that ordinarily waited on
her, while she was at her devotion, in a remote corner, and at such a time as
there were hardly any people in the Temple, my Brother, who had caused her to
be watched where ever she went, having had notice of the place where she was,
failed not to come thither, and to speak to her, but with a countenance that
sufficiently discovered the fear he was in to displease her. Tullia had no
sooner perceaved him coming toward her, but she lets fall her veyle, and by
that action had almost put the sad Antonius so far out of countenance, that he
hardly had the courage to speak to her. However, he made a shift to recover
himself, and when he was got near her, making a halt as if he stayed for some
body, and having looked toward the door of the Temple, he at last turned his
face to Tullia, whom, though she looked another way, addressing his speech to
her; Is it possible, Madam, said he to her, you should hope for any favor from
the gods you adore, when you your self are inexorable toward those men that
adore you? Tullia was silent a while out of a resolution not to make Antonius
any answer at all; but at last conceaving that what she should make him would
be such, as she might happily be rid of him for ever after: It is not for the Son
of Fulvia, said she to him, to hope for any favor from the Daughter of Cicero;
and if Cicero' s Daughter may expect any from Anthony' s Son, it shall be no
other then that he would never either see or think on her again. You cannot
without injustice, replies Antonius, charge me with the crime of Mark-Anthony
and Fulvia; nay I am confident you are satisfied of my innocence; I am so,
replied she, and therefore I have not the least thought of revenge for you^
but, if I am not mistaken, I can be charged with no injustice, if I abjure all
conversation with their son, who were the implacable murderers of my Father.
Ah unmerciful woman! replied the afflicted Prince, you pretend reason not to be
revenged of a person that is innocent, and in the mean time know very well,
that, if you should thrust a dagger into my breast, there were much less
cruelty in your revenge, then there is in your shunning me as you do. I shall
shun you while I live, replied she very angrily, and, if you get not from me, I
shall not only quit this Temple, but shall leave Rome and Italy, in case you
do not forbear persecuting me. With these words she would have risen out of the
place where she was, but Antonius, thinking he could not any further press her
without incivility, prevented her departure; and having made her a low
reverence, he went from her, so clouded with affliction, that for that whole
day he was not capable of any conversation.

Though Antonius found it a great difficulty to conceal from those who were
acquainted with his natural cheerfulness, the change which that unfortunate
passion had wrought in him, yet were they ignorant of the cause, and for a good
space of time only Scipio knew the mystery of it. But, at last, it came to the
knowledge of diverse persons by several discoveries sufficiently
extraordinary, but particularly by one which, because it was public and
withal very rare, made no small noise in Rome. The Emperor, Livia, Julia,
Octavia, and all the Illustrious Persons about Rome were one day assembled in
the Cirque, where they were to be entertained with the combats of savage
beasts, by Agrippa, who had brought them out of Africa to that purpose, as you
know it is an ordinary thing at Rome, as also that those who would have the
reputation of being magnificent, do often entertain the people with such
sports. Though Tullia went very seldom into great companies, as well by reason
of the mourning she was still in for her Mother, as out of a fear of meeting
Antonius, yet this day she thought her self obliged to go, not only upon the
account of Agrippa, who was at the charge of the divertisement, but also
because it was her Brothers will she should go, and accordingly he brought her
thither with diverse other Persons of their Family and Alliance. Antonius, who
was very much in hope she would be there, and expected, with much impatience,
to see her, observed, very much to his satisfaction, the place where she sat,
which was near enough to her Brother, and some of her Kinswomen: but found
withal to his grief, that Lucius Cecinna, a young man, of an Illustrious
House, and one that had the reputation of courting her, having waited upon her
thither, sat down by her. This sight made Antonius blush, and enflamed him
with indignation and jealousy; yet durst he not seat himself near Tullia, out
of a fear she would take it unkindly, and a confidence that she would admit no
conversation with him; but he got into a place, which, being not very far from
her, and at one of the Angles of the Amphitheatre, joining to that where she
was, gave him the advantage of seeing her better than any other part where he
could have placed himself. The seats of persons of quality are in the lowest
Stage, and nearest the Area, which is the place where the combats are fought,
whether they be between Beasts or Gladiators: so that those of that rank may
lean against certain Pilasters, whereby the Cirque is compassed about, and
which is raised up to such a height, as to secure them from the fury of the
Lions and Tigers, that are the creatures of greatest agility: the seats behind
that, being raised, and standing at a greater distance, are for the people, who
are ordinarily admitted to these sights, to their very great delight and
entertainment. I went thither my self that day with the Princess Julia, though
we were both of us at that time but in the thirteenth year of our age, and
consequently I can give you a more particular account of this action, then of
some others at which I was not present.

Antonius had his eyes continually fastened on Tullia's face, who never was
guilty of so much as one look toward him. This amorous Prince looked upon that
freedom of conversation which was between her and Cecinua, with a very jealous
eye, and with no small disturbance of mind: and if any one had concerned
himself so far as to mind his actions, he might easily have observed in his
countenance the agitations of his soul. There had past diverse combats of
several beasts, which found the Spectators abundance of sport and
entertainment, and they were going to open the door to let in a Tygre and a
Bear of a prodigious bulk, to set them a fighting together, when Antonius, who
had his eyes still fixed on Tullia, saw, that amidst the conversation she had
with Cecinna, and certain Ladies that sat about her, she took out a little
box, set with diverse rich Diamonds, wherein was her own picture, which her
Mother had caused to be taken about a year before, and which she had given her
at her death. She had shown it to those Ladies, and Cecinna had it in his hands
a good space: but at last going to restore it to Tullia, the box, through
negligence, slipped out of his hands, and she leaning on the rail, it fell down
into the Area, just when the two furious beasts were coming into it with looks
so full of terror, that they put the Spectators into some fear. Tullia, being
extremely troubled at the fall of the box, she respected so much, into a place,
whence in all likelihood there would not be any so desperate as to fetch it
again, gave a great outcry, and by her countenance and all her actions
expressed an extraordinary disturbance at that accident. The Emperor, and all
that were present, soon came to understand it, but there was no possibility to
recover it while the beasts were within the Cirque. Cecinna, who was partly the
occasion of the falling of the box, endeavored to persuade Tullia to patience,
by telling her, that, after the combat of the beasts, he would go and find it
for her: but she giving too much way to her indignation upon so slight an
occasion, answered him very roundly, that had she been a man, she would have
ventured her life to fetch her picture. She had no sooner delivered these
words, but young Antonius, whom his passion had at that time absolutely
divested of all reason, distracted as to all matter of consideration, not only
of the hazard whereto he exposed himself without any necessity, but also of the
noise which that action must needs make, contrary to the design he had to keep
his love secret, turning toward that side where Tullia was; Fair Tullia, said
he, loud enough to be heard by her, you shall find there is a man who dares
hazard his life to do you this inconsider able service; and thereupon, leaning
upon the rail, he vaulted over it into the Cirque. I was ever of opinion, that
Antonius, a person naturally discreet, would never have been guilty of an
action so extravagant, had he not been transported by an over-violent passion.
But I imagined withal, as diverse others did, that to do Tullia that service,
whereof the consequence deserved not he should expose his life to so great a
danger, he had been encouraged partly by a belief he was of, that he might not
happily, while he lived, meet with so noble an occasion to express his love to
her, and partly by a desire he had to let her know the difference there was
between him and Cecinna, whom she preferred, and favored even in his presence.
However it were, this action raised a many outcryes among the Spectators, even
to the Emperor himself, who had a great love and esteem to my Brother. My
Sister and I were almost out of our selves to see it, Octavia was not a little
troubled at the accident, nay there was hardly any one in that great Assembly,
that was not troubled at it, only Antonius seemed to be the person that had
any confidence, and though he were a little startled at his alighting, by
reason of the height of the place whence he had leapt down, yet immediately
recovering himself, he drew his sword, and went with an undaunted courage
toward that side where the box lay sparkling among the sand. He was so happy
as to take it up without any hindrance, and so indiscreet as to open it in the
same place, and to have the patience to look on the beautiful picture of Tullia
that was enclosed within it. Yet was it not with so little caution, but he
stood sufficiently on his guard, to defend himself if the beasts came to fasten
on him: but as he went toward the door at which he was to go out, he made no
more have than ordinary, and retreated so as if he had not been in the least
fear of the two beasts that were within the Cirque. The Bear stirred not from
the place she was in, but the Tigre came up to my Brother with his sparkling
eyes, and in such a posture, as put all that were present into a fright.
Antonius might have gained the door before the Tygre could have fastened on
him, if he would have run for it, but such a flight he thought unworthy his
courage; and therefore seeing this terrible enemy coming toward him, he stood
and expected him, and presented the point of his sword to him with an admirable
constancy. You may well imagine, that all those to whom Antonius's life was any
way dear, were not a little troubled at the accident, but it was the pleasure
of the gods, that when the furious beast saw the glistering of the sword, it
made a halt, and seemed uncertain what resolution to take: when the Emperor
having called out to those of his guard that were about him, immediately to
kill it, it was shot with above twenty arrows, and fell down dead at Antonius's
feet. He seemed to be somewhat troubled at the death of the beast, saying he
was very sorry he had deprived the Emperor and the Spectators of part of their
entertainment, and when he thought he might retire without dishonor, (for the
Bear had not stirred from the place) he came to the door which they kept open
for him, and by the stairs joining thereto, came up into the Amphitheatre. As
all that were present had a secret admiration for what he had done, so did all
gladly make way for him, it being perceaved that it was his intention to
restore Tullia her picture; and accordingly having without much trouble gotten
up to the place where she was, he comes to her with a submissive action, and
presenting her with the box: Were I not odious in your sight, Madam, said he to
her, I would entreat you to entertain the inconsiderable service I have done
you without aversion: and if I am so unhappy as that I cannot be otherwise, I
beseech your acceptance and acknowledgement of that I would have done you by
exposing my life which you so much detest.

Now the enmity which is between the Children of Cicero, and the House of
Anthony, being known to all the World, no body took any exceptions at those
words of Antonius; but there were many who thought that that action should have
obliged Tullia to some kindness, or at least to receave that service with a
seeming civility. But her deportment was quite otherwise, and instead of making
any acknowledgement of the service he had done her, she turned her face another
way, and vouchsafed not so much as either to make him any answer, or receave
out of his hands the picture he presented to her. This action, which displeased
all that were present, struck Antonius to the very heart; but having fortified
himself with an extraordinary courage, and done an action so full of gallantry,
that he thought himself obliged to press it home: Madam, said he to her, not
without some violence done himself, to smother his grief in so great an
Assembly, I must confess my unhappiness such, that I deserve to be treated as
I am, but do not happily, the precious treasure you are pleased to leave me, as
such as I durst not have detained, had you thought good to receave it.

These words ^cartled young Cicero a little, who sat near his Sister, and was
as much displeased at my Brother's action as she, but withal would have been
much troubled to see him keep his Sister picture. But he whom they had greatest
influence on, was the amorous Cecinna, who being passionately in love with
Tullia, could not, without much disturbance within himself, see her picture in
the hands of a man, whom he looked on as his Rival, and withal a powerful one:
so that he would undertake to Antonius, to persuade Tullia to receave the
picture, and while he desired it, Cicero reached forth his hand to receave it
from him. But Antonius looking on them both with a certain contempt, and with a
disdainful smile; It Is not thee, Cicero, said he to them, and much less to
thee, Cecinna, that I intend to restore it; And since Tullia is content it
should remain in my hands, I shall keep it no otherwise then I would do my
life. If thou would have had it, added he, looking on Cecinna, thou should
have gone for it to the place where it fell through thy negligence; and if thou
art so desirous of it, thou must force it out of a place, whence there will
happily be as much difficulty to get it, as from among Bears and Tygres. However
it be, I hear protest before the gods, that I shall never part with it
willingly, till Tullia desire it of me her self, and that I will never put it
into other hands then hers.

With these words he left Tullia, and, without any more ado, immediately
quitted the Amphitheatre, out of a fear that Tullia might change her mind, and
call for her picture. She was upon the point to do it, as being desirous it
should not remain in his hands, nay indeed would not have been well satisfied
to leave it with any man, how great an affection soever she might have for him:
but thinking there were other ways to retrive it, she thought it better to
have patience for some days, then to remit any thing of her disdain, and stoop
so low as to desire it, after what, had passed before so many great and
Illustrious Persons.

This action raised no small noise in Rome, and found all people matter of
discourse. Several judgments passed upon it, there were a many that attributed
it to the true cause, others made it only a piece of gallantry, and the effect
of a violent desire of glory, a thing not inconsistent with the fiery humor of
a young man: Nay, some pitching upon an opinion probable enough according to
the intention of Antonius, and the discourse he made of it, which was, that,
having discovered Tullia in that great Assembly to be the Lady from whom he had
received such assistance when his horse fell under him, whom till then he had
not known, and had sought out so much, though he knew not who she was, imagined
that he had resolved to express by some service, the resentment he still had
for the kindness she had done him, and that just then an opportunity offering
it self, he thought he could not, without basenesle, that is, without being
accounted either an ungrateful person, or a man of little courage, let it slip.
With this discourse did my Brother satisfy the Emperor, who blamed him very
much for exposing his life to so great a danger without any necessity; but that
account of the business being probable enough, Augustus, who could not
disapprove those actions that argued courage, had a greater esteem for Antonius
then he had before. Octavia, who was as tender of all the children of Anthony,
as she was of her own, especially of him she intended to make her Son in Law,
entertained this discourse as the Emperor did, and attributed to gratitude,
excellency of nature, and the courage of Antonius: what was merely a
demonstration of his passion. And yet what had past at the closure of the
business, concerning Tullia's picture, which he had refused to restore either
to Cicero, or Cecinna, with words passionate enough, might cause a little
suspicion; but it might also be attributed to pure gallantry, which might
produce that effect in a person of the age my Brother was then of, and that,
after the doing of so noble an action. In fine, every one censured it according
to his inclination; and Antonius, whatever might be said to him, could not
repent him of it, though he was extremely troubled at Tullia's deportment
toward him, and that the vexation he conceaved thereat, put him sometimes into
a resolution, to do what lay in his power, to free himself of that cruel
slavery.

Some days after, having entreated Scipio to bring my Brother with him to her
house, he failed not to come; and having told her that he should think himself
extremely happy, if she would be pleased to lay any commands upon him, she told
him before Scipio, who was present, that she was desirous to have some
discourse with him upon the entreaty of Tullia, who had charged her to demand
her picture of him, and had desired her to employ all the interest she had in
him to get it, upon the confidence she had that my Brother would not deny that
satisfaction to a person, for whom he seemed and professed to have a very great
esteem. Antonius entertained this discourse of Emilia's with abundance of
respect, and when she had given over speaking, Madam, said he to her, it is not
without reason your friend is persuaded that you have an absolute power over
me, and accordingly I did not much doubt but that she would make this request
to you, when ever she should be content to have her picture again: and I
further engage my self, that I will return it as soon as she shall be pleased
to receave it, and that I have no intention to keep it against her will, though
I happily better deserve that favor than others, whom she may confer it upon.
Tullia is more discreet, replies Emilia, then to bestow her picture on any one:
and I can assure you she has no such intention, and that it is only for her
self that she has entreated me to get it ou^ of your hands. Ah Madam! replied
my Brother, you know what I am obliged to by my oath, an oath I took in the
most Illustrious Assembly in the World. I cannot return the picture till Tullia
desire it, nor put it into any other hands than her own. I conceave my self
disengaged as to the one half of it, and I receave the demand you make of it,
as from Tullia's own mouth: but for the other part of my oath, whereby I am
obliged to restore it only to her self, it cannot admit any explication. And
if you will give me leave to add to the justice of my cause the confidence I
have in your goodness, and to speak sincerely to you, as to a person whose
protection I cast my self under, I shall tell you, that for the favor of one
visit from Tullia, she shall receave her picture. It Is the least she can do, if
she have any desire to have it again: and if she deny me so poor a request, you
are to imagine it is her pleasure I should keep it: all I desire is to put it
into her own hands in your presence, and you shall be privy to our
conversation. And, to acquaint you with what is most secret to my thoughts,
since you see I have but this only means left me to procure one visit more of
Tullia while I live, methinks you cannot without cruelty take it away from me.
Emilia found a great deal of reason in my Brothers discourse, and Scipio adding
his persuasions to the others to prevail with her, they brought her to this at
last, that she promised to use all the interest she could with Tullia to oblige
her to see Antonius once more, and to receave her picture from his own hands,
according as he was engaged by his oath.

She made it her business that very day, but to no purpose, so that Antonius
understood by her, the next, that all the entreaties she could make to her,
could not induce that heard-hearted Beauty to condescend thereto, and that, at
last, she had with a strange constancy protested, that she had rather lose her
picture, by an accident whence it might not be inferred that she had any design
to favor Antonius, then resolve to see him, and to speak, with her will, to a
man, whose name those of her family could not hear without horror. My Brother
was extremely cast down at this obstinacy of Tullia, and entertained Emilia
with diverse discourses, which moved her to much compassion for him: but he
also continued firm to the resolution he had made not to deliver the picture,
not that he could do Tullia this displeasure without some repugnance, but that,
besides the comfort he received from the sight of that dear image, he thought
he could not with honor restore it, after the protestation he had made not to
do it before Cecinna and Cicero, who pretended to be so much concerned in it.
What confirmed him further in this resolution, was, that, some days after, he
understood that Cicero, purposely to spite him, had bestowed his Sister on
Cecinna; and it was conceaved that within a few days he was to marry her, and
indeed it was certain that he had promised her to him, and though Tullia had
not till th^^ any particular affection for Cecinna, yet being discreet and
virtuous, she submitted to her Brother's will, and without any contradiction
entertained the Husband he was pleased she should have. This news put my
Brother into such violent transports of grief, as you may easily imagine, if
you consider well what I have told you concerning those of his Love; nay, it is
almost a miracle that he did not discover it by some action suitable to the
passion he was hurryed by. At first all his thoughts ran upon some thing that
was violent and fatal; and when he imagined to himself that his Rival was
happier then he, did not only deprive him of what he loved, but might happily be
the cause of all Tullia's rigor toward him, had prevented him by an
affection, that made her insensible of all the expressions he made to her of
his, and exasperated her against him more than any consideration of the death
of Cicero, he could not oppose the torrent of his resentments, nor think of any
thing but the death of his Rival. How, said he, walking in a furious manner, it
was then the love of Cecinna that made Tullia's heart impenetrable as to all
compassion; and it is Cecinna that robs me of this unmerciful Beauty, and, with
her, of all the satisfaction and desire of life^ I wonder not, added he, at his
backwardness to recover her picture, and the confidence he had soon to be
possessed of the person, has made him take it the more indifferently to see
her fair image in the hands of an unfortunate Rival. It Is the knowledge he had
of my misfortune made him neglect what happily both his interest and his honor
had obliged him to do, and I am satisfied he had courage enough to take the
advice of his reputation in that emergency, if the hope of a greater happiness
had not made him less earnest for what was of less consequence. Whereupon he
walked for a good while, without speaking at all, then breaking forth into his
ordinary transports, Think not, Cecinna, said he, that I resign Tullia to thee;
as thou have done her picture to me; it shall cost thee the purest of thy blood
to dispute whose she shall be, and since I have hazarded my life for her
picture, it is but just thou should venture something for the person.

This was the resolution he took; but when he thought himself fully confirmed
in it, he met with such difficulties in that design, which he was not a little
startled at. He had reason to fear he might displease Caesar, who, upon what
had passed in his presence fearing the consequence, had forbidden them very
severely to attempt any thing one against another. Nay, there was yet something
more in it, as to what resentment the Emperor might have of it; for when he
considered that he could not quarrel with Cecinna upon the account of any
interest in Tullia, without declaring openly, and discovering at the same time
the little regard he had for the advantageous design which the Emperor and
Octavia had for him, and that in a conjuncture on which his absolute fortune
depended, he knew not what course he should take to overcome that difficulty.
And yet this was not considerable to him, in comparison of the fear he was in
of Tullia's indignation, as putting it out of all doubt that he must needs
force her to the extremities of enmity toward him, by putting himself in a
posture to take away that man's life whom she accepted for her Husband. To be
short, this consideration prevailed so far upon him, that he hardly minded the
rest, and how far soever he might be from deserving the cruel treatments he
received from that incenced Beauty, yet was his soul guilty of such
extraordinary respects toward her, that he would have looked death in the face
with less disturbance, than the occasion of offending her.

These contradictions kept his thoughts in an aequilibrium in so strange a
perplexity; so that finding it a hard matter to fix on any thing, he continued
some days without fastening on any resolution. During that time he delighted
altogether in solitude, avoiding the company even of his Friend Scipio, and
retiring into the most solitary places, where he would not admit any of his own
people to be about him. Without the gate called Porta Capena, there is a little
Wood near the fair Gardens of Metellus, where the shadynesse and solitude of
the place afford very pleasant walking, for such as avoid company. Antonius
going out of Metellus's Garden, was directed thither by his own cruel thoughts,
or rather by some genius, who would determine his irresolutions. He walked
there a long time alone, (having left those servants that he brought with him
from home, which he could not dismiss, at the Garden door of Metellus) and had
endeavored to find out, though with no success, what might prevent the
happiness of Cecinna, without any violation of the respect he ought Tullia, or
incurring the displeasure, (if it were possible) of the generous Octavia and
the Emperor, when coming to a crosse-walk, he spies a man coming all alone
toward the place where he was, and having looked on him very attentively, when
he was come somewhat near, he found him to be Cecinna. The sight of him
enflamed Antonius with indignation and jealousy; and though he suspected what
design brought Cecinna toward him, yet did he mistrust his own thoughts of
mistake, and was in some fear he should not have so much power over himself as
to reflect, in that emergency, upon those considerations whereby his hands were
as yet tied up. In this uncertainty he expected him as ready to fight, and in
such a posture as put Cecinna into some disturbance.

Now my Brother being a person of higher quality in Rome than he was, and his
interest consequently, with those that managed the supreme power, much greater,
he was more cautious and circumspect in what he undertook, then he had happily
been with another person, whose fortunes had been meaner; and accordingly
coming very civilly toward him, It has been my business for some days to
find you out, said he to him, and should have spoken to you soo^^r, could I
have done it with the same liberty as I now do. I should have given you all you
could have expected, answered Antonius, if I had had but the least notice of
your desires, and since you now have as much freedom as you could have wished;
neglect not this opportunity to acquatnt me with what you think sit to let me
know. I doubt not, replied Cecinna, but you know that sufficiently well
already, and if you but remember that Tullia's picture is still in your hands,
you are at the same time satisfied of the great concernment I have to entreat
you to return it to me. I have not desired it of you while I was of opinion it
might be gotten out of your hands without my interposition. But now that the
interest of Tullia, and that of her friends has proved ineffectual, you will
not think it strange, if, as things now stand between us, I endeavor to obtain
that from you which you had denied them.

Antonius looking on him with a scornful smile, There is indeed but very little
likelihood, said he to him, I should grant Cecinna what I had denied Emilia:
besides, I am of opinion, that if you had been so desirous of Tullia's picture,
you would have gone for it to the place whence I took it. Though I was much
less obliged to do it than you, it were unjust I should, with the hazard of my
life, procure a thing you had slighted, to bestow it on you with so much ease,
and you may happily find your self very much mistaken, if you imagine there may
be less danger to get it out of my hands, then to recover it out of the Area
of the Amphitheatre. Had there been any necessity for that action, replied
Cecinna, I should have done it as well as you: And if there had been any
justice, interrupted Antonius very roundly, to restore what I had so well
gotten, I had restored it to Emilia, and not to you. However it be, Cecinna,
you ought not to expect it, as being the last of all men for whom I should have
that compliance. I thought indeed, replied Cecinna, I should be forced to those
extremities with you, which the Emperor has forbidden us: and it is with that
design that I sought you out, resolved to take away either your life, or
Tullia's picture. This is it I expected from thee, replied Antonius fiercely,
and which I thought I had so sufficiently obliged thee to, as to make thee
contemn all other considerations.

With these words they both laid hands on their swords, and drew at the same
time, there being not any body near to hinder them. They exchanged a many
blows, with much more fury then circumspection. Cecinna fought with abundance
of courage, but with little good fortune; and being over-rash and
inconsiderate, he received two mortal wounds in the body, upon which he fell
down at my Brother's feet, with very little remainder of life. Antonius had no
doubt wished the death of Cecinna, and had behaved himself in that duel with
abundance of indignation and animosity against him; but being a person of a
great and noble soul, seeing him fall with all the mortal signs, his anger
vanished, and compassion took place in his heart, into which the passions
whereby it was then moved, were not against its admittance. He came to Cecinna,
to do him all the good he could, and endeavoring to stop his blood, persuaded
him to take courage, by all the words which might express the regret and
sorrow he conceaved at his misfortune.

But while he was employed in this compassionate office, there comes, by an
accident, you cannot but be astonished at, a Chariot, full of Ladies, to take
the pleasure of a solitary walk in the Wood, to the place where they were: and
the Ladies, who intended to take a walk, being got out of the Chariot, came on
easily without any jealousy of what had happened, to the very place where the
unfortunate Cecinna was expiring his last, in my Brother's arms. You may well
imagine what astonishment this sad spectacle raised in the Ladies; but it will
be hard for you to conceave that of my Brother, when with Emilia and some other
Ladies of his acquaintance, he saw the cruel Tullia, that very Tullia whom he
had so well engraven in his soul. I leave it to you to supply the difficulty of
expression I meet with in this strange rencounter, so hard is it for me to give
you an account of the agitations of these two souls in so unexpected an
adventure. If Antonius was surprised to see that Tullia whom he adored, that
Tullia, who shunned him with all the cruelty imaginable; nay, the same Tullia,
whose Lover, that was to be within a few days her Husband, he had killed; you
may well think that Tullia, on the other side, was not less astonished to meet
with that Antonius, whom she avoided, standing over the expiring Cecinna, and
soiled with the blood of a man she was to be married to. She had not had, it is
true, any violent affection for him, yet it is withal certain she had no
dis-inclination toward him; and since she had been acquainted with the design
her Brother had to make her his Wife, she had entertained in her heart all the
love she thought her self obliged to have, for a person that was shortly to be
her Husband: so that she could not see him weltring in his blood, and expiring
at his enemies feet, without feeling an extraordinary affliction, and whatever
her soul was capable of, upon an accident of that nature. She at first sight
gave a great outcry, and was ready to swound in Emilia's arms, who made a shift
to hold her up, and, a little after, casting her eyes on both Antonius and
Cecinna, on the one, with all the demonstrations of compassion, and on the
other with all those of indignation, sheding tears for Cecinna, and darting
forth her wrathful looks on Antonius, she continued for some minutes in an
uncertainty as to what resolution she should take, whether to avoid what she
hated, or to succor what she was obliged to love. And whereas she seemed to be
rather carried away by the aversion she had for my Brother, or at least
inclined rather to the motives she conceaved she had to avoid him, then to the
affection she had for Cecinna, her first reflections seemed to engage her to
avoid the face of an enemy, especially he being such a one as confirmed himself
to be such, by the action he had then done. But afterward, upon second
thoughts, she, being a Lady that chose rather to be guided by her duty then her
passions, and conceaved her self obliged to relieve Cecinna dying upon her
account, rather then to avoid Antonius, comes to him, with her face bathed in
tears, and by certain broken words entreated him to take heart, and to further
all he could the design she had for the preservation of his life. The expiring
Cecinna met with this satisfaction in his misfortune, that he breathed out his
last in the arms of Tullia, and mustering up all the strength he had left him,
to turn his eyes toward her, and to take her by the hand, she reached forth to
him, while one of her Mayds held up his head in her lap; Madam, said he to her,
I loose my life by the hands of Antonius, but it was through my own fault and
seeking; and therefore I beseech you to forgive him my death as heart^ly as I
do my self. The compassion, he takes at my misfortune, deserves yours; and I
dye happy and glorious, since I dye at your feet, for your sake, and in a
condition that forces those fair showers from your eyes.

With much difficulty was he delivered of these words, but with them he lost
his speech, and, some few minutes after, breathed out his last, leaving in
Tullias soul such violent characters of passion, that she hardly knew where she
was, or what she did. My Brother, to give her way, retired some few paces when
she came near Cecinna; and being extremely moved with pity for his misfortune,
the affliction he perceaved it was to Tullia heightened his own so much and so
violently, that he had much ado to keep off from despair. He, at first, thought
himself obliged to avoid the eyes of that incensed Beauty; nay, though he was
infinitely desirous to have a sight of her, yet must he needs imagine, that, as
things then stood, he could not without inhumanity importune her with his. Out
of this consideration had he already retired some few paces; but his passion
growing too strong for him, would needs oblige him to speak to her, and to make
some reparation for the injury he had done her. This resolution grew so strong
upon him, that he could not resist it, and so slighting all those reflections
that were incompatible with the violence of his love, he came some paces
nearer, he looked on that desolate Beauty, with all the agitations that a soul
that has lost all command of it self can be capable of. He had not hardly had
the confidence to open his mouth, had he not been encouraged by the presence of
Emilia, whom he knew to be favorable to him, and from whom he expected some
relief. But at last, having rallyed all the courage he had, he sets one knee on
the ground, and looking on Tullia in a trembling posture; I should not presume
to importune you with my sight, Madam, said he to her, if I thought not my self
obliged to make you some satisfaction for the injury I have done you; and
though Cecinna has in some sort justified me, by telling you that I only
stood in a defensive posture against him, yet the displeasure I have done you
is greater then to be passed over with such a reparation. There was no need of
this last misfortune to heighten the aversion you have ever had for the
unfortunate person that now adores you; and this sight of you, which I so
earnestly begged before, should not have been granted me, together with that of
an accident which can raise in you nothing but horror for this so unhappy a
wretch. But since it is the disposal of Heaven, it is but just that both
Heavens anger and yours should be appeased: and since I am already so well
acquainted with your heart, as to believe I shall find in you all the
resolution requisite to revenge your self, and to do right to the Manes of
Cecinna, here take the sword, (continued he, drawing it, and presenting her
with the hilt) take the sword that has taken away the life of Cecinna, thrust
it into this breast which lies open to you, and spare not, after the injury I
have done you, a life, which, even in a condition of innocence has ever been
odious to you.

At these words Tullia, who all the while would not so much as look toward
him, but turned her face another way, gave him such a sudden and furious look,
that happily upon the first sallies of the violent passions she was then
absolutely subject to, she might have granted the desolate Antonius the death
he so much desired, and that accordingly she would have taken the sword he
presented to her, and whereof the very sight very much enflamed her
indignation, when she perceaved upon it certain drops of Cecinna's blood. But
the prudent Emilia fastening immediately upon it, got it, without much
difficulty, from Antonius; and this she did, as well in regard of the
uncertainty she was in as to Tullia's intention, as to prevent that desperate
Prince, from making use of it against himself, as he might have done, in the
distraction his grief had then put him into.

Tullia continued for some time without so much as opening her mouth,
expressing the agitations of her soul by her looks and silence more
effectually than she could happily have done by her words. But at last, not able
to master the impetuosity thereof, and looking on the prostrate Antonius with
eyes, wherein, through the tears that fell from them, the fire of her
indignation discovered it self but too apparently; Unmerciful disturber of my
quiet, said she to him, thou who being the issue of my Fathers Executioners,
art resolved not to degenerate from their cruelty; Is it possible that thy
inhumanity cannot be satisfied either with the blood of Cicero, spilt by thy
Friends, nor with that of Cecinna, which thou have shed thy self, but thou must
persecute to the death an Unfortunate Maid, who has not without reason avoided
thee, and who never yet gave thee the least offense? Do thou hope, stained
with the blood of him that was to be her Husband, that she can regard that
odious passion, which has proved the cause of all her unhappiness? Or do
thou imagine she can look otherwise on thee than a Monster, and the foulest
object of detestation and horror? Go Barbarian, go Son of Fulvia, and
disturb no longer the Daughter of the Unfortunate Cicero, for whom thy cruelty
has opened a source of tears, which no passion could ever have made her shed.

As she uttered these words, which came from her, attended with a deluge of
tears, she rested her face on Emelia's arm, when Scipio, who was then in quest
of either his Mistress or his Friend, came into the place, directed thither
happily by the gods, to prevent my Brother's despair. He was in few words made
acquainted with all that past; and though compassion had that effect which it
could not but produce in him, yet he made a shift to smother it, the better to
serve his Friend, and so joined with Emilia to oppose those sentiments of
hatred and indignation which Tullia had conceaved against my Brother. But,
notwithstanding all their arguments, entreaties and remonstrances, she was
still as inflexible as ever, and the suppliant posture wherein Antonius had
continued all this while, nor the abundance of tears he shed after her example,
could not raise in her the least touch of compassion, nor any way moderate her
exasperation.

When he saw that the mediation of Emilia and his Friend proved altogether
ineffectual, rising up from the place where he was, and looking very dreadfully
on Tullia, I now see Tullia, said he to her, that nothing but my death can
satisfy you, and I were very much to blame, if, being near the dead body of
Cecinna, I should hope to find that pity from you, which in the greatest
innocence of my life, and amidst the most prevalent expressions of my love I
could never obtain: nor indeed was it to your compassion that I addressed my
self, but I defied the implacable aversion you have for me to put a period to
that life, for which you have so much horror. I must confess, I should have
embraced death more kindly from your hands then my own, as conceaving your
revenge would be the more absolute, when you took it your self. But since
Emilia has deprived you of that satisfaction which yet had been but
proportionable to the grief I have innocently caused you, I shall make it my
own business to sacrifice to you the remainder of this life, which has been
so unfortunately preserved, and is so cruelly abhorred.

With these words he pretended as if he would go away with an action not far
from extravagance; but Scipio, who, during his discourse, was gotten near him,
stayed him, and Tullia, implacable as she was, yet having abundance of virtue
about her, would not leave in the persons that heard her, the sentiments which
her distraction might have raised in them, so that endeavoring once more to
express her self to Antonius, yet without looking on him: I come not out of a
cruel race, such as this is, said she to him, nor do I desire any bloody
reparations for the injury thou have done me. I neither wish thy death nor thy
life, and leave thee Master of a Fate wherein I never intend to be any ways
engaged: but if the horrid outrages which my family and my self have received
front thee and thine, may give me leave to hope any satisfaction from thee, I
entreat, as thou do respect Heaven, or what ever else may be dear to thee,
that thou never appear before me again, and that thou free me for ever
henceforward of a sight which neither is nor ought to be any way supportable to
me. This thou can not refuse me, if thou have any spark of virtue left in
thee: and if thou grant it me, I engage my self never to desire either of the
gods or men any revenge against thee, and that I shall not be guilty of so
much as a wish that may contribute any thing to the disturbance of thy life.
It Is but just, Madam, said Antonius to her, who was already resolved what to
do; I shall give you the satisfaction you desire of me, though it be more
insufferable then what I had offered you my self, and I protest to you, that
you shall never while you live see again that unfortunate person whom you thus
condemn to eternal banishment. With which words he went away along with Scipio,
who would not by any means leave him, out of a fear of some effect of his
despair; and not long after Emilia, and the other Ladies, having caused the
body of Cecinna to be brought away, returned into the City in the confused
condition which it is not hard for you to imagine to your self.

I shall not trouble you, Sister, either with the grief of Cecinna's Friends
and Cicero's, or with the displeasure of the Emperor at that action, wherein
yet he could not much blame my Brother, after he had understood the
circumstances of it. But I must needs tell you, that Antonius, having spent the
night with Scipio, who would by no means leave him till he were a little
recovered, vanished the next morning, and has not been seen since in any part
of the earth that ever we could hear of, though he has been sought out every
where. He went away with a very small retinue, purposely to avoid being
discovered in the places through which he passed, and where he intended to
spend his life, only he left a letter for Scipio, wherein he entreated him to
make his excuses to all those to whom he was obliged to make any, either out of
respects of birth, or any other considerations, further desiring him, not to
enquire after the place of his retirement, protesting to him that he knew it
not himself, and that he was resolved to wander up and down the World, till he
were quite recovered of Tullia's love, and then he promised to return to Rome,
and not before. Scipio and all his Friends sent some after him for certain
days, but they returned to Rome very much troubled that they could meet with
no tidings of him. Tullia extremely cast down, and in a manner distracted at
this unhappy adventure left Rome some few days after, and returned to her
solitude, where she continued for many years. And thus, by a passion fatally
enflamed, Have we lost a Brother? a great and excellent person. It is six or
seven years since this loss happened, which yet I was sensible of, before it
could be thought one of my age could be sensible of any such thing, and in
regard that it is since that time that all the remarkable accidents of my life
are happened, my Brother could not be any way concerned in them. And thence it
came, that I made no mention of him in the relation of all the misfortunes
which the love of Coriolanus has engaged me in. I shall now proceed to the
adventures of the rest of our Family, which having happened long since the
other, I have accordingly fresh in my memory.

Here the fair Cleopatra made a stop to take her breath a little, and Artemisa,
who had heard her with very much attention, without ever interrupting her all
the time, seeing her come to that place, Good Heaven, Sister, said she to her,
what an extraordinary oligation have you put upon me by this discourse of
yours? and what regret have you raised in me for the sad fortune of that
Brother of yours, who in all probability, would have lost nothing of the luster
of your noble house? How angry have I been with that inflexible Tullia, who
made so little distinction between the innocent and the guilty, and how
different have our sentiments been, though we have met with equal occasions to
express them? I could not absolutely disapprove the carriage of Tullia,
replies Cleopatra, though it were somewhat too violent at the latter end. At so
bloody a spectacle as that of the death of Cecinna, she could not be less
troubled then she seemed to be, and in the beginning, though Antonius were
innocent, yet was he Son to those who had put her Father to a death notorious
for the cruelty of its circumstances. And if there were no reason she should be
desirous to be revenged upon him, so was there not on the other side any that
should engage her to admit his conversation, much less the expressions of his
affection. In your fortune things are very much different; your friendship took
its first rise from your infancy, and from that time you have been accustomed
to endure the presence of Alexander, not as that of their Son who had put
Artabasus to death, but as that of a Prince that adored you, and for whom ever
from that time you had no aversion. The two fair Princesses had some farther
discourse upon that subject, which en^ed, Artemisa having entreated Cleopatra
to go on with her discourse, she proceeded thus.

The end of the First Book.
HYMEN'S PRAELUDIA, Or, Loves Masterpiece.
PART IX. LIB. II.
ARGUMENT.
CLeopatra, pursuing the History of Antonia and young Ptolomey, entertains
Artemisa with a descriptton of Augustus's Court, and gives her an account of
all the most considerable Persons about Rome, in point of Love and Courtship.
Augustus entertains Terentia, the Wife of Mecaenas, in the Gardens of Lucullus,
where Mithridates walking with Antonia, discovers his passion to her, and is
slighted by her. Vndressing her self that night, she finds, in one of her
sleeves, a letter from an Unknown Servant. Tullia, meeting with young Ptolomey
at Sabina's, is taken with him, but he reflecting on her inflexibility toward
his Brother Julius Antonius, slights her. Antonia going to the Empresses, where
all the great persons about the Court were met, is surprised by her Unknown
Lover with another Letter, which she finds in her handkerchiefe. A show upon
the Tiber, wherein the Unknown Lover surprises her in a Galley, which for the
invention and magnificeuce proved the miracle of the divertisement. That night
Antonia, undressing her self, finds another Letter, at the reading of which she
gives Cleopatra another which she found in one of her Gloves. Archelaus and
Mithridates, Suitors to Antonia, conspire against their Unknown known Rival,
watch him one night, but are both worsted by him, whereupon he sends them a
letter. Tullia and Emilia walk into the Gardens of Lucullus, and, for more
privacy, go into an Arbor, where Tullia acquaints her with her love to
Ptolomey, and is overheard by him and Lentulus, who thereupon falls
desperately in love with her. The solemnity of Augustus's Birthday, the several
exercises and divertisements of it described, wherein the Unknown Lover of
Antonia being declared Conqueror, receaves accordingly the Prizes, which he
presents at the feet of Antonia, and she, upon the command of Octavia, accepts.
Having so done, he conveies himself out of the Lists, yet not so, but that
being perceaved by Mithridates, he is by him pursued and overtaken in a Wood,
where they engage, and Mithridates is overthrown. Archelaus perceaving
Mithridates departed, out of the same motive of jealousy, follows him, to
discover the Unknown Lover, and comes up to them just as he had worsted
Mirhridates. Archelaus, seconding Mithridates, engages with the Unknown, who
after a little fighting, perceaving some coming from the City, unhorses him;
yet not so, but that the other laying hold of his cask, the chin-pieces broke,
and his head being by that means unarmed, he is discovered and known to be
Drusus, the Son of Livia, and Brother to Tiberius. Marcellus and Ptolomey,
coming in upon this, he makes his apolog^e to them, and is by them carried away
immediately to be presented to Antonia, who, upon the mediation of Augustus,
Livia, Octavia, Marcellus, Ptolomey, and others, entertains him as her Servant.
Archelaus goes into the wars against the Parthians, Mithridates is made, by the
Emperor, King of Comagenes, Polemon of Pontus, and Ptolomey continues his
devotions to Marcia.

IT IS since the loss of our Brother Julius Antonius, as I told you, that so
many memorable accidents have happened in our Family, such as no doubt but he
would have concerned himself in, as he ought to have done, had he not been
absent, nay, it may be, absolutely lost. It was much about the time of his
departure that Coriolanus made the first addresses of his love to me, or it was
then at least that I was come to an age, wherein I seriously began to take
notice of them. I have already acquainted you with all that has befallen me
since, even to the most inconsiderable circumstances, so that I am dispensed
withal as to any relation that concerns my self, though what has happened to
me be of greater consequence than any thing else that has befallen our Family.
For what relates to Alexander, you have been acquainted with the adventures of
his first years to his departure from Rome; and for what has happened to him
since, I have learned it from your self, who must needs have been the best
acquainted of any with his adventures, as having been the only occasion
thereof. All then that now lies on my hands to do, is, to give you an account
of young Ptolomey, of the Children of Anthony and Cleopatra, and, of those of
Anthony and Octavia, of my two Sisters, Agrippina and young Antonia, whom you
have so particular an affection for. For Ptolomey he is yet of an age wherein
it cannot be expected he should meet with many adventures, though the World
has, from several particular actions of his, conceaved very miraculous hopes
of him, and for my Sisters, I shall punctually acquaint you with all you desire
to know concerning them.

These two Princesses, born, no doubt, to all the perfections of nature, have
extremely improved and heightened them by an excellent education, for I need
say no more to you then that they have been brought up by their Mother Octavia,
to let you understand what advantages they might derive from that. Agrippina is
certainly a very rare and exquisite Beauty, has a great command of
understanding, and is of an exemplarie virtue; nay, it will happily be found
that the World is but poorlie stored with persons whose accomplishments and
perfections may come into the balance with those of this Princess. Yet is it
as certain that Antonia surpasses her in all things, and though Heaven has
bestowed on her a Beauty of the first magnitude among those terrestrial
constellations, whose influences the earth adores and is guided by, yet is this
Beauty of her person much below that of her mind, and that of her inclinations.
Never was there any one of her sex that had a mind fixed with so much
soliditie, refined by so much purity, and heightened by so great a
disengagement from things that are inconsiderable and beneath her. It discovers
such a consonancy of sweetness and severity, as amounts to a just moderation,
and all her actions are guided by so certain a rule, that they defy whatever
the most irreconcilable malice durst object against them. I could tell you
much more of her, Sister, and yet be in some fear I might not speak enough,
since it is undeniable, that, taking her in all things, there cannot be any
thing more accomplished then Antonia, and it is generally acknowledged in Rome,
that Octavia, the honor and ornament of her Time, could not have furnished the
World with any thing else that were more worthy her self, or more like her
Mother in all her great and excellent perfections.

It is not many years, since Domitius Aenobarbus, a man Illustrious enough by
his extraction, but much more for his great employments, and the noble actions
he did, addressed his affections to Agrippina, and afterward became an earnest
and constant Servant of hers. And in regard his engagement in this design was
not without the approbation of the Emperor, Octavia, and, in a word, of all
those persons whose countenance he stood in need of, Agrippina, out of pure
compliance with Octavia, entertained his addresses with the esteem and
acknowledgement she was obliged to, and, without any repugnance or violence of
passion, was resolved to submit to the disposal of those persons to whom she
ought an obedience. But, on the contrary, Antonia, having a dis-inclination to
love, and an aversion for whatever had but the least appearance of gallantry,
had spent all the years of her life to this very last, not only without
loving, but even without so much as enduring any discourse, or indeed the least
discovery of any such thing, though her extraordinary Beauty, and the
amiable excellencies of her person had raised her no small number of servants
among those of greatest quality upon earth.

Among the most eminent of those that had any thoughts for her, Archelaus, King
of Cappadocia, a young Prince, of great valor, and abundance of virtue, was
one of the first that declared himself a servant of hers: and certainly, if an
excess of merit heightened by services, full of passion and respect, might have
had any influence on the heart of Antonia, it was not improbable they should
fail of their effection it, on the behalf of that Prince. His alliance with
Caesar, or rather his dependence on the Empire, to which his dominions were
tributary, (as were those of most Kings upon earth) obliged him to be very much
resident at Rome, where all other Kings as well as he were forced to make their
constant addresses to the Emperor.

It Was in one of these voyages that he became a sacrifice to the fair eyes of
Antonia, and upon that account stayed longer in Rome then he had resolved to
do. Whole years past away ere he durst make his case known, or any way
discover himself to her, who was the occasion of all his sufferings. And though
that during this time he traveled very much up and down, either within his own
Kingdom, or into those of his next neighbors, whither the war often drew him,
yet was his love his perpetual attendant, and upon the least occasion brought
him still to Rome, where he had left the fair object of his passion. When ever
he felt in himself any inclination to discover to Antonia what he suffered for
her sake, her severitie, and that modest fierceness she was subject to put him
to immediate silence: and whereas upon all other occasions he was never known
to be awanting as to courage, yet all that great confidence he was naturally
master of, proved, as to this design, absolutely unserviceable, and that out of
no other consideration then that he was not ignorant of the inflexible humor
of Antonia. But at last he ventured to break forth into speech, after he had
ushered in the discourse by thousands of actions which might have signified no
less then what he spoke; but this first overture of his proved so little to
his satisfaction, that for a long time after he could never reflect on it
without a certain regret, which must needs be the greater, in that Antonia, who
till then had suffered his conversation as she would do that of a Prince,
eminent for his virtue, and high in the esteem of all the World, could not
endure to hear from his own mouth, the first declaration of a passion which she
had a natural aversion for, and entertained it with such a resentment, as
easily put her upon a resolution to avoid all occasions of discourse with him.
However, after some time she was persuaded to endure it, but not so much out of
any remorse of her inclinations, as by the mediation of Octavia, who would not
have her treat, with disdain and incivilitie, a King of extraordinary merit, as
also upon the advice of her Brother Marcellus, whom she had very great respects
for, and who highly esteemed Archelaus. But after all, the greatest advantage
he made of this forbearance amounted not to so much as to make his condition
any whit the better; and if Antonia gave him sometimes leave to wait on her,
and to fall into discourse with her, yet could he never either from his
addresses or conversation infer the least hope they might ever prove effectual,
or derive any other comfort from them, save that of being assured, that his
Rivalls, (who no doubt were not a few, and those very considerable) were not
treated any thing more favorably than himself.

Besides Archelaus, there was a great number of other Princes at Rome, and
there daily came some from all parts, as I told you, to do homage, and make
their acknowledgements to the Lord of the greatest part of the Universe. Among
the most accomplished were Mithridates and Polemon, persons whom their
excellent endowments made accordingly considerable, it being indeed upon the
account of their virtue, (which added a great luster and advantage to their
birth) that they had not long before received Crowns from the liberality of
Augustus; Polemou that of Pontus, and Mithridates that of Comagenes.
Mithridates, a person naturally confident and daring, and of high and aspiring
thoughts; captivated by the perfections of Julia, and flattered into some hopes
through her easiness, in admitting addresses and adorations, made no great
secret for some time of the inclinations he had for her: but at length, seized
with a fear of displeasing Marcellus, whom all the World very much respected as
well for his reputation as his virtue, and to incense the Emperor himself, who
would not have taken it kindly that his Daughter should be cajolled into any
other affection then that of Marcellus, on whom he had resolved to bestow her,
he was forced to smother his first inclinations, and after he had continued for
some considerable time in an uncertainty, without being able to fasten on any
choice, he at last ran the same fate with a many others, and became an admirer
of the excellencies of Antonia, and accordingly put himself into the same
praedicament with Archelaus, Polemon, on the other side, continued Master of
Liberty for a long time, but at last was forced to sacrifice it to Marcella,
Daughter to Octavia, by her former Husband, and Sister, both by Father and
Mother, to Prince Marcellus: but his engagement into that affection was with
very little hope, or rather very little likelihood of any good success; not
but that his great worth and high birth were very considerable, but, it was the
general belief that the Emperor had long before designed his Niece the
Princess Marcella for Wife to the great Agrippa, a person so considerable in
point of reputation and interest, as not to be pararelled by Polemon, or indeed
by any other person in the Empire, unless it were by Prince Marcellus himself.
His younger Sister by the same marriage, named Martia, a Princess of an
excellent Beauty, an admirable wit, and a disposition full of sweetness and
complaisance, had also a great number of Suitors; and you are not to imagine
but that Princesses of such worth, extractions and interests were more likely
to raise desires than hopes in the hearts of such persons as were the most
eminent.

I have purposely given you this small account that you may thence infer what a
noble and great Court there must needs be at Octavia's, where we were no less
then five Princesses, who, next to Julia, might, not without reason, pretend to
the first rank among all those of the Empire, and that had had the honor to be
brought up by the conduct of a person, whose virtue is a thousand times more
considerable then all the advantages she might have derived from either her
Birth or her Fortune.

Besides those that I have named to you, that were particularly related to the
Imperial House, or were otherwise of Royal extraction, there was at Rome a
great number of those Illustrious Families, which are no way inferior to those
of Kings, as also of those Consular Houses, whereof the chiefes have so often
led Kings in Triumph, and disposed of Kingdoms as if they had been their own
private estates. The admirable Sulpicia, Daughter to Lucius Metellus, the
Beautiful Hortensia, Daughter to Caius Lentulus, Servilia, Daughter to
Servilius Hala, Flavia, of the Noble Blood of the Fabii, Sabina, of that of the
famous Scipio's, and the discreet Virginia, the Daughter of Catulus, were, as I
may say, in respect of us of the second magnitude. In like manner, among the
men, the very same Families, and others of that quality had produced no small
number of such, as, in all probability should not degenerate from the glory of
their Ancestors; and as to matter of magnificence and gallantry, next to
Marcellus, the Sons of Livia, and the Princes I have already mentioned to you,
young Crassus, Son to those of that name, who died among the Parthians, a
person already arrived to the fame of diverse Noble Victories, young Catulus,
Albinus, Ciuna, Lentulus, Flavianus the Son of Scaurus, Aemilianus, of the race
of the Scipio's, and Cornelianus descended of that of the Cato's, were the most
Eminent and Remarkable in Rome, as well for their excellent endowments, as
their Pomp and Magnificence. All these persons, or at least the greatest part
of them, came every day to the Empresse's Court, or to the Princess Julia's,
or to us, or to Scribonia's, or to Terentia's, the Wife of Mecenas, and it may
be well affirmed, that there never was any thing of ostentation, and
magnificence, comparable to what was seen in the public shows, and
divertisements, that these Illustrious Persons daily entertained us with, and
that with such prodigality and profusions, as it were impossible to meet with
in any other place, then a City that is Lady of the Universe, and surfeted with
the spoils of so many Kingdoms.

I need not tell you, Sister, that I have all this while digressed from what I
had first undertaken, purposely to give you a slight description of Augustus's
Court, and that out of a confidence you would not take it amiss to be
acquainted with the names of those persons that are the most considerable in
the Universe. I shall therefore now return to our own Family, and give you a
punctual account of all that you desire to know concerning it, omitting, out of
design, what happened long since, the more to hasten to a relation of what has
happened within these late years, as well because it is of greatest
consequence, as that it is freshest in my memory, and most within my knowledge.

That you may therefore be the better informed as to what concerns the affairs
of our Family, you are to know, That Julius Antonius, as I have already told
you, had been lost for some five or six years; That I was at Rome exposed to
the cruel persecution of Tiberius; That Alexander was, not long before, gone
from Rome into the Army in Pannonia, whence it was that he came to you; That
Ptolomey was brought up in Caesar's Court, all the World conceaving miraculous
hopes of him; That for our two Sisters, that were born of Octavia, Agrippina
was courted by Domitius Aenobarbus, and the younger, Antonia by Archelaus, King
of Cappadocia, and diverse other Illustrious Persons, as well among the Romans,
as among those Princes that had their education in Augustus's Court, and that
for the two Princesses, the Daughters of Octavia and Marcellus, and whom we
still looked on as our Sisters; Marcella was courted by Crassus and Polemon,
but according to the general opinion, designed by the Emperor for the great
Agrippa; and the young and fair Martia, besides a many other Suitors and
Adorers, whom her excellent perfections magnetically drew after her, was most
earnestly courted by Aemilianus, one of the house of the Scipio's, and young
Catulus, both persons extremely considerable as well upon the score of their
virtues, as extraordinary worth and parts. The other Ladies, whom I have named
to you, were also courted by the most Illustrious Persons about Rome, of Roman
extraction, insomuch that Rome was, in point of galantry and magnificence, much
beyond what I am able to represent to you. The Emperor, who, as you know, is
yet in the flower of his age, and is naturally very much inclined to whatever
sounds any thing of gallantry, gave himself the example as to what tended that
way, through the engagement and inclinations he then had, and still has for
Terentia, Mecoenas's Wife, a Woman of great Beauty, and a vast-wit and
understanding, but with this disadvantage as to her reputation, that the
frequent addresses and familiarity of the Emperor did her some injury, as
being one, that, having been Wife to a man whose virtue the whole Empire had a
particular honor and veneration for, should have carried her self with that
reservednesse as might have been proof against those reports, which but too too
often blast the most circumspect behaviors.

This excellent woman did the Emperor one day take occasion to entertain with
a Comedy, Music, and walking, in the fair and famous Gardens of Lucullus, and
all the persons I have named to you, with diverse others, whom I have not
mentioned, were admitted into the noble meeting. The first divertisement they
were entertained with, while they expected the other, (which were not to be
had, but by torch-light) was that of Walking, so that the Company being gotten
into those pleasant walks, they took their turns about, and saw all the
rarities of the Garden, which certainly are admirable, and not below the report
that is spread over the World of it, and the charge, which the most sumptuous
of mankind had been at about it. The Empress, whose thoughts have ever been
more taken up with what related to her ambition and State Affairs, then with
any thing else, pretending to be ignorant of the Emperor's inclinations, and
seeming not the least troubled thereat, would needs make one of that Assembly;
and while they walked, was led by Agrippa, though she had no great respects for
him, and looked on the interest he had with Augustus, with some jealousy.
Mecoenas waited on the Princess Octavia, and after her the Emperor himself
led Terentia; after them came Julia, led by Marcellus, and after her my self,
led by Tiberius. Domitius had Agrippina by the arm, and King Archelaus the fair
Antonia. Marcella was conducted by Prince Polemon, Martia by the gallant
Crassus; Sulpicia, by Lentulus, Hortensia, by Flavianus; Sabina, by Cinna,
Servilia, by Emilianus, Flavia, by Albinus, Virginia by Cornelianus, and the
excellent Cipassis, (who for her own worth, and the friendship which Julia had
for her, was numbered among the most considerable) by Ovid. Besides all these,
Drusus, Ptolomy, Mithridates, and Horace, whom they had brought with them, and
whom all the World respected, and was in love with, for his admirable wit,
having not any Ladies to wait on, or being unwilling to engage themselves any
where against their inclinations, very pleasantly desired leave to dispose of
themselves where they might meet with any hands free; which Livia having, in
the name of the whole company, granted them, Drusus came and took me by the
hand, out of a confidence his Brother, who had me by the other, would not take
it amiss. Ptolemey addressed himself to the beautiful Martia, who was led by
Crassus; the daring Mithridates confidentlie fastened on Antonia, who was led
by Archelaus; and Horace, after he had recollected himself a little after a
very pleasant manner, laid hold of Cipassis, who was led by Ovid, and reaching
him her hand, said very wittily, that for an unfortunate stranger, she was
not the worst waited on in the Company, having those two men about her.

This Noble Assembly, the noblest happily that the whole Universe could have
afforded, went all together into a spacious walk, covered in a manner with
trees of an extraordinary height, and abutted, as all the rest did, upon a
large Basin of Water, which is in the midst of the Garden, having in it one
principal figure which may be seen from all the extremities, and that is a
Neptune, placed in the midst of the water, seated in his Chariot, drawn by
Tritons, and holding in the right hand his Trident, which at the three points
of it, cast forth water to a greater height then the heighest trees of the
Garden. He is compassed about by a hundred Nereids of Alablaster, disposed
about the extremities of the Basin, in a hundred several postures; and placed
at equal distances within a row of Pilasters of white marble, by which it is
encompassed. From this place, by the means of twelve spacious walks, which
abutt there, may be seen all the extremities of the Garden, and the end of
every walk is remarkable for some object that does a certain pleasant violence
on the sight, and surpasses the Spectator in twelve different manners. That
particular walk into which we were gotten, entertained our eyes only with the
gate of the Garden, and a prospect of Rome; but all the rest end either with
perspectives, made with so much art, that they deceave the sight, even to the
extremity thereof; or with grotts, admirable as well for the variety of shells,
and the Nacre whereof they are built, as for the diversity of the springs and
sigures, whereby they are adorned, or with Arbours miraculous for their
structure, or lastly with descents of water, ordered with such extraordinary
artifice, as that falling from an excessive height upon a many several steps,
it makes a confused, but withal, a pleasant noise, and so runs into a number of
little channels, which border the Walks in diverse places, cross them in
diverse others, so that people are forced to go over them upon Bridges, having
on both sides Pilasters of Marble.

The twelve principal walks are crossed up and down by an infinite number of
others, wherein it is not hard for one to lose himself; but with this
advantage, by way of recompense, that wheresoever chance, or your own,
inclination disposes of you, the objects you are entertained with, are every
where very delightful and very surprising. There are thousands of rarities in
this Garden, which I do not trouble you with an account of, and for what I have
told, it has only been by the way, and somewhat besides my purpose.

When the whole Company had taken several turns about the Basin, it divided it
self into several parties according to the different inclinations of the
persons, Julia having made a proposition to that purpose, and represented that
walking wanted that freedom and divertisement when there were a many together,
which it had when there is more privacy. For my part I was resolved not to
leave Octavia, who began to direct her course toward one of the principal
Walks, and my Sister Antonia was as resolved to keep me company. It was, I must
confess, no small satisfaction to me, that Drusus came and joined with
Tiberius, to lead me, as well upon the account of the many excellent qualities
I observed in his person, as also that I thought it much better, being between
the Brothers, then alone with Tiberius; besides that I cannot deny, but that I
found something in Drusus's discourse, which in some measure took off the
teadiousnesse I met with in that of his Brother, and consequently was satisfied
as to the good opinion which all the World had of him. He was in very good
terms with Marcellus, as to the difference there had been between them
concerning their loves to Julia; insomuch, that he not only forbore all visits
to the Princess, but it was visible in all his actions, that he had given over
all thoughts of her, and sought nothing with so much earnestness as the
friendship of Marcellus. Besides, though he sided as much as he could with his
Brother, as in point of honor he was obliged to do, yet did he not press his
interest very much to me, and knowing the aversion I had for his Brothers
addresses, and the respects I had for those of Coriolanus, he said very little
to me of his Brother, and spoke nothing to the disadvantage of his Rival. 'Twas
this day that he entertained me with abundance of things that were infinitely
pleasant, and his Brother maliciously putting him upon some discourse
concerning Julia, he spoke of her with so much modesty and reservednesse, but
withal with so much wit, that I had from that time a greater esteem for him
then I had had before.

After us came Antonia, led by Archelaus and Mithridates, but the Emperor
having sent for Archelaus, as having some business to communicate to him,
Mithridates stayed alone with Antonia, to his unconceaveable satisfaction. This
was it he had sought out of a long time, and what he could never find before;
and accordingly being a person infinitely confident, he would needs make his
advantage of it, attributing the silence he had for some time observed to want
of opportunity. And yet all his confidence, though sommoned together upon this
occasion, stuck not so close to him, but that for some minutes he was at a
loss what to do as to the design he had to discover his thoughts, and Antonia
on the other side was so terrible upon any occasions of that nature, that she
was able to make the most assured of their strength to tremble. However he took
heart in his resolution, and falling into discourse about the departure of
Archelaus; I never made it any question, Madam, said he to her, but that
Archelaus entertains whatever orders come from Caesar, with all the respect and
compliance that may be; but for this last, I believe it has been received by
him, with a disturbance equal to the satisfaction it has bred in me. I cannot
apprehend, replies Antonia, the cause of either his discontent or your joy, nor
see in this accident any occasion of either the one or the other. For
Archelaus, replies Mithridates, you cannot certainly but know how unkindly he
takes it to be absent from you, since you are not to be now acquainted with the
passion he has for you: and for Mithridates, you may well imagine what joy it
is to him to have the honor to wait on you alone, when I have once told you
that he is involved in the same chains with Archelaus.

These words of Mithridates made Antonia blush for very indignation, though
from some circumstances she was satisfied as to some part of that truth; but
she would needs pretend that she understood not his meaning, and so seem the
less incensed against him, whereupon re-assuming the discourse with an action
full of disdain, I know not, said she to him, what you mean either by the
chains or passions of Archelaus, but am satisfied, that were he conscious of
any thing which I should take amiss at his hands, the respects he has for me
are so great, that he would keep it from my knowledge. Ah Madam, replied he, is
it possible, that you who pretend so much to a real sincerity, can so
peremptorily affirm that the King of Cappadocia has never entertained you with
the affection he has for you? If ever he did speak to me of it, replies the
Princess, it matters not, I gave no credit to what he said, and that for me to
do so, was the greatest advantage he could ever hope from such discourse; for
after all, when he had done what he could to persuade me that he had an
affection for me, I should possibly have persuaded him in my turn, that I
should be subject to a quite contrary passion for persons, whose affections
make them forget the respect they ought to observe. For matter of respect,
replies the Prince of Comagenes, I must acknowledge, it ought to be had for you
while life lasts, and that the least violation thereof deserves the severest
punishment; but for a man to be so far from being awanting in point of respect,
as that he only presumes to discover a love, which for the greatest part
consists in respect it self; does he deserve those lightnings and thunderbolts
which you cast at the guilty? and must a man needs be exposed to your
indignation for telling you, that he has an adoration for you, equal to what
he has for the gods, as he should be to that of another person, whom he had
done some affront to? The case is the very same, replies the Princess very
roundly, and in my opinion, there should be no distinction made between such
adorations and affronts. How Madam, cries out Mithridates, it seems you allow
no difference between the effects of Love, and those of Hatred? When those of
Love are importunate and troublesome, answers Antonia, I think them more
insupportable then those of Hatred, and, such is my humor, I should sooner
pardon an affect of Hatred in my enemies, then an expression of Love in those
that call themselves my Friends. Ah Madam, replies the Prince with an action
full of earnestness, if it be so, I shall advise the unfortunate Mithridates
not to tell you till at the last gasp, that he dies for you, and I shall
beseech you for the future to read in his eyes what you forbid him to declare
with his tongue.

Mithridates had no sooner pronounced these words, with a submissive look on
the ground, but Antonia casting her eyes on him, with an action full of
fierceness; Mithridates, said she to him, I am now satisfied that you take me
for... at which word making a sudden stop, happily to correct what the hastiness
of her thoughts had almost forced into her mouth. No, no, said the Prince,
interrupting her, no Madam, I do not take you for Julia, for it was of her that
you were going to speak, and the gods are my witnesses, that though truth it
self, and the passion I have had for that Princess, might well oblige me to
speak advantageously of her, yet must I acknowledge that I find no resemblance
between you. It was from my intention, replies Antonia, to say any thing of
Julia, I conceave it an honor to be any way like her, and am persuaded she
gives as little entertainment as I do, to such discourses as that, you have
entertained me with: but whether that be so or not, if I have deserved this
unhappy adventure for the pains I have taken to make you some answer on an
unbeseeming subject, merely to avoid the like for the future, since I cannot
take down your confidence, I shall deprive you of the occasions, and you shall
talk to me in another style, or never see me again.

Mithridates at these words, notwithstanding his great confidence was somewhat
at a loss, and knew not what answer to make her, when the incensed Antonia
having pronounced them; and walking a little faster to overtake us, Sister,
Sister, said she to me, stay for us, and give us leave to be of your company,
and participate of your discourse.

These words falling from her somewhat disorderedly, were enough for me to
guess at the truth; so that when she was come up to us, I could not forbear
looking on her with a certain smile, as if I understood by her countenance that
she was really angry. Coming to our side, Drusus, who was next her, very
respectfully presented her with the hand he had at liberty, and Antonia having
with as much civility received it, we walked all five abrest, after Octavia and
Mecaenas, who were some few paces before us, and often engaged in our
discourse. Tiberius and Drusus talked in a manner all the time, and though
Mithridates was a person sufficiently inclined to discourse and mirth, yet came
there not many words from him all the day after. I could not forbear smiling
when ever I looked on Antonia, who was extremely troubled at it. But what was
most pleasant of all, was, when we were gotten out of the spacious walk to go
into others that were narrower, which lie next to the little Rivuletts, and
wherein there cannot walk above three abrest; for Drusus being in the middle of
the five, and just between my Sister and me, we were both desirous to keep him;
Antonia, to be exempted from the discourse she was so willing to avoid, and I,
because I would not be alone with Tiberius, and accordingly upon these several
considerations we both drew Drusus with us at the same time, and to make him
the more sure to us, wrung him hard by the hand.

That action surprised him a little at first, as not being wont to be so
treated by us, but a while after, being a person infinitely ingenious, he
apprehended our meaning, and could not forbear laughing at it. He was a while
in suspense which side to take, telling us that he wished himself the fate of
Aristocles, with abundance of other things, very witty and pleasant; but at
last, he decided the controversy, somewhat to my disadvantage, for he left me,
because he would be alone with Antonia, but telling me withal very wittily,
that he was a better Brother then for to deprive Tiberius any longer of my
discourse, and that he would wait upon Antonia, who had not the same
engagements to Mithridates, as I had to his Brother. Mithridates blushed at
this discourse, and was forced, though with much discontent, to accept of
Drusus's company: but not long after, being come to a place where several walks
crossed one the other, we met Julia, Agrippina, and Marcia, with Marcellus,
Domitius, Crassus, and young Ptolomey our Brother, and saw coming on the other
side, the Emperor with Terentia, the Empress, Marcella and diverse others, so
that Caesar having given order that all the Company should rally, all met
together at the end of one of the walks in a spacious vaulted Arbor, open on
three sides, and having at the three openings, three springs casting up water
higher than the roof of the Arbor. There it was that the Music expected us,
and that the most excellent voices that Rome could afford, joined to all the
instruments requisite to make a noble consort, gave us a very delightful
divertisment. After the Music, which lasted not above an hour, all went a
walking again, and walked till night; but this second time, every one
endeavored to avoid being of their Company whom they could not affect, so that
Mithridates being deprived of the company of Antonia, who did all she could to
shun him, stayed with Drusus, Crassus, young Ptolomey, and others, who came not
near the Ladies for all that day.

When the day began to dis-lodge, and resign its place to darkness, we were
all brought into a spacious Bower, so covered over with the boughs of trees
whereof it was made that the violent rays of the Meridian Sun could hardly
find any passage into it, but that night it had such an excess of light, that
it might be said it never knew a greater day, that is, that of a thousand
torches fastened to a hundred sumptuous branches sparkling with gold and
precious stones, which hanging down from the boughs of the Bower, produced the
noblest effect in the World, and enlightened a magnificent Theater that had been
set up at one end of it, and upon which the successors of the famous Roscius
entertained the Company for two hours.

The Comedy being ended, we went into another Bower, not far from the former,
and enlightened after the same manner, where we were entertained with a
magnificent collation; and that also over, the rest of the night was spent in
dancing. Archelaus danced with Antonia, whom Mithridates durst not come near
all the night. Polemon danced with Marcella, and had a long discourse with her,
and our Brother Ptolomey, with the fair Martia; but after a manner much
different from that of the other. For Polemon having an extraordinary passion
for Marcella, who for her part was not any way moved thereat, and did not much
mind the expressions of Polemon's affection, and Ptolomey naturally averse from
love, unless it were that of his liberty, was little moved at the beauty of
Martia, though she were so well furnished that way as to make an impression on
souls that were most insensible, and had naturally no aversion for Ptolemey,
but lived with him by the directions of Octavia, as if they had been Brother
and Sister. For Domitius and Agrippina, their conversation was full of freedom,
and whereas the pretentions of Domitius were generally countenanced and
encouraged, and Agrippina a person of a disposition easily satisfied, her
affection accordingly met with few traverses of fortune, and so her mind had
little to struggle withal. Marcellus and Julia were in the height of
familiarity, in regard no man disputed her with him, and that he himself had
made his peace with her, as to the difference they had had together about the
love of Drusus; and for my part, I had my hands full of Tiberius, who made all
the advantage he could of the absence of Coriolanus, but the most pleasant part
of the story was a dispute raised by Cypassis, between Ovid and Horace, who had
waited on her all that day, and who, upon a very nice and ticklish question,
said things worthy the admiration of all the World. The greatest part of the
night being thus spent, it was thought time to retire, whereupon the whole
Company being disposed into Chariots, every one went to, what was then most
desirable, rest.

I know Sister I have not done well thus to digress, or at least there was no
necessity I should give you such a particular description of that days walking
and entertainments, and it is not unlikely you expected to hear of some
extraordinary accident some way relating to this History. But this short
relation of the divertisements of that day, (whereof I have given as brief an
account as I could) may be thus far advantageous to you, as to make you better
acquainted, as well with the persons, as the little intrigues that then were in
the Court of Augustus, and I have been so much the larger out of this
consideration, that it was this day that gave birth to some things which have
since come to pass of very great consequence. My Sister Antonia and I had layn
together for some few days before, and were extraordinary kind one to another,
as being engaged in a friendship that allowed as little separation as could
possibly be. As we were undressing our selves that night, I fell into discourse
about what had happened between her and Mithridates, and though she was
extremely loath to make me acquainted with it, yet at last not able to stand out
against my persecutions of her, she gave me a punctual account of all the
discourse she had had with him, as I have related it to you already, and
discovered so much indignation in the recital thereof, that notwithstanding the
sadness which then lay heavy on my heart, I could not forbear laughing at it,
and to torment her with discourse about it. But the occasion I laid hold of to
do so, was yet more handsome, when, as she put off her clothes, there fell, out
of one of her sleeves, a letter that had been hidden there, and which was no
sooner fallen to the ground, but I took it up, and having with a great
curiosity looked on the superscription, I found written in a hand that was
unknown to me. ( To the fair Antonia.) I had no sooner eyed that
superscription, but presenting it to her, and obliging her to read it, she was
extremely at a loss, and perceaving her amazement to be so great as hindered
her from speaking, Sister, said I to her, you have not dealt freely with me,
since that having acquainted me with the particularities of Mithridates' s
affection, you conceal from me that of another more forunate Servant of yours,
from whom you receave letters. These words put her into a sudden blush; but
having soon after recovered her self, Sister, replied she very soberly, I shall
not vindicate my self to you, and I think you know me better then to believe
that I receave letters from any one. And yet you see, replied I, that this is
very truly directed to you, and that he that writ it, has been so much afraid
it should miscarry, that he would needs put your name in the superscription in
very fair Characters. For that, replies Antonia, be it on the account of his
discretion; but that he has been so fortunate in his design, as that it should
be known it was directed to me, is all the satisfaction it will bring him, and
assure your self, I am satisfied with the bare superscription, and have no
desire to see any more of it. Not but that I am persuaded it comes from
Mithridates himself, who will needs accomplish what he so confidently began, It
being not so likely that Archelaus should have any hand in it, since he talked
with me all the evening, and that I cannot believe every day should produce
persons guilty of such an excess of confidence. However it may be, said I to
her, if you are not resolved to conceal it from me, you will give me leave to
read it. You may as well let it alone, replies Antonia, but it would argue in
me a distrust of my own strength, should I forbid you to do it if you are so
resolved. I therefore opened the letter, and began to read aloud these words.

Since that in your judgment there is no distinction to be made between
adorations and affronts, and that you think the effects of hatred more
supportable than those of love.

Now, Sister, says Antonia, interrupting me, was I not in the right, when I
told you it came from Mithridates, and are they not his own words in the
discourse that past between us? So far, said I to her, I agree with you that
Mithridates is the Author of it; but let us see what follows, and comfort your
self so far, as that there is no new affront offered you in this letter, since
it acquaints you with nothing but what you knew before. Antonia being of the
same opinion, heard me with much more quietness of thought then before, so
that I began it again, and found it in these words.

SInce that in your judgment there is no distinction to be made between
adorations and affronts, and that you think the effects of Hatred more
supportable than those of Love, those who are destind to affront you, since
they are only such as are born to adore you, ought either to conceal the
offense from you, or keep the offender out of your knowledge. For my part,
fairest Antonia, I am the greatest of your Enemies, since that I am of all
mankind the person that has the greatest affection for you, and I tell you
that confidently, which I should not without trembling, were I not unknown to
you. You have seen and known the person, while yet you were ignorant of his
passion; but now that the passion is discovered, it is but fit the person
should be concealed, that only his Love may be exposed to your indignation.
And since it is only Love that you hate, and not the persons that are inclined
to love you, if it be possible to engage the aversion you have for it, with
such good success as that you may be entreated to be more favorable to it,
those who are guilty of no other crime, will appear before you in a less
odious posture, when their crime is pardoned, or at least connived at by your
indulgence. The most guilty of all those that commit any offenses of this
nature against you, seeing himself reduced by your inflexible maxims, to a
cruel necessity of either holding his peace, or concealing himself, stands in
suspense at the choice he is to make, which though it be, in appearance,
fantastic, yet is in its consequences rational enough, nay happily generous
enough, since that he cannot be charged with any consideration of his person,
but only of his love, and that it is to induce you to bear with his Love, that
he addresses himself to you, and not to engage you to any affection toward his
person, which he conceals from you, and which he shall conceal, happily, as long
as belives. Pardon him this innocent surprise, which he intends your rigor,
and let only your Beauty engage against him, in a case wherein, to punish the
rashness of his attempt, it wants not the assistance of your cruelty.

As soon as I had given over reading, I looked on Antonia, who at the same time
cast her eyes on my face, with certain discoveries of astonishment, not
inferior to what I was in my self. In a word, we were both equally surprised,
and whereas we inferred from the first words of the Letter, that it came from
Mithridates, we concluded from the sequel, not only the quite contrary, but
were persuaded withal, that the person who had writ it, had never made any
expression of his love to Antonia, and that in that Letter he took occasion to
make the first discoveries of it. It Is true we were somewhat distrustful as to
that opinion, when we reflected on the first words, which were the same she had
said to Mithridates, and could not apprehend how they could come by chance so
pat into the imagination of the Unknown Lover; but for all the rest, it had so
little relation or consistency either with the humor, former proceeding of
Mithridates, or the terms wherein he was with Antonia, that we were satisfied
it must needs be some other, and that one that either out of curiosity or
concernment in the business, might have gotten behind the trees that were on
both sides the walk, wherein the discourse had past, and listening attentively
to what was said, had heard some part of it.

Being agreed in this opinion as the most probable, we fell into discourse upon
the adventure; so far, that Antonia thought there was some thing in it so full
of surprise, and so extraordinary, that she could not be angry at it, as she
had been before at the confidence of Mithridates. We searched among all the men
I have named to you the person we could with any likelihood suspect; but though
it was out of all question that it was one of those that had passed the day
with us, yet after we had examined them all one after another, we could not
fasten on any one whom we could charge with it. Diverse of them had come near
Antonia, as well during the Comedy, as while they danced, and at the Collation;
but of all those that she could remember had had any discourse with her, there
was not any whom we knew not to be otherwise engaged as to matter of affection,
or to be much awanting in point of ingenuity, to carry on such a piece of
gallantry. When we had discovered almost to weariness about it; Who it may be,
it matters not, says Antonia, he puts himself to a great deal of trouble to no
purpose, and if he deprive me of the object of my indignation, by concealing
his person from me, he also deprives himself, continued she laughing, of the
acknowledgement I should return his affection by not discovering himself. Ah
Sister, said I to her, how well is this man acquainted with you, and how true
is it, that if you were as ready to make acknowledgements, as to be transported
with indignation, he would have taken a course quite contrary to what he has;
but, be he what he will, I do not only think him extremely ingenious, but I
believe he may carry on his design very successefully, and dare pass my word
that you have a less aversion for him then for Mithridates and others, who
have been so confident as to discover their passions to you. I acknowledge no
less, replies Antonia, and am of your mind, that if I never know him while I
live, I shall never while I live know whom I ought to hate. However it may be,
replied I, it is out of all doubt, this man has Understanding, and in that
understanding something that is great, and signifies very visibly that he is a
person of eminent quality, we shall know him when he shall think it fit....
And, I hope, added Antonia, interrupting me, that, if he be a man of his word,
we shall never know him. In troth, replied I, my mind gives me, I should be
extremely troubled at it, and must confess this untroden way of proceeding
has raised in me a more than ordinary curiosity. We should have had abundance
of other discourse upon this adventure, but it was so late, or rather so near
day, that we were loath to sit up any longer, so that going to bed a little
after, we soon fell asleep.

For some days ensuing, (though it might well be thought, that the misfortunes
of my own life, being at that time such as found matter of discontent enough,
should have left me but little curiosity) I made it my earnest business to
find out whom that Letter should come from, nay seemed to be much more
concerned in the business than Antonia her self, who looked on all these things
with the greatest indifference imaginable. And what much heightened my
inquisition, was, that me thought the adventure argued somewhat so far beyond
the ordinary way of proceeding, that, contrary to my natural inclination, I was
extremely desirous to see the issue of it. But all the little inquiries I made,
proved ineffectual, for I never could come to the least discovery of any thing;
with so great circumspection had that person managed all things in order to the
design he had to continue still unknown, though he omitted not any that might
demonstrate the earnestness of his passion for Antonia.

In the mean time, Ptolomey our Brother, (the only Brother Fortune had left us
after the loss of Alexander, who was gone to find you out in Armenia, and of
whom we had not the least account in the World) lived in Augustus's Court,
after such a rate as gave all that knew him occasion to conceave very great
hopes of him: but as to matter of inclinations, the greatest he seemed to have,
were those of his Liberty, nay, though he daily waited on the fairest Ladies
about Rome, and was extremely well entertained by them, yet could it not be
inferred from any action of his, that he had a particular devotion for any. He
was a great Lover of Arms, Horses, and all Exercises of the Body, and had a
singular dexterity therein; but, to sigh or pine for a Beauty, was a thing
inconsistent with his humor, as being a person naturally inclined to be free
and cheerful, and avoided as much as could be all distraction of thought. The
virtuous Octavia, who still persisted in the generous design she had taken to
make the best provision she could for the children of Anthony, and imagined she
could not do it any way better then by bringing them into the family and
alliance of Caesar, being now out of all hopes to effect her desires first in
the person of Julius Antonius, and not long since in that of Alexander, who was
looked on as lost as well as our Elder Brother, conceaved it might be brought
to something in Pt^lomey, and wished his inclination directed to Martia, a Lady
courted by the greatest persons among the Romans, and, to speak modestly of
her, one that had very excellent parts. Ptolomey made no difficulty, to
entertain that Princess with all the civilities she might expect from him,
nay, discovered somewhat of particular affection for her, suitably to the good
intentions of Octavia: but indeed his flames were come to no great height,
though Martia were a person infinitely lovely, for having a freedom of access
to her every day, his deportment was accordingly full of cheerfullnesse and
indifference. It was much otherwise with Martia, and though she were of an
exemplary virtue and modesty, yet must it withal be acknowledged, that she is
subjest to much tenderness of mind, and having been brought up with Ptolomey,
as with a person on whom her mother had cast her eyes with a design to make him
her Husband, and lived familiarly with him as with Marcellus, that fraternal
friendship, which, with the names of Brother and Sister, Octavia would needs
have continued among us, had made a greater impression in her mind, then well
stood with the serenity and quiet thereof, so far as that she was no longer
able to withstand the lovely qualities of that Prince, which out of all doubt
had wrought much more upon her inclinations, than hers had upon those of
Ptolomey. I had, not without much dis-satisfaction, taken notice of it my self,
and several times chid my Brother for his backwardness in his acknowledgements
of the sincere affection of Martia: but the young man, of an uncontrolled
humor, would make some shift to put me off, telling me that he loved and
honored Martia, as he was obliged to do, and that he should be well content to
give her the greatest assureances she could expect of the devotion he had for
her; but for melancholy, disturbances of mind, and reservednesse, he looked on
them as the destroyers of his happiness, and making good what he said in his
actions, he was indeed very punctual in doing her all manner of civilities, and
acknowledgements, nay so far as to express a more particular affection for
her, then for any other. Yet was it observable withal, that it was done with a
certain discovery of much freedom of mind, which argued in him such a
mediocrity of inclinations, as that he would not, to wait on her, abate any
thing of his enjoyments, nor let slip any occasion that offered it self to be
among the Ladies, whose company could afford him ought of diversion. Martia,
who is of a very mild disposition, endured this indifferent manner of behavior
a long time, without the least discovery of any discontent thereat: but at
last, looking on it as an evident expression of his coldness and negligence,
she began to be troubled, insomuch that the grief she conceaved thereat,
wrought some alteration both in her humor and countenance. All the World took
notice of her sadness; but the motive thereof was absolutely unknown, and
Martia, who made it her business to conceal it what she could, had happily
smothered it to this day, if I had not casually made the first discovery
thereof.

During the time that her melancholy grew more and more prevalent upon her,
taking occasion to give her a visit, and finding her alone, I entreated her of
all love to acquaint me with the cause of her sadness, which troubled not
only all that knew her, but my self more particularly, who (as I was for many
considerations obliged to do) had a more than ordinary affection for her. My
caresses were answered by Martia; after an indifferent and evasive manner, yet
such as betrayed much grief and resentment. Very loath she seemed to be go give
me any satisfactory answer, and would say no more then that she knew not any
cause whence her sadness should proceed, and that it must be derived from her
temperament or some indisposition of Body. But I, not satisfied with this
answer, reproached her with a want of sincerity, and was pressing her to
discover her mind more freely to a person whom she might trust with any thing,
when Ptolomey comes into the Chamber. His first appearance wrought such an
alteration in her, that her color changed several times of a sudden; and
having casually cast my eyes on her countenance, I could not but immediately
take notice of the alteration which my Brothers coming in had wrought therein.
From this discovery I might well guess at some part of the business, and was
in a manner persuaded that Ptolomey had contributed much to the change of that
Princesse's disposition.

This reflection made me take more particular notice of her deportment then I
had done before, and I observed, that while Ptolomey stayed with us, she was at
such a loss, that she found it some difficulty to speak. His visit was indeed
but very short, for having stayed about a quarter of an hour with us, he told
us, we were too sad for his company, and that he would go to Sabina's, where
Virginia, Hortensia, Telavia, and several other Ladies were met, and where he
hoped to find more diversion. Whereupon going out of the room, he left Martia
so much troubled, both at his words, and manner of departure, that the most
dis-observant person in the World might have perceaved the disturbance of her
thoughts, by the trouble it raised in her countenance. I must confess I was my
self much surprised at Ptolomey's deportment, and angry with him for it, and
having withal observed Martia's affliction thereat, I was so much the more
earnest to look further into the business, out of the desires I had to serve
and oblige her, if it lay in my power. To which effect reiterating the caresses
and entreaties I had made to her some few minutes before, I conjured her by all
the friendship that was between us, not to conceal from me any longer what her
heart was so much burdened with, assuring her that that curiosity in me
proceeded not from any thing but the desires I had to serve her in that
conjuncture, proportionably to the affection I had for her. But I could not get
a word from her, and instead of some answer, there fell from her eyes some few
tears which she could not possibly keep in any longer, and which she would have
concealed from me by turning her head to the other side. That discovery raised
in me all the compassion I could conceave at such an accident, and thereupon
putting my cheek to hers, with an action that argued the tenderness I had for
her, What Sister, said I to her, can you be so cruel as to conceal from me the
cause of a grief wherein I concern my self so much; or have I so poorly
deserved your affection, that you have so little confidence of mine? I durst
trust my life in your hands, replies Martia, nay any thing else that I thought
more precious; But why will you engage me into a discourse, whence you will
infer nothing but my foudnesse and extravagance? Or if you have any opinion of
my prudence, why will you not rather advise me to do all that lies in my power
to preserve it? I am so well satisfied as to that particular, replied I, that I
shall never conceave otherwise of you; and that is the reason I am so
importunate with you, as knowing, that I shall not understand any thing from
you, which must not confirm me in the confidence I have thereof. It argues the
greatness of my obligations to you, replied the Princess, but be what will
the issue of it, I cannot have the courage to acquaint you with my weakness,
and I think I satisfy the duty of our mutual friendship when I promise you to
acknowledge it, if you guess the cause thereof. Since you afford me that
freedom, said I to her, and consequently give me some ground to believe you
will approve that of my discourse, may I not ask you, whether the young Prince,
who now left the room, be not in some measure the occasion of your melancholy,
and whether his being awanting in the service he owes you may be some cause of
your being dissatisfied with him?

Upon these words, Martia, being not any longer able to smother the confusion
she was in, nor the blushes that spread through her countenance, leaned her
self against my shoulder, and wringing one of my hands between both her own,
with the greatest discovery of passion that could be, Sister, said she to me,
with much difficulty, I am not worthy the services of Ptolomey; nay it is not
unlikely he conceaves it so, and by his deportment toward me, you may easily
judge, that I am not to statter my self with any great hopes of him. I must
confess that, having entertained the first addresses of his affection, by the
commands of those who have the disposal of my inclinations, and that having
possibly been too implicitly dutiful to Octavia, I cannot quit the hopes I had
conceaved thereof, without some affliction; and this is the confusion, this is
the fondness, which I neither durst, nor ought to have discovered, but the
relyance I have on your friendship persuades me, that you will not let it go
any further, nay, that you will conceal it even from Ptolomey himself, who
obliges me not to this tenderness for him, while he has so little for me.

These words, falling from her with that mildness which is absolutely natural
in her, gave my heart a more then ordinary assault, whereupon embracing her
with a certain excess of affection; Sister, said I to her, Ptolomey is happy,
in^iinitely beyond his deserts, if I may measure his happiness by these
discoveries of your affection toward him; nay I am confident, that had be but
the knowledge thereof, he would cast himself at your feet, begging your pardon
for all the faults, which through the inconsiderate sallies of youth, he may
have committed against you. He were unworthy all countenance of fortune, if he
entertain not this as the greatest which Heaven could favor him with; but I am
to assure you, as I have had it thousands of times from his own mouth, and see
it in his heart, that he has for you the greatest sentiments of passion and
respect he can have, and if that be awanting in the demonstrations he ought to
give you thereof, it is to be attributed to the impetuosity of his greener
years, which time will so settle, as that you will be the only object of his
devotions for all the rest of his life. I shall not acquaint him with any thing
of what you have discovered to me, but as from my self make him sensible of his
omissions of duty, and I dare promise you to bring him at your feet, as
penitent, and as reformed in matter of inclination as he ought to be, and your
virtue deserves. With these words, and what else I said to her, I appeased
Martia, and further representing to her, that Ptolomey deserved not so great
expressions of her good will, and that it was but oitting he should not be
acquainted therewith, least it made him too insolent, I by degrees so laid that
mild nature, that I brought her to a resolution of not grieving any longer
after that manner, and that she would reassume her former freedom and
pleasantness of conversation.

In the mean time, give me leave to acquaint you with the adventure, which the
same day happened to Ptolomey, and prepare your self to hear a very strange
accident. He went to Sabina's, as he told us he would, where a great many
Ladies met, and among others, besides those he had named to us, Helvidia,
Sulpicia, Emilia, (whom I made mention of in the adventures of Julius Antonius,
and who was some years since married to Scipio) and with her that inexorable
Tullia, who had been the cause of the loss of our Elder Brother. After the
death of Caecinna, and the deplorable accident I have already related to you,
she retired to Tusculum, where she continued six years, without ever coming
once to Rome; during which time Cicero, her Brother, had made his abode in
Africa, where he was Proconsul; but being not long before returned to Rome, he
had brought his Sister with him, which to effect he had used all the authority
he had over her, otherwise she had still continued her solitude. 'Twas not
above three days before that she came to Rome, where she was thought as
beautiful as when she left it, though she were then about three or four and
twenty years of age, and had a sufficient measure of affliction to cause some
alteration in her beauty. Her dress was not after the exactness of the mode,
yet neat, and there was in her countenance such a conjunction of sweetness and
majesty, that Ptolomey, who had never seen her before, immediately took notice
of her more than of any of the rest. At his coming in, the company was gotten
into a long Gallery, where they were looking on the pieces that were hanged
about it, yet so as they were divided into parties, according to the difference
of pictures more or less inviting them. Ptolomey was not expected in this
company, and if Sabina had had any notice of his coming, she would not have had
Tullia there, though she were of her most intimate acquaintances: but he being
of a quality that won him a welcome reception every where, and that the
excellencies of his person recommended him no less then the rank he was of, he
was very kindly entertained, so far as that some part of the company came about
him at his entrance into the room. Being a person of a majestic look, a noble
carriage of body, and a deportment infinitely taking, Tullia immediately
observed him, not without surprise, and she viewed him with such a look as
discovered, that, notwithstanding his being Anthony's Son, he seemed such to
her, as could not raise her aversion. Now she being the only person in the
company to whom he was unknown, she asked one that stood next her, what his
name was; which she had no sooner heard, but there rise such a tempest in her
countenance, that the alteration happened therein was observed by all those
that looked on her. She was once in a thought to leave the company, whereupon
coming up to Emilia, and whispering her in the ear with some disturbance, What,
said she to her, can the World afford me no place of refuge against the
Children of Anthony? Emilia, who was troubled at the accident, made her no
immediate answer; but Sabina, as Lady of the House, coming near her to make
excuses for what was happened, and to let her know that she was as much
surprised at Ptolomey's arrival, as she was, told her withal, that he was a
person of such quality, as not to be forced out of the house. Whereupon Emilia,
having somewhat recovered her self, entreated her not to make any disturbance
in the company, and to remember her self, that the two public discoveries she
had made of her aversion for the children of Anthony had produced effects but
too too deplorable; that she might stay in the room, yet not engage her self
into any particular conversation with Ptolomey, and from that day avoid all
opportunities of meeting with him; that she would undertake, that Ptolomey
should not endeavor any acquaintance with her, and that she knew so much of
his humor, as raised in her a confidence that he would not be guilty of those
importunities toward her, which his Brother had been. Sabina added her
entreaties to those of Emilia, and both together prevailed so far with Tullia,
that they persuaded her to stay with them as long as the rest did.

In the mean time, Ptolomey, who, upon the first sight, had taken notice of
Tullia's beauty, and had further observed some part of the trouble which his
presence had raised in her, and some thing of what had passed in that part of
the Gallery where she had retired, being in some impatience to know the name of
that beautiful person, asked it of Albinus, who, making no difficulty, to give
him an account of her, filled him with astonishment. He retreated some few
paces, as somewhat amazed, and looking on her more attentively than before;
What, said he, is this the same inexorable Tullia, that terrible Beauty, by
whose means we have lost our Brother? At these words he stopped, running over
in his mind thousands of things which presented themselves confusedly to his
imagination. The relation had been made of the insupportable treatments which
our Brother had received from her, and the sad effects they had produced,
raised in him such bitter resentments against her, as made him abhor her as an
over-cruel enemy; And though he were not ignorant of the reason she had to
defy all communication with our house, yet was it his judgment, as well as of
a many others, that she was excessively violent against a Prince, that had
given her so great assurances of his love, and who, as to his person, was very
amiable and much respected. He had often wished a meeting with her, to see, as
he would say himself, what making that terrible person was of, and to try,
whether his soul were so immalleable, and consequently not able to resist the
influences of her beauty better then that of Julius Antonius did. But Tullia
being not returned to Rome, and that there was no expectation of her coming
thither, he had quitted all hopes of it, nay, lost all remembrance of her. At
last, having recovered himself out of the first astonishment he had conceaved
at the rencounter, he fortified his heart with more fierceness then ordinary,
summoning all his indignation, to avoid a fate like that of his Brothers. But
he stood not in any need of that assistance, for, whether it proceeded from the
prejudice he had against her, or from a certain Antipathy: he was not guilty of
the least inclination for her, and accordingly looking on her with a scornful
smile; Arm thy self, said he to himself, with all the charms of imperious
beauty, thou shall not treat me as thou did my Brother. He was at first in a
mind to be gone, as being unwilling that his presence should cause any
distraction in a company whereto he had not any invitation; but not long after
perceaving, that all were satisfied with his being there, and that Sabina her
self was not troubled at it, he resolved to stay, as thinking it no discretion
to deprive himself of his enjoyments, to do the enemy of our house a pleasure,
and being not much troubled at the spite he thought he did her by his stay.

Being a person infinitely master of himself, he immediately reassumed his
ordinary pleasantness, and while the conversation lasted, there fell from him
the most ingenious things he had said in his life, and that with such a grace,
that all the company admired him. Even Tullia her self was as attentive as any,
could not forbear looking on him, and found, to her grief, that her indignation
was not so violent, as she had wished it might have been. They spent the time
in several recreations, they danced, they had a collation; and as Ptolomey was
the most sportive, the most pleasant, and, out of all doubt, the handsomest
person in the company, so did he accordingly, in the dancing, and all the other
entertainments, draw the eyes and ears of the presence after him. He sung, he
danced with abundance of grace, nay, he would needs that day make the greatest
ostentation he could of himself, purposely to put his enemy out of countenance,
and to let her know that the children of Anthony, were not so contemptible as
she would by her example have persuaded the World. His intention as to some
part proved effectual, as to the rest, it produced effects much different from
those which he expected it should. He spoke to all the Ladies that were
present, several times, Tullia only excepted, whom yet he treated not with any
incivility, or did any action that might disoblige her, as well out of a
respect for her sex, as upon Sabina's account, thinking it enough to be at some
distance from her, as it were to make show of respect, and the fear he was in
to displease her. He looked on her often, and he observed her eyes were in a
manner always fastened on his countenance. He at first conceaved her looks to
be such as proceeded from indignation, but afterward he was satisfied there
was nothing of hostility in them, and that her eyes darted no more rigor on
him, then any other of the company. That observation made him the more
self-conceited* insomuch, that having that day resolved to be consident even to
a degree of insolence, whispering Lentulus, who stood by him, in the ear, yet
without turning his eyes toward Tullia, whom he would by no means offend; Pray
give me your opinion, said he to him, with a pleasant kind of presumption, do
not you perceave, that that cruel enemy of ours, who treated our elder Brother
with such rigor, honors us with her looks? I have taken notice of it, as well
as your self, says Lentulus to him, and you would think it very strange, if,
instead of the aversion she has for your house, she should have a contrary
passion for you. I should indeed be extremely astonished at it, replies
Ptolomey, but if it should be the pleasure of the gods that such a thing should
come to pass, I protest to you I should revenge my Brother. How, added
Lentulus, taking him to the window, that they might not be heard, you would
behave your self barbarously and inflexibly toward a Beauty that had an
affection for you, and would act the part of Tullia toward her, if she acted
toward you that of Julius Antonius? I have not hitherto, replied my Brother,
been any ways in a condition to exercise my cruelty, and when things shall
come to the pass that you speak of, I shall not be guilty of those scorns and
incivilities toward Tullia, which she was toward my Brother, because it is
impossible I should ever be exempted from that respect which I owe her Sex. But
I would have her to know, that that destiny, rather then his own reason, which
forced my Brother into the extremities of blindness and extravagance, has not
the same influence on me, and that there can but little love be expected from
me for a person guilty of so much aversion for an innocent Prince, and one so
eminent as Julius Antonius was.

While Ptolomey broke forth into these expressions, and chafed himself into
exasperation by the sight of that female enemy of his, there passed things of a
quite different nature in the soul of Tullia; insomuch that though that Beauty
did all she could to heighten her detestation against Ptolomey, yet that
passion, disarmed of its main strength, was so far from contributing any thing
thereto, that it seemed of no force at all, and whether it were that she saw in
the person of Ptolomey, (son to Cleopatra, and not to Fulvia, who had been
Cicero's implacable enemy, and much more the occasion of his death than
Anthony) but one half of its object, or that she submitted to some unknown
power, she refused to obey in that emergency, and felt her self disposed of all
that before had kept up her spirit with so much constancy. In a word, to speak
of her modesty, Fulvia could not hate Ptolomey, though possibly she was not
free from a desire to do it, she hearkened to him, and looked on him as
favorably as on others that were present, she was one of the last that
withdrew; and when the Company was dissolved, she did not express the least
dissatisfaction at that meeting, nor betrayed by any action or look, the least
aversion for the person of Ptolomey.

In the mean time, I, having left Martia, retired into my own Chamber, where I
was no sooner got, but Antonia comes in, and coming to me with a countenance
divided between a desire of laughing, and some inclination to be angry; Sister,
said she to me, I have somewhat to make you merry withal, and since you find
so much diversion in an adventure I take but little pleasure in, I love you too
well to conceal any circumstance from you, which may add any thing to your
satisfaction. I have spent this whole day at the Empresse's, where were all the
most eminent about the Court, five or six only excepted that were at Sabina's,
and this evening as I came away, I found a Letter in my hand-kerchief, and
cannot imagine by what means it should come thither without my knowledge; and
since I think it out of all question that it comes from the same unknown person
you wot of, I thought sit to bring it away with me, that you might have the
full satisfaction of it. Having with these words put it into my hands, I took
it without making her any reply, and having opened it, found therein these
words.

To the Fair ANTONIA.
I Have seen you this day, and found you brighter and more beautiful than the
star from which we derive our light, and have participated of the excellencies
of your conversation. You have seen me, you have looked on me favorably, nay,
such was your goodness, you have given me leave to entertain you with as much
freedom as any of those that were present, nay, what is yet more, there were
some not so well treated as my self, and whose condition I have been far from
envying, as to any thing has happened this day. Hence you may see, fairest
Antonia, what advantages I make of the resolution I have taken to conceal from
you the name of your enemy. Had you known me to be that criminel that durst
presume to adore you, and sticks not to tell you so, I should have been thrust
away with as much contempt as Mithridates, and have been as discontented as
Archelaus, whose fortune has not been much better. But in regard you could not
either in my countenance or yet in my designs perceave the least discovery of
what I have in my heart, you have looked on me, and treated me as an innocent
person, though I really were the most guilty of all the company. See then,
incomparable Princess, whether I am any ways to be blamed, for putting this
trick upon you, and pardon it me, since that, of all those that ever were done,
it is the most innocent.

No question Sister but it is, said I, having read out the letter, and
delivering it to her; he deserves to be pardoned, for there never was any thing
of surprise or circumvention more excusable than this. That then it your
judgment, replies Antonia, but for my part, I am not absolutely of the same,
and there is happily in this artifice much more malice and design then you
imagine. I cannot conceave, replied I, what malice you can suspect there may be
in it; I can see nothing but abundance of respect and care to avoid the
occasions of displeasing you. But Sister, added I, can you not suspect any one
of all those you have seen to day? The number was so great, replies Antonia,
that I know not on whom particularly to fix my thoughts, for there were present
Agrippa, Mecaenas, Marcellus, Domitius, Tiberius, Drusus, Crassus, Aemilianus,
Cinna, Cepio, Pollio, Flavianus, Servilius, Polemon, Archelaus, Mithridates,
Varus; and, besides these, all of the most eminent quality in Augustus's Court,
so that among so many, it were impossible for me to make any certain judgment.

Our discourse had been longer upon this subject, had not Ptolomey come into
the room, and put us from what we were then upon, with what he had to say of
another accident had happened to him. For he had no sooner set his foot in the
Chamber, but crying out to me, as it were in a transport of joy, I have seen
her, Sister, said he to me, I have seen that terrible one, I have seen that
inexorable Beauty, and thanks be to the gods, she has done me no hurt. These
words, uttered by him with a certain precipitation, gave me not any light to
guess at the adventure had happened to him, nor was it likely I should have
imagined any thing near it; but Antonia having asked him what it might be, he
related to us how he had met with the cruel Tullia, at Sabina's, how he had
passed away the whole day with her, and in a word, gave us a particular account
of that meeting, even to the last circumstances. I was extremely troubled at
the relation, to see that inflexible beauty, as it were newly reviving, by
whose means we had lost our Brother, and was afraid some unfortunate accident
would have been the effect of her return, which I had no sooner discovered to
Ptolomey, but he made thousands of protestations to me, accompanied with oaths,
that there was not any woman in the World which he should not affect rather
than Tullia, though he could not deny but that he thought her very handsome,
and was persuaded she had abundance of worth in her. I was over-joyd at those
assurances, as well because I could not by any means affect Tullia, after the
loss of a Brother, such as she had forced away from us, as because I was
desirous that Ptolomey should have been at the service of Martia, not only for
the extraordinary perfections of that Princess, the affection she had for him,
and the respects I had for her, but also out of a consideration of the
advantages of Fortune which must needs have followed upon that alliance, such
as he had all the reason in the World to embrace. From that day I took occasion
to discover my thoughts more and more to him, and to represent to him what
obligations he had to Martia, Octavia, and her self; and, seconded by Antonia,
I made him so sensible of all things, that, though he was not much subject to
make over-serious reflections on things, yet he promised us to devote himself
absolutely to Martia, for whom he had an infinite esteem and affection, and
whom he would never give any occasion to distrust his constancy; insomuch, that
giving her a visit that very night, he made thousands of protestations of his
fidelity to her, and that with circumstances so full of ardor and obligation,
that show was extremely satisfied therewith.

The very same night, the unknown servant of Antonia entertained her with a
Serenade, consisting of certain instruments, and the best voices in the World.
But, we two lying together, Antonia said it might be as well intended for me as
for her, and that among the voices she knew some to be of the Emperors Music,
whom none but Tiberius could employ; but it was long since Tiberius and I had
expressed our selves one to another by Serenades, so that Antonia was at last
persuaded to the contrary, when, after a Dialogue which was sung in several
parts, the whole Music joined together to sing these words which we heard
distinctly, and which I could not but remember, as having been sung three or
four times over.

TO express his Love, the Lover is
Unknown, to appease an angry Fair,
Can you not pardon him that dies
A crime of Love for to repair?
There needed but these words to take away all contestation between Antonia and
my self, insomuch, that since it was out of her power to remedy it, she
resolved, though not without much trouble, to endure the persecution. I could
not forbear laughing at the disturbance she was in, and no question but I might
have found a great pleasure in the adventure, had my thoughts been subject to a
certain innocent mischievousnesse, wherein persons of our age find themselves
no small diversion, But, besides that I have a natural dis-inclination to any
such thing, the misfortunes of my life have abated very much of my cheerful
disposition; and if it might be thought that I had at that time some favorable
intervals upon the news which came to Rome of the great successes of
Coriolanus, who with his sword opened himself a way to reascend the throne of
his Ancestors, I became on the other side more and more suspected at the Court,
and it was already threatened I should be secured, as indeed I was, not long
after, as I have related to you already.

There were already five or six days past since there was a general
expectation in Rome of a divertisement which the Emperor was to have upon the
Tiber in one of the fairest nights of the Summer, to express the love he bore
Terentia, as it was reported, where by the means of certain artificial fires of
the invention of the Greeks there was made, in above a hundred several figures,
a new day upon the Tiber, wherein, because it is not of it self broad enough
for such a kind of divertisement, the Emperor has caused a new channel to be
made below the City, which is six times broader and deeper than the ordinary
current: so that with that light multiplied by that of a thousand torches,
disposed along the banks on both sides, there was seen a little sea-sight,
wherein a great number of small boats, made after the manner of men of war, and
all covered over with artificial fires, crossing and engaging one the other,
according to the order agreed on before, entertained the Spectators with one of
the most delightful sights in the World. The pleasure of the eye was seconded
by that which was provided for the ear by the sound of thousands of war
instruments, which raised an echo from the banks of the River for above a
hundred Stadia about, and which instead of a confused noise, made an harmonious
sound with much art, which, smiting the ear, inspired the most vigilant with a
certain joy, and raised up the spirits of the most dull. And whereas the boats
that are up and down the Tiber are very little, especially in the ordinary
channel, and that there was requisite a vast number of them to receave those
persons that would participate of the divertisement, people were forced to
divide themselves into small parties, and for the most part there went but five
or six persons in every boat. This was it that gave occasion and birth to a
thousand designs of gallantry, and obliged the young Romans to prepare boats
for the Ladies they were servants to, the most sumptuous could be made for the
time. Tiberius had provided for me a very magnificent one, and Archelaus
another for Antonia, with abundance of entreaties that she would vouchsafe to
accept of it; but we, having no inclination to engage our selves into the
company of such persons, had resolved-before hand to take a boat for Antonia,
Martia, and some others of our own sex, under the conduct of Ptolomey, who had
taken that charge upon him, and should have waited upon us.

But while we were hot upon this resolution, comes a person of a goodly
presence to speak with Antonia, and to acquai^t her that the Empress had
provided a boat for her, and such of her Friends as she should be pleased to
take along with her, and had sent him to conduct them to it, and to take care
for all things requisite, during the time of that nights divertisement. Thought
Antonia knew not that Officer of the Empresse's, yet thought she that she could
not with civility refuse what was proffered, and knowing her to be naturally
imperious, she was the more afraid it might displease her, if she made any
difficulty to accept of it. Whereupon turning toward me, as it were, to ask my
advice, and perceiving my comply ance with her intentions, she returned the man
an answer, to this effect, That the Empress did her too great an honor, but
that since it was her pleasure so to dispose of her, she received that favor
with the same respects which she ought to have for all those that proceeded
from her goodness; at which words Martia and Ptolomey coming into the room,
and having confirmed her in that resolution, desired to be of our company, and
we took also along Sulpicia and Hortensia, who were come to give us a visit.
All the rest of the house had disposed of themselves as they thought fit;
Marcellus had prepared a boat for Julia, and waited on her; Domitius had done
the like for Agrippina, and Agrippa for Marcella. Octavia stirred not out of
her Chamber, where I would have gladly kept her company, had she given me leave
to do it. We went along with that Officer down to the river side through the
Garden, and at the door the boat waited for us, which we got into without being
able to take notice of the suptuousnesse of it, by reason of the obscurity of
the place, which was not yet enlightened. But we were scarce got in, ere the
torches were all lighted of an insant, insomuch that we were not a little
surprised as well at the suddenness of the light, as the objects that
presented themselves to our sight, which certainly were the most delightful
that can be imagined.

The boat was in the form of a little Galley compassed about by a row of
Pilasters, which seemed to be of gold, but was indeed of wood guilt; without
which hung out a hundred arms guilt as the row of Pilasters, which sustained a
hundred great torches of virgin wax, whereby the darkness of the night was
removed to the distance of many stadia. The oars seemed to be of gold
proportionably to all the rest, and the Rowers were twelve little Cupids
winged, armed with arrows and quiver, and covered with cloth of gold in those
parts of their bodies where it was not requisite they should be naked. At the
extremity of the stern grew up a golden tree, of the height of an ordinary
mast, having at the top the form of a Scuttle, compassed about by a row of
golden Pilasters and twelve arms proportionable to those be low, wherein were
tw, lve torches, and in the midst of all that sight was a Heart hanginge down,
which seemed to be all on fire, and out of which, by some strange artifice
there visibly issued flames ascending up toward the stars, and made more light
than all the torches. In the distances which were between the torches were hung
up twelve Streamers, which were tossed up and down by the flames, and the smoke a
thousand several ways, and in which by reason of the greatness of the light,
there might be distinctly seen double A. A's, with other Characters, expressing
several ways the word ANTONIA. The same Letters, and the same Characters were
disposed up and down all over the boat, as also upon the Pilasters, the oars
and the mast, and it was so lightsome every where, that the least things could
not be more distinctly discerned than they were at that time.

But if we were so much surprised by what we were entertained with, on the
outside of the boat, we could not but be so much the more, when we were brought
into the chamber that was within it, where we had no sooner set foot, but our
sight was dazzled with the luster of the gold and other embelishments, wherewith
it sparkled again. Where ever there was any gold to be bestowed, it was with
the greatest profusion imaginable; and where there was any necessity to
heighten the richness of the matter, by the perfection of art, all was done
with admirable dexterity, but with this every where observable, that the
Characters of ANTONIA were scattered up and down all places. The ground work
and the seeling had the same, and the hangings, the chaires and the cushions
were of sky-colored Velvet, intermingled with flames of gold in embrodery, as
also burning Hearts, Characters of Antonia, and the first letters of her name.
This little Chamber was admirably enlightened, and perfumed with the most
delightful sents that Arabia could afford: and what was yet a greater
convenience, (which was, that we might without stirring out of the Chamber,
participate of that nights divertisement, and might be seen by all those that
were upon the Tiber) that part of it which was covered by the hangings, was
only of glass, so that as soon as those, which were made curtain-wise for
that purpose, were drawn, the river lay open to our sights of all sides, the
Chamber it self was visible to all that were in the other boats, and the light
that was scattered by so vast a number of torches as were disposed about our
Galley, and which enlightened the Chamber falling upon the glass, as well
without as within, made such a fire on the river, as found light for all the
other boats, and seized with astonishment all those that saw it.

You are not I believe, Sister, much in doubt whether we were much surprised or
not, when we found our selves in that little enchanted vessel, and you would be
soon persuaded that we had been deceaved, and that it was not to the Empress
that we were obliged for that magnificent lodging. Antonia looked on me, not
knowing what to think of those things, and I could easily perceave in her
countenance that she was to seek as to all resolution, and that she was vexed to
the heart at the trick had been put upon her. She looked all about for that
Officer of Livia, but he was vanished as soon they were gotten into the boat,
so that there was only the Cupids that rowed, left for her to wreak her
indignation upon.

In the mean time, which way soever she looked, she met with her own Characters
and the Letters of her name scattered up and down amongst the burning hearts,
and what she was most of all troubled at, was, that the very same Characters
were exposed in the streamers at the topmast, fluttering as it were amidst the
flames of that burning Heart, and, by reason of the great light whereby they
were encompassed, were visible to all that were upon the River. The vexation it
was to her to see her self engaged with that passion which she had so much
aversion for, had put her out of all patience, if Ptolomey, Martia, and my self
had not laughed her into a good humor, and told her, that if the same thing
had happened to us, we had entertained the adventure with abundance of
enjoyment. By this means did we make a shift to dispel the clouds of her
melancholy, and disturbance, and considered at leisure all those rarities which
we could not have discerned at first sight.

But this was not our employment alone, for this great fire, and that admirable
object which it discovered, had hardly appeared on the waves of Tiber, but all
the boats left the places they had taken up, to come nearer to that which they
wondered at so much at a distance. The Torches, the Heart, the Streamers which
were, from the top of the mast, remarkable on all sides, immediately drew all
the World to it; insomuch that the Emperor himself, surprised at this sight as
well as others, caused his own boat to approach it, At first the report went
from one to another that it was Antonia's Galley, so that all coming as near as
they could to Antonia's Galley, there could hardly be any thing else heard on
the water, but Antonia's Galley, and the greatest part were resolved only to
follow it, not minding much the other divertisements, for which they were
assembled. The Emperor, Livia, Marcellus, Julia, Agrippa, and all the most
considerable persons having compassed it about not without astonishment,
Augustus asked who had bestowed that magnificent Galley on Antonia? To which
the Princess not knowing what to imagine could only say that she had received
it from the liberality of the Empress. Livia began to deny that she had made
her any such present, which the Emperor hearing, told her she needed not take
such pains to vindicate her self, and that it was apparent from all signs and
circumstances that that excess of gallantry and magnificence proceeded from
the invention and prodigality of some Lover. But while all these eminent
persons were assembled about the Galley, six of the Cupids, who were the
Rowers, coming into the Chamber, drew the hangings, and discovering through the
transparent walls thereof what was within the Chamber, filled all that were
present with a new astonishment, and all the places about with a new light,
which both near and at a distance was the most delightful thing that could be
seen.

I shall not trouble you with any further particulars of that nights
entertainment, the description I have already made thereof having been happily
too long, and therefore shall only tell you, that, when all had sufficiently
admired Antonia's Galley, and had spent a long time in talking of it, had
almost tired themselves in guessing at the Author of so sumptuous an
invention, and had celebrated this sight beyond those that were to succeed it,
they all advanced toward the place where they were to be entertained with the
seasight, and the artificial fires, doing our Galley the honor to follow it,
as it it had been the Leader of them, the lights of all the others being as
much darkened by ours, as the smaller stars are by the rays of that bright
torch whence we derive our day. I shall not give you any description of that
nights divertisements, which it must be confessed were not unworthy Caesar's
magnificence; but shall only tell you, that when all was over, and that it was
thought time for all to retire, Julia coming into our Galley, together with
Marcellus, Agrippina, Domitius, Marcella, and Agrippa, (for Tiberius, seeing
that I had refused the boat he had prepared for me, thought fit upon point of
resentment to continue still in Caesar's, and accordingly never came near us)
and having seated themselves about the Chamber upon chairs, the floor or planks
that were under them immediately opened, and we frightened at it, began to cry
out, for fear the boat should sinck, when there rises up from below a table
covered with as magnificent a collation as ever could have been served among
the Romans, not excepting the sumptuous entertainments of Lucullus; nay, such
it was, that Agrippa and Marcellus, who were not wont to wonder at great
things, were astonished at the magnificence and the neatness of it. In a word,
what ever came to Rome from foreign and remote Nations that were most rare and
exquisite was there, and that heightened admirably by art, but, what most
troubled Antonia, was, that what modes or forms soever the services were of, or
what figure soever they were disposed into, (wherein there had been more than
ordinary care taken) the Characters of Antonia were scattered up and down
amongst the burning Hearts, after the same manner as they had been all about
the vessel. This stirred up their curiosity afresh, to find out who this
servant of Antonia might be, insomuch that Marcellus having acquainted Agrippa
with what he had received from us, they sought and guessed a long time, but
after all could not fix on any person whom they could with any probability
affirm to be the man. But I shall trouble you with no more as to that, we made
an end of our Collation, we went away with the rest of the Company, and retired
with matter enough for discourse as to to that adventure, but what was most
pleasant of all, was, that, abating the trouble which Antonia conceaved
thereat, as we undressed our selves, she found another Letter in one of her
sleeves, though she thought she had made sufficient provision against any such
thing. I was hasty enough to read it, and found the words of it to be the these.

To the Princess ANTONIA.
YOu see then, fairest Princess, how much I am obliged to artifice, and how I
effect that by stratagem, which I should never compass by open hostility. You
have granted the Unknown Lover, what you had denied Kings that were professed
Lovers; and though he be obliged for this good Fortune to the name of Livia,
for which you have had so much respect, yet is he much more engaged for it to
his own industry, and the confidence he had to effect his design. You will
pardon me that I have entertained you in so poor a place, since I acknowledge I
cannot conceave any noble enough to receave you, and cannot wish you any other
then that Heart which you saw burning this day in the public sacrifice I have
made thereof to you. In a word, my Fortune, whatever it may be, has been
envyed this day by all that is great and eminent in the Empire, whence I derive
a certain hope that it will one day be envyed by all that shall think
themselves the most fortunate in the World.

I cannot, said I, having made an end of reading the letter, but acknowledge,
that this man, what ever he may be, is an extraordinary Gallant, a great wit,
and inexpressibly magnificent. I grant you all that, replied Antonia, but you
must anknowledge withal, that there is a certain spice of extravagance in his
design, and that all the pains he takes will amount to nothing. That I cannot
tell you, replied I, nay methinks I already perceave he has effected some part
of his intentions, for in that he has declared to you at the beginning, that
there is no other reason of his recourse to this artifice, then to induce you
to endure the name of Love, and to reconcile you to that passion, which you
avoid as a Monster, because you are not acquainted with it, you must needs
acknowledge that he has already prevailed with you, to endure, not only the
discourse, but all the expressions of it, much beyond what you had suffered in
all your life before, and, in a word, that you have held a greater
correspondence with love, since you first entertained the addresses of this one
Unknown Servant then you did upon those of all the rest put together. Ah
Sister, replies Antonia very roundly, what inclinations do I derive from what
you say to hate him the more, and yet how true is that which you have observed,
and I must with shame acknowledge it to be such! But if it be possible, I will
remedy it one way or other. What remedy can you think of, said I to her, while
you are kept in this ignorance? This man is happily of such a nature, that he
will not discover himself while he lives, and though we may very well from the
transcendency of his thoughts and attempts, infer the greatness of his birth,
yet may it not possibly be such, as may furnish him with confidence enough to
declare himself. Since we are fallen into this discourse, Sister, says
Antonia, I am to acquaint you, that not many days since I found, in one of my
Gloves, another Letter which I purposely forbore to show you by reason of some
discontent that you were in that day concerning Tiberius; but kept it
nevertheless, that it might be communicated to you, for you know that I mind
them only in order to your diversion. No, said I to her smiling, it is because
you would have me no further acquainted with your secrets; at which words
perceaving she had found the Letter, I took it from her, and read out of it
these words.

To the Princess ANTONIA.
THough my name ought to be concealed from my Princess, till such time as she
has pardoned me the injury I have done her, to prevent all suspicions that may
be conceaved against an unknown person, yet is it lawful for me to let her know
(and I ought to do it in order to my justification, though it may be with some
prejudice to my modesty and reservednesse) that my person is not disliked by
those whom I have addred my self to, that I am not without some esteem, or
without some name in the World, and that my birth and fortune are such, as
whence I may well derive an encouragement to serve her. In fine, my love is
that which she might most disapprove in me, after the protestations she has
made her self, that the person was not hateful; and from this defect it is that
I hope for greater advantages then I can expect from either birth or fortunes.

This letter furnished us with more matter of discourse and imagination then
all the rest; but at last, having done all we could, we resolved not to trouble
our selves any further, and to expect with patience what might be the
consequences of that adventure. Ptolomey, to whom I had given one of the
letters, had made it his business to enquire all about, whether there were any
such hand among those persons of. quality, and never could meet with any that
came near it, Marcellus had done the like, but to as little purpose. All that
passed before had made no great noise, but the Galley occasioned abundance of
discourse, insomuch that for many days after, the talk of all Companies was of
the magnificent Galley of Antonia. The King of Cappadocia taking occasion to
make a modest complaint to her upon her refusal of the boat which he had
provided for her, told her she had very much reason to slight that, when she
expected another that was so magnificent. But Antonia satisfied him as much as
lay in her power, telling him that it was not for its sumptuousness that she
had preferred that Galley before his boat, nor yet out of any other
consideration, then that it had been proffered her in the Empresse's name, from
whom she neither could nor ought to have refused it. Archelaus, a Prince of a
disposition easy to be pleased, was satisfied with that answer; but could do
no less withal then conceave abundance of jealousy against that Unknown
Lover, whose presents were preferred before his, and resolved to do all that
lay in his power to discover him. Mithridates was as earnest in the same design
as the other, and though he had been slighted by Antonia in such manner, that,
notwithstanding his great confidence, he durst hardly open his lips before her,
to entertain her with any thing of his love, after the discovery he had once
made to her thereof; yet was not his passion quite smothered, nor his jealousy
inferior to that of Archelaus. Being therefore both unfortunate, and their
loves encouraged by little hope, jealousy had not produced in them its
ordinary effect amongst Rivals, and had left in them friendship enough to visit
one the other, and to communicate part of what they thought one to another; so
that having mutually acquainted one another with the desires they had to
discover who that Unknown Lover might be, who had made such signal
demonstrations of his gallantry toward Antonia, they resolved to join their
endeavors to that purpose, and not to leave any thing unattempted to find out
the truth.

Many days past ere any one came wherein they could discover any thing, though
they had their spies in all places, and oftentimes took occasion to walk
themselves in the night about Octavia's Palace, out of some hopes they might
meet with him, not doubting but that he might have some haunt thereabouts,
especially at the time that he was wont to entertain her with serenades, which
he had done several times. At last, after abundance of fruitless enquiry,
fortune would needs have it, that, one of those nights wherein they were both
together on horseback, without any other company then that of certain slaves,
who were afoot, coming into the street into which our Chamber looked, they
heard the sound of certain instruments and voices, making an excellent consort
almost under our window. They made no question but they had met with what they
sought after, as knowing that Tiberius had given over entertaining me with
serenades, that since the departure of Coriolanus, there was not any person in
Rome that had discovered any inclinations for me, and that the lodgings of
Agrippina, Marcella and Martia, were in another part of the Palace at a good
distance from that; besides that they also knew that the Unknown Lover had
given diverse others before, and that, having not the liberty to express
himself as others did, he took occasion to discover his intentions by
demonstrations of gallantry of that nature.

The two amorous Princes, not doubting but that they were in the right,
resolved not to let slip the opportunity they now had to be informed of what
they were so desirous to know, and to attempt any thing rather then not to
effect their design. They caused no torches to be brought with them, not only
out of a desire to avoid being discovered, but indeed that it was but too light
for their design, and that the Moon being then in her full, anything in the
streets was easily discernable. Being thus light, they were no sooner come into
our stree^, but they perceave a man on horseback, who leaving the place where
he was as soon as they came in sight, went to the music, and bid them give
over and disperse themselves as soon as they could. From this action the two
Princes immediately inferred that it must infallibly be the Unknown Lover; and
being absolutely resolved to make all the advantages they could of that
accident, they came on further into the street, and passed under our windows,
where they could neither hear nor find any body. They made a little halt to
listen, and, whereas the man they had seen on horseback could not conceal
himself as they could that were a foot, and that the horse must needs make a
great noise going upon the stones, they could easily both hear and see him at a
certain distance before, endeavoring what he could to get away. They on the
other side as carefully pursued him, and passed through many streets, following
him still by the noise, and seeing him before them. The Unknown, perceaving
their resolution to follow him, put on somewhat faster, and made toward the
most solitary streets, so to get out of their sight: but that stood him in no
stead, for they followed him every where, with so much obstinacy, that they
gave him at last some ground to imagine, that it would be a hard matter for him
to get off. At length, having forced him into a street, at the other end
whereof he saw several torches and Chariots that might hinder his further
passage, he made a stand, and, turning toward those that pursued him, took one
side of the street, as it were to give them the way. But they rid up to him,
and Mithridates, opposing the design he had to make an escape, Do not hope,
said he to him, to get hence, or to avoid us, if thou do not discover thy
self; and therefore tell us who thou art, if thou would have the passage free
to be gone.

The Unknown person retreated some few paces at this action of Mithridates, and
having reflected a little on what he had to do, he set spurs to his horse, and
quick as lighting fell in between the two Princes, who were very near one the
other, and rushing on Mithridates, who was on his left hand, with all the
violence he could both of himself and his horse, (which was one of the best in
the World) and at the same time as he passed by, laying hold with his right
hand on Archelaus's bridle, he, with the shock of his horse, overthrew
Mithridates horse and man to the ground, and with that he gave Archelaus's at
the same time, made him stand upright, in such manner, that the Prince falling
backwards, and holding still fast by the bridle, overturned the horse upon
himself.

Their fall proved shrewd enough, and their condition such, that they found it
no small difficulty to get up again, especially seeing that they were not
attended by any, and that the slaves they had brought with them, being afoot,
had lost them in the several turnings they had made. At last, they made a shift
to rise, not a little bruised, and, going with some difficulty, approached one
another with no small confusion. For, all considered, they were not so much
troubled at the fall they had received, or the hurt occasioned thereby, as that
they had been so treated by a single person, and one they had forced to that
action by their own unsatisfied pursuit. They stood a while looking one upon
the other, as not being able to find out terms fit to express what their
hearts were burdened with; but at length, Mithridates, as being the most eager
and impatient, was the first that spoke, and expressed the resentment he had of
that adventure in words full of fire, and visible demonstrations of his fury.
Archelaus endured that unfortunate encounter with more moderation, and told
Mithridates that there was no more happened to them then what they had
deserved, and that ordinarily there was no other satisfaction to be given to
curiosities that were so near a kin to indiscretion.

At last they with much ado got up on horseback, and returned to their
lodgings, where having gotten into their beds, they were forced to keep them
for some days. Mithridates, for his part, extremely troubled at the adventure,
was desirous to conceal it; but Archelaus, being a person more inclined to
sincerity and freedom, and whose proceedings, in the affection he bore to
Antonia, were more clear, made no difficulty to acquaint all those that came to
visit him with the truth of the business, so that the very next day, it was
generally known, and was become the subject of all men's talk. We soon
understood it from Tiberius and Ptolomey, and the perpetual discourses, which
all entertained Antonia with about it, added very much to the disquiet she was
in before. But what troubled Mithridates more then all the rest, was a Letter
that was brought to Archelaus, and which Archelaus sent him, as soon as he had
perused it himself, as having been directed to both, whereof the words were
these.

TO KING ARCHELAUS AND PRINCE MITHRIDATES.
I Am much troubled at the small misfortune that has befallen you, though, out
of a desire of your own satisfaction you were your selves the occasions of it;
and since I am no enemy of yours, though I have done some hurt, I should have
wished your curiosity a slighter punishment, had you left it to my choice. You
may hence learn to beware how you hereafter pursue, with so much violence,
those that would avoid you, and remember that you are to make a bridge of gold
for a retreating enemy. If you are chargeable with no crime but curiosity,
disburthen your selves of it, as being a vice whereof you will find the
inconveniences to be far greater than the advantages; but if you are withal
guilty of jealousy, learn, that jealousy is a self-disturbing passion,
whereof the effects are ever dangerous, and elude the expectation. Besides it
is not much for your reputation to be jealous of a person that is unknown to
you; and did you know me, you would happily find, that I am too much below you to
do you any prejudice. In a word, whatever I may be, assure your selves I wish
you no other hurt then that you may see me more fortunate than your selves in
the service of ANTONIA, and this declaration of mine considered, I shall
entreat you not to take it amiss, if you see me among those that come to visit
you.

This Letter had been delivered to one of Archelaus's Officers, by a man that
as soon as he had done, was vanished, and could not be seen after, as having
gone his ways without being observed by any one, so that the two Princes were
still in the same ignorance they were in before. They were both very much
netled at it, though in a different measure, according to their several
dispositions, and if Archelaus was more moderate than Mithridates, yet was he
not less moved at the satirical style of his Rival. The last words of the
Letter were those that troubled them most, and they thought that fantastic
circumstance of their adventure the most indigestible of any, that among their
Friends that came daily to give them their visits, they were to expect him that
had put them into the condition they were in, and who happily might prove him,
they thought the most endeared, and could the least suspect. This reflection
made them look on all that came to see them with a certain distrust, and taking
it for granted that their Rival was of that number, they sought him among them
without any distinction, and that possibly sometimes where they were the most
unlikely to find him. They fell into discourse with all those that came to them
upon that accident, and observed their countenances while they talked to see
what inferences they might draw thence, but all proved ineffectual. For
Archelaus and Mithridates being persons that for their rank, their virtue, and
the respects which the Emperor had for them, were very considerable among the
Romans, there were few among the Families that were most Illustrious that came
not to visit then, so that amidst so great a number, they made fruitless
inquisitions for that which in a lesser they might possibly have discovered.
Archelaus has told me since that he was never at such a loss in all his life,
and that, fearing he might see the face of his Rival in all those that came
near him, his thoughts were in such a distraction, that for some minutes he
could not make any return to their civilities: and for Mithridates, he looked
on all as enemies, though his resentment was directed to one single
indeterminate person. A few days recovered them of the hu^t they had by the
fall, and with the pain, they forgot part of the affliction they had conceaved
thereat, their thoughts being now taken up, (as were those of all the most
considerable persons about Rome) with preparations for the solemnity which was
celebrated every year on the day of Augustus's birth, on which the people were
divertised by all sorts of exercises and shows, and at which time, the more to
honor the Emperor, the Romans outvyed one another in point of gallantry and
magnificence toward (...) Ladies.

(...) the mean time Ptolomey, whose inclinations for Martia were not so
violent as to deprive him of the divertisements he was addicted to, among other
designs of pleasure, wherein he was every day engaged, went one day with a
many other persons to walk in the same Garden of Lucullus's, whereof I have
given you so large an account already. Having slipped away from his Company, to
enjoy more privately that of young Lentulus, whose humor, of all his friends,
he found the most consonant to his own, and desirous to discourse with him
about diverse things which they mutually communicated one to another, they
sought out the most solitary walks, as being resolved not to join their company
for some time. As they passed through one of the most remote from all company,
they perceaved, at a good distance from them, two women, who seemed to them to
be of a very goodly presence, and though they were alone, yet the
sumptuousness of their habit, which they could perceave glittering, easily
argued them to be persons of quality, who seeking solitude as they did, had
left their attendants in some other part of the garden. These women were coming
toward them, but as soon as they had eyed them at such a distance as it was
impossible for them to know one another, they turned aside into another walk,
and continued their solitude. These two young men, having a more than ordinary
curiosity, and whose thoughts were employed in their pleasures wherever they
were to be had, were suddenly possessed with certain desirs to know who those
two women might be, and their shunning of them adding to their
inquisitivenesse, they resolved to follow them, and, if possible, to know who
they were. To that end they went into the same walk where they were, and had
soon overtaken them, if the Ladies, having perceaved them, had not avoided
meeting with them, by turning aside, and passing over one of the Bridges, to
get into some of the little Isles that are made such by the Rivulets, and
wherein there are in several places green Arbours, made of the boughs of trees
twisted together so thick, that when the Sun darts down his most perpendicular
rays, they can hardly find a passage through them.

Having observed the way they intended to take, and satisfied of the design
they had to avoid all company, they bethought them that without an excess of
indiscretion, they could not be so troublesome as to follow them any longer.
But they on the other side having resolved, out of a curiosity natural to young
people, to have a sight of them, and that the goodlinesse of their persons had
very much advanced their desires of it, took notice of the way they took, with
a design to meet them by other turnings, which they were not unacquainted with,
which yet they might have done without any bodies perceaving what game they
were in chase of. Accordingly, having traced them through diverse trees that lay
between both, they at last saw them go in to one of the little Isles, and made
no question but they would go and rest themselves in one of the Arbours. They
thought it their be^ course to give them the time to do so, and so having taken
a good walk, they made toward the Isle by other ways, and passed over another
bridge then that by which the women had gone in. They were no sooner got in,
but coming behind one of the Arbours, on a certain side at which they could not
be discovered, they heard the voice of a woman singing in the Arbor, and,
making a halt, to give her the greater attention, they found her admirable, not
only as to the voice, but also as to the skill whereby it was not a little
heightened. They at first heard her at some distance, out of a fear of making
any noise to interrupt her; but afterward perceaving that they had much ado
to hear the words, and confident withal, that if the noise did not discover
them, they might go quite to the Arbor, without any danger of being seen, by
reason of the thickness of the branches and leaves which admitted not any
passage for the sight, they went as softly as possibly they could, and came to
the Arbor time enough to hear these words, which were the last that were sung.

He Is now (alus?) overcome that would not own,
But still defied Love's charms and power;
O may my eyes my hearts dear loss bemoane,
And let their tears its shame devour,
That slave-like yields to passion.
The Lady concluded her song with a deep sigh, and her companion, who had
hearkened to her with great attention, had no sooner perceaved that she had
made an end, but addressing her self to her, and speaking loud enough to be
distinctly heard by the two Evesdroppers that were without the Arbor; But is
it possible, said she to her, and must I believe it, my dearest Tullia, that,
that god, who, as, it is generally conceaved, directs and disposes of the amorous
passion, should take such extraordinary vengeance on you, and that, to punish
you for the cruelty which you sometimes exercised, not without unjustice, upon
a Prince that adored you, he should infuse into you a kindness, nay, if I may
presume to say it, inspire you with a love for a Prince that does not so much
as think on you, and one, that, though born of the same blood, yet, has not
any thing of those inclinations toward you which his Brother had?

These words were no sooner heard by Ptolomey and Lentulus, but they withal
perceaved, by the voice, that it was Emilia that spoke them, and could not be
ignorant, having heard her name pronounced, that they were addressed to Tullia.
They were both equally surprised thereat, and Lentulus looking on my Brother
with eyes, wherein were visible not only his astonishment, but all that he
would have said upon so unexpected an adventure, had they been in a place where
they might have discoursed without any fear of being discovered, grasped him by
the arm, as if by that action, and other gestures, he conjured him from making
any noise, and to hear attentively as well as himself, a discourse, wherein, if
he were not mistaken, he thought himself very much concerned. Ptolomey was
willing enough to comply with his desires, so that, continuing in the same
pusture they were in before, they heard Emilia reassuming the discourse; Speak,
my dearest Tullia, said she, and since I am the only person in the World whom
you think fit to entrust with a secret that is so near your heart, ease your
spirits as much as you can, by acquainting me with what you would conceal from
all but Emilia. We are now where all things favor our design, so far, that
the Sun it self, did he shine, could not participate of the secret that is
between us, and all things promote the solitude we seek. Do your self therefore
no further violence, my dearest friend, and open to me that heart, which being
heretofore hard and impenetrable to all love and compassion, does now submit to
the same passion against which it was armed with so much rigor.

While Emilia was speaking in this manner, Lentulus had found a way, by turning
the leaves aside, to make a little passage for his sight, and as good fortune
would have it, he could through that little place direct it just upon Tullia's
face. By this happy means had he the opportunity to see the face of that
Beauty, leaning on the shoulder of Emilia, bathed with certain tears, which
issuing out of her fair eyes, ran down along her cheeks, and dropped into her
bosom. With one of her arms she embraced Emilia, in the other hand she held a
hand-kerchief, wherewith she wiped the tears which she could not forbear^
hedding. Her hair was in a loose and negligent posture, and all her gestures
spoke a certain remissness, but all that negligence, all that languishing did
but heighten her ordinary beauty, insomuch that there seemed to Lentulus to be
much more luster and divinity in it then he had ever observed before.

He further perceived that after she had with some difficulty prevailed with
her self to comply with the solicitations of Emilia, assuming the discourse
with an action wherein were easily remarkable all the expressions of sadness
and confusion: Why will you oblige me, said she to her, to repeat to you what
my eyes, what my heart, what my mouth have already acquainted you with? Are you
so much in love with my grief, as to be delighted with the unhappy
demonstrations I give you of it? Or would you have me, out of a reflection upon
so many acknowledgements as I have made of my unhappiness, weakness and
cowardice, to dye for shame and confusion before you? If it must be so, my
dearest Emilia, I am content, and since you are, and ever shall be, while I
have a minute to breath, the only person to whom I shall discover my
misfortune, I am willing my most secret imaginations should pass out of my
heart into yours, and wish you may be moved with pity for the misery which my
inflexible destiny has forced me into. I say, my destiny, Emilia, for it is
that only that I can justly charge with all the misfortunes I am fallen into.
Do not imagine it any effect of the celestial vengeance upon me for the rigor
I expressed toward Julius Antonius. Though I have contributed very much to his
absence, and am charged as the occasion of it, yet have I not been troubled
with the least remorse for any deportment of mine toward him. Being Cicero's
Daughter, I could not upon the first addresses of his affection to me, be
obliged to entertain any such thing from him; and reflecting on the death of
Cecinna, whom, being to be my Husband within three days, he killed in my
sight, upon my account, I was certainly dispensed from whatever the expressions
of his love might require of me in his favor. And yet, the powers of heaven
are my witnesses that I never hated him, that I never wished him any ill
fortune, that I have acknowledged his great worth, and that I do at this day
confess, notwithstanding my present sentiments, that he is as great as to
point of merit, and as amiable as to his person as Ptolomey is himself. So that
there is no ground to imagine that the gods should inflict all this as a
punishment of my cruelty; but that it proceeds merely from my destiny which in
this emergency acts against me, as it has done through all the misfortunes
that have happened to our house.

But, my dearest Tullia, replied Emilia, since you would not be flattered in
your passion, may it not be represented to you, that the same reasons which you
alleged against the love and merits of Julius Antonius, before he became an
impardonable criminal by the death of Cecinna, might with much more ground be
urged against the affection which you have conceived for his Brother; since
that not being obliged to him for any the least demonstration of love, you
cannot but look on him as the Son of Anthony, which he is, you know, no less
then his Brother? I am, no question, replied Tullia, obliged by the same
reasons to do the one as the other, at least in some part, (for I might tell
you, did I stand upon my justification; that Ptolomey is not by his birth such
a criminal to us as his brother was, since that he is Son to Queen Cleopatra,
who contributed nothing to the death of Cicero, and not to Fulvia, who alone
engaged Anthony in that design, and exercised her cruelty upon the body of my
Father, even after death, by a many abominable indignities) but such was my
misfortune, that I could not make use of them, and I need not tell you, that in
those of this nature, the assistances of reason are not always infallible. You
may further argue, that I have hardly seen Ptolomey above once, that he is a
Prince younger than my self by five or six years, and a person that neither
does, nor happily will love me while he lives. All the answer I have to make to
these objections, is, That my misfortunes are so much the more to be bemoaned,
and that the rather, out of a consideration that I have not contributed any
thing thereto my self, and have endured this violence to tyrannize over my
heart, without the least compliance of my will. Pity me then, if you please,
Emilia, and charge me not with an offense which I see no reason I should take
upon me. It Is not in the power of either Virtue, or the Study of Philosophy to
make us incapable of passions, but only teach us how to struggle with them;
and if they have not been able to make good the little garrison of my heart
against the assaults of that which now disturbs my quiet, they will so weaken
it, as that it shall not produce therein any effects that may stain my
reputation at the present, or my memory hereafter. I have been able to look on
the Son of Anthony, but it seems under an unhappy constellation which made me
indeed but too sensible of what I thought amiable in his person: I have been
able to preserve the remembrance of it too dearly for my own quiet; I cannot
think of him without tenderness, I can speak of him with delight, I can
communicate my sufferings to you, I can sigh, and as you see, weep and bewail,
this sad exchange of my condition. But this, Emilia, is all that this
destructive passion can work in my soul, so that all the tempests it is able to
raise there, shall not eclipse those lights of wisdom, which it is not in the
power of any blindness to extinguish. I can pine away, yet conceal from all
the World, Emilia only excepted, the reason why I do so; and if I must endure,
even to death it self, I can easily do it, not only rather than open my lips,
but rather then become guilty of a wish that should any way stain my
reputation, or cast a blemish on the former part of my life.

But, when all is done, replies Emilia, to speak sincerely, could you not wish
that Ptolomey loved you, or can you, with all your Wisdom and Philosophy,
oppose such a wish? To this Tullia could not for some minutes make any positive
answer; but having a little after shaken off that suspense, and reassuming the
discourse with a certain blush, wherewith Lentulus could perceive her face all
covered. The desire of being loved, said she, by that which one loves, is a
thing so natural in us, that I durst not tell you, that I did not wish my self
loved by Ptolomey; but you are withal to assure your self, that this wish is
so innocent as not to injure my virtue: nay I must add thus much, that though
it should prove effectual, yet would not my condition be any thing the more
fortunate, and that Ptolomey himself, though he should love me, should not know
while he lived, that I ever had any affection for him. I should avoid him as an
enemy, though he were dearer to me than my own life, nay though it should cost
me this very life, I should keep, to the last gasp from the knowledge of all
the earth, those sentiments which have broke forth to that of all the Romans.

But what is then your meaning, replied Emilia, what course do you intend to
take, in order to your own quiet? To dye, answered the Daughter of Cicero, to
dye my dearest Emilia, if occasion require, and I am very much unknown to you,
if you imagine, that I think my life so considerable as not to sacrifice it to
preserve my reputation. But I shall do what lies in my power to struggle with
this enemy that has possessed himself of my heart, and if the strength and
assistances of heaven, which I daily implore, prove such as that I may not gain
the victory, you shall find, Emilia, whether I have not learned to dye, rather
then be guilty of faults which might make you blush for my sake. I have
acquainted you with the secret of my heart, because there has not been any
transaction there which you have not known; but did I imagine it should come to
the knowledge of any other person in the World besides your self, I should
think one hour a long time to survive the shame I should conceave thereat, and
you should bestow on my death those tears, which compassion obliges you to
shed, to accompany those which my unhappiness forces from me.

As she made an end of these words, she could keep in no longer those showers
of tears which fell down from her eyes in abundance, which yet hindered not, but
that Lentulus, who looked on her with attention, or rather with transportation,
thought her so beautiful in that condition, and was so much moved at her
discourses, the grace wherewith she delivered them, and the fortune that
obliged her thereto, that pity; which had by degrees taken place in his heart,
was of a sudden changed into a violent passion. For though he had seen Tullia
several times before, yet did it not raise in him any inclinations for her,
other than what her merit might raise in all that knew her; but now in this
little interval, wherein grief appeared so amiable in her countenance, he
became her absolutely devoted vassal, and in love with her after such a manner,
that he had not the least strength to oppose it, and was not able to hear the
reason which should have dissuaded him from loving a person whose affections
were otherwise disposed of, and one from whom, either upon occasion of that
discovery, or out of any consideration of her own humor, he was in all
probability never to expect any thing. In a word, love here knew no degrees,
but as soon as he could be said to love, he might be said to do it violently,
insomuch, that sympathizing with her in the affection wherein he saw her
involved, he participated thereof so far, that, when he turned toward Ptolomey,
my Brother perceived his eyes were red and big with tears. For his part, he had
not been at all moved, either at Tullia's words, or the discoveries of her
affection, whether it proceeded from the resentment he had in heart against
that Lady, or that naturally he had a soul not over-susceptible of love, or
that all the affection it was capable of, was already devoted to Marcia, a
Princess of excellent beauty, and one to whom he ought abundance of
obligations. He was already desirous to remove from that place, when Lentulus,
fearing they might be surprised, and perceaving by the discourse of Tullia,
that it would trouble her infinitely if she should discover that Ptolomey had
heard her, took him by the arm and carried him away. They went thence as softly
as they had come thither, and made so little noise, that they were not
perceaved or heard. They went out of the little Isle, and walked a good while
ere they spoke one to another. Ptolomey knew not what to say of that adventure,
so much was he surprised at the strangeness of it; and Lentulus, whose soul
was wounded by what he had seen, and whose spirits were in some disorder, by
reason of his newly-conceived passion, could not think of words whereby to
express himself, and was content only to look on Ptolomey, in whom he could
not perceive the least alteration upon that accident, and knew not, whether he
should, out of considerations of compassion, advise him to love Tullia, or out
of those of his own love and interest, entertain him with the sentiments he had
for her himself. At last, having taken some few turns; they were just falling
into some discourse, when coming to the end of a walk, that abutted upon that
wherein they were, they met full but with the two Ladies, who had left the
Arbor in a manner as soon as they had, and without the least fear that they
had been overheard by any one, had reassumed their walk. They were all very
much surprised at that meeting, and particularly Tullia, as being the least
prepared for it, and the most concerned in it. Her eyes were still red with
weeping, which Lentulus perceiving, and consequently the condition she was in,
could not look on her without a certain trouble and disturbance. They were so
near one another, that it was impossible to pass by without salutes, and
Lentulus, submitting to the ascendent which now began to govern him, could not
follow Ptolomey, who after a salute full of respect turned aside. Emilia, who
took notice of his carriage, not consulting at this time so much decorum, as
minding the friendship she had for Tullia, called him, and having obliged him
to turn back; What now, Ptolomey, said she to him, do you shun the Ladies? No
Madam, replied he, but it is not fit that the Son of Anthony should come near
the daughter of Cicero, Enmities, replied Emilia, should not be eternal, and I
shall not be friends with Tullia, if she make no distinction between the
children of Cleopatra, and those of Fulvia, who alone wrought all the
unhappiness of their house. Both the one and the other are equally guilty by
their birth, replies Ptolomey, nay though they were innocent enough to deserve
that Tullia should wish them no hurt, they cannot be so far such as to hope for
any of her conversation.

This fierce young man not guilty of that tenderness he was, in civility,
obliged to, would needs, out of an affected malice, repeat the same words to
Tullia, which she had sometimes said to his Brother, as he had heard it
related; so that after this last complement he went away, and would have no
further discourse with Emilia. In the mean time Tullia had not spoken at all,
though Lentulus had come to her, but had fastened her eyes on the ground, as
being in some doubt whether she should approve the proceeding of Emilia, whose
intention seemed good to her, but her action indiscreet enough. So that her
courage, and the affection she had for my Brother, raised no small distraction
within her; but when she heard those last words, and saw him go away with so
much disdain, her face was of a sudden deprived of all color, and grief and
vexation pressed upon her heart in such manner, that after she had, with some
precipitation, said to Emilia, that she was not well, and was not able to
stand, she fell into a swound in her arms. Lentulus, whose eye was but too much
upon her, ran to her; and though her misfortune touched him to the very heart,
yet was it some joy to him to have her in his arms, while Emilia sat down on
the grass, and with the assistance of Lentulus, laid Tullia by her, and took
her head upon her lap. Ptolomey, who had not had the time to go far thence,
turned about at the cry which Emilia gave, and seeing, though confusedly, what
they were doing, he suspected what the business might be, though, it is
possible, he might not think himself absolutely the cause of that accident.
However, though he was not subject to much love, yet would he not be awanting
in point of civility, and consequently as to that assistance which he thought
due to her sex; so that when, being come near, he saw her in a swound. Emilia
loosning her garments and Lentulus in such amazement, that he knew not what to
do; he ran to the next rivulet, and, having taken up some water in both his
hands, he brought it, and cast it on Tullia's face. Whereupon she immediately
opened her eyes, and that, time enough to see the action of Ptolomey, and to
perceave that it was from him that she received that assistance. I know not
whether the joy or the confusion she conceaved thereat were the greater; but
being well furnished, both as to courage and reservednesse, she betrayed not
her thoughts of it, and giving my Brother a look suitable to the different
passions she was then engaged with; I receave this kindness from you, said she
to him, in requital for what I did your Brother in the like condition; but it
is enough for an enemy, and you are too too tender of the concernments of your
house to do me any more.

With these words she turned gently toward Emilia, and spoke to her softly, to
entreat them to depart: to which end Emilia making signs to them, they went
their ways, but, after several manners; Ptolomey with such indifference, as if
he had not been any way concerned in the adventure, and Lentulus so moved, and
so distracted in his thoughts, that he hardly knew what he did. Being come some
paces thence, they met with the women that belonged to Emilia and Tullia, whom
their Mistresses had left behind, that they might walk alone, and having
acquainted them with the accident that had happened, they obliged them to go to
their Mistresses.

When they were gotten a good distance from that place, Ptolomey, who walked
after his ordinary posture of freedom and cheerfulness, observing the
disturbance Lentulus was in, as well by his silence as by the several
expressions thereof that were visible in his countenance; Is it possible, said
he to him, that you are so much troubled at this adventure as you seem to be?
But is it possible, replies Lentulus, that you can be so little as your face
and actions discover you to be? I assure you for my part, says Ptolomey, that
I am not troubled a jot at it, and that I look on this adventure as if it had
happened to any other body. How, continued Lentulus, has neither what you have
heard from the mouth of Tullia, of the love she has for you, nor yet what you
have seen of the effects of your disdain on her spirit, raised no trouble or
alteration in you? Not a jot, replies Ptolomey, and besides the aversion I had
for that Lady, I am not much taken with what is bestowed on me upon such
occasions, if it has not cost me something before, so that I shall not make
any advantage of this adventure; and all that I shall do for Tullia that speaks
any thing of obligation, is, that I shall not divulge it, and that I do upon
the account of discretion and her sex. So that it seems, says Lentulus, you do
not love her, nor feel any inclination to do it? I do not only not love her
now, answers Ptolomey, but I protest to you, I never shall love her. If it be
so, replies Lentulus, I am some what less unhappy then I thought my self, that
I am fallen into a passion which I should have wrastled with while I lived, had
it been any way prejudicial to our friendship. And since you are the dearest of
my Friends, I shall make no difficulty to tell you, that being along with you
into this garden, as free as your self from any love I had for Tullia, I am now
fallen infinitely in love with her, to so high a degree, that it is impossible
your brother could be more.

These words made Ptolomey look on Lentulus somewhat amazedly, as if he could
hardly imagine his discourse to be serious: How, said he, is it possible,
Lentulus, that in so short a time, and by so strange an accident, you should
fall in love with Tullia's So deeply, replies Lentulus, that all the words I
can use are not able to express it, and I thought Tullia so beautiful in her
grief, and so amiable in her singing and discourse; that my soul is bestowed on
her without ever consulting my will; I say bestowed, and that in such a manner,
that I am not in the least hope ever to retrive it out of her power. I know I
put my self to strange extremities, and that attempting to serve a Lady,
prevented by a strong passion for you, and that one that has studied constancy
and resolution, such as Tullia is, I embarque for a voyage wherein I am sure to
meet with many storms; but when all is done, it is the pleasure of my destiny
it should be so, and it is not in my power to oppose it.

Lentulus went on with abundance of discourse to the same effect, which the
length of this relation obliges me to forbear repeating to you, though it put
Ptolomey into such an astonishment at the fantastic adventure, that he could
hardly imagine it to be real. He entreated him, since he was not resolved to
affect that Lady, never to speak ill of her, nor let the World know what he did
concerning her passion, which happily the little account and acknowledgement he
made thereof, might in time oblige her to forget. My Brother promised never to
speak of it while he lived to any one but to me, from whom he was not able to
conceal any thing, and engaged for me that I should not suffer that secret to
take any further air. Accordingly, he failed not to come that very night, to
give me an account of all that happened to him, conjuring me to secrecy, and I
could not but be amazed as well at his relation of the love of Tullia, as that
of Lentulus, whose misfortune I much bemoaned, because he was a person of a
most illustrious birth, and very recommendable among the Romans for his many
excellent endowments. I had also some compassion for Tullia, though I had no
reason to love her, and I blamed Ptolomey for the inflexibility of his heart;
but having great respects for Martia, and looking on that alliance as most
advantageous for my Brother and all our house, I was very glad not to see him
engaged in any other affections that might have diverted him from her. He on
the other side visited her oftener than he had done before, continuing and
adding to the demonstrations of his affection; but with this remark, that he
did all things with greater indifference and freedom of spirit then she could
have desired, and in such manner, that his love hindered him not from minding
his ordinary divertisements, or discovering the aversion he had for marriage.
However, he provided against the day of Augustus's his birth, to do for her
what all the other young Romans did for the Ladies they served, and would come
into the exercises, with the Livery, and all other demonstrations of the
engagement he lay under to serve her. Lentulus did the like for Tullia, but he
understood that she was not well, and was not likely to be present at the
Solemnity. You may some other time have an account of what has past in the
loves of Lentulus and Tullia, possibly not unworthy your attention; but besides
that there is not much come to my knowledge, they are not the subject of my
present discourse, and my relation is so long without it, that I doubt not but
you will excuse me, if I say not any thing thereof.

At length, the day destined for the celebration of the Solemnity, and the
honor of Augustus's birth being come the whole Court, all the Nobility, and
the people ran to the Sights. I shall say nothing to you of the duels fought by
the Gladiators, and the fighting of savage beasts, which were the
divertisements of the people for the morning. The rest of the day was spent in
things of greater magnificence, such as wherein the Roman Nobility discovered
their greatest pomp and gallantry; and yet I shall give you but a short
description of it, and that out of a necessity that lies upon me to make
mention thereof in my relation. There was no place within Rome able to contain
the vast number of people that were to be present at the shows, and that of the
persons that were to celebrate them. The Emperor therefore, had, without the
gates of the City, in a fair Plain upon the Tiber side, caused a vast tract of
ground to be railed in, having left two sides free for the people, which were
bordered with an Amphitheatre of several steps, on which an infinite number of
people might be disposed. He had caused to be raised over against the entrance
certain Scaffolds covered over with rich tapistry, for the Ladies, the Senate,
and such other persons as were destined for those places. On the fourth side
were disposed part of the Emperors Guard, whose employment it was to open the
railes at the entrance of the Chariots the horses and people that were to come
in, and all that side was wholly taken up by such as were requisite for that
office, to avoid all confusion and disturbance. The place was spacious enough
for the longest races of either horse or Chariots, and of such an extent, as it
was said, that it was sufficient for the encamping of an army.

The first sight was to be that of the Chariots, which was followed by
horse-races, and after that was a combat on horseback, between two parties with
edgelesse weapons, which the Romans call Troy, and they say was invented by
Ascanius, the Son of Aeneas, at his arrival into Italy. All the Chariots passed
one after another, took diverse turns about the place along the railes, and
after they had been seen by the Emperor, the Ladies, and the people, when the
signal of the races was given, they were all disposed according to the order
they had observed in coming in, at that end of the place which was opposite to
our Scaffold, in expectation of the last signal at which they were to set
forward. They had all four horses abreast, open before, with one only place
behind, for the Master of the Chariot, wherein he sat armed all over, having
on, a headpiece, the visour down, with a Buckler on his left arm, and two
Javelins in his right hand; and the Chariots, the slaves that followed them,
the clothes that covered the horses, and all the Equipage wore the Livery of
the Ladies, as far as they were known. Upon these occasions was it particularly
that the young Romans outvy'd one another to discover their inclinations; at
least those who had no design to keep them secret, and to that end was there a
great distance between the Chariots as they passed by, that people might the
better observe the attendance of every Chariot in particular, and that without
any confusion.

The first that appeared was that of Marcellus, all glittering with gold and
magnificent workmanship; his attendance was noble and full of pomp, and about
his person, and in all his Equipage he wore the Livery of Julia. That of
Tiberius came next, not inferior in point of magnificence to that of
Marcellus, with my characters and colors. That of Domitius followed him, with
those demonstrations which argued the affection he had for Agrippina. After
that came Archelaus with the colors of Antonia. Next came young Ptolomey, very
neat and gallant in his Equipage, wearing the colors of Martia. Prince Polemon
followed him with those of Marcella; and Mithridates, who came after him, made
no difficulty to have also those of Antonia. The next was Crassus, with a
Livery which none could guess whom it was for, and whence it was to be
inferred, that his intention was not to have it known. Then came Lentulus with
that of Tullia, and then Albinus, Aemilianus, Cinna, Cepio, and a many others
of the most Illustrious Roman, to the number of fifty, it being the Emperor's
pleasure there should be no more to avoid the confusion that might have ensued.
Though Agrippa was not of an age that made him incapable of these exercises,
yet would not the Emperor have him engaged therein, but took him and Mecaen^s
for company's sake, to judge of the races, and to order the distribution of the
prizes. And though all the Masters of Chariots had the visours of their
headpieces down, and were in such a posture* as if they had been ready to
fight, yet were they known as they passed by, as well by the persons that were
of their attendance, as by diverse other marks, so that it was in us to judge of
the magnificence and graceful carriage of them, which we did, and gave our
opinions thereof very freely.

This great number of Chariots, (which certainly was the noblest sight in the
World) had gone round about the place, and it was thought there would not come
any more, when the Lists being opened again, the place echoed with the noise of
twelve Trumpets which appeared at the entrance, and began to match a good
distance after the last of the Chariots that had passed before. They were
mounted on twelve excellent horses, and their long coats were of a sky-colored
stuff, which was the color of Antonia, all covered over with enflamed hearts,
and the characters of Antonia, in embroidery of gold; but the noblest and most
sumptuous embroidery that ever had been seen at Rome. The flags which hung at
their Trumpets were full of the same characters. After the Trumpets, came one
after another twenty horses, led every one by two slaves, who held them in on
both sides by two scarfes of the color and embrodery before mentioned. The
horses were of the best kind of Gennets, and the proudest in their paces that
ever were seen; they had in their heads, which they lifted up with a certain
pride, great pennaches of the aforesaid color, and their maines and tails
tied up with ribands of gold and sky color. The bits of their bridles were
enameled with gold, and embellished with precious stones, and they were
covered with sky colored clothes hanging down to the ground, and enriched with
the same embroidery of gold, and the same characters of Antonia. The clothes of
the slaves were of the same stuff, and had the same trimming. After these came
fifty others clothed after the same manner, without any difference, and went
on both sides the chariot which immediately followed the twenty horses.

The Chariot had in it four horses white as the very snow, done with ribands,
and harnessed as the former. It seemed to be all of gold, mixed with sky-colour
at certain distances, with double A. A's, burning hearts, darts, chains, and
other emblems of love and servitude. The two sides had the form of two Lions,
that seemed to have sumitted to the yoke, upheld the seat, and served for a
leaning place on both sides. And behind there was a Cupid made of the height of
a man, whereof the figure was somewhat greater than ordinary, which resting
only on one foot behind, stretched himself out as it were to fly, and, having
the wings spread, covered therewith the person that was in the seat, and seemed
to have been put there purposely against the injuries of the weather, and as it
were a covering for the Chariot. The sculpture of that Cupid was admirable, his
face as handsome as the best Gravers could have made it, and his wings
glittering with gold and precious stones, which shined in several places. In
one hand he carried a heart upon the top of one of his arrows, and in the other
a little flag of sky-colored silk, wherein between two chains, and other marks
of slavery, might be seen these verses written in letters of gold: I like a
captive pine and sigh;
Yet place a glory in my woes,
I Would rather own this slavery
Then of the universe dispose.


All the rest of the Chariot was open, so that it was easy to see how the
person was accommodated that was within it. He had on a cuirats and a
headpiece of gold, enameled with sky-colour, and enriched, in several places
with stones of a great value. The headpiece was covered over with a many
plumes of blew feathers, which both backwards and on both sides hung down to
his Shoulders. But in the enamel, as well of the headpiece as the cuirats,
might be observed every where the characters of Antonia; and the sleeves and
the lower part of his under-garment, which came down somewhat below his knee,
being interwomen with gold and blew silk, were full of the same characters,
with an excellent embroidery of gold, and his buskins interlaced with gold and
blew, adorned with rich buckles and precious stones. Nor was there any want of
them, about the sword he had by his side. He had in his right hand two
Javelins, with the points guilt with gold, and in the left, a Buckler of the
same metal, with the edges enamelled suitably to the rest of his Arms, and
enriched in the middle with the picture of the fair Antonia, done so like her,
that it was immediately concluded to be the work of the most excellent Painters
of Italy.

I thought it not amiss to give you this short description of him, for that
indeed we spent more time in looking upon him, then we had done on all else
that was to be seen, though it must needs be acknowledged there was no want of
state or magnificence any where. But in regard that all the rest were known,
and that there was no means to discover this last, either by the persons of his
attendance, or by any other mark, he drew after him, not only the astonishment
and acclamations of the people, but also the curiosity of all others. And yet
though it was impossible to know either his face or name, yet from some other
circumstances, that were public and remarkable enough, it was generally
concluded that it could be no other then the unknown servant of Antonia, who
some days before had bestowed on her the magnificent Galley, who had
overthrown Archelaus and Mithridates, and of whom, under the name of the
Unknown Lover there were such strange reports spread up and down Rome and
elsewhere. It immediately ran from mouth to mouth among the Spectators, and all
the discourse was concerning Antonia's servant, insomuch that Archelaus and
Mithridates perceaving it, conceaved not a little trouble and envy thereat, and
could not for a certain time recover themselves out of that disturbance of
thoughts which that sight had caused in them.

Antonia and my self were not far from the Emperor, so that, over-hearing all
the discourse which fell not only from Caesar, but all those that were about
him, upon occasion of this accident, there spread such a redness over
Antonia's face, as could not be gotten off for almost all that day. And though
I was not thereupon thrifty of my discourse to her, and earnestly entreated her
to communicate her thoughts to me upon that emergency, yet was it a long time
ere she would as much as open her mouth to make me any answer. Sister, said I
to her, was it not shrewaly guessed of me some days since, that your unknown
servant was a person admirable as to point of invention and magnificence, and
do you not find that in whatever he undertakes, he eclipses all that is done by
others? In troth, I cannot forbear speaking for him, and to tell you, that I
have conceived an extraordinary good opinion of him. Antonia was in some
uncertainty, whether she should discover her displeasure at the adventure, or
make her diversion of it as others did: but what thoughts soever her
disturbance might inspire her with, yet could she not but entertain in her soul
a certain joy at the advantages of a person that loved her, though he did it
contrary to her intentions, and the reputation he acquired, whether she would
or no, for his gallantry and magnificence.

But not long after, she had much more reason, for in fine, Sister, (not to
tire you with a relation of all that passed that day, which it were impossible
to relate to you fully) I shall think it enough to tell you, that this unknown
person having provided all things for that day, with all the care and prudence
imaginable, and furnished himself with the best and fleetest horses that could
be had, carried away all the prizes, as well for the horse-races as the
Chariots, leaving behind him at a distance all that ran with him, and in that
combat on horseback called Troy, he behaved himself with so much address and
vigor, and did all things with such an admirable grace, that he alone drew
after him the general acclamations of the Spectators. In fine, he was by the
Emperor himself declared Conqueror, how partial soever he might be for
Marcellus, and received the prizes, which he came and laid at the feet of
Antonia, bending the knee, and bowing to her with a submission that spoke him
her slave. Antonia blushing for shame and vexation, though happily she was not
much dissatisfied at the adventure, did, by the commandment of Octavia,
receive them, and immediately after, the Unknown Lover mounting one of the best
of his horses, rid him before us with such a grace, and seemed to us to be of
such a noble presence, and so well to become the bow of the saddle, that we
could not forbear admiring him. A while after, he went in among the rest, and,
taking his time, and making his advantage of the disorder and confusion they
were in, he went out of the Lists, and got away with as much speed as could be.
His Chariot, and Equipage were gone long before, for he had given order, that
as soon as the Chariot-races were over, all should withdraw, while the people
were taken up with the other exercises, wherein he was to make use of no more
then the horse he rode on.

By this precaution had he taken a course, that those who were not concerned in
his affairs, should not follow the persons that were of his attendance in order
to discover him, as it might have been the design of diverse. But as he retired
himself, how circumspect soever he might be, he could not escape the eyes of
the jealous Mithridates, who fully satisfied it could be no other than the same
Rival that had cast him to the ground, took a resolution to follow him to the
worlds end, and never to leave him till he had discovered who he was, or that
the other had made him satisfaction for the injury he had received from him.
He went out of the lists soon after him, and perceiving he made all the speed
he could away, he followed him at a distance toward certain houses, whither he
saw he intended, and are distant from the City about fifty or sixty stadia.
Archelaus, perceiving that Mithridatts was gone, presently imagined the
occasion of his departure, and it being no less his concernment then the
others to be acquainted with his Rival, would needs follow him, and took his
course that way which he was told he had taken.

In the mean time Mithridates was gotten far enough before, and having observed
that his unknown Rival turned toward a little Wood on the left hand, he made
after him with all the speed he could, and reached it in a manner as soon as
the other. It was with no small difficulty that he overtook him, nor indeed had
he done it, had his Rival suspected any thing of his design; but ere he
perceived any such thing, he was gotten so near him, that all he could do was
to pull down the visour of his headpiece, which he had raised up to take a
little more air, and he did it time enough to prevent Mithridates from knowing
him. Having so done, he would have kept on his way, but Mithridates made a
shift to get before him through the trees, and opposing his passage; Hope not,
said he to him, to get away this time again, till I have known thee, and
possibly till thou have made me satisfaction for the many injuries thou have
done me. The Unknown Lover, troubled at this renconter, was in suspense for
some minutes what answer to make him; but at last, perceiving what extremity he
was reduced to, and thinking that, besides the care he should take to disguise
his voice, the headpiece would contribute so much thereto, as to make him
undiscernable by the other. Mithridates, said he to him, thou have little
reason to be so obstinate in pursuing a man that is not thy enemy, but may
become such through thy importunate persecution of him. If thou art my friend,
replies Mithridates, thou should not conceal thy self from me, and if thou
art not, I little fear thy displeasure, after the disgraces I am fallen into by
thy means.

As he uttered these words, he opposed his passage more than before, and held
up against him the point of a Javeline he had in his hand. The Unknown Lover
would have avoided fighting without discovering himself, but perceaving it
impossible to do it; Thou will happily have occasion to remember, said he to him,
what violence thou do force me to, and if thou receave any inconvenience
thereby, thou have no body to blame but thy self. With these words they charged
one another at the same time, and having broken their Javelins on their
Bucklers upon which they received them, they drew their swords, and many blows
were dealt on both sides. But my little experience in matter of Combats,
permits me not to give you all the particulars, and therefore shall only tell
you, that the Unknown Lover finding in one pass, Mithridates's horse in
somewhat an unsettled posture, ran his own abreast upon him, and so overturned
both him and his master to the ground.

The Unknown Lover thought himself freed by the fall of Mithridates, and would
accordingly have kept on his way, when there coming before him Archelaus; Stay,
cried he to him, having seen Mithridates fall, thou have done but half thy
work, unless thou conceive me less concerned to know thee then Mithridates.
This second stoppage put the Unknown Lover out of all patience, though he very
much esteemed the person of Archelaus, and seeing diverse others coming from the
City, he conceived he had but little time to loose, and accordingly without any
further consultation, he fell upon Archelaus, who answered him with blows as to
weight, not much inferior to those he dealt himself. They fought for a good
while on equal terms; but at last, the Unknown Lover perceiving the persons,
he had seen before, coming nearer and nearer, runs to Archelaus, and laying
hold of him, he put on his horse, which was one of the best in the World, to
force him out of the sadle, and so free himself by his fall, as he had done
before by that of Mithridates. And certainly, he put so much strength to it,
that he did what he desired in some part, and drew Archelaus out of the sadle
upon the crupper, whence he slipped down to the ground: but Archelaus, having,
as he fell, gotten hold of the other by the headpiece, held him with such
force, that he broke the chin-pieces of it, and taking it with him, his enemies
head was naked and disarmed. Upon which Marcellus, Ptolomey, Crassus, and
diverse others being come into the place, ran to the two Combatants, and in the
sight of all those persons, as also of Archelaus and Mithridates, who were
gotten up, the face of the unknown Lover was seen, and known to be that of
Drusus, the Son of Livia, and Brother to Tiberius.

The astonishment of the two Princes that had been worsted by him, of
Marcellus, Ptolomey and the rest, was not ordinary, when they found Drusus to
be the Unknown Lover of Antonia, who had served her, without discovering
himself, with so much gallantry and good-liking, and if Archelaus and
Mithridates were troubled that they had met with so powerful a Rival; they were
in some measure comforted as to their disgrace, because it happened by the
hands of a Prince, whose valor was known to all the World. Drusus was in a
little trouble and disorder to see himself discovered, as thinking he had not
come to that point he should have done ere he had been known; but perceiving
the misfortune to be incapable of any remedy, he generously resolved to endure
it, and turning toward Prence Marcellus and Ptolomey, who stood near him: Most
Illustrious Princes, said he to them, I crave your pardon for the surprise and
stratagems I have used toward the Princess your Sister, and the offense I
have committed against you by serving her without your knowledge. Had I thought
my self worthy that glory, I should not have had any recourse to artifice; but
how mean soever I may be as to point of merit, I cannot but hope from the
goodness of Prince Marcellus, for whose sake I cheerfully quitted all the
pretentions I had for Julia, that he will grant me, out of an excess of
favor, that which I durst not presume to desire of him, before I had in some
sort obliged him to love me, by the services it was in my thoughts to do him.
And from Prince Ptolomey, a person I have ever infinitely esteemed, I do
expect, he should not oppose me in the design I have absolutely to sacrifice my
whole life to the service of the Princess his Sister.

To this effect was the discourse of Drusus, which when he had done, he
expected the answer of the two Princes with that considence, which he might
well derive from the friendship they had expressed toward him for some time
before. It Is true, Drusus was a Prince of so great merit, that he was infinitely
esteemed by all that were of his acquaintance; and from the time that Marcellus
was reconciled with him after the duel they had fought for Julia, having
discovered his excellent endowments, as well in his conversation, as the
earnestness he observed in Drusus to purchase his affection, he had conceaved
more respects and friendship toward him than any other among the Romans, and
preferred no man before him in his inclinations, but only Coriolanus. On the
other side, Drusus's Fortunes were so considerable by reason of the authority
of Livia, and the interest his own worth had justly gained him with Caesar,
that neither Marcellus, nor Ptolomey, nor any of the other Friends of Antonia
could wish her a match that were more advantageous. They accordingly studied
not long for the answer they were to make him, and Marcellus speaking for both,
out of a confidence that what he said should be confirmed: Prince, said he to
Drusus, we have some reason to be displeased with you; but it is only for the
little relyance you have had in our friendship, and the esteem we have for you.
But that you shall hear more of another time; and therefore in the interim,
since you have thought Antonia worthy your affections, I shall tell you that I
think her happy, and very much honored in the inclinations you have for her;
that I question not but that Caesar, Octavia, Alexander, wherever he may be,
and Ptolomey are of the same mind, and that, for my part, if in the design you
have upon her, you need the assistances of a Brother that has some power with
her, I proffer you all you can desire or expect from me, as being one that
endeavors nothing so much as the acquisition of your friendship, and next to
that, the continuance of it while he lives.

What Ptolomey said to Drusus, was to the same effect, whereat this Prince was
so much satisfied, that he could not express his joy without a certain
confusion. After he had discovered his resentments thereof to both, as much as
he possibly could, he comes to Archelaus and Mithridates, and made his excuses
to them, as to what was past, in the most obliging manner that could be. These
two Princes felt so much grief within, that they could not think of any
consolation, but not so much for the disgrace of their falls, as for that their
ill fortune had raised them so dreadful a Rival, and the words they had heard
from Marcellus and Ptolomey, from which, together with the confidence they were
in that Augustus and Octavia would declare for Drusus, they could not but infer
that the little hope which they had conceived in the course of their
affections, would come to nothing. But, however they were burdened with grief,
they received the civilities of Drusus as they ought, and on their side craved
his pardon for their indiscretion, and whatever they attempted against him,
while they knew him not.

I see, Sister, you are desirous I should contract this relation, since it is
indeed of an excessive length, and therefore, I shall only tell you, without
insisting too much on particulars, that, notwithstanding all the resistance
that Drusus made thereto, Marcellus and Ptolomey would needs have him,
immediately, and in that very posture presented to Antonia, and that Drusus
having opposed it for some time out of the fear he was in to displease her, at
last was prevailed with to come along with them, and followed them to the City,
and so to the Emperors Court, where all the most eminent persons about it were
assembled, and discoursing of the Unknown Lover of Antonia. They were yet
speaking of him when Marcellus comes into the room, leading in Drusus by the
hand; and it was before this Illustrious Assembly, that Marcellus, having
presented him to the Emperor, and Octavia, brought him to Antonia, and, having
discovered him to her for the Unknown Lover, who had given her such
gallant-like expressions of his love, and that in so extraordinary a manner,
entreated her to entertain him, as a Prince that had devoted himself to her
service, and whose inclinations for her were an honor to all their house. The
whole Assembly was nothing but applauses and acclamations at the sight and
discovery of Drusus; and being a person generally beloved, all were glad to
hear that it was he who had done such noble things for Antonia, and cried out
they were worthy one another, and that it was a couple the best matched of any
in the World. The Emperor conceived an extraordinary joy at it, Livia was well
pleased with the good choice her son had made, and the Emperor and she
together, joining with Marcellus, (having performed the first civility to
Octavia) addressed themselves to Antonia, entreating her to entertain Drusus
into her service, and give him leave, by open hostility, to take in that heart
which he would have surprised by stratagem.

Antonia, some what troubled at the adventure, found it some difficulty to
recover her self out of the disorder she was in; and though it be certain that
it was some joy to her to see the unknown Lover changed into Drusus, who was
the person of all the Romans, into whom she had most reason to wish him
changed, yet was she still vexed at the artifice he had used toward her, and
could not of a sudden overcome the resentment which was risen thereof in her
mind. However she had a command over her ordinary moderation, and, having
raised Drusus, who was on his knees before her, she only told him that there
was a consonancy between her will and those of the persons to whom her birth
had made her subject; and that, (I mean her moderation) she made use of not
only for that day, but was the same for a many that followed; insomuch that
Drusus has found it true, that all the demonstrations of love that may be have
no influence on her spirit, and amount to no more than the compliance she had
for the disposal of Octavia. He was at last received into her service with the
joy and acclamations of all, insomuch, that Antonia, having since had a greater
acquaintance with his excellent endowments (if she were incapable of Love) has
at least submitted to the commands laid on her by Octavia and Caesar in his
behalf, and has satisfied him, by expressions worthy her solid virtue, of the
esteem she has for him. And so it has continued ever since, by the happy
meeting of these two complyant dispositions, who are not subject to any
trouble, because not to the weakness of a many others, so that it is out of
all question that the Emperor will have them married at the same time that the
nuptials of Marcellus and Julia shall be solemnised.

Drusus has told us since how that he had heard from Mithridates's own mouth,
the discourse that had passed between him and Antonia, when they walked
together, upon which he grounded his first letter, as also what course he had
taken to conceal himself from all the World, as well that day that he bestowed
on her the magnificent Galley, as that of the public shows, before which,
some few days he had pretended affairs of consequence in the Country, because
there should be no notice taken of his absence, at an Assembly, wherein he
should in all likelihood be one of the first. Some few days after, Archelaus,
overcome with grief, went to ease himself of it in the war, whither he was
called to assist the King of the Medes, his kinsman, against the Parthians, and
wherein, as they say, he has gained abundance of reputation. Mithridates was
in the same posture, u^^aple of any consolation, though his love had not made
so much noise as the others: but to satisfy him in some sort, the Emperor
having the Crowns of Pontus and Comagenes, where there had happened very great
revolutions, to dispose of, bestowed that of Pontus on Polemon, and that of
Comagenes on Mithridates, and sent them to take possession thereof.

Ptolomey, according to his ordinary way of courtship, continued his addresses
to Marcia, that is, with little earnestness, and much esteem and respect, but
discovering little inclination to marriage. He never minded Tullia, who in
requital was very violently courted by Lentulus, but I shall not give you any
account of their loves, because they relate not much to the subject of my
discourse, though they may be said to be some consequences thereof. I have
already given you an account of all that happened to my self at that time, as
well as to the news I received of the infidelity of Coriolanus, the departure
of Marcellus and Tiberius, and the Emperors voyage, wherein we accompanied
him; so that you are fully acquainted with the affairs of our house; and the
better to satisfy and entertain you therewith, I think, and that truly, that
I have spoken more in three days, then I had done all my life before.

Thus did the fair Princess Cleopatra put a Period to her long relation, which
to do, she had done a more than ordinary violence to her disposition, and
Artemisa had heard her with an attention, which had suspended in her mind the
memory of her misfortunes.

The end of the Second Book.
HYMEN'S PRAELUDIA, Or, Loves Masterpiece.
PART IX. LIB. III.
ARGUMENT.
MEgacles discourses with the unknown person, whose life he had saved, about
the constancy and inconstancy of Fortune; Cleopatra and Artemisa, of the
fidelity and infidelity of Coriolanus. The King of Armenia visits Cleopatra
with a great deal of Courtship and Personated Affection. She, abhorring him
for his cruelties, and having resolved to be Coriolanus's, slights him, and
looks on his addresses as the pure effects of insinuation and sycophancy.
However he forbears force, because far from his own Kingdom, whither he would
make all the have he could, but is prevented by contrary winds. Zenodorus the
Pirate entertains Artaxus with the History of his Life. He marries Elisena, a
beautiful Lady of Armenia, and not long after grows jealous of her, through the
means of one Cleontes, a young man, with whom she was over-familiar. His
jealousy still increasing, Cleontes is by Elisena desired to depart the Court,
The day before his departure, he and Elisena taking their last leaves, in an
Arbor, are surprised by Zenodorus, who transported with rage and jealousy,
immediately kills Elisena in the midst of their embraces. Cleontes gets away,
but afterward hearing of the death of Elisena, (...) himself to Artoxus sword,
who (...) him through. As (...) dying (...) discovery^, his neck and breast,
and is found to be a Woman, (...) to Phraates King of the Parthians, to avoid
whose addresses she had disg^ised her self. Phrates, to revenge her death,
comes with an Army, and drives Zenodorus out of his Tetrarchy, which is
afterward begged of Augustus by Herod. Zenodorus having lost all, seizes some
few ships, and turns Pirate. He follews Piracy with great success for ten
years at last takes Candace, Queen of Aethiopia, whom he falls in loves with;
but she, firing his ships, and casting her self overboard, escapes. Loosing
her, he takes Elisa, sole Heiresse of the King of Parthia, but going ashore to
seek out Candace, he loses both Elisa and all his ships, has most of his men
killed, and is himself wounded. He is met with in a Country-mans house, under
the Surgeons hands, by Aristus, and by him brought, along with the men he had
left, to the King of Armenia.

WHile the two Princesses were thus engaged in discourse, Megacles. whole ear
was equally divided, between that of having them in safe custody, to obey the
commands laid upon him by his Master, and that of affording him the best
attendance he could, to satisfy in some sort his own inclinations, which were
ever directed to virtue, omitted nothing of what he thought might be expected
from him in order to either of these obligations. And whereas on the one side
it was some dissatisfaction to him to be employed to secure them, out of the
fear he was in to incense a Prince who was not wont to pardon any thing, so on
the other, he with no less joy laid hold on those occasions which presented
themselves, to discover unto them the repugnance which he struggled with to
displease them. Being therefore obliged not to part from the ship, he had sent
Aristus betimes in the morning to see what news he could learn of the King of
Armenia, and this man being returned, had brought him word, that the King would
infallibly come aboard the vessel that very day: and that though he were in
such a posture as topoint of health, that he could not well undertake such a
voyage without some danger, yet had he absolutely resolved to venture it, out
of the great desire he had to see Cleopatra, and the fear he was in of loosing
so noble a prize.

Megacles, having received this intelligence for certain, began to dispose all
things in the vessel in order to his entertainment; and having understood that
the Princesses were desirous to be alone, he, out of the great respect he had
for them, would not so much as come near their Chamber, and was content only to
give notice to one of the women that belonged to Cleopatra, that he desired
that notice might be sent him, when the Princesses were pleased that he should
wait upon them, and when they would have any thing brought to dinner. That
done, calling to mind the Unknown Person, whom the day before he had rescued
from the devouring waves, and of whom he had conceaved a marvailous good
opinion, he would needs give him a visit, and being come into the chamber,
where he had left him a bed, he found that he made a shift to get on his
clothes; but that afterward, being much troubled with the great quantity of
salt water he had drunk, he had been forced to cast himself again on the bed
they had assigned him, Megacles, as soon as he came in, caused a little window
to be see open to give a little more light to the chamber, and having by that
advantage of light made fresh observations of the good countenance and
hundsomeness of the Unknown, he was now much more surprised at him then the day
before, and could not look on him, but with a certain admiration. The other,
who with much ado knew him again, and reflected on the assistance he had
received from him, as also on the conversation they had had together, and the
more than ordinary pains and earnestness he had expressed in the saving of his
life, entertained him with abundance of kindness, and gave him some occasion
to see through the clouds of his melancholy, that though he had little love for
the good office had been done him, yet had he abundance of acknowledgment for
his good intentions. Add to that, that all his behavior, all his gesture, nay
indeed all things seemed to be so great, as if there had been in him a
conjunction of sweetness and modesty with a noble and majestic air, that,
notwithstanding all his ill fortune, Megacles felt in, himself abundance of
inclinations to respect him, as he would do the person of Artax^s himself.
After he had sat down by him, that he had felt his pulse, and had desired of
him some account of his health, the unknown person assuming the discourse with
a sigh, which by its depth seemed to have come from the bottom of his heart; My
health, said he to him, is but in too good a posture compared to that of my
Fortune; but whatever it may be, you see that I do not any way oppose the
return of it, and that I have kept the promise I had made you not to attempt
any thing against my life, while I shall be in your power. And for that very
reason, replies Megacles, you shall continue in it as long as I can possibly
keep you, and I should find it no small difficulty to suffer you to leave us,
if I had the least imagination that you forsook us, to go and seek out death.
When I consider what posture my life is reduced to, replied the Unknown, I
think death to be the only happiness I either can or ought to hope, and yet
since I have had that of seeing you, having made some reflections on the things
you told me yesterday, on the strange manner whereby I was delivered out of the
very jaws of death, contrary to all probability, and other circumstances of my
misfortunes, I concluded, that I ought not to put a Period to my own life,
before I had done all that lay in my power to serve a person on whom I had
bestowed it; since that in all likelihood she stands in need of it, and that it
is not impossible but that by some one of those extraordinary accidents that
happen to me, but she may yet receive it. Out of this consideration, and upon
the account of this obligation, rather than out of any hope, or remainder of
love that I have for my life, had I taken my clothes, and would have begged
your leave to be gone; but, to deal truly with you, the body was not able to
follow the motions of the spirit, and perceiving that all the strength I could
muster was hardly able to bear me up, and consequently far from putting that in
execution which I had intended, I was forced to ly down again, till such time
as I shall have recovered it a little better, as I possibly may ere this day be
quite passed. The Gods have the praise of this good resolution, replied
Megacles, and I shall think my self obliged to give them thanks while I live
for the opportunity they have furnished me with to prevent the effects of your
despair, since that by this very demurre we have made to it, we may happily have
absolutely diverted and dismissed it. Alas, alas, replied the afflicted person,
with a sigh, how little acquaintance have you with my Fortune! And how far
would you be from that opinion, had you but once an account of my misfortunes!
I shall know them when you shall think good, replied Megacles; but I shall not
desire it of you, till such time as your own inclination shall inspire you to
give it me: for, the little time I have known you consiered, I have conceived
such a respect for you, as permits me not to deal with you as I happly should
with ordinary persons. That compassionate sentiment, which you have for the
miserable, replied the Unknown, you rather derive from your own virtue, then
any thing you might have observed in my person, which is only the mark of
Heavens indignation, and a ball continually tossed and bandyed by the
inconstancies of Fortune. And therefore assure your self, that the opinion I
have conceived, and the resentment I have, of this compassion you express
toward me, should, no doubt, prevail with me to make a discovery of my self
to you rather than to any other person, if I might thereby convince you of the
esteem I have for you, and were I not obliged to secrecy out of other
considerations then what concern my self. You may judge of the truth I now tell
you, by the posture wherein you have seen me, and I doubt not but you are
satisfied that he who contemns his life, as I have done, has nothing to fear,
as to himself, that might hinder him to discover himself. Till such time then
that I am at that liberty, I shall only tell you, that whatever incensed
heaven, and the indeprecable destinies may have ever executed that were most
insupportable, on a great number of miserable persons, is fallen in such manner
on me alone, that neither the times of our Fathers, nor yet our own could ever
afford such another example. And whereas you have seen diverse persons become
unfortunate through the loss of dignities, friends, estates, the affection,
nay and the persons too of all that they could love in this World; you have in
me a draugt of all these, but I draught, a thousand times greater than your
imagition can represent it to you.

I have ever bin of opinion, replied Megacles, that your misfortunes were
indeed extraordinary, and your soul has appeared to me so great in the
expressions I have seen thereof, that I immediately inferred it impassible as
to ordinary ones. And yet I shall presume to tell you that in the course of the
World there have been seen revolutions strange enough to raise up and encourage
the most crushed hopes, and that several persons out of the most dreadful
abysses of misfortunes, have as it were in an instant flown up to the highest
pitch of happininess and glory. Who could have promised Marius in the midst of
his miseries that glorious change that happened in his condition? and who could
have put him into such a hope, as that out of the fenne where he had hid
himself for the safety of his life, and out of the dungeon, wherein he had been
exposed to the mercy of those that were sent to murder him, he should, within a
few days after, enter Rome in triumph, and be raised up to the same height of
greatness whence he had before been cast down?

You find it no small difficulty, replied the Unknown person, to meet in all our
ages but with this one example, to prove the possibility of man's return from
misfortune to lost felicities; but you may easily find an infinite number to
demonstrate how easy it is to fall from thrones into chains, and from fame and
happiness into shame and misery. So many Kings in Rome, drawn after Chariots,
laden with chains, and disposed into prisons, and among the Romans themselves,
the great Pompey, and the deplorable Anthony, furnish us with examples of it
sufficiently dreadful. A man may endeavor to struggle with Fortune by the
assistance of virtue and a great courage, but not expect the return of her
favors, when she has once withdrawn them by her inconstancy: for this envious
goddess is much more inclined, and subject to pull down what she had once built
up, then to raise up what she had once brought to ruin. Besides, there are some
happinesses, and some misfortunes in our lives that have no dependence on
fortune, and wherein she is very little concerned: and whereas she has no
power over men's inclinations, it were in vain for those, whose greatest
unhappiness should consist in the loss of an affection, which they thought
extremely precious, to expect the return of it from Fortune, and it were
fruitless for them, any way to rely on her assistance. Sylla, who seemed to
have made an alliance with her, and who might well attribute more to her
indulgence then he could have done to his own virtue, enjoyed the continuance
of her favors to the end with a more then ordinary constancy; and that Greek
Captain, whom she in his dreams, presented with Cities besieged in nets,
acknowledged her ever for an assistant goddess. But neither of these two great
examples ever sought any other happiness, or feared any other misfortunes then
those which are deriveable from her Empire, and she might well be their
principal divinity, since she disposed of all those things that could raise in
them either fears or desires, and consequently could make them either fortunate
or unfortunate: but for my part, who, with all she could take from me, have
lost what she cannot restore me to, alas, to what god can I address my self?
Or where shall I find either assistance or compassion, when both heaven and
earth have conspired against me?

These words fell from him with such an expression of sadness, and yet he had
uttered them with such a grace, and in so obliging a manner, that Megacles had
not only all the pity that could be for him, but also all the admiration. He
therefore omitted nothing of what he could say to him, that he thought might
give him any comfort, and having, before he would stir out of the place, caused
victuals to be brought in, he would not leave him till he had eaten something.
Which done, out of a fear he might be troublesome to him, and a considerantion
that rest would do him much good, he left him, and went about those things
which his charge obliged him to look after, and particularly to take order for
the bringing of victuals and other necessaries from Alexandria, in order to
their voyage, wherein he was to be so circumspect as that the vessel might not
come thereby into any danger of being discovered. In these employments and some
other which he had had, the morning and better part of the day was spent; so
that at last perceiving it was very late, and that the Princesses had not
called for any thing, he went to their chamber door, and sent to entreat them
that they would be pleased something might be brought them to dinner. It was
much about the time that the fair Cleopatra had made an end of her long
relation; insomuch, that upon the solicitation of Megacles and their Women,
they gave way that somewhat should be brought them in, and took a little
nourishment.

About the end of their repast, the Princess Cleopatra, who seemed to have
slumbered her self into a deep recollection, gave a sudden start, and was as it
were in a great trouble and disturbance; but a little after recovering her
self, and fetching a sigh from the bottom of her heart; Good God, Sister, said
she to Artemisa, how true is that which I told you this morning concerning the
force of our imagination, and how certain is it that the remembrance which I
still have in my soul of the unfaithful and unfortunate Son of Juba, has
imprinted such strong idea's of him in my mind, that if his countenance appears
not to my eyes, his voice I am sure smites my ears! Even at that very moment
that you might have observed some alteration in my countenance, I thought I had
heard him distinctly very near me, and several times this day, during the time
of the discourse I have entertained you with, this same deluded imagination of
mine brought that sound to my ears, and had almost put me out in my relation.
I could not have believed that for an unfaithful person there should have
remained such strong impressions in my mind: but alas, how unconstant soever he
may have been, he is happily dead for my sake, and by the blood he has shed by
defending us against the Barbarians, he has happily expiated part of the offense
he has committed against.

In troth, Sister, replied Artemisa, whether he has lost his life in our cause
and assistance, or that it has been the pleasure of the gods to preserve him,
as it is not impossible but it may be so, I cannot, for my part, imagine he
should be unconstant: and what has appeared to me in order to his
justification, has had such an influence over my belief, that I am still of
the same mind, and cannot forbear telling you, that I think him very innocent.
Might it please the gods he were such, replied the afflicted Princess, and
were it the pleasure of the same Gods that I had purchased the innocence you
attribute to him, with the best part of my blood. But having paused a while, O
vainest of wishes, continued she, the pure effect of the tenderness of my own
heart! What advantage can I derive to my self from his innocence? If he were
destined to dye, should it not be some satisfaction to me that his infidelity
has happened before his death, that so I might be capable of a comfort which I
should never have hearkened unto, had he dyed constant? And if on the other
side he be living, when I consider the wretchedness of my misfortune, and the
captivity I now am in, which happily will never suffer me to see him again, am I
not much less unfortunate in that I have only my own miseries to bewail, then
if, it being supposed he were constant to me, I should be obliged to have a
resentment of his as much as if they were my own? And yet all this
notwithstanding, concluded she with a sigh, (proceeding either from weakness,
or that she had some reason for it) I cannot repent me of my wish, and I should
be glad, though happily it might cost me my life, he were not unconstant to me.

I am very much of your mind as to that point, replied Artemisa, and
accordingly make it out of all question, that of all the miseries which it is
in the power of Fortune to force upon us, there are not any but are more
supportable to a heart sensible of a tender affection, then those that proceed
from that very affection, as being such as are all directly levelled against
the same heart that is wounded by them. There are in our souls several degrees
of tenderness, for they are not equally sensible of the happinesses and
unhappinesses of this nature as of those that proceed from other causes; nay I
dare affirm, that while they have this impression, they have no other
consideration of these later, than that they were assistances or obstacles to
those which we look on as purely real and essential. Which granted, I can
without any difficulty believe, that amidst all the misfortunes which the just
indignation of heaven may send upon us, the unconstancy and infidelity of the
person beloved, is the most indigestible, and most grievous and insupportable,
and, by a certain violence of assault, storms that strength of mind which might
possibly hold out against all other unhappinesses. And you must on the contrary
acknowledge, that amidst all the miseries through which our inexorable destinies
will needs force us, the faith and constancy of the person we love, raises up
our spirits into such a height of consolation and enjoyment of our selves, that
during such time as we make a strong reflection thereupon, we are almost in an
apathy as to all the rest, all our sensibility being taken up by the other.

Ah, Sister, replies Cleopatra, fixing her eyes on Artemisa, with a
languishiag, but withal an amiable look, how true is all you have said, and
consequently how have you fully convinced me, that I am the most unfortunate
person in the World, and that you are not unhappy at all, since that being
exposed to all those misfortunes, which you have mentioned, and particularly to
that which you acknowledge to be most insupportable. I am deprived of that dear
consolation which might in some sort alleviate them, and which the gods have
been pleased to leave you. I must indeed confess, replied Artemisa, that I
shall never think my self absolutely miserable while my Alexander is constant
to me: but I hope you are in the same degree of happiness, and cannot forbear
telling you over and over, that I find more reason and probability in the
circumstances that make for Coriolanus, then in those that make against him,
And you ought to give me so much the more credit, Sister, for that I speak on
the behalf of truth contrary to my own interest, and against my own quiet. Your
interest, Sister, says Cleopatra to her, and what interest have you I pray in
the fidelity of Coriolanus, other then what our friendship obliges you to have?
I am so much concerned in it, replies Artemisa, that Coriolanus is not much
more himself, And this you might easily have imagined, though I have not spoken
any thing to you thereof, since it is apparent enough, that, if, according to
the presumption you have of the inconstancy of Coriolanus, you should once
banish him your heart, the King my Brother, whose prisoners we are, and who
loves you well enough as you have had sufficient try all, might conceive a
little more hope from your neglect and oblivion of Coriolanus, then if you
still afforded him a place in your affections. And if that alteration should
once happen, what fortune were comparably to mine, since I might hope to be two
several ways your Sister, and to possess my Alexander without any danger, and
that with my Brothers consent? And yet you see, Sister, that this interest
could not prevail with me to speak contrary to what seemed to me to be truth,
and the innocence of Coriolanus; and all the fortune might happen to me should
it be otherwise; could not force me to disguise my thoughts or betray the
affection I have for you.

Your deportment in this business, replies the Daughter of Anthony, speaks you
a Princess nobly born, full of goodness and virtue, and I conceive my self
obliged to you for this particular demonstration of your friendship, much more
then for all the others you might have given me. But since you have thought fit
to make this overture to me of your self, give me leave, Sister, to entreat
you, by whatever is dearest to your thoughts, to persevere in that good
intention, and I beseech you, by all the good inclinations you have for me,
never to aggravate the miseries of my captivity by such discourses as happily
the King your Brother will oblige you to entertain me with on his behalf. I
shall not tell you, that, by his horrid cruelties as well toward my Brother as
your self, he has rendered himself unworthy, both of the affection he expects
from me, and the assistance which he hopes you may afford him. Nor shall I add
to that, as I very well might, how that by the same cruelty, whereof I have
been acquainted with the abominable circumstances, both from the relations of
Alexander and your own, he has raised in my heart the greatest horror that
may be for him, whence it comes that I look on him rather as a Tiger than a
great King. But I shall not stick to tell you plainly, that, though his life
were not stained with any base or reproachable action, though his manners and
disposition wanted not that mildness and affability I should require, though
his person were more than ordinary amiable, and that to his single Crown he
could add the Roman Empire, he should never have any part in this heart, which
I have once bestowed, and never can do a second time. Coriolanus has had the
first spoils of it, and shall carry them with him to the grave; whether he be
living or dead, constant or inconstant, he only shall have that advantage. And
if, by his infidelity, I am dispensed from the affection which I ought to have
continued to the very last gasp, had he persevered in his; or am, by his death,
disengaged, as to him, of a friendship, which it is needless to observe
toward the shades, there is nothing can disengage me from my self, that is,
from what I imposed upon my self, when I first submitted to that innocent
affection, and consequently, nothing can set my soul at liberty in order to a
second choice, or into a condition to entertain any new impression of love. It Is
enough that the great Cleopatra has once given way to love and been taken with
the great perfections of the most amiable among men; but the justification
which I might find for my former weaknesses, would not happily be accepted for
the latter. Expect not therefore from me, my dearest Sister, what I could not
obtain of my self, for my self, though I should pretend a greater interest it
should be so, then that which you represent, and imagine that there cannot be
any selicity hoped from an affection contracted by such extraordinary ways. To
do you what service I can with the King your Brother, and to oblige him to
treat you more civility, I shall conceal part of my resentments, and the
aversion I have for him; and therefore you ought to be satisfied with me, when
you shall see me do that for you which I should never endure to do one minute
formy self, and consider the violence I do my self for your sake, as no slight
demonstration of my Friendship.

Artemisa gave Cleopatra many thanks for the promise she had made her to force
her inclinations upon her account, and begged her pardon for what she had said
concerning her own concernments, and, in requital, made a protestation to her,
that she would never speak to her more on the behalf of the King her Brother,
and that she had two great an esteem for those resolutions of fidelity and
constancy which she had taken, ever to be guilty of any design to oppose them.

Thus were they engaged in discourse, when of a sudden they heard a very great
noise in the ship, and not long after, that it was upon occasion of the Kings
coming into it. What lectures soever they might have read one to another of
constancy, they both grew pale, and were a little startled at this news, and
looking one upon the other without speaking, they were at a loss as to all
resolution; yet so as that there might be some difference in their thoughts,
and if the soul of Cleopatra was burdened with a more lively grief, that of
Artemisa was subject to more fear. At last, Cleopatra, whose courage was
greater than that of Artemisa, was the first that broke forth into any
resolution, and looking on Artemisa with a countenance that spoke something of
more confidence, Sister, said she to her, let us rely on the assistance of
Heaven in our misfortune, and in the mean time summon together all our virtue,
and let us not forget the resolution we have taken.

Artemisa had not the power to make her any answer, nor indeed had she time,
for immediately thereupon their chamber door being opened, the first thing they
saw was the dreadful countenance of the King of Armenia. He was somewhat of a
pale complexion, and leaned, as he came along, upon one of his men; but his
palenesse was dispelled at the sight of that object by which he was enflamed,
and he made a shift to forget all his weakness to get near Cleopatra, who at
his first coming in was risen from the place where she sat. Artaxus saluted
her with abundance of respect, and Cleopatra, who was glad to continue him in
that humor, and laoth to force him to those extremities, which she might
justly fear from a man so violent, returned him, though with a sad and serious
countenance, what was due to his quality from a Princess of hers. Before he
spoke to Cleopatra, he cast his eyes on Artemisa, who trembling for feer, had
her eyes fixed on the ground, not having the confidence to look him in the
face. The fear and confusion he perceived her to be in, added not a little to
his joy; but however, he thought fit to speak to Cleopatra, before he addressed
himself to the other, and looking on her with a countenance wherein he
endeavored to moderate some part of his natural fierceness, and to take off
somewhat of that which was most dreadful in him; Madam, said he to her, my
love forces me to wait on you, though the justice of the gods has made you
mine to be disposed as I please; even in the late accident you might have taken
notice of so much, and you ought to forget your own resentments of it, out of a
consideration of the blood I have lost to preserve you. I shall never believe,
answered Cleopatra, that it is to be attributed to the justice of the gods,
that a free person, and one of my birth, should become your prisoner, without
any war, and contrary to the Laws of all Nations. You might have observed no
less your self in this very adventure, wherein it has cost you so much blood,
and it is impossible they should approve the unjust violence you do me, if they
are, as it is believed, the assertors and patrons of Justice and innocence.
What violence, replies Artaxus, can he be said to do you who casts himself at
your feet? Or wherein does he violate the Law of Nations, when he gives you a
full right and absolute power over both his heart and his crown? Do you in
agine that this injustice is of the same kind with those which the gods punish,
and are you not afraid to incense them your self, by entertaining so much
aversion and animosity against a King that adores you, and is ready to dye at
your feet?

Having said these words, he turned toward Artemisa, and looking on her with a
little more mildness than ordinary, by reason of the presence of Cleopatra,
whom he knew to have a horror for his cruelties: Well, Artemisa, said he to
her, you see after what manner Heaven has prospered your designs, and how it
has approved that the Daughter of Artabasus should forsake her Brother and her
King, to run away with the Son of Anthony. My Lord, replies Artemisa,
endeavoring to recover her self a little, though my affection was, I must
confess, very great toward Alexander, yet was it not such as should have
obliged me to forsake you to follow him, could I have taken any other course to
have saved his life, which you would have taken from him, and he should have
lost for my sake. This makes nothing for your justification, replies Artaxus;
but you do not stand much in need of any, having found such a sanctuary in the
Princess Cleopatra. The power she has over me disarms the indignation I have
against you, and I have no hatred for Alexander since I adore Cleopatra. In a
word, your destiny is in her hands, and I shall not only pardon you the
offense you have committed against me, but I shall furrher consent to your
marriage with Alexander, if Cleopatra will be but mine.

It is not impossible, replies Cleopatra, not staying for any answer from
Artemisa, but that we may find other means to get out of your power; and if
they fail us, we will follow those resolutions which the gods and our own
courage shall inspire us with. In the mean time, be not flattered with so fond
a hope, as that Caesar should tamely suffer you, in his own dominions, and
almost in his arms, to carry away a Princess that is one of his house, and
under his protection; but on the contrary, assure your self, that by such a
contempt of his authority you may stir up such a fire as may set your kindome
all into a flame.

Caesar, I question not, replies Artaxus, will remember, that my Father has
always served him, and dyed in his cause, through the cruelty of your Father,
who was his implacable enemy. I my self, in my younger years, have drawn my
sword of his side against Anthony, and if the children of his enemies are not
more considerable to him then those of his Friends and Allies, he will not
think there is more injustice in the carrying away of Cleopatra, then in that
of Artemisa. Artemisa has not been carried away, replies Cleopatra, she has
only fled away from your wrath, after she had saved my Brothers life. It was
her obligation to preserve it, because it was for her sake that he had exposed
it to that ignominious death, which you had intended he should suffer. And so
after she had thus acquitted her self toward a Prince who was not unworthy of
her, she was content to follow him and participate of his fortune in order to
the safety of her life, which she could not hope to have secure with you after
those examples of cruelty which she had so fresh in her memory.

Well, Madam, replied the King of Armenia, whether Alexander carried away
Artemisa, or Artemisa carried away Alexander, it matters not; this is certain,
that I received the affront, in the very heart of my dominions; and that a
Prince of the quality of Alexander had no ground in the World to go and remain
incognito in the Court of a King, whom he knew to be his enemy, whether it were
to gain the affections of his Sister, or out of any other design which he might
have had; and that there is not any Prince in the World, by whom he had not
been ill trated upon such an account. But though this reason, and the others I
have already alleged of the interests and the services of our house, should
amount to nothing with Caesar, I am now to appeal to another power than his,
and since I have submitted my self to yours, I stand in greater fear of your
indignation than Augustus's.

This he seconded with some other discourse, after which, he desired leave of
her to sit down, by reason of his wounds which had weakened him very much, and
were not a little troublesome to him. Cleopatra laughed in her sleeve at this
pretended respect, and yet was not a little pleased to keep him in that humor,
out of a fear he might break forth into disorder, and accordingly not much care
what violences he put in execution. Nor indeed was the design of Artaxus any
other; it being impossible that his fierce and cruel nature should spend it
self long in fruitless complyances! But he thought it his best course to
dissemble, while he was yet in a condition to fear all things, and out of that
consideration would not make use of his power, till such time as he were come
into his own Kingdom. In the interim, he had resolved to do all that lay in his
power to humor Cleopatra, and omitted no humble services or submissions, to
make her forget, if possible, the aversion she had conceived against him. He
would needs have the ship to hoise up sail at that very instant, though his
Surgeon had made it appear to him, that the sea was prejudicial to his
wounds, and indeed he had on the other side some reason to fear he might be
surprised upon that coast, by those that were sent out in quest of Cleopatra.
He conceived, and that not without probability, that he had not escaped so
long, had it not been for the little likelihood there was that those who had
carried away Cleopatra, should stay so near Alexandria. And indeed it was out
of that very consideration that those who went in their pursuit, as well by sea
as by land, had gone the farther from the place where the fact was done.
Besides the vessel was so hidden by a rock, which in a manner covered it, that
on the land side it could not any way be seen; and to prevent all suspicion
from the sea of its being that vessel wherein were the Princesses, order had
been taken, that neither they nor any belonging to them, should at any time
appear upon the deck.

With this precaution, and these favorable circumstances, Artaxus, not
conceiving himself secure, would needs have been gone thence at that instant,
when a wind, contrary to his designs, and consonant to the wishes of the
Princesses rises at the same time; but a wind so contrary to the course they
were to take, that it was thought impossible to get out of the river, while it
blew with the same violence it had begun, nay there was some fear, that if they
went out of the place where they were, wherever they had cast anchor, it could
not be so private as the other. The King of Armenia, exasperated at this,
^ailed at the gods and fortune for this misfortune, but after he had tormented
himself for some time to no purpose, he was forced to give way, and to suffer
the remainder of the day and the night following to pass away in expectation
of a change. In the mean time he was retired into a little chamber which they
made a shift to dress him up in the vessel, where he thought fit to take his
rest for some time and have his wounds dressed.

The two Princesses had soon notice of this favorable change of the wind, by
Camilla, who had heard it from Megacles, and this wench, who was indeed very
much esteemed by her Mistress as well for her virtue, as her many excellent
qualities, after she had told them the news with a countenance full of joy and
cheerfulness, Madam, said she to her, let us not despair of Heavens
assistance, and since it begins to declare it self for us, let us believe that
its assistance will prove abselute and effectual, and that it will never
forsake such great and virtuous Princesses in such a misfortune as you are in.
I am very much inclined to hope it, my dear wench, replies the Princess, and
we ought to join our prayers together, to beseech the gods to direct those to
the place where we are, who in all probability run up and down to our rescue.
There is no doubt to be made, added the fair Artemisa, but that Alexander will
search the World over in our pursuit; but he goes far enough to find us while
we are so near the place where he lost us; it is so much the more our
unhappinesses, and it will never be believed that those who carried us away
should make a stay at the gates of Alexandria. I am of your mind, replies
Cleopatra, but these reflections avail us nothing, and all that lies upon us to
do, is, to expect with patience what it shall please the sovereign disposers of
our destinies to do with us.

While they were discoursing thus in their Chamber, Artaxas kept silence in
his, unless it were when that from his bed he gave orders for his voyage.
Megacles gave him an account of that admirable unknown person whom he had
relieved, and had disposed into his bed, and spoke of him in such manner as
raised in the King a desire to see him, upon the extraordinary relation which
the other had made concerning him. But in regard that Megacles told him, that
he was too weak and too much cast down to be brought before him, in a time that
he shunned the light, and hated life it self, he resolved to give him a visit
in the place where he was, after he had taken an hours rest on his bed.

Thus was he employed, when he sees coming in to him, Aristus, and with him
seven or eight men sufficiently well armed, with fierce and savage
countenances, and, in the head of them, he who seemed to be their chief, and
had as little kindness in his looks as any of them, though he were very pale,
and seemed to have laien in lately of some great sickness. The King at first
sight could not call the man to mind, not only by reason of the alteration
wrought in him by his sickness, as the change which ten or twelve years had
made in his countenance, it being so long since he had seen him. But Aristus,
assuming the discourse, and presenting him to the King, This my Lord, said he
to him, is the famous Zenodorus, whom you have sometimes seen in your own Count
and in your Armies, before the accidents that have happened to him, had obliged
him to coast up and down the sea, where he has made himfelf so dreadful. I
have met him, and known him again by a very strange chance, and in regard that
I knew your Majesty has had a great esteem for him, and conceiving that his
services and those of the men that accompany him, (persons much better
acquainted with these seas than any of your subjects) might prove advantageous
to you in the condition you are now in, I thought sit to bring him along with
me, out of a confidence that your Majesty would take it well at my hands.

With these words Zenodorus continuing the discourse, made himfelf fully known
to the King, and Artaxus, who had not only seen him many years before both in
his own Court, and also in the King his Fathers, but had also a particular
esteem for him, and, at his coming to the Crown, had assisted him in his
marriage with one of the handsomest Ladies in all Armenia, called him to mind
very well; and having entertained him with much kindness, he assured him of
his joy to see him again, and of his assistances as far as he were able, upon
what account soever he might desire them. Zenodorus returned him thanks with
much respect, and proffered to serve him in his own person, and promised the
services of those men that accompanied him with all fidelity. Artaxus,
discovering his weakness by the paleness of his countenance, and having known
him to be a person of a considerable rank, caused him to sit down, and after
some words expressing the respects he had for him; Zenodorus, said he to him,
if you are astonished to see me upon this coast, and in the posture wherein you
find me, I am no less my self to meet you in that condition wherein you appear
to me. About the time of your departure from Armenia, while yet I was but young
I heard thousands of stories of you, and have understood since, that for these
eight or ten years you have scowred the seas with several considerable ships of
war, have taken many prizes, fought diverse memorable fights, and grew dreadful
beyond all the Pirates that found so much trouble to the Great Pompey.

It Is very true, my Lord, replied the Pirate, that I have done part of what you
say, and that I have been feared as well in the main sea, as in that where we
now are. I was, not many days since, the richest of all the Pirates, and had
gotten together riches enough, to forget all resentment for what had been taken
away from me to bestow on Herod; but Fortune has eased me of a great part of
them. The late tempest, which lay so heavy on this sea, dispersed some part of
my ships, the rest have been taken by the Praetor of Egypt, as I have received
my self upon this coast, a thrust through the body, which left little hopes of
life behind it, and yet I have with much ado recovered it, and by a miraculous
assistance am brought into the condition wherein you now see me. What you tell
me, replied the King of Armenia, I am not only astonished, but much troubled
at, and if ever we come into Armenia again, I will furnish you with those
supplies which you shall conceive necessary to restore your fortune to the
posture it was in before. But in regard I have heard a many strange and
wonderful things of you, and that without any order or dependence, I should be
very glad to understand from your self the accidents of your life, such as are
of greatest consequence as may best suit with a short discourse, if it may be
done without any inconvenience to you. I shall be no less satisfied, my Lord,
replied Zenodorus, to give your Majesty that demonstration of my obedience and
respects, and notwithstanding the palenesse which is so visible in my face, and
proceeds merely from the great quantity of blood which I have lost, I feel no
inconvenience that shall hinder me from giving you a relation of my adventures,
which were not happily worth your Majesty's attention, were it not for one
accident, which, being very remarkable, has accordingly made no small noise in
the World. With these words he came somewhat nearer the bed, and sat in the
place where the King had commanded him, and having caused his men to leave the
room, Megacles received them, and lodged them with the others that were in the
vessel; so that having, by a little rest, and some minutes of silence prepared
himself for the discourse he was to make, he began it in these terms.

THE HISTORY Of the Pirate ZENODORUS.
I Shall not be so dis-ingenious as to deny, that in the life I have led for
these eight or ten years, I have been forced to do many actions full of
impiety, injustice, and cruelty; that I have violated all manner of laws, and
committed all manner of crimes: nay, that by the constant practice of them, I
have contracted such a habit of evil, as I shall happily find it no small
difficulty to reform my self of. But I would withal, if possible, gladly
persuade your Majesty, that a great part of the mischievous inclinations which
are grown so powerful within me, are rather the consequences of my cross
Fortune than the effects of my own nature, and that, if the misfortunes that
have happened to me since my departure from Armenia had not exasperated my
disposition, and corrupted my manners, I should, as I had been born with great
inclinations to virtue, have continued in the same esteem and reputation that I
was in when your Majesty was pleased to honor me with more than ordinary
favors and kindnesses. I shall contract the discourse of my misfortunes as
much as I can, as well because I am unwilling to abuse your attention, as that
considering the condition your Majesty is in, it were very unseasonable for me
to spin out any over-teadious relation.

Your Majesty has hertofore understood that I was born in the Frontieres of
Judaea, where the Fortunes of my Father were such, that through the affluence
thereof he had the means to purchase the estate of Lisanias, which was a small
portion of that Country endued with sovereign power, and without appeal to any
other Monark than the Emperor. Lisanias had possessed it as such for a long
time; but at last, having, for certain weighty considerations, exchanged it for
some other estate which my Father had, and some moneys he had gotten together
in the several employments he had gone through in the wars, my Father became
the peaceable Lord of it, and I by that means came into a rank which rendered me
the more considerable among my neighbors. I spent the first sallyes of my
youth in the Armies, and through the natural inclination I ever had to the
wars, I gained therein some reputation. I was in that of Anthony against the
Parthians; and being merely a Soldier of Fortune, and not minding Factions, I
followed the children of Pompey, against Augustus Caesar, and among other
services. I was at that famous sea fight that happened between Menas and
Menecrates. That war receiving a Period by the ruin of young Pompey, I sought
out new emploiments elsewhere, visited the Courts of diverse Kings, and at last
came to yours. You were then but about 15 or 16 years of age, and it was not
long after the taking of the King your Father. He honored me very much with
his kindnesses; but he being shortly after taken by Anthony, I had, in those
attempts which, young as you then were, you made to procure his liberty, and
afterward to revenge his death, the honor to follow you, in a very
considerable employment in your Cavalry; and I was so happy as to have it from
your own mouth, that you were satisfied with my services, and accordingly
received those presents, and acknowledgement from your liberality which I have
had reason to celebrate ever since.

But besides the inclinations I immediately conceived for a valiant and a
grateful Prince which engaged my stay in your Court longer than in all the
rest, another thing that detained me there was the beauty of Elisena. I shall
not need tell your Majesty, who remembers it well, as having seen her, that
that Lady was one of the greatest ornaments of your Court, that by her birth
she was one of the most considerable, and that in point of beauty and desert,
there was none comparable to her. A man cannot well imagine any thing more
amiable or more excellent than her face, but the advantages of her mind were no
less admirable, and the reputation of her virtue was generally known through
the whole Court of Armenia. Thousands of persons sighed for that beauty, of
which number, I had no sooner seen her, but I became one. My love increased
from day to day, till at last, that passion became as violent in my soul, as
ever it had been in any, though the most possessed by it. I entertained her
with all the demonstrations I could of it, with respect, earnestness and
assiduity; but she seemed to be little moved thereat, and discovered very
little resentment for all those expressions of love which she received from all
the rest who made their addresses to her. She was endued with a virtue which
nothing could shake, and was subject to a modest kind of severiry, which was
proof against all passion. Her inflexibility at that time drew daily complaints
from my mouth, and sighs from my breast; but if I was troubled at the small
success of my own sufferings, I had still this comfort left me, that the
Fortune of my Rivals was in no better a posture than my own, and that she
seemed not to incline to any choice, other than that which she should be
advised to by those to whom she ought her birth.

But, to be short, my Lord, (why should I abuse your patience, by acquainting
you with things that you know?) your Majesty was pleased to employ your
authority on my behalf, you spoke your self for me both to Elisena and her
Friends. Insomuch, that about the same time, news being come that my Father was
departed this life, and that I was absolute Lord of that little estate which he
had dyed possessed of as a sovereign Prince, your Majesty was pleased to
further my interests, made appear the advantage of my alliance, and, to the
confusion of all my Rivalls, though they were your own subjects, I carried away
the fair Elisena and married her. The Nuptials were solemnly celebrated in
Artaxata, and I had gotten into my possession that beauty for whom I had
suffered so much, and in the possession whereof I found much more sweetness
than I had imagined to my self. Alas! can I reflect on these things without
dying, and, though my mind be grown brawny by reason of the accidents I have
run through, and the barbarous employments wherein I have spent my life, Can I
resist the resentment they should produce in me? I became possessor of Elisena,
and with her of all the excellencies both of body and mind, that can be wished
in one single person. Nay, what is contrary to what ordinarily happens, the
possession increased my love, and through the more particular knowledge that I
had of my Elisena, I discovered a many excellent qualities which I had not
observed before in their full luster. After I had made some stay in Armenia, I
took leave of your Majesty, I departed, and carried away my dearest Elisena,
that she might take possession with me of that little estate which my Father
had left behind him. I was there received as their sovereign, and began to lead
the most pleasant and delightful life that could be imagined. Thus far, my
Lord, has my life been known to you, thus far was it innocent.

Now may your Majesty be pleased to understand what has happened to me since,
and to have so much goodness for me as to charge my adverse Fortune with some
part of my crimes. In my little retirement with my Elisena, I knew not what
meant the least disturbance from abroad, and enjoyed all imaginable felicity at
home. My government, though of no great extent, was such as I was content with,
and though it were envyed by Herod, who was too powerful a neighbor for me,
yet with the assistance and protection of some others, I could make a shift to
maintain my own, the love I had for Elisena having had such an influeuce over
me, that I had given over all thoughts of the wars, to which I had before
sacrificed all my inclinations. My amiable Elisena, though she had married me
purelie out of the compliance she had for the commands of her Friends, yet had
ever after so much accommodated her affections to her duty, that she had an
extraordinary love for me, as soon as she was cenvinced that she ought to love
me. Accordingly might it in a manner be said that we were inseparable, for that
at all hours of the day, whether we stayed in the chamber, or went a walking,
or a hunting, whither I carried her sometimes, and in all manner of
divertisements, Zenodorus was never seen without his Elisena. Heaven it self, I
fear me, envyed our felicity: or, it may be, I was not born for that pleasant
kind of life, and those who know me at this day, would find it no small
difficulty to imagine, I could ever spend my time as I did then.

The first year of our marriage was not yet run about, when, among those
persons whereof our little Court consisted, I took notice of a young man
lately come thither, for sanctuary, as he said himself, against certain
enemies that were more powerful than himself, who had forced him to leave those
places where he was born, and who, having been very courteously entertained
among us, set up his staff there. He was called Cleontes, and this I may truly
say of him, that of all the men I ever met with, I never saw a handsomer, or a
more gentile person, in all his actions, nor a more amiable in all that
appeared outwardly of him. Suitably to these good endowments, he immediately
insinuated himself into the affections of all the World, in so much, that there
was no divertisement appointed between persons of either sex, but the amiable
Cleontes was invited thereto. All the World courted him, all the World spoke
well of him, and all the World were extremely desirous to oblige him. He very
pleasantly received those demonstrations of kindness and friendship which were
rendered him: and though he seemed not to be above eighteen years of age, yet
did he discover such prudence and conduct in his behavior, as is seldom in
persons of a far greater age. Yet was this particularly observed in him, that,
slighting ordinary persons, nay indeed many Ladies, by whom he was not a little
courted, he enjoyed himself in no other conversation, but that of Elisena, whom
he accordingly honored with his constant attendance. In so much that at last
he got a haunt of visiting her so often, that he was in a manner perpetually in
her company. And whereas it was none of the most inconsiderable perfections of
Elisena, that she was admirable in matter of discourse, and that Cleontes was
infinitely pleasant in that kind also, they passed the best part of their time
away with abundance of mutual satisfaction. Among all the rest that perceived
it, I took notice my self of the great kindness and familiarity that was
between them, but at the first looked on it without the least disturbance, and
out of the extraordinary opinion which I had of the virtue of Elisena, I not
only harbored not the least suspicion of them, notwithstanding all the
complyances, services, and constant addresses which Cleontes had for her, but
also took notice, without the least worm of jealousy, that Elisena looked very
favorably on him, and dissembled not the pleasure she took in his company
beyond what she did in that of diverse other person that came to see her.

Several months were past and gone in this manner, before ever I conceived the
least suspicion of the demonstrations of friendship that past between them; and
though I was indeed of opinion that their familiarity was greater than there
ought to have been between a person of the quality of Elisena, and a man of the
age and beauty of Cleontes, yet did I attribute their weaknesses to their
youth, and the friendship which Elisena naturally had for persons of good
pleasant wits. In a word, their manner of behavior made greater impressions on
other men's minds then it did on mine, and among the many persons that conceived
an ill opinion thereat, there happened to be some indiscreet enough to act the
part of the unlucky crow, and to bring me the tidings of my own unhappiness.
One above all, a person I very much credited, egged on by an imprudent zeal,
came to me on a day, and pumping, not without some difficulty, as I could
perceive, for words wherein to dress his expressions the more modestly; My
Lord, said he at last, is it possible your voluntary blindness should be such
as must reduce your most faithful servants to a necessity of giving you those
discoveries of their fidelity which they cannot do without regret and violence
to themselves? Or are you resolved not to open your eyes to see what is done
against you, while it is yet in your power to remedy things by mild and gentle
courses, and that evils are not come to their extremities? Observe my Lord,
after what manner Elisena and Cleontes live together, and spare me the
confusion it will be to me to tell you what follows.

This was the discourse of that indiscreet person, which yet had this effect
upon me, that I could not have been more cast down, had I received a mortal
wound. However I did what I could to smother the resentment I conceived at his
words, and thought it enough to tell the men, that we ought not to pass our
judgment so lightly of a thing that might be innocent; that I was confident of
Elisena's virtue, and if, through the pardonable eruptions of youth, she had
been too familiar with, and too liberal of her company to Cleontes, I could not
thence safely infer it proceeded out of any unjustifiable design or intention.
This I spoke to him with a countenance wherein yet he might have observed some
part of the effect of his own discourse, and, having dismissed my
intelligencer, I would be the more at liberty to make reflections on the
knowledge he had given me of my own misfortune. It began to magnify in such
manner to my apprehension, that my soul for some minutes was as it were in a
tempest, and my mind over-cast with such clouds as darkened all its former
light, the better to dispose it to receive melancholy and fatal impressions.
All that before had seemed so innocent to me, presented it self now to my
thoughts under another form, and calling to mind all the occasions upon which I
had observed too great familiarity between Elisena and Cleontes,: I was
astonished at my own blindness or rather inadvertency, and upon that came to
my memory a hundred circumstances which I condemned all as criminal. O ye gods,
how did this fatal discovery eat into my heart, to make a place there for the
greatest grief it could be capable of! And what deplorable effects did that
self-tormenting passion immediately produce there? This black impression
wrought a kind of Metamorphosis in me, insomuch that I was become quite another
man than what I was some days before. Being thus convinced of my want of
circumspection, and consequently of any misfortune, I railed at Fortune, I
quarrelled with heaven, and I took any occasion to discover my affliction. Is
it possible, said I, that one that is so dear to my heart, this great example
of virtue and tonjugal love has so soon turned bankrupt as to all virtuous
inclinations, and lost all the affection she had promised me? Or if she never
were virtuous, nor had any real affection for her Husband, is it possible she
should be so well read in the art of dissimulation as to ^conceale it from a
man's knowledge with so much artifice for so long time? How, can that Elisena,
to whom I had absolutely sacrificed my heart, that Elisena, for whose sake
only I love my life, prove unconstant to me, and it may be, dishonor me? O
inexpressible cruelty of my destiny, against which it cannot be expected my
courage should be able to rescue me! O Heaven! O Fortune, what resolutions
would you have me to take? Shall I ever be able to hate what I have so
affectionately loved; and from hatred can I proceed to revenge, against an
object so dear to my heart, and that the only object of all my affections? But
if I do not, I shall be insensible of the persidiousnesse of an ungrateful
woman; and can I with an unparalleld baseness endure those extraordinary
affronts which must needs blast my honor for ever? Hatred, Love, you that
divide my heart between you, let either one or the other give place, and
persecute not my soul with perpetual uncertainties and irresolutions.

Many days did I spend in these reflections and discourses, while in the mean
time my countenance began to change with my humor, and the alteration that
happened, there, was so observable, that all the World took notice of it.
Elisena was one of the first that observed it, and by all demonstrations and
expressions of love took occasion to discover the grief she conceived thereat;
but her carriage toward Cleontes was still after the old rate. And whereas my
eyes were now^ much more open than they were before, and discerned all things
after another manner then I had done in times past, methought, I could perceive
in all her actions, so much tenderness, and so much love for Cleontes, that I
made it no more a question, but that I was as unfortunate as I had imagined my
self. I saw the whole day in a manner was little enough for them to spend
together; they had ever and anon some secret or other to communicate one to
another, and when they were at too great a distance to speak one to another,
they discoursed by their eyes, and cast looks at one another that were more
eloquent than any thing of conversation, and this to the observation of all the
World as well as my self.

This alteration seemed very strange, insomuch that all those that had known
Elisena a little before could not without an excess of astonishment, make any
comparison between these sallies of lightness and liberty and her former
reservednesse and modesty. True it is nevertheless, that notwithstanding all
those demonstrations of affection that past between her and Cleontes, her
carriage toward me was as it had been ever before, and I could never porceive
either from her discourse or her countenance, that there was any abatement or
remission in her love toward me, or that she was less taken with my person
then at the first hour of our marriage. Her caresses, and her insinuations were
still the same, she spoke with the same sweetness, and acted with the same
compliance, save that she did it not so constantly as in times past, that she
left me often to go and discourse with Cleontes, and bestowed on his
entertainment the best part of those hours which she had before only devoted
to mine. At last, my grief was seconded and reinforced by my resentment of
those things, and after I had been a long time sad and melancholy, I became at
length exasperated, and studying how to be revenged of Cleontes, I began to
discover to Elisena, how that her caresses had not over me that influence they
were wont to have, that I looked on them as the pure effects of artifice and
dissimulation, and that I felt my soul changed from the love I sometime had for
her, to the passion that was most contrary thereto. I gave over looking kindly
on her, I took a bed by my self, and by degrees forbore all discourse with her.

She seemed to be as much troubled at this alteration as the most affectionate
woman in the World could possibly be, and gave me all the demonstrations of a
grief as violent as any soul can be able to endure. She used all the
insinuation that could be, she melted into tears, and omitted nothing, which
she could imagine might persuade me that she was really moved. In some
intervals, I was extremely sensible of those expressions of her affliction, and
those imperious remainders of love that were yet left in my soul did partly
produce therein the effect she desired; but a little after, through the cruel
prejudice that had taken root there, all was dashed out again, and I had no
more regard to what she did then, as if it had been mere personation and
sycophancy. At last, after a many days silence, she would needs force me to
speak, and having found me all alone in my chamber, whither I was often wont to
retire since the change of my humor, she runs to me with her face bathed in
tears, and grasping my both hands, with an action full of earnestness and
passion; Ah, my dearest Husband, said she to me, shall I be any longer unhappy,
and not know the cause of my unhappiness? And will you by so many several
expressions make it appear to all the World that I am odious in your sight, and
not acquaint me by what horrid misfortune I have lost your affection? Am I
less worthy of it now then I have been formerly by reason of some defect which
you have discovered in my person; or have I made my self unworthy of it by any
offense I have committed against you?

To these words she added a many others, no less earnest, and pressed upon me
so far, that I could not forbear making her some answer. Madam, said I to her,
methinks you take abundance of pains to express with your tongue that which
has no acquaintance with your heart, and if my quiet had been so dear to you
as you would make be believe, you would not have utterly ruined it by your own
cruel inconstancy. It Is enough for me to be miserable, and not that you should
aggravate my misery by your dissimulation, and you ought to be satisfied with
what I have suffered hitherto, and not put my affection to greater trials.

Elisena seemed to be extremely troubled at these words, as I could easily
observe in her countenance; but mustring up all her strength together to
recover her self; My Lord, said she to me, it is not any change in me that
disturbs your quit, or may have been the occasion of that which is happened in
your self. The gods are my witnesses, that I am the same woman to you that ever
I was, and that my life is innocent even to the least thoughts. It is very
strange, replied I, that the thoughts should be innocent when the actions are
criminal, and that when they appear such not only to the eyes of a Husband,
but to those of a thousand other persons.

These words were a little indigestible to Elisena, so that she took a little
time to ruminate upon them without making me any answer, but with the
countenance of a person recollecting and examining her self, to find out
wherein she had offended. At last, looking on me with an action which spoke
something of clearness and confidence, Can it be possible, said he to me, that
the cause of my unhappiness must be no other then the demonstrations of
kindness and friendship which have past between me and Cleontes? And knowing
me so well as you ought to know me, is there any possibility that you should
persuade your self, that in the good entertainment I make him, there can be any
thing criminal or unhandsome? The demonstrations of your affection toward
Cleontes, replied I, are so public and so remarkable, that you need not
pretend so much astonishment, that, when all the World had taken notice of
them, they should at last come to my knowledge; and you ought to be so much the
less surprised at the effect they have wrought on my disposition, if you but
reflect on the love I have had for you.

This proved another bone for her to pick, so that she could not make any
answer thereto till that she had been silent a good while, with an action that
discovered her uncertainty, and loss of resolution. At length, lifting up her
eyes, which she had all the time before fastened on the ground, and directing
them on me with a countenance much more settled and serene than before: My Lord,
said she to me, when I recollect my self, and call to mind things that are now
past, I much acknowledge, that there has been some want of prudence in my
carriage, and if I have committed any fault, no question but it has been out
of the excess of confidence which I have had in your love. I cannot deny but I
have entertained Cleontes with very great demonstrations of a particular
esteem, nay, I confess that I have still abundance of respects for him, as
well upon the account of his own worth, as for other reasons which oblige me
thereto, and which I shall acquaint you with, when you shall give me leave to
do it: but I call all the gods witnesses of my innocence, and desire them to
send me some exemplary death before your face, if ever I have injured you as
much as in the least thought, or ever discovered in Cleontes any design or
intention that you might condemn. I freely give you leave to take away my
life, if in process of time you find not my words true, and will accordingly
be sorry for the injury you have done me. In the interim, I conjure you to
restore me to your affection, the loss whereof is much more insupportable to
me then would be that of my life. And since you have not taken it away from me
but upon unfortunate apparences, which rather argue my imprudence than bad
intentions, I shall make such provision against the like for the future, that
you shall not have the least occasion to suspect me.

This was the discourse of Elisena, but uttered with so much assurance and
serenity, that I began to be persuaded she might be innocent; whereupon that
love whereof there were still some remainders in my heart speaking to me on her
behalf, with as much force as her words, dispelled by little and little some
part of my suspicions, and if it could not absolutely clear them, and make it a
bright day in my mind, it did at least put me into such a posture, as that I
was willing to hearken to what it suggested to me for her advantage, and to
expect her justification from time, in stead of condemning her from what was
past. I immediately acquainted her with all the transactions that past in my
soul, promising, that in case I should find her as innocent as she would
parswade me she was, I should love her with the same passion that I had ever
had for her, and she entertained that promise and assurance with such
demonstrations of joy, that I could not at that time suspect her guilty of any
artifice.

From that day she began to live after another rate with Cleontes, that is,
with much more reservednesse and distance than formerly; she forbore all secret
meetings, and private discourses with him, and entertained him no otherwise
than as civility required, that such a person as Cleontes should be. This
alteration occasioned a change in my humor, and I began to recover the rest I
had a long time wanted, and was convinced that Elisena, having been a little
extravagant through the imprudent sallies of youth, had by the strength of her
own virtue and good advice recovered her self. I also, for my part, carried my
self toward her as I had done formerly, and expressed my love to her with the
same earnestness as I had done before my mind became disordered by jealousy.

This lasted for some months, during which time we lived together with as much
delight as can be imagined: but not long after, the same person who had made
the first discovery to me, came again to tell me of certain kind and amorous
looks, and other circumstances whence he concluded there was a secret
intelligence between Elisena and Cleontes. Now my disposition being before
prepared for impressions of this nature, I entertained them much more easily
then at the first time, and observing my self, that there was a certain
violence in that reservednesse of Elisena, I fell into my former humor, and
that so violently, that I was likely enough to fasten on any desperate
resolution.

When Elisena was sensible of the alteration she soon took notice of in my
countenance, and would know the reason of it, I answered her with nothing but
bloody reproaches, and the passion I was then possessed with, furnished me with
all the words I could desire upon such an occasion. Elisena heard them with
much patience, and at last, when I had given over speaking, joining issue in
the discourse with abundance of resolution, but a resolution full of modesty,
and the demonstrations of that confidence which is ever the attendant of
innocence: My Lord, said she to me, I thought I had reduced my self to such a
behavior toward Cleontes as you expected, and was of opinion, that I had
entertained him no otherwise then I ought in pure civility to do. But since I
have been so unhappy, either through my ill fortune, or my imprudence, there is
now no dispute to be made of it, but the occasion must be removed, for the
correspondence which is between Cleontes and me, is not of such consequence, as
that we should thereby purchase the danger and inconveniences which are the
effects thereof. I shall not therefore tell you that I will not see Cleontes
any more, or that I will never speak to him again. No, this is not security
enough for you, while Cleontes shall continue in your territories; no, he must
not tread your ground; and though it speaks a certain barbarousnesse and
inhumanity, to force away a person from the place where he had taken sanctuary
against a malicious fortune, yet is not it considerable in comparison of the
mischiefs which his abode here has already, or hereafter, may occasion. I
will therefore take it upon me to send him hence so as he shall never return
again, and after the term that you shall appoint for his departure is expired,
I promise you that neither you nor I shall ever see him more.

These words of Elisena gave me some satisfaction, though I think she
discovered some violence when she made that proposition to me, and so, resolved
to grant it her. Well Madam, said I to her, if you expect that you and I should
live together in any quiet, there is a necessity that Cleontes should be sent
away. His longer abode here may happily involve us into some misfortunes which we
shall do well to avoid, when it lies in our own power to do it; and therefore I
shall entreat you to dispose him to leave us within eight days, that is the
longest day I can afford him to provide for his departure, and to find out some
other place for his refuge, and that time once expired, I beseech you let such
order be taken that he may never be seen in our dominions again. I promise you
to do it, replies Elisena, and I shall take occasion this very day to acquaint
him therewith, and endeavor what I can to have things so carried, as not to
raise among our neighbors any suspicion of the true cause of his departure.
With those words she went away and left me, but as she took leave, she
expressed so much affliction in her eyes, that it was easy for me to judge,
through the constancy which she so much affected, that it was not without a
sensible regret that she was induced to dispense with the company of Cleontes.

The next day I saw them speaking together, and I perceived they were very
earnest in their discourse, and, in their gestures and looks, discovered much
sadness. But conceiving all to be in order to his departure, I bore with their
conversation, at that time, as also what they had in my presence the day
following, during which time Cleontes took leave of his friends, alleging
certain reasons to them for his so sudden leaving of them. The seventh day,
which was just that day before his departure, guided by some unfortunate
genius, and my own malicious fortune together, I would needs take a walk in my
Garden. And being desirous of solitude, and at that very time reflecting on the
uncertainty I was in as to what I should believe of Elisena, finding
appearances of all sides, as well to demonstrate her affection to me, as to
satisfy me of her infidelity, I went aside from those that followed me, and
leaving them some in one of the fairest knots of the Garden, and others in the
more spacious walks, I went into those that were most private and solitary, and
so continued my walk in the most remote parts of the Garden. At the furthest
end of the Knot, before mentioned, there is a little handsome Grove, and in
diverse places of the Grove, Arbours made of the boughs of trees plashed
together. Coming near that which lies at the greatest distance, I heard the
noise of some people talking, and going forward still to come yet somewhat
nearer, and listening with much attention, I could discern the voice of
Elisena. The privacy of the place bred a little worm in my brain, and I
immediately suspected there might be some unhandsome action committed; and not
willing to let slip an opportunity; so favorable for the discovery of the
truth, I crept softly between the trees, and coming near the Arbor with so
little noise that I was not heard, I put my head close to the branches whereof
it was made, and finding an easy passage for my sight, I presently perceived
all that was done in the Arbor. O ye gods, what a spectacle, with what object
were my eyes unhappily smitten with! I saw, my Lord, since I must rip up these
doleful passages of my life, I saw Cleontes set upon a little table that stood
in the middle of the Arbor, holding Elisena standing between his legs,
compassing her with his arms, while he was as amorously embraced by those of
Elisena, and at the same time both giving and receiving thousands of kisses
from him. Sighs, tears, and bemoaning expressions were the burden of their
caresses, and reciprocally wiping off one another tears, they reiterated their
kisses with so much love, that a person the least subject of any in the World
to suspicion, could never have been persuaded but that there might be yet a
further familiarity between persons so passionate. For my part, I made not the
least question of it, and from that fatal spectacle, concluding my
unhappiness undeniable, I gave way to the rage then gaining ground upon me,
and stayed not a moment to consult upon the resolution I was to take to revenge
my injured love, and to repair the loss of my honor. I seldom went any where
without my sword, and as ill fortune would have it, I had it it then about me.
I drew it, transported with fury, and running to one of the doors of the Arbor
with so much have, that those two amorous persons had hardly the time to break
off their kissing; You must dye, base perfidious wretches, cried I, you must
dye, and putting my fury in execution upon the first object that offered it
self, it fell upon the first object that offered it self, it fell upon the
unfortunate Elisena, whom running with my sword in at the breast, there needed
not much strength to force it in up to the hilts. Cleontes had the time to get
out at one of the doors of the Arbor, and had got away as soon as he saw me
appear with all the speed he could make: but the unfortunate Elisena, who stood
nearest to me, receiving the mortal wound, fell down at my feet in a torrent of
blood; and as she fell, fastening on my knees, she held me so that I could not
get off from her to run after Cleontes. In the mean time Elisena expiring,
strove as much as she could to speak, and with abundance of difficulty made a
shift to bring forth these words. Zenodorus, said she to me, thou have spilt
innocent blood, which will cry out for vengeance against thee; but far be it
from me to desire it of the gods, and I forgive thee my death, which my own
imprudence, and thy want of recollection has brought me to: thou will find
that I have not injured thee, and therefore content thy self that thou have
taken away my life, and meddle not with Cleontes, who is.... She would have said
somewhat else, but ere she could bring it out, both voice and life had taken
their leaves of her.

This spectacle, you may well imagine was deplorable enough to move me to some
pity, and the love which I had formerly had for Elisena, whom I saw expiring
at my feet, beautiful even in her palenesse, and, amidst the very looks of
death, as amiable as ever she had been in her life, must in all likelihood
force me to some compassion. But rage and fury being grown predominant over my
soul, and I looking on the loss of my honor as a thing infallibly certain,
and from the last words of Elisena, when she recommended unto me the life of
Cleontes, and seemed so indifferent as to her own, drawing no other conclusion
then that of the excessive love she had for him, my fury derives new strength
from that cruel confirmation, and leaving the body of Elisena in the hands of
her Women, who were come in at the noise, out of a place where they waited hard
by, I pursued Cleontes, with the sword all bloody in my hand, that way that I
had seen him run away. He was gotten far enough from me, and I should have
found it no small difficulty to overtake him, if at the same time a noise had
not been spread about the Garden, that Elisena was dead. At this unhappy news,
Cleontes stays, not desirous to save his life after the misfortune which he
had been the occasion of, as I came into the Knot of the Garden, I saw him
coming toward me, tearing his clothes, pulling his hair, and filling the place
with his lamentations. Instead of avoiding my sword, he would run upon the
point of it, and presenting his naked breast to me, he therein received the
mortal thrust which ran him through and through. After he had gone two or three
paces backward staggering, he fell down at the feet of a Diana of Alablaster,
which stood at one of the corners of the Knot, and as he fell embraced it:
Goddess of chastity, said he, receive this life which I offer up up to thee,
and if I stain it with my blood, thou know it is pure and innocent.

There was something in these words that seemed so mild, and withal so
mournful, that the better part of my fury was thereby abated; and while a many
persons were running to the place where I was, the expiring Cleontes, turning
his eyes from the statue, and fastening them on me: Barbarous man, said he to
me, hope not that the gods will pardon thee the death of the innocent Elisena,
though I forgive thee mine, and since I have not life enough left me to
convince thee of her innocence, acknowledge it upon the sight of what I had
never shown any man, and which thou of all mankind art the most unworthy to
see. With these words, contracting together all the strength he had left, he
made a shift to open, or to tear that which covered his stomach, and by
discovering to us a neck and breasts, whiter then the Alablaster which he
embraced, easily satisfied us that he was a Woman.

Artaxus interrupting Zenodorus at this passage; Heavens! Zenodorus, said he to
him, what is this that you relate to me, and what an unfortunate adventure was
this of yours? Till now, though there were things deplorable enough in your
relation, yet had I not been moved to compassion at any, and I thought there
was so much reason in all proceedings, that I could not bemoane the destiny of
two persons whom I conceived worthy the chastisement they received at your
hands. But these last words of your relation having, changed the whole scene of
the adventure, and though there lies no more guilt on you then there would have
done, had it been otherwise, yet I must confess your are so much the more to
be pittyed. You may very well think it, my Lord, replied Zenodorus, and with
the same labor comprehend some part of what I was not then able to express.
At that sight, that fatal sight, that fatal and too slow discovery, I was in a
manner more like a dead carkase then those I had deprived of life; and not able
to oppose all the passions which then made their several assaults on my soul
with as much violence as can be well imagined, nor express them by words, I
was almost grown immovable and senseless in the arms of those persons that
were about me. I apprehended my self at the same to be the murderer of two
Women, of two beautiful and amiable persons, and two innocent persons, whereof
one had been my own Wife, whom I had loved as dearly as my own soul, and the
other merely upon the account of compassion had already raised in me an
affection toward her. This demonstration of the innocence and fidelity of
Elisena, did at the first reflection on it stick a sword into my heart, much
more cruel than that wherewith I had pierced her breast, and the sight of that
unfortunate person, now no more Cleontes, but one of the handsomest Ladies in
the World, wounded my soul with the most violent affliction that it was capable
of: Certain it is, that some other person, endued with a greater tenderness of
mind than I, who have ever been of a fierce and harsh disposition, had not
survived so deplorable an accident, and yet, such as I was, I really felt in my
heart whatever a lively and piercing grief can have in it of torment.

After I had recollected my self for some time in the hands of those persons
who had taken away my sword from me, as having gathered from the fury of my
looks, that it was not unlikely I might do my self a mischief, I drew nearer to
that expiring Lady, making signs to others to endeavor to help her, when
perceiving my intention; Stand away, cruel man, said she to me, and come not
near me. Thy assistance is more hateful to me then the death thou have given
me, and since the unfortunate Elisena, whose death I have unhappily been the
occasion of, is no longer living, oppose not the last demonstrations of the
friend ship I had for her, and suffer me to expire without any other regret
than that of having sacrificed to my misfortune, a person so virtuous as she
was. O Elisena, Elisena, since my last kisses proved so fatal to thee, learn
among the dead, where I am coming to enjoy thee again, that I was unwilling to
survive thee, and that I run after thee to continue among the shades that
friendship which was so dear to us hear?

As she uttered these words, she saw passing by the body of Elisena, which they
were carrying out of the Garden, and at that sight, crying out louder than her
weakness could bear, she withal sent out her last breath in the arms of those
that were come about to relieve her. Among those that came immediately after, a
young Gentlewoman that served her, and who after her example disguised her sex
by man's clothes, casting her self upon the body as soon as she could get near
it, made the air echo again with her cries and her lamentations, and did a
many things worthy compassion, which I was not in a condition to take notice
of, for that as the sight of the body of Elisena, which they had very
indiscreetly caused to be carried close by me, I grew absolutely senseless and
distracted, and was conveyed away and cast upon my bed, where I was carefully
looked after, out of a fear I should have fallen into despair. When I had a
little recovered my self, I ran to the place where they had laid the body of
Elisena, and giving it thousands of kisses with an affection equal to that I
had for her at the beginning of our unfortunate marriage, I did all that lay in
my power to dye near her, and have a thousand times since wondered, that my
grief alone should not be strong enough to do that which no doubt I should have
done with my sword, had I been left at liberty. Her innocence and her virtue
being then but too too well known to me, I became a continual prey to that
remorse, and those implacable furies which unmercifully torment the soul; and,
looking on my self as a Dragon, or some horrid monster, I made against my self
the most terrible imprecations, that a man could make against his most
inveterate enemies.

From the body of Elisena I went to that of the unfortunate companion and
partaker of her death, and though I had not had any affection for her while she
lived, yet had the unhappiness of her destiny such an influence upon me, and
she had appeared to me so amiable, even in the last minutes of her life, and in
the last words she spoke, that my soul was possessed by something greater then
compassion, and I was no less liberal of my tears for her death, then for that
of Elisena. When I was so far recovered, as that I could apprehend any thing
was sad to me, I was very desirons to know who she was, and the Gentlewoman
that had waited on her, and who after her death had no reason to conceal what
she had kept secret while she lived, being brought before me, though she could
not look on me without horror and detestation, and being informed what my
desires were, gave me this account of her; Since you are so desirous to know,
said she to me, who this unfortunate woman, whom you have put to death, was; I
shall soon satisfy you to your sorrow, for with that you shall know what
enemies you have raised your self by your cruelty. She was born among the
Parthians, of an extraction that is equally noble with any of the subjects of
Phraates, and was allied on both sides to the Illustrious Family of the
Arsacides. Her name was Artesia, and her beauty such, when it appeared in its
meridian luster, under clothes suitable to her sex, that the World can afford
but few comparable to her. She has neglected it very much ever since, and
indeed has had no great reason to be much in love with it, because it has
proved the occasion of all the misfortunes that have happened to her. Being
brought up about the Queen, as a Princess that could claim some kindred to
her, and having in a short time discovered to the whole Court, as well the
beauty of her countenance, as that of her understanding, she was there
generally beloved; but indeed much more than she desired to be, insomuch, that
the amiablenesse of her person having enflamed Phraates with an affection
toward her, she became accordingly the object of his cruel persecution. She
endured the torment of it for some time with an admirable virtue, and
endeavored to smother the extravagant inclinations of the King, by all those
ways which in any other soul might have produced that effect. But her modesty
and resistance adding to the eagerness of the Kings love, he would at last
needs come to violence, and without any consideration of the nobleness of
Artesia's blood, which was no other than a branch of his own, he laid a design
how to put his wicked resolutions in execution upon her. This virtuous Lady,
whose Father had been dead many years before, destitute of all protection
against her King, and that such a King, as to whom, after he had put to death
his own Father, all crimes ought to be easy and familiar, had no way but to
fly, to deliver her virtue from that tempest, and there being no way for her
to conceal her self from so great a King, but by disguising her sex, she put
on man's clothes, and causing me to do the like, took only me along with her in
her flight, and two ancient menservants of her Fathers, whose fidelity she was
confident of. After several journies to and fro, wherein she had still
inviolably kept the secrets of her adventure, she at last came into your
territories. It was not her design to make any long stay therein; but she was
immediately charmed by the virtue of ^lisena, and in process of time coming to
a perfect knowledge of her, and conceaving her a person with whom she might
safely enter into a solid friendship, and in whom she might repose a great
confidence, she discovered her self to her, acquainted her with her Fortune,
and revealed to her what she had so carefully concealed from all the World.
Elisena entertained these demonstrations of her affection and confidence with
an admirable goodness, and offered her all the assistance that lay in her
power. This was merely the effect of her generosity as to a stranger; but not
long after, the virtue and excellent endowments of Artesia having wrought their
effect on the spirit of Elisena, as those of Elisena had upon that of Artesia,
it became the cement of such a perfect friendship between these two amiable
persons, that the present age could hardly have furnished us with a nobler
example. The mutual demonstrations which they gave thereof one to another, with
less circumspection than persons, whose intentions are criminal, are wont to
observe, raised jealousies and suspicions in you, insomuch, that upon the first
discoveries you made thereof, they consulted together, and considered whether
it were safe to discover the truth to you, and acquaint you with the sex and
fortunes of Artesia. But after much debate, Elisena her self thought it not
either safe or seasonable, and knowing that you stood in some fear of the power
of Phraates, and that your Tetrarchy lying near his great Empire, it concerned
you very much to hold a good correspondence with him, did not think it fit that
that secret should be communicated to you, as being in some fear, that either
to put an obligation upon Phraates, or to avoid the occasion of making him your
enemy, you might discover to him that Artesia was in your power, and happily have
sent her back to him. The sincere friendship which Elisena had for Artesia,
inspired her with that fear, which indeed became so great afterward, that upon
your relapse into jealousy, and the second discoveries you made thereof, she
chose rather to be deprived the sight and company of her friend, then that you
should be acquainted with the secret of her life, and consequently expose it to
any danger. This separation could not but occasion a violent grief on both
sides, insomuch, that when you unfortunately took them in the Arbor, they were
taking their last leaves one of another, with those demonstrations of
friendship which proved so fatal to them. You are but too well acquainted with
what followed, I desire to be excused as to any further discourse with you, and
your leave to return to that body which I so much loved when living, to render
it my last services, and to take some course for the carrying of it away out of
this cruel country, and, since it is now beyond all fear of the violences of
Phraates, dispose it among the monuments of her Fathers.

Such was the discourse of the desolate Gentlewoman, whereby coming to
understand as well the extraction, as virtue of Artesia, I felt the grief and
remorse, which I thought violent enough before, assuming new strength to
torment me the more. I was in a perpetual posture of sighing and sobbing, which
being pent up in the cranies of my breast, forced out their way with the
greater violence, bringing forth with them words so pitiful, that it raised a
certain compassion in all those, who upon the cruel consequences of my mistake
had conceived a horror for me. I continually called upon the name of Elisena,
and with that of Elisena, I oftentimes brought out that of Artesia, whose
lamentable adventure I was no less troubled at, then I was for the loss of my
wife, whom I had thought so amiable, and accordingly so dearly loved.

I shall not tire you, my Lord, with tedious discourses of my complaints, or
with relations of all those things which I did for some days, during the
extravagance of my affliction, and shall only tell you, that those who know me
at this present, and know what course of life I have led for these many years
together, would not easily believe the strange effects it wrought in me. The
Gentlewoman, who had waited on Artesia, and her two ancient servants, having
caused the body to be embalmed, carried it away into their own Country; and
that of my Elisena, was disposed into a sumptuous Monument which I caused to be
built for her. I visited it every day, and spent whole hours in washing it
with my tears, embracing the cold Marble, and doing a hundred actions which
sufficiently discovered my love, melancholy, and despair. There was not any
thing from which I could derive any comfort; in the day time I avoided the
society of men, and in the night, methoughts I saw perpetually at my beds head,
the unfortunate images of Elisena and Artesia, showing me their wounds, and
loading me with the most bitter reproaches that might be. During these
imaginations, I was many times in a manner distracted, insomuch, that in time,
if I were not grown absolutely mad, I was at least so far gone, that I had
nothing of mildness, nothing of a sociable humor left in me. By degrees I
became more and more savage, and barbarous, much more than I was naturally
inclined to be, and out of an imagination I had, that all the World ought to
abhor me, I began to abhor all the World. Accordingly, from that time all
things fell out contrary to my expectations, and my crime was such, that
Fortune declared her self my enemy as well as men. The King of the Parthians,
who was infinitely troubled at the death of Artesia, immediately resolved to
ruin me, and Herod, who watched all occasions to possess himself of my
Tetrarchy, to join it to his own dominions, whereof he conceived it should be
some part, having no pretense of war against me himself, promoted underhand the
designs of the Parthian King, gave a passage through his Country, to the Army
he sent against me, and supplied them with provisions, out of hopes of getting
my estate into his hands.

Things fell out, in a manner as they had designed they should, so that I, who
in the height and favor of fortune, had not been able to oppose the forces
which the King of the Parthians sent against me, could hardly, in the
misfortune, I was fallen into, lost as to friends, courage, and all things,
make any resistance against them. The Parthians forced me out of my country,
and Herod having gotten it into his hands upon some treaty there had past
between him and Phraates, he not long after went and begged it of Augustus,
alledgiug that he had some interest in it, during the time that Lisanias was in
possession thereof. It was bestowed on him, and he was put into possession
thereof by the Emperor, who sent Sosius to settle him quietly in it, and who
accordingly maintained him therein, against the pretentions of the King of the
Parthians. This was the occasion of the difference wherein Phraates was so much
exasperated against Herod, and which bred the war that has happened between
them since, and which was begun by Phraates not long after the carrying away of
Phasela, and old Hircan.

In the mean time I made a shift to get away with a certain number of ships,
destitute of all friends and supply, nay indeed lost as to all things; for
having applied my self every where for assistance, all proved ineffectual, all
denied me. Insomuch, that, my mind exasperated by the constant malice of my
Fortune, I became lost as to all virtue and morality; and thence out of an
assurance I had that all the World were enemies to me, I became an enemy to all
the World. While my grief, for the loss of Elisena continued strong upon my
spirits, I was but little troubled at the loss of my estate, and friends; but
when time had wrought some abatement of it, I could not, without indignation
and rage, look on the change of my condition, and see Herod possessed of all I
had, and so powerful through the authority of Augustus, who maintained him in
it, that there was but little probability of ever getting it out of his hands.

This put me upon resolutions of getting that elsewhere which had been wrested
out of my hands at home, and having yet a number of ships under my command, I
began to make a Sea-war; first against those only that had taken away my
estate, and afterward against all Nations, without any choice or distinction
of parties. I had gotten with me my Nephew Ephialtes, as valiant and daring a
person, as ever followed this course of life, who contributed much to the
carrying on of my design; insomuch that when I had, by a great number of rich
prises, got together abundance of wealth, I bought more ships, and so
reinforced my Fleet, and lured in a many soldiers, who found better service
and pay in our war, than they would have done in any lawful one. In fine, I
became so powerful, that I had squadrons of ships on all seas. Having made
Ephialtes my Vice Admiral in those parts of the sea which admitted not of any
communication by sea, we went and met by land, having Horses and private
retreats for that purpose. So that of a desolate man, and one that in all
probability should have spent his whole life in weeping over a Tomb, I became
terrible and dreadful to all Nations, the terror of all that had any business
with the sea, and famous for thousands of Prises, which had made me the richest
of all the Pirates that ever were. This course of life have I led for these ten
years very near, and yet I shall not entertain you with the most considerable
actions I have been engaged in, not only because it would require a long
relation, such as possibly might prove very troublesome to your Majesty, but
also for that I am confident you have already had some account thereof, and
have, not without astonishment, heard of the several changes of my Fortune. I
shall therefore only tell you, that during the space of ten years, that I have
followed this trade, there happened not any thing memorable unto me, in
comparison of what has come to pass, within these few days upon these very
coasts, there having in a manner at the same time, fallen into my hands, two of
the most beautiful preyes that the whole universe can afford. And this I am
confident you cannot but acknowledge, when I have told you that in two days
time, I had in my power and disposal the fair Candace Queen of Aethiopia, and
the Princess Elisa, the only daughter and heir of the great King of the
Parthians. I took the Queen of Aethiopia, just at the mouth of the Nile; and
this soul of mine, which since the death of Elisena, had not entertained the
least impression of love, nor ever thought it could have been capable of any,
remitted some part of its Forces, upon the first view of that Princess, and,
by degrees, became absolutely subject to her Beauties. I was ignorant both of
her name and quality; and yet love made me at first slight the proffers she
made me of a considerable ransom, and when afterward she told me that she was
Queen Candace, I would not absolutely believe what she said, out of an
imagination that she might take that name upon her, purposely to keep me within
those terms of respect which she perceived I should not be long able to
observe. During that uncertainty, I did all that lay in my power to persuade
her to my will, and having found all the ways I took ineffectual, I hoped at
last to effect my own satisfaction, by making use of the power I had over her,
when that during the space of one night, which I had allotted her to fix on
some resolution, this Princess, daring above her sex, and beyond all example,
set my ship on fire, which broke forth in several places, and cast her self
into the sea within some few stadia of this river. You may well imagine what an
astonishment I was in when it came to my knowledge that I had lost her in that
manner. I made the best shift I could to repair the breaches which the fire
had made in my ship, that I might the sooner make after her into this river,
whither I conceived she might get upon planks, with the assistance of some men,
who had cast themselves overboard at the same time with her.

We were very busy a mending of our ships, when it was the pleasure of
Fortune, (to make me some requital for the former loss) to send me a vessel,
wherein was the Princess of the Parthians, which having with much ado escaped
wrack in a great tempest that had been, and being not furnished with men to
maintain her, came and cast her self into our hands. We boarded her without any
great difficulty, and the first thing I was entertained with, was the shouts of
certain slaves, whom I found to have been my soldiers, and some of those that
I had left Ephialtus. They presently gave me an account of the death of my
Nephew, and pointing to a person that stood near the Princess, they told he
had been his murderer. I cast my eyes on the man, and notwithstanding the
admirable things I could observe in him, yet was I resolved his life should be
sacrificed to the Manes of my Nephew, whom I had so dearly loved, and thereupon
caused the points of all our swords to be turned upon him. But good gods, how
strangely did he behave himself! for passing through our arms without any
fear, he comes up to me, takes hold of me by the middle, and cast himself into
the sea, with me in his arms. I was relieved and taken up again by my own men,
not without some difficulty; but when I had recovered the danger, cast up the
water I had drunk, and put on other clothes, the presence of a Beauty which all
the World might admire, but that seemed orewhelmed with an insupportable grief,
could not make me forget her, who may be said to have set my heart a fire as
truly as she had done my ship. And thereupon resolving to follow her living,
or find out her dead body about this river, I came hither, and landed with
thirty of my men, leaving the fair prize I had taken in my Vessel, under the
care of a Lieutenant whom I trusted her with. I wandered up and down the
riverside all that day, and could not make the least discovery of what I
sought, and the next day, after I had spent some part of the day in the same
enquiry, and having divided my men into several parties, in order to visit more
places, I came at last, accompanied only by two of them, near a spring, where
I saw two men engaged in a furious combat. They were both persons of an
admirable goodly presence, their arms rich and magnificent; but there was
nothing comparable to the valor wherewith they fought, but the animosity they
expressed in the combat. One of the two had upon his arms, which glittered
with gold, the Roman Eagle spread in diverse places, and those of his adversary
remarkable for certain Lions, causing me to observe his stature and action, I
at last discovered him to be the same person that had cast himself over-boord
with me in his arms, and whom I had given over for drowned.

I was at a loss what I should do upon this occasion, when, notwithstanding
the attention whereto it might be thought the combat obliged him, he cast his
eyes toward me, and immediately calling me to mind, he retreated a little
before his enemy, and having said something to him, which I could not hear, he
left him, and fell upon me with as little mercy as a bird would on his prey. I
was astonished at the violence of his proceeding, but though I had then no
other arms about me but my sword, yet I saw there was a necessity I should put
my self into some posture of defense. When I saw falling dead at my feet upon
the dealing of but two blows, my two companions, who had set themselves before
me; I must needs confess, that this sudden execution frightened me a little,
and seeing my self without arms, to engage with a man armed all over, I was
afraid to meet with him, and so made away from him as fast as ever my horse
could carry me. I rid a great way, flying still before him, and he had very
near overtaken me, when coming into a pleasant valley, I met with a person on
horseback, very sumptuously and richly, armed, who secured me from him, and in
the very same place had I sight of the admirable Princess, whom I sought
after. I was not a little encouraged at this happy adventure, but being not in
a condition to carry her away without some assistance, I returned to my
companions, and having met with some of them, I came back again along with them
into the Valley, and with their help carried away the fair Candace, on horse
back. It Is true, the greatest part of my soldiers, were killed by those valiant
men that engaged with us at our coming into the place, insomuch that I had but
one about me by that time I got to the river side. Here it was that I was
satisfied as to the inconstancy of Fortune, who had treated me so odly in one
and the same day; for my ships were all gone, and casting my eyes toward the
sea, I saw them at a good distance, making as much sail as they could away.
However I resolved not to quit my prize, and accordingly carried her into a
Wood that was hard by, in spite of all the resistance she could make. At last
having made a shift to get from me, while I was upon the point of recovering
her again, I was set upon by diverse men on horseback, and being run through
with a sword, I fell down to the ground with very little hopes of life. That
soldier of mine who had followed me, saw me fall at a good distance from the
place; and when our enemies were gone away with the Princess, he came back to
me, meeting in his way with another party of his companions, which I had sent
some other way, and had not been engaged in the fight we had had. They were
extremely cast down to see what condition I was in, and perceiving there were
some remainders of life in me, they carried me to a poor Country-mans house not
far from that place. This man was sent into the City for a Surgeon, having
before engaged himself to keep all things secret, and my men having put them
both into hopes of extraordinary rewards for the good they should do me, they
have accordingly done as much for me as I could have desired them. I had about
me both money and jewels to engage them to sidelity and attendance, and I must
confess, they have done all things with so much good success and secrecy,
that they have brought me into the condition you now find me in, without the
least discovery of any thing.

During the time I remained at that house, such of my men as had gone several
times to Alexandria, purposely to see what news were stirring, brought me word
that Candace was in Alexandria, that it was the Praetor himself that had
wounded me, and that the very same day those whom he had sent to sea had taken
my ships, killed all the rest of my men, together with my treacherous
Lieutenant, and recovered the Beauty I had left with him, who had discovered
her self to be Elisa, Princess of the Parthians. Till then had I been ignorant
who she was; but had learned Candaces name from her own mouth, as I told you
before, though my people told me, that she was not known in Alexandria for any
other then a Lady of great quality, born in Aethiopia, and one whom it was
thought the Praetor was fallen very deeply in love with. In a word, my Lord,
having lost my ships, my men, and the noble prizes I had taken, with the
assistance I have happily met with, I am gotten into the condition wherein you
see me, and this very day, as I was thinking of my departure from that house,
Aristus, seeking out where there were any provisions to be sold, comes in. We
had been heretofore very intimate friends, and, notwithstanding the alteration,
which so many years must needs have made in our faces, yet after we had looked
a good while one upon the other, we called one another to mind, we embraced,
and after we had enquired one after another what accidents or occasions had
brought us into these parts, he told me, that your Majesty was hereabouts, and
made me believe that my own service, and that of these men I have left me,
might be worth your acceptance, and contribute somewhat to the furtherance of
your designs. Whereupon I thought my self obliged to follow him, which I did
with the greater joy, for that it gives me some occasion to satisfy you, that
even in the midst of my misfortunes, notwithstanding all the changes I have run
through, nothing has been able to force out of my memory the resentment of
your goodnesses, or the desire I have, by all the services it lies in my power
to do you, to acknowledge them.

The end of the Third Book.
HYMEN'S PRAELUDIA, Or, Loves Masterpiece.
PART IX. LIB. IV.
ARGUMENT.
THe King of Armenia acquaints Zenodorus how he had brought away the Princesses
Cleopatra and Artemisa, tells him what designs he had upon them, and is
encouraged in his enterprise by the Pirate. Artaxus is set upon by an Egyptian
Vessel, for the deliverance of Cleopatra, and is like to gain the victory, when
an unknown person that was in Artaxa's ship, awakened by the noise, comes in to
the relief of the Armenian, and forces the Egyptian to retreat. Having secured
the victory, he is known by Cleopatra to be Coriolanus, whereat she is almost
distracted. Upon her reproaches to him for the disservice he had done her, he
swounds, but soon after recovers, pleads his ignorance, and the innocence of
his intentions. To expiate his crime, he undertakes to deliver her out of the
hands of Artaxus, who thereupon sets his men to kill him, but upon the
mediation of Cleopatra, he is proffered life and liberty. He refusing both, is
again set upon, kills Aristus, Zenodorus, and diverse others, and keeps all in
play so long, till a ship of Alexandria coming in quest of Cleopatra, comes to
his relief. The ships being ready to close, Artaxus threatens to kill the two
Princesses, whereupon the Egyptian Vessel, wherein were the Princes, Alexander
and Marcellus, dares not fasten on the other. Artaxus would have put his
barbarous design upon the Princesses in execution, but is miraculously
prevented by Coriolanus, who thrusting him to the other side of the ship, sets
himself before the Princesses. Marcellus taking his advantage upon that
interval, boards the Armenian. Alexander would have killed Artaxus, but, upon
the mediation of Artemisa, forbeans; yet he, scorning life from an enemy, falls
upon his own sword. Coriolanus is charged with, and, at last, informed what his
ancient infidelity to Marcellus and Cleopatra was, promises to clear himself,
and is promised to be restored to Cleopatra's affection. Marcellus, Alexander,
and the two Princesses return to Alexandria, whither the body of Artaxus is
brought by Megacles, who in his way set Coriolanus ashore, to find out some
means to approve himself a faithful lover and servant of Cleopatra.

THis was the conclusion of Zenodorus's discourse, and when he had given over
speaking, the King of Armenia acknowledged his obligations to him for the
proffers he had made him of his Services, and by way of requital promised him,
that, as soon as they were arrived in Armenia, he would furnish him with all
the assistance he could desire, either to restore him to his Estate again, that
he might spend the rest of his life in quiet, or put him to sea in as good a
condition as he had been in some days before. Zenodorus told him on the other
side, that it was neither prudence nor safe for him to make any stay in
Armenia, because of the Friends of Elisena, who could not look on him without a
certain horror, and therefore he relied more upon the hopes he had put him
into, of his furtherances in that course of life which he was resolved to
follow. Artaxus, who by this unexpected supply was twice as strong as he had
been before, in men, not only well versed in Sea-affaires, but much acquainted
with those coasts, was not a little glad of the adventure: and out of a design
of engaging Zenodorus the more to serve him, he thought it not amiss to
discover to him all that had passed, how things then stood, and related to him
the manner how he had brought away the Princess Cleopatra and Artemisa, and
how that his intentions were to carry them to Armenia as soon as the wind
should serve.

The Pirate was infinitely pleased to see a King fallen into that course of
life which he had followed for so many years, and being almost out of himself
for joy that he had such a companion, he encouraged him in his enterprise, and
promised him success in it, or that he would perish in his Service. These two
souls, near of the same making, were extremely glad at this renewing of their
acquaintance, but Megaeles, a person of a quite different disposition, and one
that could not without a certain regreet endure the violences of his Master,
looked on the Pirate with horror, and had shed many tears at the unfortunate
adventure of the deplorable Elisena. Having therefore taken his rest (which he
should otherwise have done out of a consideration of his indisposition) during
the whole time that this relation had lasted, Artaxus, thinking it long since
he had seen the Princess Cleopatra, rose up from his bed, and was going to her
chamber. But before he was gotten into it calling to mind that virtuous unknown
person in whose commendation Megacles had spoken such great things, and though
he were of a cruel nature, yet upon the account of his courage, which indeed
was very great in him, having a certain esteem for noble and generous persons,
he would needs give him a visit, and so went to the place where he was in his
bed. The unknown person lifted himself half up at his coming in, for having
heard the word King often spoken of in the vessel, out of an imagination that
he might be the King himself who did him that civility, he received him with
abundance of respect, and with as great demonstrations of cheerfulness, as
might be expected from so deep a melancholy as he then groaned under. The place
was something dark, and the day almost spent; but it was not long e're torches
were brought in, by the light whereof the King soon discovered the
gracefulness of the unknown person; which raised in him not only astonishment
but much respect for him. The first discourse he made to him, was to express
how much he was satisfied with the assistances he had received from Megacles,
repeating some part of those proffers which Megacles had made him before: and
the unknown person on the other side, though he entertained them not as one
that had any intention to make advantage of them, yet acknowledged how great an
obligation he had laid upon him, and did it in such terms and with such a
grace as raised no small admiration in the Armenian. Having understood by the
account Megacles had given of him, that he was a person much inclined to
Virtue, he thought it not fit to let him know any thing of his carrying away of
Cleopatra, as conceiving he might not approve of it, whence it may be inferred
that Virtue has this advantage, that even in the persons of the miserable, she
raises a fear of her self in the most happy and most powerful. He told him
that he had to his no small satisfaction understood, that since his coming into
the ship, he had lost some part of that aversion which he had for life, or at
least that he would not prove his own executioner as he had intended the day
before. The unknown person made him answer, that as to matter of Life, it was
no dearer to him then it had been, when he had endeavored to rid himself of
it; but that having called to mind a certain obligation that lay upon him, to
continue it till such time as he should be disengaged from it, he had resolved
to make one attempt more to meet with some opportunity to do it, and
consequently not die with a regreet of having omitted any part of his duty.

That discourse ended, the King asked him whether he would go along with him,
in a voyage he intended to make with the first fair wind, or if he had no
inclinations to that, whether he had in some other design any occasion of his
assistance? The unknown person made answer, that not able to imagine how he
could do him any service by reason of the despicable condition whereto fortune
had reduced him, and satisfied on the other side that being unserviceable he
must needs be troublesome, he made no proffers of his company, but entreated
him, that, e're they set sail thence, he would order him to be set somewhere
ashore.

Some further complements past between them; but at last the King remembering
where he was to go, and impatient to see the Princess, put a period to the
discourse, and having left the unknown to his rest, which he seemed very much
to want, he went to the chamber where Cleopatra was. He came to her with a
countenance wherein through the Love it discovered, was visible some part of
the discontent he was in; and not able to dissemble the occasion of it: All
things, Madam, said he to her, are contrary to me, all things oppose me, while
you are against me, nay, the winds themselves, which seem to depend of another
power than yours, will never turn to do me any service while I am hateful in
your sight. You may thence also infer, replied the Princess, the injustice of
your designs, since that where there is a want of the assistance of men, the
very Elements fight against you. We must not always, replied Artaxus, measure
the justice of the intentions by the easiness of the obstacles which we meet
within the execution of them; and if you lay that down as a general rule
without any exception, you must consequently reconcile Fortune and Virtue, who
are seldom found to be very great Friends. I am of your mind as to that,
replies the Princess, and if Fortune did take part with justice, and afford
her assistances to virtue, it is out of all question that you had been e're this
punished for the violence you do me, or at least I should not be your Captive.
Ah, Madam, says the King of Armenia, do not call her my captive, who her self
has me in chains, and disposes of me with a sovereign power! I pray give me
leave only to dispose of my self, says Cleopatra, interrupting him, since
that there is no Law in the world that gives you any power over me. The Laws of
Nations, replies Artaxus, are of much less authority than those of Love, and
it is only to these latter, that men, such as we are, that like so many stars
of the greatest magnitude, are of the highest quality, ought to submit
themselves. By this law of Love, whatever my passion puts me upon, is
justifiable, and all that I could allege, as concerning the affronts and
injuries I have received from your house has much less of argument in it than
this imperious reason.

It was with no small trouble that Cleopatra endured, not only the discourse
but even the presence of the King of Armenia, and notwithstanding her
reservednesse, no question but she had treated him with a great deal of scorn
and contempt, had it not been out of a consideration of Artemisa, whose
condition pitied her no less than her own, and a conceit withal, that there
was no way to keep Artaxus within the bounds of civility and respect, but by an
excess of patience. Supper was brought them in, and the King to express his
compliance, permitted them to eat alone, as knowing they would look on it as a
favor, and endeavoring by such behavior to dissemble the resolution he had
taken to make use of his power, when he were gotten off a little further from a
Country where he was not over-confident of the safety of his prize. He spent
some part of the night in discourses of the same nature with the precedent, and
when he thought it time to leave the Princesses to their rest, he withdrew into
his own chamber, and before he lay down, gave order that a good strong guard
should be set in the ship, to prevent all designs the Princesses might have to
get away in the dark. The two Princesses passed away this night as they had
done the precedent, save that they were in a much greater fear of their sudden
departure than before, if it were not prevented by some unexpected assistance
from heaven and the kindness of the winds, which did them all the favor they
could. Artaxus, tormented with his Love and a fear of loosing his beautiful
prize, could sleep but little. The unknown person disburthened himself of
frequent sighs which were heard by some in the vessel that were nearest him;
And Zenodorus bursting almost with grief and rage for the losses he had
received, had much ado to find any rest.

The day hardly began to appear, when upon the first dawning of it, those who
were upon the watch discovered a vessel, which being gotten somewhat near them
while the darkness was not yet dissipated, made all the sail she could
toward them, as having a very good wind, that indeed in a manner forced them
upon the shore. They immediately gave the alarm, and all being prepared, and
in expectation of an engagement with the other ship, all that were able to bear
arms, took them, and came up upon the deck in order to a fight. There were
much more arms in the ship than were requisite for the number of men that were
in her, insomuch that the Seamen who minded only the conduct of the ship,
could not as she then lay be any way employed, as being in such a posture as
they were loath to quit by reason of the advantage of the place, which was so
advantageous that the enemy could not assault them but by one only side.
Zenodorus and Megacles having put all into arms, and there being as I told you
but one side to make good, they fortified it with men, and put it into such a
posture of defense, that it was as defensible as if they had had a far greater
number of men. This charge did Zenodorus and Megacles take upon them, because
of the wounds which the King had received not long before, whereby he was still
a little indisposed, and would fain have had him kept his bed; but he would by
no means take their advice, by reason of the great concernment which he had to
make his party good, and accordingly starting out of his bed upon the first
alarm, he called for arms, and came up upon the deck in the posture of a man
that wanted not either courage or confidence. Zenodorus and Megacles walked up
and down the ship, putting all things into good order, and Artaxus showing
himself among his own people in a posture of fighting personally with them,
endeavored to encourage them as well by example as by words. He omitted
nothing of all that he thought might any ways animate them to fight, and
promises them extraordinary rewards, if they behaved themselves gallantly, and
came off with honor.

During all this time the other vessel drew nearer and nearer, and when it was
come within a competent distance, Zenodorus discovered by the flag, that it was
one of those ships that belonged to the Praetor Cornelius, and which ordinarily
lay in the port of Alexandria. This discovery exasperated him not a little, as
calling to mind the wounds he had received, and the great losses he had
suffered by the same enemies; and thereupon he told Artaxus that he need not
question but he would be set upon, and that infallibly it was one of the
Praetors ships purposely set out by him in the pursuit of those that had
carried away Cleopatra. Upon this discourse, which made some of the company
tremble, Artaxus reiterated the entreaties he had made to them to defend
themselves to the utmost, and they all promised him, though possibly with
unequal resolution; that they would stand to him, to the last drop of their
blood. The two Princesses, who had awakened at the first noise that was made,
and had, from what they had distinctly heard through the ship, easily imagined
the truth of what had passed, got immediately out of bed, and betaking them to
their devotions prayed the Gods to send them those assistances whereof they
then began to conceive some hopes

In the mean time the vessel of Egypt being come up to the Armenian, the person
that commanded it showed himself upon the deck very well armed, and having made
some sign to show that he was desirous to speak with those of the other
vessel before they engaged, asked for him that commanded the Armenian vessel.
Artaxus having showed himself to be the man, and asked him what his business
was with him; My business, said he to him, is to find out the Princess
Cleopatra, and those that have carried her away, and if you are any of those,
you are either to restore the Princess or prepare to fight. Artaxus would have
been glad to avoid fighting, as not conceiving himself strong enough to deal
with his enemies who very much exceeded him in number; and accordingly making
him answer, though not without shame and some repugnance. Those whom you seek
said he to him, are not among us, and there is very little likelihood that any
people having made such a prise should stay so near Alexandria. What you say,
replies the other, may possibly be true, but we shall not take your word, and
therefore must search your ship, which we are empowered to do by the orders of
the Praetor and the authority of Caesar. Artaxus, ex asperated at this
discourse, and perceiving there was no way to avoid ^ighting; I am not a person
to acknowledge any orders, said he, nor know I any authority, that should force
me to commit a base action, and therefore if it be fightiag that thou desire,
prepare thy self for it without seeking any other pretenses.

These words were spoken so loud that they were distinctly heard by the
Princess Cleopatra; and out of a fear that she was in least Artaxus might
persuade those of the other vessel with fair words, and divert them from their
intended design, she would needs show her self to them. Finding therefore the
chamber door fast, she ran to a little window that was on one side of the ship,
and opening it as hastily as she could, she showed them her beautiful
countenance, which seemed to shine a new day upon the waves, and lifting up her
voice so as that she might be heard; Here, generous men, cried she, here is
Cleopatra, whom you look after, I expect my Liberty from your assistance, and I
beg it of you out of the compassion which my misfortune may have raised in your
Souls.

There needed no more to satisfy all parties so as to resolve upon what was to
be done, insomuch that she was scarce delivered of these words but the
Egyptian vessel had fastened her grappling irons in the other. The fight upon
the first onset was very terrible, and so much the more cruel in that they
were come to handy blows, those that were come to rescue the Princess, having
it seems purposely forborne to make use of arrows out of a fear they might hurt
them. There being therefore on both sides a many gallant men, and those
animated by considerable interests and concernments, they all fought with
abundance of valor, insomuch that within few minutes the waves were died with
the blood of both parties. With the first rays of the rising Sun were seen the
swords glittering, and the blows falling at the same time either on the
bucklers opposed thereto, or on those unarmed places where the steel found its
passage to dispatch life. And whereas Artaxus and his men were only upon the
defensive, and stood to their business close and covered with their bucklers,
it was very difficult to force them and so to board the vessel. The first that
came on of the enemies was cast overboard, and there fell more then one by the
hands of Artaxus himself. He was gallantly seconded by Zenodorus and Megacles,
though this latter fought with some regret upon so unhandsome a quarrel. But
after some dispute, the number of their enemies being still greater than
theirs, and being also better armed than they, and commanded by no less
valiant men, and that of Artaxus's side there were but twenty fighting men, and
the rest only ordinary Seamen whom they forced to fight both against their
wills and their custom, Fortune began to turn to their side who fought for the
liberty of Cleopatra, and their Commander having with an unmercifull blow upon
the head laid Zenodorus grovelling on the ground, and gained the places which he
had forced him to quit, his companions took encouragement by his example, and
victory seemed to declare her self for their side.

Things were come to this pass when the unknown person, who rested himself
upon his bed in the bottom of the vessel, and perceived that through the rest
he had taken he had recovered his strength, having heard the noise, and at
length understood the truth of what was done, immediately got on his clothes.
And though he seemed a person little concerned in what was done in this world,
yet, his generosity being not quite extinguished by his misfortunes, he thought
himself obliged to assist those men, who had done him such civil offices in
his despair, and who were set upon in a vessel wherein he was with them.
Possessed by this imagination, he stood not to resolve on what he was to do in
that emergency; so that finding his sword lying by him, he took it, without any
other arms, and comes up on the deck; where meeting with a buckler at his
feet, he covered with it his left arm, and in that posture went toward those
that were a fighting. Just as he came in were Artaxus and his men ready to quit
the place, and their enemies pressing very hard upon them, began to board the
ship in several places. The unknown person stood still a little to consider
how the fight stood, and perceiving what an ill condition they were in whom he
was to relieve, he ran and set himself in the head of them, and by the first
blows he dealt, let them know that in one single person, they had met with an
assistance far greater than they could have expected. The two stoutest and most
forward men of the enemies side fell dead at his feet at two blows, and
rushing in upon the rest with such a force as they were astonished at, he
dispersed the most daring, in such manner, that in a few minutes, he brought
the victory into dispute which had been before concluded for the other side.
Artaxus and Megacles were immediately sensible of this assistance which had so
much changed the face of their affairs, and, perceiving him to be the gallant
unknown person mentioned before, because he fought without any thing on his
face, and without any arms other than a svvord and a buckler, they were
over-joyed at the relief they had received in him, and looked upon him as some
miraculous person.

When he had by the first blows that fell from him scattered the most
confident of the Enemy, calling Artaxus and his men to him, and encouraging
them to prosecute the fight both by his words and example; Take heart, said he
to them, gallant men, fight with me for your own safety, and do not fear
enemies that dare not stand before you. These words were seconded with such
heavy blows, that there durst not an enemy appear before him; and Artaxus and
his men having recovered a little of their courage at this miraculous
assistance, came up to him, and began to fight again with abundance of valor.

During all this time, the fair Cleopatra, who in a strange disquiet expected
the success of a fight on which her liberty, and all the happiness of her
life depended, after she had spent a good space in prayers to the gods for
those that fought for her deliverance, would needs, if possibly she could, see
them fight, out of an imagination that they might derive no final encouragement
from her presence. To this end coming to the chamber door, which, during the
time of the disorder of the fight, was not guarded, she found a means to open
it, and to get up upon the stern of the ship. From thence she soon discovered
how things had past, and perceived, much to her grief, that those of her party
fled before the dreadful sword of the unknown person, and those others whom his
example had animated, and that that man, without arms, by a prodigious valor,
sweeping all that came before him, forced the others into their Vessel with
much more speed then they had made to get into that of the King of Armenia; Woe
is my lot, cried she at that fight, overwhelmed with grief! What man is this
that the gods have armed against me, and why, if they are just, have they not
made him one of those that came to my rescue, since that I might with more
reason expect my safety from his single sword, then from the assistance of so
many men, whom he puts to slight? Thus, continued she, sighing and speaking a
little lower, did, not many days since, my unfortunate, or unconstant
Coriolanus fight for me, and with the same valor would he fight again, had it
but pleased the gods to send him to me.

While she thus discoursed to her self the unknown person, whose valor she so
much admired, and was withal so much displeased at, either flung his enemies
over board into the sea, or forced out of the vessel what ever stood in his
way; and, being at last come up to the Commander in chief of the contrary
party, who had fought all this time very gallantly, he burdened him with such
heavy blows, that notwithstanding his extraordinary valor, not able to bear
them, he was forced to retreat toward his own vessel, and had gotten his foot
into it, when he receives a blow on the head from the same dreadful hand, which
made him fall to the ground among his own men, who reached out their arms to
save him from falling into the sea. The fall of their Commander, and the death
of the best part of their companions, put the enemies to a loss of all
courage, and having, as soon as they could, got their ship clear from the
other, they made all possible have away, and would meddle no further with
either the victory or relief of Cleopatra. It Is inexpressible what affliction it
was to the Princess, to see all the great hopes she had conceived vanish of a
sudden, and with what resentments was she not exasperated against that valiant,
though unknown, person, whose valor had proved so fatal to her? She looked
upon him sighing, and when, after he had secured the victory, he turned his
face toward that part of the ship where she was, which before he had always
had upon his enemies, she cast her eyes upon him full of tears. But, O
celestial powers! What a strange astonishment, what an incredible surprise was
she in, when in the countenance of that destable stranger to her, who had been
the only hinderance of her liberty, and had returned her once more into the
power of Artaxus, she saw that of Coriolanus? Here certainly all expression is
too weak to make the least representation of what she felt upon that cruel
discovery, and the strangeness of the accident wrought so violently on her,
and put her into such a distraction, that having not the command of her
constancy for some small time, she was upon the point to cast her self into the
sea at the sight of that ungrateful person, and so to sacrifice to him a life
which he had made so insupportable to her, by delivering her up to the most
cruel enemy she had in the World. She looked on him for a good while together,
out of a fear she might be mistaken, and found it no small difficulty to
convince her self of that cruel truth. But at last being satisfied that her
eyes did not deceive her, and that it was but too too certain that she saw no
other then the true Coriolanus, she was out of all patience so far, that she
discovered her grief by such circumstances and demonstrations of it as she was
not able to conceal, and made the ship, and the hollownesse of the adjoining
rock to echo again with the noise of her lamentations. Is it possibe, wickedest
of men, cried she, that thou should fight against the liberty of Cleopatra?
This then is the innocence thou pretendest to, and would have had me to
believe; Or art thou not sufficiently satisfied with thy former treachery,
which had armed the powers of Heaven and earth against thee, but thou must
commit a second more detestable than the other, by being thy self the
instrument to deliver her whom thou had so ungratefully forsaken into the
hands of the greatest of her enemies?

She had no sooner begun to speak, but Coriolanus, (for it was really
Coriolanus himself) smitten with a voice he was so well acquainted with, had
cast his eyes upon her with some precipitation, and perceiving it to be the
celestial countenance of the Princess whom he adored, he became as immovable
as a statue of Marble; and having, from the very first words she said,
discovered the certainty of his unhappiness, that conviction of the
malevolence of his destiny, wronght so much upon him, that immediately a deadly
shivering running all over his body, the sword fell out of his hand, his eyes
closed, and his strength leaving him of a suden, he fell down in a swound upon
the deck. The incensed Cleopatra, had not lost her generosity, and therefore
seeing him in that condition, though she was somewhat of opinion that that
weakness might come upon him from some wound he had received in the fight, she
gave those notice that were about him to have a care of him, since he had
fought so well in their quarrel.

Having so done, she found a place to sit down where she was, and leaning her
amiable face on her two fair hands, she burst out into a rivulet of tears, and
deplored the strange and extraordinary misfortune that had happened to her, by
such complaints, as no doubt would have moved any soul with compassion, unless
it were those of Artaxus and Zenodorus. Artemisa, who sat by her, would have
comforted her, but not being able to do it, she wept with her for company, and
was not afraid to displease Artaxus by participating in her lamentations. When
the fair Daughter of Anthony had with much ado dispersed those sobs which made
some resistance against the passage of her voice, turning upon Artemisa those
fair eyes, which, though drowned as they were in tears, set all on fire in the
ship, even to the hearts of unmerciful Pirates; Ah Sister, said she to her,
what fortune was ever comparable to mine, by what means think you am I fallen
into the hands of Artaxus, now the second time! That man whose innocence you
pleaded so much, and were so confident of; that man from whom, inconstant as I
had concluded him, I yet expected assistance, nay, that very man whom you saw,
not many days since, fighting so valiantly in our defense, by the same valor
delivers us up himself, and that into his hands from whom he had before rescued
us, the King, your Brothers. Had it not been for the assistance of his fatal
valor, we had been freed; and it was he alone that forced away, nay, happily,
killed those that fought for our liberty. After such an adventure as this,
never dispute with me again the greatness of our misfortunes, and find me but
one example in the World that may be paralleled with this. I do not think it
strange, that Artaxus, an implacable enemy of our house, and one that by his
former inhumanities had discovered the malice he has against us, should treat
me with violence and injustice: but that he who had sometime loved me so
dearly, whom, to my confusion, I had loved beyond my own life, who had suffered
so much for my sake, and upon my account, and had been the occasion that made
me suffer so much my self, and to be short, that that only person who should
have sacrificed thousands of lives for my liberty, should come and expose all
he had against my friends and against my rescuers, purposely to return me into
the chains and power of Artaxus, and not into his own! Ah Sister, this, this is
what no ages ever produced any thing comparable to, and it is such a strange
accident as I am not well able to comprehend, though my eyes can but too well
witness the truth of what I have seen.

While Cleopatra broke forth into these lamentations, and that Artemisa,
astonished at the strangeness of the adventure, gave her the hearing, and wept
with her without making any reply, Megacles and diverse others were gotten
about Coriolanus, endeavoring to recover him again, some others were employed
in casting the carcasses overboard, and to dress those that were wounded,
whereof there was no great number. But before they went to visit them, having
looked all about the body of Coriolanus, they could not find any wound about
him: and, yet though they cast water in his face, and used several other
remedies, all could not bring him to himself again. Megacles, who had the
greatest respect of any for him, made it his business very earnestly to
recover him, besides that when they reflected on the assistance he had done all
that were in the vessel, all did accordingly conceive themselves obliged to
relieve him. Artaxus knew not how he should entertain this strange emergency,
and though his first motions were inclined to gratitude and acknowledgement,
for the great services he had received from that valiant person, yet those
which immediately succeeded them began to raise a terrible disturbance within
him. From the words of Cleopatra, which fell from her in the violence of her
grief, contrary to her ordinary prudence, he concluded that that man must needs
be his Rival. But that grieved him not so much as to consider that it was a
Rival very precious in the affection of Cleopatra, and the history of the King
of Mauritania's Love to that Princess being a thing known all over the world,
from the gracefulness, from the valor, and from all the other demonstrations
and characters of a great soul that were discoverable in that valiant man, he
was easily persuaded that it was Coriolanus, and consequently he that of all
the world should be most his enemy, and whom he should accordingly be most
jealous of in the love he had for Cleopatra. Yet could he not find in his heart
to hate him so suddenly, as well for the considerable service he had received
from him, as that from several circumstances it was very probable he was
unfortunate in his affection, and that from the reproaches of infidelity which
the Princess made him, he could infer no less than that that Prince had
sorsaken her. In this confusion of imaginations he was at such a loss, that he
knew not what resolution to take, casting his eyes sometimes on the Prince that
was still in a swound, and sometimes on the afflicted Princess. Besides, it
being not his opinion alone, that the unknown was the very same person he
thought him, it went from one to another, that without question it was the
valiant King of Mauritania. So that, coming at last to the ears of Cleopatra,
as incensed as she was against him; yet was she not a little troubled that she
had by her discourse discovered him; and yet it being to no purpose to recall
what is once past; Yon are in the right, said she, it is indeed the King of
Mauritania, it is a perfidious man whom for a double infidelity I am obliged to
hate above all mankind besides; but he is a Prince, how unconstant soever he
may have proved to me, deserves your assistance for the service he has but too
fortunately done you against me, and therefore since you have made some
advantage of his treachery, you have as much reason to look after him as I have
to abhor him.

To this effect was the discourse of this generous Princess; and though that
in all appearance she seemed, not without very much reason, to be incensed
against the unfortunate son of Juba, and to have made a strong resolution not
to admit him into her affections again, but to avoid him as much as she could,
yet could she not wish his death, nor endure the very thought that he should
die for want of assistance. 'Twas for this reason that she aggravated his
infidelity before Artaxus, purposely to make him the less odious in his sight,
and to divert what after such a discovery he might well fear from the
exasperated Armenian.

The Prince was not all this while come to himself, and while Megacles was very
busy and took a great deal of pains about him, one of the Armenians being
come near him, and viewing him with a countenance swelled with indignation;
instead of the assistance you afford this man, said he, with so much care and
tenderness we should do well to run our swords into his breast. This is the
very man that killed our companions not many days since, when we carried away
the Princesses; and besides the lineaments of his face which I easily call to
mind again: I have found about his bed the arms of my Brother whom he
unmereifully killed in my presence. This was the discourse of the Barbarian,
who could not but discover the malicious design he had against the Princes
life, when Megacles hearing it, and having authority over him, gave him such a
look as upon which he immediately took occasion to be gone, with some
threatening gestures, that sufficiently argued his resentment of it.

At last, upon the application of several remedies, the King of Mauritania
opens his eyes, and became sensible, and having gotten up, he scattered his
scaring and extravagant looks on all those that were about him, and, finding
Megacles one of the nearest him, and one that made it most his business to
assist him, he looked on him a while in such a manner as if he would express
thereby how sensible he was of his compassion and good offices, yet were
displeased at him for them? Will you ever be, said he to him, the cruellest
enemy I have, by taking so much trouble upon you as you do for the preservation
of my life, and should you not rather have suffered me to die, since you are
one of those that carried away Cleopatra. Charge me not, said Megacles to him,
speaking very low, with a crime I have not committed, and confound not those
who do things out of a consideration of the duty they owe their Masters, with
those that serve them in their most unjust and irregular passions, Coriolanus
thought it not fit to make him any answer and perceiving he had recovered his
strength again, he gets up, and looking about for Cleopatra, he found her
sitting in the same place where she had continued ever since they had given
over fighting. This second sight of her had almost put him into the same
condition he had been in before, and reflecting on the disservice he had done
her by opposing her deliverance and liberty, the grief he conceived thereat was
so great, that he found it no small difficulty to support it. And yet he
thought, that, as things stood, his only course was to muster up all his
courage, and to summon all his virtue to his assistance, and after the short
reflection of a few minutes, thinking himself in a better condition, that he
met with Cleopatra in that posture, than that he should have lost her for ever,
he took the best heart he could, and with a slow pace, such as argued the
smallness of his confidence, he goes toward the place where Cleopatra was
still set. She saw him coming toward her, and her indignation against
Coriolanus being greater upon the recovery of himself, than her pity had been
before, she could not endure he should come near her, and giving a look
sufficiently discovering her displeasure; Stay there, barbarous man, said she
to him, and come not any more near a woman whom thy continual treacheries
expose to so many misfortunes! What can thou hence forward expect from me,
and what further mischief can thou imagine yet to do me, after thou have
bestowed me on the King of Armenia. That Prince, inhumane as he is, and though
the greatest enemy of our house, has not betrayed me as thou have, and I am
much inclined to believe, that he would not give me to any other, as thou, with
so much baseness, do: Leave me therefore quietly to him, since that it is on
him that thou have bestowed me, even with the hazard of thy own life, and
aggravate not my afflictions with thy abominable presence. This heart which so
unfortunately received for thee those impressions whereof it should have been
insensible for any other, favored thee and argued on thy behalf, seeking out
something, by way of justification for thee, while thou were in arms for
Artaxus against Cleopatra. Do not therefore think it much to afford her that
comfort which she may derive from thy eternal absence, since thou have for
ever deprived her of all hope of any other, and imagine not, that after I have
cleared my thoughts of the image of an unconstant man, they can ever entertain
that of Artaxus, for whom no doubt but thou art come to speak.

The dejected and almost desperate Coriolanus, leaning against one of the
Masts, hearkened to this violent discourse of Cleopatra, having not the courage
to make her any answer, and the Princess, attributing his silence to the
confusion he might conceive at the horror of his crime, was the more enflamed
into indignation, insomuch that she could not forbear to discover it in further
reproaches. Tell me, cruel man, said she to him, by what offense had I so far
incensed thee, as to deserve the unworthy treatment I receive at thy hands,
and, if I were no longer worthy the affection thou were pleased sometime to
afford me, and which had wrought all the pleasure and felicity of my life, by
what action, or by what defect, am I become so odious to thee, as that thou
must needs sacrifice my liberty, life, and enjoyments to the most inhumane of
all mankind; to him, whom of all men I should look on as the most detestable?
Or if this proceed not from any hatred, which I know not how I should have
deserved at thy hands, upon what account of friendship or interest, could
thou do Artaxus a service so disconsonant to the precedent actions of thy life,
and to that virtue which thou had sometimes the reputation to practice? Were
thou restored to the throne of thy Predecessors by the means of any assistances
from the King of Armenia, or were thou so deeply engaged to him that thou
could not any way disengage thy self but by presenting him with that which
thou have sometime preferred before the Empire of the Universe?

Thus did the disconsolate daughter of Anthony discourse, while the King of
Armenia and all those that were about him gave so much ear to what she said,
that they had not any of them the power to interrupt her; and the Prince
overwhelmed with grief and confusion at the apparent justice of her reproaches,
suffered the torrent of them to wast it self without offering to oppose it, and
would not have presumed to open his mouth in his own justification, if the
Princess had not given over speaking, to wipe the tears that fell abundantly
from her fair eyes. The dejected son of Juba took the advantage of that
in^ervall to rejoyne to her discourse, but it was with no small difficulty that
he made a shift to speak, so much were his expressions in a manner smothered by
sighs. I am satisfied Princess, said he to her, that it is not without some
reason that I am so detestable in your sight, and since that by so many
extraordinary demonstrations and by misfortunes so far exceeding those of the
common rate, it may easily be perceived how odious I am in heavens account, it
is but just you should avoid the eternal object of its indignation, and have
no farther commerce with a person so strangely destined to be miserable. I am
guilty of the crime you lay to my charge, I cannot deny it, and in an accident
so unfortunate I cannot stand upon my innocence. I have fought for your
enemies, against you; I have with all the strength I was master of opposed your
liberty, and I have been the means of your coming into the hands of a man whom
you would have me look on as the King of Armenia. After the commission of such
a crime, I cannot pretend any thing to innocence, and, when their effects have
proved so deplorable, it were vain for me to plead the ^harmlessenesse of the
intentions, But might it be once the pleasure of heaven, Madam, that the former
treacheries you charge me withal, and for which I am undone, were so much
within the reach of my knowledge as this last which you reproach me with, I
should not be as miserable as I am, since I should happily find somewhat to say
for my self by way of justification in relation to those, as I can for this
last.

How is that, wickedest of men, said the Princess, interrupting him, do thou
think to find any thing by way of justification for a crime thou have committed
in my sight, or would thou persuade me that I have not seen thee with thy
sword drawn fighting for my enemies against those that endeavored my
deliverance? Would thou dazzle my own eyes in this, as thou would those of
all the World in thy former treachery, or is it thy design to persuade me that
I am extravagant and out of my wits? It is indeed but too too true, replied
Coriolanus, that you have seen me with my sword drawn fighting for your
enemies, and I may presume to affirm, that I happily made their way to a victory,
which without my assistance it is likely they had not carried. It is not
therefore my design to justify the events, but only my own intentions, which
if considered alone, I dare affirm my self innocent, if there can be any
innocence in an offense whereof the success has proved so fatal to you. You
may be pleased to remember, that there are not many days past since I fought
in your defense against the same enemies, whom I have this day served, and
there is but little likelihood I should since that time have contracted any
friendship with them to prejudice the love I have for you. For this man, said
he, looking on Artaxus, whom you would have me take notice of as King of
Armenia, he knows how that it is but some few minutes since I first saw him,
and whether I discovered the least desire to be acquainted with him. And for
those others, said he, pointing to Megacles and his companions, you may have
happily learnt from them, whether they had not recovered me out of the waves into
which I had cast my self from the top of the rock that covers us, through the
despair which the loss of you had put me into. They can further tell you what
trouble they had to make me admit of life, and they know, whether it were out
of any other motive than that of gratitude, and a sense of the obligation I
ought them for their assistances, that I took up arms in their quarrel when
they were set upon. These truths cannot be unknown to you, all those that hear
me are now become my enemies, since they are those that did you violence, and
yet I appeal to them whether I affirm any thing which is not true.

At these words he made a little stop, looking about him of all sides, and
perceiving that Artaxus, being much at a loss to think of this adventure,
expected to see what would be the issue of it without speaking one word, and
that all those that stood about him were in the same posture and suspense,
continued his discourse to this effect. I know not, continued he, whether I
wanted any love toward you, when I cast my self headlong into the sea, out of
the regret it was to me that I could not relieve you, when it has been known,
that in other very considerable misfortunes, to which my life has been
exposed, I have never been charged with want of constancy to support them, but
these very enemies that hear me, know whether, upon their earnest entreaties, I
have prolonged my life out of any other desire then that of making one attempt
more for the service of that person to whom the life they prolonged was devoted.

As soon as Cleopatra began to find some probability in the discourse of
Coriolanus, she had heard him very attentively, and out of the desire she had
that he were innocent, she favored him in her heart as much as she could; and,
looking on Artemisa, seemed as it were to ask her, whether she was not also in
some sort convinced of the innocence of Coriolanus? Artemisa was very much
inclined to that belief without any solicitation, and it was only by reason
of the presence of the King her Brother, that she would not speak openly in his
justification.

In the mean time Coriolanus deriving a little more confidence from the silence
of Cleopatra, as also from those discoveries which he perceived in her
countenance of the disposition she was in to be persuaded of his innocence,
reassumed the discourse with an action that argued a greater setlednesse of
mind. You see then, Madam, said he to her, what I can say for my self, to
justify my intentions: but for the effects, since they have proved so fatal in
relation to your quiet, and that it is impossible to recall what is past, the
reparation I am to make you, must be extraordinary. And therefore this very
hand that has done the mischief, must find out the remedy for it, and this
sword, ( continued he, putting his hand on the hilt of his weapon, which he had
taken into his own hands when he got up) this very sword that has put you into
the power of the King of Armenia, ought to bring you out of it, or take away
his life, were it to be done, not only in this vessel, but even in the heart
of his kingdom. It Is with this resolution that I cast my self at your feet,
added he, coming near her, ready to defend you against him to the last drop of
my blood, and it may be in a condition yet to give him his death in the mid^t
of all his men, if he does not resign up to me what is mine, and restore you to
that liberty against which I have so unfortunately fought.

Artaxus had hitherto, with a great deal of patience hearkened to all the
discourse that had past between Coriolanus and Cleopatra, and was content to
hear the Princess charge him with cruelty, and declare that he was odious in
her sight; but at this last discourse of the Prince of Mauritania, he thought
his temerity and confidence insupportable, and accordingly looked on him with a
malicious and scornful smile; Coriolanus, said he to him, I have passed by the
first affronts I have received from thy presumption, out of a consideration of
the service thou have done me, and I have given thee leave to speak against my
concernments with too much liberty, because thou had defended them with
abundance of valor; but now I perceive thy temerity knows no limits, so that
it will be hard for me to observe those bounds which I had proposed to my self
upon the first reflections I had made on the assistance I have received from
thee, and the esteem I have conceived for thy person.

Artaxus, replied the valiant Mauritanian, looking on him very fiercely, there
cannot be any such thing as a mutual esteem between us, and if my actions have
raised any such in thee toward me, happily not without reason, thine cannot
possibly have the same effect upon me. Besides, it cannot be expected we should
be any longer Friends, not only because thou keep Cleopatra as a captive,
but also because thou love her. For the service thou have received from me,
thou art soon di^engaged as well by the regret and affliction it is to me that
I have done it thee, as by the little intention I should have had to do it, had
I known thee to be him that carried away Cleopatra; and for the good office
which I received from thy people, when they took me out of the water, I have
sufficiently requited it, by exposing my life for their defense. We are
therefore upon equal terms as to point of obligation, we are equal as to that
of extraction, and if we are unequal as to fortune, it is in the power of
Heaven, who protects justice against oppression and iniquity, to make our
forces and conditions equal, and to put me once more into such a way as that I
may be able to deliver Cleopatra. If it be the pleasure of fortune that I
perish in the design, expect not thou ever the more that she will be long at
thy disposal, nor indeed can thou be ignorant that the whole Empire is at
this present in arms against thee, and that, when thou have brought the
Princess into Armenia, thou will be soon followed thither by the most
dreadful forces of the Universe, who will destroy all that lies before them by
fire and sword, upon so just a quarrel.

The Armenian King was silent all this while, as if his astonishment was no
less now at the confidence of Coriolanus, then it had been not long before at
his valor; and thereupon giving him a look wherein he sufficiently discovered
his indignation; Thou speak to me, said he to him, with as little respect,
as thou would happily do, if thou were in the head of a hundred thousand men,
but there is, it may be, some flaw in thy memory, and thou have quite forgotten
that thou art alone, and without arms in my ship, in the midst of all my men,
and that thou art already obliged to me for the life which thou have enjoyed
upon my courtesy ever since that moment, wherein thou gave me the first
occasion of displeasure. From this very indulgence Cleopatra might infer so
much as might oblige her to quit the opinion she has conceived of my cruelty,
and there are few Kings in the World, who having an absolute power, such as
mine is, would have suffered so much from any man, and not have cast him into
the sea. I shall cast my self into the sea of my own accord, replied the Prince
of Mauritania, when the misfortunes of my life prove so insupportable as to
advise me to put a Period thereto; but thou will find, that, to cast me into
the sea against my will, is not an attempt so easy in the execution as thou
conceivest it. And though thou have a great number of men about thee, yet am I
confident that the most daring among them will bethink him more than once what
he has to do ere he attempt it, and though they should forget all respect to
the royal character which I bear as well as thy self, they are better
acquainted with the metal my sword is made of, then to come over-confidently
too near the point of it.

Artaxus had his hand ready on the hilt of his sword, and by his own example
was going to oblige all his men to fall upon the King of Mauritania, who
securing himself with a buckler, expected them with an undaunted courage, when
Zenodorus, having recovered himself of his fall, and the lethargy occasioned
thereby, and being come up to him, told him that the wind was turned, and was
very good for their departure thence, and that it was their best course to
weigh anchor, and be gone from a coast, where they must expect to be assaulted
again if they stayed there any time. Artaxus overjoyed at that happy change of
weather, gave order to hoise up sail, and that they should make what have they
could out of the river. But now was it that Coriolanus made them know what he
was, and turning toward Cleopatra, who heard that order of Artaxus as she would
have the sentence of death passed against her; I beseech you, Madam, said he to
her, be pleased to receive this last service from me without any repugnance,
and be assured by the death which I am soon to suffer for your sake, what
correspondence there has been between me and the King of Armenia. I do not
suspect you guilty of any, replied the disconsolate Princess, and
notwithstanding the unconstancy you have been guilty of toward me, I am better
satisfied as well of the nobleness of your blood, as of that of your courage,
then to make a hard judgment of you in things where there is any one
circumstance that makes any way for your advantage. But how inconstant soever
you may be, added she, rising from the place where, she sat, I am far from
desiring your death, and I shall never give way you should receive it in my
sight, if I can hinder it.

Coriolanus had not heard those last words, and seeing too men somewhat near
him, doing something in order to the departure of the vessel, he thrust away
the nearest to him with such force that he had turned him overboard into the
sea, and with his sword cleft the others head into two pieces. Upon this
spectacle Artaxus, perceiving it was not safe to dally any longer, and
repenting he had not fallen upon him sooner, cried out to his men to hasten to
cut off that temerarious person; and when he saw himself fortified by those
that came about him, he advanced along with them with his sword drawn toward
the Prince of Mauritania. But Cleopatra came and stood before him, and,
speaking to him much more mildly than ever she had done before, Artaxus, said
she to him, if ever in thy life thou will do an action which I may take kindly
at thy hands, attempt not the life of Coriolanus, and remember the assistance
thou have received from him, without which I had been out of thy power, and
thou thy self happily out of the World. What you desire of me, Madam, replies the
King of Armenia, is a thing out of my power to grant, besides that Coriolanus
himself, who, unworthily abusing the respect I have for you, sticks not to
murder my men before my face, is not desirous of that life which you so much
beg for him. And yet I shall not take it away from him, that I may at length
begin to do something that pleases you, and though he be my Rival, and that one
so much the more to be feared for that he is much in your favor, yet shall I
permit him to live, and give him leave to depart immediately, out of the ship,
and go his ways whither it shall please fortune to dispose of him.

If there be any favor in this, replies the Mauritanian, it were done to thy
self and not to me, nor indeed do I make the least doubt of it, but that thou
would be very glad I were once out of thy ship; but thou art not guilty of so
much vanity as to imagine I will go hence without the Princess Cleopatra, and
therefore resolve immediately either to restore her to liberty, or to give me
my death, and withal to defend thy own life, which I doubt not but I shall
even in the midst of all thy men, put once more into danger. Alas! for death,
cries out Artaxus, being grown furious to the highest degree, thou shall
without much difficulty find it at my hands, and here I now sacrifice thee to
my resentment, and my love, both as a temerarious enemy, and an insole^t Rival.

With this Rhodomantade, having not the patience to give any further ear either
to his words, or the cries of Cleopatra, whom he caused to be taken away by
force from between their arms, he began to make toward the Prince, who, having
got to a place whence he could not be assaulted, but only before, covering his
left arm with a buckler, and brandi^^g his dreadful sword with the right,
expected him in such a posture as spoke him a person whom no danger could
frighten. Artaxus was both valiant and daring; but besides that, he was not
absolutely recovered of his wounds, and felt himself a little too weak to
engage in a combat, the great actions he had seen him do that day against the
enemy that would have rescued Cleopatra, made him look on that enterprise with
some distrust, and accordingly was not much displeased to see the stoutest of
his men expose themselves before him to that danger. Zenodorus, followed by the
rest of his companions, and some of the Armenians, animated by him whose
Brother the valiant Prince had killed some days before, was the first that
would venture to come on. Megacles, not able to divert this misfortune, would
not however have any hand in the crime, and holding his arms acrosse at the
other end of the ship, did all that lay in his power to persuade to stay with
him such of the Armenians as had most affection for him. Aristus, who was the
first that offered at the King of Mauritania, was also the first that paid for
his confidence; for, having made a blow at the Prince, and he putting it off
with his buckler, he received another from him by way of exchange, which taking
him in the throat, cut off the passage of his respiration. For the blood,
issuing out of his wound in thick clots, choked him within a few minutes, and
after he had staggered some paces backwards, spreading his arms asunder, he
fell down and breathed out his last at the King of Armenia's feet. Had
Cleopatra delighted in revenge, and that a bloody revenge, here she might with
no small pleasure have looked on this victime which the Prince sacrificed to
her, since it was this man that had seized her, and carried her in his arms
into the ship.

This sudden dispatching of Aristus did a little cool the courage of his
companions; but it withal animated them to revenge him; and the King, who had
loved Aristus very dearly, being extremely grieved at his fall, cried out to
his men to take heart, and would have been in the head of them, had he been in
his absolute strength, and if some of his own, who would not have him to hazard
his life, had not stood in his way. But this they did partly out of a desire to
please him, and the fear they were in at the sight of Coriolanus's dreadful
sword, and partly out of a certain repugnance they felt in themselves to put to
death a valiant Prince, who not long before had so generously hazarded his life
for their safety. Those that were the most forward to second Aristus, met with
a destiny, not much different from his, and he who was so violent to be
revenged for his brothers death, coming on a little too rashly, lost his
resentments, with his life, by a thrust which for want of arms found a way into
his belly, and which made him fall down into a rivulet of his own blood. The
deaths of these two men made their companions more circumspect, and more
fearful of the length of Coriolanus's sword. The valiant Prince looking on them
with a certain contempt, and frightning them the more by menacing gestures; It
is not so easy a matter, said he to them, as you conceived it, to take away a
man's life, who knows how to defend it, the advantage of number and arms does
not always bring victory with it, and if I die this day, as it is possible I
may, by your hands, if the gods have so disposed of me, I hope I shall not die
unrevenged.

Having said these words to them, he kept his former posture, that is, stood
close to the ships side to avoid being set upon behind, and warding off the
blows which were made at him with his buckler, he looked like lightning on his
enemies, and when any one of them instigated either by shame or the cries of
Artaxus grew more daring then his companions, he neglected not either time or
occasion to make him repent his forwardness, and always directed his sword so
fortunately and with such force and execution, that it ever proved either the
messenger of death or some cruel wound. At last Zenodorus, to whom this kind
of engagement was more familiar than to any of the rest, being ashamed to fight
with so much precaution against a single person, and desirous to let the King
of Armenia see how much he deserved the assistance he had promised him, after
he had called his companions about him, and reproached them with their
cowardice and baseness, comes on before them, and, intending to direct his
stroke at the Princes bare head, Coriolanus warded it off with his buckler.
But, having many adversaries to deal with, and they directing several blows
at him at the same time, he could not so well put off that of the Pirate, but
that his sword sliding down along the buckler fell upon his shoulder, and gave
him a slight wound. Zenodorus perceiving the Prince to be in some disorder,
would needs be at him again, and taking his sword with both hands, he lifted it
up high in the air, with a design and hope to cleave the Prince his head
asunder; but at the very same time the son of Juba, exasperated at the blow he
had received, gave him a back-blow with such force, that the edge of the sword
meeting with the Pirate at the wrists, which were not covered with any arms,
cut them both off, so that both hands and the sword fell down at the feet of
those that were fighting. The unfortunate Zenodorus, seeing himself in that
deplorable condition, was loath to live any longer, whether that strange
misfortune raised in him an aversion for life, or that he was persuaded that
through his cruel wounds it would have run out with blood. So that having
remained some little while as it were in an irresolution what to do, and sent
forth a doleful exclamation toward heaven, he of a sudden flies at the
Prince, with a design to thrust him overboard into the sea. And certainly he
might have effected it, if the Prince perceiving he made toward him, had not
stepped aside with so much agility, that the desperate Pirate not meeting with
any thing to stay him, and thrusting forwards with the whole weight of his body
fell over the vessel into the Sea, where having no hands to do him any service
in point of swimming, or to fasten on any thing if need were, he was soon
drowned, loosing his life after a little struggling, the last word that fell
from him being the name of Elisena, it being a certain justice in the Gods that
he should expire in that Element upon which he had committed so many crimes,
and was grown so dreadful to all the world.

The misfortune of Zenodorus took off much of the spirit and eagerness of his
companions, which had been the most animated by his example; but on the other
side it put Artaxus into so much rage and violence, that being not any longer
able to forbear either out of fear or any other consideration, he came up to
the most forward of his men, resolved to perish himself or to take away his
enemies life. What, cowardly villains, cried he to his own men, you are afraid
and give back for a single person, and you suffer the stoutest of your
companions to be killed before your faces and are not able to revenge them? O
shame beyond expression, the stain whereof neither all his blood nor all ours
is able to wash off! O Zenodorus, added he, since thou have in my quarrel lost
a life, which thou had preserved among so many dangers, and among so many
misfortunes, if I cannot make that satisfaction to thy Manes which I ought
them, receive at least that victime which I now sacrifice to thee.

With these words he comes on full of fury, when the most affectionate of his
men cast themselves before him, and kept the Prince so much in play, that there
was little probability, with all his valor, he should long defend a life set
upon by so great a number of enemies, and that with so much eagerness and
animosity.

Alas! how can we imagine the disconsolate Cleopatra was employed while they
were engaged in this unequal combat; and with what abundance of tears did
she bewail the loss of a Prince whom she saw perishing upon her account, and
that a Prince who, notwithstanding the pretended infidelity laid to his charge,
was dearer to her than her own life? What endeavors did she not use to divert
his enemies from their inhumane enterprise? But when she perceived that all her
entreaties and solicitations proved ineffectuall, as to the expectation she
conceived from them, what complaints, and what regrets did she not importune
heaven with, since that, in her misfortune, her lamentations and tears were
all she could afford, and indeed all that Fortune had left her? She embraced
the comfortless Artemisa, whose tears were mingled with hers, and pressing
her, with an action that spoke the height of passion; Now Sister, said she to
her, now, may you see the extremity of my cruel and unfortunate destiny, now
may you see the most extraordinary effects of heavens indignation, that ever
fell upon any wretch in this world. After the infidelity of Coriolanus, after
the loss of my liberty, and after the affliction it must needs be to me to see
my self returned into captivity by no other hand than his whom I loved so much,
all the misery I could further expect, was, to see the same Prince whom I loved
so dearly cruelly destroyed in my sight, and perishing in our defense. If it
must needs be the pleasure of the Gods that he should die in my presence, it
had been supportable to me that he had done it while he was yet in his mistake
and fought for our Enemies, and that to the former infidelity I might not
reproach him with this last, which he has now sufficiently cleared himself of.
But the gods thought not fit to leave me that consolation in his loss, and
would needs make his innocence appear as to this last crime, whereof I might
otherwise have accused him, as if it had been done purposely that my grief for
his loss might be the more insupportable.

But Sister, said Artemisa to her, whenever the importunity of her tears made
any intervall in her discourse, can you be still of opinion, that this man whom
you see fighting with so miraculous a valor for your deliverance; that he,
that should cast himself headlong from the top of a reck into the sea, merely
because he would not survive your loss and indignation; and that has refused
before us the life which Artaxus was content to leave him, purposely, that he
might sacrifice it to your service, can be a treacherous and unconstant person;
and will you not quit that opinion upon so many apparent demonstrations of his
fidelity and his affection? No doubt, Sister, but I should have other thoughts
of him, replies Cleopatra, if in the discovery he made to me of his treachery
he had not been so cruel as to deprive me of all matter of hope, and not leave
me any circumstance whence I might argue any thing on his behalf. But, I
beseech you; let us have no farther dispute about his innocence, since that if
he be found innocent, I shall be so much the more unfortunate, and that it must
needs be more insupportable to me to loose him innocent, then to see him die in
his unconstancy. And yet Sister, though I see my grief must needs be the
greater, yet can I not forbear wishing him innocent, and therefore whatever he
may be, whether innocent or guilty, whether loved or hated by me, might it
please the Gods that I could redeem his life with the sacrificing of my own,
and that those Barbarians that assault him, would turn their swords against my
breast so they would spare a life which is so dear to me as his.

The consequence of these words was a torrent of tears, which when it had
almost spent it self, she lifts up her eyes toward heaven, and reassuming her
discourse; O ye just powers of heaven, cried she, are you then resolved to
expose virtue to rage and cruelty, and shall heaven be turned into brass only
against my addresses, when it is open to the Lamentations and cries of other
wretches that call upon the gods?

These words were hardly understood by Artemisa and Megacles, who desirous to
have no hand in that unjust combat was come into the room where the Princesses
were to comfort them as well as he could, but there was such a horrid noise in
the ship about one single person, that there could not well be a greater, had
there been a fight between diverse ships. That put Cleopatra in a manner out of
all hope of ever seeing Coriolanus alive long, when casting her eye toward the
sea, as she did every minute almost to see whether there were any thing coming
to their assistance, she discovered a ship making all the sail she could. That
sight recruited her heart with some hope again, especially when she perceived
by degrees with Artemisa and Megacles, who also observed her course, that the
ship tacked about and came directly toward theirs, and was not at that time so
far from it, but that it might come up time enough to relieve the Prince, if he
would but stand it out as long as he could. To that end she thought fit to
communicate that hope to him, and accordingly speaking to him as loud as she
could, by reason of the noise and disorder; Take heart Coriolanus, cried she to
him, the gods have sent you relief, husband your strength so as to expect it,
and do not cast your self away through despair, when it is yet in your power
to hope.

These words of Cleopatra wrought on him the effect she expected they should,
and by a certain miracle multiplying the remaining fractions of courage which
were yet left in the Son of Juba, when his strength was upon the point to
forsake him, they obliged him to have a greater care of his life then he had
had before. Five or six of his enemies were laid with their bellies upward at
his feet, and made, as it were, a kind of a rampart against the rest, who,
notwithstanding the cries of Artaxus, and their own great resolution, were
afraid to meddle with him, and thought it greater prudence to expect till
weariness had made him incapable of fighting any longer, that they might
accordingly kill him with less danger. Artaxus was somewhat of the same
opinion himself, out of a confidence he had that he could not escape him, and
finding in himself, that his strength, grown much less by reason of his
wounds, was not proportionable to his fury, as he could have wished, he was
content to remit somewhat of his rage, and to have a little patience with him.

But, having at the exclamation of Cleopatra cast his eye about him on the sea,
and seen the ship making toward them, which he could not take for any other
than an enemy, the violence of his grief was inexpressible, insomuch, that
retreating some few paces full of confusion and astonishment, he was for some
minutes at such a loss, that he stood immovable, and incapable of all
resolution. The first imagination that came into his mind, was, that he could
not be in a condition to stand an engagement with those that came against him,
especially, when the men he had lest, found it such a difficulty to take away
the life of a single person: so that he was in a fear both of loosing
Cleopatra, without whom he did not much care for life, and also to loose that
very life against which he had armed such powerful enemies. Possessed with this
fear, he looked all about him, and perceiving he was at no great distance from
the shore, he had some thought to quit the ship, and accordingly to avoid a
fight which must needs prove disadvantagious to him upon the sea. But this
reflection was no sooner in his mind, but he considered withal that that
flight into the land, besides the dishonor of it, would prove fruitless, and
that, though he should with much ado get ashore, yet could he not get Cleopatra
out of the vessel till he had dispatched Coriolanus out of the way. Nay all
this granted as possible, and that he were delivered of that obstacle by the
death of the Prince, he conceived himself less safe upon the land than he was
upon the sea, it being in a Country where all things were at the command of his
enemies, and where he was not likely to meet with any retiring place for
himself, or any to conceal Cleopatra, whom he could not think of forsaking
without death.

These difficulties, with a many others, coming immediately into his
imagination, made him soon quit the design he had at first framed to himself,
and thereupon he took an absolute resolution to fight it out, and to defend his
beautiful prize to the very last gasp. In this resolution, looking up to heaven
with eyes sparkling with indignation, and an action expressing the very depth
of despair; Though gods and men, cried he, and all the elements combine to
ruin me, yet shall they not abate a jot of my courage, and if I must perish,
implacable destinies! you shall find I can do it without either baseness or
remorse. With these words, he returns to Coriolanus, as conceiving it
absolutely necessary that he should be dispatched out of the way before the
enemy were come up; and thinking it now past time to dally, and that he was to
make all the have he could with him, he comes up to him in such manner, that
the Prince, after he had warded off certain blows which the other had made at
him, struck him over the head with all the strength he had. The goodness of
the headpiece saved him from death; but it was not able to hinder him from
being stunnied in such wise, that after he had staggered a while, he fell down
within some few paces of the Princess Cleopatra. Megacles ran immediately to
help him, and Artemisa, out of the excellency of her good nature, remembering
what she ought her own blood, came to him, and took up the visour of his
headpiece, to give him a greater freedom of breathing, and more air.

While he continued in that condition, Cleopatra, running to those that were
still fighting against Coriolanus, and who possibly, notwithstanding his
miraculous resistance, would have dispatched him at last, comes up to them
without any fear, and liftng up her voice that she might be the better heard;
Hold your hands, said she to them, and if you expect any favor from those whom
you see coming to our assistance, make no further attempt on the life of a
Prince, on whom your own, will, within these few minutes, depend. It Is the only
way you have left you to secure your lives, for you are not to hope for any
mercy, if you be take you not to your own Prince, and by compliance make your
selves worthy the pardon which I promise you. These words proved effectual upon
some part of those that heard them, and particularly upon the Armenians, who
were most of them persons of considerable quality. These were content to do as
the Princess would have them, and, giving over sighting, went to see how their
King did: but the Pirates, in whom the death of their leader, and the despair
of pardon wrought a different effect, were obstinate in the design they had
conceived to take away Coriolanus's life, and, though there were but one half
of them left, yet despaired not of revenging the death of Zenodorus.

The Prince, perceiving himself eased, not only of the greatest part of this
enemies, but also of the most dangerous and most valiant, valewed not much
those that remained; and though he must needs be very much weakened, as well by
the continual action he had been in, as by some slight wounds he had received,
yet was he now in greater hopes than ever of gaining the victory, and
delivering Cleopatra. In the mean time, Artaxus, who had only been stunned
with the heavy blow he had received, comes at length to himself, by the
assistance they had given him; but ere he had so far recovered himself as to
know all that were about him, and become master of his strength, that is,
before he was in a condition to discern what passed in the ship, and to give
out orders about any thing, the other that was coming in to the assistance of
Cleopatra, and which had already been known to be one of those of Alexandria,
was gotten so near, that they could hear them hollow that were within her, and
in a manner discern their faces.

Artaxus having got up, and taken his sword again, looked about him of all
sides, and perceiving that all his hopes were vanished, he was convinced his
final ruin was at no great distance. He sighed again for very grief and rage,
as conceiving himself not to be in a condition either to execute his revenge,
or keep Cleopatra in his possession, and therefore was at such a loss and
irresolution, that he knew not what side to take. While in the interim, the
other ship came on still with such speed and such hollowing, that it was out of
all question she was an enemy, and indeed within a few minutes after Cleopatra
and Artemisa, perceived, in the head of those that were coming to their
assistance, Prince Marcellus and Prince Alexander, who, that they might be
known to the Princesses had raised up the visours of their head-pieces. If
their joy was extraordinary, the grief of Artaxus, who, upon the first sight
knew Alexander, was no less violent. He blasphemed against Heaven, and railed
at his evil fortune, and that hateful sight filled him no doubt, upon the first
apprehension thereof, with fatal resolutions. We must perish, cried he, but it
is but just we bury under our ruins those that should derive any felicity from
our destruction. And for thy part, Alexander, said he, loud enough to be heard
by him, assure thy self thou shall not laugh at the defeat of Artaxus. With
these words he comes up to the two Princesses, and looking on them with eyes
red with blood and fire, he put them into a greater fright then ever they had
known before; See here, said he, these are either my security, or my victimes:
what shall escape my love, shall never escape my revenge, and if it be lost to
me, it shall be lost to all the World besides.

As he uttered these words, he took Artemisa in the left hand, and with the
right presenting the point of his inhuman weapon to the fair breast of
Cleopatra, he directs his fatal looks on Alexander and Marcellus just at the
instant that they were preparing all things to fasten the grappling-irons, and
addressing his speech to the Son of Anthony: Alexander, said he to him, hope
not thou shall have any thing to rejoice at in the misfortune of thy enemy, and
think not to triumph over me so many several ways as thou have, through the
malice of my fortune, and the perfidiousnesse of Artemisa. It was through the
baseness of this Princess that she ever came into thy power, and the
revenging gods have been pleased that Cleopatra should fall into mine; but if
my Sister has been too susceptible of thy love, thine has been too ungrateful
to entertain the affection I have had for her. Thou returnest again conducted
by that Fortune which has ever been in hostility against me, with a design,
and happily in a condition to force them both out of my hands: but know, that thy
hope has deluded thee, and all thou art to expect from this enterprise, is the
death of these two Princesses. Thou may save their lives by directing thy
course some other way, and leaving me at liberty to pursue mine: but if thou
losest a single minute in considering what resolution thou shoulst take, thou
shall find me aready resolved to sheath this sword in the breasts of Cleopatra
and Artemisa.

The King of Armenia had made this discourse without the least interruption,
while Alexander, seeing him in that cruuel posture against the Princesses, had
given order to those that were preparing to fasten the ship, to forbear, and
stood in a confusion, and absolutely at a loss what to think of so terrible a
spectacle. Upon the first sight of that Barbarian, and his inhuman attempt, his
indignation would have broke out against him with all its violence; but
fearing, on the other side, by his precipitation, to lose what was a thousand
times dearer to him then his own life, his love tied up his hands, with
considerations as strong as the other, and kept him in an irresolution full of
perplexity. Thence it was, that he not only forbore interrupting Artaxus while
he spoke, but also when he had given over, was not able to make him any reply,
and only looked on him with much confusion, and as if he had been in a trance.
Marcellus was also afraid for Cleopatra, whom he loved as dearly as he could a
Sister, but his soul being not, upon this occasion, capable of such a violence
of passion as was that of Alexander, he was guilty of a greater freedom of
apprehension, and consequently was the less troubled at the horror of that
object. Hence was it that he took occasion to speak while the other was silent,
and darting on Artaxus, a look expressing the greatness of his indignation;
Barbarous wretch, said he to him, if the sight of those divine beauties cannot
stay thy hands, consider what will become of thy own life in that horrid
attempt, and doubt not but thou shall loose it by the most exquisite torments
that humane invention ever found out, if thou execute thy barbarous resolution.

The Armenian smiled at this discourse of Marcellus, and looking on him very
scornefully, Do not imagine, said he to him, that thou can frighten me with
thy menaces, or that I stand in any fear of death my self, after I have given
it to what I love beyond my self; but if thou with Alexander art desirous of
the safety of these Princesses, resolve immediately to do as I would have you,
for fear your resolutions come too late. Ah! says Alexander to him, assuming
the discourse at last, will thy cruelties never have any end, and will thou
treat me with more inhumanity upon the sea of Alexandria then thou did upon
the scaffold at Artaxata? Thus did he speak to him, as much out of tenderness
as indignation, when the courageous Cleopatra, out of a jealousy that that
softness might prove prejudicial to her liberty, and standing less in fear of
death then of her captivity, and the importunate Love of the King of Armenia,
brok that silence which she had observed all the time before, and looking on
Alexander with a countenance that argued much more confidence than his:
Brother, said she to him, have a greater relyance on the gods then to forsake
us upon the vain frights which Artaxus would put us into. He dares not put us
to death, but though we were to expect it, we think it much more supportable
then the life he prepares for us.

Artaxus was in a manner satisfied that these words of Cleopatra would have
that effect on the spirit of Marcellus and that of Alexander as she expected
they should, and fearing to be surprised, he lifted up his arm as he drew near
to Cleopatra (who was gotten some paces from him) either to frighten them the
more, or possibly to execute his bloody resolution. But, as happy fortune would
have it, at the very same instant of time, the valiant son of Juba, who was
fighting at the other end of the ship against those that were left of the
Pirates, had, notwithstanding their finding him so much employment, (minding
the safety of Cleopatra much more than his own) partly taken notice of what was
past: Transported at the imminent danger he saw her in, and perceiving it was
not now a time for him to be so mindful of his own life, broke through those
enemies that stood in his way, and laying on the ground all that any way
opposed him, he got up to the King of Armenia with so much speed, that, before
he was sensible of his coming, he gave him a thrust with such force that he
laid him at his feet and tumbled him upon the deck to one fide of the vessel.
Artaxus made a shift to get upon again, bet e're he could do it, Coriolanus was
gotten before Cleopatra in a condition to defend her, while in the mean time
Alexander and Marcellus in taking their advantage of this intervall had caused
their ship to close with the other, and, notwithstanding the opposition of the
Armenians and the Pirates, who joined with them with abundance of resolution,
made their way through and boarded the Armenian.

This fight, as it was undertaken upon a barbarous occasion, so was it managed
with more animosity than ordinary, and upon that account was it that there was
some blood spilt, which upon another occasion had happily, through the clemency
of the Chiefs, been spared. The Egyptian soldiers that followed Alexander put
all they met with in their way, to the sword; but that Prince and Marcellus
scorning a victory too easily gained, ran to Cleopatra and Artemisa, and if
love obliged the son of Antony to mind in the first place what he most loved,
Friendship had in a manner the same effect upon the son of Octavia. Alexander,
full of fury and indignation ran toward Artaxus, whom rage had put upon the
last and most violent attempts, and who must needs have expected the execution
of a just revenge; but Artemisa stepped before him, and speaking to her dearest
Alexander with her natural goodness; Alexander, said she to him, put not to
death the King my Brother, and satisfy your self with the victory and
possession of Artemisa. Alexander let fall the point of his sword at this
discourse, and looking on the Princess with an action full of affection and
respect; Madam, said he to her, had not you laid your c^mmands on me, I should
have considered in the person of Artaxus both the blood of Artemisa and the
dignity of a King. Whereupon, turning to Artaxus, who, swelling with rage and
confusion, and overpressed with grief and weariness, sat upon the deck,
whence darting his scattered looks of all sides, his thoughts ran upon what
was most barbarous and horrid. King of Armenia, said he to him, thou shall
receive from us what thou have never granted any one, and what indeed thou
should not expect, if thou call to mind that cruel scaffold upon which my
head was once made a public spectacle. We leave thee thy life, and absolute
liberty to dispose of thy self as thou please, and desire no other advantage
than that of delivering Artemisa and Cleopatra out of thy cruel hands. From
this difference of carriage, thou may reflect on what there is between us,
and from the ill success of thy enterprises infer what horror and vengeance
the good and just powers of heaven have for thy violences and cruelties.

To this effect was the discourse of Alexander when the King of Armenia,
looking on him with eyes wherein the rage which possessed him was visibly
apparent; Be not so fond as to imagine, said he to him, that I will accept of a
life from the son of Anthony, the Cajoller of Artemisa, and the brother of
Cleopatra. Thy very birth made thee my enemy, thy crime armed me against thee,
and thy Sister, by the little regard she had for my love, has deprived me of
all the desire I could have had for life. Think not then that I will owe it to
him who has occasioned me so many misfortunes, or survive the hope I now lose
both of being revenged of thee, and possessing Cleopatra. With these words he
rises with his sword in his hand from the place where he was set, and rolling
his dreadful eyes about him, gave all notice as it were of the horrid
resolution he had taken. The two Princesses, who were best acquainted with his
furious humors, ran behind their defenders, and the Princes set themselves
before them in a posture to oppose Artakus, if he should attempt any thing. The
cruel King having considered his weakness, and the little probability there
was he should execute what his resentments inspired him with, hearkened to the
temptation of his evil genius, and after the silence of a few minutes;
Implacable Fortune, said he at last, thou see me ruined, but not vanquished,
and though, by thy unjust assistance, thou have made the blood of Anthony to
triumph over that of Artabazus, yet is it not to thee, but to my own revenge
and love that I now offer this great sacrifice.

Having uttered these words, with a furious action he turned the point of his
sword against his breast, and directing it to a certain place where there was
nothing of arms to oppose its passage, he fell upon it so of a sudden, that no
man had the time to prevent him, and that so effectually, as to his design,
that the murdering sword meeting with no resistance, ran him quite through,
and, passing through those parts which are most necessary for the preservation
of life, deprived him of it in a moment. Though that unfortunate King had drawn
upon himself the detestation of all those that were present at his death; yet
were there some among them, who could not but pity his misfortune: and though
Alexander were a person that of all men had the most just ground to hate him,
yet was he extremely troubled for him, even to the shedding of tears at that
deplorable adventure. Artemisa ran immediately to her brother with a face
over-flown with tears, and bewailed his loss with all the lamentations, which
an excess of good nature could put into a woman's mouth. Cleopatra, Coriolanus,
and Marcellus thought themselves concerned in it merely out of a consideration
of generosity, and not long after, they all jointly acknowledged the justice of
the gods in that example, and submitted to their will in the punishment of that
cruel King. Artemisa was still about the body of Artaxus with Megacles and the
rest of the Armenians, who had their lives given them upon the mediation of
Cleopatra. Cleopatra returned her thanks to Marcellus and Prince Alexander for
their assistance, and Coriolanus, not able to stand for weariness by reason of
the continual action he had undergone for so long time, and the weakness he
was in, through certain wounds he had received, was sat down, and looked on
what passed as a person distracted by different reflections, when Marcellus and
Alexander, casting their eyes on him, knew him. Their astonishment was not
small at that accident, for Alexander, having been acquainted by Marcellus with
the pretended infidelity of Coriolanus, he was no less surprised then
Marcellus, to find him with Cleopatra. Now Alexander, having ever loved the
person, and respected the virtue of the Son of Juba, thought not the ground he
had to hate him so great as should oblige him to forget the esteem he sometimes
had had for him. But Marcellus, whose resentment proceeded from a more violent
passion, could not absolutely moderate himself in that emergency, and looking
accordingly on the Princess Cleopatra with a countenance wherein might be seen
the lively characters of his astonishment: What, Sister, said he to her, is the
King of Mauritania among you? And is that Prince, who is guilty of so horrid an
infidelity both against you and me, so near Cleopatra, whom he had so
ungratefully forsaken? You may credit your own eyes, says Cleopatra to him,
and know withal, that that very inconstant man, whom you find so near me, has
fought all this day alone against Artaxus and all his men, has killed the
greatest part of those you see laid along upon the deck, overthrew Artaxus in
your presence at the very instant, that he was going to take away my life, and
has done so much in my assistance, that without it, yours had come too late,
and I had been yet in the hands and power of the King of Armenia. I never
questioned, replies Marcellus, but that Coriolanus was the most valiant Prince
upon earth; but we may as little doubt, for your part and mine, but that of all
men he is the most unfaithful both to his Mistress and his friend.

Coriolanus, as it were, awakened by this discourse, out of those reflections
wherein his thoughts were employed before, and looking on Marcellus with a
certain discovery of his resentment; Marcellus, said he to him, now do I
perceive that thy cruelty knows no limits, and thou think it nothing to
crush a miserable man with such indignities as he could not have expected from
a Prince that had sometimes been his friend. It is a great demonstration of my
fidelity, that I suffer these affronts from thee with patience, and not many
days since, when thou had an implacable design against my life, I presented
my breast to the point of thy sword without the least opposition, though it be
not unknown to thee that I am able to defend it. If it be any trouble to thee
that thou did not then take it from me, come now and destroy the pitiful
remainders that are left of it, and satiate thy self with my blood without
tormenting me continually with thy cruel persecution. Acknowledge the
difference there was between us in point of friendship, since that, for an
imaginary perfi^^ousnesse which thou woulst have to be construed a real
infidelity, thou art bent against my life with so much inhumanity, and that by
so many unworthy actions of thine, (whence I cannot but too much infer thy
baseness) thou could never abate any thing of that affection which my heart
has conceived for thee, and does still preserve, indeed, but with too too much
fidelity. Go cruel man, triumph over my misfortune by thy change, and
prosecute, with Cleopatra, those enjoyments which I am content to resign to
thee. I must needs at last conclude from the conformity which I perceive there
is between her sentiments and thine, that it is upon thy account, and to enjoy
thee, that she slights me, as conceiving her fortune will be much better with
Caesar's Nephew, a person destined for the Empire of the Universe, then with a
beggarly dispossessed Prince, whom Fortune has not left any thing but his
sword. And yet as contemptible and as wretched as I am, I would not resign the
interest I have in her to Tiberius, while I had one drop of blood left in my
veins, and I would wander all over the World, but I would find him, and take
away his life, did I but once imagine that Cleopatra were designed for him. But
for thee, who did sometimes quit the pretentions thou had to her, to me, I
find in my self a compliance for thee, suitable to so great an obligation, and
if I cannot look on thy fortune without dying, I will be so far from being any
way thy hindrance, that I shall happily by my death remove out of thy way the
greatest obstacle which any other but thy self could have met with in such a
business.

This was the discourse of Coriolanus, and notwithstanding the cruel prejudice,
whereby some, that were concerned in it, were possessed, yet had it that
influence upon their spirits, that it was impossible for them to conceal the
discoveries of their sympathy. Marcellus, who was a person of an excellent good
nature, could not dissemble it; and doing himself a certain violence to
express what he felt within him; Coriolanus, said he to the Prince, how far
soever I ought to be persuaded of thy infidelity, yet have I not so great an
aversion for thee, but that I would spend the best part of my blood, might it
contribute any thing to thy justification; and if thy proceeding had been such
as to leave us anything to doubt of, thou had found an advocate in my heart,
that would have maintained thy innocence against all the World to the last
minute of my life. But, Coriolanus, thou were not pleased to afford us that
comfort, and have taken such a course to have thy crime noised through the
whole Roman Empire, that unless we had been without the limits of it, banished
into the most remote parts of the earth, it was impossible we should be
ignorant thereof. Ask the most inconsiderable person among the Romans what the
infidelity of Coriolanus was, and by what means it broke forth; and then ask
Caesar, ask all the Romans, nay, Cleopatra her self, whether I have betrayed
thee, or whether, from the day that for thy sake I disengaged my self from the
affection I had for her, I ever looked on her otherwise then as a Sister, or
minded any man's interests as to her, but thine. Do not therefore charge either
her or me with any baseness, since there has happened no change in our
sentiments, and that when we both accuse thee with a departure from thy former
thoughts, and the infidelity thou have committed against us, infer not that I
have quitted Julia for Cleopatra, or that Cleopatra, shunning Coriolanus as a
monster of ingratitude, has looked on the Empire, or Marcellus, or indeed any
other person that thou can any way reproach her with.

Coriolanus, being out of all patience at this discourse, rises up of a sudden,
and coming to Marcellus in an excess of passion; I am satisfied, said he to
him, that what thou say is true; but thou must either run me through this
heart with thy sword, or expect to see me fall upon the point of my own, after
the example of the King of Armenia, or let me understand at l^st, what this
infidelity is, which is so well known to all the World, and unknown only to
the person that has committed it. I have nothing (...) particular to acquaint
thee withal, replies Marcellus, but it (...) ever my opinion, that what was
apparent to the eyes of all the World carried crime enough in it to deny thee
the thought of innocence, and that thou need not express thy self more
plainly both to Cleopatra and Marcellus, then by sending plenipotentiary
Ambassadors to Caesar, with credentialls under the great Seal of Mauritania,
to demand of him the Princess Julia in marriage, and thereupon to do him
homage for thy Kingdom. -- Who? I! cries out the Prince, at this discourse of
Marellus, have I sent Ambassadors to Caesar to demand Julia of him, and to do
him homage for my Dominions? It Is true Coriolanus, says the Princess
Cleopatra, who had been silent all the time, it is true, Coriolanus, you did send
them, and if we ha^^ not seen them our selves with their credential letters in
form, and with full power, we should hardly have been persuaded to a thing so
improbable. Theocles, one of the most eminent of your Subjects, was the chief
person of that Embassy, and he came along with Volusius to Rome, at his return
out of Mauritania. There was nothing omitted in that affair, either as to
solemnity or form, and if it wrought not the effect you expected it should, it
has raised in the heart of your friend, and that very justly, the resentment
he has discovered to you, and in that of the unfortunate Cleopatra, a grief
which will bring her to the grave.

Cleopatra having thus disburthened her thoughts by this discourse, Camilla,
whom the virtue of that Prince had ever obliged to side with him, perceiving he
was mute and immovable at these reproaches, comes to him, and in few words
acquainted him more at large, with the cause of his misfortune, and the truth
how all things were managed between Volusius and his Ambassadors. The son of
Juba no less cast down at this discourse then if he had been struck with a
thunderbolt, stood still for a good space of time looking still about him as
if it had been to seek for some either to witness his innocence, or make good
the charge put in against him. At last, dispelling his astonishment, and
fearing his silence might be thought an argument of his guilt, he comes nearer
to Cleopatra, and setting one knee to the ground; Madam, said he to her, I
humbly crave your pardon, for my having charged you with any thing unjustly; I
should have known, that you are just in all things, and thence have inferred,
that your change could not proceed but from a cause suitable thereto. I might
happily, not without reason, hope it from your goodness and the friendship of
Marcellus, that you would have proved my advocate to your self, and plead my
cause against the artifices and designs of my enemies. And this it was not
hard for you to take notice of, since there was little likelihood I should so
much court the alliance and friendship of Caesar when I was possessed of the
throne of my Ancestors, having slighted it in a time when I had no favor or
fortune to hope for but from him alone, or that I should voluntarily offer him
the homage of my kingdoms after I had conquered them by open war, and the
defeat of his forces, when I had not long before refused them of him upon those
very terms. But, in fine, since I have not been so fortunate as to find that
protection in you, and that you have really been persuaded that I had been
guilty of a baseness so improbable as that, and, if I may presume to say it,
so disconsonant to the other actions of my life, it concerns me to endeavor
my own justification, and to satisfy both you, and all the world besides, of
the impossibility there is I should be guilty of so base an infidelity. I must
find out Volusius and Theocles, and I must find out Tiberius, who, no doubt, is
the Author of this cruel intrigue. I hope, through the assistance of the
gods, to make my innocence apparent to all, and am confident that within a
short time I shall dispell all these mists of plots and prejudice. But, Madam,
you may be pleased to remember, that when you banished me out of your sight for
ever, and pronounced that dreadful sentence, which has occasioned all my
losses, I was master of two great Kingdoms which I came to present you with,
and that through the despair you put me into, you deprived me not only of the
power but even of the design I had to go and maintain them, as no doubt I
could have done against all the forces of the Universe. Through that misfortune
is it now come to pass that I have nothing left me, as having lost, not only
the crowns I had conquered, but also the Friendship of Caesar, from whom I was
to hope for all I could expect. So that when I shall return again into your
sight, in a condition innocent enough to hope a readmission into your favor, I
shall have no Crown to offer you nor indeed a refuge in any part of the earth,
it being not so easy for me to expect a second revolt of my Subjects, after I
have by my negligence betrayed them to Caesar's severity, and the orders he has
settled in the Provinces since his last conquest thereof. Thus Madam, can I not
cast my eyes on you with any confidence, nor indeed desire, you should fasten
your felfe to the fortunes of a miserable person that has not an inch of earth
to offer you and to entertain you in. However I go my ways in order to my
justification, so to satisfy both my love and my duty, by both which I am
equally obliged thereto: and when I shall have effected it, I shall either, out
of a compliance with the will of the gods, not disturb a better fortune, which
it is in their power to send you, or, with my hopes, lose a life which must
needs be troublesome to you, and to me insupportable.

To this effect was the discourse of Juba's son, and Cleopatra and Marcellus
were so moved thereat, as also at the reflection he caused them to make upon
the deplorable change of his condition, that they could not forbear tears, and
all other demonstrations of the tenderness, compassion, and sympathy, which
might be expected upon such an occasion. Cleopatra, the most concerned of any
to express her sentiments to the Prince, looking on him with eyes wherein
could not be seen any thing of displeasure; Go Coriolanus, said she to him, go,
and endeavor your justification, I desire you should effect it, no less than
you do your self. It Is possible you might be sufficiently justified in my
apprehensions by the things you have done for my deliverance, by the
probability which I find in your discourse, and by the good opinion I have of
you, were it not requisite to make your innocence apparent, that so it might be
lawful for Cleopatra to readmit you, with honor, into her former favor and
affection. They are but the just rewards of your fidelity, if you have
continued in it, and the loss of your Kingdoms shall loose you nothing in my
heart if yours have suffered no change. In the mean tune conceal your self in
a Country where you are to fear all things, as being so near so powerful an
enemy; and assure your self that in the uncertainty I may be in of your
fidelity, I am not so little concerned in the safety of your life, but that I
tremble when I reflect on the hazards whereto you expose it.

With these words she reached forth her hand to raise him up, and the Prince
imagined to himself so much kindness and obligation in what she had said, as
also in all the other demonstrations of her affection, that for the time he had
in a manner lost all remembrance of his misfortunes. He stood still and made no
reply, not knowing how to express his resentments, when Marcellus, looking on
him with eyes red by reason of the tears he had shed; Prince, whom I once
loved so dearly, said he to him, and whom I cannot yet hate, if you are
innocent I know not what reparations to make you; but what condition soever you
may be found in, I here promise that I will never oppose you.

Having said thus much, they all went toward Artemisa who was showring down
her tears upon the body of her Brother, and, after they had given her a little
time to recover her self, they entreated her to pass into the other vessel.
Artemisa was content, and was handed in by her Alexander, who, looking on her
now as Queen of Armenia, by reason of the general opinion there was of the
death of Ariobarzanes, would have behaved himself with more respect toward her
than he had done before, would she have permitted it. They ordered Megacles to
carry the body of Artaxus to Alexandria, that it might be embalmed, and
transported thence into the monument of his Fathers: and Coriolanus, who had a
great esteem for Megacles, out of a consideration of his virtue, would needs be
carried ashore in his ship. Cleopatra, Marcellus, Alexander and Artemisa,
having once more taken their leaves of him, went into their own, and, with all
the joy and satisfaction, which they could derive from the liberty of the two
Princesses, set sail toward Alexandria.

FINIS.
TO THE Truly Virtuous Lady, Mrs. JANE AVBREY, Of Ynis-gedwin in the County of
Brecon.
MADAME,
THink it not strange, to find so great a Princess so unfortunate, nor much,
to entertain her suitably to her condition, though not to her quality, and
afford her what her misfortunes have forced from all she has addressed her
self to, Compassion. We are much moved at the distresses of Strangers, merely
out of a consideration of their being such; but when we find the greatest Merit
and Excellencies struggling with Calamities, Virtue it self surrounded with the
inconveniences of life, and such, whose veins swell with the noblest blood,
exposed to all the miseries of a malicious destiny, it defies Humanity to be
unconcerned, and is able to force the most barbarous inclinations into
Sympathy. All these recommendations have we, Madam, in the person of the
incomparable CLEOPATRA, one whom her misfortunes have wafted for refuge all
over the World, yet afford not a greater hope of their drawing toward a
Period, then that they have brought her to the extremities of it, as it were,
to try the entertainment of Wales, after that of so many other Countries.

And where should I address her there, with greater hopes of reception and
assistances then to a Family, which glories only in the secret satisfaction
that attends the doing of what is highly generous and obliging, and sheds its
kindnesses as much beyond the expectations as deserts of those that receive
them. This is an acknowledgment, Madam, which those, I have in particular
received from your noble Father, force from me, and which I hope your Modesty
will pardon, since that, though it were much greater, it would be below the
resentments may justly be expected in,

Madam, Your most humble and most obliged servant, J. DAVIES.

HYMEN'S PRAELUDIA, Or, Loves Masterpiece.
PART X. LIB. I.
ARGUMENT.
ARtaban and Elisa, Princess of the Parthians, take sanctuary in Alexandria.
Agrippa, under whose protection they had cast themselves, falls in love with
Elisa, but out of consideration of virtue and generosity forbears the
discoveries of his affection. Candace and Elisa discourse of their loves.
Caesario (generally known by the name of Cleomedon) comes to Alexandria, upon
intelligence that Queen Candace was there, with whom he has a secret interview
in the night time. He entertains her and Elisa with a continuation of his
History. He gives battle, with 16000 men, to Tiribasus, who had 100000. is left
for dead in the field, but afterward miraculously recovered by Eteocles, who
was left in a condition not much better. The next day after the battle,
Eurinoe, an Ethiopian Lady, coming into the Field to seek the body of her
beloved Teramenes, is brought also to that of Cleomedon, whom, as having killed
him, and not long before a Brother of hers, she would have run through with a
dagger, but is prevented by Eteocles. Making a second attempt to do it, she
finds something in his countenance, which being taken with, she has compassion
on him, causing him and Eteocles to be carried to her Castle, where they were
nobly entertained, and recovered of their wounds. Eurinoe, having given order
for the enterrement of her dear Teramenes, he miraculously recovers to life,
and is brought by Pelorus to a sisters house of his, where he is secretly
cured, and informed of all that passes at Eurinoe's. She falls in love with
Cleomedon, whom she much presses to promise her a mutual affection: but he
persisting in his former resolutions of virtue, and constancy toward Candace,
all proves ineffectual. Several conferences they had together to that purpose,
most of which are overheard by Teramenes, who thereupon conceives a great
esteem for Cleomedon. At last Teramenes is reconciled to Eurinoe, and by the
mediation of Cleomedon they are married before his departure thence; and, in
requital of his good offices, furnish him with all things necessary. He goes to
Telemactrus and Onisthenes, to whom he discover himself, and acquaints them
with the design he had against Tiribasus.

IN the mean time, the Queen of Ethiopia, and the Princess of the Parthians
were gotten into Alexandria, and after that the two Princesses had been
disposed into their several lodgings, Cornelius, who had already taken order
for the entertainment of the King of the Medes, did the like for the
accommodation of Artaban. This latter, though he were not looked upon as a
person of a royal rank, as Tygranes was, yet was he treated with as much
respect as any of those that wore Diadems; and the great reputation he had
acquired, such as was already spread over the whole earth, added to the
gracefulness of his countenance, and that majestic air which was so
remarkable in his person, made Agrippa, and the Praetor of Egypt consider him
as a man worthy all the reverence and acknowledgment that might be due even to
the Caesar's. Though by an extraordinary indulgence of good fortune he had come
off without wounds, having been engaged in so great a fight as he was that day,
yet was he not so thoroughly recovered of those he had received before, but that
the action he had been in had weakened him so much, as that he stood in need of
some rest. Elisa could have wished he should take his ease for a certain number
of days; but, not able to persuade him to it, by reason of the impossibility
which he urged there was he should forbear waiting on her for so long time,
after he had so miraculously met with her again, she laid her commauds on him
not to stir out of his bed for that night, and the best part of the next day,
though she did no small violencce to her self merely out of the tenderness she
had for his health. He obeyed her commands with that respectful submission,
which, notwithstanding his heat and fierceness, he had ever observed toward
her, and, receiving the lodgings appointed him, and the Officers whom Cornelius
ordered to wait on him, with abundance of satisfaction and respects, he passed
over that night in his bed with reflections much different from those which he
had had, for some that preceded it. Certain it is, that that great soul, great
even among those that could pretend most to greatness, though it were not
immoderately subject either to grief or joy, was at this time sensible of both:
for as it had, in the loss of Elisa, made trial of the greatest spite that a
malicious fortune could do him; so in the happy recovery of her, he had met
with the sweetest satisfaction he could be capable of.

During these pleasant entertainments of his thoughts, reflecting on the many
extraordinary accidents that checquered his life, and not a little delighted
with the consideration of those many victories that had raised his fame to so a
high pitch, and the noble demonstrations of his affection to his Princess, he
could hardly for some time so much as think of the misfortunes he had already
run through, or the opposition he might for the future meet withal, through
either the cruelty of Phraates, or the troublesome enterview between him and
the King of the Medes. All this signified very little with him, when it came
into his mind that he had found Elisa again, that, by many discoveries, he
found her not displeased that she had met him, that he was within the same
walls with her, and that in a place, where she stood not in fear of any thing
from either the authority or tyranny of Phraates. O ye immortal gods, said he
at last, directing his thoughts to Heaven with all possible acknowledgment, O
ye assistant deities, who have ever delivered me out of those abysses of
misfortunes, whereinto an implacably malicious Fortune, and the ingratitude of
men have often forced me! I humbly acknowledge your power in this miraculous
effect of your goodness, and I repine no longer for what I have suffered,
either from the hands of ungrateful men, or from the contrary disposal of my
destiny, since you have been pleased at length to restore me my Elisa. I have
not forgotten how much I am obliged to celebrate your divine assistances, not
only for a many victories which have proved the means to raise me to some name
and rank in the World, but also for the extraordinary protection which you
thought fit to afford me, as well amidst the swords of my enemies, as the angry
waves. There is therefore much less reason I should forget, that, at the point
of despair, you restore my Princess, and with her those felicities which are
not subject either to the inconstancy of Fortune or the ingratitude of men.

From this consideration his thoughts were taken up with Tigranes, and he began
to reflect on the obstacles and inconveniences he might fear from him, and his
unfortunate meeting with him; and certainly, such a reflection, had it happened
at some other time might have moderated, if not disturbed, his joy, but, as
things stood now, it was not so considerable as to come into balance against
his present happiness. Whereupon, calling to mind how that during the small
time he had been felicified with the company of his Elisa, he had observed that
her affections were absolutely devoted to him, and that she had all aversion
that could be for ^igranes, he could not but raise his thoughts to a certain
confidence, that all the hindrance he might fear from that Rival would not be
able to injure his Fortune. The protection which Agrippa had put him in hopes
of amounted to so much, as to win him into a belief, that Caesar would not any
way oppose him, and the constancy he had perceived in Elisa toward him, though
she were not naturally guilty of too much forwardness, made him imagine that
though all the world should be against him, yet was his happiness so surely
grounded on the affection of his Princess, that nothing could shake it. Amidst
these imaginations wherein it might be said he placed a certain felicity, his
greatest disquiet, was, that he wanted the sight and presence of his Elisa for
some few hours; and the impatience he was in to see her again, made him look
on that one night, and a piece of the next day as if it had been a year, so
trivial seemed to him the consideration of his rest in comparison of that of
his Love.

But if his reflections troubled and interrupted his sleep, that of the great
Agrippa might be said to be subject to greater distraction. For the passion he
had for Elisa having already arrived to its full strength, and being come to
such a height as that all the force of his understanding and discourse was not
able to oppose it, the effects it had wrought in his soul were accordingly so
violent, that he could expect no other issue thereof but perpetual and
inevitable disquiet. And though it had been merely out of the consideration of
his own virtue, which would not suffer him to deny the doing of a good action,
when an opportunity offered it self to do it, that he had protected Artaban,
against the arms and power of Tygranes, and purely out of generosity had taken
his part rather than that of the King of the Medes, yet was it not in his power
to forbear looking on him as his Rival, and that not as a Rival out of favor
and slighted, as Tygranes was, but as one much esteemed by Elisa, and
consequently as the only person that had been so fortunate as to engage her
affections. He had, it seems, that very day observed very evident
demonstrations of the mutual respects that passed between them. And whereas,
on the other side, the revolutions which had happened in the Kingdom of the
Parthians and that of the Medes by the valor and conduct of Artaban were of
such consequence as that they were known all over the world; in like manner,
his inclinations for Elisa, and the ingratitude of Phraates, made no small
noise among the Romans and by that means was come to the ears of Agrippa so
that when he looked on Artaban he must needs consider him as that person, who
of all men was the most likely and most able to cross him in his love, or
rather as the only man that could ruin all his pretenses.

This consideration made him sigh for very grief, and if his virtue had not
been so great, no question but he had repented him of the assistance he had
given him: but, having withal a great and gallant soul, and all his
resentments conformable to the noble fame he had acquired, he could not be
troubled that he had done what he ought to have done, and thought it sufficient
only to quarrel at the crossenesse of his Fortune without being guilty of a
wish that should any way derogate from his virtue. Nay, he was not able to
conceive any aversion for such a Rival, and those excellent qualities which
might oblige him to fear Artaban, were no less powerful in obliging him to
love him, as representing to him, that he might by the same means deserve the
friendship of Agrippa, as he had obtained the love of Elisa. And yet all this
hindered not but that he wished himself loved by Elisa, and all the great
virtue he was master of, could not oppose in him a desire so natural to those
that Love, nor prevail with him to quit Elisa to Artaban, though he were very
much in her favor, and not unworthy her affections. He was satisfied that how
earnest soever he might be to gain her love, all his endeavors would prove
ineffectuall, and yet his passion exasperated by that kind of despair seemed to
grow more and more powerful, and to seat it self in his soul with more
empire and authority.

From this therefore he concluded; that it was impossible for him to give over
loving Elisa, and thereupon resolved to do all that lay in his power to force
her inclinations from Artaban^ and to give a check to the favor she was
pleased to afford him. But, in regard that all his thoughts were comformable to
honor and generosity, and out of a consideration that he could not, without
prejudice to both, disturb a noble affection grounded on extraordinary
Services, and that, between persons that had cast themselves under his
protection, in a place where he had all power in his own hands, and where, in
all likelihood, he could not make use of his authority, without a certain kind
of tyranny, he sought but a mean to reconcile his Love to his Virtue, and to
manage the former without prejudice to the latter.

Upon these reflections he resolved to dispute the business fairly with
Artaban, without any advantage as to matter of power, and to strive with him
for the heart of Elisa, by desert and services, and not make use of his credit
in the Empire, or the authority of Caesar. Being confirmed daily more and more
in that resolution; What injury, said he, do I do Artaban, by being desirous to
engage with him in a combat; wherein all the advantage is of his side? And what
quarrel can be justly have against me when I shall with no other force, than
that of Love, assault a heart already delivered up to his disposal, and that a
heart favorably prepossessed for him with all that may make him happy, to my
prejudice. I am not engaged to him either upon any account of Friendship, or
obligation, and therefore see no reason that should persuade me tamely to sit
down in my own misery, out of a fear of thwarting his happiness. There are few
persons happily that have such a command of their inclinations, as to confine
themselves to those rules which I propose to my self, and it is in Love rather
than policy, and to gain the possession of what a man most affects, rather than
to gain a kingdom, that it is lawful to employ all arms, and to make use of
all manner of forces. And yet to avoid the reproach, I might make to my self,
of having abused my Fortune against persons to whom it is contrary, I will by
no means make use of Augustus's favor, or the power I have in the Empire, but
shall be content to be unhappy while I live, if my happiness cannot be
effected by other ways than those.

Having so said, he recollected himself for some few minutes, as if he were
extremely well satisfied with the resolution he had taken. But not long after,
reflecting on the difficulty of his enterprise, and the little hope he had to
bring it to any effect: It is true, continued he, that by this course I should
avoid that remorse and those scruples which might rise in my mind, for
oppressing, by my power, a man whose virtue is not inferior to my own: but,
alas! if this be the way to quiet my conscience, it is also the only course I
can take to crush my hopes; that is, I undertake a business whereof I cannot
expect the success should be fortunate. Artaban is already very much in the
affections of Elisa, and besides the eminent services, whereby he has deserved
her favor, he is otherwise worthy of it upon the account of the great
excellencies of his person, as much as for the noble effects of his Love. So
that there is very little probability, that a Soul engaged not only by a
great merit and very considerable services, but also happily by a strong
inclination, can easily be disengaged by a new affection, if I neglect my
advantages, (which alone may come into comparison with those of my Rival) and
merely upon the account of merit deal with a merit, which is so far from being
inferior to my own, that it has already wrought in the soul of Elisa, all
that I could hope, or rather all that I could desire.

This reflection troubled, and cast him down very much; but not long after
taking encouragement from that little shadow of hope which ever offers it self
even to the most miserable; Why, added he, may it not be lawful for me to
hope? There happen daily revolutions no less strange than what I am about to
undertake, and if a man may be pardoned a little self-conceit upon some
certain occasions, I may hope something beyond the ordinary rate of men. My
person is not unacceptable to those that see me, I have some name among men, my
rank is considerable enough to work some effect on the inclinations of Elisa,
to the prejudice of a man, to whom heaven, though it has bestowed on him great
advantages, has denied some part of those which it was but requisite he should
have to pretend to the Princess of the Parthians. Let us hope then if we may
presume to do it, or at least, let us not absolutely despair, since that hope
is a virtue so much inclined to assist any one, that it hardly forsakes the
most unfortunate that are, though in their greatest and last extremities.

Thus were Agrippa and Artaban treated by love, (who at this time, in a City
where the Ptolomeys had reigned, was taken up with nobler employments then
happily he had met with in all the extent of his Empire) while Prince
Ariobarzanes, and Prince Philadelph, were entertained by him with such
enjoyments as to all others were incomprehensible. These two Lovers, who, after
so many traverses of fortune, and so many tempests, saw themselves at the feet
of their amiable Princesses, as it were in a secure Haven, could not without
some difficulty apprehend the greatness of their felicity, when they reflected
on their past miseries, and may in some sort be said to have found that, in the
excess of their joy, which they had avoided in their afflictions and dangers.
All that day was spent in transports, such as the prudence of their Princesses
would have moderated, though ineffectually; and though those of Ariobarzanes,
should, proportionably to his adventures, and the accidents had happened to
him, (which indeed had been of the most dangerous and extraordinary) have
expressed in all probability something more vehement then could be expected
from those of Philadelph; yet was it certain, that in the soul of the Prince of
Cilicia, there passed somewhat that argued a greater tenderness and
sensibility of affection. For, this satisfaction having happened equally to
both that they had met with the Princesses they adored, and whom they sought
out so earnestly, Philadelph had this advantage, that now he had by many
infallible demonstrations discovered himself to be admitted to a happiness
which he was not before assured of, and found that his amiable Delia, who,
while they were in Cilicia, could never be persuaded to declare what sentiments
she had for him, made no difficulty to afford him, even in the presence, and
with the consent, of her Brother, the greatest proofs of affection he could
have desired, from a virtue, such as was that of Delia. Above a hundred times
that day had he embraced her knees, with expressions of love particular to his
passion; and the modest Arsinoe, mildly putting him back, could not but with
joy observe the continuation of that noble affection, whereof he had given her
so many obliging demonstrations in Cilicia. The more he called to mind those
pleasant entertainments, the more it added to his acknowledgments, insomuch,
that the fair Olympia, whom Ariobarzanes had already acquainted with all the
particulars of their History, conceiving an affection toward Philadelph, upon
the account had been given her of his generous way of proceeding, took occasion
to confirm Arsinoe more and more in the resentments she had thereof.

Yet was not this felicity of Philadelph without some disturbance, for the
experience he had of the King of Armenia's disposition, (which was such as
admitted no reconciliation with his enemies) put him, not without some ground,
into a fear he might refuse his alliance, and, out of the hatred he had him for
his house, raise him some new difficulties. Arsinoe her self was not absolutely
free from that fear, and could not dissemble it to Philadelph, when he
discovered his to her: but Ariobarzanes gave him the best consolations and
assurances he could, by promising him that he would further his interests as
much as lay in his power, even though the King his Brother should oppose them,
and that he would perish rather then that Arsinoe should be any other man's then
Philadelph. Besides, when it came to the worst, they had this course to gain
the consent of Artaxus, still left them, which was to make use of the authority
of Augustus, who had such an influence upon the King of Armenia, that he could
not deny him any thing, having some intentions, to that very end, to cast
themselves under the protection of Augustus, who had sometimes proffered it
them, and making no doubt but that he would employ the utmost of his interest
to effect their quiet, not only upon their own entreaty, but also upon the
recommendation of Agrippa, who had promised to assist them with all the power
he had with the Emperor. The same mediation they thought would prove effectual
with the King of Cilicia, who in all probability would gladly comply with the
desires of Caesar, though, on that side, all that was to be done was to
satisfy Arsinoe, in regard Philadelph was fully resolved not to be troubled at
any obstacles, which through the means of the King his Father, might any way
delay his happiness.

As for Ariobarzanes, his trouble was much less, as being not obliged, as
Arsinoe was, to be guided by the will of his Brother, and knowing no reason he
could allege to disapprove the alliance of Olympia. However, he hoped he
should not want Caesar's Authority, if it were requisite, and doubted not but he
should find him favorable in an occasion which of its self was sufficiently
such. The consent of Adallas he stood not at all upon, as thinking it
unnecessary, and, besides that he had already given it, he had, by the
inconstancy of his proceedings, given them but too clear a dispensation from
all ordinary proceedings. The greatest regret he now had, was, that he wanted a
Crown to present Olympia withal, as Adallas had sometimes cast it in his dish.
For though that Princess seemed to be very well satisfied with his present
condition, and to prefer his person before all the Empires of the World, yet
had it been no small difficulty to him to digest the displeasure he conceived
thereat, had there not been a certain hope left, that with the help of the same
sword which had defended Thrace with so much valor, he might possibly raise
Olympia to the dignity of her Ancestors. Besides, it must needs be some grief
to him, to observe, in the Princesses countenance, the alteration, which her
sickness and sufferings had wrought therein; but he doubted not but that in an
age, such as was that of Olympia, joy might recover what sadness had taken
away, nay, he was further of opinion, that the change which her condition had
received that very day, had in that small space of time retrived no small part
of her beauty.

These four, mutually loving, and mutually beloved persons, having thus passed
the day together, understood at night, and not long after the return of Elisa
and Candace, some part of what had happened to them, and how that the Princess
of the Parthians, had almost been carried away: but what they heard was with
some uncertainty and confusion. And therefore since it was very late, and that
they were assured the Princesses were safely arrived in the palace they forbore
the visit they intended them till the next day, as being only to express how
much they concerned themselves in their adventure, and their desires to be
acquainted with the particulars thereof.

In the mean time, Candace, and the fair Elisa being retired to the lodgings
appointed them, after they had endured the conversation of Agrippa and
Cornelius for the space of an hour, were no sooner left alone with the women
that attended them, but perceiving themselves delivered of the company that had
hindered them from entertaining one another when they had the greatest desire
and opportunity to do it, they caused their chamber door to be made fast, that
they might discourse with greater privacy and liberty. After they had looked
upon one the other, with eyes wherein might be perceived some part of what they
had to say, they embraced one another with as much earnestness, as if it had
been a long time since they had met. Whereupon, sitting down together upon a
bed, Candace began first to speak, and pressing Elisa's hand between her own,
with an action expressing the greatness of her friendship; Well then, my
dearest Princess, said she to her, will you not for the future give credit to
my predictions, and was I not a true prophetess, when I promised you a happy
change in your fortune? Fairest Queen, replied Elisa, returning her caresses, I
should but poorly acknowledge the happiness it was to me to meet with you,
should I not have derived from it all the advantages I could expect, for I have
not only found what I gave over for lost, according to your prediction, but I
have found it by your means, and through that inspiration which no doubt you
had from Heaven, to take me along with you to that happy walk. So that it seems
then, replies Candace, I am not like to be henceforth the most satisfied of us
two, and that you will return me some part of those consolations which you have
received from me, when I shall bewail Caesario, as you did Artaban. May it not
please the gods, replied Elisa, that you have the same occasion to do it; I had
with these eyes seen Artaban buried in the waves, and you have seen Caesario
living within these few days, and know that he is not far from Alexandria. I
know not certainly, replies Candace with a sigh, whether I may trust my own
eyes or no, and through the experience I have of my own unhappiness, I begin
to imagine that rencounter a pure illusion. But whatever it may have been, I am
content for this day to suspend the remembrance of all my misfortunes, to
dispose my self the more absolutely to joy out of a compliance with your good
fortune, wherein I think my self so much concerned, that I can hardly believe
your apprehensions of it more lively than mine. This argues you as excellent in
point of goodness, replied Elisa, as you are in all those great perfections
which make you so admirable a person, and these I am so extremely sensible of,
that...

No more of that, I beseech you, says Candace, interrupting her, I do not
expect any acknowledgments, from you, of an affection, which, being but too
much your due, the expressions I make you thereof cannot be excessive, nay I
question not but your merit will force as much from all the World besides. But
since it is lawful for me to rejoice with you, now that all occasion of your
weeping is taken away; do you not expect I should reproach you with a felony
you are guilty of toward me, for having stolen from me a man, whose first
inclinations, if I am not much mistaken, were directed to me? And consequently
you will give me leave to charge you with the trick you put upon me, in that,
when you related to me the great actions of Artaban, you would not let me know
that it was Britomarus, and that, when I gave you an account of the first
actions of Britomarus, you would not tell me it was your Artaban.

You charge me with two things, replied the Princess, whereof I shall find it
no great difficulty to clear my self. For the former, which is, that I have
robbed you of the heart of Artaban, I am to tell you, that the age and
condition he was of when he was with you, considered, there is little
probability he should lift up his eyes so high as you; and that further,
supposing that might happen, the treatment he received from you, continued she
smiling, might happily displace you out of his heart, so that there might not
possibly be any necessity he should meet with Elisa the more to alienate his
inclinations from you. And for the latter, which is, that I had not discovered
to you that Artaban was the same person with Britomarus, I can assure you, that
I have ever been ignorant of it as well as your self; that Artaban never
acquainted me with any thing that had happened unto him before I knew him, and
that, being satisfied that his greatest glory consisted in the memorable
actions he had done, whereof those of most consequence we had the knowledge of,
I was never guilty of a curiosity to know any more of his fortune then he was
pleased of himself to communicate to me, out of a fear of engaging him in a
discourse, which he should take no great delight in.

I am very much troubled, added the Queen of Aethiopia, that I have acquainted
you with that particularity of the first beginnings of his life, though it
discover as much of the greatness of his courage, as the gallant actions he
has done since, and could I have thought that Britomarus was sometime to be
Artaban, I should not have let you known how he had lived with me, in a
condition not proportionable to the rank which he now deserves to be in among
men. Assure your your self, replied Elisa coldly, that you have not done him
any ill office by that discourse, and that Artaban, having only told us that
he was of noble birth, has not been with you in any employment, which might
derogate ought from the nobility of his blood. On the other side, added she,
with an action more free and cheerful, I shall not blush when I tell you, that
you put me into no small joy, when you let me know that Britomarus had had some
inclinations for you; and, if I should think it any misfortune or malice of my
destiny to have complied with the affection of a man, whose birth is
disproportionable to my own, I should have this comfort withal, that I were not
the first of my rank and quality to whom he had addressed himself, and thence
fall into this consideration, that he might very well lift up his eyes to me,
when he had had the confidence to do it, you.

This were but a very slight comfort, replied the Queen, but indeed you stand
not in any need of it, since the virtue of Artaban is such as may both raise
him to Crowns, and without doubt is to be preferred before them. But, my
fairest Princess, continued she presently after, will you promise me that he
shall be no longer at any distance with Caesario, if I may be so so happy as to
meet with him again? He has made you that promise himself, said the Princess
to her, and, not to mention the respect he has for you, and the consideration
he may have of the desire I made to him to that purpose, there is so much
advantage in the friendship of Caesario, as that he will not only desire it,
but endeavor by all ways to purchase it; nay I dare further promise you upon
the experience I have of the generosity of Artaban, that, if ever any occasion
offer it self, he shall with the hazard of his life confirm the truth of what
he has already assured you of.

Elisa having spoken to this effect, Candace spent a few minutes as it were in
a deep recollection, not making her any answer at all. At last, awaking as it
were out of it, and lifting up her head, she spoke to the Princess with much
more earnestness then she had done before. But, Madam, said she to her, if I
am not mistaken, you related a while since, before Agrippa and Cornelius, how
that when Tigranes would have carried you away, you had been relieved by a
certain man that laid him grovelling on the ground, and killed two of his men.
It Is very right, Madam, replied the Prencesse, I have been relieved by a very
miraculous person: one that must certainly be Caesario, since it was not
Artaban. The distraction and trouble I was in hindered me from taking better
notice of him, only thus much I can remember of him, that he was somewhat pale
in the face by reason of some wound or sickness; that he seemed to be much
about the age of Artaban, and though I cannot happily speak of Artaban without
partiality, yet methinks, measuring all things by the little notice I could
take of him in so short a time, that either in point of beauty or valor, this
person was not inferior to him. According to the description you make of him,
added the Queen, I should be almost persuaded that it can be of no other than
Caesario that you received that assistance, as being satisfied that unless it
be Caesario, no man can come so near, as you express it, the valor and
handsomeness of Britomarus. Might it please the gods, my most amiable
Princess! to afford me a comfort so great as that of being certainly assured
that it was really he and no other, who had done us that service. And this I
the rather wish, not only out of a reflection that you had received it from a
Prince I infinitely love, and could not do me the like more to my satisfaction
in my own person then he has in yours, but also out of a consideration that
this action might in some part take away the aversion which Artaban has for
him, and might prove a likely means of a reconciliation, and as it were a short
introduction to that Friendship which we would establish between them, as by
fortune and the sympathy of our dispositions it is effected between us. Do not
I beseech you make the least doubt, replied the Princess, but that Artaban
will acknowledge this action with as much resentment as I do my self, and
assure your self, that, if I have received this relief from Caesario, his
endeavors to gain his friendship will be greater than the dis-inclination he^
sometime had toward him.

The two Princesses would have continued their discourse for some time upon
this subject, when Clitia who not long before (...) g^ne out along with Cephira
to take a little fresh air upon the Terrace, comes into the chamber, and
presented her self before he Queen with a countenance wherein might be seen
that the owner of it was in no small disturbance and astonishment. Candace
having looked upon her, knew by her demeanor that she had something to say to
her: whereupon, causing her to come nearer, she commanded her to discover
before the Princess the cause of that disturbance which was so apparent in her
countenance. Clitia having looked about her, and perceiving there was none in
the chamber but only Vrione, whom they were confident of, takes the Queen by
the hand, with a certain unusual eagerness; Madam, said she to her, the news
I am to acquaint you with, is, no doubt, the best I could ever bring you; but
indeed it is so great that you may well pardon the disturbance it has put me
into and which you took notice of. Caesario is in this palace, nay is come up
upon the Terrace, and stays at your chamber door. O ye heavenly Powers!
Clitia, says the Queen, in a manner out of her self, what do thou tell me?
Is Caesario at my chamber door? He is, replies Clitia, in the little Gallery
which abutts upon the terrace, where he expects my return and your commands to
wait on you. Taking advantage of the night and the confused number of persons
that are in this palace he has made a shift to get in; and being acquainted
with all the passages of the place, as having not only been born here, but
spent his youth in it, he has without any difficulty got to your lodgings, and
has walked upon the terrace, till such time as he saw me appear, and, by the
discourse I had with Cephisa, knew my voice. Whereupon, having called me softly
by my name, he acquainted me with his own, and not long after with his person,
whereof I had an impression so well graven in my memory, that it would not have
been very hard for me to have discerned him in the greatest darkness.

While Clitia gave this account of Caesario, the beautiful Queen was in a
manner overwhelmed with an excess of joy, which, by a pleasant authority, got
the dominion of her Soul; and, though fear and disquiet endeavored to disturb
it, yet was there a necessity they should give place to the first sallies of
that passion, and suspend their effect, till the first violence of the other
were spent. The Queen, casting one arm about Clitia's neck, Ah Clitia, said
she to her, it is certainly decreed, that it is from you I must expect all the
most happy tidings, and it was you that heretofore brought me word into the
garden at Meroe, of the life and return of Caesario, at a time when I bewailed
his death, and that I had renounced all the enjoyments of life.

After she had said these words, she would have put a hundred questions to
Clitia, and that all of a sudden, upon that accident: but she told her, that
the time she had was to be otherwise spent, and that she must resolve either to
see Caesario at the place where he expected her return, or permit him to come
into the chamber. Now was it that fear began to disturb her joy; and if, on the
one side, she were satisfied to see her self so near the Prince she dearly
loved, she trembled, on the other, when she considered, that he was in a Palace
whereof Augustus's Lieutenant had the command, and that a place where he must
expect no less than to lay down his life, if he were discovered. This fear
made her to shake again, and put her to such a loss that she knew not what
resolution to take, looking sometimes on Elisa, sometimes on Clitia, as if it
had been to ask their advice what she were best to do. The fair Princess of
the Parthians, who had received so great consolations from the Queen, together
with such remarkable demonstrations of Friendship, conceived her self
extremely concerned not only in the joy, but also in the fear which she now
strugled with, and would have been as glad as the other to find out a way to
see Caesario with as little danger as might be. But, after they had continued
for some time in uncertainty and at a loss what course should be taken, they
at last thought it the safest way that he should be brought into the chamber,
it being then such a time of the night that it was not likely they should be
troubled with any more visits, especially there being conveniences enough to
hide him in case it were necessary, and that Clitia proffered, as soon as she
had brought him into the chamber, to go out upon the terrace along with
Cephisa, and to walk there a while, to see if any body came by whom they might
be surprised. Besides all which, it made something for the security of the
Prince that he was, not only, not known in Alexandria; but also his death was
more firmly believed there, then in any other part of the world. Upon all these
grounds summed up together, yet not without a great deal of doubt and terror,
the Queen commanded Clitia to go and fetch him in, whereupon Elisa thinking her
self obliged in discretion and civility to go into her own chamber, that they
might be at a greater freedom in that interview, would have done it, but
Candace embracing her would not permit it, and entreated her to be present at
her felicity, as she had been at the happy meeting between her and her Artaban.

Elisa, at the entreaty of Candace stays in the room, and presently after
Clitia returns, bringing along with her the son of Caesar into the chamber. At
that first sight, these two excellent souls felt in a moment all that a
passion such as theirs could produce in a longer space of time, and their first
looks communicated one to another, of an instant, what their hearts meant of
greatest tenderness and passion. As Soon as ever the Prince appeared at the
door, the Queen ran toward him, with an action, whence he might easily infer,
how welcome his presence was to her; and the son of Cleopatra, kissed her hands
and embraced her knees with such transportations of joy, as might well convince
her that his Love had not admitted of the least diminution or remission.
Candace, after she had embraced him very earnestly with both her arms, while
he was yet in that submissive posture, raised him up, and entertained him with
all those Caresses which were suitable to her dignity and modesty, considering
withal the violence of her affection. During the first expressions of their
mutual satisfaction and joy, their discourse was accordingly confused, and
incoherent; but when the violence of those were over, Candace, retreating some
few paces back, as it were to take the better notice of the Prince; What
Cleomedon, said she to him, the gods it seems have thought fit to restore you
to me, after so many dangers as I had run through my self, and so many others
wherein I had left you? But, Madam, replies the Prince, it was then decreed I
should find you, after I had so unfortunately lost you, and what is more, I do
not only find you living, and full of goodness for me, but I meet with you in
Alexandria, in the Palace of my Fathers; and in that very Chamber, wherein I
drew the first mouthful of air, and saw the first beams of light. It Is an
accident, I must confess, replies Candace, that speaks something
extraordinary, and if you are surprised at it, I must needs be not a little
moved thereat. O how does this second life which I here receive, added the
Prince, make the Palace of the Ptolomey's much more dear and precious in my
apprehension then the former which I ought it, and how easily can I bear with
the loss of the command of it when I find therein what is a thousand times
more dear to me then thousands of Empires and thousands of lives.

To this discourse he would have added much more, to the same effect, and the
beautiful Queen, whose affection was not inferior to his, though, out of the
civility and reservednesse suitable to her sex, she moderated her self the
more, looked on him with a certain delight, and had pleasantly seconded him her
self in the expressions of his love, had she not thought it unhandsome to
suffer any more, before the Princess of the Parthians, till Caesario had taken
notice of her and saluted her. Upon that account, mildly interrupting him, she
obliged him to turn toward Elisa, and prepared him to salute her as the
greatest Princess upon earth, and the best friend she had in the World.
Caesario, however he might be transported at the sight of Candace, was
astonished, and in a manner dazzled at that of Elisa, and, coming near her with
a respect, which her admirable beauty, and the words of Candace easily forced
him into, saluted her with such submission, as the most inconsiderable of
mankind might do the heiresse of the throne of the Arsacides, and received from
her all the civility she could have done him, had he been possessour of the
Empire. He was not at all surprised to meet with Elisa, whom he knew before to
be in Alexandria, and with Candace, but looking more earnestly in her face, he
thought he had seen her that very day once before, and the fair Elisa taking
more particular notice of him, discovered in his, that he was the same man whom
she was talking of some few minutes before, and who had that day relieved her
against the violence of the King of Media. She no sooner perceived it, but but
her gratitude and acknowledgment working their effect upon her, she turned
toward Candace, with a countenance which partly expressed the sense she had of
that obligation. Madam, said she to her, our wishes are accomplished, and if
you find in this Prince a person infinitely dear to you, I find in him, that of
my valiant defender, and look on him accordingly as one whom I ow, not only my
liberty, but also the happiness I have to be bear with you.

These words put the Prince into a modest blush, and receaving them with a
bundance of submission; Madam, said he to her, I have done no more for you then
you might have received from any man whatsoever upon the same occasion; but
indeed it proved so favorable and so glorious a one to me, that I ought to
have hoped for no less in consequence thereto, then the great happiness which
I enjoy this fortunate day.

Having thus expressed himself he thought himself obliged to observe a greater
reservednesse in the presence of Elisa, as conceiving it not fit he should
disburthen himself before her of all that lay upon his heart. But Candace,
taking notice of it, would not suffer him to entertain any such thought, and
after she had looked on the Princess with a smile; Ca^sario, said she to the
Princess, since I have had sufficient experience of your respect, even so far,
as not to fear any incivility from you even in deserts, and that the Princess
has a greater goodness and friendship for me then to deny us that liberty, I
must tell you that her presence obliges you not to any reservednesse but what
may be expected only upon account of the respect due to her, and not upon the
score of any circumspection otherwise. And this you may be confident of, in
that before her I call you Caesario, in Alexandria, and you will happily be the
more assured of it when I shall have told you that she is not only acquainted
with all our adventures, but also, that she is not ignorant of my most secret
thoughts.

Upon that assurance, and the freedom you are pleased to afford me, replied the
Prince, I shall presume, my fairest Queen, to ask you what posture my life and
fortunes are in, and to conjure you to let me know whether it be possible, that
distance, distractions, and the dangers whereto you have been exposed, have
wrought any change in that fortunate condition to which you had out of your own
goodness raised me? May I hope, fairest Queen, continued he (setting one knee
to the ground, instead of sitting in a chair which Urione had brought to the
bedside, where the Princesses were already sat) ought I, and may I hope that
that precious affection, whereby you have made me the most glorious person in
the World...

It Is enough, said the Queen interrupting him, and forcing him to rise, it is
enough, I doubt not but you could answer that question sufficiently to your own
satisfaction were you so pleased, and I am in a manner confident, that you make
not the least doubt of the constancy of an affection, which I have inviolably
preserved for you, amidst traverses of fortune as great happily as those that may
have happened to your self since our separation. Not but I must confess, that
I have been in more than ordinary extremities, and my life and affairs in such
a posture, that I stood very much in need of your assistance. Ah Madam, replied
the Prince, I have understood no less from Eteocles, whom it has pleased the
gods to preserve for my comfort; he has indeed given me an account of that
dreadful danger, whereto you were reduced, when you fell into the hands of the
Pirate Zenodorus, and that admirable resolution which your virtue inspired you
with rather to sacrifice your life to flames and waves, then to suffer any
violence. It is possible, indeed, added the Queen, that that action might
proceed purely from my virtue; but I must withal entreat you to conceive your
self a little obliged to me in it, and accordingly believe, that the design I
had to preserve my self absolutely yours to the last gasp, extremely fortified
me in that resolution.

Caesario was so strangely transported with joy at these obliging expressions,
that he was at some loss how to signify the resentments he conceived thereof.
And yet at last he made a shift to do it, but with such a disorder and
confusion, as more truly discovered the greatness of his passion then the
best couched discourse could have done. And when the Queen had suffered him to
recollect himself in that posture, wherein she beheld him with abundance of
pleasure; But is it just, said she to him, I should be any longer ignorant,
how, and by what adventure I come to see you again, what good genius has
brought you to Alexandria, and what fortunes you have run through since our
separation? It is just, replied the Prince, I should give you an account of
what you were pleased to entrust me with, and acquaint you with the state of a
Kingdom which you thought fit to leave to my management. That is not it,
replied the Queen, which I am so desirous to press you to; and though I should
be content to understand whatever you shall think worthy our knowledge, yet
this fair Princess can satisfy you, that, in the discourses we have had
together, she has observed, that the loss of my Kingdom was not the thing I
was most troubled at.

Your generosity is to be admired, replied the Prince, that is suitable to your
admirable person, and I cannot express the experiences I have found of it, but
by my silence and confusion. I shall therefore acquaint you, as well with what
past at Meroe, as what has been done in Aethiopia, since your departure
thence, whereof the relation cannot be long, because it can amount to no more
then a diary of some few days actions, and afterward, what has happened to
my self, since it has been my business to find you out,

Now it comes into my mind, added Candace, when I entertained this fair
Princess with a relation of our adventures, I forgot, to give her an account
after what manner you got off from that bloody battle, which with a handful of
men you gave the great and numerous army of Tirabasus, and where you were left
for dead, and passed for such in my apprehension, as you did in the general
opinion of all the World, till the day that I saw you again in the garden at
Meroe. And though you since told me something of it, yet was it so confusedly
that as well for that reason, as that I thought not fit to confound that
discourse with the perfect relation I had to entertain the Princess with of
other things, I made not the least mention thereof. So that it shall be your
business to acquaint her with that particularity, which is all she wants of
your adventures to your return to Meroe, and then we shall be glad to know
what has happened to you, since my departure thence. The discourse you have to
make, you will, I know, contract what you can, by reason of the disturbance I
shall be in, if you make any long abode in this place, where I cannot look on
you without fear, as knowing what danger you expose your self to.

With these words the Princesses having called Vrinoe, who only remained in
the Chamber, entreated her to take such order as that there should not come
near them any of the slaves that had been appointed to wait on them, and to
have a care with Clitia, that they might not be surprised. After this
precaution given, the Prince having seated himself between them, as the Queen
had commanded him, after a recollection of some few minutes, to recall into his
mind, the things whereof his discourse was to consist, began it at length in
these terms.

The continuation of the HISTORY OF CAESARIO.
I Must needs confess that in the battle wherein, with 16000. men, the
greatest part wounded and unfit for service, I engaged with an Army of 100000.
I did not do like an experienced General, or a man that had before commanded
Armies, and gained Victories. But it is also to be acknowledged, that it was
not out of any hope of victory, that I came into the field, but merely out of a
desire to dye, proceeding from the despair whereto the misfortunes of my great
Queen had reduced me, and to endeavor even at my death to shake, if not
overthrow, the perfidious usurper of her Crown and Liberty. Besides, having
considered all things, I found my self not in a condition to make my party good
by retreating before the army of Tiribasus, which was come of a sudden upon us
into that very field, where not many days before I had defeated 35000. men,
and killed Antenor, the Brother of Tiribasus, by whom they were commanded. I
shall not therefore spend any further time to justify that action, which will
be thought more pardonable, among persons prepossessed by a violent passion,
such as was that of mine, then among persons experienced in the business of
war; and consequently shall only tell you, that I was not fortunate enough to
effect what I had undertaken, though I had the happiness to see Tiribasus fall
in the midst of his men with two or three wounds about him, and had this
comfort in my misfortune, that, with the loss of my own; I saw the field
covered with a number of carkases three times greater then that which I could
make when I first came into it.

At last it was my lot to fall, laden with wounds, amongst those that covered
the ground with their carkases, and, as my good fortune would have it, my
faithful Governor Eteocles, who still kept as near me as he could, having
fought it out a little longer, fell also not far from me, with such wounds
about him, as had deprived him of all sense and apprehension. The Enemy spent
the remainder of the day in shipping the dead, and in burying or burning their
friends, but in regard that about that place where we were, the air was grown a
little infectious by reason of the precedent battle, the Generals thought not
fit to make any longer stay there, and thereupon marching all away in the
night, they encamped at a good distance thence upon the way to Meroe insomuch
that there were none left in the Fields but the dead, or at least what were
thought such by those that left them.

Now the wounds of Eteocles proving not very great, and that his weakness
proceeded not so much from their danger as the great loss of blood he had
undergone, he made a shift to recover himself as soon as it was night, and I am
in this extremely obliged to him, that e're he had bestowed many minutes to
reflect on the condition he was in himself, he came to see what was become of
me. He sought me out, and with much ado found me, notwithstanding the
darkness, because I was not far from him, and crawling along as he could to
get a little nearer me, he came and felt me all over, trying by all the ways
he could whether there were any life in me. The cold air of the night stayed
the bleeding of my wounds, insomuch, that Eteocles finding me cold as ice all
over, his first apprehensions concluded me absolutely departed this world, but
at last laying his hand on my breast, he found by the palpitation of my heart,
that there were some small remainders of life in me. The weak hope which this
unexpected discovery raised in him, filled him with all the joy he could, in
that condition, be capable of, and though he took abundance of pains about me
to recover me to some degree of sensibility, yet all his endeavors proved
ineffectuall, insomuch that the whole night, which at that time of the year,
was of the shortest, was over e're he could do any good with me. He many times
endeavored to get upon his feet, and to go seek out some held, but his
weakness was such that he was not able, and e're he could half get up, he
fell down again by me. I shall not trouble you either with the complaints that
fell from him, or the grief it was to him, that he could not effect what he
desired, and it were but to make my relation the more tedious to insist upon
such frivolous particulars.

The Sun was gotten into his chariot when I first began to open my eyes, and to
breath, in such manner that Eteocles perceived it. He immediately creeps nearer
my face, almost out of himself for joy, gave me so many kisses, and spoke to
me with so much earnestness, that at last he absolutely recovered me to life
again. I began to feel and to see, but had not the power to stir, and though I
saw Eteocles, yet did I not perfectly know him, but as it were by some broken
remainders of an Idaea half forced out of my memory. In the mean time he
perceived it was impossible for him any way to relieve me, and though he saw I
was come to my self, yet did he in a manner put it out of all question that I
would die for want of assistance, and, out of the fear he was in it might so
come to pass, he importuned heaven with cries and exclamations, and did all
that lay in his power to call in somebody to our relief. Yet were they not his
cries that wrought that effect; but it happened by an adventure very strange
and unexpected, whereof, for many reasons, I thought fit to give the Queen but
a slender and imperfect account, but shall now relate at large, since it has
been your pleasure to command it from me.

I had already made a shift to open my eyes fully, though all I could do was
only to stir them a little, when Eteocles hears the neighings of certain
horses and the noise of their going, which made him imagine that there were
some people coming toward us. He thereupon looks about him, and perceives a
chariot coming into the field, among the dead bodies wherewith it was covered,
and a man riding on horseback before the chariot, as if he had been a guide to
those persons that were within it. Those were only two women, one whereof
filled the air with the dolefulness of her Lamentations, and there followed
the chariot only three slaves, all asoot. At last, when they were come quite
into the field, the heaps of dead bodies hindering the passage of the chariot,
the women, that were within it, were forced to alight, and the man, that was on
horseback having done the like, took the more considerable of the two by the
arm, and led her toward the place where we were. Eteocles, whom this accident
put into a great hopes of relief, took very much notice of all that passed, and
distinctly heard the mournful cries and expostulations of that disconsolate
Lady, which certainly were such as might have been heard many Stadia's. Her
hair was loose and dishevelled, as if she had been fallen into some
extravagance, her eyes showred down tears, her breast almost rent with the
violence of hersighes, in a word, her deportment was no other then that of a
person distracted and ready to fall into despair. Terrible death, cried she,
implacable devourer of mankind, which appearest to me here in so many forms!
is it possible, that in this place, where thou have exercised thy power with so
much cruelty, thou should forbear to dispatch one miserable creature that
defies thee, or that thou can deny her thy assistance, after thou have
deprived her of all that could oblige her to shun thy face. Insatiable
Goddess, to whom my malicious Fortune has sacrificed all that the earth had
that was amiable in my sight! is it possible thou should avoid an unfortunate
woman as I am, while thou cuttest off such noble lives? and that, more inhumane
in thy compassion than thy cruelty, thou must needs strike a thousand times at
a heart which there needs but one blow to deliver from thy Tyranny.

Here sighs and sobs made a patenthesis in her discourse forsome minutes; but
soon after, reassuming it with an accent much more doleful; Teramenes,
continued she, my dear Teramenes, where art thou? why do thou conceal thy
self from me? O thou body that I have loved beyond all things; why do thou
hide thy self from her eyes that was sometimes so dear to thee? Art thou
afraid, thy countenance covered with the horrors of death might frighten me,
or that it will be a less delightful object to me in that figure, then it was
in that wherein I was so much taken with it? No, no, my dearest Teramenes, even
under that dreadful livery, under that irremissible ice of death, I shall
think thee amiable, and it may not happily be impossible, I should by my kisses
restore to thee some part of that which thou have lost, and reinfuse into thy
cold body that soul which thou had enflamed with a fire that death it self
is not able to put out.

At this passage she made a little truce with her Lamentations, but it lasting
not above a minute or two, she turns her self to the man that conducted her:
But Pelorus, said she to him, where is then the body of Teramenes? You showed
me this place, with a confidence it was that where I should infallibly find it,
and yet, among this vast number of carkases I see not that of my Teramenes.
Fear not, Madam, replied the man to whom she spoke it will not be long e're we
find it, for now we are come to the place where I saw him fall yesterday by the
hands of Cleomedon. No doubt, but he came by his own death out of the over
earnestness he had to revenge that of your Brothers, who died by the same hand
in the former battle, as also out of an excessive desire to have the honor of
dispatching with his own hands a Prince of so great a fame. Cleomedon falling
at his feet drew him upon him, and with that little remainder of strength he
was yet master of ran him into the throat with a dagger which he had still in
his hand. Teramenes, though mortally wounded with that thrust, made a shift to
get off the body of the expiring Cleomedon, but after he had staggered a
little, he fell down within some ten paces of him, and, by reason of the blood
which, coming out abundantly, hindered his respiration, died immediately.

Ah cruel man, cries out the Lady, ah inhumane stranger, whom I had never any
ways injured, and that leavest thy native soil to bring death after so many
several ways into the breast of the innocent Eurinoe! May it please the gods,
since I have no other revenge either to take or desire upon thee, that thy body
may be the prey of Vultures, and that thy shade may eternally wander amongst
the most unfortunate ones, without ever obtaining of the infernal Gods any
other rest then what thou leavest this miserable woman, Thou had opened the
sluices of my tears by the death of a brother I infinitely loved, which thy
unmerciful arms had deprived me of not many days before; but thou thoughtst it
not sufficient to assault my self only upon the account of Blood, and
Friendship, without sacrificing to thy cruelty, whatever there is in Love that
is most passionate and most violent in the death of my Teramenes.

While she disburthened her grief by such expostulations, he, who conducted her
showed her the body she looked after, which lay not above fifteen or twenty
paces from us, and it was upon the cruel spectacle, that the desperate woman
casting her self on the cold body with a great cry, fell into a swound, which
for some time interrupted her lamentations, and found these persons that were
about her work enough to relieve her. For my part, I had not the least
apprehension of any thing that passed, though I had my eyes open, wherewith,
all I could do, was to look on the dejected Eteocles. But he had not missed one
of these words, and was infinitely troubled to find himself so far from the
relief he had expected upon that accident, as not doubting but that I should be
discovered and known by those exasperated persons, if they saw me, and that, in
the rage which then possessed them, they would take away those small remainders
of life there were in me, rather then any relieve me. On the other side he saw
me drawing toward my end, and was sensible he should die himself, if he were
not assisted, and in that perplexity, not knowing what resolution to take, he
lifted up his eyes to Heaven, and desired that of the gods, which he thought it
vain to expect from men.

In this interim the woman comes to her self again, and immediately discovered
it by her mournful groans and la^^ntations: she embraced the frozen carkase,
and bestowed thousand of kisses on a face all covered with blood, and that with
such transportation as from whose violence Eteocles could inser no less then
that that of her love had been extraordinary. Dare Teramenes, said she,
sometime the enlivening light of my days, but now a Luminary eclipsed by the
interposition of eternal darkness! Are these the happy Nuptials that were
prepared for ourselves, and after the faithful test of so many traverses and
misfortunes, is it in this fatal field that I was to enjoy thee? Dear shade,
which by an unhuman thrust have quited this body, the object of my truest
affections, and wandrest yet about these shores in expectation of sepulture!
Infinitely beloved shade, do thou forsake me for ever? And is it possible
thou should seek rest while thou leavest me in disturbances a thousand times
more insupportable then that death which snatches thee from the embraces of thy
faithful Eurinoe?

Many other exclamations to the same effect fell from her, such as were the sad
effects of her despair, and which Eteocles would have hearkened to with more
patience; but the danger wherein we were, or rather the desperate condition of
our lives, took up his thoughts so much, that he could not afford her any
longer attention. But indeed it was not long ere he had another motive to
discover us, when the man that waited on that afflicted Lady, being come nearer
me, and having presently known me, out of a confidence he was of that I had
fallen in that place, and knew me very well by sight, perceived withal that my
eyes were open, and that I was not quite dead. They had not stripped me naked
because of the abundance of blood that was about my clothes, but they had taken
away the excellent armor wherein I had fought, and whereby I was so remarkable
in the battle. Eteocles had wiped the blood off my face, so that the man could
with less difficulty know me again, and thereupon returning immediately to his
Lady: Madam, said he to her, if revenge may abate any thing of your grief, lay
hold on the opportunity which the gods favor you with to offer a noble
sacrifice to the Manes of Teramenes. Here, behold not only his murderer, but
the murderer also of your brother, is yet alive, and the just gods seem to have
reserved those little remainders of life which he has yet left purposely that
they might in some measure satisfy your revenge:

Never did any Tigresse fly out with so much fury at those that had carried
away her young ones, as that exasperated and desperate woman did upon those
cruel words. She lays hands on a dagger which she spyed lying on the ground
among other arms, and running to the place where the man pointed, she was
immediately with me, looking on me with eyes sparkling with indignation, yet so
as through which satisfaction she conceived at her intended reveng, did in
certain intervals, show it self. Teramenes, cried she, I am now going to
sacrifice to thee all that is remaining of thy executioner, and shall meet with
thee again with greater joy, when I shall have appeased thy Manes with this
victime.

With these words she comes up close to me, (who was lying on my back with my
face directed to Heaven, and my eyes open, which I weakly fastened on the
objects, yet so as that I was not able to discern what past) and lifting up her
arm to thrust the weapon into my breast, it was coming downwards upon me, when
Eteocles lifting himself half up, put forth his hand, and, laying hold of hers
with greater force then in all probability he seemed to have had in him; Hold
thy bands, cruel woman, said he to her, spare the blood of the gods, and do
not, by the cruelty, shorten, for some, few minutes, the noblest life in the
World.

Eurinoe was so surprised both at the action and the words of Eteocles, that
the dagger fell out of her hands, and she was at such a loss as to all
resolution, that she could only look on the man whom the gods seemed to have
purposely raised up to prevent the effect of her resolution. But at last her
passion being still the most predominant in her mind, her rage grew more
violent then it had been before, and running to another weapon which she saw,
not far from her. Do not hope, said she to Eteocles, thou shall divert me from
the sacrifice which I owe my Teramenes, and be content with this comfort, that
his executioner has but those weak remnants of life, whereas I should wish him
a hundred lives, that I might take a nobler revenge of them altogether.

With these words she comes to me on the other side, and at a place where the
assistance of Eteocles would have stood me in no stead; desirous to execute her
revenge with a grater satisfaction, she would needs look upon me, and so as she
lifted up her arm fixed her eyes on my countenance. Eteocles has told me
since, that even in that languishing posture wherein I then appeared to the
sight of Eurinoe, there was something in me more beautiful then ordinary: my
eyes looked more gently, because I looked more dejectedly then I should have
done otherwise, and my hair stained with blood in some places, playing with my
cheeks, by reason of a little wind that then blew, heighthed the little beauty
which still remained in my face, whereof the palenesse must needs be thought an
extraordinary witness, in a Country where ordinary degrees of witness are
thought rare and admired. In fine, for my part, I know not with what advantage
I appeared in the sight of that incensed woman; but the arm she had lifted up
remained in that posture, and at the same time having gently turned my eyes
upon her, with a feeble groan, her indignation was disarmed at that object,
and the weapon fell out of her hand the second time.

The man that waited upon her, thinking he did her a very acceptable service in
egging her on to take the intended revenge, put the weapon into her hand the
third time, and encouraging her to the action she would have done, was ready to
help her to put it in execution, when the woman looking very passionately upon
him; Hold thy hands, said she to him, it is not the pleasure of the gods that I
should put Cleomedon to death. The man, who was, on the other side, as ready to
obey her, was quiet, and Eurinoe having sat her down some few paces from me,
began to look very earnestly upon me, and ever and anon disburth^ned her self
of certain sighs which her breast was not strong enough to keep in. She looked
still more and more earnestly, and the more she looked on me, the more she
seemed to struggle with her passion, and by all her deportment it was easily
visible to those that took notice of it, that there passed strange things in
her soul, and that there was an engagement of passion there, whereof she was
not over-confident which should have the victory. Sometimes she would take her
sight off my countenance with some signs of reassuming her resolution; but
presently after she would fasten her eyes on me again with greater earnestness
then before, and during those uncertain and impetuous motions which raised such
a tempest in her soul, she with much ado made a passage for certain sighs.
Which when she had disburthened her self of, Cruel man, said she, loud enough
to be heard by Eteocles, who was the next man to her, fatal enemy of our house,
must thou needs, after thou had triumphed over the life of my Brother and my
Lover, prosecute thy victorious arms even into my heart? With these words she
held her peace, and observed, not without confusion, that Eteocles might have
overheard them.

I here entertain you with a discourse not much consistent with the modesty
which is natural to me, and which Eteocles might better have undertaken than my
self; but it was your pleasure to command it, and I know not any reason whereby
I may be dispensed from the obedience I owe you.

While the woman was still struggling with the incertainties she was in, and
that by several discoveries it was visible, that she was guided by a passion
contrary to that which a little before had put the weapons into her hand to
dispatch me; Eteocles, who, notwithstanding the extremity whereto he was
reduced himself by reason of his wounds, was satisfied of the truth of his
observation. Being accordingly desirous to make what advantage he could of the
adventure, wherein he could not but imagine something miraculous and
extraordinary, and looking on Eurinoe in a very submissive manner: Fair Lady,
said he to her, since your indignation has submitted to your pity, be not
generous by halves, and consider with your self, that to thrust a dagger into
the breast of Cleomedon, and to leave him without relief in the condition
whereto you now see him reduced, is, no question, one and the same thing. Let
your virtue have an absolute conquest, in favor of a Prince who has offended
you only through his misfortune, and will serve you by his acknowledgments, if
the gods shall, through your assistance, prolong his life.

Eurinoe needed no more prevalent solicitation to oblige her to do a thing
which she was earnestly bent to do, and thereupon giving Eteocles an immediate
answer; I shall satisfy your desires, said she to him. I shall relieve
Cleomedon, though he be the murderer of both my Brother and my Love; and the
gods who were not pleased he should receive his death at my hands, command me
to preserve his life, if it be possible.

With these words turning to the man that accompanied her; Pelorus, said she to
him, the hazard I run in this action is very great, and, besides the report I
am to fear by doing this good office to him that has shed the blood that was
so dear to me, you know I have yet one brother left about Tiribasus,
exasperated to the revenge of his own relations, and without doubt an
irreconcilable enemy of Cleomedons. But I have so great a confidence of your
fidelity, that all my hope is in it, and I am accordingly inclined to believe,
that you will not betray this secret, and will afford me your assistance upon
an occasion of so great consequence. The man, who was become absolutely her
creature by the death of his Master, complied with her in all things, and
promised her to be as secret as she expected.

But why should I importune you any longer with the relation of particulars of
little consequence? By the command of Eurinoe, and the care of those that were
about her, a horse-litter was prepared and brought to the place where we were,
into which I was put, and Eteocles by me, and we were conveyed as gently as
could be possible, to a castle which was but one hours riding from that place,
where we were at first disposed into several beds, but in the same chamber,
Eteocles, it seems being very unwilling to be in any other place then where I
was.

But now give me leave to beg your attention, O ye great Princesses, and
withal your astonishment, at what I have to tell you, or at least be pleased
to infer thence the constancy of those affections which seem to be the most
violent. You have heard the account I have given you of the affliction Eurinoe
was in for the loss of her Teramenes, as also of her lamentations and her
deportment full of despair and extravagance, which in all probability were the
expressions of the most violent love that a soul could be capable of: and now
you are to know that when she left the place, whence she caused us to be
conveyed away, she hardly so much as thought on him, or at least bestowing all
her pains on the living, who might stand in need of her assistance, she thought
it enough to give Pelorus order to cause the body of Teramenes to be carried
away, and to see it buried.

They presently sent into the next Town for Surgeons, by whom we were dressed
with much secrecy, taking great care they should not come to the knowledge of my
name who knew me not by sight. And these being excellent men in their
profession, their endeavors proved so successeful on me, that, ere that day
was passed, they brought me absolutely to my self again, and within a few days
after undertook to Eurinoe, and Eteocles, that I should not die of my wounds. I
have understood since that Eurinoe entertained that assurance with as much joy
as if her life were concerned in the preservation of mine; but for my own part,
I can truly affirm that I received it without any, and that after I had
recovered my memory, and began to make my first reflections on the wretched
condition I was in, I had almost cast my self, through my own despair into that
danger out of which they took so much pains to deliver me. Whereof this
certainly must be the reason, that the violent desire of death which had forced
me to engage in the sight, being not yet gotten out of my mind, I should in all
likelihood have followed what that inspired me with, and had rendered the
endeavors of those that took so much trouble upon them about my recovery,
absolutely ineffectuall, had it not been for the continual solicitations and
importunity of Eteocles, for whom I have ever had a very great esteem and a
most affectionate friendship.

I shall not trouble you with a repetition of all those reasons whereby he
endeavored to make me apprehend, that I did not only betray a great want of
prudence, but that I was guilty of a capital crime against my Love, by
courting my own death, at a time, that my life might be necessary for the
Queens service, and that since I had not received any tidings that she was
either dead, or married to Tiribasus, there was no reason I should rush into
extremities which I might overtake time enough, when those misfortunes were
come to pass. To be short, he pressed these things to me with so much reason
and conviction, that I began to acknowledge the truth of them, and to submit to
his judgment, that it was not well done of me, to hazard upon such light
grounds a life which I had bestowed, and consequently could not dispose of my
self, while she that was the Mistress of it, might expect any service out of
it. Upon this consideration I was content they should endeavor my recovery,
and entertained with great acknowledgements the care they took of me.

Asson as I had arrived to such a degree of recovery as that I was able to
endure discourse, Eteocles came and told me what place I was in, and by what
adventure I was brought thither, and at the same time acquainted me what
aversion Eurinoe had had for me upon account of the death of her Brother and
her Love, and what affection she had conceived for me of a sudden. Now his
health being in a much better posture then mine, as having given over keeping
his bed, while I was yet in great danger, he had had more leisure to inform
himself of all that he was desirous to know, and had understood that Eurinoe
was a widow of very great quality, that her friends and her husband had always
kept her at a distance from the Court, that she had had two Brothers, very
deeply involved in the interests of Tiribasus, whereof the younger was slain in
the late Battle, and the elder had stayed at Meroe by the orders of Tiribasus,
who affected him very much, and reposed great trust in him; that she had been
very earnestly courted, since her widow-hood, by that Teramenes, on whom she
had bestowed, so many tears, a person it seems of very great worth and very
amiable as to his person; that she had loved him very dearly, and that after
many great traverses and revolutions she was upon the point of marrying him
with the consent of her friends, when death deprived her of him. Eteocles
acquainting me with all these things, told me withal how circumspectly I
should carry my self, that I might not be discovered by any other persons then
those whom Eurinoe was forced to trust with that secret, not doubting but that,
if such a misfortune should happen my life must needs be in manifest danger, as
well by reason of the rage of Eurinoe's brother, as the near relation he had to
Tiribasus, who, out of all question would never suffer me to live, should he
once find out where I were retired. But, as things stood, the security of that
secret consisted not altogether in our circumspection, for Eurinoe was so much
concerned in it her self, not only out of the desire she had to preserve a
person on whom she had bestowed her affection; but also for fear of her
brothers indignation, whose savage humor she was acquainted with, that she
omitted nothing which in point of care or caution might be expected from her.

I shall not presume, my great Princesses, before you, whose beauties eclipse
what ever is beautiful in all nature, to say any thing of the beauty of
Eurinoe, but certainly among the beauties of the rank next inferior to the
first and chiefest, the might very well pass for a handsome woman, somewhat
duskish, not absolutely black, the lineaments of her face very good, of a good
stature, and in a word one of the handsomest persons that ever I met with in
Aethiopia. I should commend her farther, were it not that you would imagine,
fairest Queen, that in the commendations of her beauty, I should have no other
design, then to celebrate my own sidelity.

As Soon as I was grown any thing capable of conversation, I had her perpetually
at my bedside, and I soon observed in all her deportment what Eteocles had
told me before of her affection. Her modesty indeed was such, that she would
not in words discover what her heart was burdened with; but her eyes betrayed
some part of it, and all her actions sufficiently confirmed the observation
which Eteocles had made of her. During some few days, at first, while the
success of my recovery was yet doubtful, and my fever very violent, she said
little to me, and I saw her not but at some certain times; but when I was a
little recovered and permitted to discourse, she was very liberal of her
company. She was one day at my bedside, where she seemed to be extremely
satisfied to see my health in so good a posture, when I, venturing to speak,
more than I had done before, took occasion to give her thanks and to make all
the acknowledgement I could of her care and tenderness toward me, and
commended the generosity she exercised toward a man who had been of a party
contrary to that of her Friends, and withal so unfortunate as by the chance of
war to do her a displeasure. She patiently bore with my discourse, and taking
her advantage of my silence, My lord, said she to me, I have done no more for
you than your virtue deserved; but shall entreat you not to attribute merely to
a consideration of generositie all that I have done to serve you. After you had
not only been the death of my Brother, but also deprived me of a person I
infinitely loved, and one with whom I was upon the point of marriage, there was
no reflection of generosity strong enough to oblige me to do an action,
whereby, I cannot but incur, if it be known, the reproaches of all the world,
and the indignation of all my kindred, and you may therefore well judge, that it
must proceed from some more powerful motive, that I conceived my self engaged
to relieve you. I shall take it upon what ground you please, replied I, but you
will give me leave to imagine that it is merely to your goodness that I am to
attribute the assistances I have received from you, since I had not any ways
deserved them. If it be merely upon the account of goodness, replied she with
a sigh, alas! how fatal will that goodness prove to me, and if I am only
good to you, how cruel am I to my self! It would be an infinite trouble to me,
replied I, to think that the good offices you do me should cause you any
displeasure, and therefore when my health shall be in another posture than it
is now, I shall heartily spend this life, which I have received from your
courtesy to protect you against whatever you may fear. You your self, said
she, casting down her eyes with a blush which covered all her face, you are the
most dreadful of my enemies, the only person I can fear, and the only man
against whom you can offer me your assistances.

These words, though I were not at all surprised thereat, put me to such a
loss that I knew not what answer to make her, and seeing me silent as seeking
what to say; It plainly argues in you, added she, an excess of cruelty to
pretend your self ignorant of my condition, after what you have discovered
your self, and what you might have understood from Eteocles. You cannot be yet
to learn that miraculous alteration of my heart and sentiments, which, by
reason of the inexpressible suddenness of it, must needs proceed from some
superior power, or a strange fatality e're it could pass out of one extremity
into the other. It is impossible you should not take notice of its engagement
in my actions since, and in fine you but too too well perceive all the
transactions of my soul, for me to trouble my self to acquaint you therewith
by my discourses. I am not naturally very much inclined to make declarations of
this kind, but I have not been able to contain my self in an adventure
absolutely prodigious, and whereof all the consequences must needs be
extraordinary.

Here Eurinoe put a period to her discourse not without great discoveries of
confusion, and I was in too much disorder my self, not to be astonished
thereat, as perceiving my self reduced out of necessity, to act a part for
which I had so much aversion. I thought it fit to make her some answer, and
after I had studied sometime to dress it with such obliging expressions as
that I might neither engage my self nor deceive her; Madam, said I to her, I
now perceive I am much more happy than I thought myself, since I must infer
from your discourse, (it being your pleasure I should) that I owe that to your
affection, which I thought my self obliged for only to your pity. This
happiness is too great not to be esteemed and acknowledged by a person that
has the least pretense to respect and gratitude, and I must therefore promise
you that you shall find my heart as well furnished, as to that point, as you
can desire your self. This was all I said to her for the first time, and I was
not able to judge, whether she were satisfied or displeased at it, for that
Pelorus, whose fidelity she began to mistrust, comes into the chamber, which
obliged her to fall upon some other discourse, and not long after to leave the
room.

The discoveries of this affection of Eurinoe had made some further impressions
upon me, if my soul had not been then struggling with other afflictions which I
thought more insupportable and if the knowledge I might have had of the
extremities whereto my Queen had been reduced thorough the Tyranny of Tiribasus
had not tormented me with such a violence as afforded me but little leisure to
think of any thing else. Woe is me! what cruel reflections was I persecuted
with at that time, and how often in the day, did I represent to my self that
my fairest Queen was fallen into the power of Tiribasus, and, it may be, upon
terms of yielding to his violence? Then was it that I seriously repented me of
my rashness in pursuing my own death, at a time that I should most have
husbanded my life to do her further service; and I thought that if I had minded
my own safety, I might have been able, alone, and by some other ways, to take
away Tiribasus'^ life in the midst of all his Guards. That which aggravated my
grief, was, that I durst neither enquire after any news from the Queen, nor
give any credit to what I heard related in that place, as being such as I could
not but suspect. On the other side I could well remember that just upon my
engagement in the battle, I had writ her a Letter, whereby I gave her to
understand, that I was going to inevitable death, and consequently made no
doubt, but that the news of my departure was soon brought her, and spread all
over Aethiopia. And th^^ I saw must needs prove prejudicial to me two ways,
either by exposing her to a grief for my loss, proportionable to the first
experiences I had received of her favors, or by exempting her, by my death,
from the obligation she had to my Love, and the promise she had made me.

I was so tormented with these cruel reflections that I saw there was no
remedy, but patiently to expect my recoverie, and to hasten it all that lay in
my power, it being not to be expected I should there meet with any express
messenger whom I durst trust with the secret of my life, and Et^ocles being
absolutely resolved not to leave me in the doubtful posture I was in as to
point of health, and withal in a place where I lay subject to a thousand
dangers, if my abode there were discovered. I therefore resolved, with much
difficulty, to complie with the present necessity, mustring up all the forces
of my mind to my assistance in that emergencie; while in the mean time my
fairest Queen was still in my thoughts, and her idaea, as it was the cause of
all my sufferings, was also the ground of all my consolations.

That part of the Castle into which we were disposed was at some distance from
all the rest, so that those persons that were in the others, knew nothing of
what was done where we were, Eurinoe having so ordered things that all was
carried on with the greatest caution and secrecy imaginable. By this means had
I all the accommodation and attendance I could desire, insomuch, that, having
kept my bed a month, I at last began to sit up, and to walk a little about the
room. Now had I so much of Eurinoe's company, that she was in a manner never
from me, making it her business, by all her discourses, though ever clothed
with modesty enough, to convince me of the greatness of her affection. I, on
the other side, expressed my self with as much acknowledgment, as I could
possibly, of the obligations I ought her, as well because I thought it no more
then civility to do so, as upon the advice of Eteocles, who would not have me
by any means to exasperate her, and was afraid of the dangers it was yet in her
power to bring us into.

But she in the mean time was not satisfied with my simple civilities, and
expected I should engage my heart in a love proportionable to h^rs toward me.
I, on the contrary, avoided all the occasions of saying any thing to her which
might displease her, though I said not ought that the might be mistaken in, or
on which she might ground any thing of affection. But one day, after she had
pressed me very much to resolve on something, yet in a way full of sweetness
and modesty, I thought fit to discover my thoughts more particularly then I had
done any time before. Looking on her therefore in the most obliging manner I
could; Fairest Eurinoe, said I to her, I have this unhapiness for one, among
many others that are my perpetual attendants, that I cannot convince you of the
sincerity of my intentions, and the real acknowledgments I have for all the
great demonstrations you honor me with of your affection. This misfortune
happens to me, for that I really have too great an esteem for you, to make
protestations to you beyond what I am able to make good; but since you will
needs oblige me to open my heart to you, with that freedom which I owe a person
to whom I owe my life, and of whom I have received such extraordinary
expressions of affection, I must tell you, fairest Eurinoe, that, since you are
acquainted with my name and person, it is not to be doubted but you have had
some account of my life, and consequently know how far I am at liberty to
dispose of my affections. There are few persons in Aethiopia but know it, and
therefore without obliging me to discover my self any farther, be pleased to
reflect on what I can, and what I ought to do, and assure your self that I
shall be infinitely desirous to afford you all the expressions of my
resentments that I possibly can.

Eurinoe seemed to be a little dashed at this discourse, and it was some time
ere she could make any answer thereto, but at last, having sufficiently
recollected her self; I have, indeed, with all the Kingdom, said she to me,
heard of the love you have for the Queen, the great actions you have done for
her service, the intentions which the late King had to bestow her on you, and
the hopes you may, upon just grounds, have conceived, that you may obtain her,
and I am not so far blinded by my passion, but that I am sufficiently sensible
of the disparity there is, as well in regard of nature as fortune, between
Candace and Eurinoe, upon the account both of quality and beauty; nor is my
extravagance come to that height, as that I would dispute with Queen Candace,
the possession of a heart to which she has any pretentions. But my Lord, you
are withal not ignorant, how that, on that side, all your hopes are blasted,
that Candace has now lost both her Kingdom and her liberty, and that all the
good intentions she may have for you, stand you in no stead. She has happily
bestowed her self on Tiribasus, who is master of her person as well as of her
dominions; and the inclinations she has had for you, if they have not already,
will no doubt give way to that cruel necessity, which allows her not the
liberty to make choice of a husband.

These words, wherein I perceived there was abundance of probality and truth,
came very near my heart, and not being able to conceal it from Eurinoe; The
news you tell me is very doleful, said I to her, and yet you tell me nothing
but what I knew before; I have been acquainted with the usurpation of Tiribasus
and the captivity of Candace, but I know withal, that the gods are just and
omnipotent, and that by a turning-cast of their power and justice, they may
overturne Tiribasus, and raise Candace into the Throne. There have been seen
among men revolutions as strange as that, and we must not quit hope till the
utmost extremities of misfortune. But such a hope as that, replied Eurinoe,
cannot be well grounded, and as it is not impossible but you might alone
counterballance, and happily overturn the fortune of Tiribasus, if you had had
sufficient forces to oppose him, for you are not ignorant that there is not any
body left which he needs fear, or that can with any probability prevent his
establishment in Ethiopia. I can do it yet my self, said I to her, not able to
disguise my thoughts, what necessity soever there were I should do it, I may
yet happily thwart that fortune which you think so well established, and put him
to as great a hazard upon the usurped throne he is in, as he was in when he had
the command of a hundred thousand men. Ah, my Lord, replies Eurinoe, trust not
too much to that unfortunate presumption. Your courage is sufficiently known,
but Fortune is not your friend, and your life is dearer to me then that I can,
without trembling, reflect on the danger you must expose your self to. Your
fear, said I, smiling, is happily for Tiribasus, as knowing well that a miserable
person that is careless of his own life, may endanger those of the most
powerful and most fortunate. Cleomedon, said she to me, you do not, I hope, any
way doubt, but that your life is much dearer to me then that of Tiribasus,
since I value it above my own. I shall not take the pains to persuade you any
further as to that point, but shall only add thus much, that how far soever
my brothers have been wedded to his interest, whether upon the account of
fortune, or some alliance that was between our houses, and though Teramenes,
(whom when living I loved beyond my self, and whom dead as he is, I should have
loved to the last minute of my life, had it not been for the fatal sight of
Cleomedon) was very much in his esteem, I could never, for my own part, approve
his proceedings, nor conceive any respects for an ujust man and an usurper.

She would have said more, had it not been for Eteocles coming into the room,
before whom she would not insist any longer on that subject. In the mean time,
my greatest care was to hasten my recovery, being upon thorns to fasten on some
occasion to sacrifice the remainders of my life, with some advantage, to the
service of my fairest Queen. But the more I recovered my health, the more did
Eurinoe's diminish, insomuch, that at last she was brought so low by that
unfortunate passion, that I could do no less then pity her, if I may use that
term with modesty, and was extremely troubled that I could do nothing to
comfort her.

I was at last grown so strong, that I durst venture out of my chamber, and to
go into a fair garden where she would needs have me to walk with her. I did it,
though with much difficulty, she being forced to help me ever and anon by
reason of my weakness. 'Twas in this place that she made her complaints to me
with more freedom then she could do in the chamber, and where I was many
times extremely put to it, though I am obliged to give her this character,
that, in all the most violent expressions of her passion, I never observed any
thing to fall from her that was unhandsome or prejudicial to modesty. I urged
to her, but to no purpose, the fidelity I ought to the Queen, and one day above
all having pressed it to her more earnestly then at other times; Cruel man,
said she to me, you have but that only argument to elude me withal, and I am
confident, that it is without any hope that you make it a cloak for your
cruelty. I have told you several times, that I would not dispute your heart
with Candace, could you but think of her with any likelihood of obtaining her;
but you know well enough that she is lost as to you, and yet thrust a dagger
into the breast of an unfortunate woman who loves you but too well, and pretend
fidelity to a person that cannot think on you, and, no doubt, does not.

These words, which I was extremely moved at, furnished me also with an answer
thereto, wherewith I thought she would be in some measure satisfied; yet so as
that I should not stand engaged to any thing, and thereupon taking her by the
hand, and wringing it, with an action that argued something of a passionate
affection more then ordinary; Madam, said I to her, it is no small affection to
me to find you so doubtful of the sincerity of my heart; but since you are so
incredulous, I must make you one overture more, which shall absolutely convince
you of my reality. Since therefore you have already declared that you would not
dispute my heart with Candace, and that it is only upon the supposal of her
loss that I must be yours, I protest to you, by all the gods, in whose
presence we now are, and make a solemn vow to you, such as nothing shall ever
oblige me to break, that if Candace be lost as to me, and that I survive her
loss, I shall never love any thing but the fair Eurinoe. Though she could not
derive any advantage from these words, if rightly understood, and that I
hazarded nothing by promising not to love ought but her, in case I could love
any thing after the loss of Candace, yet I observed that this discourse
wrought that effect which I expected it should, and that she was so strangely
appeased, that for many days her thoughts were in a more then ordinary
serenity, during which time I grew stronger and stronger, insomuch that I
thought my self able, within a few days to get on horseback.

Now was it that my disquiets persecuted me afresh, as having neither armor,
nor horses, and knowing no means how to procure any, but only through the
assistance of Eurinoe, whom I was very much afraid to make any proposition to
upon that account, as being confident she would do all that lay in her power to
prevent my departure at least as long as she could. And certainly I was not
mistaken in the opinion I had conceived of her, and accordingly as soon as she
understood, that I was upon some resolutions to be gone, she was so extremely
troubled at it, that I thought it would have proved impossible to comfort her.
This put me into a strange disturbance, as well out of the fear I was in, that
her despair might produce something that should prove prejudicial both to her
self and to us, as the improbability there was I should get out of her house,
in the condition I then was in, without her consent, or indeed without her
assistance. My thoughts were continually employed in finding out some
expedient, and consulting with Eteocles, who was to seek in it as much as my
self, when our disquiets were determined by an adventure that happened, and at
which you will not happily be a little astornished.

During the time that Eurinoe was troubled most with a fear of my departure,
and that I found my self in such a condition as that I might get on horseback
within three or four days, she took me along with her, as she had done diverse
times before, to walk in the garden. And in regard I had now fully recovered my
strength, she carried me into the most solitary walks, and most remote, having
with her that Gentlewoman, whom she had entrusted with this secret from the
beginning, as if she stood much upon the decorum and civility she had always
observed toward me. After we had taken some few turns, we sat down upon a
seat made of turss, at the end of a walk, on both sides of which was a high and
thick hedge-row, and there, after she had spent some time in the remonstrances
she ordinarily entertained me with. How cruel man, said she to me, can you
possibly prevail with your self to forsake me, and leave me in an indignation
that I have made no impression upon your heart by so many demonstrations, of a
perfect affection? It seems then, that neither what I have done in order to
your safety, nor what I have done against my self by exposing my self to the
indignation and resentments of my friends, nor the violence I did for your
sake, to an ancient and earnest passion, could never move that insensible soul
of yours, and you make it a light matter to forsake me for ever, and to leave
me at a time, when you cannot doubt but that the loss of my life depends on
that of your sight.

There fell abundance of other things from her, with such a torrent of words,
as I knew not how to stand against. But when that was spent, and that she had
given over speaking, Eurinoe, said I to her, I shall not leave you, till such
time as you give me the liberty to do it, and shall be your self satisfied that
I ought to be at a greater distance from you, as well in regard of your
concernments as my own. By the discovery I have made to you of my thoughts you
have understood that I am obliged to endeavor once more to do something for
the service of an unfortunate Princess, to whom you know my life has been
long since devoted, and I were unworthy your esteem if I should basely forsake
her in the misfortunes whereto she is reduced. This is it I am obliged to do,
as to what concerns my self; and for your part Eurinoe, you must give me leave
to tell you, that what may be thought lawful and happily commendable in your
carriage, during the extremities whereto my wounds had brought me, would not be
thought so after the recovery of my health, and that it would prove very
unhandsume, and much prejudicial to your reputation, that a person of my age,
and one to whom you pretend an affection should make any longer abode in your
house. What may have been kept secret hitherto, cannot be any longer, for time
does at last discover things that are most concealed. You have abundance of
virtue, Eurinoe, though you have been overcome by some passion, and it is your
virtue as much as the assistances I have received from you, that I conceive my
self obliged to esteem you for. Since then your virtue is really more then
ordinary, suffer it not to be stained with those spots, which it will be hard
for you to get out again, and endeavor to preserve your reputation amongst men
by actions conformable to those of your life past. You will pardon me for being
so free as to give you this advice which, assure your self, proceeds from a
heart full of grateful apprehensions, as also if I presume to beg no other love
from you, then such as you would afford a Brother, since that you perceive by
the posture of my affairs, that I cannot love you otherwise then as a sister.

I had not till then spoken in such terms to Eurinoe, whence it came that she
was the more surprised thereat, insomuch, that for a long time she was not able
to make any reply. And yet I think she had bethought her of something to say,
when our discourse was interrupted by a little noise which we heard behind the
hedg-row, against which we were sat, and not long after, by the appearance of
a man, who, being come into the walk, made all the have he could toward the
place where we were. Eurinoe's thoughts being employed at that time much more
then mine, I took notice of the man before she did, and saw that he was of a
very goodly presence, a noble and majestic air, and had a very fair
countenance for a man of that nation, though he seemed to be weak and brought
very low, and discovered in his eyes some dreadful resolution. Being, for my
part, ignorant what occasion might bring him thither, I was very glad of a
sword I had by my side, which Eurinoe had given me the day before, and had
begun to wear it but that very day, to make use of, if need were, in a Country
where I was to suspect all things: but Eurinoe, who had thought before that it
was either Eteocles or Pelorus, cast not her eyes on him, till such time as he
was come up almost to us. At the same time the woman that was with her gave a
shriek, which she hearing, and endeavoring to find the cause of it in the
countenance of that man, she immediately found it, when she knew him to be her
unfortunate Teramenes, on whose death she had bestowed so many tears, and o^
whose body she had made so much lamentation, and done things that
sufficiently argued her extravagance and despair. At this sight she gave a
great shriek, as she brought forth the name of Teramenes, and the terror she
conceived thereat was so great, that she fell into a swound upon the seat where
she was sat. Her action, that of the woman that was with her, and the name of
Teramenes, which they pronounced, put me into an imagination it might be his
ghost, or happily he himself preserved by some miracle.

During that uncertainty, retreating back a little, when he was come up very
near us, and putting my hand to the hi^ of my sword; Stand there, said I to
him, and if thou a^^ only the ghost of Teramenes, disturb not any further by
thy approaches, those whom thy presence has frightened. Were I only the ghost
of Teramenes, replied the man, it were to thee that I should address my self,
as having been my murderer; but since I am Teramenes living, and recovered of
the cruel wound which I received from thee in the battle, thou shall not need
to fear in this deplorable condition, him, whom thou could look upon without
any dread in the head of an Army. I am Teramenes the over-faithfull Lover of
that faithless woman, whose heart thou have gotten from me after thou had
taken away my life not only in her opinion, but in that of all the world
besides. I was thine enemy upon the concernments of Tiribasus who was my
Friend; I became thy enemy upon the wound I received from thy hands, which
has brought me to the extremities of life and death, and I have yet a more
just ground to be thy enemy for the injury thou have done me in robbing me of
the affections of Eurinoe, which I was in possession of, and had well deserved.
I must further acknowledge, that this last injury though thou have done it
innocently, had armed me against thee; and that I came abroad this day, though
the first of my stirring, with a resolution which might have proved fatal to
one of us; but the words that have fallen from thee, and which I have
overheard, have wrought a change in my thoughts, and I have found so much
virtue, prudence and goodness in them, that they have taken off all the
indignation I had conceived against thee. I come therefore, no longer as an
enemy, but as a person that has a veneration for thy virtue, and as one that
is an humble suitor to that generositie, which thou discoverest as well in thy
actions as thy words, to beg that heart of thee, which thou have taken away
from me, without making any advantage thereof, and which thou keep from me,
yet would rather be without it. Restore to me Cleomedon, a thing which thou
have no mind to preserve, or if thou would be further revenged on the Friends
of Tiribasus, behold the sacrifice, which I shall now offer at the feet of an
ungrateful woman, of a life, which must now be as detestable to her as my
death was grievous at the last moments of her affection.

While Teramenes disburthened himself after this manner, and that I hearkened
to him with attention and astonishment, Eurinoe, by the assistance of her
woman, and that of Eteocles and Pelorus, who came in at the same time, was come
to her self again, and might have heard some part of what Teramenes said, while
Pelorus, who had cast himself at her feet, assured her that he was really
living, and craved her pardon for having put such a trick upon her. The woman
was so strangely at a loss between horror, astonishment, shame, and,
possibly, grief into the bargain, for the return of a man she had then no
affection for, that she knew not in a manner where she was, was not able to
speak, and had not the confidence to look upon him. With this, she found it no
small difficulty to be persuaded that Teramenes was living, though Pelorus had,
by protestations assured her of as much, as but too too well remembering the
last kisses she had given his cold and bloody body, and the orders she had
given for his enterrement.

While she was in this perplexity, Teramenes comes toward her, though by her
shrieks she sufficiently discovered the fear she was in he should come near
her, and thereupon stopping at the distance of some few paces from her, because
he would not disturb her any further, and looking on her with a countenance
wherein his passion was extremely visible; Is it possible, Eurinoe, said he to
her, you should be so much affrighted at Teramenes living, when you could find
in your heart to give him kisses when he was dead, and wash his face with so
many tears! But can I think that change any miracle, cruel and ungrateful
Eurinoe, when I am so well acquainted with that of your soul; and that I am
not ignorant, how that, in the same minute, you were seen to pass from, the
effects of the most violent passion in the world, to a mortal oblivion of him
that had adored you with so much fidelity, and to new inclinations for a dying
man, whom you had never seen before, and one that had been the death of those
persons whom you thought dearest to you. I return, Eurinoe, I return, almost
from hell to reproach you with your prodigious inconstancy, and the gods have
been pleased to restore me to life contrary both to your expectation and my
own, that I might come and represent to you, the many oaths and protestations
wherein you have called them to witness, to your promises of an eternal
affection for me. Is it possible that you can call them to mind without remorse
and confusion, and can so many demonstrations of my love, which you sometime
valued at the highest rate, come into your memory, and not raise in you either
a secret grief or a secret repentance? Your hand was lifted up to thrust a
dagger into the heart of my Murderer, and by an extravagance of passion, you
were hurried into extremities not ordinary to your sex, when that fatal sight
gave a check to your cruelty, and that new love, possessing it self of your
soul in an instant, forced thence the unfortunate Teramenes in such manner,
that you hardly remembered he had once lived. In the mean time, my life was
preserved to my greater misfortune, and I wish it had pleased the gods to have
put a period to it at that very minute when your affection ceased, and that
their assistance and that of men had not proved so effectual as to restore it
me, to make me fall into the greatest unhappiness that ever man groaned under.
Do you imagine, Eurinoe, that heaven has not a punishment for so strange an
insidelity, and that the cries of a desperate and an injured Lover, will not
bring upon your head those misfortunes which his Love permits him not to wish
you.

To this effect was the discourse of Teramenes, which fell from him with a
certain action, that raised in me abundance of pity, and he would have said
more, had not the excess of his grief prevented him, when Eurinoe, having
quite recovered her self, as convinced, both by the things which she heard, and
by what Pelorus had told her, would needs stop the torrent of his words.
Whereupon, smothering that confusion and remorse which had tied up her tongue
so long, she looked on Teramenes, not without some remainders of the fright he
had put her into; and not long after, venturing to speak, though with
difficulty enough; Whatever thou art, said she to him, whether the Ghost of
Teramenes, or Teramenes himself alive, thou have filled my soul with terror
and astonishment, and I cannot look on thee in that condition, after I had
honored thy cold and bloody body with the last demonstrations of my Love, but
I must needs be disturbed at so strange an adventure. Assure thy self therefore
that what thou have observed in my countenance is merely the effect of that
trouble, and not of that confusion and remorse which thou do reproach me
with, and though it might happily have proved more advantageous to my self to
have continued my affections to thee even after thy death, since it was decreed
thou should come to life again, yet is it certain that thou have lost them by
a misfortune which I have not any way contributed to. With what justice,
Teramenes, can thou charge me with any infidelity toward thee? Have I been
any way backward in the Love I had promised thee to the very last minute of thy
life, or did we persuade one another that our Love should last beyond this
life? What law is that which engages one to this eternity of affection toward
the dead, or by what symptoms, could I judge that thou should return to
life, after I had caused thee to be brought out of the Field in order to thy
burial? Those demonstrations of love which I gave thee, and what else thou
may have understood from the unfaithful Pelorus, were they the effects of an
ordinary passion, and was there not ground enough thou should be satisfied
with a passion which engaged me to do things beyond the bounds of reason? To
revenge thee, I became, contrary to my natural inclinations, more cruel than
a Lioness, and would have attempted the life of an expiring Prince, at whose
sight even Tygresses would have been moved to compassion. If I therefore were
moved thereat, if the will of the gods, and generositie obliged me to assist
him, and if since, (as thou art too well informed to be denied any thing) his
excellent endowments, or some superior irresistible power, have forced my
inclinations, and taken that place in my heart, which was not to be eternally
kept empty for one that was dead, do thou find in this misfortune that horrid
infidelity which thou reproachest me with, or did thou imagine that my
obligations were as great to thy ghost, as they were, while living, to thy
self? No Teramenes, think not that thou can accuse me with any justice, and
if thou have been so unhappy to loose my affections, by an adventure so
prodigious quarrel, with heaven, whose will it was it should be so, and not
with my will which has contributed nothing thereto. As to the misfortune which
thou bewailest so much, my condition is not a jot happier than thine, and thou
may elsewhere find a better fortune than thou can expect with the
unfortunate Eurinoe, while in the mean time it is destined she should be
eternally miserable, and exposed to that chastisement of heaven, which thou
say must fall upon me, and which indeed I have already felt.

The period of this discourse of Eurinoe's was a shower of tears which it lay
not in her power to keep in any longer. Whereupon Teramenes whom it put to the
extremity of grief, by reason there could not be a greater confirmation of the
reality of his unhappiness, casting a dreadful look upon her: No, no,
Eurince, said he to her, I shall accuse you no longer, but acknowledge with
you, and submit to that irresistible power which has forced your inclinations.
But in regard my life might do your reputation some prejudice in the world,
though my tongue were silent and that it is not to be doubted but that I am now
as abomible, as ever I was amiable in your sight, it is but just my life should
here determine, and that in such a manner, that you may not be therein mistaken
a second time. The greatest regret I now have at my death, is, that I leave you
an unfortunate woman, and if the virtue and constancy of Cleomedon could but
give him leave to forget Candace to enjoy you, as you have, to gain him,
forgotten Teramenes, the last entreaty I were to make should be, that he would
be less cruel to her, and not aggravate any further a revenge which I desire
not you should take.

With these words he drew out a dagger he had about him, and listing up his
hand, would have thrust it into his breast, if I had not fastened upon him, and
stayed his hand, though only with so much force as to prevent him from
executing his resolution. Teramenes, perceiving his design frustrated, looked
on me very disturbedly, and endeavoring to snatch the dagger which I had taken
out of his hands; Cleomedon, said he to me, content your self that the
experience I have of your virtue, has prevailed so far upon me, that I would
not have the effects of my despair fall upon you, and since I am willing to
spare those by whose means I am become miserable, purposely that I might
execute all my revenge upon my self, hinder me not from freeing my self from
those miseries which I groan under upon your account. I will hinder you to lay
violent hands on your self, said I to him, if it lie in my power to do it, and
it shall not be my fault, if you do not find out some expedient besides that of
death, to get out of those misfortunes whereof I am the innocent cause. Eurinoe
knows very well, that it is not upon any hopes that I have given her that she
perseveres in the affection which she has for me, and I here give you a full
discovery of my thoughts, when I tell you, that I should think my self a very
wretched person, and abominable in the sight of Heaven, if a love so faithful
as yours should come to an unfortunate end by my means.

Having with these words taken away the dagger from Teramenes, I turned toward
Eurinoe, in whom the deportment and last words of her husband had raised some
compassion, I said to her all those things which pity could suggest to me on
her behalf, and alleged to her all the reasons which I thought might any way
oblige her to dis-lodge me out of her heart, and to readmit her faithful
Teramenes. For some time she was not able to make me any answer, other then
that of a shower of tears, which being at last over, she very earnestly
reassumed the discourse, and charged me with the greatest cruelty and
ingratitude imaginable. I heard all with abundance of patience, and not
discovering the least trouble thereat, I took occasion to represent unto her,
what might be the consequences of an obstinate perseverance, in a fruitless
passion, and that directed to a man engaged in another love, one that was ready
to take his leave of her, and should not happily ever see her again; nay, which
is more then all, one, that, though he were not called away by the affection he
had for the Queen, could not make any abode with her, but to the utter ruin of
her reputation, besides the little probability there was she would be so
extravagant, as to entertain in her house the murderer of one of her Brothers.
To this I added what she might fear from her other Brother, who was still with
Tiribasus, and that she must needs expect he would have some designs, not
only against her life, but mine also, as being dear to her, but that, on the
contrary, she could not but be happy with Teramenes. it being out of all doubt
that he had an extraordinary affection for her, since the demonstrations she
had received thereof were very remarkable: that he was approved and recommended
to her by her friends, and, in a word, that it was the only means to make a
composure not only in her own mind, but also in her house and fortunes.

While I thus disburthened my thoughts to Eurinoe, Teramenes, having cast
himself at her feet, bathed them with his tears, insomuch, that, whether it
were upon that spectacle, which stirred up in her the embers of her former
affections, or that she was convinced of the reason and truth of the things I
represented to her, and withal lost all hope of being loved by me, and happily
imagined she might never see me again, after a doubtful engagement wherein we
spent the best part of the day, she at last began to yield. Whereupon looking
on Teramenes, with a milder countenance then before, she turned toward me, and
told me she would do what I should advise her to, and that, being become mine
through the means of some unknown power, she now submitted again to the same
power, which she was not able to resist. Teramenes, almost out of himself for
joy, after he had given thousands of kisses to her feet, cast himself at mine,
embracing me by the knees, calling me the author of his safety, and his
tutelary angel, and making all the earnest protestations he could to me, that
he would heartily spend, to do me any service, that life which I had prevented
him from destroying, and made him happy in. And knowing on the other side that
Eurinoe might be in some fear he should afterward remember the change that had
happened in her affections, and accordingly conceive some discontented
thoughts of the love she had some time had for me, he, to rid her of that fear,
made thousands of protestations to her, that it should never come into his mind
again. He told her that he absolutely attributed that accident to the
extraordinary merit of Cleomedon, which might produce no less miraculous an
effect any where: but in fine, that, however he might seem to quarrel with her,
he was confident of her virtue, not only upon the former expressions she had
made thereof, but also from that very demonstration of it, which, when he least
expected any such thing, he had heard from the mouth of Cleomedon; that, for my
part, he should never conceive the least jealousy or ill thought of me, out of
a confidence I should never prove unfaitful to Candace, either for Eurinoe, or
any other person in the World.

Here am I forced to contract my relation, for that, should I make it my
business to repeat all the discourses which passed upon this occasion to
satisfy and convince Eurinoe, it would take up more time then I have spent in
the account of all I have given you already. At last I made an absolute
reconcilation between Teramenes and Eurinoe, who endeavored, all that lay in
her power, to conceal before him, the violence she did her self upon that
occasion, and prevalid with her so far upon the earnest entreaties of that
Lover, that I got her to promise that she would be married to him before my
departure thence, as she might very well do, being, as she was, altogether at
her own disposal, and knowing withal that her marriage with Teramenes was
approved of, and desired by all her friends.

At last we would needs know of him, how he had recovered to life, and had
carried his business so secretly that Eurinoe never so much as suspected any
such thing. He, in few words, acquainted us, how that, after we had been
brought into the Castle, Pelorus returning to the place, where he had left him,
with a letter to carry him away, found him recovered out of that mortal
swouning wherein he had continued all the night, and some part of the day; that
this man, being one that had been brought up in his service over-joyd at the
accident, had taken such pains about him, that at last he brought him so far to
himself, that he was sensible of what was said to him. To this Pelorus added,
That Teramenes had commanded him to carry him to Eurinoe's, as having no place
where he might well retire any nearer, and that thereupon he had been forced to
acquaint him with the truth of all that had passed, as having far greater
respects for his Master then he had for Eurinoe: That Teramenes had almost dyed
in good earnest at that cruel news, and that nevertheless, out of a desire to
see the consequences of that adventure, and to apply those remedies which time
and his own resentments should suggest unto him, he was content to be carried
to a house that belonged to a Sister of Peloruus's, not far from Eurinoe's
Castle, where he might not only be privately looked after in order to his
perfect recovery, but also be in a place, where he might every day understand,
by Pelorus, what was done at Eurinoes: That all things came to pass as
Teramenes had desired, and that he had been waited on and dressed with so much
care as might be, by persons concerned in his welfare, and such as had not
anyway betrayed the secret committed to their trust: That this had been done
with the greater ease, by reason of Eurinoe's continual employment about me,
and the little curiosity she was then guilty of, to enquire what was done in
her neighborhood: That he brought Teramenes notice every day of what was done
at the Castle, in regard he might go and come to his Sisters house without the
least suspicion: That Teramenes conceived such a grief and affliction thereat,
that many times he was upon the point of discovering all, not doubting but that
Tiribasus, and Eurinoe's Brother, and all of that party would soon find out
some means to dispatch me, when they were once acquainted with the place of my
abode, but that he had been persuaded to the contrary, partly by his
entreaties, who desired him to delay it, and partly by those remainders of love
which he still had lest in him for Eurinoe, for whose sake principally it was
that he forbore putting that bloody design in execution; that at last, through
the assistances of those that were employed about his recovery, he was come to
the posture of health wherein he saw him, and that having notice given him,
that Eurinoe and my self walked every day in the Garden, he would needs come
thither, to over-hear our discourse, if it were possible, and to take his
opportunity to be revenged of me in such a manner as might least prejudice the
reputation of Eurinoe; That he had many times overheard our discourse, through
the hedge-row, but that in those which I made to Eurinoe, he had found so much
prudence and virtue, that he immediately changed his resolution, and that
perceiving I had no affection for Eurinoe, he thought sit to make his advantage
thereof, and had then discovered himself to us to implore my assistance upon
the opinion he had of my generosity.

Thus did Teramenes give us an account of his adventure, and prevailed so far
with Eurinoe, that she pardoned Pelorus, who in those transactions had
expressed a greater love to his ancient Master then to his new Mistress. But
to what purpose should I spin out the particulars of this relation, all things
were composed, quiet and serenity of thoughts began to chase away all former
dissatisfactions, only Eurinoe discovered by certain sighs that her soul was
not absolutely recovered, and, three days after, finding my self in a
condition to depart thence, I charged Eurinoe with her promise, and in my
presence obliged her to marry Teramenes. There happened some particulars in
this action which I carefully concealed from Teramenes, and the next day I
pressed them, to accommodate me with those things that were necessary for my
departure, that I might repair to those places which I was obliged to go to,
promising them, I should acknowledge, when it should please the gods to enable
me, the assistances and kindness I had received from the officions Eurinoe.
Teramenes granted my request, and furnished us with clothes, arms, and horses,
and would have gone along with me, had I accepted of his company: but I gave
him thanks for his kind prossers, and told him, that I was satisfied he should
be no longer my enemy, without engaging him to be any way serviceable to me
against Tiribasus, who was much his friend, and so entreated him not to
discover any thing he knew of me, and to promote the report which was already
spread abroad of my death. And this I was the more confident he would do, not
only upon the promise he had made to do it, but also out of a consideration of
his own interest, which would advise him not to publish a thing, that might
exasperate Tiribasus against him. They also taught me an invention which proved
very fortunate to me; for, perceiving I was somewhat troubled how to conceal my
self in the places I was to pass through, by reason of the fairness of my
face, so different from the complexion of the men of that Country, they gave me
a certain water, which is commonly used among the Aethiopians, by those that
are desirous of a more shining blackness in the countenance, and having made
experience of it first on my hands, they afterward therewith painted my face,
as also that of Eteocles, so that after three washings, we were grown as
blacsh as if we had really been Ethiopians. They gave me a little Glass Bottle
full of it, to carry along with me, and showed me the way to take it off, when
I had a mind to do it, which was, only with warm water and certain herbs put
into it. In this posture, after some bemoanings from Eurinoe, which she was not
able to forbear, and thousands of protestations which I made her, to
acknowledge her extraordinary favors, if ever Fortune proved kind to me, I
departed from that house without any other company then that of Eteocles, and
one servant on horseback, Teramenes bestowed on me, and of whose fidelity he
gave me very great assurances.

The design I then had was secretly to get to those whom I knew to be still
my Friends, and were desirous to serve their Princess, and had a zeal for the
memory of their late King, hoping, that upon my return they would be
encouraged to attempt something for the service of their Queen, whom I knew to
be well beloved among the Ethiopians. Among those Telemachus and Oristhenes
were the most considerable, and, having understood in my way that they were
retired from the Court to certain houses they had in the Country, where they
passed away their time in grief and solitude, I, without any danger, got to
Oristhenes, passing through all places, without the least suspicion, by reason
of the blackness of my countenance, which disguised me so well, that you your
self, Madam, were mistaken in me. I shall not take occasion to prolong my
discourse upon the astonishment of Oristhenes and Telemachus, when I had
discovered my self to them, and when they found me living after they had
bewailed my death. They gave me thousand of expressions of their joy and
friendships, and continuing still as well affected and as zealous for the
service of their Queen, as ever they had been; they very cheerfully entertained
the proposition I made to them, of attempting something against the Tyrant, and
proffered of themselves to go, and secretly solicit all her faithful Servants
and Subjects into some engagement, and to get together such a Body as might
undertake some remarkable enterprise. They acquainted me, Madame, how you had
been secured and guarded; and gave me an account of your admirable constancy in
opposing the solicitations of Tiribasus, who was not yet come to the utmost
violences, but had gone so far as to put your most faithful Servants into some
fear, that he would not long continue in those terms. I communicated to them
the design I had to wait on you, and they were persuaded, that, considering
how I had disguised my self, I might come even into the presence of Tiribasus
without any danger. I came to Meroe, where I had not the happiness to see you
the first time; but the second, when I came into the Garden, I was more
fortunate, and seeing you again, I laid as an offering at your feet your
faithful Cleomedon, whom you had honored with your tears, and who, through the
excess of your goodness and favors, still lives in your memory.

The end of the First Book.
HYMEN'S PRAELUDIA, Or, Loves Masterpiece.
PART X. LIB. II.
ARGUMENT.
CLeomedon prosecutes the continuation of his History. He draws to his party
4000. men, with whom he forces the Palace at Meroe, forcing Tiribasus into the
City, and sending Queen Candace along the Nile to Bassa. He maintains the
Palace till the supplies raised by Oristhenes and others were come into the
City, whereupon, sallying out to join with them, and jointly to engage
Tiribasus, he meets with a party commanded by Asanor, defeats it, and kills
him. He relieves Oristhenes, hard set upon, and consummates the victory by
killing Tiribasus, Having secured the reduction of the City by a new oath of
allegiance to Queen Candace, he goes after, thinking to find her at Bassa, but
meets there with a probable report that she might be taken by the Pirate
Zenodorus, whom thereupon he makes a fuitlesse search after, till at last he
was by a tempest cast ashore near Alexandria. Renewing his search after her
upon Land, he meets accidentally with Artaban, they fight, but are interrupted
by Zenodorus passing by, who is pursued by Artaban. They both fight against
Zenordorus and his men, till that weakened by wounds and loss of blood, he is
relieved by Eteocles, and brought by Alexander to a house where he has a sight
of his Sister Cleopatra, but discovers not himself to either. By the mediation
of Candace and Elisa, he is induced to an inclination of friendship with
Artaban. Olympia and Arsinoe come to visit Candace and Elisa. Philadelph goes
to visit Tigranes, to whom he presses his vain pursuit of Elisa, and reproaches
him with his former affections to Urania: Olympia and Arsinoe are made
acquainted with Artaban, who know him to be the same Britomarus, who had
sometime had some inclination for Arsinoe, and had rescued Ariobarzanes out of
the hands of the Pirates. Ariobarzanes and Philadelph are made acquainted with
Artaban, and acknowledge their great obligations to him under the name of
Britomarus. Agrippa entertains Ariobarzanes, Philadelph, and others, with the
loss of Cleopatra, upon which the Princes that were present take occasion
(...) discover what they had every one contributed to that adventure.

THe fair Princess of the Parthians and the Queen of Ethiopia had hearkened
hitherto with great attention to the relation of Cleomedon, without offering to
interrupt him, but when he was come to that passage, Elisa, looking on the
Queen with a smiling countenance; You were very much to blame, Madam, said she
to her, not to have discovered to me this particular of Caesario's life,
because, in my judgment it is none of the least important. But I withal
perceive that you purposely avoided all occasion of giving me any account of
the Love of Eurinoe, out of a fear you were in, that I might observe in your
discourse, some glimpses of the jealousy you may have conceived at that
adventure. You force me to a protestation, Madam, replied the Queen (with an
action wherein she seemed to be as indifferent and as little earnest as the
other) which is, that the greatest part of those things which he has related,
was not come into my knowledge; and therefore whether it were for the reason
you allege, or for some other yet unknown to me, Caesario had given me but an
imperfect account of that adventure, and had not discovered the particulars
thereof that were of most consequence. You are very much in the right, Madam,
replies Caesario, for indeed, I should gladly have avoided giving you any
account of it, could I well have done it, and the little inclination I have to
engage my self in a discourse of this nature might have exempted me from doing
it now, had you not laid your absolute commands upon me to that purpose. I have
therefore made a shift to get through the first and longest part of my
narration, since you have already acquainted this great Princess with the
entertainments that passed between us in the garden, as also all that happened
even to the day, on which, after I had brought in four thousand men of those I
had drawn in to our party by the means of Telemachus and Oristhenes, I forced
the palace, and that Tiribasus, having saved himself by getting into the City,
I led you through the garden to a vessel which I had provided to carry you
along the Nile to the city of Bassa, a place then at our devotion. Of all
these things, replied the Queen, I have given the Princess an exact account,
all you have yet to inform us of, is, what has happened to you since our
separation. Though this, replied Caesario, be the shortest part of my relation,
yet is it that of greatest consequence, and I cannot but extremely wonder you
should not be more impatient to know whether you have not still a Crown to
dispose of.

After I had brought you to the vessel, and there left you, though not without
much violence to my self; to put the design we had undertaken in execution,
which we had in some part effected, in as much as concerned your liberty, but
as to what was yet to be done were in a very ill posture by reason of the
escape of Tiribasus, I returned to the palace, where I found all my men
absolutely resolved to make good what they had gotten, and to fight for your
interest to the last gasp. I encouraged them in that design by all the words
I thought might any way animate them, and put them into a posture of
maintaining the Palace, in the best order I possibly could. I made no doubt but
that Tiribasus, as being a man much experienced in matters of war, would come
immediately and set upon us with all the force he could of a sudden make,
knowing that it concerned his safety to recover presently what he had lost,
before those supplies came in to us which we expected. This he accordingly put
in execution, as I had imagined he would, and he was no sooner gotten into the
City, but he forced all the Citizens to take up arms, though the main motive
of their obedience was their fear, their inclinations being absolutely for
their Queen; and in the mean time having given order that all the troops that
were in the suburbs and about the City, should rally under the command of
Theogenes and Asanor, he got a considerable body together, and came against the
Palace with abundance of fury. You know, your self, Madam, that all the
fortification there is about it, is a ditch with a low stone-wall flanked here
and there with certain Towers. The ditch may soon be filled, as being neither
very broad nor very deep, yet not so easily but that it would cost a great many
men to do it, the palace being made good by a considerable number of men, and
those all resolved to sell their lives at the dearest rate.

Tiribasus having made his assaults upon that side of the palace which lies
toward the City, sent at the same time to secure all the boats that were upon
the Nile, that he might not only have the command of the river to carry on the
siege against us, but also prevent us from making any escape that way. Nay I
doubt not but that, if he had had the least suspicion of your departure, he
would have sent some boats after you; but you might have been so far before he
bethought him of that course, that I was out of all fear of your being taken
before your arrival at the City of Bassa, where you were expected. Tiribasus
made his approaches and carried on the assault, as a man that very well knew
what he had to do; and causing some part of his soldiers to bring turfs,
stones, faggots, and all such other things as were fit to fill up the ditch, he
began to do it with abundance of earnestness, but there being within a
considerable number of old soldiers, and such as were well versed in matters of
war, and far greater then was necessary for the defense of the palace, while I
gave order that some should rest themselves, the rest were disposed upon the
battlements, and showering down arrows upon the Stormers that were below, they
filled the ditch much more than all those other things did which the enemy had
brought thither to that purpose. I had, as good fortune would have it, found
out in the palace, an infinite number of arrows and all other arms, which it
seems Tiribasus had caused to be brought in thither, and which was yet a
further happiness going into that chamber which he had appropriated to himself
since his pretended Royalty, I there met with my own armor enriched with
Eagles of gold, the very same which I had been stripped of after the battle,
and which had been brought to him, as well for their sumptuousness, as to put
him into a greater assurance of my death. I have been informed since that it
was an officer that had fought under my command in the war of Nubia, and one
that had some respects for me, that had hindered his companions from cutting off
my head, to present it to Tiribasus, as they were once resolved to do, and was
content only to strip me of my Armor and to present him with them. This
accident I looked on as a good omen, and thereupon putting them on with much
joy, I imagined my self more hardly conquerable in them than I had been before.
I very diligently visited all those places wherein my presence might be any way
serviceable, and omitted nothing that contributed ought to our defense, no more
then Tiribasus did on the other side to carry on the assault. I once perceived
him, amidst a many of his Soldiers, issuing out his orders with much
earnestness, and having discovered my self to him by a great shout, I took a
bow and arrows in my hand, and shot twice at him, the latter arrow coming so
near his head, that he durst not continue any longer in the place where he was;
and perceiving that, at the same time, I caused him to be shot at several
ways, after he had threatened me by cries and gestures, he retired to a place
where he was more secure. From that time I set upon him the best Archers I had,
to shoot continually at him as soon as ever he should appear, by which means it
came to pass that he was less confident in the assault then he had shown
himself before.

The number of men that I had within the palace was such, that I might have
ventured to sally out, and have forced back the more daring of the Enemies
side; but it was my greatest concernment to gain time, in expectation of those
supplies which Oristhenes was to bring me, and which were raised with so much
privacy, in the Cities that were still under our command, that Tiribasus had
not the least intelligence thereof, and in the mean time to keep Tiribasus so
in play, that, directing all his force against us, he might make the less
provision against other enemies. Besides those I had about me in the palace I
had four hundred men lying dormant in the City, in certain houses whereof we
were confident, and under the command of Clinias a Nephew of Oristhenes; and
these were ordered, as soon as the supplies were come, to join with them at a
place appointed, and possess themselves of a gate of the City to make way for
the other forces. I discovered some part of my design to the principal
Officers, encouraging them to play the men that day, and promising them they
should be relieved, if not the night following, at farthest the next morning.
There was no great need of this solicitation, for they all fought with such
eagerness, that, though Tiribasus had in some places filled up the ditch, and
had brought sealing ladders to storm the place, yet all came to no other
effect then that those who were most forward to get up, were rumbled down into
the ditch, as it were to abate the confidence of those that were to come after
them.

You would happily think my relation very tedious and impertinent, should I give
you a particular account of all the actions of that day, and therefore, I shall
think it sufficient to tell you, that the Gods (who no doubt, had a vengeance
in store for the Tyranny of Tiribasus,) took away the light of his reason in
that emergency, and, depriving him of some part of his ordinary prudence, were
pleased, that, blinded by the violence he was in to reduce us, he bent all his
forces to do it, in such manner, that he made not any provision for the
security of the City. Upon this account was it that he spent the whole day in
assaults against us, but to no purpose, and having hardly taken one hours rest
in the night, he was at us again before day, much more furiously then before.

In the mean time, Oristhenes, having landed in the Island without any
difficulty, was, with the advantage of the night, gotten to the very gates of
Meroe, and, at the break of day, having given the signal which we were agreed
upon with Clinias, he was presently at the gate, whither all his men, coming to
him from several quarters, came about him, and, before that those who were
then upon the guard could perceive whether they were Friends or Enemies, they
fell upon them, cut off those that made any resistance, and having forced the
rest to fly, set open the gate for Oristhenes. Yet could not this be done with
so little noise, but that those who were upon the walls, though but few, and
those not much minding what was done, did, as soon as it was light, discover the
forces of Oristhenes, and accordingly give the alarm; but, before it could
come to the place where Tiribasus was, Oristhenes was gotten into the City, his
troops coming in still like waves, and meeting with nothing that any way
opposed them. He brought in along with him three thousand horse, and about
seven or eight thousand foot, all choice men, and such as were ready to
sacrifice their lives for the just cause wherein they were engaged. Oristhenes
used all the expedition he could to get in his forces, which he disposed into
the more spacious streets and other large places that ly near that gate, and
when he saw that the greatest part were come in, and that the rest would follow
without any hindrance, he advanced toward the palace, putting all to the sword
that he met with in arms. He caused it to be cried wherever he came that the
Citizens should lay down their arms, and that no violence should be done to
those that would not fight for Tiribasus. It were impossible for me to
represent to you what a distraction Tiribasus was in, when word was brought of
that misfortune, and what imprecations he made against heaven, when he
perceived himself surprised by those very enemies, whom not long before he had
slighted for their weakness: and yet he withal saw that he had but little
time to loose in consultation, and that instead of carrying on the assault
against the palace, he must make head against Oristhenes and fight him.

He accordingly resolved to do it, and thereupon, rallying all the forces he
had abont him, and giving order that his horse should mount, he mounted also
himself, and leaving a small number before the Palace to keep us in play, he
took all the rest along with him to engage with Oristhenes. I had understood by
a signal from Clinias that the supplies were come, and easily imagined what
might have followed, insomuch, that, finding that I might either freely sally
out, or at the worst meet with such opposition as I might well overcome, I
thought it not fit to sight any longer behind dead walls; and so leaving twelve
hundred men to make good the Palace, though a less number might have served to
do it, I commanded out all the rest, and getting up of a good horse, whereof I
found no small number about the Palace, and which I disposed among the most
considerable of those that were about me, I caused the great gate of the Palace
to be opened, and drew out into a spacious place not far from it. Those that
endeavored to oppose our passage were immediately cut in pieces, and the rest,
running away, made all the have they could to Tiribasus.

I was no sooner got into the City, but I caused it to be proclaimed every
where, as Oristhenes had done before, that the Queen pardoned the Citizens,
provided they laid down their arms, and this, running from one to another,
proved so effectual, that the greatest part of the inhabitants took occasion to
go home to their own houses, by which means Tiribasus's party became much
weaker then it had been. However, the number he had about him was far greater
then that of our forces; but he could not make any advantage of their number in
the streets, where the engagement was not the same as it would have been in an
open field. Tiribasus was already engaged with Oristhenes, and upon the first
encounter there was abundance of blood spilt on both sides. As I was marching
toward the place where I thought to have found them, I met with Asanor in my
way, in the head of a party which he was carrying to the relief of Tiribasus. I
immediately charged him, and it happening that we met in a spacious place, the
engagement proved accordingly very hot and bloody. The success also for some
time was very doubtful, but at last victory declared her self for the juster
cause, and, Asanor being killed, with the most considerable of those that were
about him, the rest ran away in disorder toward the place where Tiribasus was
fighting against Oristhenes, and certainly there it was, that blood and blows
were not spared, and that we had by much the worst end of the staff. Tiribasus
fighting with his men like one that had all at the stake, had charged
Orisihenes with such fury, that the bravest of his men lay upon the ground, and
he himself, being unhorsed, disputed the business on foot with little hope of
victory, nay, it would not have been long ere he had lost his life, had not
some of the best affected and stoutest of his men set themselves before him,
and relieved him with much eagerness. Tiribasus, making all the advantage he
could of that overture of victory, forced his enemies to retreat, fighting them
still even into the spacious place of Meroe. There it was that he thought to
give them an absolute defeat, by reason of the advantage of the place, and the
distraction they were already in, when I, coming to their relief another way,
which I found free, got up to that place with my Troop, and immediately crying
out, Candace, Candace, and those that followed me, Cleomedon, we revived those
that were ready to quit the field, and abated their confidence, who expected
nothing less then victory. The presence of the two chiefs added very much to
the bloodinesse of the engagement, which was upon my coming reassumed, and,
having sent some of my men to relieve Oristhenes, whose danger I had
understood, I endeavored to meet with Tiribasus, as knowing that in his person
consisted all the war. I took notice of the place where he was, and he
immediately knew me. I am easily persuaded that it was not his desire to avoid
fighting, being, by the acknowledgment of all, a man valiant enough, and no
less concerned in my death then I could be in his: but the most devoted to his
interests that were about him, setting themselves before him, many were laid on
the ground that I was forced to dispatch to come up to his person. At last we
came together, notwithstanding the opposition of our men, and running at him
full of fury; The day is now come, Tyrant, said I to him, that thou must render
up the Crown with thy own life into the bargain. He made me some answer, which
I could not hear by reason of the noise, and the heat I was then in, and
received me with a resolution not must different from what I brought. But,
being ever and anon hindered by our men, who came in between us, and that
especially by his, who fell upon me on all sides, I grew the more eager to
determine the difference, and that was it had almost cost me my life. I had
made two blows at Tiribasus, with such good fortune, that they gave him two
wounds, whereupon he began to look on me as one that fought with a certain
confidence of victory, when my horse, by reason of many hurts he had received,
fell down so of a sudden, that I had much ado to get my feet out of the
stirrups, and to stand before Tiribasus, who taking me at that advantage, was
upon the point of running over me, I could not avoid the shock of his horse,
insomuch that he had almost overthrown me, but in that posture leaning on my
own horse that lay dead between my legs, with my left hand, I, with my right,
thrust my sword into the belly of his, so that when he was coming at me, he
felt him falling down under him. In that interim I closed with him, to avoid
the shock of his men, and in that disorder finding a place unarmed, I run him
with my sword through the body.

Tiribasus stretched forth his arms as he was falling with his horse, but, in
regard that I stood near him, he very furiously cast himself on me, and, by his
weight forcing me to the ground, he fell upon me, as he breathed out his last,
and fastened on me in such a manner, that I found it no small difficulty to get
from under him, all goared and covered with his blood. The danger I was in by
reason of that disadvantage, had been very great, had I not been relieved by
diverse stout men, woe rescued me from the rage of Tiribasus's friends, and,
notwithstanding all they could do, got me on horseback again. This, Madam, was
the fate of Tiribasus, the usurper of your Dominions, and your precious
Liberty, and you may see in it how that the just gods decreed he should perish
by his hands, to whom, of all men, that revenge was most due.

Upon his death, those that were of his party were so lost, as to courage and
resolution, that the most eager in the cause could hardly be gotten to fight
much longer. When I saw the resistance they made was very weak, and that some
were running away in the streets, casting away their arms, I considered, Madam,
that they were your subjects, and thereupon, out of a desire to spare their
blood, I cried, and caused it to be cried up and down, that if they laid down
their arms, the Queen would give them their lives, and would forgive all that
was past. Some particular friends of Tiribasus would not accept of this
proffer, but would needs be killed, and, among the rest, Eurinoe's Brother,
whose life I would gladly have saved for his Sisters sake: but all the rest,
perceiving there was no safety but by that means, and having, for the most
part, sided with Tiribasus, purely out of fear, laid down their arms, and cried
up and down, God save Queen Candace. I immediately thereupon sent orders every
where, that none should be put to the sword; and it was so religiously
observed, that, after some few minutes, there was no more blood spilt. All
those of Tiribasus's party went in among the Citizens, who had laid down their
arms as soon as I was gotten out of the Palace: and our men, though in arms and
victorious, began to treat the others as their Countrymen and companions.
Oristhenes, who, having been set on horseback again by the relief which I had
sent him, had joined with me, and behaved himself with abundance of valor, rid
all about the City by my order, and so appeased the remainders of the disorder,
that when the dead bodies were removed out of the streets, it could hardly be
imagined there had been any fight.

All things being thus composed, I sent out orders, that the more considerable
of those that had followed Tiribasus, as well Citizens as soldiers, should
come to me in one of the most spacious places in the City, and, after I had
entertained them with a discourse (which it were not fit to trouble you with a
recital of) wherein, having in, the first place, represented to them the
greatness of their crime, I made them, in the next, apprehensive of that of
your goodness, who were graciously pleased, even at a time that they might be
punished with severity, to pardon them so horrid an infidelity, and forget all
that was past; provided that for the future they did those things which were
expected from them. And that I exhorted them to do with a true remorse, and to
repair their crime, by a fidelity as remarkable as their defection had been.
All the inhabitants answered me with cries and tears, and, pronouncing your
name on their knees, they called all the gods to witness the sincerity of
their intentions, and protested they had done nothing against you, but by
force, and out of the fear they were in of the power of Tiribasus. The
souldery, for the most part, returned me the same answer, so that after I had
taken a new oath of allegiance from them all in your name, I dismissed the
Assembly, permitting all to follow their occasions, and such as had friends
dead, to bury them. I also gave way, that those that pretended a more
particular affection to Tirabasus, should take away his body in order to an
honorable enterrement, as knowing, Madam, your generosity to be such, as
permits not your resentments to go beyond death. And thereupon, having my
thoughts wholly taken up with you, and yet not thinking it safe to leave Meroe
that very day, for fear of the accidents that might happen upon so sudden a
revolution, I sent Clinias Express to you, to give you an account of all that
had past, and to entreat you to remain at Bassa till the next day, at which
time I should have waited on you, bringing along with me your people of Meroe,
who were infinitely desirous of your return.

Having gone so far, I spent all the rest of the day, and some part of the
night in pacifying and composing all things, and, considering the shortness of
the time, there was such order taken, that it was hardly perceiveable that
there had been any revolt in Ethiopia. But what grief it was to me, what
distraction I was in, the gods only know, the next day, when I found Clinias
returned, telling me, that you had been expected to no purpose at Bassa,
whither you came not at all, and where there had not bin any thing heard of
you. Being extremely troubled at this account of you, I immediately left
Meroe, having only stayed so long as to leave orders with Oristhenes to take
care of all things till your return, and, taking certain boats, and such a
number along with me, as I thought fit, of those I could best trust, I made all
the have I could to Bassa. There I soon met with the cruel confirmation of your
loss, and understood from those that you had left to command there in your
absence, that they had neither seen nor heard any thing of you. These
unfortunate tidings raising the greatest distraction imaginable in my thoughts,
put me to such extremities, as I had never been acquainted with before; and the
violence of my affliction taking away for some time the use of my reason, I had
much ado to forbear revenging my self upon such as had contributed nothing to
the misfortune. I did nothing the rest of that day, and all the next night, but
wander up and down upon the Nile, while thousands of persons were searching in
other places to the same purpose.

But all proving ineffectual, I thought it my best course to return to Meroe,
out of a conceit, that, without all question, you had been taken by some
persons that Tiribasus had sent after you, and that, by securing those that
were yet there, of the friends of Tiribasus, something might be discovered,
when there comes to Bassa an Egyptian Merchant ship, by which I understood,
that as they sailed up the Nile, they had met with the Pirate Zenodorus, with
four ships, and had escaped being taken by him, by making to land, which they
were not far from, and that they had passed so close to him, by reason of the
narrowness of the River in that place above any other, that they could easily
perceive there were some Ladies prisoners in his Vessel, whereof they had seen
some upon the deck, and heard the cries of others ecchoing all over the River;
and that afterward, coming further into the River, after the Pirate was gone
by, they met with abundance of carkases sloating, and found all the
circumstances of a great and bloody engagement. From this disourse, which the
passion I was then distracted by easily induced me to believe, I immediately
inferred, all circumstances considered, that it must needs be you, Madam, that
was fallen into the hands of the famous Pirate Zenodorus, whose name was grown
dreadful in all these coasts, and who was the best acquainted of any therewith,
by reason of the perpetual inroads that he made upon them. You may easily
imagine, Madam, that it were impossible for me to make you sensible of the
grief it was to me to hear these fatal tidings, and that all I am able to say
will come very far short of what I then felt upon the first entertainment of
that cruel account of our malicious Fortune. This was it that put me out of all
patience, and in a manner took away the use of my reason, insomuch, that the
gods may well pardon me, if, during the time that that extravagance lasted, I
did not always observe that respect which a man should never be guilty of any
breach of toward them. Nay, me thought the age I was then possessed by, was in
some sort excusable, and that misfortune, happening at a time when I expected
all the kindness and indulgence of fortune, seemed to me so great, that I
could not imagine it supportable by the greatest constancy in the World.
Nevertheless, thinking it too great a lowness of spirit to loose time in
lamentations and fruitless complaints, I sent Clinias back, again to Meroe,
with orders directed to Oristhenes, to hearken out every where after you, in
case the tidings I had received of you should prove false, and to secure the
most intimate friends of Tiribasus, to find out, by that means, whether you had
been taken by any orders of his, and, having given him that charge, I took up
three vessels that lay in the haven ready to set sail, accompanied by all those
I had about me, that I thought able to fight, and made all the speed I could
toward the mouth of the Nile, into the Mediterranean Sea. I thought it no such
difficulty to make after Zenodorus, though with a number of vessels, much
inferior to his, and, no doubt, less serviceable as to matter of engagement,
and all the fear I was in, was, that I should not find him, so far was I from
any thoughts of being worsted, if I were so fortunate as to meet with him.

We got out of the Nile, and were ^^tred into the sea, being absolutely to seek
what course we should take; but, having understood that Zenodorus came, often
to Pelensia, and the ports adjoining to Alexandria, to sell some part of what
he took upon those coasts, I imagined I might there hear of him, and so thought
fit to make toward Alexandria. I shall not, Madam, trouble you with the
complaints I made during the time of this sad course, nor the doleful
reflections which tormented my thoughts without the least intermission. I was
sensible, as indeed I ought to have been, of a misfortune that deprived me of
the happiness of your presence; but this was not yet the greatest of my
afflictions, and when I imagined to my self, that my fairest Queen was in the
hands of a merciless Pirate, and represented to my self all the dangers
whereto she might be exposed, (and to which, as I have since understood from
Eteocles, it was but indeed too too true that she was) I was at a loss of all
patience, insomuch that I could hardly forbear casting my self into the sea. At
last, we were entertained by the same tempest which proved so favorable to you
against the insolences of Zenodorus, and which has been the occasion of so
many accidents upon these coasts at the same time; and this also grew so
implacable to us, that our veilels were dispersed, in such manner, that I could
never yet learn any tidings of the other two, and know not but that they are
long since devoured by the waves: and that wherein I was in my self, after we
had, for two whole days strugled with the same cruelty of weather, that you
had met with, was at length cast upon this coast within a hundred Stadia of
this City, so shattered, that it was absolutely unfit for the sea. I left some
part of my men to get the vessel repaired, as at Alexandria they might with
all freedom do, there being free commerce between the Ethiopians and the
Egyptians, leaving orders with them that they should expect to hear from me in
the port of Alexandria, and that they should make enquiry every where after the
Pirate Zenodorus. And so, taking only twelve along with me, proportionably to
the number of horses that we had in the vessel, we all mounted, and having,
for some time rid all together along the shore, I thought it not amiss that we
divided into parties, it being the more likely way to find out what we sought,
and thereupon showing them a little village which I knew, and whereof I gave
them the name, I entreated them, that, after they had visited all the places
about Alexandria they would all meet there at night.

This was done as it had been resolved, and for my part I would have no more in
my company but only one Esquire, by reason of the aversion, which, through
melancholy, I had for all company. All that day was spent in a fruitless
search, and at night meeting at the rendez-vous appointed, we there passed it
over, wanting nothing as to the accommodation of the body, if the mind could
have taken any rest. The next day, I named to them another small town distant
from this place about two hundred Stadia, where was appointed the meeting for
the night following, and so, dividing into several parties, as the day before,
directing them to take other courses then they had done, went my self as
before, attended only by a single person in the quality of an Esquire.

I had wandered up and down for some part of the day, when, finding my self
sweltred with heat, and the weight of my Armor, which I had not put off all
this time, I would needs take a minutes rest, and refresh my self at a spring
that lay in my way in the midst of a very pleasant valley. With this resolution
I alighted at a certain distance from the spring, and, having given my horse to
the Esquire, I sat down by it, and putting up the visour of my headpiece, I
drunk of the water, and lay down on the grass, where no doubt I had taken some
little rest, had my grief been so supportable as to afford me such an
intervall. I had not been there many minutes, when there comes to the place
where I was, a man accoutred much after the same rate that I was, and, as I
conceive, with the same intention. His arms were very sumptuous, and he was of
a goodly presence: but I thought him quite another man, when he had put up the
visour of his helmet, as I had, and that, casting my eyes on his face, I found
he had the best countenance in the world? We saluted one another very
respectfully, though that in his face, as well as mine, were visible the
characters of more than ordinary sadness. After he had quenched his thirst,
which it seems had forced him thither, he began to look more earnestly on me,
and he had no sooner cast his eye on my face but he thought he should know me.
His behavior obliging me to look on him with the like earnestness, methought
the lineaments of his face were not strange to me, and, notwithstanding the
alteration which seven or eight years might have wrought therein, I presently
was persuaded I had seen him somewhere before.

We looked thus one upon the other, with some suspense on both sides, when he,
first discovering himself, and speaking to me with an accent which I was not
unacquainted with; I know not, said he to me, whether you would find Britomarus
in my countenance as I would do Cleomedon in yours. There needed no more than
these words to put me out of all doubt, that it was no other then the same
audacious Britomarus, with whom, while we were yet both very young, I had had
that great falling out in Ethiopia, and whose valor and generosity I had so
much admired. And though I should have gladly concealed my self from any other
person, yet could I not imagine it pardonable in me to do it from Britomarus,
after I had reflected on those things that had passed between us, and thereupon
making him an answer suitably to his manner of speaking to me; You are very
much in the right, said I to him, I am Cleomedon, and though it is with much
ado that I called you to mind, yet now I am absolutely satisfied that you are
Britomarus. It Is very true, I am Britomarus, replied he, and I must tell you
moreover, that I am Artaban. Under this latter name I am much more known among
men then under the former; under that name I have gained some battles,
conquered Kingdoms for ungrateful Kings, and have done those actions, which
have happily raised me to that rank, whereto I told you at our last parting, I
was in hopes to raise my self. I have measured my sword with Kings, who have
not thought it any dishonor to themselves; I have raised some of them, I have
pulled down others, and I have not met with any greater than my self, till the
chance of war had decided the controversy.

There needed no more than the word Artaban, to satisfy me as to some part of
those things which he told me, the reputation of Artaban being so much spread
all over the world, that few were ignorant of the great actions he had done. On
the other side, by reason of the acquaintance there had been between me and
Britomarus, I was easily persuaded that he was Artaban, as finding in him all
things extremely conformable to what I had known in the other. I hearkened to
his violent discourse with much patience, to see what would be the issue of it,
when he, proceeding; I do not, said he to me, tell you these things of my self,
Cleomedon to derive any vain reputation thence, but to give you occasion to
remember that, when I was affronted by you, and forced to quit the service of
Candace for your sake, I told you, as we parted, that a day might happily come,
wherein I should be in a condition once more to measure a weapon with you. Not
but that the cause of that resentment of mine has long since been taken away,
and that the addresses which were slighted by Candace, have Been entertained by
a Princess who is not inferior either to Candace or any other Princess in
the world; not also but that I am satisfied that the aversion which I have ever
naturally had for you, is unreasonable, since your excellent endowments ought
in all justice to gain you the esteem of all the world. On the other side, it
is not unlikely, but that there may be some occasion, nay happily necessity, that
both of us should employ our arms elsewhere, and upon that consideration I
shall not oblige you to turn yours against me: but you will be pleased to
remember, when we shall meet with a more favorable opportunity, that
Britomarus is arrived to that condition which he said he should come to, and
dares measure a sword not only with Cleomedon, but with all the Princes upon
earth,

This fiery discourse of Artaban's, though it raised in me a certain esteem for
the person, yet was I not a little incensed at, and my thoughts being easily
put into disorder by reason of the affliction I was in, there needed but a
small matter to put me out of all patience. Not but that I was extremely
troubled at this adventure, as such as obliged me to a fruitless engagement,
in a time which I was to employ in finding out other enemies; but there being
no grief so great as to smother the Love of glory, I thought, that, the
discourse, which Britomarus had made, well considered, I could not with honor
avoid fighting, though he had left it to my choice. Upon this reflection
looking on him with an eye, which easily discovered how much I was moved at
what he had said; Artaban, said I to him, I am very ready to believe of you all
that you say of your self, as also all that Fame has spread abroad concerning
you, and am withal satisfied, that the cause of your resentments has been
taken away by the change of your affections; but, it seems, though there be no
quarrel between us out of any consideration of jealousy, I am yet to be
accountable for your aversion, and though there want not happily other occasions
of far greater consequence than the motives of our differences that call me
elsewhere, yet will I be obliged for my liberty to prosecute them, to my self
and not to your civility. Let us not remit to another time and other
opportunities, what we may determine in this. It is possible we may not meet
with another so favorable, and we were both equally blameable if we should now
part and avoid an engagement that is now become necessary, and for which it
seems you come so well prepared.

With these words I rose up from the place where I lay, and after I had put on
and fastened my headpiece, and taken my buckler from my Esquire, I got up on
horseback, and rid forth into the most delightful part of the plain. Artaban
was not a person to be expected, he had his foot in the stirrup as soon as my
self, and being immediately, come up to me, he easily discovered by all his
deportment, that he was the person Fame published him to be. The first ouset
proved very furious, and the indignation I was in to think that he should
continue an unjust aversion during so many years for a displeasure I had
innocently done him, and for which I had made such satisfaction, caused me to
fight with no less animosity against him, then I had done some few days
before against Tiribasus. The first blows that were dealt on both sides were
hearty and heavy enough; but being both very well skilled in the use of the
Buckler, there were a many exchanged ere there was any wound received on either
side. At last being more and more exasperated by this trial of our strength,
we engaged one another with less circumspection, insomuch that both his armor
and mine began to be died with the blood, which our swords drew out of our
bodies. That spectacle heightning our courage added also to our animosity, and
no doubt but that the end of the combat would have proved fatal to one of us,
nay it may be to both, by reason of the great equality of our force, when a
certain man on horseback riding at a small distance from us, and making a
sudden halt, stayed for some little time to look on us. For my part, I could
see nothing in the man that might divert me from minding what I was then about:
but Artaban had no sooner cast his eye on him, but he gives a great shout, and
at the same time, gave me such a blow over the head that I was for some minutes
stunned with it. However, I made a shift to recover and that immediately, and
was thinking to drive toward him, when, looking about, I perceived him at a
great distance from me, riding with all the speed his horse could make, after
the man we had seen, and pursuing him so closely, that it was not long ere a
turning that was in the plain deprived me of the sight of him. This accident
put me very much to a loss, as being too well acquainted with the valor of my
Adversary, to imagine that it was out of any motive of fear that he avoided
fighting. No, I was far from conceiving any such thing of him, as knowing him
to be as gallant and as stout a man as ever drew sword: but being already
exasperated by the sight of my blood sliding down along my Armor, I would
needs run after him, either to decide our quarrel, or know of him the reason
why he had left me in the midst of it.

Whereupon observing the way he had taken, I followed the track of his horse,
with all the speed I could make, and within a small time came into a place
where I found him engaged in a combat with another man that seemed to be no
less valiant then himself. But, my greatest Queen, I shall say no more as to
what past then, because you were your self present and saw all, having Eteocles
with you, and another valiant person, who made it his business to part us.
There it was that I had the happinnesse to see you like a flash of lightning,
and just at the minute that I began to feel the first motions of joy for that
adventure, I saw you carried away, once more, by the man whom Artaban had
pursued, who was returned thither with his companions, and was the Pirate
Zenodorus, as I have understood since by Eteocles.

The fair Queen, who had been present at that action, and had observed all till
she was carried away, was so well acquainted with all passages, that he might
well forbear all further account thereof. Whereupon the Prince related to her,
how that he had followed her so long, till at last, through the great loss of
blood, and the weakness he was reduced to, by reason of his wounds he fell off
his horse; how he had been relieved by Eteocles, and not long after by his own
Brother, Prince Alexander, and the Princess Artemisa. He afterward
entertained her with an account how they had brought him to the house where
they had taken sanctuary themselves; how that some few days after, when he had
in some measure recovered his health, he had been acquainted with the History
of their loves, and yet, though he had not the least mistrust of their virtue,
and friendship, that he thought it not fit at that time to discover himself to
them, as not knowing whether she might take it well at his hands.

He afterward acquainted her with the arrival of the Princess Cleopatra, and
her being in that house, to whom also he had not discovered himself, and how
that the next day she had been carried away again with Artemisa. Caesario
aggravated to the Queen the affliction he conceived at that misfortune, as
being not in a capacity to afford his Sister the assistances he ought, and to
go along with Alexander after those that had carried her away; yet told her
withal, that it was his resolution to have done it, and that he would have put
on his armor, if Alexander himself had not prevented him; and if Eteocles had
not taken such order, that he could get neither arms nor horses for that day:
that the next day toward the evening finding himself a little stronger, he got
out of his bed with an intention at the same time to seek out both Candace and
Cleopatra, and was got to one of the windows, whence, casting his eye upon the
adjoining wood, he had seen a Chariot passing by, wherein he had perceived the
Queen, with the fair Princess of the Parthians, whom he knew not, that upon
that happy sight, joy taking its former place in his soul, friendship had
submitted to love, and the loss of Cleopatra troubled him the less by reason
of the recovery of Candace: That he would immediately have run after her, but,
not long after, Eteocles, coming into the room, and having communicated that
good news to him, had entreated him to have a little patience, and to give him
leave to run alone after the Chariot, to find out the truth of that adventure;
That accordingly Eteocles got on horseback, and followed the track of the
Chariot, and those that conveyed it, into Alexandria, whither having got in
undiscovered, he had informed himself so well of all things, that he understood
how the Queen was in the Palace, with the Princess of the Parthians; that she
had been rescued out of their hands that had carried her away by the Praetor
Cornelius, and that she was attended with all manner of respect, though she had
discovered her self only so far as th^^ she was a Lady of great quality, born
in Ethiopia; that these tidings restoring him, as it were, to a new life, had
also restored him, in some measure, to his health and strength: and that,
having that very day sent Eteocles into the City to speak with her, if he
possibly, with any convenience, could; he returned some time after, with news,
that he had seen her getting up into a Chariot, wherein she went out of the
City, to take the air along the river side, and would come within a small
distance of the house where he was; That, upon that news he was not able to
keep in any longer, and that notwithstanding the reasons alleged by Eteocles,
who would by all means have hindered him, he got on horseback, and rid for^h
into the wood, in hopes of some opportunity to see her, out of a confidence he
should not meet with any one that knew him. That it was, as he crossed the wood
up and down upon that design, that he first heard certain outcries, and
afterward saw the Prince^s Elisa in the hands of Tigranes; That, though he knew
not who she was, he had done her that service which he ought her, and that he
had not forsaken her, had he not seen Artaban, and a company of men on
horseback coming behind him; That being unwilling to be discovered by them, he
withdrew; but that he had taken particular notice of Artaban, and that, looking
on him as the most concerned in the relief of the Princess, he was very glad
that he had done him that good office, as well out of a consideration of the
satisfaction a man takes in doing what he is in honor obliged to, as out of a
remembrance, that, in the engagement they had had together, against the Pirate
Zenodorus, and his men, Artaban had relieved him, and helped him on horseback,
after his own had been killed under him; That afterward he had wandered up and
down the wood, in hopes to see the Queen, but that, having observed some
appearance of Agrippa and Cornelius, with their Troop, he would not by any
means be met with by them, and thereupon retired till night, at which time,
through the help of the darkness, he made a shift to get into the City, and,
knowing what part of the Palace the Queen was lodged in, he, without any
difficulty, found her out, having once gotten upon the terrace, where he had
met with Clitia.

Thus did Caesario put a period to his relation, and when he had given over
speaking, the Queen, looking on him with a countenance wherein her thoughts
were in some measure legble; Caesario, said she to him, you have had your
traverses and extremities, and we had ours, which I shall not trouble you with
any relation of, because you have understood them already from Eteocles. If I
have suffered much for you, I must yet confess you have endured more for me,
besides, that by your attempts and valor, you have regained me a Kingdom,
which I gave over for lost. It is but just it should be a present made to you,
as it were, in some sort, to reward your care and conduct, and might it please
the gods I had any thing to present you with, that were more considerable and
more precious, that I might requite, as I ought to do, those so many noble
demonstrations of your affection. Madam, replies Caesario, it is beyond the
merits of my blood, nay, indeed, of my life, to deserve the expressions I
receive of your favors and goodness, and I am very much ashamed to expect so
many great things from my noblest Queen, when I am able to offer her nothing
but a miserable wretch discarded and dispoiled of that which now makes up so
many Monarchies and a............

It Is enough, says Candace, interrupting him, let me hear no more of that
discourse, if you have not a set purpose to displease me, and take it for
granted, that your person is of a value high enough to be preferred by the
greatest Princesses in the universe before that of the usurper, who is now
possessed of your Fathers Palace.

Having by these words engaged him to silence, she fell upon some other
discourse, wherein she discovered to him what trouble she was in for the danger
whereto he exposed himself, by coming into Alexandria, where he must expect no
less then death if he were once known; as also her displeasure to see him so
careless of his health, as being not sufficiently recovered, (as might be seen
in his countenance) to venture on horseback, and take such pains as he did. The
Prince, after he had thanked her for the afflictions she was in for his sake,
as being the pure effects of the tenderness she had for him; For the hazard
whereto I expose my self, said he to her, it is not so great as you imagine it,
and besides the difference there is between the face of a child of fourteen
years of age, and that of a man of four and twenty, the report that is
scattered up and down the world of my death has taken such root, and is
particularly so much credited by Augustus, that it were no small difficulty to
persuade people to the contrary: and for my health, I find, that through the
joy which the gods have been pleased to afford me, by meeting with you again, I
have recovered my strength in such a measure, that within three or four days I
shall be in as good plight and condition as ever I was, either to do any thing
in point of arms, or to wait on you by sea into Ethiopia. Eteocles has within
these two days found out our vessel, which the Ethiopians that had followed me
have gotten made fit for the sea again, and rides at anchor within a hundred
stadia of Alexandria. Your faithful subjects that are aboard it, have
understood, not without great transports of joy, that you were in this City,
and expect your orders with that secrecy which Eteocles has engaged them to. I
shall be content to remain either with them, if you think it good, or in the
house where I have already made some abode, and where, by the appointment of
Alexander, I have hitherto been extremely well entertained, and at such hours
as these you will give me leave to wait on you for some small time, till the
day that you shall have resolved to depart hence. Alas! for matter of
departure, says Candace to him, it shall be as soon as your recovery shall
permit, besides that there are some other reasons best known to my self, which
would force me to hasten my departure hence, were it not that the company of
this fair Princess, which I cannot without an infinite affliction ever quit,
does prevail with me to wave all resolutions of that nature. It was but just,
said Elisa to her, that you gave me that little comfort, after the cruel
discourse you have entertained me with, and I shall be very much troubled to
consent to your departure, if you do not take me along with you.

These last words fell from her with a certain smile, whereupon the Queen
looking with a more serious countenance; Fairest Princess, said she to her, you
speak that in jest, which, with more reason, you might do after another
manner: and were it the pleasure of the gods, and that I might hope so much
from your friendship, as that, till such time as you are reconciled to the King
your Father, or have settled your self by other ways, you would make your
residence in Ethiopia, you shall be there attended with so much respect and
affection, that possibly it would be long ere you returned among the Parthiaus.
Two hours since I could not have made you this proposition; but since that
through the assistances of the gods, and the valor and conduct of Caesario, we
have recovered the Kingdom of our Fathers, I shall never derive any advantage
thence that can be more acceptable to me then that which I may receive by this
goodness of yours.

This discourse of Candace was accented with so much affection, that Elisa
could not forbear embracing her, and kissing her many times together, giving
her withal many thanks for this demonstration of her friendship, in terms
wherein she fully expressed how extremely sensible she was thereof. At length,
turning to Caesario, I should have feared, said she to him, that the difference
there is between you and Artaban might have engaged you to employ the interrest
you have with the Queen, to oppose the sanctuary and entertainment she is
pleased to prosser me, as knowing the inclinations he has for me, and happily
having understood the marks of a more then ordinary esteem which I have for
him: but since you have been so fortunately generous, as to have done her, with
joy, the greatest service she could have expected from the best of her friends,
I cannot but hope, that, through the assistance of the Queen, who will make it
very much her business to persuade you thereto, you will not be so exasperated
against him, as to deny him your frienship, if he desires it of you, as he is
obliged to do. Madam, replies Caesario, I can make an unfeigned protestation to
you, that I never had any hatred against Artaban, and from the esteem I have
ever made of his admirable endowments, it may easily be inferred, how extremely
I was troubled to find in him so much aversion for me. Insomuch, that without
engaging by this action, the Queen, or your self, to a belief that it proceeds
from the respect and compliance I have for your commands, I shall gladly
embrace his friendship, and give him what assurances of mine you shall think
fit.

Elisa seemed to be extremely joyd at this discourse of Caesario's, whereupon
the Queen, desirous to unite those two extraordinary persons by a friendship
great as that which was between herself and Elisa, knowing that Caesario had
had some imperfect account of the great actions of Artaban, as also of the
affection he had for Elisa, acquainted him in few words with what of most
consequence he was yet ignorant of. Insomuch, that by that relation she gave
him such a character of Artaban, that he looked upon him as the greatest and
most generous of men, and representing to him the difference there is between
those elevated souls in whom noble actions raise only an impression of esteem
and respect, and those other reptile ones, wherein they produce envy and
enmity, to desire with earnestness, the acquisition of his friendship.

It is not to be doubted but that the sight of Caesario was an infinite
satisfaction to Candace; and Caesario, on the other side, could gladly have
spent whole ages in her company, and yet not be sensible of their length; but
yet, besides the fear which upon his account Candace was perpetually in, the
night was in a manner spent, and Caesario thought it too great a presumption to
delay any longer the repose of those two great Princesses. So that he was
obliged to recommend them to their rest, having first obtained the Queens leave
to wait on her the next night at the same hour, and promised, that he would
entertain Artaban with all friendly embraces, if it should prove his fortune
ever to meet him again. As Soon as he was gone, the two Princesses went to their
beds, and by reason of the alteration that had happened that day in their
fortunes, having dismissed those cruel disturbances which interrupted their
repose, thy fell into such a quiet sleep, that it was very late the next day
ere they awoke.

Thus was this night passed over by those many illustrious persons who were
then at Alexandria, and the next day as soon as Olympia and Arsinoe had notice
brought them, that Candace and Elisa were awake, they left their own lodgings
with an intention to give them a visit, and to let Elisa understand how much
they thought themselves concerned in what had happened to her the day before.
They would by no means give way that Ariobarzanes and Philadelph should follow
them, though it was no small torment to them to be out of their Mistresses
presence so much as one minute, and indeed they were not over-earnest to do it
at that time, knowing well, that by reason of the difference of sex they had
not the same freedom with the others to visit Ladies before they were dressed.
Besides Philadelph was a little troubled by what he had understood of the
arrival of Tigranes, and the attempt he had made to carry away Elisa. And
being withal a kinsman and friend to the King of the Medes, and that it was by
his assistance and that of Archelaus King of Cappadocia, that Tigranes had
recovered his Kingdom, he knew not well, how he should behave himself toward
Elisa, for whom he had already conceived abundance of respect, and for whom
Arsinoe whose commands he was wholly to be guided by, had a very great
affection. At last he resolved not to do any thing that Arsinoe might take
amiss at his hands, or prejudice the respect he had for Elisa; but he thought
he might safely go and see Tygranes, having understood that he was in
Alexandria, and thereupon taking his leave of Ariobarzanes for some time, he
went to give him a visit. And yet before he was gotten out of doors he called
to mind the ancient enmity that was between the King of the Medes and the house
of Armenia, though there had been a peace concluded between those two Crowns
by the interest and Authority of Augustus. And accordingly, fearing that
Ariobarzanes was still wedded to the quarrel wherein his house had been
engaged, and consequently an enemy to Tygranes, he entreated him for his sake,
to moderate the resentments there might be yet remaining in him as to that
affair, and to do that Prince no ill office, if he did not by some deportment
of his, oblige him thereto. Ariobarzanes, who was a person of an excellent good
nature, promised Philadelph to be guided in all things by him, and seeing
himself deprived of all company by his departure, he went to see Agrippa whom
he extremely honored for his virtue, and whose friendship he was very desirous
to preserve that he might make use of it, either upon his own account or
Philadelphs, against the implacable humor of Artaxus, whom he stood much in
fear of.

Tygranes had passed away the night in such fits of madness and exasperation,
as had hardly allowed him the rest of some few minutes, and brought him into an
humor, which made him unfit company for all in a manner, Philadelph only
excepted. But as soon as he cast his eyes on that Prince whom he had infinite
love for, and whom he was obliged to for the recovery of his kingdom, all his
melancholy and extravagant resentments vanished to make way for that excess of
joy which filled him at a sight so little expected. He found it some difficulty
to imagine to himself that it was really Philadelph; but when the Prince had by
his words and caresses, confirmed what his eyes durst not easily decide, the
satisfaction it was to him proved an excellent remedy to alleviate his
discontents, and, suffering himself to be absolutely possessed thereby, his
behavior toward the Prince was such as could not proceed but from a violent
and cordial affection.

After the first complements, ordinary upon the occasion of such an interview,
were past, Tygranes asked Philadelph what strange adventure had brought him to
Alexandria, and Philadelph, having made the same demand to the other, they
reciprocally satisfied one the other; and entertained one another with an
account of their last adventures, by means whereof they were come to
Alexandria. Tigranes seemed to be very glad at the fortunate success of
Philadelphs Love, though he could not but much wonder, that that fair Delia, of
whom he had heard such strange things while they were in the wars together, was
the same Arsinoe, that was reported to be dead long before with her Brother
Ariobarzanes, and Sister to Artaxus their in econcileable enemy. Philadelph
told him that he had been no less astonished at it himself, and therefore
doubted not but that the indeprecability of Artaxus and that of the King his
own Father might yet put a many rubbs in their way; but, all notwithstanding,
he thought himself happy in having consecrated his life to the most amiable and
most virtuous Princess upon earth, and that he expected no less from the
friendship of Ariobarzanes, and the authority of Caesar then that all things
should be so carried that both parties should comply to contribute to their
good Fortune.

After they had had some discourse of the affairs of Philadelph they spoke of
those of Tigranes, and after that that violent King had with a great deal of
fury and fierceness disburthened himself of part of that which lay so heavy on
his heart, and made thousands of complaints against Elisa, and disgorged
thousands of menaces against Artaban and all those that were of his party,
Philadelph took occasion to reassume the discourse with abundance of mildness
in these terms. You do not doubt, said he to Tigranes, but that I am your
Friend, and as deeply engaged in your interests as any Prince whatsoever,
either of your allies or neighbors. The expressions I have received thereof,
are but too many, too great and too important, replied Tigranes, not to raise
in me a confidence of your Friendship. Since you are so much of that belief
replies Philadelph, you will give me leave to tell you that you your self
contribute most of any to your own misfortunes, and that the same Elisa for
whose sake you have once already lost your kingdom, may prove the occasion of
greater inconveniences to you. I must needs acknowledge the world affords not
any thing comparable to her beauty, not any thing greater than the rank she is
in among the Princesses of the earth, and that the Crown of the Parthians,
whereof she is yet presumed to be the lawful heir, is, next to the Roman
Empire, the greatest Monarchy in the world. But on the other side, yo are to
consider, that this Elisa shunns you, hates you, preferrs before you a person
whose revenues consist in his sword, and defies the indignation of her Father
and her King, merely to satisfy the aversion she has for you; so that you may
well infer that there is little likelihood to reduce that which neither
paternal authority, nor the hazards she has hitherto been exposed to, have
ineffectually attempted: And therefore, if you will take my advice, you will
make this advantage of the disentertainment of your addresses, to banish out of
year heart a person that slights you, and one that, though she were within your
power, will never have any affection for you while she lives, and consequently,
must needs make you, by reason of the continual hostility which you must ever
expect to struggle with in your own house, the most unfortunate Prince upon
earth.

On the other side, I have heard of some little engagement you were in toward
Urania, during the time you took sanctuary with King Archelaus, her Brother,
who may with very much reason be exasperated against you, if the things I have
heard be true, and you must needs expect the reproaches of all the world, if by
your irregular proceedings you disoblige a friend from whom you have received
services of so great consequence.

While Philadelph held him with this discourse, Tigranes hearkened to it with
much impatience, as desirous to interrupt him. But when he had given over
speaking; I must needs acknowledge, said he to him, that there is abundance of
reason in some of these things which you insist upon; but if you have had as
much love for Delia as you have sometimes told me you had, I am to learn, how
you can imagine it should be so easy for me to disengage my self from that
which I have for Elisa, the influences of whose beauty are not so weak but that
they may work their effect upon a man's heart while he lives. Besides, though my
inclinations that way proceeded not out of any engagement of Love, and the
interest of a Crown, such as is that of the Parthiuns, I am obliged to do what
I do out of a consideration of honor; for I have married her by my
Ambassadors, and the King her Father bestowed her himself upon those
Ambassadors, that she might be brought into my embraces. So that I am to take
in any part of the earth, wherever I meet with her, the woman that is my
lawful wife, and by all manner of ways revenge the affront I have received,
and I cannot imagine that Caesar, or any other Authority in the world, will
oppose so justifiable a resolution. For Urania, you know the worst she can
expect; it will be no prejudice to her to give place to Elisa, and though what
you have heard should prove true, she is no worse dealt with by me then she had
been before by you.

I hope you are not so far mistaken, replies Philadelph, as to imagine I ever
promised Urania any thing, and that if I had, the Love I have for Arsinoe
should not oblige me to deceive her. As for the revenge you speak of, and which
you say you ought to endeavor for the affront has been done you, I know not
on whom you should execute it, and if you take my opinion, I think it is only
of Elisa that you have received that affront. I shall not revenge my self on
Elisa, replied the King of the Medes, because, notwithstanding her ingratitude
and insensibility toward me, she is yet dearer to me than my own life, and I
could never attempt any thing against her, but it must wound me to the heart.
But I will punish that audacious fellow whom she most shamefully preferrs
before me, and will chastise a person who, risen out of the dust, would needs
raise himself above Kings, and who, not able to list himself up into the rank
whereof he now is, but by the favors that I have done him, and the employments
I have put him into in my Armies, has so insolently abused the fortune he
crept into by my lenity, and treats Kings as his equals, if not as his
inferiors.

I am not acquainted with Artaban, replies Philadelph, though his great fame
has raised in me a great desire to be; but if I may measure him by the things
I have heard related of him, I cannot look on him as a person that Kings should
contemn. This you can testify more than any other, and consequently when I
consider the things he has done as well for you, as for the King of the
Parthians, it cannot enter into my imagination that you will find it so easy a
matter to punish him as you conceive.

Philadelph would have said more to that purpose, as being not able to forbear
giving that acknowledgement of Artabans virtue which all the world confessed to
be its due; but observing in the countenance of Tigranes, that he was not well
pleased with discourses of that nature, he thought fit not to continue it, and
not long after falling into some other talk, for some time, they went together
to give a visit to Agrippa. Tigranes made some difficulty to go, by reason of
the hindrance he had done him in his design the day before; but considering
withal that, by reason of the interest he had with Caesar, the success of his
affairs depended partly on him, he went along; Philadelph having before hand
made him promise, that he would not discover any dissatisfaction toward
Ariobarzanes, who was no enemy of his, and had made the same promise as to him.

Agrippa entertained all these Princes with much civility, and, being a man
that derived no pride from the greatness of his fortune, because it was indeed
below his virtue, he treated them with all the honor due to their dignity. And
knowing that in Alexandria they had not all things suitably to their rank, nor
had that attendance, they were wont to have, especially Ariobarzanes and
Philadelph, who had not any retinue at all, he invited them to dine with him,
excusing himself for being so free with them, out of a respect of their present
condition in Alexandria, which was such, that they could not have those
accommodations at their own lodgings, which they might with him. Ariobarzanes
and Philadelph were persuaded to stay; but Tigranes would needs dine with
Cornelius, who had sent him an invitation to that purpose in the morning. At
this first interwiew between Ariobarzanes and him, they saluted one another as
persons that were not acquainted, without any expression of discontent or
animosity of either side, which was all that Philadelph desired.

In the mean time Arsinoe and Olympia were gone to visit Elisa and Candace,
whom they took just getting out of bed, and as soon as Olympia was gotten near
Elisa, putting on, yet with a cheerful look, the countenance of a slave; What,
Madam, said she to her, have you no employment now for your slave, and will you
(...) your self to be dressed, and receive the services of those that are about
you, and slight mine? Elisa blushing at this discourse, after she had kissed
Arsinoe and Olympia; I cannot blame you, Madam, said she to her, for
reproaching me with the faults, which, through my ignorance, I have committed
against you; and to be ingenious, I must confess they are such, that if you
are not in some measure guilty of them your self, I shall be ashamed of them as
long as I live.

This discourse had been continued somewhat longer, if the fair Arsinoe had not
interrupted it, to let Elisa know, how much she thought her self concerned in
what had happened to her, as well upon her, meeting with Artaban, and with
Tigranes, assuring her, that she was no less troubled for any misfortune night
come to her, then those persons that had been of her acquaintance many years
together. The discourse of Olympia was much to the same effect, and that in
terms full of affection; and when Elisa had returned them thanks, clothed in
the best expressions she could, For your part, Madam, added she, speaking to
Olympia, you have done nothing upon this occasion, but what I might justly have
expected from the friendship we have mutually promised one another: but for
yours, Madam, said she, directing her speech to Arsinoe, I must needs
acknowledge my self infinitely obliged to you, for adhering to my interests,
against your own friends, or, at least, if I may be pardoned that freedom,
against those of Philadelph. For I cannot imagine you are ignorant, that
Philadelph, is both a Kinsman and Friend to Tigranes, and that it was
Philadelph himself that raised him into that Throne, out of which Artaban had
pulled him down.

Since you oblige me to answer for Philadelph, replies Arsinoe, smiling, and,
and blushing at the same time, I shall tell you, that happily he did but his duty
when he relieved his friend and kinsman against those that had dispossessed him
of his dominions; but if he place any concernment in the loss or enjoiment of
my person, I shall accordingly hope, that those of our house will be as dear to
him, as any related to that of Tigranes, who has ever been an enemy thereto.
And for our own particular, I am to tell you, that there is such a constancy in
the inclinations we both have to honor you, that I dare assure you that we
shall ever be of the same party. Besides, I am further to let you know that
both my brother and he, though they never saw Artaban, are so strangely fallen
in love with the noble fame he has acquired, and the account has been given
them of his person, that it will be a kind of miracle that ever they should
oppose him in any thing. Some considrations of no small consequence have
obliged them to forbear visiting him this morning; but they hope, that ere this
day be over, they shall find out some means or other to see him: and if you
will pardon me the acknowledgment of my own curiosity, I must confess, that I
desire it no less my self, and that I cannot make any representation of him to
my self, but as a very extraordinary person. When you shall have seen him,
added Candace, your conviction will be much greater then your confidence is
now, and you will find, that though Fame be extremely liberal of her good word
and character of him, all comes short of the truth, and in this discourse which
I make of him, I am the more to be credited, the less I am obliged to be his
friend, and that, for some little infidelity he has been guilty of toward me,
I were sufficiently dispensed from speaking so much to his advantage.

This last expression falling from her with a smile, and that observed by
Elisa, onwhom she looked at the same time; I did not imagine, replied Elisa,
that you had been acquainted with Artaban, and much less that you could have
charged him with any infidelity: but I have this only to say by way of excuse
for him, that if he had been guilty of it toward any other person then your
self, whose attractions are so great, as to confine the most inconstant minds
till death dissolve them, I think I should pardon such a defection out of a
consideration of the noble cause of his change, and that I should not call that
man inconstont that should forget all things to sacrifice himself to the fair
Princess of the Parthians. You would take that for good satisfaction, says
Candace to her, if he had forsaken you to serve her? I know not what I should
do in that case, replied Arsinoe, smiling, but am satisfied, that I ought to do
it, if I were but any thing rational. I do not place so much felicity in
revenge, replies the Queen of Aethiopia, as to wish that Philadelph should
prove inconstant; but I would with all my heart, that Artaban, in whom you are
not so much concerned, had seen you, had loved you, and had forsaken you, to
court Elisa, and it would be no small happiness to me to have so fair a
companion in this disgrace.

Arsinoe was going to make her some reply, when Olympia takes occasion to break
off the discourse; out of a desire to be more particularly informed of the
adventure that had happened the day before; as having before had but an
imperfect relation thereof. Elisa entertained them with an account of it; but,
being unwilling to bring in any thing into those adventures relating to the
History of Candace, which they had not been acquainted with, as they had with
her own, she said nothing of the discourses that had past between her and
Artaban, and did not discover any thing whence they might imagine that Artaban
was Britomarus. These two Princesses were, by this relation, confirmed in the
great opinion they had conceived of him, and acknowledged that such a man,
though without Crowns, was to be preferred before those that wore the ^ichest
in the World.

When the Princesses were quite dressed, word was brought them, that dinner
staid for them, and though Elisa doubted not but that she should see Artaban
that afternoon, as she had promised him, yet out of a conceit that she should
not any time that day, have the freedom to see him alone, she thought sit to
entreat the two Princesses to dine with them, which proposition they complied
with, when they had understood by a messenger that came from Ariobarzanes to
the Princess his Sister, that Philadelph and himself were invite^ to Agrippa's.

As Soon as they had dined, they immediately returned into Elisa's chamber,
whither they were hardly all gotten, but Cephis^ came and acquainted the
Princess, that Artaban was at the door desirous to wait on her. She, with a
certain agitation which she was not able to conceal, gave order he should come
in, so that at the name of Artaban, Arsinoe, and Olympia prepared themselves
for a sight which they had long been infinitely desirous to see. Artaban was
immediately admitted, and came in with that attractive countenance, and
majestic deportment, which raised in all those that saw him, respect and
admiration. Olympia was astonished at it, as finding somewhat beyond all she
could have imagined of him, and would needs turn to Arsinoe, as it were to read
her thoughts of him in her countenance, when she observed in it, more of
astonishment and surprise then she had thought to find there. Accordingly,
Artaban, having in the first place very submissively saluted Elisa and Candace,
had no sooner turned himself toward Olympia and Arsinoe, to do them the same
civility, but the Armenian Princess met with, in his countenance, that of
Britomarus, the same Britomarus that had courted her with a very violent
affection, in the King her Fathers Court, that Britomarus, whom, for his
over-confidence, she had slighted, though she infinitely esteemed him for his
great worth, and who, not long before, had, in Cyprus, protected her against
the violences of Antigenes, and restored her into the hands of Ariobarzanes,
after he had delivered him out of the chains of the Pirates, as she had related
to Philadelph two days before. These last obligations put upon them by
Britomarus were of such consequence, that in a mind, such as was that of
Arsinoe, they could have produced no less then an acknowledgment equal
thereto, and when that in the person of that great Artaban, whom she looked on
as a man, whose sword decided the fates of Empires, she found that of
Britomarus, to whom she ought her honor, and her brothers liberty, she could
not avoid being seized by a violent surprise, yet such withal, (...) was
delightful, and brought with it no less satisfaction then astonishment. Nor
indeed either could she, or would she, dissemble it, and thereupon coming up to
him with such a confidence as she might have expressed toward a most
affectionate brother: What, Britomarus, said she to him, are you then that
great Artaban, whose fame fills the universe, and who, under that illustrious
name of Artaban, are pleased to conceal from us that of Britomarus, to whom I
stand engaged for my own honor, and my Brothers life?

The other three Princesses could not but wonder very much at this discourse of
Arsinoe; but indeed Artaban could do no less himself, as considering with
himself, not without astonishment, how Fortune, in so small a space of time,
should bring together, out of several Kingdoms that lay at a great distance one
from another, the only three persons for whom he ever had conceived affection.
The presence of Elisa, as things then stood; put him into some little disorder,
and yet not willing to be thought insensible of the civility he had received
from Arsinoe, for whom he had infinite respects, after he had saluted her with
as much submission as he could have done, even when his affections were most
violent for her, Madam, said he to her, the same fortune, that makes Delia's
and Arsinoe's, may also make Artaban's and Britomarus's, and under both these
names I continue toward the Princess Arsinoe a respect, which nothing shall
ever be able to make me forget.

Elisa, during this discourse, being gotten close to Arsinoe: What, Madam, said
she to her, it seems you are acquainted with Artaban? Since Britomarus is the
same with Artaban, replies Arsinoe, I dare tell you, Madam, that I knew him
before you, and shall further let you know, that I have much reason to be
acquainted with him, since that, not to mention the addresses he sometime made
to me in my own Country, even while he was yet very young, he has within a
small time, by his admirable valor, and with the hazard of his life, preserved
that, which, amongst us, is counted most precious, and delivered my brother out
of the hands of the Pirates. What Sister, cries out Olympia, is it than to the
great Artaban, that we are obliged for the safety of Ariobarzanes? It is so
Sister, replies Arsinoe, it is to him that we are obliged for him, and I believe,
let him go which way he will, he shall every where meet with persons engaged to
his fortunate valor. If your considerations are limited by the engagements you
have to my valor, replied Artaban, you may reflect only on services which you
might justly have expected from all those persons whom fortune had favored
with the same opportunities to do them; but if you call to mind that
over-confidence, as you thought it, which you punished with so much severity
and disdain, while I continued in Armenia, you will happily conceive your self
more obliged to my crime, then my services, and that I had presented you with a
thing at that time, which might have made a greater impression in your memory,
then that little relief, for which you are endebted only to my sword.

These words made Arsinoe blush, and while she was considering what answer she
should make, Candace not well affording her the the time to do it; Ah Madam,
said she to her, might it please the gods that the wish I made some minutes
since may be accomplished, and that it were true that Britomarus were guilty of
the same infidelity toward you, which you so much approved, or, at least,
thought so excusable by reason of the noble cause thereof. For matter of
infidelity, replies Artaban, I am not guilty of any toward the fair Arsinoe,
for she never accepted of my fidelity, nor entertained the respect I had for
her with any obligation. But certain it is, Madam, that when I left you, I
brought away this young heart, which was, upon my first inclinations, grown
confident enough, and laid it at the feet of Arsinoe, and that, without all
question, I had spent my whole life in that engagement, if the rigor of this
Princess, and the pleasure of my destiny, reserving me for another vassa^age,
had not involved me in other chains, for which I should willingly forsake, with
all it contains that is most excellent, the Empire of the whole World. But who
can be confident, says Elisa to him, not with too much earnestness, that
these last chains will not be broken as the former were, and what ^eauty in the
world can be secured against your inconstancy, since that of these two fair
Priecesses has not been able to fix it? I am very confident, replies Artaban,
that she, whose vassal I now particularly profess my self to be, is not in any
fear I should break the chains I am in, and am far from thinking my self so
happy, as to put her into any fear, which might raise me to a degree of
felicity whereto I am not yet arrived. Might it please the gods I were on those
terms with her, for I should find it no hard matter to (...) her, that I
conceive my slavery too too glorious for me to imagine there is any need of
fidelity to continue in it.

These few words he thought sufficient as to that point, and Elisa was
satisfied therewith, not insisting upon any further matter of justification to
be convinced of a fidelity, which she had experienced in so many extraordinary
demonstrations. Upon that account was it that she fell upon some other
discourse, and so asked Artaban, by what miraculous means he had escaped out of
the sea, into which she had seen him cast himself, and being satisfied for that
day, she could not hope to have any private discourse with him, she entreated
him to relate before those Princesses, by what strange ways he had escaped,
and in what manner he had spent his life since their unexpected separation.
Artaban was preparing himself to obey her commands, conceiving, as she did,
that he must needs expect till some other, more favorable opportunity, to
enter into private discourse with her, when there come into the room Agrippa,
Philadelph, Ariobarzanes, Ovid, and some others, who had dined that day with
Agrippa. Arioborzanes and Philadelph, how impatient soever they might be to see
their beloved Princesses, from whom, after so cruel an absence, they could
hardly bear with one that took up only some few minutes, found that desire,
when they were come to the Princess of the Parthians lodgings, exchanged into
another, viz. That of seeing Artaban, whose great reputation had raised in them
no less curiosity for his acquaintance then esteem for his person. As Soon as
Philadelph saw him, he thought there had been something more then humane in his
countenance and deportment; but Ariobarzanes had no sooner cast his eyes upon
him, but, as Arsinoe had done before, finding Britomarus in the person of
Artaban, he retreated some few paces with an action full of astonishment, and a
little after coming up to him with his arms spread open, after he had craved
the pardon of Elisa and Candace, for the freedom he took in their presence, he
embraced with all the demonstrations of a perfect friendship, and, seconding
his caresses with words full of affection; O ye just gods, said he, is it
possible, that in this Artaban, who is so favous all over the World, I should
find that Briton arus, who is so dear to me, and to whom both my Sister and my
self are obliged for our honor, life and liberty? Ah! no question, it is the
very same, added he a little after, and all things were so great and promising
in Britomarus, that, from the first discoveries he made of himself, we could
presume no less then that they would terminate in the glory of the great
Artaban.

Artaban, entertaing the caresses of that truly noble and amiable Prince with
all manner of acknowledgement, and his expressions of him with abundance of
modesty, answered him with the respect he had for those Princes that
degenerated not from their dignity; and, knowing withal that Ariobarzanes was
yet more considerable for his actions then for his birth, as he had understood
from the relation he had received of him after he had rescue (...) out of the
hands of the Pirates, he looked on him with so much esteem, as he could
possibly have for those whom their quality and rank make the most recommendable
^^ought men. Whereupon disengaging himself out of his embraces, My Lord, said
he to him, your own virtue makes you set too great a value on their valor in
whom you may have discovered some virtuous inclination, and the actions of
Artaban are not so considerable as the miracles of Artamenes. Besides, both
your self, and the Princess your Sister conspire together to attribute to me
the glory of an assistance you received not from me, since that it is not to be
doubted, but you had your self a greater hand then I had in the victory, which
rescued you out of the hand^ of the Pirates.

They had continued their discourses to this effect for some time longer, if
Philadelph, perceiving by what Ariobarzanes had said, that Artaban was the same
Britomarus who had rescued De^ra from the violences of Antigenes; and put to
death that infamous Ravisher, and all his lewd companions, being almost out of
patience to express his gratitude toward him, had not come up to him with as
much earnestness as Ariobarzanes had done before. And in that heat, not having
the least memory of the interests of Tigranes, but looking on Artaban, as a
person to whom he was obliged for what was of greater conce^nment to him then
his life; And have not I, said he to him, as much reason as any man to offer my
self up wholly to the service of the great Artaban, and can he have delivered
Arsinoe out of the hands of her enemies, and not command the life of
Philadelph. At that word Artaban, having taken notice of Philadelph, whose
goodlinesse, as to his person, he had already observed, and whose life he had
been acquainted with, both from the mouth of Arsinoe, and that of ^ame it self,
looked on him with more earnestness then he had done before, and, considering
him as one that might justly be of that number of men, whom he thought worthy
his respects and affection, he accordingly expressed himself with as much
freedom to him, as he had done to Ariobarzanes. So that after he had received
his caresses with the same civility, It had been very much more to my
advantage, said he to him, that you had had these favorable sentiments toward
me, when you were so earnest in restoring my enemy to his throne, and in a
condition to deprive me of all, both my hopes and my happiness; but what time
or occasion soever you take to proffer it me, I must needs place abundance of
glory and felicity in your friendship. When the King of Cappadocia, and my
self, replies Philadelph, assisted Tigranes to recover his Kingdom, out of
which you had forced him, we gave him an assistance, which, no doubt, we ought
to have afforded our friend and our kinsman; but what advantages soever he
might have made of your absence, he would have been but little the better for
it, if that sword of Artabans, which commands victory where ere it comes, had
still been in the service of the King of the Parthians. When that sword
purchased me any victory, replies Artaban, I had not to deal with such
enemies, as Philadelph, and if Tigranes had followed your noble examples, he
had never fallen into those misfortunes out of which you have since delivered
him.

Philadelph replied to this discourse with much modesty, and they had continued
it somewhat longer, if Agrippa and the rest of the company had not interrupted
it, all looking one upon the other with a certain esteem and veneration. And
certainly the persons that were then met were such, that whether sex were
looked upon, there was still matter of esteem and admiration, it being likely
to prove a hard matter to find in any other part of the world, a like number of
persons to whom nature had been so liberal of her advantages.

When they were all sat, they fell into very pleasant discourse, but it was
not free from some reservednesse, and, unless it were Ovid, and some others
that came along with Agrippa, there was not any one in that noble assembly that
was not rather desirous of private discourse with some particular person
present, then a general conversation. Ariobarzanes and Philadelph could have
wished they had been where they might with freedom speak to their Princesses,
yet were not they the most disturbed of any, and whereas their fortunes were in
a more settled condition than those of any of the rest, they accordingly with
the more patience endured that little abatement of their satisfaction. Artaban,
who had not had any discourse with Elisa since their separation, was no doubt
very desirous of it at that time; but being confident that he was loved to as
high a degree as he could rationally desire, he was much in a better condition
than Agrippa, who certainly was the most disordered of the whole company. He
had taken a seat very near Elisa, but he could not say a word to her which must
not be heard by all the rest, especially Artaban, who sat at a very little
distance from her, and, for the most part, had his eyes fixed on her
countenance. Elisa from time to time fastened on him such looks as easily
discovered what kindness she had for him iu her heart; or if those who were
not concerned therein in were accordingly the less apprehensive thereof, they
were but too too significant to the construction of the passionate Agrippa,
who, reading in them all he could fear in favor of his Rival, was wounded
thereby to the very heart. Of this he would have givenexpressions remarkable
enough had he hearkened only to the suggestions of his passion, but being a
person of much prudence and reservednesse, he so far (...) he agitations of his
thoughts, as not to discover them (...) to Elisa, who had already taken but too
much notice (...)

Now there having not happened any thing of a long time in that Country so
remarkable as the carrying away of Cleopatra, that became for some time the
subject of their discourse, and after that Agrippa had acquainted the company
with the order that Cornelius and himself had taken for her recovery, and how
they had sent by land an infinite number of persons to find her out, and by Sea
the greatest part of the ships that were in the port of Alexandria, to so
little effect that none of all those brought any account of her, all spoke with
very much resentment of the misfortune of that fair Princess. It went to the
very heart of Candace for Caesario's sake; Elisa out of her own excellent good
nature, was extremely troubled at it, and Ariobarzanes and Arsinoe though the
children of Artabasus and Brother and Sister to Artaxus, having not for the
deplorable destiny of their Father, that cruel resentment which their Brother
would never quit toward the innocent family of Mark-Anthony, but, on the
contrary, calling to mind, with tenderness, the years they had spent in the
company of the Princess Cleopatra and her Brothers, in the same City and
Palace, where they then were, and reflecting on the demonstrations they had in
those days received of their affection, were very much afflicted at that
misfortune. Insomuch that Ariobarzanes, concerning himself in it with that
ingenious generositie which was observable in all his actions, made a
protestation that he would hazard his life in the service of that Princess.
Whereupon, Agrippa, who had privately seen Alexander the day before, had
furnished him with a vessel, and had in few words been informed by him how
things had passed, looking on Ariobarzanes with a smile; I am very glad, said
he to him, to find your sentiments of this business suitable to the greatness
of your courage; but I am doubtful whether you will persist therein, when you
have understood that the Princess Cleopatra was carried away by the King of
Armenia your Brother. Ariobarzanes was very much at a loss to hear that, but
not long after rejoyning to the former discourse; You entertain me, for your
own diversion sake, said he to Agrippa, with a discourse that seems to have but
little probability in it; but, it being supposed that the King my Brother had
carried away the Princess Cleopatra, I should by no means approve his action,
and would never serve him in such an unjust enterprise. I expected no less
from your virtue, replies Agrippa, and it is upon the experience I have of it,
that, after a little recollection, I am resolved to acquaint you with the whole
truth of that business, and shall inform you of diverse other passages which
you must needs be astonished at, after I have told you that instead of sending
abroad both ships and men, I would have gone in person, as I thought my self
obliged both in point of duty, and the friendship I have for the children of
Anthony, in pursuit of the King your Brother, who would needs come and carry
away even out of our port a Princess of the house, and under the protection of
Caesar, if I had not received an express order from the Emperor not to stir
hence, upon any account whatsoever, before his arrival.

This premised, Agrippa perceiving that the whole company, and particularly
Ariobarzanes and Arsinoe, hearkened very attentively to him, gave them a brief
relation of what he had understood from Alexander, of his first addresses to
Artemisa, of the cruelty of Artaxus, and the extremity whereto he had been
reduced upon the scaffold, his escape through the assistance of Artemisa, and
his arrival upon the coast of Alexandria with that Princess. Ariobarzanes,
who had trembled, as it were, out of the horror he had conceived (...) that
description of his Brothers cruelty, was on the other side glad of the safety
of Alexander, and commended Artemisa for the acknowledgement she had made of
his affection; protesting that if he had been near her, he would have
encouraged her in that design, and have sacrificed his life to promote it.

Agrippa, perceiving him to persevere in those virtuous sentiments, after he
had commended him for it, reassumed his discourse, and entertaining the company
with all that Alexander had learned from Cleopatra, during the space of a whole
day that they had been together before her last carrying away, gave them an
account of her meeting with the King of Armenia upon the Sea; how that cruel
King was going to thrust a weapon into her breast to kill her, and had been
disarmed by the Love he immediately conceived for that Princess; the
persecutions he had made her suffer, their arrival upon the coast of
Alexandria, the escape of Cleopatra, the relief she had received from an
unknown person on horseback, who had defeated the King of Armenia when he was
upon the point of retaking her; how she got to the Lodging, where Alexander and
Artemisa were retired, and how that the next day she had been carried away a
second time into the wood with the Princess Artemisa, by a company of horsemen
that belonged to Artaxus, who in all probability had returned her into the
hands of their Master: that Alexander, having wandered up and down in pursuit of
her all that day and the next night, though to no purpose, gave him a secret
meeting the next day, and after he had given a brief ralation of what he (...)
entertained them with, had entreated him that he might (...) a vessel and men
to make after those that had carried away Cleopatra and Artemisa; which he had
done, not without much regret that he could not go himself in person, by reason
of the express orders he had received from the Emperor not to stir by any
means out of Alexandria.

During all this long discourse, the prudent Agrippa made not the least mention
of Coriolanus, though he had furnished him with his own horse in the wood to
ride after Cleopatra, and was not ignorant of the greatest things he had done
for the relief of that Princess. The whole company was extremely astonished at
the relation of Agrippa, especially Ariobarzanes and Arsinoe, who were doubly
concerned in it, both in the person of Artaxus and that of Artemisa. They
continued for a good while all silent; but at last, Ariobarzanes, being
unwilling Agrippa should imagine, that his discourse had wrought any change in
him as to his former opinion; I am extremely astonished said he to him at the
relation you have made of the cruelty and injustice of Artaxus, and so far
from disapproving the procedure of Artemisa, that, certainly, had I been at
Artaxata, at that time, I should with her have hazarded my life for the safety
of Alexander. The extremity he was reduced to, by the inexorable severity of
Artaxus, makes me tremble, and though he be my Brother and my King, he should
not find any other in the world that would more oppose him in these horrid and
detestable attempts. Might it please the gods, that, notwithstanding my
obligations to him, I might without attempting his life, deliver Cleopatra and
Artemisa out of his hands, and I protest to you that I should neither spare my
pains nor my blood upon that account. The King of Armenia, added Artaban, has
shown himself in those last actions to be the same man he had ever been, for it
was out of the horror I conceived at his cruelty, that I sometime quitted his
service, when he babarously put to death two Cilician Princes, both prisoners
of war, whom I had taken my self in fight. But I can assure you thus much, that
he is hardly in a condition to undertake any long voyage or any great
enterprise; that I have seen him, and spoke to him within these (...) days,
and that we parted but yesterday, after (...) had remained for some days
together in the same (...).

(...) this he related to them how he had met Artax^ the house of Tiridates, as
also what discourse had past between them, and told them, how that the day
before, he had left that house, not long before his departure thence, upon a
visit to Tiridates's tomb.

That discourse of Artaban gave the Company new matter of reflection upon that
adventure; insomuch that at last Philadelph, who had been silent a long time,
taking, upon that, occasion to speak; If I thought that Prince Ariobarzanes,
and the Princess Arsinoe, said he, looking on them, would pardon me the injury
I have innocently done them, I should acknowledge how far I have been engaged
in this adventure, and would tell them, that, if I am not much mistaken, it was
my self that fought with Artaxus, for the recovery of Cleopatra, and who,
encouraged by the justice of the quarrel, gave him such wounds as made him
incapable of further fighting.

Here he took occasion to acquaint them how he had met with Artemisa near the
spring, though he spoke of her as a person absolutely unknown to him; how that
at first he took her for Delia, what grief it was to him when he grew sensible
of his mistake, what compassion she had expressed thereat, the long discourse
there had past between them, and how that upon the point of their departure one
from the other, he had seen Cleopatra passing by, making all the have she could
before a person on horsebock that pursued her. He told them that he had not any
acquaintance with that Princess, but that by the admirable beauty he had
observed in her countenance, it must needs be either some Goddess or the
Princess Cleopatra.

This account of Philadelph raising in the Company new matter of astonishment,
as that, by a strange traverse of fortune, two men that were implacable enemies
should come and engage one the other, yet without eithers knowledge of it, and
that the amorous Philadelph should fight with the Brother of his beloved Delia.
He once more craved their pardon for it, and both of them assured him, that the
greatest affliction they conceived at that adventure proceeded from the fear
they were in it might further exasperate Artaxus against Philadelph, and would
make him the more inexorable as to the consent he expected from him for the
quiet enjoyment of Arsinoe.

It was generally concluded that the fair La^ he had met with at the spring
was no other th^^ Artemisa, and that especially after the description (...) had
given them of her, and the resemblance, which upon the first sight had made him
mistake her for Delia, though there were a difference between their faces
observable enough an imagination that were not so violently prepossessed with
the impression of Delia.

The end of the Second Book.
HYMEN'S PRAELUDIA, Or, Loves Masterpiece.
PART X. LIB. III.
ARGUMENT.
FLavianus is brought in wounded to Alexandria, having been worsted in his
attempt for the deliverance of Cleopatra; Whereupon Agrippa, Artaban and others
prepare for her rescue; but upon their coming to the port, discover a ship
arriving, wherein were Alexander and Marcellus, bringing in Cleopatra and
Artemisa. Tigranes desires the favor of a visit of Elisa, but is denied:
Cornelius persisting in the presumption he had, that Candace was only a Lady
of great quality in Ethiopia, persecutes her with the discoveries of his
affection. Cleopatra and Alexander are brought into Alexandria. Artemisa,
persuaded, that Ariobarz^^^ and Arsinoe had been dead, swounds upon the first
(...) of them, and afterward acquaints Ariobarzanes that (...) King of
Armenia, by the death of her Brother Ar^^^ Ariobarzanes, Alexander, Philadelph,
Olympia, Art^^^a, and Arsinoe condole his death, and afterward reflect on the
advantages they all have by Ariobarzanes's coming to the Crown. Candace and
Elisa are made acquainted with Cleopatra, to whom Queen Candace discovers both
her self and quality, and entertains her with the History of Cleomedon. Elisa
does the like with that of Artaban. Agrippa has a private conference with
Elisa, wherein he further discovers his passion to her. Artaban entertains
Elisa and Candace with a relation how he escaped drowning, after he cast
himself, all armed, into the sea, with Zenodorus the Pirate in his arms.
Cleomedom has a secret interview with Artaban in Elisa's Chamber, where be
discovers himself to Cleopatra and Alexander, to be Caesario, the son of
Caesar, and Queen Cleopatra; which they not easily crediting; are confirmed and
saitisfied by Candace, Elisa, and Eteocles.

WHile these Illustrious Persons were thus in the midst of their
entertainments, discoursing of the many strange accidents that were come to
their knowledge, Cornelius comes into the room, discovering by his action that
he had something of news to communicate. Whereupon, addressing himself to
Agnippa, My Lord, said he to him, I have just now received some tidings from
the Princess Cleopatra, and those that carried her away. Those whom we sent in
pursuit of them, were gotten far enough hence to find her, when in the mean
time they were nearer us then can well be imagined, insomuch, that Flavianus, a
Commander of one of our ships, met, but this morning, with that, wherein were
the Ravishers, lying close under one of the Rocks, which in some places hang
over this coast, came up to her, saw the Princess, spoke with her, and fought
for her deliverance with so much good success in the beginning, that he
boarded the enemy with diverse of his men, and was in a manner possessed of her,
when a certain person, who had not appeared at the first engagement, comes up
upon the Deck, without any other arms then his sword, and fought ours with so
prodigious a valor, that, having either killed or forced away all that were
gotten into the other vessel, he struck down Flavianus himself, loading him
with such wounds, that he was incapable of fighting any longer, and so by the
death of the Commander, abating the courage of the Soldiers, they gave over
the enterprise, and were forced to quit their attempt for the deliverance of
Cleopatra, and to make what have they could into our Port. Flavianus is brought
into the City, very desperately wounded, I have seen him, and though it be with
much difficulty, that he expresses himself, yet have I made a shift to get thus
much out of him.

The news is not the worst we could have expected, r^^^ies Agrippa, and since
Cleopatra is yet at so small a distance from ^s* I hope she may be met with by
some of the other vessels the are still abroad to find her. It was ever my
opinion, says Artaban, that the King of Armenia could not be gotten far hence,
and that, out of all question, the wounds he had received had been the ground
of his lying in that obscure place, till such time as he were in a condition to
depart. But is it not possible, continued he, turning to Cornelius, we may yet
come time enough for the relief of that Princess? And have you no other
vessels ready for us in this extremity? We may make use of that which has
brought in Flavianus, with what there is remaining of his men, and such others
as will follow us, says Agrippa to him, and since that those we seek are so
near us, I think I shall not much oppose the orders of Caesar, if I go some few
stadia out of Alexandria, upon an occasion of so great importance. It were not
civility to entreat either Ariobarzanes or Philadelph, whereof the one is
Brother to Artaxus, the other in hopes to be, to afford us their assistance in
this emergency; but for you, generous Artaban, if your condition, in point of
health, be such as may permit it, I should not refuse your assistance, and
having such a second with me, I may well think our enemies must be very valiant
to dispute the victory with us, I find my self in a capacity to follow you,
replies Artaban, and there is not any thing shall hinder me from courting the
glory I conceive it is to fight under the great Agrippa.

Elisa's complexion changed at this discourse of Artabans, and she discovered
in hereies the touble it was to her that he should so readily engage himself in
such an enterprise. Ariobarzanes and Philadelph knew not well what resolution
to take, there being little probability they should be drawn in to engage, the
one against his own brother and his King, the other against the brother of his
dearest Delia, both of them being equally troubled at the departure of their
companions in order to an engagement upon so just a quarrel. However, they knew
no remedy but to take all patiently, there being no matter of choice in the
business, and consequently saw, there was a necessity they should quietly
expect what would be the event, upon the promise which Agrippa made to
Ariobarzanes, that if they met with the King of Armenia, they would treat him
as a King, and would afford him the fairest terms he could expect, for his sake.

These two great men, conceiving they had very little time to loose, as things
then stood, in order to the design they were engaged in, left the Princesses,
and were attended by all the Roman Nobility that came along with Agrippa to
Alexandria. It Is possible they might have taken a far greater number with them,
but having understood what number of men might be with Artaxus, and ^nowing
that he had but one single vessel, they thought there was ^^necessity of taking
any more with them. Artaban sent for his ^^mour, giving order that Telamon
should come along with them from the house of Tiridates and that they should be
brought aboard the vessel, to be made use of if occasion were, as being not
able, by reason of the condition he was then in, to endure the weight of them
without some inconvenience to himself.

After they were all departed out of the Chamber, Cornelius, who stayed there
upon the order of Agrippa, coming up to Elisa, acquainted her, that he had, not
long before, parted with the King of the Medes, who had honored him so far as
to dine with him, and that that Prince had entreated him to know of her,
whether he might with her leave give her a visit. Elisa, though naturally full
of mildness and compliance, seemed to be much troubled at that proposition of
Cornelius, and looking on him with a little angry blush, that immediately
spread over her face; He shall not need put himself to so much trouble, said
she to him, for after the violence he would have done me yesterday. I cannot
look on him otherwise then as my Enemy. Let me therefore entreat you to spare
me that affliction, if you please; and if you will have me to conceive my self
at my own freedom, in a City where you command, I beseech you, let me not be
forced to see those persons, whom above all I endeavor to avoid. Far be it
from me, replies the Praetor, to side with Tigranes against you, and assure
your self you shall be free and absolutely at your own disposal in Alexandria,
while I shall continue in that power which the Emperor has put me into: but
on the other side, you are to consider, that, since you have the liberty to see
Artaban, you were not very much to be blamed, if you also endured a visit from
the King of the Medes. It is not my design, replied the Princess, that
Tigranes should be ignorant how much I prefer Artaban before him, and that he
should accordingly assure himself, that, besides the difference which virtue
has made between them, I must needs add very much to it of my self, unless
he imagines I know not how to distinguish between two men, whereof the one has
done me the greatest injuries he could, and the other the greatest services I
could expect from him.

Cornelius, who had not made this proposition to Elisa, but merely to satisfy
the importunity of Tigranes, who had entreated him to do it, thought it not
civility to press it any farther, perceiving she was offended thereat, as
being a thing, which he saw she had not the least inclination to grant.
Whereupon, having taken a seat somewhat near Candace, he began to entertain her
with the eyes, rather than with his tongue, as having not that command of his
speech, as that he durst acquaint her with his thoughts; and that fair Queen
perceiving it, would not suffer Elisa to be a minute from her, out of a fear
she might be left alone with him. At last having observed that the weather was
somewhat cloudy, and (...) the Sun darted not his rays with too much violence
upon (...) Terrace, he would needs invite the Princess to take a walk about
it, not only for the air sake, but also for that there was a fair prospect
thence into the sea, and that they might distinctly perceive things far beyond
the place where they had met with the King of Armenia's ship.

This curiosity was a sufficient motive to oblige them to leave the Chamber,
and Philadelph, upon the command which Arsinoe her self laid upon him, having
taken Elisa by the h^nd, while Arsinoe staid with Ariobarzanes and Olympia, to
whom her presence was not any inconvenience, Cornelius very fortunately
happened to be alone with Candace. They took some turns upon the Terrace,
before he could speak to her with any freedom, but at last, getting some few
paces before the rest, and imagining he could not be over heard by them; Is it
possible, Madam, said he to her, that, in a place where I may presume, I have
some power, I should be the only miserable person, and that I should find so
many other men happy through the favors of those Ladies whom they affect,
while you seem to be absolutely insensible of the love I have for you?

Candace conceived such a vexation at this liberty of discourse, that she was
upon the point to declare to him what she was, so to stiffle the presumption he
took to speak to her after that rate, as conceiving withal that it could not be
long ere she were discovered, and that she was not so much obliged to conceal
her self, now that Tirihasus was dead, as she had been were he living. However,
reflecting on the concernments of Caesario, she forbore to do it at that time,
out of a fear of exposing him to some danger, and being withal unwilling to
discover her self, before she had taken his advice in it. She therefore
endeavored to find out a mean, that is, so to express her self, that
Cornelius might perceive she was displeased at his discourse, yet so as that he
might not be incensed thereat, as calling to mind how much she was obliged to
him, and fearing the discourtesies he might do her. Upon these considerations,
after she had continued some little time ere she made any answer, That I am so
insensible of the passion you tell me of, as you conceive me, said she to him,
the only reason is, that I neither am, nor am any way desirous to be,
acquainted therewith; but I must withal assure you, that I am extremely
sensible of the civilities I have received at your hands, and that with the
remembrance thereof I have all the gratitude and acknowledgement I ought. Were
that certain, Madam, replied he with some precipitation, you would treat after
another manner, a person whom you conceived your self obliged to for so
considerable a service, and you would not slight, with so much disdain, an
affection which cannot any ways displease you. Were I not sufficiently mindful
of the obligations you have laid upon me, replies Candace a little moved, I
should tell you that many times, what does not displease may be thought
importunate, and that to endure any man's, either injury, or importunity, is to
me equally insupportable.

This discourse put Cornelius out of all patience, and not being able to
dissemble it; I am very much troubled, Madam, said he to her, that I should be
thought importunate to you, but if you will be pleased to remember your self, I
think I have sometimes found you in so good an humor as that you thought not
my presence troublesome to you, and it is yet possible, that if I prove the
object of your detestation, I shall not be withal that of your contempt.

Candace, who was naturally fiery and confident enough, could not smother her
courage upon this discourse of the Paetor, and thereupon looking very
scornfully upon him; You have lost, said she to him, all the glory of the
service you have done me, by pressing it to me with so many reproaches, and the
menaces you add thereto, whence I perceive that you know me not, and that when
you shall understand who I am, you will happily learn at the same time to speak
to me after another manner.

With these words she stood still, expecting Elisa and Philadelph to come up to
her, and would have no further discourse in private with Cornelius. She made no
difficulty to speak that day much more confidently then she had done at any
time before, because she was in some thoughts to leave Alexandria within some
few days, where if nevertheless she were obliged to make any longer ab^de,
she knew that Caesar was upon his arrival thither, and considered, that,
Agrippa being there already, she should not be exposed to the persecutions of
Cornelius, as she might have been without their coming thither. It came also
into her mind, that if Augustus came thither before her departure thence, it
were not policy in her to conceal her self, out of a fear, that, if she were
discovered (as it was very probable she might, by reason of the commerce that
was between the Ethiopians and Egyptians, and the report which might be
scattered every where of her flight, and the revolutions lately happened in her
dominions) he might misconstrue her lying there incognito, and might take
occasion to secure her.

After she had spent some time in these reflections, she engaged in the
discourse of Elisa and Philadelph, and not long after they made a halt for
Ariobarzanes and the two Princesses he waited upon, to come up to them, that
they might further participate of their conversation. Ariobarzanes seemed to be
very much dejected and troubled in his thoughts, and Arsinoe in no small
disturbance, there being a certain tempest raised in them by the reflections
they made on the attempt of Artaxus, and the inconveniences likely to ensue
thereupon, such, it may be, as might occasion great alterations in their
fortunes. They discoursed thereof for some time, all having something to say of
it, ( Cornelius only excepted, whom the last words and deportment of Candace
had so netled, that for all that day he spoke not a word) and after several
discourses, whereby Olympia endeavored to divert Ariobarzanes; I know not,
said she to him, what you would presage by your sadness; but for my part I
have dreamed this last night, that you presented your self before me, with a
Crown of gold upon your head. Could I wish my self a Crown, replied
Ariobarzanes, you may assure your self, my dearest Princess, that it should be
only to present you with it, and that it is many times no small trouble to me
to consider the rank you are pleased, out of your own goodness, to quit for my
sake. I have represented it to you, more then once, replied Olympia, that you
cannot do me a greater displeasure then by insisting on discourses of that
nature; and, not to mention that you are Brother and Son, to Kings, that by a
long series have sat successively in the Throne, you should be sufficiently
satisfied, that a virtue, such as yours is, is more considerable in my account
then many Crowns.

While they were discoursing in this manner, Agrippa, with Artaban, and a great
number of persons of quality from Rome, were in their way toward the Port. As
they went, Agrippa fell into discourse with Artaban, whom he could not but
admire in whatever related to his person, and hardly forbore sighing, when he
considered the many excellent qualities which made him both amiable and
dreadful. Yet was it not in his power to have any aversion for him, as well by
reason of the natural propension he had to virtue, as that the personage of
Artaban was such, as if it had been purposely made easily to raise love, and
hardly aversion, in any that saw it. Artaban, who had not the least suspicion
of Agrippa's love for Elisa, who esteemed him very much for his great actions,
and much more for his moderation amidst so vast a fortune, who was in hopes of
his assistance against Phraates, and was obliged to him for the refuge he had
afforded him against Tigranes, looked upon him with very much respect, and a
most unfeigned affection. The complements that passed between them all the way
to their coming into the Port, were accordingly such as well expressed the
mutual admiration and esteem they had one toward another. They were hardly
well gotten into it, but they perceive a vessel making all the sail she could
toward them, and and was already within such a distance, as that they could
discern the streamers. The Officers of Cornelius, who were with Agrippa, had no
sooner observed them, but they told him it was the same vessel which had been
provided for Alexander, in order to the design he was then engaged in, and upon
that account Agrippa having stood still, resolved to wait its coming to shore,
as taking that to be the only way to hear what news they might bring of
Cleopatra. They had not long to expect, for that within a few minutes the
vessel was gotten into the Port, and immediately they saw appearing upon the
hatches, Prince Marcellus, with the Princess Cleopatra, Alexander with
Artemisa, and behind them the Women that belonged to Cleopatra.

Agrippa, being a particular friend to all of the house of Anthony, and one
that had a more than ordinary honor for Cleopatra, was extremely elevated at
that sight, nay indeed astonished at that of Marcellus, whom he thought not to
be near that Country, and of whom there had no tidings been heard; no more than
of Tiberius, since they both lest Rome, much about the same time. There was a
very great friendship between Marcellus and Agrippa, though it had been often
imagined at Rome that the great authority of Agrippa might produce alteration
in that particular, and that there had been many reports spread abroad, that
Marcellus, to whom the Empire was designed, looked with some jealousy on the
great credit of that Favorite of Caesar's, and had some thoughts to pull him a
little lower. This suspicion had prevailed very much among the people, but
those, who were acquainted with the virtue of Marcellus and Agrippa, were of
another opinion: and besides that the excellent good nature of Marcellus was
such as forced on him an esteem and affection for Agrippa; on the other side,
Agrippa loved him and looked upon him no otherwise than as if he had been
indeed the Son of his Benefactor, and accordingly endeavored what lay in his
power to moderate his fortune so as that he might not conceive the least
jealousy thereat.

As Soon as he had perceived those illustrious persons on the deck, he would not
stay their coming ashore, and thereupon, taking Artaban along with him, took a
boat and went to receive them in their own vessel, and at the same time sent
some of his men to Cornelius, to give him notice of their arrival and to
desire him to send chariots to bring the Princesses to the palace. Cleopatra
seeing these two great persons appearing, one whereof was unknown to her, came
toward them with that amiable majesty which purchased her a certain empire
over all that saw her, addressing her self to Agrippa, whom she knew to be one
of the best friends she had, she entertained him in the most obliging way that
could be, and surprised Artaban in such manner with the sight of her admirable
beauty, that how strangely soever he might be prepossessed with that of Elisa,
he could neither suffer that luster without being dazzled, nor forbear
acknowledging the advantages which heaven had bestowed on that beauty beyond
all that were mortal. He had not shaken off that astonishment when Agrippa
presented him to Cleopatra by recommending him to her under the famous name of
Artaban, and giving him withal a character which could not any ways be denied
him. This made Cleopatra look on Artaban with an astonishment not much
different from that which he had conceived at the first sight of her, and while
he saluted her with the same respect which he would have expressed toward a
goddess, and she received him with abundance of kindness and civility;
Marcellus and Agrippa embraced one the other, and Alexander coming forward, and
presenting Artemisa to Agrippa, as a treasure he had recovered through the
assistance he had received from him, the virtuous Roman received that fair
Princess with all the courtship that was due to her birth, her great merit,
and the friendship he bore Alexander. Upon that, Marcellus, being advanced to
salute Artaban, whose name he had understood from Agrippa, after he had looked
on him a little, knew him to be the same man whom he had seen in the house of
Tiridates, at the time that that unfortunate Prince breathed out his last, and
called to mind the hot contestation there had past between him and the King of
Armenia, and how far he had himself endeavored to reconcile them. Artaban also
knew him, and knowing him withal to be Prince Marcellus, whom all the Empire
had a love and respect for, gave him no less honor than he would have done to
Caesar himself, and received from him those demonstrations of the esteem and
account he made of him suitable thereto.

That done, Artaban and Alexander saluted one another as two men equally
surprised, the one at the goodly presence of Artaban, the other at the great
beauty of Alexander. But when Artaban came near Artemisa to salute her, and
that she was preparing to return to the name of Artaban which she had several
times heard pronounced, what was due to its great reputation, she cast her eyes
on his countenance, and, considering it with some earnestness, notwithstanding
the alteration which some years had wrought in it, she at last read in the
person of Artaban, the same Britomarus whom she had sometime known in Armenia,
and for whom she had that esteem which all the world was forced to acknowledge
justly bestowed on him. While they were solemnizing their renewed
acquaintances, with expressions full of tenderness and affection, Agrippa
being returned to Cleopatra, discovered to her the joy he conceived at her
liberty and return; and that Princess who had understood from Alexander, that
it was he himself that had furnished him with the vessel and men that had come
in to her relief, and had heard but a little before that he was then coming in
person to find out those that had carried her away, had not her happy arrival
prevented him, expressed the great sense she had of that obligation, in words
proceeding from the greatest gratitude imaginable.

At last, this illustrious company closing up together again; and Agrippa,
having acquainted the Princesses with the care he had taken to send for
chariots to convey them to the palace, persuaded them to remain in the vessel
till they were come, and, in that interim would needs know after what manner
they had been recovered, and what accident had brought Prince Marcellus into
their company. Marcellus thought it then unseasonable to give any particular
account of his adventures, and so, only to give Agrippa some satisfaction,
told him, that he came into Alexandria, just at the time, that Alexander was
going to take ship, to find out the Princesses; and that, having met him and
known him upon the Port, after they had embraced one another, with that
fraternall affection wherein they had been brought up by Octavia, he had
acquainted him with the loss of Cleopatra, and the design he had to relieve
her, and that upon that account of her, he without any further disputing of the
business, went aboard resolved to run the same fortune with him.

But when the Princess Cleopatra was pressed to give Agrippa a particular
account of her being taken and her deliverance, she looked on Marcellus and
Alexander, as not knowing whether she should make any mention of Coriolanus
before Agrippa, in whom the concernments of Caesar might have altered his
inclinations. But Marcellus, who was satisfied of the virtue of Agrippa,
advised her to give him a faithful relation of all without disguising any
thing, assuring her out of the confidence he had of his generosity, that he
would rather relieve than crush the miserable. Upon this confidence of
Marcellus, the Princess gave Agrippa a brief narrative of what had happened to
her since her last carrying away, whereof the accidents of greatest importance
had happened that very day, and surprised him in such manner, by the relation
of the great performances of Coriolanus, and by that of the King of Armenia's
death, that he could not for some time recover himself out of the astonishment
which the consideration of so many extraordinary occurrences had raised in him.
And thereupon taking occasion to let Cleopatra know that it was not without
reason that she reposed so much confidence in him, he related unto her, how he
had met with the disconsolate Coriolanus in the wood the night before she was
carried away the second time; how that that unfortunate Prince had discovered
himself to him by his speech, and how that, not being able to do him any other
service, he had bestowed on him his own horse, and had passed over the night in
the woods, after he had spent the day in pursuit of those that had carried her
away.

Cleopatra could not forbear celebrating the generosity of Agrippa upon that
occasion, and being before more then half convinced of the innocence of
Coriolanus, she was not a little glad to find that, even in his misfortunes,
Agrippa continued that Friendship toward him which he had ever had for him.
Artaban, before whom, upon the engagement of Agrippa, who had to that purpose
satisfied Cleopatra, were related the prodigious effects of the valor of
Coriolanus, was very much pleased with that discourse; and being acquainted
with that Prince by reason of the combat wherein he had been engaged against
him in the presence of Candace and Tiridates, and by the abode they had both
since made at Tiridates's house, and, having accordingly conceived very much
affection and a more than ordinary esteem for him, he thought himself very much
concerned, in what he had heard said of him, and though he concealed what he
knew of him, because he saw there was not any necessity to speak of it, he was
earnestly desirous to meet with some occasion wherein he might serve him. And
indeed it was partly upon that ground that he had so generously proffered his
assistance in order to the relief of Cleopatra, at a time when the posture of
his health, and other allowable motives might well have procured him a
dispensation from engaging in that enterprise.

Upon that reflection, looking on Artemisa, and perceiving the tears standing
in her eyes for the death of the King her Brother, he was troubled at the
misfortune of that Prince, though he was neither taken with his disposition nor
his person, and so gave the Princess his Sister the best words of comfort he
could. He thought not fit to tell her any thing of Ariobarzanes or Arsinoe,
because Agrippa and he had so resolved before, that she might be the more
surprised when she saw them; and yet when he heard her called in the ship by
the name of Queen Artemisa, he could not forbear telling them, that they should
not be so hasty to give her that title before the Kings death were published,
and that he had a certain imagination that she would not be Queen of Armenia.

This discourse made Agrippa smile, which Marcellus perceiving would fain have
known the meaning of it, when they perceived Cornelius was come with two
chariots, followed by an infinite number of people whom the tidings of
Cleopatra's arrival had drawn down to the port. The name of Cleopatra was in
so much veneration in Alexandria, and the children of that great Queen were so
dear in the account of the people, who had seen them born and brought up in
their City, that they could not understand that the Princess Cleopatra, and
Prince Alexander her Brother, whom they had sometimes, upon the commands of
Anthony, reverenced in a manner as gods, were coming into their City, without
running before them with exclamations, and such expressions of tenderness, as
could not admit any thing comparable thereto, but upon such another occasion.

Nor indeed did Cleopatra and Alexander much mis-interpret those expressions of
their affection, for they could not look on either the walls or people of that
City, wherein they had received their first breath, where they had passed over
their first years with so much reputation, and whence, after the deplorable
ruin of their house, they departed ten years before to follow as far as Rome
the fortune and the triumphall chariot of their Conqueror, but the sadness of
the commemoration must force them to shed those tears which it was impossible
for them to keep in. And it was the more observable in Cleopatra, for that she
never gave over weeping from the port even to the palace, the sight whereof
multiplied her grief when she could not look on it only as the magnificent
house of the Ptolomey's, but that also where the unfortunate Anthony, and the
deplorable Cleopatra had lost their lives with the Empire, not to mention
thousands of other sad circumstances, which at the same time pressed into their
memory.

Cornelius had so ordered things, that Olympia and Arsinoe, Ariobarzanes and
Philadelph, as also Tigranes and Artaban, were not lodged within the Palace,
because that had been reserved for the Emperor and the Empress, who were to
come thither within two days, and how spacious soever it might be, the
Emperors retinue was so great, that there would be but little lodging to spare
for other persons. But for the Princess Cleopatra, Cornelius thought it not
fit to lodge her out of the Palace, but had appointed her certain rooms within
that which had been designed for Octavia. And Candace, either to leave the more
room for the Empress, or that she could not be without the company of Elisa,
was, upon the desires of that Princess, gone along with her, and had left her
lodgings void; so that Cornelius finding none more convenient for the Princess
Cleopatra, changed his former resolution, and disposed of her into the place
which before had been taken up by the Queen of Ethiopia.

When the two Princesses were alighted out of the Chariots, they met, at the
bottom of the stairs, with Elisa, Candace, Olympia, and Arsinoe, with
Ariobarzanes and Philadelph, coming to meet them. Agrippa immediately showed
Elisa and Candace to Cleopatra, to whom he had spoken of them before in the
Chariot, and those two Princesses coming up close to her, she saluted them,
with sentiments not much different from that admiration which they expressed at
the sight of her divine beauty. She knew Elisa to be sole heir to the Empire of
the Parthians, and looked on Candace as a Prince of the royal progeny of
Ethiopia, and, accordingly, made the return of civility to both, which upon the
sight of their countenances they might have challenged from all the World; and
at the same time Artemisa saluted Olympia, who, knowing her to be Sister to
Ariobarzanes, was, through a forwardness of affection, come up to her.
Artemisa entertained, with very much civility, the effects of an affection,
whereof she yet knew not the cause. But when, after she had disengaged her self
out of her embraces, and received those of Candace and Elisa, whom she first
met in her way, she was going toward Arsinoe, who stretched out her arms with
a cordial friendship to entertain her, and at the same time cast her eye on her
countenance, as also on that of Ariobarzanes, who stood close by her, she was
seized by such an astonishment, that had it not been for Artaban, who was not
ignorant of the cause thereof, and came forward purposely to hold her up, she
had fallen all along on the ground.

In the mean time Arsinoe kissed her, and embraced her with much tenderness,
yet was not able to bring her to her self, nor make her apprehend that what she
saw was real. Whereupon Ariobarzanes, after he had saluted Cleopatra, whom
Agrippa had acquainted with his name, as also with that of Arsinoe, taking
Artemisa out of his Sisters hands, after he had begged the pardon of those
great Princesses, to acquit himself of the civilities he ought his Sister,
saluted her at last, with all the demonstrations of an affectionate friendship,
and perceiving that that Princess, astonished at the unexpectedness of the
interview, could not be recovered out of her amazement; What, Sister, said he
to her, will you not know Arsinoe and Ariobarzanes? Artemisa, with much ado,
coming at last to her self again, and looking on them one after another for
some time, before she would venture to speak: Alas, said she at length, I
very well see the countenances of Ariobarzanes and Arsinoe, but I question
whether I may trust my eyes so far, and I find it no small difficulty to be
satisfied, whether they are their shades that present themselves to me after
their death, so well known throughout all Asia, or whether they appear really
before me, and without any illusion. Assure your self, Sister, replied at the
same time Ariobarzanes and Arsinoe, you see us really, and you may embrace us
without any fear, since we are truly living, and have not been dead, but in
the opinion of men.

Artaban, who stood near Artemisa, gave her further satisfaction as to that
truth, acquainting her her in few words, how they had both escaped shipwreck;
and when the Princess was convinced, and that the caresses of her brother and
Sister had dispelled all her doubts, she in the first place gave way to certain
tears, which a tender joy would needs add to those which the death of Artaxus
still forced out into her face. And then, instead of returning the caresses she
had received from Ariobarzanes, suitably to their ancient familiarity, she cast
her self on her knees before him, and taking him by the hand, and bathing it
with her tears, Since it is certain, said she to him, that you are Ariobarzanes
alive, and that I am now absolutely at your disposal, be pleased to pardon the
unfortunate Artemisa, what too too justifiable a gratitude has obliged her to
do for the safety of Alexander, she embraces your knees to obtain that favor
at your hands, and she hopes, the gods have not restored you to life, to raise
in you a severe, and an inexorable, judge of my actions.

Ariobarzanes, astonished at the deportment of Artemisa, from whom he expected
those caresses that spoke more familiarity, raised her up with much ado, and
discovering how much he was surprised at it in all his looks; Sister, said he
to her, I apprehend not what you mean by this kind of behavior toward me; and
besides, that the crime you charge your self with, deserves rather to be
commended then blamed, and that I should have done no less my self for the
safety of Alexander, it is to the King our Brother, and not to me, that this
submission is due from you. If it be due to my King, replies Artemisa, it is to
my King that I make this submission, and since I am the first of your Subjects
that has demanded any favor at your hands, I am also the first that brings
you the news that you are King of Armenia.

These words put Ariobarzanes to such a loss, that he had not the power to
make any present reply thereto; and during the silence he kept by reason of the
astonishment he was in, Agrippa assuming the discourse acquainted him with the
particulars of Artaxus his death, as he had not long before understood them
from Cleopatra; and in the relation he made thereof, he forgot not to insist
very much upon this, that his death was purely the effect of his own rage and
exasperation, and that his enemies had been so far from contributing any thing
thereto, that they endeavored all they could to prevent it.

Artaxus ha^, no doubt, been a very inhuman Prince, one for whom it could not
be expected, that the inclinations of Ariobarzanes and Arsinoe should be very
violent, by reason of the great disproportion there was between their
dispositions; yet, being both of excellent good natures, the grief they
conceived at that unfortunate accident, was, for the present, so great, that it
could not be abated by the purchase of a Crown, in the apprehension of
Ariobarzanes, nor, by the hopes of a more happy condition of life, in that of
Arsinoe. For Philadelph and Olympia, if they were astonished in some measure at
the first hearing of that news, as soon as it was dispersed, joy took its place,
and there was no reason it should give way to any thing in their apprehension,
it being considered how very much it concerned them to find Ariobarzanes King
of Arnenia. But for him, he had his countenance covered with tears for some
time, which there was not any one thought proceeded from dissimulation, by
reason of the confidence which all had of his virtue; and Artemisa, by the
embraces wherewith she received him, and by his courteous reception of Prince
Alexander, seemed to be so far eased of that burden of sadness, which till
then had been very observable in her countenance, that there was not any could
suspect her the least troubled at the loss of a Kingdom, which in all
probability she should otherwise have possessed. Ariobarzanes, thinking himself
obliged in civility to retire, Artemisa, who would needs, and conceived she
ought to follow him took leave of Cleopatra for some small time. He was also
immediately after followed by Olympia, Arsinoe, Alexander and Philadelph; and
the Princess Cleopatra, with Elisa and Candace, attended by Marcellus,
Agrippa, Artaban, Cornelius, and diverse others, went up the stairs, and was
conducted by that illustrious company into those lodgings that had been
prepared for her. She could not prevail with Elisa and Candace, to forbear
waiting on her thither, though that, out of the assurance she had of the
quality of Elisa she did all that lay in her power to prevent that civility
from her, that she might rather have done it to her. But she being the last
come thither, and having lately escaped a danger which gave others a pretense
to visit her, she was forced to pern it it, and she did it with such a grace,
that those two Princesses were infinitely taken with it. They both equally
admired that so famous beauty of Cleopatra; and, though nature had been
sufficiently liberal of her excellencies in theirs, to raise the same
admiration in those that knew them, and that there was in that of Elisa, as
much delicacy and perfection, and in that of Candace, as much grace and majesty
as ever had been observed in the most accomplished beauties that ever were; yet
was it certain, that the delicacy of that of Elisa, and the majesty of that of
Candace were equally apparent in that of Cleopatra, and that if it were very
hard for any man to see her, and not be sensible of a love toward her, it was
also a matter of no less difficulty to look on her, and not conceive a respect
and veneration for her.

Candace, who thought her self much more nearly concerned in her person then
Elisa, and looked on her with an affectionate tenderness, as the Sister of
Caesario, was very desirous of some opportunity to discover her self to her,
and to enter into that measure of her friendship which she should be pleased to
admit her into. And having heard her particularly celebrated for her prudence
and reservednesse, she resolved to make her acquainted with Caesario, and could
not but think him chargeable with a certain degree of inflexibility, that he
had remained a whole day in the same house with her, and never offered to
discover himself to so amiable a Sister. But for the present, she, with the
Princess Elisa, only expressed to her, in terms full of the tendrest passion,
how much they were troubled at the misfortune she had fallen into, and how glad
they were of her liberty and happy arrival thither. Whereto the fair daughter
of Anthony having returned thanks, for that demonstration of their affection
with the greatest acknowledgments she could make thereof, assured them on the
other side of the satisfaction it was to her to meet with them in Alexandria:
and in regard they were both strangers, and might happily stand in need of some
recommendation to these powers which then disposed of the Empire, she pr^ffered
them, in the most obliging manner in the World, to serve them with all the
interest she had in the friendship of Octavia, Julia, Marcellus, and some other
persons when she was allied to, in order to what they might have to propose, to
the Emperor, promising them withal, all the service and asistance they night
desire in chose traverses of fortune which had foerced them out of their native
Countries.

The two Princesses received those proffers with the greatest acknowledgments
imaginable; and while they were thus engaged in discourse, Agrippa and Artaban,
having not the opportunity to entertain Elisa as they could have wished,
Cornelius having not the confidence so much as to come near or speak to
Candace, and Marcellus being drowned in a deep melancholy, which had hanged
upon him for some time before, Agrippa rising up, said, it was but just to
leave the Princess Cleopatra to her rest, after the travail and vexation she
had undergone, and Cornelius entreated Marcellus, that he would be pleased to
follow him to those lodgings that were designed for him. By which means the
Princesses were left to themselves, Artaban not presuming to stay alone with
them, though he left not the room without some regret. But ere he went out,
Candace having called to him with much more confidence, then Elisa durst have
done, and calling to mind the resolution she had taken to reconcile Caesario
and him together that night, gave him notice to be on the Terrace at the hour
she assigned him, and which was the same wherein Caesario was appointed to
come. Artaban entertained that favor with abundance of respect, and going out
of the Palace very well satisfied, he went to give a visit to the new King of
Armenia.

In the mean time, Ariobarzanes, being retired to his own lodgings, in such a
sad posture as had not permitted him to take notice of the persons that
followed him, observes at last, among many others that were in the chamber,
Prince Alexander, and imagined with himself, that the affliction he was in,
could not excuse him from entertaining with the civility he ought a Prince so
eminent as the son of Anthony. Whereupon addressing himself to him, with that
sweetness and courtship that was ordinary and natural in him, after he had
excused his unmindfulnesse of him, and the want of respect he was guilty of in
suffering him to accompany him at that time, by confessing the disturbance he
then was in; My Lord, said he to him, is it possible there can be any goodness
remaining in you toward a house that has exposed your life to so dreadful a
danger, and wherein you have received such barbarous entertainment? And is
Artemisa still so happy as to have the continuance of your affections, after
she had put them to such terrible trials? Assure your self, my Lord, replies
Alexander, that for what I have suffered for Artemisa, I place abundance of
glory and happiness in it, and the reflection I should make thereupon, must
needs be very pleasant, if I am so fortunate as to find you in sentiments as
much to my advantage, as those of King Artaxus, were to my prejudice. Ah my
Lord, replies Ariobarzanes, make not the least doubt but I shall acknowledge
the great honor you do our house, and be confident, that, notwithstanding I am
the son of Artabasus, I shall have my eyes so far open, as to consider, how
little you have contributed to the misfortunes of our Family. No, I have still
fresh in my memory the first expressions of your friendship; and I should have
disclaimed my Sister, had she not done what she has for your safety,
especially in an extremity whereto you were reduced, merely for your love to
her. I shall not therefore tell you she is yours, for you have but too much
interest in her for any man to dispute her with you, but I shall, for your
further confidence, make this protestation to you, and that truly and
sincerely, that your affection to her cannot be greater, than the earnest
desire I have to serve you both in your mutual inclinations.

Alexander almost out of himself for joy to hear Ariobarzanes in these
expressions, comes up close to him, whereupon these two Princes embraced one
another, with so many discoveries of a real friendship, that the whole company
could not forbear taking notice of it, not without much sympathy and
satisfaction. Artemisu could not smother the felicity she conceived therein, as
seeing her self, after so many storms prosperously arrived into so happy a
Port, and finding, by reason of the sweet and generous disposition of
Ariobarzanes, her fortune much different from what it had been some few days
before. While her thoughts were the most taken up to find out terms to express
her satisfaction, or rather to moderate it, she accidentally cast her eyes on
Prince Philadelph, whom, till then, by reason of the disturbance she was in,
and the many illustrious persons she had seen before, she had not taken any
particular notice of. And after she had looked on him for some time very
earnestly, she found him to be that Prince of Cilicia whom she had met with
some days before, and who had entertained her with a relation of his noble
inclinations for Delia, and who, upon the point of their parting, had so
gallantly defended the Princess Cleopatra, against those that would have
carried her away. Artemisa, upon this occasion, conceived such an esteem for
Prince Philadelph, and was so much moved at the relation of his loves to Delia,
that she could not look on him without expressing an extraordinary joy thereat.
Whereupon coming to him with a countenance, wherein were visible the great
kindness she had for him; What, my Lord, said she to him, I have, it seems,
the good fortune to see you again, and the liberty withal once more to assure
you of the esteem which I have conceaved for your admirable virtue?

Philadelph, whose joy had had put him into so much disorder as Artemisas could
have done her, and who waited the opportunity to discover himself to Artemisa,
and to put her in mind of their last meeting, kissing one of her fair hands
with the greatest submission that might be; Madam, said he to her, my fortunate
meeting with you, proved the prologue to that good fortune which the gods have
been pleased to send me since, and you may also infer thence that I was not
absolutely blinded by my passion, when I took you for Delia. How extremely I
was moved at your relation, replies Artemisa, the gods only know, and
consequently you may well think your self obliged to let me know immediately,
whether you have had any tidings since of that Delia, for whom you pretended so
extraordinary an affection.

These words of Artemisa causing Philadelph to look on the Princess Arsinoe
with a smiling countenance; I know not, Madam, said he to her, whether it be
any prudence in me to acknowledge my inconstancy to you; but I cannot forbear
making this confession to you, that that Delia, for whom I had so much
affection, has resigned up all the right and title she had in my heart to the
Princess Arsinoe, your Sister. Ah Philadelph! cries out the Princess with
some precipitation, though my Sister were the most amiable person in the World,
I should never approve that change in your inclinations, and I should no longer
continue that esteem toward you, which I some time had for you, if I thought
you could be guilty of any such infidelity.

These words fell from her with so much earnestness, that Philadelph could not
forbear laughing at it in such a manner, as put him afterward into a little
disorder, and more sport might have been made of it, if, by reason of the death
of Artaxus, civility had not obliged them to a more serious conversation. And
yet Arsinoe thinking it sit to make some rejoinder to the former discourse,
What Sister, said she to Artemisa, it seems you would advise Philadelph to
prefer a person he never knew before me? She said but these few words, but the
action wherewith they were pronounced, raised at first some suspicion in
Artemisa, which afterward grew into a satisfaction, in some measure, as to the
truth of that business. With that reflection, looking on them both with a
countenance wherein were legible the characters of her astonishment, Ah
Philadelph, said she to him, is it possible that Arsinoe, and Delia should be
the same person? Philadelph, who thought it unseasonable to continue that
lightness of discourse any longer, discovered the whole truth to her, and,
telling her, that that Delia, whom he had professed so much love to in his
relation, was the Princess Arsinoe her Sister, put her into such an
astonishment, that for a long time there fell nothing from her but
exclamations, which once over, she embraced a hundred times together that
amiable Delia, and entertained Philadelph with all the caresses she could
express toward a beloved Brother.

Ariobarzanes, who all this time was in discourse with Alexander, had
nevertheless taken notice of what had passed between his Sisters and
Philadelph. And when that first astonishment of Artemisa was over, taking her
by the hand, and presenting her to Olympia, who stretched out her arms to her
with much affection; What, Sister, said he to her, would you bestow all your
caresses on Philadelph and Arsinoe, and will not look on my Princess here,
her, I say, to whom I not only owe my life, but have sacrificed it, to make
her satisfaction in some measure for what I am obliged to her? Artemisa,
without any difficulty, cast her self into the arms of Olympia, in whom,
notwithstanding her palenesse, she could observe the tracks of an admirable
Beauty, and a most amiable kind of Majesty. And thereupon having entertained
her embraces with abundance of affection; Be pleased, Madam, said she to her,
to charge the faults you now find me guilty of, upon my ignorance, as
conceaving, that, one, who, within these few minutes, knew not whether
Ariobarzanes and Arsinoe were in the World, could not have learned whom they
are obliged to for their lives, nor understood the particular respects due from
her to your self.

Olympia made answer to this discourse of Artemisa with a civility suitable to
that of the other, and the King of Armenia engaging himself in their
conversation, addressing himself not long after to Olympia, and looking on her
with eyes full of love, and a deportment, which, by reason of the present
occasion of his sadness, was somewhat more serious then ordinary; Madam, said
he to her, when I was so desirous of a Crown to present you with, the gods are
my witnesses, that it was my hope I should have arrived to it, by some other
way then that whereby it is now fallen to me, and that I should have chosen
rather to pass away my life with a private fortune, then aspired to the Throne
by the death of the King my Brother. But since it has pleased those celestial
powers, whose decrees are irresistible, so to dispose of me, as that I am come
to the possession of the Crown of my Ancestors; give me leave to offer it to
you, as I would offer you that of the Universe, were it in my power, and be you
pleased to receive it from your faithful Ariamenes, as a thing of greater value
then it is, and yet as what he conceaves a thousand times less dear, and less
glorious then the chains he has worn, and shall wear for your sake to the last
minute of his life.

Olympia entertained this discourse of Ariobarzanes with a deportment suitable
to his that spoke it, and looking on him with a countenance, which, in some
measure discovered the present state of her thoughts; My Lord, said she to him,
I have looked on you with so much esteem, even while you were without a Crown,
that that, which you have now received, can hardly add any thing to what you
were in my account before; I receive it with all heartinesse and submission,
because that with the Crown, I am confident you will bestow on me the Prince
that is to wear it, and without the person of Ariobarzanes, I could easily
contemn all the Crowns and Scepters of the Universe. I cannot bestow
Ariobarzanes upon you, replied the Prince, because he is yours ever since the
day he ceased to be his own, and consequently it is not in my power to make you
that present; but I might well offer you the crown, because that it is within
this hour that it came to my disposal, and that till then I was not in a
condition or capacity to make you any offer thereof; and so, I, in some measure
make your satisfaction for the injury I did you, in depriving you almost of all
hopes of a dignity which you could not have missed elsewhere, and which you
slighted for your Ariamenes.

He entertained her with a many other things that discovered the greatest
kindness and sense of obligation that might be; whereto the fair Princess
answered with the same generosity, and their discourse might have continued yet
some while on the same subject, had it not been interrupted by Prince
Philadelph. And what shall become of me? said he to Ariobarzanes, shall I make
no advantage of that influence which the change of your condition gives you
over my fortunes? And will you offer me nothing, now that you can do all
things, after you had offered me so much when all my hopes consisted merely in
the good inclinations you had for me? Assure your self, replied the King of
Armenia, that one of the greatest advantages I shall hope to make of my new
dignity, is, that I may be able to do you the civility I ought: and though you
have indeed but too great an interest already in Arsinoe, yet if you have that
distrust of her disposition, that you imagine she stands in need of a Brothers
consent to make her absolutely yours, I should heartily, with that consent,
part with the crown I have received, could I think that present might
contribute any thing to your satisfaction.

Philadelph received this discourse of the King of Armenia's, with the marks
of both a satisfaction and a resentment that were indeed extraordinary, and
immediately thereupon casting himself at the feet of his amiable Delia, and,
notwithstanding her resistance, kissing one of her fair hands, with the
ordinary sallies of his affection, entertained her with abundance of discourse,
consonant to those demonstrations of Love which she had received from him in
Cilicia. Alexander was in the same terms with Artemisa and Ariobarzanes being
also in the same humor with Olympia, these six fortunate persons, after so
many storms which a malicious fortune had raised against them, finding
themselves safely arrived at the so much wished for port, celebrated their
happiness by all the obliging expressions, which they might derive from such
an excess of joy. But being mutually ignorant of the fortunes of those persons
that were so dear to them, and particularly Artemisa, who knew nothing of that
of Ariobarzanes, and had not understood some part of those of Arsinoe, and that
there were a many particulars in that of Artemisa and Alexander that were
unknown to Ariobarzanes and Arsinoe, they would needs be informed one of
another, and thought fit to spend that day in the relations of their
adventures. To do this, they would observe a certain order, and Alexander and
Artemisa being extremely desirous to understand those of Ariobarzanes and
Olympia they were accordingly the first satisfied, with this provisoe, that
Alexander, Arsinoe and Philadelph should afterward give them an account at
large, of what, of their fortune, was not as then come to their knowledge.
Artaban coming into the room while they were thus engaged, and being very
kindly entertained by all those illustrious persons that were present, diverted
them not from the resolution they had taken. And being a person they might well
trust with their concernments, he hearkened, not without much satisfaction to a
many things, whereof, as having had an imperfect account of them before, he was
very much pleased with the relation, and would needs sup with that noble
company, and spend his time in it till the hour assigned him by Candace.

In the mean time the Princess Cleopatra stirred not out of her own chamber,
where she had with her Elisa and Candace, and as soon as the Princes were
departed the room, the two Princesses imagining, not without reason, that
Cleopatra might stand in need of rest, took their leaves of her, and went to
their own lodgings which were close by. Cleopatra, upon their importunity laid
her self upon the bed, and rested for an hour; but that time expired, she got
up, any having understood what quality Elisa was of, and had some account of
Candace, and finding her self inclined to a great esteem and affection for
both, she would put off no longer the return of a civility which she conceived
she ought them, and going out of her own chamber with her woman Camilla, she
went to that of Elisa. The two Princesses quarrelled very much at her for that
strictness of ceremony, and seemed to be very much troubled, that she had
taken so little time to rest, considering the great trouble and hardship she
had undergone. But she made them answer, that the rest which her body might
require was not so considerable to her as the obligation she thought lay upon
her to return their civilities, nor so dear to her as the honor to wait on
them, which she was not able to dispense with any longer after she had been
deprived of their sight with so much precipitation.

The two Princesses made her answer with equal civility, and whereas Candace
was already passionately in love with her, as well out of a consideration of
her excellent endowments, which might produce that effect in any one, as upon
the account of Caesario, and was very desirous to be more intimately acquainted
with her, looking on her in a most passionate manner; As for the fair Princess
of the Parthians, said she to her, whose extraordinary merit makes an immediate
assault on all hearts, and whose illustrious birth is known to you, she may
without any unjust presumption claim some place in your friendship, and there
are few souls can stand out long against her charms, if she thinks fit to
make use of the battery thereof. But for one whom you have no other account of
then that she is a person of some quality born in Ethiopia, and cannot aspire
above a mediocrity of parts, she cannot rationally hope for the same advantage,
if in some measure, to balance those wherein Elisa so much excells her, she
could not pretend to something, that, more particularly recommends her to your
notice. For matter of recommendation, replied the Princess, smiling at the
modesty of her discourse, there is so much legible in your face, that it were
supererogatory in you to look for any elsewhere; and as for your being born in
Ethiopia, you are never, for that, the less worthy of our affections and our
respects. I am not, I must confess, made absolutely acquainted with your
birth, though I have understood something of it; but besides what I have
observed of the Princess Elisa's familiarity and behavior toward you, there
are a many other arguments whence I infer, that your quality must needs be of
the highest, and I shall happily know more of it, when you shall be so well
acquainted with me, as to think I may be trusted with a secret of that
consequence. I know not, replied the Queen, whether I can with civility
distrust you; but, besides the bent of my own inclination which naturally
engages me into a very great confidence of you, I have happily some very
particular reasons to discover that to you, which I have not to any but the
Princess of the Parthians. And therefore to begin with something, I shall make
no difficulty to acknowledge my self to be Candace, Queen of Ethiopia, whom
Fortune has been pleased to cast on these coasts, and that dispossessed of a
Kingdom, which she has since recovered by the assistance of a person not
unknown to you.

Upon this discourse of Candace, Cleopatra asked her pardon, in case, through
an ignorance of her quality, she had been awanting as to point of civility
toward her, and gave her many thanks for the confidence she was pleased to
repose in her, with a protestation that she should make no other advantages of
that acknowledgement of her, then such as might give her the occasions to serve
her, if she should be so happy as to find them. And thereupon reflecting on the
last words that fell from her whereby she confessed her self obliged for the
recovery of her Crown to a person of her acquaintance; May I pretend to so much
happiness, said she to her, as that there should be a person within the reach
of my knowledge, that may have done you a service of so great importance as
that you tell me of, and can I beg his name of you without presuming too far
upon the confidence you have honored me with. I hope, it will not be long,
replied Candace, ere I shall make you far greater discoveries of him than that
of his name, and, it may be, renew your affectionate inclinations toward a
person upon whose account I presume so much upon your friendship; but till that
happen, give me leave to ask you whether you did not see Cleomedon, in the
house where Prince Alexander made some little abode upon his arrival near
Alexandria. It is very true, replied Cleopatra, that I have seen him in that
house, where I staid one night and some part of the next day, till such time as
I was carried away thence: Alexander procured me the sight of him in his bed,
which he was confined to by reason of some wounds, so that I could not see him
with as much advantage in that condition, as, no question, I should have done
in another. But to measure him by that little observation I then made of him, I
perceived as well in his countenance as his discourse, something that argued a
certain grandeur much beyond the ordinary rate of men; and it now comes into my
mind, that my Brother procured me that sight of him as a person of a great and
noble fame, and told me withal, that his name was much cried up in Ethiopia
for many famous victories. Alexander replies Candace, has told you no more of
him than Truth will justify; but I am in hope that he will bring both you and
Alexander, those tidings of a person whom you once thought very dear, which
may prove very advantageous to me, and very much further the design I have to
purchase your friendship; and it is for that only reason, that I asked you
whether you had seen him, and that I am desirous to give you another sight of
him before this night be quite passed, if you give me the liberty to do it. It
cannot be, replied the fair Princess, but too great a satisfaction to me, to
see a man so considerable, both upon the account of his own worth, and the
great services he has done you, and I think my self so much concerned already
in whatever relates to you, that I cannot but with much more interest than
heretofore, look on a man to whom you are obliged for the recovery of your
Crown. Not, Madam, that any consideration of his person, or the hopes I may
conceive within my self of him can add any thing to the respect which I have
already for you; and assure your self, that if the friendship you are pleased
to desire of me, were any thing of far greater value then it is, I should
gladly offer it you by way of exchange for that which I desire of you.

Candace, extremely satisfied with this discourse of Cleopatra, made her answer
in terms so affectionate, that the fair daughter of Anthony, as well out of
considerations of gratitude, as for the remarkable excellencies of that great
Queen, felt in her self a more then ordinary inclination to love her as much as
lay in her power, and began to give her the greatest assurances she could
thereof. Which Elisa, who had been silent all the time, very much observing,
and not able to endure it any longer without some discoveries of her jealousy;
What, Madam, said she to Candace smiling, you are, it seems absolutely resolved
to engrosse the friendship of this fair Princess to your self, and would not
suffer me to have any place therein, though possibly my desires of it are not
inferior to yours? If you dispute it with me, replies Candace, no question but
you will clearly carry it from me, but if you do, you must look on it as the
pure effect of your merit, whereas I have some reasons to pretend thereto,
which you cannot any ways allege.

Cleopatra perceiving this obliging contestation of the two Princesses, found
it no great difficulty to give them satisfaction; and indeed they were both of
them so amiable, that she was easily inclined to afford them those
demonstrations of her affection which they desired, that is, such as could not
well be denied them. But the discourse of Candace, whence she might have
inferred that she must needs have something of news to acquaint her with,
raising a certain curiosity in her, she could not forbear discovering to her
the desire she had to be somewhat better iuformrd then she was, of her affairs,
as also of those of the fair Princess of the Parthians. Which they were no
sooner sensible of, but they were both very ready to afford her that
satisfaction, and having obliged her to cast her self on the bed, upon which
they sat by her; Candace gave her a more brief account than she had done to
Elisa, of the adventures of the greatest consequence that had happened to her;
but in her discourse she discovered nothing of the birth of Caesario, and
calling him all the way Cleomedon, represented him only as a Prince come for
refuge into her dominions.

Cleopatra having admired the strange accidents of Candaces life, and expressed
how much she was moved thereat, with no small affection, gave hearing
afterward to what she was yet to learn of those of Elisa; I say what she was
yet to learn, for the greatest part thereof was already come to her knowledge
from the common reporter of all things, Fame, who had divulged the most
memorable of her adventures. By these discourses of the two Princesses,
Cleopatra became better acquainted then she had been before, with both Artaban
and Cleomedon, and looked on them as the only two in the World, whom she might
justly compare to her own Coriolanus, and having understood from them the
design they had to have them reconciled that night, and to oblige them to
forget the great differences that had been between them, she very much approved
their resolution. And being further satisfied, that Cleomedon, for very good
reasons, could not come to visit Candace till such time as all other people
were in their beds, she assured the Queen that she would gladly return into
their Chamber at that time, if she thought it sit, that she might take better
notice then she had done before of two men so particularly observable, as also
to understand from Cleomedon, what the Queen had put her in hopes of,
concerning him. They continued their discourses of this nature till supper time
drew near, and having discovered their desires to eat together, all things were
accordingly prepared in a Parlour, not far from their lodging rooms, whither
they were conducted, and immediately after supper, returned to Cleopatras
Chamber, to pass away the evening with such as should come to visit them, and
whom, by reason of their rank, they could not deny that civility, with a
resolution withal to meet together at Elisas Chamber, when all were withdrawn.

Immediately after they were gotten into the Chamber, as they had imagined,
they were visited by Marcellus and Agrippa, who had supped together at
Agrippas, Cornelius having, as it should seem, spent that evening with the King
of the Medes, with whom he had contracted a friendship, and was engaging in
some designs of his. Marcellus, whose company was infinitely pleasant, when
His mind was in a serenity free from the tempests of his discontents,
entertained the Princesses for some time, with an account of some particular
observations he had made in his late voyage; when in the mean time Agrippa,
finding an opportunity to sit by Elisa, so as that Candace was not so near her
as she was wont to be, that fair Princess could not avoid, but that he might
speak to her, yet not be overheard, and consequently that he might acquaint
her with his love. She would have called Candace to a relief which they
mutually afford one the other, by way of combination against both Agrippa and
Cornelius, could she without incivility have done it: but Agrippa was a person
of that rank, and, withal, of such worth in himself, that the Princess, not
without some reason, was afraid to disoblige him, and thereupon resolved to
endure his discourse, as being out of necessity forced to do it.

Agrippa having thus broken the ice, and removed the first difficulties, he
found it so much the less to carry on his design; and after some discourse of
an indifferent nature, perceiving that he might speak without any fear of being
heard: Is it possible, said he to her, that, in a place where I have the honor
to wait on you at any time, I have with much ado got the advantage of this
little interval, to give you some assurances of that submissive passion which I
have for you? Or rather am I to imagine, that the first discoveries I made to
you thereof, have incensed you so much against me, that you should avoid my
company as you do?

No doubt but Elisa, was sufficiently troubled at these words, yet would she
not displease Agrippa, whom she thought her self obliged to, whose power she
was afraid of, and whose virtue she highly esteemed. Accordingly, rejoyning to
his discourse with an accent full of mildness and modesty; I have but too
great esteem, said she to him, both for your worth and your person, to shun
your conversation, and therefore if you find any repugnance in me as to that
point, it does not proceed from either of those two causes; and I should both
see you and hearken to you with very much satisfaction, had you so much
goodness for me as to make something else the subject of your discourse. My
discourse shall be of what nature you shall approve of, replies Agrippa, but I
cannot, without a great violence to my self, forbear telling you, that I dye
for your sake, and that, though you should forbid my mouth to tell you so much,
it were very hard for my eyes to afford you the same obedience, and that they
should not, in some measure, express the effects of what you have caused in my
heart. I am easily persuaded, replied the Princess, that you do not feel all
that you would have me believe; and I cannot but have that confidence of your
generosity, that instead of what your discourse might very well put me in fear
of, I shall find only, where you are, a sanctuary against that persecution
which I have run through so many dangers to avoid. I should think my self the
most unfortunate man in the World, replied Agrippa, if you should look with the
same eyes on the love of Tigranes, and that which I have for you, and call that
by the name of persecution, which is, on the contrary, a passion full of
respect and veneration, such as mine is, as you do the violence of a Prince,
who, by force and tyranny has sought that which he should have patiently
expected from your own good liking. I knew, Madam, that the enterprise, I
engage my self in, is of no small difficulty, when I would dispute a heart
prepossessed by another affection, and that an affection dearly purchased by an
excess of merit, and which you have, not without much reason, conceaved for
him, who, of all men, has shown himself the most worthy of it, as well by his
virtue, as the transcendency of his actions. But I shall entreat you withal to
assure your self, that it is not by condemning it, that I shall endeavor to
ruin it, to my advantage; and observe, that I freely acknowledge Artaban to be
worthy of his fortune above all the men I have known, and, that it is not my
own will that inclines me to traverse his affections, but that it proceeds
merely from the violence you do me, which is such as I have ineffectually
endeavored to overcome by all the reasons which you could your self have
alleged against it. Do not therefore consider what I do against him as a
voluntary action, which might be condemned, but as a forced action, and
consequently rather deserving your pity, then his resentment; and pardon, if
you please, the design I have to dispute your affections with him, which I
shall not do out of any consideration of Caesar's authority, and the power he
has invested me with through the whole extent of his Empire, but by my love
and services.

To this effect was the discourse of Agrippa, and the Princess finding some
comfort in the conclusion of it, and in what he had said to the advantage of
Artaban; It has ever been my persuasion, said she to him, that, what design
soever you might be engaged in, you would make use of no other force then that
of virtue it self to effect it; and that is it indeed which makes you more
considerable then the rank you are in, or the friendship of Caesar; and it is
from the same virtue that I am inclined to hope you will overcome a passion,
which may happily expose your reputation to some reproach by thwarting the
enjoyments and felicity of those that cast themselves under your protection.

These words troubled Agrippa more than any thing else could have done, as
being levelled at him in point of generosity and honor; and indeed, great
souls, such as was really his, are far more sensible of assaults of this
nature, then those which proceed merely out of a consideration of difficulty or
danger. He accordingly was at a little loss what return to make thereto, but
when he had recollected himself a little; It is not for Agrippa, said he to
her, to afford protection, within the territories that are under the subjection
of Caesar, to a daughter of the King of Parthia. Caesar may be said to protect
you, and I may contribute my services to his protection; but it concerns me
ever to be suppliant and submissive to you, and to account my self your vassal,
rather than your Protector: under this qualification of vassallage, which I
conceave honorable enough for me, and not under that other of protection,
which I could not pretend to without insolence, it may be lawful for me, upon
equal terms, to engage against my Rival, and in this kind of engagement, I
shall not seem very dreadful to a person, of whose side the victory is already
declared.

He would have spun out this discourse to a greater length, had not Candace,
troubled to see the Princess so engaged, started a question to her, purposely
to break it off, and, not long after, obliged her to quit Agrippa, and to
participate of their conversation. It continued not long that night, for Elisa
and Candace, to oblige Marcellus and Agrippa to withdraw the sooner, bid
Cleopatra goodnight; telling her, that, the better to recover the rest she so
much wanted, it was but fit she should go to it somewhat sooner then ordinary.
Whereupon the two Princesses departed to their own lodgings, and Marcellus and
Agrippa, having taken their leaves of them, left the room at the same time.

The two Princesses were no sooner alone, but Elisa acquainted Candace with the
discourse that had passed between her and Agrippa, and the Queen of Ethiopia,
gave her an account at the same time of what she had had that day with
Cornelius. Whereupon they advised with one another what they should do in that
case, and spent some time in deliberating whether they should acquaint their
Lovers with that new emergency. They found very strong reasons on both sides,
as well to oblige them to do it, as to divert them from it, and they were
absolutely unresolved what to do, when Artaban comes into the room. It Is, out of
all question, that Elisa was infinitely desirous to see him, yet could she not
look on him at such an hour, without blushing at the freedom she gave him; and
though she loved him to that degree which she conceived her self obliged to do,
as well by way of recompense for his great services, as out of her own
inclination, yet had she not ever granted him any favor that derogated from
the strictest observances of honor and her sex; and had not been persuaded to
this secret enterview, but out of compliance with Candace, whose authority,
rather then any thing else, satisfied her scruples, and prevailed with her to
grant it in order to the interview which she so much endeavored between
Caesario and him. Candace, though she had no less devotion to virtue then the
other, might presume upon a greater liberty, and besides, that she could not
see Caesario but at such hours, she was absolutely at her own disposal, as well
in regard of her person as her dominions. Add to that, that in her favoring
Caesario, and bestowing on him her Crown with her person, as she was resolved,
she complied with the will, and obeyed the commands of her father, who, in his
life time, and at his death, had publicly declared such an intention, and had
absolutely ordered it should be so.

Elisa entertained Artaban with her ordinary sweetness and modesty; and
Candace, having treated him with all manner of civility, You are now satisfied,
said she to him, that I am not much inclined to revenge, and that
notwithstanding the resentment which your inconstancy might well raise in me
against you, I yet think it not much to procure you such favors as you had not
happily ever received before. I must indeed confess, replies Artaban, that this
favor is a pure effect of your goodness; but shall not acknowledge, if I may
be so free with you, that you had any great resentment to struggle with, for a
loss you were not any way sensible of. The loss cannot be thought light,
replies Candace, when one looses such a man as Artaban: but it has been the
pleasure of our destinies to dispose of us both otherwise, and for that reason
it is but fit we forbear all reproaches. But I must tell you withal, that I
have not been the instrument to procure you this sight of Elisa, besides your
expectation, without some little By-concernment; and that is, a request that
both she and I make to you, that you and Cleomedon have an interview in this
room, that you embrace one the other in our presence, and, if it be not
impossible, become good friends, as your fair Princess and my self are.

Artaban receiving this discourse of Candace, with a great sense of the
obligation she laid upon him; I am very much troubled, Madam, said he to her,
that you should not make trial of the respect I have for you, by a test of my
obedience, wherein I might find more difficulty, then there can be in that
which you propose to me; for the friendship of Cleomedon is a thing, whereof
the purchase is so advantageous, that I cannot entertain the offer you make me
of it, otherwise then as a recompense you are pleased to allow me, and not as a
punishment that you impose upon me. I may add to this, that he has put a late
obligation upon me, which ought to have a greater influence on my soul, then
that unreasonable aversion which heretofore I ever found bandying against that
affection which his virtue might raise in me for him, and I conceive my self
engaged to him in much more than my life amounts to, since I must acknowledge
the liberty of my Princess, an effect of the relief she received from his
valor, when she was in the arms of Tigranes. Artaban, said Elisa to him, very
much satisfied with his discourse, assure your self, you cannot any way oblige
me so much as by this kind of proceeding, and there is such an union between
this fair Queen and my self, that it were very unjust there should be any
difference between the objects of our Loves. Cleomedon made in a manner the
same answer, when we made the same proposition to him; and accordingly, it is
no small satisfaction to me, to see that we shall find it no hard matter to
establish between you a friendship not unlike ours.

While Elisa spoke in this manner, Candace, desirous to favor Artaban all she
could, pretending she had some business to do in a closet, that was within the
room, took occasion to go into it for some time. Which intervall the passionate
Artaban making his advantage of, cast himself at the feet of Elisa, and
embraced her knees, with all the most affectionate demonstrations of that
passion, which she was already so well acquainted with; and whereas he could
not express that transcendency of joy which then possessed him, otherwise than
by confused and broken words, the fair Princess thought his love more legible
in that disorder, than it had been in a discourse well couched, and actions
proceeding from the greatest recollection. The presence of Vrinoe (for Cephisa
was walking upon the Terrace with Clitia in expectation of Caesario's coming)
hindered him not from giving thousands of kisses to the fair hands of his
Princess; and this being the greatest favor he could expect from her, she
could not deny it him in so favorable an opportunity, and that especially
after a separation, which had caused her to bewail his loss with so many
tears. Nay, she had much ado to keep them in now, during the reflections she
made on it, and looking on him in the most amorous manner that could be, with
those very eyes which had set him so much on fire; Ah Artaban, said she to him,
what real afflictions has your imaginary death cost me! and what abundance of
tears have I shed out of that cruel persuasion! Ah Madam, replied Artaban,
how precious ought I to esteem that death, and how dear those tears! The rest
of my life is no way comparable to that fortunate death, no, it was not either
my life or death could deserve those tears, which compassion drew from your
fair eyes. But is it not time, added the Princess, I should know, by what
adventure it came to pass that you are now alive; or am I still to be ignorant
what good fortune it is that we are obliged to for your safety?

Artaban was going to acquaint her in what manner he had escaped drowning; but
Elisa, remembering her self how that the night before, Candace would needs have
her to be present at the arrival of Cleomedon, and being a little ashamed that
she had suffered her to withdraw into the closet, she called her, and entreated
her to participate of their conversation as she had done of the discourse that
had passed between her and Cleomedon, and understand, how Artaban had escaped
the fury of those waves into which he had cast himself, since that in all
likelihood the relation he was to entertain them with would not be so long but
that he might well go through it before Cleomedon came in. Candace made her
answer, that she should gladly hearken to any thing wherein she thought her
self concerned, and after she was set down by her; Madam, says Artaban to her,
since that there are but few days since my falling into the Sea, I shall not
need many words to acquaint you with what has happened to me from that time,
and shall not abuse your attention long with an account of things of little
consequence.

It is not without some reason, continued he, speaking to Candace, that you
said you were concerned in my safety, or at least I may well say that you have
contributed very much thereto, and consequently that I am not a little obliged
to you for it. To me, replied the Queen, somewhat astonished at what he said?
Even to you, Madam, said he, more then any other; and had it not been for that
generous action which you did in setting Zenodorus's ship on fire, that action,
I say, which carried in it a more shining demonstration of your virtue then the
fire you kindled on the water, I had infallibly lost a life, which I could not
long have made good against the violence of the waves, being armed all over, my
buckler hanging about my neck, and being at too great a distance from the shore
to recover it by swimming, even though I had had nothing of armor about me.
Their weight had once already forced me to the bottom, where I had rolled my
self for some time upon the sand, when by the violence of a Billow I was again
brought up to the top of the water, where, as good fortune would have it, I met
with a plank, half burned, of Zenodorus's vessel, which struck against my
head, and, not long after, touched against my hand. Though my condition was
such that I had but little knowledge or apprehension left, yet made I a shift
to do that, which they say is natural to all men in the like extremity, which
is, to fasten on any thing they can: and so, embracing the plank, which was
thick and heavy, I did so well with the help of it that I got my head above
water, and had the liberty to breath; insomuch that, by degrees, I got it under
me, in such a manner, that it bore me up, with the help of my legs, which I
moved to and fro, as if I were swimming, the best I could. But I was, withal,
so weary, so much troubled with the water I had swallowed, and so laden with
my armor, that I could not hope to escape with that help alone, though I
endeavored with all the remainder of my strength, to force the plank toward
the shore.

Being in this extremity, it pleased the gods to direct certain Fisher-boats
whereof there are a many upon that coast, toward the place where I was, which
was not very far from the shore. Those that were in them taking notice of the
glistering of my headpiece, and perceiving the top of my plume of feathers all
wet, imagining what the matter might be, came up with one of their boats to my
relief, and indeed it came just at the point that I stood very much in need of
it, and was reduced to my last shifts. They took me into their boat, disarmed
me, and at the same time made me cast up the salt water I had drunk, and when
they saw I had a little recovered my self they took me ashore and brought me to
one of their cottages. There was I forced, by reason of the hardship I had
undergone, and the sad condition I was in to rest my self for some hours, as
being so spent, that I was hardly able to stand on my Legs.

I had not been there long ere the memory of my misfortunes began to torment
me, and thereupon representing to my self how that I left the Princess under
the power of a cruel Pyrate, and that I was without men, without vessel, and
knew not any way how to relieve her, my grief came upon me with so much
violence, that I was in a manner resolved to go and seek, in the bowels of the
Sea that death, which I had with so much difficulty escaped; and certainly I
think, that, had I not been prevented by those good people, I should have
executed that fatal resolution; but indeed my weakness was with all such,
that it was easy for them to keep me on a sorry bed whereon they had cast me,
and where I had already passed away some hours.

I shall not trouble you Madam, continued he addressing himself to Elisa alone,
with a repetition of all those words, which fell from me, during the violence
of my grief; and you may judge by the greatness of a passion which you are
well acquainted with, that there was, in the effects it produced, but very
little moderation. The night was now drawn near, when having recovered my
strength and spirits in some measure, I called for my clothes which the
Fishermen had taken off to be dried, and began to find my self in such a
condition, that I would not by any persuasions be kept there any longer, when
good fortune, being then my Friend, directs to the cottage where I was, a
certain man, whom I knew to be Telamon, a person that accompanied me in the
quality of an Esquire. I immediately called him by his name, and the faithful
Esquire, transported with joy runs to me, and embracing my knees, asked me
thousands of times by what miracle I had escaped; but instead of answering
him, I presently asked him what was become of the Princess? Telamon,
perceiving with what earnestness I pressed that question to him several
times; My Lord, said he to me, as soon as the Pirate, by the assistance of his
men, was taken up out of the water, and brought into the vessel, finding
himself in a posture able enough to pursue the design he had undertaken, as
having been immediately recovered out of the water, he gave orders to be set
ashore at a certain place he appointed to them, and leaving the Princess under
the guard of his Lieutenant, he left the vessel with a select number of his
men, to seek out, as they said, a person that had made an escape the night
before, after she had set his vessel on fire; he commanded his Lieutenant to
have a care of the Princess, and to expect his return at a place where he
appointed him. For my part, having not the patience to stay any longer in the
vessel, I thought it my best course to leave it, with a resolution to give you
all the assistance I could if so be I found you capable of any, or to take some
order for your enterrement, in case I should have found your body cast up any
where on these shores. Whereupon I came away with the Pirates, with Zenodorus's
leave, after I had cast my self at his feet begging his permission to look
after the body of my Master, to do it the last honors it were capable of.

So that it seems then, said I interrupting him, my Princess is yet about the
river, where she is to expect the return of the Pirate, and that Zenodorus is
come ashore upon this coast, and is not yet returned to his ships. I can assure
you, My lord, replied he, that he is not yet returned, and that he is resolved,
by what I have understood, to bestow all the next day to find out the person
that is escaped from him, and that it is impossible he should have met with her
since we came ashore.

This account of Telamon filled me again with new hopes, as resolved, that if I
could meet with the Pirate, what number soever of men he might have about him,
I would either die in the engagement with him, or force him to return the
Princess, out of a certain confidence, that either gods or men might afford me
some assistance to carry on my enterprise. In order thereto, knowing that we
were not far from Alexandria, where might easily be procured all things that
were necessary, I gave Telamon some of the jewels I ordinarily carried about
me, and which the Fishermen had not, as good Fortune would have it, taken out
of my clothes, when they dried them, and commanded him to make all the have he
could to the City, and buy two horses, charging him, by all means, to make
choice for me of the best he could meet with all, what rate soever he might be
set at. To which having further enjoined him to bring them me as soon as he
possibly could, and to give notice that night to the Praetor of Alexandria of
the arrival of the Pirates upon the coast, and the carrying away of the
Princess, I dismissed him.

Telamon, with these orders, took his way toward Alexandria, while I remained,
with some little hope to do something, among the Fishermen, who would needs
force me to take what poor entertainment they could afford me; and certainly;
that nights rest was no more then necessary for me, to recover my strength, and
put me into a condition to be able to deal with those enemies which I should
meet withal. But why should I spin out my relation to such a length? In a
word, the next day about an hour after Sunrising, I saw Telamon coming with
two horses. So that having put on my Armor and bestowed some of those jewels
I had left among the Fishermen, I got up on the better of the horses, which I
found, much to my content, very fit for my turn; and having understood from
Telamon that the Praetor had notice given him, and was sending out vessels to
the relief of the Princess, I resolved to make a search all about Alexandria.
During all that day, it ran still in my thoughts, that the only way for me to
relieve you, Madam, was, to meet with Zenodorus, and to become master of his
liberty as he was of yours; and I thought it so much the more likely to be
effected, in regard that Telamon had assured me, that, the better to find out
the person he was in quest of he had divided his men into four parties, and
consequently had but very few about him.

I thought sit in the first place to ride up and down the shore and to visit
the woods, and all the places thereabouts, especially wherever I observed the
track of any horse. I had spent in this manner the best part of the day to no
purpose, when crossing through a pleasant valley, and perceiving a little
rivulet, which took its rise from a spring that was not far off, the thirst I
then was in, occasioned as well by reason of the heat of the day, as the
heaviness of my armor, obliged me to alight, and to come to the spring, where
happened that accident which you may have had an account of from Cleomedon,
since you have already seen him. It Is very true, replied the Princess Elisa,
we have so, and understood all the particulars of your combat; and I knew not
how to forbear blaming you, for being so ready to give Cleomedon occasion to
come to blows, since you had no ground to hate him, nor did pretend any thing
to the Queen of Ethiopia.

Madam, replies Artaban, you may be pleased safely to assure your self as of
nothing but truth, that the condition I was in then was such, that I had not
any intention to engage Cleomedon to sight; but calling to mind the last words
I had said to him at our parting, wherein I made a confident brag, that I
should one day be in a condition to measure a weapon with him without any
prejudice to him, I thought my self obliged to put him in mind of it, out of a
fear he might attribute that forgetfullnesse to any want of courage, and yet I
endeavored all I could to express it in such terms, as could not have
provoked him to fight, had he not been as forward as my self.

Whereupon Artaban, having briefly run over those passages which Caesario had
related before, acquainted them with what had happened to him since Candace's
being carried away in their sight the second time; his engagement with
Zenodorus's crew; his retreat to the house of Tiridates, and the abode he had
made there, to their meeting at Tiridates's tomb.

He had just made an end of his discourse, when Clitia came to give them notice
that Cleomedon was upon the Terrace, and immediately after, he comes into the
room with an amiable and majestic deportment. He had hardly acquitted himself
of his salutations to the two Princesses, when Artaban, who would needs do,
with an obliging grace, whatever he conceived he ought to do, comes up to him,
and saluting him with a civility animated by all the expressions of a real
greatness of soul; Generous Cleomedon, said he to him, I have forborne too
long from rendering you that which all men acknowledge to be your due. Since you
have overcome that unjust repugnance which I had to do it, as well by the
admirable virtue you are Master of, as by a late demonstration of your
generosity, give me leave to approach you with abundance of remorse for what is
passed, abundance of respect for your person, and a more than ordinary
earnestness to deserve some place in your Friendship.

Caesario, who was resolved to have done that to Artaban which Artaban had done
to him, was somewhat troubled that he had been prevented, and entertaining his
discourse and action with a civility suitable to his; The friendship you
proffer me, said he to him, is a happiness of that concernment, that it was
but just I should purchase it with the price of my blood, and as I could not
charge any thing but my own misfortune with the backwardness you were in to
afford it me, before; so is it to my good fortune only that I must attribute
the present you make me of it now. I conceive, replied Artaban, that respect
and esteem which I have for you, due to your virtue, your birth, and your
excellent endowments; and the earnestness I have, freely and faithfully to
serve you, to the assistances you afforded me by your valor, in delivering
this great Princess out of the hands of those that would have carried her
away. It has been no small satisfaction to me, replied Caesario, that you were
something concerned in the service I have done the Princess of the Parthians,
thought it were such as she might have received from any man upon the like
occasion; but I have not forgotten the relief you gave me, when my horse was
killed under me in the engagement against Zenodorus's men. However it be, I
conceive it a great happiness, that these mutual civilities should engage us
to become faithful friends, and I promise, I shall never be found guilty of
the least violation of a friendship which I desire may be eternal between us.

With these words, these two great persons embraced one another, upon the
commands of the two Princesses (the respect they had for them not permitting
them to take that liberty in their presence) and a little after, they looked
one upon another with a mutual admiration, and were both equally satisfied as
to the Friendship which they had contracted. Candace who was infinitely pleased
with it, spoke to them whatever she thought might any ways confirm them
therein; and Elisa, who was extremely sensible of the assistance which she had
received from Caesario, joined her solicitations with the others, to establish
a perfect union between those two great men. But they might very well have
spared their endeavors to that purpose; for the behavior of these two great
souls was so mutually ingenuous and cordial, that there was such a prefect
consonancy between their words and thoughts, that it might be said, their
friendship was truly consummate before they had in a manner made the first
overtures thereof.

These four illustrious persons, all satisfied, though with some inequality,
would have fallen either together, or separately, into some pleasant discourse
had not Candace be thought her self that the Princess Cleopatra was not gone
to bed, out of an expectation to hear from them, and if she had not had a great
desire to make her acquainted with Caesario that night. Upon that reflection,
having taken the Prince a little aside (and at the same time left Elisa with
Artaban in an affectionate and pleasant discourse) she discovered to him her
desires, that he would make himself known to the Princess his Sister, to whose
prudence it were not unsafe to commit things of the greatest importance, and
repeated to him all the discourses which she had entertained her with, to
prepare her thereto.

Caesario very willingly condescended to the proposition of Candace, as having
already found it no small difficulty to conceal himself from so amiable a
Sister, and having forborne it upon no other account than the submission he had
for the Queen. Candace would have sent word to Cleopatra of it; but she was a
little troubled that Artaban should be present, as not conceiving, that
Caesario would, before him, declare a thing, the least discovery whereof would
infallibly cost him his life. She acquainted him with her thoughts to that
purpose, and advised with him what course should be taken to have things so
carried as that Artaban might not be present at that action. But Caesario's
soul being too great to entertain the least distrust of such a person as
Artaban, and upon the first discovery the Queen made of her jealousy,
slighting that precaution, and lifting up his voice, purposely that he might be
heard by all that were in the Chamber: There is no necessity, Madam, said he to
her, of any such circumspection when we have to deal with a virtue, such as is
that of Artabans. I know him so well, as that I would trust him with something
more precious than my life, and therefore, since it is your pleasure we should
see Cleopatra, I shall discover my self to her, before Artaban, with as much
confidence as before your self.

All that were present were infinitely pleased with the ingenous clearness
which Casario expressed; and Artaban, who had heard the words, and easily
imagined the occasion on which they were spoken, willing to return him an
answer, not unworthy the good opinion he had of him; I must needs confess,
said he to him, that this demonstration of your generosity is very great,
wherein you are content to make a discovery of your self to me, which, among
persons, of whose faith you were doubtful, might prove prejudicial to your
safety; and I receive, with the resentment I ought, a confidence, whereto I
have not any ways obliged you. But that you may be satisfied, that I am not
absolutely unworthy of it, and that you need not fear I should abuse it, now
that you have assured me of your friendship, I am to let you know, that, even
during that time, wherein I had the greatest aversion for, nay, in the time of
youth, which is not ordinarily over-apt to keep a secret, I have known your
name and birth, and that you will not tell me any thing I know not, when you
shall discover your self to the Princess your Sister to be Caesario, the son
of Caefar and Cleopatra.

This discourse of Artabans, little expected by Caesario, raised in him some
astonishment, and might have put Candace into some jealousy of Elisa, had she
not immediately called to mind to some words which Artaban had said to her,
when they met at Tiridates's Tomb, whence she might have imagined, that the
birth and true name of Caesario were not unknown to him. The Prince, upon this
new expression of true friendship, could not but admire the great courage of
Artaban, who, notwithstanding the strange aversion he had ever discovered
toward him, and that in an age which is not much inclined to the moderation of
the most violent passions, had slighted the opportunity he had to prejudice his
enemy, and observed that secrecy toward him, which he would not, without some
difficulty, have found, even among his friends. And certainly his astonishment
had been the greater at this kind of proceeding, if these characters of an
elevated soul had been less familiar to him, and if he had not found in
himself an inclination to do the like toward Artaban.

However, he thought it but just to let Artaban know what esteem and
acknowledgment he conceived at so generous a carriage, and looking on him with
an action, which in some measure expressed what his thoughts were employed
about; I must needs confess, said he to him, that all things are admirably
great in you, and that it will be a great injustice in fortune, if she raise
you not above Kings, since they are things you can pull down when you please.
There are few persons certainly would have made so little advantage as you have
done, of a discovery, which might have proved so prejudicial to me in the
world; but there are yet fewer would have effected those great things which are
in you the accomplishments of your generous beginnings. But, may I presume to
ask you, by what adventure you should come to the knowledge of that which all
the World was ignorant of? A young man that had sometime been a servant of
yours, replied Artaban, and who since, as I have been informed, was killed in
one of the battles which you fought in Nubia, having for me a very particular
friendship revealed that secret to me, and there needed no more then the
illustrious characters I observed in your person to satisfy me that he told
nothing but what was truth. If those characters are able to work that effect,
said Caesario to him, I must needs imagine you to be the issue of the gods; and
though you are not pleased to derive any recommendation from a birth, which you
do not stand in need of to make you equal to the greatest Princes that are, yet
can I hardly be persuaded but that yours is of the most eminent. Artaban would
have made some modest return to this discourse, when the Princess Cleopatra,
whom Candace had sent for, comes into the room, the Princesses having not
thought it fit that she should receive Caesario's visit in her own, because of
her women, to whom there was no necessity he should discover himself.

The room, upon her coming into it, seemed to be filled with a new light, which
dazzled both Artaban and Caesario, and though one of them had seen her that very
day before, and that the other were her brother, and had spent his childhood
with her, and that, to say better, they were both of them prepossed by a
passion, which till then had not permitted them to imagine anything in point of
beauty comparable to Elisa and Candace, yet could they not smother the
astonishment which they conceived upon this sight, nor but acknowledge, though
with some confusion and repugnance, that all the beauties upon earth ought to
give place to that of Cleopatra. Caesario, transported with the affection which
the blood and merit of that Princess, inspired him with, could upon the first
sight hardly forbear making discoveries thereof; but upon second thoughts he
resolved to proceed after another manner, and to make that adventure contribute
somewhat to the diversion and entertainment of those that were present.

Cleopatra was hardly gotten into Elisas chamber, ere word was brought her that
Prince Alexander, her brother, was come into her own, and that having left the
King of Armenia, he thought not fit to depart the lodgings till he had wished
her a good night. Cleopatra was going to send the Messenger back again with
word that he should stay a while for her, when Queen Candace, who knew it was
Caesario's design, to discover himself, as well to Alexander, as Cleopatra,
entreated her to send for him, assuring her that there was none had the least
mistrust of him, and that Cleomedon was too much engaged by the assistance he
had received from him to deny him the opportunity to see him.

Cleopatra, having done what the Queen desired of her, saluted Caesario and
Artaban, with that ceremony which she conceived she ought to have observed
toward two such eminent men, and of whom she had her imagination full, by the
account had been given her of their gallant actions. She looked on them one
after another, with a certain astonishment, as not knowing any one in the World
whom she could think comparable to them, but only her own Coriolanus.

They were going to fall into some discourse, when there comes into the room
Alexander, upon the first sight, somewhat at a loss to find that company
there. Artaban and he had spent the evening together with Ariobarzanes, and it
was not long since they had parted, after they had conceived, (considering the
small abode they had made together) abundance of esteem and respects one for
another. But the sight of Cleomedon, was it, that he was most astonished at;
and, having not seen him since he had left Tidaeus's house in pursuit of
Cleopatra, he wondered much to find him in the same room with her. Yet was not
his astonishment so great, but that he expressed the satisfaction he conceived
it to meet with him; and after he had in the first place addressed his
civilities to Elisa and Candace, with much submission, he came to him, to let
him know how glad he was to find him in a condition so different from that
wherein he had left him, and craved his pardon, that, by reason of the urgent
necessity that had called him away to the relief of Artemisa and Cleopatra, he
had been forced to leave him, and to recommend to other persons the recovery of
a health which he infinitely esteemed.

Caesario thought this discourse so obliging, that he could not but make an
answer suitable thereto; whereupon looking on Alexander and Cleopatra with an
affection, which blood, obligation, and merit, had easily raised in him; No, it
is I, said he to the Prince, that ought, with much more reason, make my excuses
to you; and had you afforded me the time to put my self into such a posture as
that I might have followed you, the indisposition I might have been in by
reason of my wounds, should not have excused me, for not bearing of you
company, to relieve the Princess Cleopatra. That was an affair, which I was
more particularly obliged to look after, then you could have imagined; and
besides the engagement I stand in to the assistance I received from you, when
my life was in greatest danger, the remembrance of a person whom you have
sometimes esteemed, and of whom I have undertaken to bring some tidings to the
Princess Cleopatra, and your self, makes me concern my self in your interests,
with a very violent affection.

It is very true, replied the Princess Cleopatra, that the Queen has put me
into very much hope that I should receive by you some account of a person I
have sometime dearly loved, and it is out of that confidence, that she has
been pleased I should come to her Chamber at such a time that it may be some
inconvenience to her. I must needs confess that this promise of the Queens
has raised in me a curiosity which is more then ordinary to me, as well out of
the imagination I have, that, from a great person, such as you are, I shall
understand only great things, as out of a self-flattery I have been guilty of
that it might be of a Beloved brother, a person of excellent endowments, whom
an amorous despair, forced from Rome about seven or eight years since, that you
have something to say to me. We are to learn whether he be dead or living, and
it is not impossible, but that in his travels he might have met with you, and
been of your acquaintance.

I am very much troubled, Madam, replied the Prince, that it is not in my power
to give you the satisfaction you expected from me; for as to that brother you
enquire of, I have not certainly any account to give you of him, nay, which is
more, I never know him. But I may happily have what to acquaint you with
concerning some other persons of your house, who were no less dear to you, and
whom I have heretofore familiarly seen and conversed with in this City, before
the ruin of Anthony, and Queen Cleopatra. And that you may be the sooner
convinced, observe well my face, and see, whether, notwithstanding the change
which ten years may have wrought in it, you can find some features like to
those of that person, who was brought up with you, and whom you dearly loved. I
have been heretofore flattered by some with that resemblance, and know not
whether you have preserved the idaea of it so well, as to find there is yet
something left of it.

These words raised no small astonishment in the children of Anthony, and
Alexander coming up close to Caesario, was was purposely got near the torches,
Cleopatra and he looked on him a long time with much earnestness. It was about
the tenth year of their age that Caesario departed from Alexandria, and about
the fourteenth of his own, so that, by reason, as well of the infancy of
Alexander and Cleopatra, as the alteration, which (more remarkably then in any
other degree of man's age) happens in the countenances of men between that of
fourteen, and that of four and twenty, which was then the age of Caesario, it
might well happen, that the Princess, and the Prince her Brother, could not,
upon the first sight, discover the face of their Brother, in that of Cleomedon,
whose speech, proportionably to the rest, was altered, by growing bigger since
their separation. Yet was not all this alteration so great, nor their memories
so weak, but that after what Cleomedon had said, and the particular observation
which he had obliged them to make, they would have known the Prince, had they
not been carried away with the general opinion, that he had departed this
World. Nay, after they had well considered his face, they, in a manner, knew
him; but that discovery had no further effect on them, then to force out
certain sighs; whereupon the Princess Cleopatra, assuming the discourse after
she had looked on Alexander, to see whether he was of the same opinion: I must
needs acknowledge, said she to the Prince, that I find abundance of resemblance
between your countenance, and that of a Prince, with whom my Brother and my
self were brought up, and one that might have been much about your age, if the
gods had thought fit to have continued him in life and health, and to preserve
him against those powers, by which he received an untimely death.

I am also very much satisfied, added Prince Alexander, that if out Brother
Caesario were living, he might be very like the brave Cleomedon. And thought
that from the age of fourteen years, which was that of Caesario, when he dyed,
to that of Cleomedon, which seems to be greater by nine or ten years, there
happens more alteration, both in the bulk and countenances of men, then in all
man's life besides, and that it might be withal granted, that time may in some
measure have worn away, out of our memories, those Idaeas, which cannot be
expected otherwise then imperfect in the minds of children, such as we were
then; yet can I not call them to my remembrance, without a certain conceit that
I find them again in Cleomedon, and imagining to my self, that, if Caesario
were now alive, there would be a very great resemblance between them. Nay, I am
much inclined to believe, from the great hopes that were conceived of him, and
the glorious blood that ran in his veins, derived from illustrious ancestors,
that this resemblance might have reached to the greatness of courage, and that
he would have thought it a dishonor to come too far short of that stupendous
man, whom it was his glory to imitate in all things.

The modesty of the son of Caesario, made him blush at these obliging
expressions of the son of Anthony; whereupon, looking on him with a smiling
countenance, It is but just indeed I should suffer any thing, said he to him,
from a Prince to whom I am obliged for an assistance that preserved my life.
But since you and the Princess Cleopatra are pleased to flatter me so
pleasantly, with so advantageous a resemblance, I must in requittal assure you,
that it is yet greater in all things then you imagine it, and that I am not
only, as to my inclinations, comparable to Prince Caesario, but also that my
fortunes have been absolutely suitable to his. I should put you to some
astonishment, should I tell you, that, as he, so I was dearly loved by
Alexander and Cleopatra in their younger years: That I was loved as tenderly as
he was by the Queen your mother, and that her indulgence toward me was as
great as what she expressed toward him; that as he, so I also left you to seek
out my safty in Ethiopia, after the downfall of your house; That I was born as
well as he of an unfortunate Queen, and am son to the greatest that ever was of
mankind; and, in a word, I am so extremely like him, that I might even in
Alexandria presume to own the name of Caesario, if by such an acknowledegment I
should not put you to the hazard of loosing him once again.

These words of Caesario raised such a distraction in the souls of Cleopatra
and Alexander, that neither of them being able to comprehend any thing of it,
could do no more then look on him that had spoke them, with a silence which
argued their astonishment, much more then any verbal expressions could have
done. The son of Caesar had suffered them to coninue a while in that posture,
when he sees Eteocles coming, in whom he had caused Clitia to call from the
Terrace, where he had left him. Whereupon, reassuming the discourse with an
action which held the Brother and the Sister equally in suspense; That you may
be absolutely satisfied, said he to them, that my fortunes have been in all
things conformable to those of Caesario, behold the man that brought me up, and
who presumes that he has been of the same name, was of the same Birth, same
Country, and same countenance as the Governor of Caesario. If you look on him
with more earnestness then you have done for some days past, when he was with
you in that very house where I received your assistances, you will easily
observe that resemblance, and he is a person of such an age, as wherein ten
years cannot make so great an alteration, as they may in that wherein one
passes from infancy to a more advanced age.

While he thus spoke, the eyes of Cleopatra and Alexander were fixed on the
countenance of Eteocles, and it being very certain that it had undergone much
less alteration then that of the Prince, they immediately found therein all
the features of that of Eteocles, with whom they had sometime been so familiar,
as having been one that had carried them thousands of times in his arms, and
had been brought up in the house, as son to the faithful Apollodorus, the dear
favorite and confident of Queen Cleopatra. Whereupon both the Prince and
Princess cried out, that it was really Eteocles, and immediately turning to
the Prince with an astonishment much greater then what they were in before, by
reason of this last circumstance: Cleomedon, said the Princess to him, for
heavens sake, keep us not any longer in the disturbance which you have raised
in us, and let us know that Caesario is living, to tell us so much himself. It Is
only his death that abates that confidence which we raise from all the other
circumstances, and if Caesario were living, I should be immediately satiefied
that you were he.

Should he discover himself to be Caesario, in any place that is under the
jurisdiction of Augustus, replied the Princess, there is so little expectation
of any Fortune thereby, that it were hard to suspect such a confession subject
to any imposture: but it is withal a thing so glorious to be born of Caesar
and Cleopatra, tha^ without an excess of baseness, a man cannot disclaim it,
and there is so much satisfaction to Caesario, to meet with a Brother and
Sister, great and amiable as Alexander and Cleopatra, that no consideration in
the World can oblige him any longer to conceal from them, a brother they have
dearly loved, and one that has continued toward them the tender affection he
ever had for them.

With these words, he came near Cleopatra, with his arms stretched out, and
that fair Princess soon satisfied those that were present, that she knew him
to be her brother, by receiving from him, and returning him those caresses
which never had passed between her and any, but those that were of that near
relation. Alexander also received and returned the like, by the command of
Elisa and Candace, whose presence obliged them to a greater reservednesse. But,
notwithstanding all that blood might persuade the children of Anthony to, and
the joy it must needs be to them to meet with a lost brother, in the person of
so great a man as Cleomedon, yet was not all enough to dispell their
astonishment, and this adventure seemed to be so great, and so full of miracle,
that to be fully satisfied, it was but necessary they had the assistance of
Candace, Elisa and Eteocles, who very freely acquainted them with the secret of
Caesario's life: for as to the great actions he had done under the name of
Cleomedon, they were in some measure known to Alexander, and absolutely to
Cleopatra, by the relation which Candace had made thereof to her.

When they were fully convinced of these truths, their joy discovered it self
by all the effects it could produce in moderate and affectionate dispositions,
as theirs were; and it had not happily been greater, though they had seen this
very brother returning in that pomp and magnificence, which he might have hoped
from his former fortune, when, even in his infancy he had been proclaimed King
of Kings, by the commands of Anthony, and Queen Cleopatra. Then was it that
Cleopatra, notwithstanding all her reservednesse and modesty, could not forbear
entertaining so great a brother with embraces sit to be envyed by all men; and
that Alexander expressed the agitations of his heart, by the most earnest
demonstrations, that a sincere affection could produce in a noble soul as his
was.

It was also during these pleasant intervalls that the fair daughter of
Anthony, giving thousands of kisses to the Queen of Ethiopia, gave her infinite
thanks, with tears, which the excess of joy and affection drew from her fair
eyes, for his preservation, and for the present she made her of so great a
brother, and thence took occasion to celebrate her generosity, and the
extraordinary goodness she had expressed, in bestowing her precious affections
on a Prince whom fortune had not left any thing she could have taken away from
him, and raising him up to a Crown whereby he might recover himself into the
dignity of his Fathers. What, said Alexander, is that invincible Cleomedon, who
gained so many battles in Nubia, and whose reputation, notwithstanding the
interposition of so many Provinces, eclipsed the glory of our most famous
Captains, no other then the same Casario, on whom, in our infancy, we had
bestowed so many tears, and in that dead Brother, do we recover again a
Brother, whose glory may darken that of his Father?

When the first demonstrations of this happy reacquaintance were over, they all
joined together in a more moderate conversation; so that Artaban taking
occasion to express his concernments in the joy of Cleopatras children, no
less then if he had been of the same Blood, made them consider with a certain
admiration, that character of greatness, which the gods had put upon him. They
thought it no ill course to moderate the discoveries of their joy, out of a
fear the cause might come to be known; which if it should happen, it could not
be without bringing Caesario's life into in minent danger. And considering
withal that the night was in a manner quite spent, and that such long sittings
up might, in time, raise some suspicions, the desire which the Princess
Cleopatra and Alexander had to enjoy yet for some longer time, that happy
re-acquaintance, and that which Caesario had to understand the fortunes of
Cleopatra, whereof he had but an imperfect account, were not so great, but
that, though not without some violence done to themselves, they appointed it to
be the entertainment of the night following, those that were concerned in the
safty of Caesario, thinking it not so safe to trust it to the day.

They parted therefore, though with much unwillingnesse, and Alexander and
Cleopatra were extremely troubled that the son of Caesar should take his
retreat, in a lone house not much frequented, which Eteocles had provided for
him in one of the most solitary skirts of Alexandria, as conceiving there would
be less notice taken of his going in and out there, then in that of Tidaeus
without the City, where he had spent some days before.

But before they parted, Artaban and Caesario confirmed the reconciliation they
had made, by words full of the greatest expressions of a real friendship, and
reciprocally promised one another all the assistances, which according to the
posture of their fortunes, they should be able to afford one the other. The two
Princesses they served, were extremely satisfied thereat, and when they were
alone, the Daughter of Anthony passing to her own lodgings, they went into
their beds, to crown the extraordinary accidents of that day with a pleasant
rest.

The end of the Third Book.
HYMEN'S PRAELUDIA, Or, Loves Masterpiece.
PART X. LIB. IV.
ARGUMENT.
VOlusius coming in wounded into Alexandria, is entertained by Cornelius, and,
upon his entreaty, brought to Marcellus and Cleopatra, whom he entertains with
his own History. The noble deportment of Coriolanus toward him after his
defeat, his honorable dismission from Mauritania, and his ungrateful
resentments of such extraordinary civilities. He is overtaken by Theocles, a
discontented Noble man of that country, and with him enters into a conspiracy
to do Coriolanus all the mischief they can. Volusius, not daring to come to
Rome, as having exasperated the Emperor against him, by the loss of
Mauritania, makes friends to Tiberius, who, (being an enemy to Coriolanus, and
Servant to Cleopatra) undertakes his readmission into Caesar's favor, with
promises of readvancement. Theocles is drawn into personate an Embassiy from
Coriolanus, to Augustus, for the obtaining of Julia, so to make a difference
between Coriolanus, and his friend Mircellus and Cleopatra; which proves in
some measure effectual. Volusius, slighted by Tiberius; falls into contempt,
and sickness, which having recovered, he leaves Rone, and, some time after,
meets with Tiberius at Brundusium, whom he puts in mind of his former promises,
and goes along with him and Theocles for Alexandria. They, conceiving some
jealousy of him, plot his death, which is attempted by Theocles and his men,
but he is rescuel by an unknown person, who having killed Theocles, and
delivered him, proves to be Coriolanus, whom he acquaints with what he had done
against him. Marcellus and Cleopatra are extremely glad and troubled at the
relation of Volusius and Marcellus extremely grieved for the injuries he had
done Coriolanus, goes to seek him out, resolved not to return till he had found
him.

THe fortunate meeting with a Brother, such as Caesario was, had raised in the
Princess Cleopatra such a satisfaction, as, since the imaginary infidelity of
Coriolanus, she had not been capable of, whence it came, that she passed over
that night with more delight, and took more rest than the precedent. Now, as
the best part of the night was spent ere she lay down, so was it accordingly
very late ere she awoke in the morning, insomuch that those who knew not any
thing of her long sitting up, would not have a little wondered she had slept so
long, had they not imagined that the trouble and hardship she had gone through,
for some days before, might require a more than ordinary repose.

It Is a common observation, that, it is ordinarily at our waking in the
morning, we make the most natural reflections on the conditions and accidents
of our lives. She accordingly had no sooner opened her eyes but the Idaea of
her late adventures presented it self to her remembrance, and as she was of an
excellent good nature, so that sympathy which her meeting with Caesario had
raised in her mind, was the first effect that was produced there. Her thoughts
were, with no small satisfaction, taken up with that fortunate rencounter, as
looking on it as a thing extremely advantageous, to find a Brother, whom she
thought dead so many years before, changed into a Brother so great, so
amiable, and so considerable, as well for his virtue, as the greatness of his
actions. She reflected on the noble accidents of his life, the strange Fortunes
he had run through, and fixed her consideration on the present posture of his
affairs, which in all probability was such as promised him a safe harbor
against all those tempests whereby he had been tossed up and down for the space
of so many years, and seemed to be an establishment, such as gave him not any
occasion to envy that of his Ancestors. The consideration of her Brothers
concernments had that effect on her which it might be expected they might have
on the best sister in the world, and struck her thoughts with so much delight,
that for some time she could hardly make any reflection on her own: but at last
she could not keep them off any longer, but they must needs do a violence to
her memory, and the Idaea of her unfortunate Coriolanus presented it self to
her in the same posture as she had seen him the day before. Her first
imaginations represented him to her in that terrible posture, wherein he had
forced out of the vessel those that fought for her deliverance: but there
being not so much satisfaction in this, as in the reflection on the other
accidents that succeeded it, she soon quitted it, and imagined to her self a
sight of the Prince in that mortal surprise wherein he was upon his first
knowledge of her, and fell into a swound upon the ^eck; as also in that
undaunted posture wherein hef had desied the King of Armenia, and was engaged
himself alone against so great a number of Enemies; and lastly, she thought on
him in that sub^is^^ve posture, whereinto he had put himself ^ef^re her an^
Marcellus, to clear his innocence. 'Twas upon this last reflec^ion that ^he
fastened her thoughts more than any, as desiring not so much any assurances of
the valor of Coriolanus (whereof she had sufficient experience) as of his
innocence, whereof she had been so long in doubt, and whereof either the
certainty or uncertainty occasioned all the happiness or unhappiness of her
life. She had so well engraven in her memory all the words which ^ell from that
poor Prince, that, notwithstanding the disturbance she had been in, while he
had spoken them, there had not so much as one slipped out of her remembrance.
And finding them all very pregnant and full of conviction, it was a certain
imaginary pleasure to her to be in a manner persuaded, that it must needs be
innocence and truth that put them into the mouth of that Prince, to convince
her of that error, wherein she had passed over so many sad days. Alas! with
what satisfaction, and with what tenderness did she repeat them over and over,
and how did she make it her ^ain business to heighten those circumstances that
any way made for him? All indeed were very strong for him, from the time that
she first opened her eyes to truth, and the discoveries of that pretended
infidelity; and she could not but acknowledge her credulity, in having too
easily been persuaded to a belief of things, that were contrary to reason and
common sense. She could not find the least favorable imagination to persuade
her that Coriolanus should fall in love with Julia, being then absent from her,
when, even in her presence, and during the time that she expressed a great
aflection toward him, he had ever slighted her, and that the Prince should so
much court the friendship of Augustus, she thought yet more improbable, and
that he should proffer himself to be tributary to him, when he had by open
hostility recovered a powerful Monarchy; when he had refused the same
friendship, at a time when he was not master of any thing but his sword, and
could not expect any thing but by his means and assistance. She called to mind
in what terms he had vindicated himself with so much apparent reason, and
found so much eviction in all, that there needed not much, absolutely to
justify him in her apprehension.

During these pleasant intervalls she opened her soul to give admission to
that joy, which, of a long time before, could never have the least
entertainment there, but it was at the same time very much abated, by a cold
reflection on the miserable condition, to which that Prince was reduced, as
having lost the Kingdoms he had conquered, and being deprived of all support
and relief in the world, through her inflexibility toward him. These
reflections, equally divided between grief and joy, drew many a sigh out of her
breast, and this was the entertainment of her thoughts, all the time she lay in
bed after her awaking, and while she was dressing.

She was just upon the point of going out of her chamber, to go into that of
Candace's (whom she now looked on as a Sister to whom she was engaged for the
life and fortunes of her Brother, and who, as well as the Princess of the
Parthians, had lain longer in bed then she had) when Prince Marcellus comes to
give her a good morrow. Cleopatra entertained him as a beloved Brother, but
what confidence soever she might have of his prudence and generositie, yet did
she not think it fit to trust him with the secret of another, though she had
with her own, and so made not the least mention to him of Caesario, though she
had not the least jealousy, that any consideration whatsoever might induce
Marcellus to do him any ill office. This Prince, after the first civilities
were past, being sat down by her; Sister, said he to her, I am to acknowledge
to you, that during all this night, the Idaea of the disconsolate Coriolanus
never forsook me, and that I have spent the greatest part of it in finding out,
as well in his actions, as his words, an innocence whereof I am more then half
convinced. This Prince, who was sometime so dear to me, and whom it is not yet
in my power to hate, comes and engages my heart with the same arms, whereby he
had so well mastered it before, and methinks I find again, not only in his
countenance, but also in his words and all his actions, that greatness of
soul which we ever observed in him, and withal that confidence which never
appears where there is a certainty of crime; and of all this I am so much
assured, that I cannot, without an extraordinary violence, be persuaded, he
has been really unfaithful toward us.

Cleopatra, in whom whatever were favorable to Coriolanus had already taken
place, could not hear this discourse of Marcellus, without being moved to so
much compassion, that a beautiful dew began to break forth at her eyes.
Whereupon, having continued silent for some minutes, in such a suspense as
easily discovered the disturbance she then struggled with; Brother, said she to
Marcellus, the acknowledgement you have made to me, is such, that I conceive my
self obliged to let you know, that my reflections have been absolutely
conf^rmable to yours, and that I find so many de^nstrations of innooence in all
the procedure of Coriolanus, and so much reason to fortify what he would have
persuaded us to, that the opinion we had conceived of his infidelity, has now
with much ado any probability with us. Coriolanus, added the prince, cannot be
justifiable in your apprehensions, but he must be so in mine too, and as we
charge him both but with one and the same crime, wherein we are both equally
concerned, so can he not be innocent as to what relates to you, but he must be
so too as to what relates to Marcellus. Ah Sister! if this (...) out to be
true, what remorse shall I not feel within me while I live, for being so ready
to hate a Prince so worthy the affection I had for him, and one, that,
notwithstanding the cruel discoveries of my hatred, seems to have continued
his inclinations toward me? What reparations am I not obliged to make him, if
he be innocent, or rather, what blood can wash off the crime I have committed
against him?

Cleopatra was going to make the Prince some reply, and their conversation
might happily have been more earnest and tender, as being engaged upon a subject
wherein b^th thought themselves much concerned, when Cornelius comes into the
room, and drew near them with a countenance, intimating that be had something
of news to acquaint them with. After the ordinary salutations passed between
them, I am very glad, said he to them, that I have found you together, for I
have charged my self with a request that is made to you both, which is, that
you will be pleased to grant an hour of private audience to a certain man I
have lest in the outer-room, and one whom the sad condition be is in might well
have dispensed from coming hither, if the things he has to acquaint you with,
were not of very great consequence.

This discourse of Cornelius made Cleopatra look on Marcellus, as it were to
ask his advice, and Marcellus, by another look seeming to leave it to her what
answer to make, she told him, that he might bring in what persons he thought
fit, and that the Prince her Brother and her self should very read^^y afford
him the audience he desired of them. Upon these words Cornelius went out of the
room, leaving the Prince and Princess in some impatience, and withal some
disturbance at the adventure; and not long after, he returns leading a man
whom he helped to walk, and one that seemed brought very low through sickness,
or by reason of some wounds.

Cleopatra and Marcellus knew not, upon the first appearance, who it might be;
but afterward, having looked a little more earnestly on his countenance, they,
without much difficulty, knew him to be Volusius, who had sometime been Praetor
of Mauritania, before it had been recovered from him by Coriolanus, the son of
Juba, whom that Prince had generously sent back, after he had overcome and
taken him Prisoner, and who, upon his coming to Rome, had ruined the fortunes
of that Prince, as to Cleopatra, by acquainting that Princess, Marcellus and
all Caesar's Court, with the pretended infidelity of Coriolanus, and the design
he had for Julia, and presenting to the Emperor a person of eminent quality,
very considerable in Mauritania; who gave out that he was come thence express
upon that negotiation. Marcellus was a little astonished at the sight of the
man, whose mischievous reports had brought him to very sad extremities: but the
Princess was put into such a disturbance upon the return of a man, who had
been the destruction of all her happiness and enjoyments, that, having not the
power to rise off the chair whereon she sat, though she should in civility
have done it, out of a consideration of the qualities of Cornelius and
Volusius, she sat still, as it were in a strange suspense and disorder.

Volusius took very much notice of her deportment, and the perplexity she was
in; but being well acquainted with the occasion of it, he was not at all
astonished thereat, and thereupon taking a chair, by the order of Marcellus,
who was sensible of his indisp^^ition, and during the trouble Cleopatra was in,
thought fit to do the civilities of her chamber, he made a sign to Cornelius,
whereupon, knowing his meaning, he went out of the chamber, to give them the
greater privacy, and withal thought it not amiss to divert the visits of
Elisa, Candace, and other persons that otherwise might have disturbed their
conversation. Volusius, being in such a condition, as required some rest,
continued ^ilent for some time, though Cleopatra and Marcellus seemed to be in
expectation of what he had to say to them. But at last having prepared himself
to speak, and seeing about the Princess only Camilla, who had obliged the
rest of the women to withdraw into the closet, and who might be admitted to
hear the discourse he was to make; Madam, said he, speaking to the Princess, I
should speak to you and to Prince Marcellus in another posture, then that I am
now in, and coming to make an acknowledgment of the crime I have committed
against you, I should cast my self at your feet, to to beg a pardon from you
which I neither hope nor deserve to obtain, were I not disabled by two wounds I
have about me, such as have hardly left me the strength to come to you, and
which will prove, for ought I know, a certain revenge for the injury I have
done you. Only my remorse, and the promise I have made to do it, force me to
discover to you things that ought rather to be concealed from all the World;
and though I must introduce into my discourse, persons, whose power is much to
be feared; yet shall I not forbear, since that within a few days, I shall
either be in a condition not to fear it, or, if the gods think good to continue
my life, I am more willing to see it exposed to some danger by my confession,
then be perpetually persecuted with remorses which make it much more
insupportable to me. Be pleased to afford me your attention to the discourse I
have to make to you, and it is my earnest prayer to the gods, that it may in
some measure repair the mischief I have done, and restore that happiness and
fortune which I have unfortunately disturbed. To this effect was the discourse
of Volusius, and perceiving, that, instead of making any answer, Cleopatra and
Marcellus hearkened very attentively to him, he re^ssumed the discourse in
these terms.

THE HISTORY OF VOLUSIUS.
WE are satisfied by experience, that both the remembrance of good turns, and
that of injuries, have a different operation, according to the different
character of those souls where they are entertained, and that, as there are
some minds wherein offenses make but a very light impression, much lighter then
that which good offices might make in them, so, on the other side, there are
some, in whom the greatest benefits cannot smother the least injuries, or, to
say better, who, not much sensible of obligations laid upon them, have
nevertheless eternal resentments for injuries. That I have been worsted and
disgraced by Prince Coriolanus, I must attribute it merely to his valor and my
own unhappiness, and that I was nobly treated by him, it was the effect of his
pure generosity: and yet the impression of the injury filled my soul in such
manner, that it leaves not any place for that which the generous entertainment
should have had there, and opposed the resentment it should have conceived
thereof, that so I might be the more absolutely hurried into contrary
resolutions.

I doubt not, Madam, but you have heard, how that, having been several times
defeated in the persons of my Lieutenants, I was at last overthrown in my own,
and, through the valor of the son of Juba, having lost a battle, which in all
probability I should have gained, I was by the same valor cast to the ground,
and taken prisoner. You have also further understood, how that after some days
imprisonment, such as was sweetened by all the kind entertainments which I could
have received from a brother, or the best friend I had, the same Prince, whom,
by all manner of injuries I had obliged to treat me with cruelty, forgetting
all, out of an admirable generosity, and comforting me in my disgrace with the
most obliging words could fall from man, gave me my liberty without any
condition, loaded me with presents of great value, and furnished me with ships
and men to bring me to Rome, or any other place where I would my self. It might
in all probability be expected, I should have been sensible of this treatment,
as much as I had been of my misfortune; but having, through my disgrace,
besides the fame I might have acquired in my former years, lost the government
of two great Kingdoms, (a very high fortune for a private man) and the hope of
finding again among the Romans an establishment comparable to that I had lost,
the grief I conceived thereat, had so cankered my soul, that I was not able to
entertain those expressions of the goodness and clemency of the King of
Mauritania, with the least discovery of gratitude. However I pretended to be
extremely sensible thereof, as I ought to have been, of a favor I should not
have expected, and I received, with my liberty, the other effects of the
magnificence of that Prince, with those demonstrations which might well
persuade him that I was not insensible thereof. I went a-board with a soul half
burst with grief, and I carried with me into the sea an affliction grown so
violent, through the change of my fortune, that there was nothing able to
afford me any satisfaction. And yet I am apt to imagine that my grief would
have been satisfied in being only a torment to my self, without producing any
effects prejudicial to the fortune of my Conqueror, if something of chance,
and the solicitations of other persons had not furnished me witl^ the
occasions to do it, and that at a time wherein my sufferings were not
aggravated by any design of revenge.

The third day after my departure I was overtaken by a Vessel, that came after
me from Mauritania, and he that was Commander of it being come aboard mine, to
give me a visit, was known to me, to be a person of very great quality among
the Moors, named Theocles, whose Father had had under King Juba, the father of
Coriolanus, the greatest places in the Kingdom, and the governments of greatest
importance. But it happening upon the death of King Juba, that Theocles
revolted to the Romans, and sided very particularly with me, as having not the
least remainder of love for the royal blood, and that further he had expected
till the issue of the war, without declaring himself for his Prince, as the
greatest part of the Moors had done, young Juba, coming to the Throne, had
accordingly slighted him, though he had not any way disobliged him, nor taken
away any thing he was possessed of, and in the distribution of the Governments
and charges which he bestowed on those whom he thought most worthy, and had
expressed most affection toward him, he conceived himself not at all engaged
to prefer Theocles, whose pretensions were great, suitably to his quality, and
the high rank his Father had lived in before him.

Theocles, thinking himself hardly dealt with, and taking it very impatiently
that his sovereign should prefer other persons before him, such indeed as were
inferior to him in birth, but much more considerable than he, by their
services and their fidelity to their Prince, would needs leave Mauritania, and
lurk among the enemies of his King, and bring over with him among the Romans
his resentments and desires of revenge. So that having taken ship the same day
that I departed, the third after, he comes up to me, and coming out of his own
vessel into mine, he gave me a visit, making the greatest expressions he could
of the affection he had for me. Now this man being he that of all the Moors I
had held the greatest correspondence with, and his discontents being not
unknown to me, I was extremely glad to meet with him, and having understood
from him, that the resentments he had against his Prince were the occasion why
he left the Country to follow me, and to go along with me to Rome, this
consonancy of thoughts made me the more confident of him, and raised in me a
certain affection for him, and engaged me to promise him all the friend-and
assistance, amongst the Romans, that I could possibly help him to.

Thus resolved we continued our voyage together, and in the same vessel;
though we made his to follow us, and that very day Theocles acquainted me at
large with all I knew not that related to his affairs, and disburthened
himself of all that lay upon his heart; but with so much aggravation and
animosity against his Prince, that, though I were really his enemy, and well
pleased to meet with a man that loved him not, yet could I not in my Soul
approve the procedure of his Subject, and that one that had no ground given him
of discontent. However, I dissembled the apprehension I had of it, as thinking
it not amiss to encourage him in that exasperation, against a man I loved not:
and so mutually communicating our resentments one to another we kept on our
voyage, and, having very good weather, came at last to Brundusium, where we
landed. Here it was that I thought fit to make some abode, to make some
discovery what posture my affairs were in at Rome; and knowing well enough
that the loss of Mauritania happened partly through my fault, as having not
only by tyranny and mis-government, but also by the liberty I had given the
Soldiers to do them thousands of injuries, given the Moors occasion to rise
in the behalf of their Prince, and partly by reason of my neglect of preventing
that revolt in the first eruptions thereof, and, by that negligence, given
Coriolanus leisure to fortify, and put himself into a condition to reascend
the Throne, which he would have found very much difficulty to do, had I used
all the diligence I ought to smother that evil at its first breaking forth;
the conscience I had of this truth troubled me extremly. By which put into a
fear of the displeasure of Augustus, whom a loss so considerable as that of
two great kingdoms might very much exasperate against me, and not doubting but
that there were a many persons about him both very ready, and very likely to do
me any ill office, I thought it no prudence to go to Rome, till I had before
been assured what I was either to hope or fear upon my coming thither.

To that end I sent one of my men with Letters to those Friends whom I had at
Rome, wherein I entreated them to send me word truly and without flattery how
I stood in the favor of Caesar, and what entertainment I was to expect from
him, after the misfortune that had happened to me. The messenger got to Rome,
and some few days after returned thence with some of my Friends; who came to
see me at Brundusium, and these did not only heighten the distrust I was in
before, but withal told me positively, that there was no coming for me to
Rome, where I was extremely ill spoken of, till I had in some measure
vindicated my self; that the Emperor was prepossessed with an opinion very
disadvantageous to me; and that if I did not employ certain powerful persons
that had much interest in him; there was not only very small hopes I should
ever recover my former fortune, but they thought there was no great safety for
my person, and accordingly advised me, till the tempest were laid by some
persons I should employ to do it, to continue at Brundusium, where I had the
advantage of the sea if I should be put to any extremity.

This discourse, made to me by persons whom I could not any way suspect, and
whose Friendship I had great experiences of, put me to more than ordinary
distractions, insomuch that I resolved not to leave Brundusium; or look at
Rome, till the Emperors indignation were appeased. To effect that, I writ a
large Manifesto, in order to my justification, wherein I laid down all the
reasons that made any way for me, and endeavored to elude all accusations that
were put up against me, and having delivered it to my Friends they returned to
Rome to set on work all those persons who we were in hopes might prevail any
thing with Caesar, and those such as had most power and authority with him. I
durst not expect any thing from either Octavia or Marcellus, as being not
ignorant that there had ever been a very great friendship between that Prince
and the King of Mauritania. I had as little confidence of the mediation of
Agrippa, whom I had ever observed an enemy to those Governors, who by their
miscarriages had exasperated the nations they were to govern against them, and
so thought it my only course to address my self to Livia and Tiberius who had
ever been en^mies to Coriolanus, and whose interest with Caesar was not
inferior to that of any other whatsoever.

I thereupon imagined, that my Friends, by the means of Tiberius, might set
the Empress on work who could do any thing with Augustus, and it was
altogether that way that I advised them to use their utmost endeavors. They
departed in order to the design, and I remained still at Brundusium very much
disquieted endeavoring what I could to shake off my affliction by the company
of Theocles, who would needs stay there with me, and expressed a very great
engagement in my concernments. Some days were passed since the departure of my
Friends, when one of them returns to me, to assure me, that he had not only
managed the business with much success with Tiberius, and had dis^osed him to
engage the Empress, his Mother, to endeavor my (...) but also, that that
Prince, after he had with much ^atisfaction embraced the occasion to do me any
favor, had sent, him to dispatch me from Brundusium, and to bring me privately
to ab^use that belonged to a Friend of Tiberius's, in the midway between Rome
and Brundusium, where I should meet with Tiberus, and where he would discourse
with me more freely concerning the state of my affairs, and express the
earnesinesse he had to serve me therein. I received this news with no small
satisfaction, and though I could not but attribute this earnesnesse of Tibertus
to his envy against Coriolanus, much more then to any Friendship he might have
for me, yet ^^st I needs embrace this occasion of recovering my self very
seriously, never examining out of what motive it might p^oceed.

^eft Brundusium in the night, accompanied by Theocles, who would by all means
go along with me, giving out that I went another way quite different from that
which I took, nay to make it the more credible sent some part of my equipage
that way, least it might have been discovered, that I had any interview with
(...), who had indeed sent me instructions to that effect by ^y Friends. I came
to Clunium, which is the name of that (...), seated in a solitary place, such
as a man might wish for a secret interview. Tiberius came thither the same day,
having (...) a (...) person with him, and lest Rome in the night, and (...)
with so much secrecy that there was not the least notice (...) of his
departure. The condition I am in, and the desire (...) not to abuse your
attention, obliges me to contract my (...) and therefore, to be as brief as I
can, I shall only (...), that Tiberius, whose subtle wit bends it self to any
(...) would be at, entertained me with extraordinary caresses, (...) kindly
received Theocles, atter I had acquainted him (...) quality, and the
mis-understandings there were between (...) and Coriolanus. Whereupon, falling
into discourse about my misfortune, he comforted me with the kindest
expressions that could be, by instancing in many great persons to whom Fortune
had been as malicious, and telling me, that I ought to have this satisfaction
in my disgrace; that what discourses soever my enemies might raise against me,
yet was there not any durst charge me with any want of courage or valor. Then
did he express the infinite desire he had to serve me, and, to make my peace
with Caesar, and restore me to my former favor and fortunes, to employ not
only the little interest that he had himself, but also that of the Empress
his M^ther, which, whatever people night talk, was far greater than either
Agrippa's or Marcellus's, telling ^e withal, that he was confident, upon the
account of that Friendship which she had for him, that the would not only do
what lay in her power, but that she would effectually prevail with Augustus to
condescend to what she desired.

I made answer to this discourse of Tiberius; and his noble prof^ers with all
the discoveries of a kind resentment I could possibly give him, and after I had
told him several times, that I had not deserved these demonstrations of his
goodness, I made a pretestation to him, that I would sacrifice the life and
fortunes, which I should be obliged to him for, to serve him, and that no
consideration in the world should make me quit his interests. After I had
several times repeated this discourse to him; I do not doubt, said be to me,
but that in a noble soul, the sense and acknowledgement you are to have of the
service I am to do you, will produce the effect you promise me it shall;
besides that there is some reason our interests should be joined together,
since we have one common enemy that has ruined our fortunes, and has crossed
all the happiness and enjoyments of my life by all the obstacles he could lay
in my way. I conceive you are not now to learn, Volusius, what misfortunes
have happened to me through the means of this African, who, not content to have
disputed Cleopatra with me, upon the score of his own good Fortune rather then
any other advantages, has basely attempted my life, and almost reduced it to
the last gasp by a wound he gave me at un^wares. It is my business to be
revenged on him, and I cannot do it better than by joining with you who are
obliged to be his enemy; but, with my revenge, I seek the possession of
Cleopatra, without whom life it self is unsupportable to me. I hope with your
assistance, easily to compass both, and if you will do but what lies in you
power to do, you may assure your self that there shall not be any thing which I
shall not both undertake and execute to give you satisfaction.

This discourse of Tiberius, instead of putting ^e to any trouble, raised in me
no small joy, by reason of the conformity which I found there was between his
sentiments and mine at that time, and accordingly, returning him an answer,
with a certain alacrity, whence he inferred how ready I was to do him any
service that he should put me upon, My lord, said I to him, I shall think my
happiness much greater than I could ever hope it would have been, if to the
advantage which I expect from your protection, you add that which I ought to
expect from any employment wherein I may serve you. For, though the Prince of
Mauritania were not mine enemy, yet so much am I engaged to your generosity,
that there is not any thing which I shall not undertake to facilitate, both
your revenge, and the possession you so much desire of the Princess Cleopatra.
Be pleased therefore only to let me know how you will dispose of me in order
thereto, and think me unworthy the assistances you promise me in my misfortune,
if I endeavor not to merit them, by the earnestness I shall express in
promoting your interests.

Now, now is the time, replied Tiberius, and, as my affairs stand at the
present, there is nothing can contribute more to my happiness, then to
persuade the Princess Cleopatra, that Coriolanus has forgotten her, now that
he is gotten into the throne, that matters of policy have stifled his
affections, and that, to secure his acquists, he seeks other alliances than
those of a ruined house, such as is that of Anthony, but these things must she
be persuaded to by authentic proofs, and such circumstances as shall not leave
her any thing to doubt of. As for the means how it may be done, I come to
advise with you as a person whose testimony in this case she cannot mistrust
provided she hear nothing of our interview; and I find there is yet much less
difficulty to effect it then I had at first imagined, by the account you have
given me of the discontents of Theocles, his quality among the Moors, and the
desire he has to be revenged of Coriolanus. I can assure you, said I,
interrupting him, that Theocles shall do any thing that we shall put him upon,
and that he is so strangely exasperated against Coriolanus, that there is not
any consideration shall stave him from doing that Prince all the ill offices
that lie in his power.

Tiberius recollected himself a little upon this discourse; but at last
rejoyning to it; If what you say be true, replied he, I see an infallible
expedient to do that effectually which I had projected. The design, at first
sight, you will think requires much confidence, especially as to Theocles,
whose assistance and agency in it is absolutely necessary; but when you look
farther into it, you will find there is nothing of danger, and yet the action,
as to us shall be so meritorious, that all our house and relations shall
perish, before you be exposed to any inconvenience, for having ^one me this
service.

Know then, that Coriolanus has been sometime heretofore, very dearly loved by
the Princess Julia, insomuch that it was the persuasion of many people that
Coriolanus was not insensible of that affection. Marcellus himself grew not a
little jealous of it, so for that it had almost made a breach in that
Friendship which has ever been so prejudicial to my affairs. When we have
once facilitated your access to Caesar, and brought you into the same
reputation with him as you were in before, you may represent to him, that
Coriolanus has not set you at Liberty, and treated you with such extraordinary
endearements, but upon condition that you should do him all the favor you
could with Caesar, in relation to the design he had to demand the Princess
Julia, and present Theocles (whose rank and quality might well suit with an
Embassy, to him as a person commissionated to that purpose. To that effect,
Thoocles in an equipage conformable to that employment, wherein there shall be
nothing awanting as to matter of expense, may address himself to Caesar, with
credentiall Letters under the great seal of Mauritania, which it will not be
hard to find at Rome, among those of diverse other Kingdoms, that have been
brought thither after their reduction into Roman Provinces, and propose unto
him in the name of his King; That if, with the Peace which he should be
desirous to have with him, he would also bestow on him the Princess Julia in
marriage, he would submit to him, as all other tributary Kings did, and would
take his Kingdoms as dependent of the Empire. This proposition must be made
withal the solemnities requisite to so great an Embasse: and in regard we are
at a great distance from Mauritania, so that there is not any commerce between
us and that Country, and that as things stand at the present there is little
hope we shall have any, it is impossible we should be discovered. And though it
may be thought somewhat unlikely there should be so sudden a change, and so
beyond all expectation, in the affections of Coriolanus, yet there happens
daily things no less strange, which, notwithstanding their distance from
probability, are yet neighbors to truth, and there will be those whom it will
not be hard to persuade, that his (...) both made him forget his Love, and that
in the condition he is now arrived to, desirous of a rest he never yet met
with, he could no way better effect it than by making a peace, and courting the
alliance of Caesar, of whom he might expect the former upon the conditions
proposed, though he took him not into the latter. And we shall find it a matter
of so much the less difficulty to make Cleopatra sensible of his insidelity,
for that I have it from very good hands, that, since his departure, she has
not heard any thing from him, and that she has already conceived no small
jealousy of what we would persuade her to. By this intrigue, I shall not only
turn that love which Cleopatra has for Coriolanus, into a higher degree of
aversion for him, which is the only rub that lies in my way to happiness: but
I shall also dissolve that Friendship which Marcellus has for him, by making
him believe that Coriolanus, addressing himself to Julia, whom he loves, and
looks on as designed for him, is no less perfidious to him then to Cleopatra.
And by that means, I shall deprive our enemy of a friend, whose interest with
Caesar has hitherto been the greatest obstacle I have had to struggle with;
and instead of those supplies which he secretly receives from him, and the good
offices he daily does him with Cleopatra, he will have the greatest
indignation, and most irreconcilable hatred that can be against him. So that,
to arrive to the felicity I aim at, and to make my revenge the more complete, I
shall not be opposed either by the love of Cleopatra, or the friendship of
Marcellus, which will be both destroyed by an artifice that cannot be
discovered in many years.

I hearkened with a great deal of patience to this discourse of Tiberius, and
found in it many things not easily digestible, as such as must needs bring us
into many inconveniences; but I overcame the greatest part of the difficulties
I should meet with, by the great desire I had to purchase his friendship and
protection. Whereupon, assuming the discourse when he had given over speaking;
My Lord, said I to him, though your design seems to carry in it much danger,
and requires no small daringnesse in those that are employed in it, yet all
must be hazarded to serve you, and we shall not be discouraged by any
considerations whatsoever from effecting your satisfaction. But I shall take
the boldness to propose it to you, whether it were not fitter to demand some
other person rather then Julia, so not to draw on you the displeasure and
interest of Marcellus, whom we must visibly engage against us, by demanding of
Caesar a person whom he is in love with, and that is designed for him. By this
demand, replies Tiberius, we break the friendship that is between Marcellus and
Coriolanus, which it concerns me most of any thing to do; But we do not thereby
any way injure Murcellus, and you do not run the hazard of encurring his
displeasure, (though you may well be assured that your party shall not be
weaker then his, after the union of our interests, and considering what you may
expect from our house) for, as it is not hard for you to imagine, there is
little likelihood that this personated Embassy of Theocles from Coriolanus,
should any way prejudice Marcellus, or that Caesar should prefer the alliance
of that African, his enemy, before that of his Nephew, whom he loves no less
then if he were his own son, and designs to be his successor. No doubt, all he
will do, will be to laugh at the extravagance of Juba's demand, but though the
effect it will have upon him, will signify nothing, in Cleopatra and
Marcellus, it will do all that I expect it should: so that I am in some hopes
to enjoy Cleopatra long before the truth be discovered. And if ever it should
come to light, I promise you, that through the power of the Empress, who will
be absolutely for us, we shall reconcile all, it being to be presumed that the
Emperor will not be much displeased at an artifice, which has no design in
it, but that of assuring me of the enjoyment of Cleopatra, and is not
prejudicial to any but his greatest enemy.

To these, Tiberius added a many other reasons to encourage me to engage in his
design, so that there needed not much to inflame the disposition I was already
in to serve him, into a resolution to do any thing he would have me, and by his
own natural eloquence, and the inclination I had of my self to be persuaded, he
took off all the difficulties I could make to my self when he first made his
proposition to me.

After I had reiterated the protestation I had made to him, we called Theocles,
to whom Tiberius repeated all those things he had said to me, and without any
difficulty brought him to a resolution to undertake any thing, which he the
sooner was persuaded to, as well by reason he was naturally mischievous, and
revengefull, but withal very indiscreet and inconsiderate, as by the hopes he
was put into by Tiberius, of great fortunes and assistances among the Romans.
At last he resolved to endeavor any thing should be proposed to him, and made
no difficulty to personate the Ambassador of his King, and to take all his
instructions from Tiberius. We stayed together all that day, and the best part
of the night, to take all the order requisite in our design, and when we had
settled all things, and thought our selves fully instructed, Tiberius departed
from that house to go and endeavor my peace with Augustus, having desired us
not to stir thence till we had heard from him; but with as much secrecy as
might be, least there should be any suspicion of our interview. We accordingly
staid there as he had ordered us, while in the mean time Tiberius, having made
a full discovery of his design to the Empress, and represented to her, that
all the happiness of his life consisted in the hope he was in to enjoy the
Princess Cleopatra. Livia, who who had a very great tenderness for him, after
some few difficulties were satisfied, engaged in our design upon you, and
promised him all the assistances she could afford him to effect it. He thought
it not fit to make the least discovery of it to his brother Drusus, as knowing
him to be a Prince of a candid and open disposition, and consequently would not
have approved those artifices, so that all the persons acquainted with, and
concerned in our plot, were only Livia, Tiberius, Theocles, and my self. For
as to the persons we were to make use of, we easily persuaded them to what we
would have had all others to believe. Livia solicited my readmission into the
Emperors favor with so much success, that she soon dispelled those clouds of
reproaches and accusations which my adversaries had raised against me; and yet
so ordered all things, that Tiberius was not any way suspected to have any hand
in it, pretending, that what she did, was upon the importunity of some of my
friends, who were persons of very considerable quality in Rome. So that as soon
as Tiberius understood that I might have access to the Emperor, he sent to me
by a trusty person, even the very same that had accompanied him in the
interview, that I should come to Rome, and without any fear prepare my self to
put in execution what we had undertaken. We departed thence, Theocles and
myself, and got thither much about the same time as our retinue and equipage,
which we had sent for to Brundusium; but before I presented my self to Caesar,
we had another secret conference with Tiberius, and having understood from him
how strong our party was, by reason of the Empresses being of it, he further
acquainted us, how that he had in his hands the great seal of the Kings of
Mauritania, and the order he had taken for the liveries of the Ambassadors,
and for all other things that were requisite to our design. The next day, I
waited on the Emperor, who, suitably to the hopes that Tiberius had put me
into, entertained me with abundance of courtesy, imputing my unhappiness to
fortune only, and seeming to be satisfied with the reasons which had been
given him in order to my justification. And though he discovered nothing so
much in his discourse, as the violent aversion he had for Coriolanus, yet did I
still give him the greatest commendations imaginable, celebrating his valor,
and acknowledging the extraordinary civilities I had received from him, in such
terms as easily discovered that I was far from being his enemy. For thus had
Tiberius and my self ordered the business to be carried, it being resolved
that Theocles and I should speak well of him every where, so to take off all
suspicion men might conceive of any evil design that we might have against him.
The first time I was brought to the Emperor, I gave him only an account of my
own affairs, as also of those of Mauritania; but in the second audience I had,
which was when all things were ready and ripe for Tiberius's design, I had some
discourse with him about Theocles's commission, and demanded audience for him.

But here Madam, and you my Lord, continued Volusius looking on Cleopatra and
Marcellus, I am now come to that part of my relation, which, being to give you
an account of things you are but too well acquainted with already, will
accordingly be troublesome to you. For you know as well as my self how we were
entertained by Caesar, as also with what contempt he looked on the Embassy of
Theocles, and in a word, all the particular circumstances of our negotiation.
You also best know what influence our design had upon your selves, in some
measure answering the expectations of Tiberius; yet so, Madam, as that, to his
misfortune and my unhappiness, he made not that advantage thereof he was in
hope it might have produced, since that though you ceased to love a Prince whom
you conceived inconstant to you, yet did it not occasion the least change in
you as to what thoughts you had of Tiberius; nay, on the contrary, the aversion
you had had for him, seemed to be far greater then it was before, upon this
accident.

At this passage Volusius made a little stop, as if he had gone through the
first part of his relation; and Marcellus perceiving, that the Princess, having
summoned all the forces of her resolution and constancy, to keep up her spirits
at this reiteration of her cruel afflictions, was, nevertheless, forced to
give passage to certain tears, doing himself a little violence to avoid
expressing the same weakness; It is but too true, said he to volusius, that
your barbarous combination produced effects but too deplorable, and that if the
crafty Tiberius made no advantage of it, through the justice of the gods, who
have ever a punishment for such treacherous designs; he drew nevertheless
this satisfaction from it, that he filled our souls with a mortal grief, and
that it did me more mischief then you expected it should, in regard of that
strange influence it had on the disposition of the unconstant Julia, which it
might have had on that of the generous Cleopatra. It Is she, Volusius, whom you
have not yet justified, though you have assured us of the fidelity of
Coriolanus, and though Tiberius and your self have overreached us to the
prejudice of that poor Prince, who, you tell us, had not really so much as
thought of Julia; yet has that unmindfull Princess appeared such upon that
occasion as she had done upon diverse others before, and the feigned
expressions of the love and pretended design of Coriolanus, drew from her very
earnest ones of the refluxe of that affection which she had sometimes had for
him. Ah, my Lord, says Volusius, reassuming the discourse, entertain not any
such thought, and assure your self, if you dare credit a man acknowledging
himself guilty of so great a cheat, that Julia has shown her self upon this
emergency, no less constant then Coriolanus, and that she entertained with
abundance of contempt what we would have persuaded her to, as to the affection
of Coriolanus. The gods are my witnesses that I have not in the least
contributed to the occasions of your jealousy, but was told by Toeocles, after
he had received orders from the Emperor to leave Rome within some few days,
that Tiberius, who had made him his absolute creature, and had promised him a
secure refuge, though he saw him but very privately, and that in public he
pretended not the least acquaintance with him, would needs, out of an
extraordinary suggestion of malice, have him give you some occasion of
jealousy, the more to inflame the resentment you might have against the King
of Mauritania. This was to be done by the means of one of Julia's women, who,
being corrupted by presents, was to give him admittance two nights
successively, into the lodgings of that Princess, so to put you into an
imagination that he had secret conferences with her. But he has protested to
me, with many imprecations, that he never saw the Princess, and that he had
not spoken to any but that only woman, whose name is Acilia, if I mistake it
not, with whom he had passed over several hours in the Princesses Wardrobe, and
whence he never came but at such hours, as there must needs be notice taken of
him.

Cleopatra having wiped her eyes, looking on Marcellus with a very serious
countenance; I know not, brother, said he to him, whether you dare trust me as
far as you would Volusius. But if the late dissatisfactions which you have
expressed your self to be in as to Julia, proceed merely from those secret
interviews which she has been suspected to have had with Theocles, they are
very unjust, and besides that the Princess coming to understand it after your
departure, has sufficiently cleared her self in my presence, as also by the
acknowledgments of Marcella and Antonia your Sisters, who spent those two
nights with her, I can, for my own part, assure you, that during the
representation of all this pretended infidelity of Coriolanus, she expressed
nothing but a very great displeasure and indignation against him. I should have
acquainted you with as much, had you not been gone from Rome without taking any
leave from us, and must further let you know, that, according to my
apprehensions of it, you cannot any longer justly charge with lightness a
Princess, who, in your absence, though she had reason to take it very much
amiss, has ever expressed a firm and faithful affection toward you.

At these words of Cleopatra, Marcellus, who reposed no small confidence in any
thing came from her, seemed to put on another countenance, and looking on her
with an action, wherein she might discover the change they had wrought in his
heart: Ah Sister, said he to her, how much does the assurance of a person such
as you are, fortify that of Volusius, and what sufferings and afflictions had
I avoided, if I had been acquainted with what I now hear from your mouth, and
which I cannot but give credit to, by reason of the authority which you have
over my belief, with as much confidence, as if I had it from the relation of
Volusius. For my relation, replied Volusius, you have no more reason to suspect
it as to this particular, then you do as to the other truths which you have
received from me: and if you will but afford me your patient audience to the
end, you shall find, that, considering the interest which makes me speak, it is
impossible I should entertain you with any thing but what is true. The
Princess and the Prince having, upon those words, expressed their readiness to
give him the attention he desired, he thereupon reassumed his discourse,
whereof Marcellus hearkened to the sequel with much more serenity of thoughts
then he had done to the former part.

When Tiberius first engaged me, with Theocles, to be instrumental in the cheat
he had resolved to put upon you, my readiness to (...) drawn in, proceeded not
so much from the dissatisfactory re^^ntments I had conceived against the King
of Mauritania, as the necessity I then stood in of his assistance, to be
readmitted into favor with Augustus, and the expectation he put me into, of
the protection of Livia, his own, and that of all his friends, for the recovery
of my Fortunes which I had lost, with the government of Mauritania. He put me
into some hopes, that, by the recommendations of Livia, I might be entrusted
with other employments, not inferior, or less considerable, then that, nay
happily with the same again, if the Emperor brought that Kingdom under
subjection.

He performed these promises he had made to me in some part, and, as I have
told you, he made my peace with Caesar, before he got me to do any thing in the
design, wherein I was to serve him. But, when he perceived that the artifices
he had made use of, answered not his expectation, and that though they had
proved so fortunate as to satisfy you both of the infidelity of Coriolanus,
and consequently destroy or divert the affection you have had for that Prince,
yet would not that diversion prove any way advantageous to himself, nor raise
in the Princesses heart those inclinations which were lost as to Coriolanus, he
immediately grew cold, not minding my concernments at all, or the great hopes
he had, not long before, put me into. I was sensible of that change of his
disposition by many circumstances, and took notice of it with no small
dissatisfaction. However, at the first I took all things with abundance of
patience, as not thinking it very strange, that the distraction Tiberius was
in, which was such as made him less careful of himself, might well make him
reflect but little on his friends, and that, considering with himself what
little possibility he was in to gain your affections, Madam, at a time where he
was in a manner confident not to meet with any difficulty, as having no Rival
to balance his ad^resses to you, his humor seemed to be somewhat changed from
what it was, and discovered some remission of that earnestness which he had
before expressed to do me all the favors I could expect from him. But when I
saw that his coldness increased more and more, and that the Empress did me
not any good office with Caesar, I began to be troubled, and to give
entertainment to that remorse which ever attends guilt, when a man reaps not
the benefit which had encouraged him to the commission of a crime.

However Tiberius thought fit, out of policy, to flatter me still with some
slight remainders of hope, and held it no prudence to make an absolute breach
with me, out of a fear that the discontent I might conceave thereat, should
engage me to discover the truth of what had past. Upon these considerations was
it, that he, being prodigal enough of his kindness and caresses, when there is
any thing of concernment to himself, entertained me with civilities, such as,
in appearance, were the most obliging in the World. But I perceived that in
effect, he thought but little of me, and minded me no more then as a complice,
in the base trick he had put upon you, and one that he could gladly have wished
out of the World, so to be rid of a fear of being sometime or other betrayed.
His carriage was not the same toward Theocles, and knowing him to be a person
of mischievous inclinations, and one fit to be put upon any enterprise, he had
held him in a very fair correspondence to be made use of in a design he had,
and to be employed, as I have told you, to persuade Prince Marcellus that the
Princess Julia treated privately with him upon the negotiation, he was sent
thither upon, from Coriolanus. When the Emperor had sent him an order to leave
Rome, he sent him to a house of his own, within a days journey from the City,
and there kept him secretly, till the time of his departure, which was within
few days after. You know how he left Rome, in a manner alone, without any
attendance, and went his ways, so obscurely, that it was not known what design
he was gone upon, nor what way he had taken at his departure. He gave out, some
days before, (as I also heard my self) that his intention was to find out
Coriolanus in the midst of his dominions, and to be revenged by his death, for
the wound he had received from him, since the Emperor had denied him all other
ways of satisfaction, and thought not fit to trust him with the command of
that naval army which he had sent against him, under the conduct of Domitius
Aenobarbus, and I was confirmed in the confidence I had that he was gone away
upon that resolution, when I understood that he had taken Theocles along with
him, who was well acquainted with the Country, and might accordingly very much
facilitate the execution of his enterprise.

The departure of Tiberius put me into no small astonishment, as being a thing
that came not within my expectation, for I found my self, by that means, much
to my discomfort, deprived of that little assistance which I was as yet in
hopes to receive from him. That which put me into a greater necessity of it,
was, that, by the concernment I had in Theocles's negotiation, I had drawn upon
me your displeasure, my Lord, with that of all your house, and that of
Anthony's, which are the most powerful of the Empire, and against which I could
not hold out long, but by the interest of Livia. Not my Lord, that I ever
received any discourtesie either from your self or the Princess, or that you
did me any ill office that ever I could hear of; but it was not hard for me to
take notice that you were all but little pleased with me, and I was not
ignorant that you were in a capacity to do me a displeasure whenever you had a
mind to do it. For your part, my Lord, you soon put me out of that fear, by
your departure some few days after Tiberius, which was almost after the same
manner, and, as most people were of opinion, with the same design; but the
Princess Octavia staid behind, as also the Princesses your Sisters, and
diverse other persons of great credit with Caesar, who were all very much
dissatisfied with me. Livia and Drusus were indeed able to counterballance that
credit of theirs; but Livia countenanced me no longer, when Tiberius once
forbore his solicitations on my behalf, and Drusus, a person of a more then
orninary virtue, finding happily little inclination to any such thing in me, and
having at my first coming conceived a prejudice against me, expressed not the
least friendship toward me.

Thus was I, in a manner, discarded by all, little esteemed by Caesar, who had
not entertained me but upon the mediation of Livia, and abused by those that
saw me fallen, through my own negligence, from that noble employment, and
favor of fortune wherein I seemed to have been so well settled. My ancient
friends, nay my own relations began to slight me, and not to endure my company
without some violence; so that instead of continuing in the hopes I had
conceived to be restored to my former condition, I found my self in a
probability to wast away my life, not only in the condition of a private man,
but withal, in that of one of the most unfortunate of mankind. The reflection I
made on this alteration filling me with melancholy and despair, began to
reinflam^ those regrets in my soul, which I might well conceive for the abuse I
had done to so great a Prince, and made me look on my present fortune as a
visible effect of Heavens justice, whom I had incensed against me, by an
unreasonable desire of revenge, and the carrying on of a base and unworthy
project. I made all the friends I could for several employments, which were all
denied me, though they were such as I might well pretend to; and I found at
last that there was no living for me in Rome, but with the contempt even of
those persons who had sometime adored my greatness. This consideration stuck
such arrows in my heart, that, at last, being no longer able to hold out
against my affliction, I fell into a long and dangerous sickness, which I was
struggling with when Caesar left Rome to go that vast progress he intended
through the Empire, and from which he is not yet returned.

I shall not trouble you with the particulars of my sickness which kept me
fastened to my bed in a manner ever since that time, and during which there
have happened very strange and great revolutions, especially in Mauritania,
which, upon the absence of its valiant Prince, whose presence might have
maintained it against all the World, is fallen under the power of Augustus.
Hearing this news at Rome, grief seized me afresh, as reflecting on the promise
I had been fed with by Tiberius, to be restored to that government, if ever it
were reduced. At last, after a long and dangerous sickness, I made a shift to
leave my bed, much about two months since; and conceiving, that change of air,
might contribute somewhat to the recovery of my health, I departed from Rome,
and went to spend some time in certain houses I had still left me in Italy.
When I was grown to some competency of strength, I would needs take a further
progress, and after I had spent some time in visits among my friends, (if I
may say that in my misfortune I had preserved any) I went to a certain house
belonging to Mummius, distant from Brundusium about an hours riding. There had
I staid two days, when, by some that belonged to Mummius, who went almost
every day to Brundusium, I understood that Tiberius was newly arrived there. I
was a little surprised at that news, nay, so far, that I was in suspense what
course I should take, as not knowing whether it were then a fit time for me to
wait on him, to put him in mind of the promises he had made to me, and to
acquaint him with the sad condition I was reduced to, or sit down in the
persuasion I was of that he had absolutely forgotten me. But at last, some
little scantlings of hope, that he would in some measure perform what he had
promised, encouraged me into a resolution to see him. Accordingly, I went to
Brundusium, and presented my self to him, at a time, that in all probability he
was not much taken up with any thoughts of me. It Is generally known what a great
master he is in the art of dissimulation, yet could he not so disguise himself
at my first appearance, but that I could easily perceive he was somewhat at a
loss to see me there, and that I was not the welcomest person in the World to
him. But after a while recovering himself and his artifices, he entertained me
with abundance of seeming obligation, even to the making of a many excuses to
me that he had left Rome without giving me notice of it, and swearing that that
injury, (if it were any) was no more then he had done to all the World besides,
those only excepted whom he had taken along with him, and that he had
concealed his design from all, that so it might not be in the power of any to
prevent it.

Finding him in such a posture of civility toward me, I thought it a fit time,
in plain terms, to acquaint him with the miserable condition I was then in as
to point of fortunes, and did silently reproach him with a certain baseness,
in that he had forsaken me, after I had upon his account engaged my self in an
action, which had raised me enemies among the most powerful persons about the
Emperor. I also took occasion to put him in mind of the promise he had made me
for my recovery of the government I had lost, if it came within the power of
Augustus.

Tiberius dissembled the vexation which this discourse must needs put him into,
and affirming that he still persisted in the same resolutions, he told me that
the reason of his stay at Brundusium, was, to learn by those that he had sent
to Rome, in what place he might meet with the Emperor, who, as he had
understood, was so far gone in his progress as into Asia, out of a design he
had to visit the Provinces of the Empire. That as soon as his people were
returned, his resolutions were to put to sea again to overtake Augustus's
Court, where he promised me to endeavor all that lay in his power with him and
the Empress to resettle me in Mauritania, in the same condition I had been in
before.

Seeing him in this humor, though I durst not be over-confident of his
promises, I entreated him that he would be pleased to take me along with him in
that voyage, and give me leave once more to try, whether I could recover my
self out of the wretchedness of my fortunes by his protection and assistance.
Tiberius entertained that request with a countenance wherein it was visible
that he thought me a trouble to him. Yet durst he not deny it me, out of a
fear, as I have had good ground to imagine since, least such a disappointment
might oblige me to discover the combination and the design we had to
circumvent you; which it seems he was very loath should take any air, though
he had not made that advantage thereof which he expected. He therefore was
content I should accompany him, insomuch that having some three days after
received from Rome the account he expected, and the accommodations he had sent
for, in order to his retinue, I went aboard, by his permission, taking along
with me but a small number of servants that had attended me to Mummius's house;
and so we directed our course toward Alexandria, whither he had understood
that the Emperor was to come within a short time, and to make some stay there.

I had forgot to tell you, that I found Theocles with him, in very good terms,
as to matter of trust and intimacy, which I was at first very glad to see: but
not many days after I perceived that the good inclinations which that
Barbarian had sometimes expressed to me, were in a manner lost, and that I was
much more an eyesore to him then to Tiberius. I understood from both, that
they had been in Mauritania, to endeavor, by any means they could, the death
of Coriolanus, it being, it seems, the judgment of Tiberius, that he might
compass it any way whatsoever, without any prejudice to his honor, after the
treatment he had received from that Prince in Rome, and the course he had taken
to be satisfied of him by other ways, if the Emperor had thought it good to
bestow on him the command of the naval army which he had desired. They further
told me, what trouble it was to him that he had not met with him in his own
Kingdom, and that after they had sought him up and down in others the next to
it, he thought it best to take his way back again to Rome, out of an
imagination he might be secretly returned thither to see the Princess
Cleopatra.

Though I was no friend to Coriolanus, as I think I had sufficiently made it
appear, yet this persidiousnesse of Theocles could I not but conceive a horror
at, perceiving it to be such as egged him on to compass the death of his
Prince; and this troubled me so much, that I could not forbear discovering it
to him, so far as that I could not any way approve of it. It was no doubt an
imprudent action in me, and the Barbarian conceiving himself disobliged, not
only forbore all further correspondence with me, but raising suspicions in
Tiberius of me, he had ever and anon private conferences with him, which I must
not be admitted to, and accordingly gave me occasion to mist rust there was
something a-brewing against me.

Thus we kept on our voyage which proved prosperous enough, till that yesterday
we landed upon this river, at a little City which is distant about three hours
riding from this place, Tiberius, it seems, being unwilling to come up into the
port of Alexandria, out of a design, as he told me, to come into the City
undiscovered. In order to that resolution he told us that we must be divided
into several parties the better to avoid going in such a number and equipage
as might occasion any discovery, and thereupon ordered me to go before with
Theocles, seven or eight of his men and only two of mine, assigning Theocles a
place in Alexandria, where it was appointed we should all meet at night. We got
on horseback (I all this time not having the least mistrust of the wicked
design they had upon me) and rode a good way discoursing of indifferent
things, the distance which was between Theocles and my self being not come to
that height as to hinder us from discoursing together. At last being come into
a wood, which from the river side reaches some stadia into the neighborhood.
Theocles began to rip up the former discourse we had together some days
before, concerning the service he would have done Tiberius in the design he
had undertaken to be the death of his own Prince; and told me that he very much
wondered, I should disapprove his proceeding, being guilty of an action that was
no better, and had my self engaged him in a cheat; which he had never been
drawn into but by my advice and encouragement. Though I might well imagine that
Theocles fell not upon that discourse but with a design to quarrel with me,
and find a pretense without infamy to Tiberius to put in execution what they
had basely plotted against me, yet did I not reflect on it soon enough, and
accordingly could not forbear telling him, that there was a vast difference
between an action wherein we had been jointly engaged (though truly
considered, it were very horrid) and the design to murder a King in his own
Kingdom; and that there was the greater difference between those two actions,
in regard of us by as much as that I was a Roman and he a Subject to
Coriolanus.

This barbarous wretch, who, what answer soever I had made, would have found
the pretense he was so desirous of, pretended to be transported with
indignation at this discourse, drew his sword and ran at me with all the fury
he could. I should have been but little frightened at his action, if all those
that were about him had not done the like, and with the same labor satisfied
me, that Tiberius had not bestowed that guard on me but to give me my death. Of
my two men, the more affectionate lost his life at my feet, and the other
frightened saved himself by getting into the wood, so that I was forced to stand
alone to the fury of those cruel Butchers, who came about me and gave me two
great wounds. No question, but a thousand more had followed to dispatch me out
of this world, and I saw it was to no purpose to think to lengthen my life by a
fruitless resistance, when it pleased Fortune to direct into that part of the
wood a man armed all over, mounted on a very stately horse, and attended only
by an Esquire. He made a little halt to see what was done, and perceiving he
had but little time to loose, if he would save my life, after he had
anticipated his coming by a great outcry, and in few words reproached my
enemies with baseness and cowardice, he ran in among them with a fury to which
nothing can be compared, and having with the shock of his horse overthrown the
first he met within his way, he set upon the rest with such eagerness as
showed he was nothing daunted at their number. And whereas they, as well as I,
had no other arms then their swords, he spent very few blows which either
carried not death along with them, or made those they met with incapable of
fighting any longer. Theocles astonished at this miraculous relief, and
perceiving there was no possibility to make an end of me till he had rid his
hands of the stranger, endeavored with the assistance of his men to dispatch
him. But as it happened, he ran upon his own death, for that valiant man having
received upon his buckler the blows he made at him, ran him clear through the
body, and so he fell down to the ground, and immediately breathed his last. His
companions were but weak in their endeavors to revenge his fall, and finding
themselves reduced to one half of the number they made at first, and that by
the same hand, they were quite discouraged, and placed all their safety in
their flight.

Finding my self rescued in that manner from those unmercifull enemies, though
very much weakened by the two wounds I had received, I made a shift to come
nearer my deliverer, to give him thanks for his assistance; and it happened at
the same time, that he, feeling himself very much heated, either by reason of
the sultrinesse of the season, or the action he had been in, put up the visour
of his headpiece to take in a little fresh air. I had hardly fastened my eyes
on his countenance, but I was in a manner dazzled by the luster and goodlinesse
of it, and thereupon looking on him a little more earnestly, I knew him to be
that person to whom I had been so cruelly perfidious, the valiant King of
Mauritania.

It is impossible I should represent to you the confusion I was in, to find my
self obliged for my life to a Prince whom I had so basely abused and to see
that Fortune should, after so strange a manner, direct to my relief that person
from whom of all men I had least reason to expect it. An adventure so
unexpected could not but tie up my tongue for a while, and stifling the
discourse I intended to disburthen my self of by way of acknowledgement for the
deliverance I was obliged to him for, I stood still before him, mute,
immovable, and in the posture of a man whom an excess of remorse had deprived
of all confidence. And it was certainly from my remorse, rather than any fear,
that this proceeded, as not knowing whether the injury I had done him, was come
to his knowledge; but if I was astonished to see him, he was no less to meet
with me, and calling me to mind by the idaea's he had still in his memory of my
countenance, and happily confirmed by the astonishment he observed in it, he
stood still, as well as my self, like one lost in suspense and irresolution. At
last, the passion which produced that effect in him being much different from
that which had put me into so great disturbance, he soon recovered himself, and
having viewed me with much more earnestness then before; Are not you Volusius,
said he to me, sometime Praetor of Mauritania? I am the very same Volusius,
answered I, who am now obliged to you twice for this wretched life, as having
once received it with my liberty, as a demonstration of your generosity, and
being obliged to you for it now by the relief I have received from you when I
was reduced to the last extremities. You might have added to that, said he,
that you are the same Volusius, who being once before obliged to me for your
life and liberty, have nevertheless made me the most unfortunate man in the
world, and by your perfidiousnesse have occasioned me the loss of Cleopatra's
affection, my kingdom, and whatever should make me in love with life.

This reproach put me to such a loss, that I knew not what answer to make,
whereupon casting my eyes on the ground with an action expressing the
greatness of my confusion, I satisfied the Prince that I had nothing by way of
justification to say for my self. When he had looked on me for some time in
that posture; What injury soever I may have received from you, said he to me,
it troubles me not that I have been the occasion that you are yet alive; but
certainly, it is a visible example of Heavens justice to reserve the revenge of
your perfidiousnesse to me who have been most injured thereby. Reassume the
confidence which the conscience of your crime seems to have deprived you of,
and since I have seen you defend your life with courage enough against diverse
men at the same time, muster up all you have, to defend it against one man
alone, and give me not occasion, by a feeble resistance, to blush at the defeat
of a man of inconsiderable valor. Do not imagine I shall make use of the
advantage I have over you, though the nature of the injury you have done me
might very well induce me to wave that consideration; and since you have
nothing about you but abare sword I shall put off this armor, which if I
should keep on the engagement were unequal.

With those words he cast off his headpiece and buckler, and was going to
unhaspe his ^^irats, when, looking upon him with the countenance of a man
already overcome, and one that prepared himself for voluntary death rather than
a combat; My Lord, said I to him, If these little remainders of life I have
left me can any way satisfy your revenge, you may without any difficulty take
them, nay, though I were much more in love with it then I am, you should never
see me defend it against you. This is the second time that I receive it as your
gift, and therefore present you with nothing but what was yours before, when I
sacrifice it to your just indignation. Besides, should I endeavor the
resistance which you would have me undertake, I have not strength to bear me
out in it, for I sind my spirits issuing out with my blood with such have, that
it is with some difficulty they afford me the leisure to speak to you; so that
if you consider the condition I am in, you may well take a just revenge on me,
but not expect an honorable victory. Nor indeed is it from the ruin of a
person infamous for his per^idiousnesse and treachery that you ought to look
for any glory, yet will it not be any reproach to you though you should without
any further combat run your weapon through a breast which I lay open to you,
and which I offer up to your indignation, without any other regret than that of
an incapacity to make you better satisfaction for the mischief I have been the
occasion of, and the injury I have done you.

While I spoke to this effect, the Prince perceiving my countenance grew more
and more pale, and that my blood ran down along my clothes in abundance, not
only moderated his just displeasure, which would have armed him against me;
but, passing from one extreme into another, with a generosity that is never met
with in any soul but such as his, he seemed in a manner ashamed that he had
been so ready to engage a man to sight that was weakened by so great wounds.
Whereupon, compassion forcing its passage into that truely-royall heart through
those barricadoes of passion which for some time had opposed it, he became
tenderly moved at the wretchedness of my condition, and, looking on me with a
countenance, wherein there was not any thing legible of his indignation;
Volusius, said he to me, the injury you have done me is of such a high nature
that it is not to be satisfied with light reparations; but it is not in the
condition you are now in that I can take my revenge on you; nor indeed have I
been wont to fight my enemies when they are weakened by wounds, and incapable
to defend themselves. Far be it from me to take those remainders of life you
offer me, since that though you had many whole lives to give me, 'twere but
little by way of reparation for those cruel losses which I have suffered by
your means.

With these words, out of a miraculous excess of goodness, he commanded his
Esquire to help me off my horse, to view my wounds and to stop my blood if it
were possible, The officious Esquire immediately obeyed his Masters command,
and having torn off some linen from his own clothes, he endeavored to stop
the blood which ran in abundance from my two wounds, and to recover me so far
as that I might get hither, being not distant many stadia's.

After I had received that assistance from him, turning to the Prince, who
looked on the good office he did me without any expression of animosity; My
Lord, said I to him, this miraculous goodness of yours does in a manner
multiply my crime, and forces a grief upon me, such as I shall not be able to
shake off, but by the hope I am in, that the arrows which the sense of my
crime thrusts into my breast, will ere long put a period to my life. The gods
know, that the remorse I conceived at that was the only thing which brought it
into the hazard wherein you have seen it, and if I had not discovered to
Tiberius a regret for the offense I had committed, and to Theocles a horror
for his perfidiousnesse, they had never plotted that against me, which no doubt
but this latter was to put in execution, as well to satisfy his own
resentments as to obey the orders of Tiberius.

The Prince interrupting me at these words, entreated me to clear up a little
more that which I had said somewhat obscurely. Whereupon, to satisfy him, I
made him abrief relation of what I have repeated to you more at large, as well
in relation to the instructions we had observed in the carrying on of the
treacherous design we had upon you, as to what had happened to me from my
departure out of Mauritania to our then meeting. And when I was come to the
close of my discourse, I showed him the perfidious Theocles, who had newly
breathed his last, and whom the gods by the miracles of their providence had
reserved to die by his hands, as a reward of the horrid attempt he had made
upon his life.

The son of Juba was very much astonished at the wickedness of Theocles, whose
face he knew, though somewhat dis^igured by death At last when I perceived that
he was, what by my words, what by my deportment, persuaded I was truly sorry
forwhat I had done, I am very unfortunate, said I to him, that I can do so
little in order to any reparation for my crime, and all the favor I desire of
the gods, is, that they would continue me the light of this life, but till such
time as that I have acquainted the Princess Cleopatra and Prince Marcellus
with the cruel abuse we have put upon them. I shall give them an account of
the whole transaction, and will acknowledge it to all the World to my last
gasp. In a word, I shall endeavor to restore you to that innocence, which I
have been the occasion that you have lost in the opinion of men, and I wish my
blood spent upon no juster an account then that of restoring you to that
kingdom, which I sometime maintained so poorly against you. Accept, from a
miserable wretch, of what you can get for the expiation of his perfidiousnesse,
since you will not take those poor remainders of life he offered you, and which
should have been sacrificed to your revenge.

These words were accompanied by so many expressions of a real and sincere
repentance, that the Prince, absolutely satisfied that I was truly sensible of
the heinousness of my crime, was extremely moved at it himself by the
discoveries I had made thereof. Whereupon having continued silent a little
while, as it were to recollect himself, and to consider what he had to say to
me; Volusius, said he, I heartily forgive you, the mischief you have done me,
and am satisfied with the death of this persidious subject, whom the gods, by a
miraculous conduct of their justice had reserved to perish by my hands, when I
least expected it. I refuse not the proffer you make me to give an account of
my innocence to Cleopatra and Marcellus. I am confident they have already
entertained some apprehensions thereof, and it will be your business to rid
them of all those which may be yet remaining in them of the infidelity
wherewith I have been charged. I imagine not but that my justification is of as
great concernment to me as the recovery of my kingdom. I have made a shift to
live without a Kingdom, assured of the affections of Cleopatra; but I would not
be burdened with the keeping of a Kingdom, when I have been abhorred by
Cleopatra. I shall entreat you to tell both the Princess and Marcellus, that I
had deserved they should have made a stricter inquisition into my crime, and
consequently been more concerned in my vindication before they had condemned me
with so much severity; and that they should both of them have debated the
business a little on my behalf, against apparences uncertain enough. How do I
acknowledge my self obliged to the gods that they have ordered things so, as
that, before my death, I may let them know, I have not been perfidious either
to my Mistress or my Friend, and that, since I have recovered my self from
their reproaches by truth, they shall never hear of those which I might make to
them, merely out of the love and respect which I shall have for them to the
very last breath. Only you will be pleased to entreat the Princess to
remember her self, that, notwithstanding my innocence, notwithstanding my
justification, I am no longer worthy to serve her, and that, though I might
hope the recovery of her affections, yet durst I not presume to desire they
should be cast away on a wretch, persecuted by heaven and a cross fortune, and
one who has not, all over the earth, any place he may call his own. Further,
that time has been I might, through the friendship and assistance of Caesar,
have hoped to be restored to a condition not much different from that of my
Ancestors; that after I had lost Caesar's friendship, I had recovered a Kingdom
wherein she should have reigned, had the gods and my cruel destiny been so
pleased: But that now, being dispossessed of all, all assistance, all
protection, and all hope, it is not fit I should lift up my eyes on a
Princess, whom the greatest Kings upon earth would think it a glory to serve,
nor indeed so much as wish my self beloved by her, since she cannot affect me
but upon a condition of her own unhappiness, by involving her self in the
miserable destiny of the most unfortunate of mankind; That all I have to do
now, is to die, so to put a worthy Period to this Tragedy, and that I shall be
able to do, either by laying violent hands on my self, after the example of the
King my father, or by Caesar's wrath, whereto I shall expose my self without the
least fear, after I have offered up to my ill fortune a victime which I am
obliged to sacrifice to her. That after that action, whatever may be the event
of it, I shall endeavor to forbear disturbing the enjoyments of a person that
is a thousand times dearer to me then the life which I bestow to further them;
and lastly, that I make it my earnest suit to the gods that they never be
interrupted by the memory of a wretch, whose remembrance might happily occasion
some disturbance in the felicities I wish her. With those words reaching forth
his hand to me, he bad me farewell; and having commanded his Squire to help me
up on horseback again to come for Alexandria, in order to the cure of my
wounds, he took another way, and left me, much more troubled at his discourse
and the action of it, then I was at the danger and pain of my wounds.

Being gotten on horseback again by the assistance of his Squire, I took my
way toward this City, much about the setting of the Sun, and came into it
before it was quite dark, so weakened, that I was hardly able to stand. As to
what has passed since, I shall not trouble you. I was kindly entertained by
Cornelius, who was my ancient friend, and seemed to be very much troubled at my
misfortune; but it was not in his power to hinder me, out of any consideration
of health, which he pressed very much, from leaving my bed, as soon as ever I
understood, Madam, I might have access to you, to acquit my self of the charge
I had taken upon me: and to clear to you and Prince Marcellus, the innocence of
a Prince, who was never guilty of any thing but by the artifices of Tiberius
and our combination, and who cannot justly b^ charged with any thing either as
to his Mistress or his Friend, but is the most constant and most generous of
all men living. I acknowledge the goodness of the gods in the favor they have
done me to acquaint you with this truth before I die, and humbly beg it of them,
that this discovery, which, proceeding from a real repentance I now make to
you, may in some measure be thought a reparation of my crime. It has produced
effects too too important, and too too deplorable for me to hope any pardon
from you, though I have obtained it from him, who has been the greatest
sufferer thereby, and whom I had offended most; but I fear me, I have received
my punishment from those that were my co-agents in it, and that I shall not
long survive the discovery of an action which must needs make me abominable in
the sight of all the World.

Thus did Volusius put a Period to his discourse; and though that toward the
end of it he observed in the countenances of Cleopatra and Marcellus more
compassion and grief then resentment or indignation against him, yet, were it
that he could not any longer endure the presence of persons whom he had so
highly injured, or that his wounds troubled him, he would not make any longer
stay in the chamber, and, with some difficulty, making a shift to rise off the
chair he was sat in, after he had, by a gesture full of humility, and the
expressions of his grief, taken his leave of the Prince and Princess, he
passed into the outer-room, where he found the persons which Cornelius had left
there to bring him back to his lodgings.

It were no easy matter to represent what posture Marcellus and Cleopatra were
in, upon this relation of Volusius. They were at the same time subject to such
a distraction of thoughts, that it had been some difficulty to unravel them,
and to make their confusion capable of some order. Yet is it certain, that
their first apprehensions were those of joy, and that neither of them could,
without being infinitely glad, entertain the news, that Coriolanus had ever
been a constant lover, and a faithful friend, and that they could not any
longer doubt of that innocence which they so much wished. They looked one upon
another during this first apprehension, and in their countenances expressed
their mutual satisfaction. Cleopatra, as the most concerned in the business
spoke first, and letting the Prince read in her eyes what her heart was so full
of; Well Brother, said she to him, you see that Coriolanus is innocent, and
that it was not without some ground that I was satisfied of it, before I had
understood so much from the mouth of Volusius. I acknowledge the indulgence of
the gods, replies Marcellus, as great toward me in this, as in the greatest
favor they ever did me; and I take them to witnesses, that what you and
Volusius have persuaded me to of the constancy of Julia, has not caused in me
such a satisfaction as what I have understood of the ^idelity of Coriolanus.
How, replied the Princess, with a certain transportation not suitable to her
ordinary moderation, it is then infallible, that Coriolanus, whose pretended
infidelity cost me so many tears, has ever been constant to his Cleopatra; and
that Princess, who, by her misapprehension thought her self condemned to
eternal afflictions, may now reassume those joies and hopes she had before
broke off all acquaintance with?

Here would she have taken occasion to open her soul for the reception of a
passion, which, of a long time, had not had any entertainment there: but that
joy was soon eclipsed by an interposition of grief, and a certain reflection
which filled her heart with all the sadness it was capable of, when she
thought on her cruel dep^rtment toward that Prince, the deplorable effect it
had produced, as having proved the occasion of the loss of his Crown, and of
all her hopes, and that fatal resolution which he had expressed to Volusius,
that he intended to take, and whereof he had given her some notice at their
last parting. In a word, being thus convinced of his fidelity, she could not
call to mind the cruel entertainment she had made him at Syracuse, when,
enflamed to the highest pitch of love, and thinking it a thousand times more
glorious to be her servant, then what so noble a conquest, and the recovery of
his Kingdoms had made him, he had passed through thousands of dangers, to come
and offer her those very Kingdoms; she could not think on the cruel and
injurious speeches wherewith she had received him, and the sad condition
wherein she had left him, without a mortal wound in that heart which nothing
but the love of that Prince could ever make any impression in.

From that doleful reflection, calling to mind, how she had met him in the
Woods of Alexandria, the day that he relieved her with greater valor then
success, against those that afterward carried her away, and lastly remembering
the meeting she had had with him in the King of Armenia's ship, whereof she
represented to her self all the particulars, after another manner then they had
appeared to her, while she was still prepossessed by her cruel mistake, as well
out of a consideration of that long swounding, into which her sight and words
had put him, as the discourse, full of a generous confidence he had made to
her, and the admirable resolution he had taken and gone through with, by
sighting alone for her liberty, against so great a number of enemies, with such
prodigious valor, and by the last words he had spoken to her at their parting,
wherein, as well as in his actions, his innocence was but too too apparent. And
from these things, whereof her eyes had been but too too faithful witnesses,
diverting her thoughts to others that were of no less consequence, such as the
loss of a great Kingdom which he had conquered for her, and which he neglected
to maintain, through the despair she had reduced him to; that which he had
expressed when he cast himself into the sea, because he would not survive his
disgrace, and the shame he thought it, that he was not able to rescue her from
her Ravishers; the miserable condition he was brought to, having no place of
refuge, no relief, nor any comfort in the World, and lastly, the resolution he
had discovered to Volusius and her self, of his unwillingnesse to have her any
longer engaged in his misfortunes, and to seek out the remedies thereof only
in death, which, for a courage, such as his was, it would not be hard to find;
she could not fasten her thoughts on all these truths, which were but too
importunate upon her memory, without giving way to such a grief, as neither all
her own great constancy, nor yet the joy she conceived at the innocence of
Coriolanus, were able to abate.

After she had for some time smothered the disordered agitations she was in,
being not able to hold out any longer, and conceiving she might freely
disburthen her self before Marcellus, whom she was confident of, and whose
soul, during that time, was persecuted by imaginations much of the same nature;
Coriolanus is innocent, said she, breaking forth into a rivulet of tears: But,
O ye heavenly powers! such is my cruel destiny, that Coriolanus cannot be
innocent, but I must at the same time be the most criminal person in the World.
That Prince, the most amiable, the most generous, and the most virtuous of men,
has continued inviolately constant to me, and has still persisted in the same
perfect affection, which had at first taken in my soul; and yet, unfortunate
wretch that I am, I have had the cruelty to banish him my presence as a
Monster; I have had the inhumanity to see him in a manner expiring at my feet,
and never could be moved at it; and I have at last reduced him to such
extremities, as have proved the occasion of loosing that Kingdom which he had
designed for me, have made him a restless vagabond all over the earth, made
him seek out precipices, and now make him resolve to seek in death a Period of
these deplorable miseries, into which I, only I, have brought him. O
Cleopatra, unfortunate Cleopatra! what pretense of joy can thou find in the
justification of Coriolanus, since it must needs expose thee to the most cruel
regrets that ever persecuted guilty souls? It were much more for thy
satisfaction, at least, if it were not for thy satisfaction, it would be much
more to thy advantage, that thy Coriolanus had been found unconstant, and that
thou should be found innocent thy self; and since that thy innocence and his
are things inconsistent, either he ought to be guilty, or thou have continued
in the misprision which thou had been persuaded to. O cruel Volusius! cruel
in thy malice, and cruel in thy remorse, thou art in both equally the messenger
of death to me, and I find fatal poison in this appearance of life which thou
bringst me, when thou tellest me that Coriolanus is constant to me. Let us
then, till death, bewail the misfortune which attends us as well in the one as
in the other condition, and never entertain any comfort, since that is a kind
of happiness which guilty souls are never to expect.

Here the tears interrupted the course of her speech, and fell from her in such
abundance, that she was forced to allow them a free passage, and to let them
express some part of what she felt within her. In that interval she repented
her of her last reflections, and as soon as she was in a condition to reassume
her discourse; I crave thy pardon, said she, with a voice imperfectly accented
with sobs, I crave thy pardon, faithful Prince, for so unjust an apprehension,
and what ever I may fear from my own remorse, and the reproaches thou may
justly make me, yet must I needs acknowledge, that it is more satisfactory to
me, nay a thousand times more satisfactory to me, to be found criminal by thy
innocence, then to be found innocent by thy infidelity, for I set such a value
on thy affection, that nothing can repair the loss of it, nor counterballance
the happiness it were to me to recover it. I am content to be thought guilty
of all that the artifices of my enemies have occasioned me to commit, and shall
not seek for any excuse, either in my error or my repentance, but only
flatter my self with this comfort, that thou have ever loved me, love me now,
and wilt love me to the last gasp. It is not therefore in thy justification
that I would be thought unfortunate, because then the guilt lies on my side;
but I acknowledge my self unfortunate in the ingratitude I have expressed
toward thee, in the misfortunes I have occasioned thee, in the irrecoverable
losses I have caused thee, and the cruel resolutions I have forced thee upon.
It was by my means, that, at Syracuse, thou were reduced to those extremities
that brought thy life into danger; upon my account have thou lost a Kingdom,
which thou did design for me, thou have spent thy days in wandering up and
down the World with much misery, thou have sought death among the Waves, and
thou art still resolved to run thy self upon death, merely becase thou would
not, either by thy presence or memory, disturb the enjoiments thou wishest me.
Ah Coriolanus, it is in that resolution thou art unjust and cruel, no less then
I have been, and thou ought not, by loosing thy own life, imagine to add
any thing to my happiness, since it is from thee alone that all the happiness
of my life is derived. Thou have but little acquaintance with Cleopatra, if
thou can think the loss of thy Kingdom able to abate any thing of the value
I set on thee; I have ever preferred thy person before all the Monarchies of
the World, and, supposing the condition thou art reduced to as miserable as can
be imagined, I would run fortunes with thee with no less satisfaction then if
thou had the universe at thy disposal. Do not therefore court thy own death,
Coriolanus, if thou do it not to rid thy hands of an unhappy woman, whom for
her ingratitude thou have reason to abhor, or (...) thou proposest to thy self
greater felicity in death then in Cleopatra, let us go to it together, and
know, that, as well as thy ^el^, I am come from a house wherein the examples of
voluntary death are but too too familiar, for me to be daunted at any such
thing.

With these words she as it were opened the floodgates to that grief, which
was ready to overrun her, and cast her self on her bed, after a most pitiful
manner, insomuch that Marcellus, who had never seen her so unable to command
her passions being astonished at it, and rising from the place where he sat,
came to her with an endeavor to recover and comfort her. Is it possible,
Sister, said he to her, that so unreasonable a grief should have such a
powerful influence on your imaginanations, whom I have known with so much
constancy resist the assaults of a just affliction; and cannot you entertain an
account of Coriolanus's innocence with some moderation, who have supported his
infidelity with so much settlednesse and resolution? Can it possibly come to
pass, if the affections of that Prince were ever dear to you, that you should
not, with joy, entertain this change of your condition, and that the remorse
you conceive at the miscarriages that have happened through your
misapprehensions should have a more powerful operation on you, then the
assurances of a fidelity which you have wished with more earnestness than you
could have done any thing relating to your own life? Ah Sister, if these must
be the effects of your regretts, let them fall only upon me who am
ore-burthened with crimes by the engagement I have had in your mistake, for
that it was upon my solicitation principally that you came to hate a Friend,
who loved me beyond himself. It was I that traveled up and down several
Kingdoms and crossed many seas to find him out, purposely to dispatch him,
when in the mean time I was dearer to him than his own life, and that was it
that all my attempts were bent to cut off, even while, by the force of his
Friendship, he contributed to the execution of my design, by presenting his
naked breast to me to satisfy my cruelty. Let therefore all those arrows of
remorse be stuck in my breast, with all the care of the reparation we owe him,
and take heed you do not incense heaven by not entertaining, with the
acknowledgements you ought, a favor you have put up so many suits to the gods
for. I entertain, Brother, replied the Princess this favor from the
celestial powers, with all the resentments I ought to have for it, and cannot
but acknowledge, that there is not any thing could be more dear to me than the
innocence of Coriolanus: but Brother, after what manner would you have me
consider the miserable condition whereto he is reduced, for my sake and upon my
account, and with what constancy can I hear of the fatal resolution which he
sends me word he intends to take, to run upon death merely to prevent his being
any way a hindrance to my felicity? For what concerns his Fortunes, replied
Marcellus, what lowness soever they may now be reduced to, it is not
impossible but that they may be recovered to their former greatness, by such
another revolution as that whereby they were ruined, and that either by open
hostility, or th^^e other ways he practiced formerly, he may yet reascend into
the throne of his Ancestors. But supposing all this were nothing but pure
matter of imagination, and should never come to pass, he has those Friends
who will never have any thing of fortune to dispose of, which they shall not
divide with him, and will disclaim all they can pretend to in the world, if all
be not common among them. For his fatal resolutions, we must endeavor to
divert him from them: and since that he is not far from this place, hovering
hereabouts, in hopes to meet with Tiberius, I am in some confidence, that,
seeking him out diligently, he may be met with. That care ought to be mine, and
I accordingly take it upon me, and, in order to that design, I immediately
take my leave of you, with this protestation that I will never return while I
live, till I have met with Coriolanus, till I have obtained his pardon for the
injuries I have done him, till I have acquainted him what favorable
apprehensions you have for him, and have brought him to those terms wherein
you would have him.

The fair daughter of Anthony, being extremely eased and comforted by these
kind prof^ers and expressions of Marcellus, would have made him some reply,
when Queen Candace and Elisa came into the room, and, immediately after, the
Princess Artemisa, attended by Alexander. As Soon as this company was come in,
Marcellus, who was out of all patience to put the design he had undertaken in
execution, withdrew without speaking ought to any one, and so, that the
Princess her self could not otherwise than by a cast of her countenance
express how infinitely she thought her self obliged to him for those good
intentions of his. Though she had wiped her eyes, yet could she not hinder but
that the three Princesses perceived she had been a-weeping: and in regard they
all had a very great affection for her, and that Candace and Artemisa did not
look on her otherwise than as an admirable Sister, and the Princess of the
Parthians, as a person whose incomparable perfections had powerfully forced her
heart and inclinations toward her, they discovered a certain emulation in
expressing how much they were troubled for the grief she was in, whereof they
saw the marks very fresh in her countenance, and with much precipitation would
needs know the reason of it. Cleopatra returned them many thanks for those kind
demonstrations of their affection, and after she had in few words expressed the
resentments she had thereof, turning to the Princess Artemisa who was more
particularly acquainted with the passages of her life than the other two, and
had sometime seen Coriolanus, and pleaded very much on his behalf, and
conceiving she might safely tell her what it was that lay so heavy on her
heart, even before the two other Princesses, whom she had not the least
suspicion of, and who were informed, though somewhat more confusedly, of the
most important adventures had happened to her; Ah Sister, said she to her, (yet
not without a little violence, to keep in the tears that would otherwise have
accompanied her words) Ah Sister, how much were you in the right, when you
maintained against me, that Coriolanus was not inconstant, and with how much
reason did you take his part against an over-credulous person, and one whom her
imprudent credulity has made guilty of irreparable miscarriages! It Is very
certain, Sister, he is innocent, and has been cleared, even by those that were
the authors of the calumny raised against him. All the crime and all the
remorse does now absolutely fall to my share, and if you have made any
discoveries of grief in my countenance it was the effect of those just regrets
which I could not but conceive thereat.

Artemisa seemed to be very much moved at this discourse, and made answer to
the Princess with very much earnestness; But I pray Sister, said she to her,
what certainty have you of the news you tell me, what stronger arguments can
you have received of it, than those you might have derived from the discourses
and actions of Coriolanus himself, and in a word, what is it that has so
strangely convinced you of a thing, whereof you would not before admit of any
satisfaction? Candace and Elisa, who, among other remarkable adventures of
Coriolanus, had also heard of the pretended infidelity laid to his charge,
thought themselves concerned in his justification, no less than Artemisa was;
and Alexander, who had ever had a very great friendship for the person, and
abundance of respect for the virtue of that Prince, seemed to be no less
desirous to understand the truth of that business. The fair Cleopatra thought
it but justice to satisfy them all, and perceiving there were only those
persons in the chamber, she gave them a brief relation of all she had heard
from Volusius, insisting more particularly on those passages that were of
greater consequence. So that having by that discourse satisfied the noble
company present of the innocence of Coriolanus, they were all extremely
troubled to understand what a deplorable condition that Prince was reduced to,
and the sad resolutions he had taken thereupon. The gods have the praise, cries
out the Princess Artemisa, for that they have been pleased to confirm a truth
which I have ever maintained, and whereof all virtuous persons were obliged to
wish a perfect discovery: I had ever observed in all the actions and words of
that great Prince what remorse never permits in guilty Souls, and I would have
hazarded my life upon the confidence I had of his innocence.

The Queen of Ethiopia, and the fair Elisa discovered for the vindicat^^n of
Coriolanus, a joy and satisfaction not inferior to that o^ Artemisa, though he
was, as to his person, utterly unknown to Elisa, and that Candace had not seen
him, but for some few minutes in the combat wherein he had fought with Artaban
against the companions of the Pirate Zenodorus. But Alexander was absolutely
over-joyed, as well out of a consideration of his Sister, as that of a Prince
whom he had ever infinitely esteemed; and having understood from his Sister the
design which Marcellus was engaged in to find him out, and so to divert him
from his tragical resolutions he proffered to go along with him, and entreated
Artemisa to give him leave to accompany Marcellus in so noble an enterprise.
Artemisa was content he should, though she could not look on his departure
without some regret; so that Alexander immediately went out of the room, with
an intention to find out Marcellus, and to join endeavors with him to recover
Coriolanus out of his despair, and to rescue that Prince out of the danger
which he might fall into by coming too near so powerful an enemy as Caesar was.

The three Princesses, remaining still with Cleopatra, endeavored to persuade
her out of a grief whereto she seemed to be inclined beyond all reason or
moderation, and to convince her that she ought ^o be more satisfied with her
condition as it now stood, then as i^ was some days before, since that the
cause of her most just an^ sensible grief was taken away. To which, when she
would represent to them, how it troubled her to the very heart, that she had
treated with so much rigor a faithful and innocent Prince, and had brought
him from a throne, into which he had recovered himself, to the wretched
condition he then was in; Candace assuming the discourse, Madam, said she to
her, the very regrett you discover for your harsh treatment of the King of
Mauritania, is, no doubt, reparation enough to him, and there needs no more to
satisfy him and all the world, than to consider the apparences whereby you
were deceived, and which might indeed have deceived the most subtle and
circumspect persons upon earth. And for his condition in respect of Fortune,
which you seem to bewail so much, besides what you may promise your self from
the Friendship which Marcellus has for him, I dare proffer you both, in
Ethiopia, not only sanctuary, but absolute and sovereign Authority. For when
the Prince, whom you know, shall once come to reign there, as I am much in
hopes he will, I am confident he will not think it much to divide, with you,
the power he shall have there, and think it not impossible but that with the
assistances of his men and person, he may put Coriolanus into a condition to
get once more into a throne which he had made a shift to recover without the
helps of his Friends.

Cleopatra made answer to this obliging discourse of Candace, with the greatest
acknowledgments that could be, embracing her with the greatest affection
imaginable. And the Pri^cesse of the Parthians, who could not make her so
absolute a pro^^er in the dominions of her Father, till they were fallen under
her power, made a protestation to her, that if ever it should please the gods
that she had the sovereignty there, she might assure her self of no less
authority in her dominions than in those of Candace.

The incomparable daughter of Anthony was, not without reason, very much raised
up and elevated by the discourse and proffers of those fair Princesses, and
they would thereupon have fallen into a long conversation, if Agrippa had not
come into the room, after he had before sent in his desires of admission. Being
come in, he told them, that; by a letter he had received from Caesar, he
understood that he would be the next day at Alexandria, that all things were
putting in order for his entertainment, though he had not sent any notice that
he expected a more then ordinary reception. He told Elisa in particular, that
the King of Media, was gone to meet him the day before, and that he was just
getting on horseback with the same intention, attended by all the Roman
Nobility, that came along with him to Alexandria. Whereupon h^ took leave of
them and particularly of Elisa by a passionate look, as ^aving not, in that
company, the opportunity of a more private con^ersation.

FINIS.

