A LETTER Written by the EMPEROR TO THE Late KING JAMES, Setting forth The True
OCCASION of his FALL, AND THE Treachery and Cruelty of the FRENCH.

Licensed

J. Fraser.
May 2. 1689.


LONDON, Printed for Ric. Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1689.

A LETTER Written by the EMPEROR To the Late King James; Setting forth the true
Occasion of his Fall, and the Treachery and Cruelty of the French.
LEOPOLDUS, etc.
LIteras Serenitatis vestrae 6. Febr. nuperi ex arce St. Germani ad nos datas,
ab ejusdem in aula nostra Ablegato Carlinfortio exhibitas, recte accepimus, and
ex iis in quem statum redacta sit Serenitas vestra, qualiterque ab exercitibus
suis, immo and ab intimis and domesticis fere omnibus, post adventum Principis
Arausionensis derelicta praecipiti fuga saluti suae consulere, and ibidem in
Gallia praesidium, subsidiumque quaerere coacta sit: Denique etiam a nobis ad
recuperanda Regna sua Auxilium expetat pluribus intelleximus. Serenitati
vestrae id certo recipere and confirmare possumus, quod simul atque peracerba
haec rerum vicissitudo ad aures nostras pervenit, animum etiam nostrum non
communi illo humanitatis, sed pro sincero nostro in eandem affectu, propiore
and strictiore sensu tetigerit, and intime indoluerimus, illud tandem evenisse,
quod nobis quantumvis meliora sperantibus animus jamdudum anxie praesagiit.
Quod si enim Serenitas vestra amicissimis nostris per Ablegatum nostrum nuperum
Comitem in Caunitz factis remonstrationibus potius, quam fraudulentis Gallorum
suggestionibus, quibus id unum agebant, ut perpetuas inter Serenitatem vestram,
and ejusdem Populos fovendo simultates reliquae Christianae Europae tanto
securius insultarent, fidem praebuisset, and continuis eorundem pacifragiis and
contraventionibus, quarum vindiciae pace Neomagensi ad eandem spectabant,
authoritate and potentia sua modum serio ponere, eumque in finem communia
nobiscum, aut cum aliis recte consulentibus, consilia inire placuisset. Nobis
quidem nullum dubium est quin Serenitas vestra animos Populi sui odio
Religionis nostrae jam tam exulceratos multum demulsisset, and etiamnum tam in
Regno suo, quam in Romano Imperio tranquillitas illibata staret. Nunc autem quo
loco res nostrae sint, ut Serenitati vestrae auxilium praestari possit a nobis,
qui non Turcico tantum bello impliciti, sed insuper nos etiam crudelissimo and
iniquissimo a Gallis rerum suarum, ut putabant, in Anglia securis, contra datam
fidem impediti sumus, ipsimer Serenitati vestrae judicandum relinquimus. Illud
sane eandem non celandum ducimus, quod Religioni etiam nostrae non ab aliis
majore injuria quam ab ipsismet Gallis illata sit; quippe qui non tantum in
nostrum, and totius Christianae orbis perniciem foedifraga arma cum juratis
Sanctae Crucis hostibus sociare, and susceptos a nobis pro Dei Gloria conatus
interrumpere, successusque ab Omnipotenti manu nobis concessos impedire fas
sibi ducunt; sed etiam in Imperio perfidiam perfidia cumulando urbes deditione
occupatas contra datam ex ipsiusmet Delphini manu signatam fidem immensis
tributis exhaurire, exhaustas diripere, direptas funditus exscindere, aut
flammis delere. Palatia Principum ab omni antiquitate inter saevissima bellorum
incendia intacta servata exurere, templa spoliare, dedititios in servitutem
more inter barbaros usitato abducere. Denique passim, imprimis vero etiam in
Catholicorum Ditionibus, alia horrenda, and ipsam Turcarum tyrannidem
superantia, immanitatis and saevitiae exempla edere, pro Ludo habent. Quae cum
necessitatem nobis summam imponant, non contra ipsos minus, quam contra Tureas,
omni nos etc. Sacrum Romanum Imperium melion ratione tuendi, ab ipsiusmet
Serenitatis Vestrae aequanimirate certum nobis assensum promittimus, nobis a
nemine imputari posse, siquam hactenus per multiplices Tractatus assequi non
potuimus securitatem, justissimis Armis asserere satagamus; eundemque in finem
cum iis, quorum interest, communes pro defensione and securitate nostra
rations inire cogamur. De caetero Deum rogamus, ut omnia ad suam Gloriam
dirigat, vestraeque Serenitati in hoc gravissimo infortunio suo vera solatia
praestet, qui tandem tenerrimo fraterni animi affectu complectimur.

Viennae 9. Aprilis 1689.
LEOPOLD, etc.
WE have received your Majesty's Letters, dated from St. Germans the sixth of
February last, by the Earl of Carlingford, your Envoy in our Court: By them we
have understood the Condition your Majesty is reduced to; and that you being
deserted after the landing of the Prince of Orange, by your Army, and even by
your Domestic Servants, and by those you most Confided in, and almost by all
your Subjects, you have been forced by a sudden flight to provide for your own
safety, and to seek Shelter and Protection in France: Lastly that you desire
Assistance from us for the recovering your Kingdoms. We do assure your Majesty,
that as soon as we heard of this severe turn of Affairs, we were moved at it,
not only with the common sense of Humanity, but with much deeper Impressions
suitable to the sincere Affection which we have always born to you. And we were
heartily sorry that at last that was come to pass, which (though we hoped for
better things) yet our own sad thoughts had suggested to us would ensue. If
your Majesty had rather given Credit to the Friendly Remonstrances that were
made you, by our late Envoy, the Count de Kaunitz, in our Name, than the
deceitful Insinuations of the French, whose chief aim was, by fomenting
continual Divisions between you and your People, to gain thereby an Opportunity
to insult the more securely over the rest of Christendom. And if your Majesty
had put a stop, by your Force and Authority, to their many Infractions of the
Peace, of which by the Treaty at Nimegen you are made the Guarantee, and to
that end entered into Consultations with us, and such others as have the like
just Sentiments in this matter; We are verily persuaded that by this means you
should have in a great measure quieted the Minds of your People, which were so
much exasperated through their aversion to our Religion, and the public Peace
had been preserved as well in your Kingdoms as here in the Roman Empire. But
now we refer it even to your Majesty, to judge what condition we can be in to
afford you any Assistance, we being not only engaged in a War with the Turks,
but finding our selves at the same time unjustly and barbarously Attacked by
the French, contrary to, and against the Faith of Treaties, they then reckoning
themselves secure of England. And this ought not to be concealed; that the
greatest Injuries which have been done to our Religion have flowed from no
other than the French themselves; who not only esteem it lawful for them, to
make Perfidious, Leagues with the sworn Enemies of the Holy Cross, tending to
the destruction both of us and of the whole Christian World, in order to the
checking our Endeavors, which were undertaken for the Glory of God, and to
stop those Successes which it has pleased Almighty God to give us hitherto;
but further have heaped one Treachery on another, even within the Empire it
self. The Cities of the Empire which were surrendered upon Articles, signed by
the Dolphin himself, have been exhausted by excessive Impositions; and after
their being exhausted have been Plundered, and after Plundering have been
burned and razed. The Palaces of Princes, which in all times, and even in the
most destructive Wars, have been preserved, are now burnt down to the Ground.
The Churches are robbed, and such as submitted themselves to them, are, in a
most barbarous manner, carried away as Slaves. In short, it is become a
Diversion to them to commit all manner of insolences and cruelties in many
places, but chiefly in Catholic Countries, exceeding the Cruelties of the
Turks themselves* which having imposed an absolute necessity upon us to secure
our selves and the Holy Roman Empire, by the best means we can think on, and
that no less against them than against the Turks; We promise our selves from
your justice ready assent to this, That it ought not to be imputed to us, if we
endeavor to procure, by a just War, that security to our selves which we could
not hitherto obtain by so many Treaties; and that in order to the obtaining
thereof, We take measures for our mutual Defense and Preservation, with all
those who are equally concerned in the same Design with us. It remains that we
beg of God, that he would direct all things to his Glory, and that he would
grant your Majesty true and solid Comforts under this your great Calamity; we
embrace you with the tender Affections of a Brother.

At Vienna the 9th of April 1689.

