THE Charge of Socinianism AGAINST Dr. TILLOTSON CONSIDERED.

In EXAMINATION of some SERMONS He has lately Published on purpose to clear
Himself from that IMPUTATION.

By way of a DIALOGUE betwixt F. a Friend of Dr. T's and C. a Catholic
Christian.

To which is Added Some REFLECTIONS upon the Second of Dr. BURNET's Four
Discourses, concerning the Divinity and Death of CHRIST. Printed 1694.

To which is likewise Annexed, A SUPPLEMENT upon Occasion of a History of
Religion, lately Published, Supposed to be Wrote by Sir R. -- H -- d.

Wherein likewise CHARLES BLOVNT's Great Diana is Considered; And both Compared
with Dr. TILLOTSON's Sermons.

By a True Son of the Church.

EDENBVRGH: Printed MDCXCV.

N. B. When the Reader meets with this Mark * P. 6. C. 2. line 51. He must cast
his Eye to the next Col. to this Mark ** and read that Four Line-Paragraph
(which was left out by Mistake in Composing, and through haste misplaced in
Correcting) at the first Mark.

ERRATA.
PAge 3. Col. 2 li^. 50. read Subtily, p. 4. C. 2. l. 3. r. which by th^^, l.
46. after of dele r. p. 6. C. 2. l. 51. r. permission, ibid. l. 57. d. a p. 7.
C. 1. l. 55. r. are not now, p. 7. C. 2. l. 53. for (...) r. (...). p. ^. C. 1.
l. 29. r. Imperfection, l. 37. r. Till-n, Col. 2. l. 37. r. Exult, l. 39. for
That, r. Thus, p. 10. Col. 1. l. 3. r. Mountain that, l. 22. r. there is no
more, C. 2. l. 49. r. lends, p. 11. C. 1. l. 19. r. his, C. 2. l. penul for
generally r. Eternally, p. 12. C. 2. l. 2. r. run, l. 13. r. without either, l.
21. r. so obstinately, p. 13. C. 2. l. 34. r. as to, p. 14. c. 1. l. 21. for to
r. do, p. 15. col. 1. l. 9. r. Christ's, col. 2. l. 10. r. Justifies, l. 27.
for to r. the, p. 16, col. 2. l. 25. r. over, p. 18. col. 1. l. 49. for
Naturer. Honor, p. 19. col. r. l. 21. f. He r. there, p. 21. c. 1. l. 3. f. or
r. as, c. 2. l. 42. f. by r. upon, p. 22. c. 2. l. Antep. r Conceive, p. 23. l.
ult. f. put? p. 26. c. 2. l. 42. f. it r. is, p. 27. c. 1. l. 24 for fight r.
light.

The PREFACE.
THat which I have to Advertise the Reader of by way of Preface, is That the
following Animadversions upon Dr. Tillotson's Sermons, were wrote before the
Death of that Unhappy Man: and should not now have been Published, were it not
that his much Mistaken and Pernicious Principles have survived him, and are
Recommended by the Authority of his Name.

Yet the Respect I bear to the Dead might have restrained some Sharpness (if
any such be found) in the following Sheets, had they been wrote since his
Lamentable Exit.

I am likewise to tell the Reader that the Socinians have Published an Answer
to what they think, or pretend makes against them, in the Four Sermons,
hereafter Examined, of Dr. Tillotsons; and the 2d of Dr. Burnet's Discourses,
which I have taken into Consideration. Their Treatise bears this Title,
Considerations on the Explication of the Doctrine of the Trinity, occasioned by
Four Sermons Preached by his Grace the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury -- A
Discourse by the Lord Bishop of Salisbury, etc. Printed 1694.

To this there is a Reply, by Dr. Burnet, for himself, in a Letter to Dr.
Williams, and by the said Dr. Williams in Vindication of Dr. Tillotson,
Published since his Death, both Printed together, 1695. and carries this Title.
A Vindication of the Sermons of his Grace John Archbishop of Canterbury,
coucerning the Divinity and Incarnation of our B. Savior -- From the
Exceptions of a late Book, Entitled, Considerations on the Explications of the
Doctrine of the Trinity. To which is annexed, a Letter from the Lord Bishop of
Sarum, to the Author of the said Vindication on the same Subject.

The License for Printing this Book, is Dated at Lambeth, 17. Nov. 1694. the
very day before Dr. Tillotson was struck with that Fatal Apoplexy, which
carried him out of this World the fourth day after; and made Room for another
Comprehensive Latitudinarian who looked over Lincoln, to Succeed him. But the
Books above mentioned came to my view after some of the following Sheets were
sent to the Press, otherwise I had made more particular Observations upon them;
for the present I had only opportunity to make some short mention of them in
some of the remaining Sheets.

And here I must take notice, that whereas the abovesaid Considerations p.
63.64. Objected against the Account which Dr. Tillotson had given of the
Grounds of Christian Religion, viz. That the Mysteries of our Religion were
only a Gratification to the Humor of Mankind, who were fond of Mysteries: That
the Incarnation of Christ was to Comply with their Notion of a Sensible Deity:
And his Passion, with their Custom of Human Sacrifices: His Exaltation, with
their Custom of Deifying Men: His Intercession: with their Common Apprehension
of Mediators, between the Gods and them, etc. which are a main Subject of the
ensuing Discourse. I say; these being thus Objected, together with some other
Exceptions, against Dr. Tillotson's Doctrine, in the fore-quoted pages, his
Vindicator Replys to some of the others, but leaves these abovementioned
totally untouched. Vindication, page 61.62.

Whether they were Material to be Answered I leave to what follows: and whether
they are Answerable, upon any Christian Principles, I refer to the Judgment of
the Reader, and this sort of No-Vindication of them.

Doubtless Dr. Tillotson would read this Vindication of himself before he
Licensed it to be Printed.

And, if he could have given any Answer to these most Monstrous Objections made
against him, be would certainty have done it: Wherefore we must conclude him
Self-condemned: and yet he has not (at least Publicly, as he ought) Recanted
these Blasphemous Errors: He ought to have Recanted and Abhorred them, both in
Print, and in Pulpit, as he had Published them. But he has received his
Sentence. --

Here let me Reply, though not for Dr. Tillotson, yet against these Socinians:
They Argue that there was no Necessity for the Incarnation of God; and for this
they Quote Dr. Tillotson's own words, Considerations p. 63. That the Gospel,
and the Pardon of Sin; might have been offered to Mankind by a Prophet in the
Name of God. And because he says it, they charge it upon the Church. Our
Opposers (say they) Grant it, his GRACE Grants it. See the mischief of this
Man's Prevarications, and his Advancement to the Throne of Canterbury! But to
the Argument, First, the Vindicator, p. 61. (and consequently Dr. Tillotson
himself) does shamefully give up this Cause: and Plead for the No-need or
Necessity either of CHRIST's Incarnation, or of his Death.

But yet it was the Height of Impudence in the Socinians to Object the
No-necessity of the Incarnation, against the Divinity of Christ; when that same
Argument Militates as strongly against themselves, as to the Death of Christ:
For which, upon their Principles of No-Satisfaction being due to the Justice of
God for Sin, there can no tolerable Account be given; for a Prophet might have
Taught, and Preached, and been a good Example, and Intercessor too; and
Performed every one of the Conditions, and Ends, which they Assign for Christ's
coming into the World, and for the Sacrifice of his Death upon the Cross.

This of Denying the Satisfaction, is the Heart of Socinianism, and the
Millstone which will sink it into the Sea* for without this, there was no Need
or Necessity, either for the Incarnation or Death of Christ: But the Doctrine
of Satisfaction being Established, infers the Necessity of the Divinity of
Christ, (without which an Adequate Satisfaction could not be ^ade) and the
Divinity of Christ does necessarily infes the Plurality of Persons in the
Deity; which is the whole of the Difficulty alleged against the Trinity. So
closely are these Divine Principles of the Christian Religion linked and join a
together. The denial of any one of them breaks the whole Chain.

Dr. Burnet, in the abovesaid Vindication of himself, p. 101. Instead of
Recanting his former Error, proceeds expressly to Dispute yet farther against
the Satisfaction; and says, that, It is no part of the Doctrine of our Church
-- our Articles (say he) are the only Standard to Judge of our Doctrine, as far
as they go, but they have Determined nothing in this matter, but rest in the
General Notions of Expiation (which the Dr, Expounds not to mean SATISFACTION)
and of Reconciling us to God. Thus this Learned Doctor.

But my last Topic, with which I close my Observations upon his Discourse, has
sufficiently disproved this; and shown the Doctrine of the Satisfaction to be
expressly taught in the Homilies, and that they account not him who denies is to
be a Christian-Man, but an Adversary to Christ and his Gospel.

Now shall we suppose it possible that this Dr. never Read the Homilies, which
he has Subscribed? No, nor they very Articles which he Quotes? Or that the
Homilies are not contained, and all expressly named in the said Articles?

Or otherwise shall we think that he meant hereby to Impose upon unwary
Readers, and thus to Belie and Falsify the Doctrine of our Church, on purpose
to conceal the more effectually his own Apostasy from it?

But though every Body is not well acquainted with the Homilies (through an
inexcusable neglect of reading them Publicly, as it is enjoined) yet none can
come to the Sacrament, without taking notice that in the very Prayer of
Confecration, Christ is said to have made full Satisfaction for the Sins of the
whole World. The Dr. has forgot this too. --

Lastly, I will show you the Advantage which the Socinians make of these
seeming Defenses of the Christian Religion, which of all other Methods, do most
effectually undermine and betray it. See how they Glory and Exult in this
Performance of Dr. Burnets. Furthermore (say they) Considerations, p. 15. The
Socinians, and all other small and envied Parties of Christians, are in his
Debt, for Owning and Espousing Publicly, Diverse such Truths, as others perhaps
see as well as he, but have not Sincerity, nor Generosity enough, to avow them.

Here they detestably insinuate that all are Hypocrites who, in good Earnest,
do oppose Socinianism: And gather from the Account which Dr. T. and Dr. B. give
of the Christian Faith, that others are of the same Opinion; while they see
them not Opposed nor Censured for these their Blasphemous Heresy; but on the
contrary, they are Vindicated, Excused, and their vile Sophistry Palliated and
covered by the Divines in Fashion. What the Consequences of this may be is
dreadful to apprehend!

This Dr. B. has so Explained the Doctrine of the Church, as that the Socinians
may close with it. It is (say they) Considerat. p 31.32. the very Doctrine of
the Socinians, which they have owned from the beginning in all their Books. And
speaking of the Satisfaction, they truly say, That his Lordship himself,
Professedly dislikes it, and Argues against it. Which they there prove from p.
135. of his Discourse. In brief (say they) were the Questions about the Trinity
and the Divinity of our Savior adjusted; there would be no longer Dispute
about the Satisfaction; as his Lordship has stated it. Nor, to say true, have
we Controversy with him, about the two former Questions; for he contents
himself to say the Three, and when he says most, the Holy Three, disclaiming
(expressly) the word Persons; in the Sense, says he, that is commonly taken --
To say all at once (concludes that Socinian Author) I have not made this Reply,
to oppose it to his Lordship's Discourse, but to testify our Respects to his
Lordship; and that we submit to his Doctrine.

His Lordship (as this Socinian styles him) in his Vindication, p. 99. calls
this an Imputation upon him; but yet does not clear himself from it; for which
I refer to what follows, where it is Examined.

I conclude this Preface with giving the Reader a needful Caution against these
Horrible Socinians, that they are going about to Undermine the Authority of the
Holy Scriptures; because they cannot Reconcile them to their Damnable Heresy.
They have now (Considerat. p. 50.51.) Publicly assauted all the whole Works of
St. John, his Gospel, Epistles, and Revelation. This was the shortest way of
Answering them; and, at the same time, of confessing that they were, no
otherwise Answerable by them. I say nothing here to their Arguments, because
they are sufficiently Confuted in Dr. William's Vindication. Only let me
Observe, that if their pretenses against these parts of Scripture which make
most against them, and which therefore they Reject, do hold, the whole Canon of
the Scripture is rendered precarious, andour FAITH Uncertain. Which must be the
consequence, if these most Execrable of Heretics should prevail. Which God of
his Mercy prevent^

THE Charge of Socinianism AGAINST Dr. TILLOTSON, CONSIDERED, etc.
F. SInce our last Discourse upon the Famous Sermon of Hell, preached before
the Queen, 7th of March, 1690. upon Matthew. 25.46. and Printed by Their
Majesty's Special Command, The Author has this Year 93. published 4 Sermons,
two of them preached An. 79. and two An. 80. upon John 1.14. This he has done
to clear himself from Socinianism.


C. He says in his Advertisement to the Reader, That he has Revised and
Enlarged them; so that we cannot tell what Part of them was preached at the
time Specified, or what added since, to clear his Reputation now that he is got
into an higher Station, so as to make such a Vindication necessary. For it is
to be presumed that he did not think it worth his while before, otherwise he
would not so long have lain under the Imputation of having been neither
Christened, nor a Christian in his Principles: Both which have not only been
loudly Clamoured, but objected in Print against him many years ago. Wherein
only he truly Exercised Non-Resistance; For he opened not his Mouth.

But it is never too late to mend. And if he be not now; Pray God he may be a
good Christian before he dies. For I must confess, I do not think it
sufficiently Evinced in these Sermons. In the Reading of which the Character
which the History of the Unitarians gives (though falsely) of Grotius came into my
Mind; wherein he endeavors to make Grotius a tho'ro'-pac'd Socinian, but yet
to have covered his Meaning so craftily, particularly in his Comments upon this
First Chapter of St. John's Gospel, whence this Author has taken his Text, as
not to be known to be a Socinian, unless to a very discerning Reader.

And I must observe, that this Author in the foresaid 4 Sermons, though he seems
to speak home sometimes; yet has taken special Care to avoid the only
Shibboleth which the Christian Church could find out to discover the several
Sorts of Arian and other Heretics, who denied the Divinity of Christ. which
was Consubstantiality. That God the Son was of the same Substance with his
Father.

Several of them (for there were several Subdivisions of them, and of different
Opinions) would allow Christ to be of the like Substance with the Father* That
is (...), but not (...), that is of the same Substance. And except the single
Iota, which is betwixt these two Words, they could swallow the whole Nicene
Creed, by virtue of Distinctions, in which they were great Masters; And it is
very strange that this Author should forget this only Matterial Word, which is
the heart of the whole Cause, and expressly asserted in the Nicene Creed;
especially considering that Sermon 3. p. 140, 141. he quotes the words in that
Creed immediately following these [Being of one Substance with the Father]
which words he does not mention; and which being owned by him would have been a
more clear and full Vindication of his Orthodoxy in this point, than all these
4 Sermons; And since it was impossible he should forget it, he repeating the
same Sentence in the Creed wherein it is contained; we must conclude; that be
left it out on purpose, and consequently, That he does not really believe it;
though he endeavors with all his Art, to cast a Mist before the Reader's Eyes,
in other Expressions, which to some might seem Tantamount, as Arius and his
Followers did. Even our Modern Biddle in his Confession of Faith touching the
Holy Trinity, Printed in the Year 1648. and now reprinted in the Year 1691.
Artic. 3. Confesses Christ to be Our Lord, yea Our God, and yet in the same
Article asserts, That he has no other than a Human Nature. But he was a
Senseless Socinian, though now much Admired amongst them in London, and his Books
carefully reprinted. He Refined from the Socinians, and added to it the Old
Anthropomorphite Heresy, That God was a Body, of the Shape of a Man, Fingers,
Eyes, Toes. etc. As the Socinians refined from the Arians, and gave the Son of
God no Existence before his Birth of the Virgin, and have exceedingly Entangled
their Cause by it. The Arians were more Subtle and Learned than any of their
Follo^ers, who have grafted upon their Stock. It was hard to discover the depth
of Arianism, They defended themselves with Nice distinctions.

They would call the Son, God, yea, Truly and Really God. As this Author
confesses. 2 Sermon. p. 123. And what plainer or fuller words could readily be
desired, wherein to confess the true and real Divinity of Christ in opposition
to Angels and to Men; who are called Gods, but it is only in a Figurative and
Borrowed Sense? They are not truly and really God, as the Arians said of Christ.


F. The Author in the same Sentence explains himself, and those whom he calls
his Adversaries (whether Arians or Socinians) who say that Christ is truly and
really God, by adding these words, by Office, and by Divine Appointment and
Constitution.


C. That is a very vain Distinction: For a God by Office, or any other way, so
he be truly and really God, is as great as a God by Nature, because nothing can
be greater than God.

Besides, a God by Office, if he be truly and really God, must likewise be a
God by Nature, for he could not, otherwise, be Truly and Really God: as he
could not be truly and really Man, who were not a Man by Nature, or who did not
truly and really partake of the Nature of Man.

And, as a Consequence of all this, the Author tells, ibid. That our
Adversaries did allow the very same Honor and Worship to be given to the Truly
and Really God, though by Office, which we give to him who is God by Nature

And as these Adversaries could not be found out by the word GOD, which they
freely allowed to Christ; no, not by the words Truly and Really God: So neither
could the word Eternity fully discover them, viz. To assert Christ to have been
from Eternity.

We know several Adversaries to Christianity, who have asserted the World to
have been from Eternity, and yet would not allow it to be God. It is part of
the Muggletonian Creed, at this day, that Earth and Water were from Eternity,
and yet not God.

A Book called The Oracles of Reason (by that Execrable Char. Blount, Mr.
Gildon, and others of H^bb's wretched Disciples) does argue expressly for the
Eternity of the World, and of Mankind too, in the same State they are in now.
This is printed for our Instruction in the Year 1693. as one Branch of our
Glorious Reformation, and Christian Toleration. And if these Wits allow
Eternity to mere Men, much less would these Socinians stick to call Christ
Eternal, who own him to be truly and really God. For whatever is so, must be
Eternal.

Therefore, as I said before there was no Shibboleth, which all these our
Adversaries did refuse, but that of Consubstantiality, and which this Author
does refuse; and while he does so, he must still be reckoned among these
Adversaries to the Christian Cathelick Faith. Though Tho among what particular
Species or Denomination of them I will not determine; or whether he may not
have refined to a degree and Peculiarity by himself, for he delights in Bold
Strokes.

Mr. Biddle above told, is owned by the Socinians, as a good and laudable
Brother, tho he set up the Old and Exploded Heresy of the Athropomorphites:
And the Arians are admitted into their Communion, and, as such, quoted and
pleaded by them against the Orthodox, tho they held the Prae-Existence of
Christ before his Incarnation, which the Socinians have rejected. Among whom
some, even at this day, hold the Personality of the Word, and Holy Ghost, which
others of them do absolutely deny. Some of them make these to be Creatures,
others to be Really and Truly God, and not any thing different from God.

Nay the Old Nazarens, Ebionites, etc. are in the Brief Hist. of the Vnitar.
Quoted as the Primitive Fathers of the Socinian Opinion, some of whom rejected
the Scriptures, others all of it, but some Particular Books, which pleased
their Fancies; Others owned other Scriptures never Received by the Church; and
publicly allowed and practiced Altering the Holy Scriptures, which they called
Mending of them; and some of them said that Christ was begot by Joseph like
other Men, Nay by their Latudinarian Principles, Mahomet himself, and his
Alcoran must be admitted into their Confederacy, who speak more honorably of
Christ than the Socinians themselves, and deserve the Name of Unitarians, even
in their own Sense; as much as they can pretend to.

In the Church of Rome, if you will but own Expressly the Authority of their
Church, to the Height they Assert it; you shall be owned a good Catholic, and
excused by an Implicit Faith in all other Articles of the Creed, tho you be
never so ignorant, or hold particular Opinions different from the Church.

So, with the Socinians, if you will but reject the Consulstantiality of
Christ, you shall have Liberty to make him a God, or a Creature, or what you
will; You may talk of his Eternity, his True and Real Godhead; His being God
of God, Light of Light, etc. They have distinctions for all these. And tho they
love not; nor like the Expressions, yet they can make a hard shift with them:
They can puzzle People's Understandings, tho by very foolish and contradictory
Arguments, How God by his Infinite Power, might have bestowed True and Real
Divinity upon another, and that even from Eternity; for what he can do to day,
he might have done Yesterday, and so backwards for ever.

But then, this would have been only a voluntary Act of God; and what he did,
he might not have done, if he had so pleased; and consequently, that this
Adopted God, tho from Eternity, was still a Precarious, tho a True and Real
God; and yet not properly to be called a Creature, that is, like Finite Things,
produced in time.

But on the other hand, to make another Person Consubstantial, that is, of the
same Nature with God the Father, this infers the necessity of a Plurality of
Persons in the very Nature of the Godhead, and so to be of the Essence of God,
as Faculties are of the Essence of the Soul, so that it could not be a Soul
without the Faculties, nor a God, without the Persons, and tho one depends upon
another, and springs from another, yet they are all equally Necessary,
Coeternal, and Coequal, as being all of the same Nature.

This grows too hard for a Distinction, and our Unitarians, as they call
themselves, will compound for any thing, so you keep off from this
Consubstantiality.

And therefore the Christian Church could find no other Criterion to discover
the subtle Heresy of these pretended Unitarians of several Degrees and
Classes, who, tho differing never so widely among themselves, yet all join, and
reckon themselves as Brethren; against the most Glorious, and most ample
Revelations of the ever Blessed Trinity, Recorded in the Holy Scriptures of
God. And whoever refuse this Test, cannot be accounted sound in the Christian
Faith.

But where there is unwillingness it will one way or another show it self; and
it is easy to distinguish betwixt those Expressions which proceed from a
hearty Conviction, and those which are taken up out of force and necessity, to
clear our selves from an Imputation which lies upon Us.

This your Dr. discovers pretty plainly, in the present Case; for being
necessitated, in a Vindication of himself, as to the Doctrine of the Trinity, to
use the Word Persons, he does it, as brought to it against his Will, very
grudgingly and slightly, he does pass it over, and cannot conceal his
Inclination rather to the Distinction used by the Anti-Trinitarian Heretics,
to elude those Texts which speak of the Trinity, which is, that there are three
Differences in the Deity, which are expressed in Scripture by the three
Denominations of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: and which they allow are spoken
of after the manner of Persons; as Wisdom is said to build he House, etc. But
they will not allow them to be truly and properly Persons, or different
Subsistences, but only three several acceptations of the same Person, according
to the different Manner of his Revealing himself upon several occasions: And
thus they may make as many Persons, in this Sense of theirs, as their Fancy
pleases to suggest. And in this Sense, and no other, the Dr. is pleased to let
the word Persons pass, since we must have it; tho at the same time he gives it
such a stab, as shows that he is by no means reconciled to it. But take his own
words, which he gives as his determination of the whole Matter, and the utmost
to which he will be brought. Sermon. 2. p. 120.

Here then I fix my foot: That there are three Differences in the Deity, which
the Scripture speaks of by the Names of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and every
where speaks of them as we use to do of three distinct Persons: And therefore I
see no reason why in this Argument we should Nicely abstain from using the word
Person; tho I remember that St: Jerome does somewhere desire to be excused from
it.

Thus the Dr. and according to this, where he has occasion to name the Three
Persons of God, he adds to explain himself, his own word Differences, which he
likes better, thus, p. 122. The Three Differences or Persons in the Divine
Nature, expressed in Scripture by the Names of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
etc. and so in other places.

And here, He has fixed his foot; you shall have no more of him, if you be not
pleased with this, you must let it alone, and trouble him no more about
Socinianism, Arianism, or any of these like Matters.

But this somewhere of St Jerome's was a strange Quotation for so Grave a Dr.
to bring into the Pulpit upon so serious a Subject, if he thought it so. For, I
fancy he spoke this with a Smile, saying to himself -- I Will make this poor
Auditory believe that I have a place of St. Jerome under my Thumb, to overthrow
all this business of different Persons in God; which word since they force me
to use, I Will be revenged on it. But I will not name the Place in St. Jerome,
for there are Rogues will be Examining of it, and put me to a great deal of
trouble; It will do well enough for a Squib among the Crowd.

But these poor hopes are vanished; for this Dr. has already been taken to
task, and stands Corrected for this, by a much more Learned Person than
himself. The Author of the Animadversions upon Dr. Sherlock's Book Entitled, A
Vindication of the Holy and ever Blessed Trinity, etc. Printed 1693. There
Chap. 8. p. 265. This Place of St. Jerome is quoted. And it is shown, that St.
Jerome did not Scruple to use the word [Person] or desired to be excused (as our
Author comically words it, by way of wit) but on the contrary, that he did use
the word [Person] and in the same Sense, in this Question, which is put upon it
by us at this day, as one of the distinct Subsistences of the Divine Nature, or
Substance, whom he did own to be Tres Personas Subsistentes. But that what
scruple he had was concerning the Greek word Hypostasis, which yet he did not
absolutely reject, nor refuse to make use of it, but thought it needed some
Explanation, or rather Caution, in the use of it.

But this Author (whatever scruple he may have, which he signifies in Hints
very plain) will not too nicely abstain from the Word Person (or any other
word) since he can make it signify what he pleases, only a Difference, or a
Somewhat, or a No-what, by a Mental Reservation, tho he knows those he disputes
with, and those he speaks to, take it in another sense.

The great Art of the Socinians is in altering the meaning of Words, so that no
words almost can bind them. And this Dr. does very subtlely recommend their
Interpretations of Scripture, by bringing them sometimes to prove the Divinity
of Christ, that so he may take you off the much more strong and full proof
which lies in the true and plain meaning of the words. For example. Sermon. 2. p.
^0. He brings Phil. 2; 6. etc. as a Proof of the Divinity of Christ; who being
in the Form of God, thought it no Robbery to be equal with God. But instead of
he thought is not Robbery, (...). The Dr. would have the Sense to be, He did
not arrogate to himself to be equal with God, though it is quite contrary to the
words, which are literally translated. He thought it not Robbery to be equal:
(i. e.) He did make himself equal. He did not arrogate to himself to be Equal
(i. e.) He did not make himself Equal. Senses which are in terms opposite. He
did, says the Text; He did not, says Dr T. This is the Impudent answer which
the Brief History of the Unitarians gives to this Text, and which the Dr. here
recommends. And he says, that that Phrase is used so by Plutarch. But he names
not the words, nor Quotes the Place, which he would have done, if he had
thought it for his purpose. For he cannot deny that the words are rightly
Translated, and they cannot bear two opposite Senses,

But now to bring himself off from seeming to favor the Socinians in this
Intepretation: He pretends to prove the Divinity of Christ from it, thus;
Christ did not arrogate to himself to be Equal with God; (i. e.) He made no
Ostentation of his Divinity, and this the Dr. says, He takes to be the true
Meaning of that Phrase.

But it means much more easily, That Christ had no Divinity to make Ostentation
of, that he did not so much as pretend to it, or arrogate it to himself.

By this Socinian Interpretation of the Dr's, Here is first a very weak
Argument brought for the Divinity of Christ, which is the most effectual Method
to destroy a Cause. Secondly, Here is a very strong Argument for his Divinity
diverted and eluded. For let the Text lie in the plain and Grammatical
Interpretation of the words, and they are not to be answered by the Socinians:
For if it was no Robbery in Christ to be Equal with God, it follows
unavoidably, That he was True and Real God by Nature.


F. Let us come now to the other great point of Socinianism, the Doctrine of
Satisfaction. They deny that the Death of Christ was a Satisfaction paid to the
Justice of God for our Sins, for the Dr. has Cleared himself in this Point
likewise.


C. He has Cleared himself indeed! not only to have been, but still to
continue a rank Socinian in this Point, even where he endeavors most to make a
show, as if he were come off it. He mumbles it like Thistles. For tho the Great
point be the Satisfying God's Justice. Yet he is so very Careful to avoid
coming upon that Question, That he names it but once in all those 4 Sermons;
And that after such a manner as plainly discovers, that he is still of the
Opinion he told us in his Sermon of Hell, of which he says there is no
Certainty, Because there was no need of any Satisfaction to Gods Justice at
all. And that God's Justice is to be Considered no otherwise than as a
Politi^u^ to secure his Government, and therefore does not infer any punishment
of Sinners, But that his threats may be only in Terrorem, or so far to be
inflicted as may secure his Government from the Rebellion and Usurpation of
wicked Men. As if God were afraid of being Deposed by them. A strange Notion of
the Justice of God! But this New Doctrine of making Hell precarious does totally
overthrow the Doctrine of the Satisfaction of Christ, and plucks it up Root and
Branch: For, if there be no certainty of a Hell, there can be no Necessity of
Satisfaction for Sins; which this means are remitted without it. But your
Author thinks to put us off with a Complement in this matter. Sermon. 4. p. 211.
He says, that this way of Remitting Sins by the Death of Christ, was a way,
indeed, very Honorable to the Justice of God, and the Authority of his Laws.
And this is every word he says, as to the Justice of God in all these 4 Sermons.

He comes off like a Courtier, I confess, and will let it be very Honorable
for God; (that is Civil!) if we would let alone any Arguments as to what the
Nature of Justice requires, which makes it more than Honorable, even
Necessary, That a full and adequate Satisfaction be made to Justice; otherwise,
Justice can be no more Justice, and God is no more Justice.

Besides, it will appear that, if there was no necessity of satisfying Justice,
it was not only, not very Honorable in God, but even not reconcilable to any
Notion we can have of Justice, to take the life of an Innocent Person without
any necessity in the world.


F. You are a sort of People hard to be pleased, Therefore this good Dr. in
Compliance to your Infirmity; and because indeed he has treated very slightly
of the Satisfaction in these 4 Sermons; he has since preached a Sermon before
the Queen at White Hall 9th of April. 93. upon Heb. 9.29. on purpose,
Cencerning the Sacrifice and Satisfaction of Christ; and it is published by Her
Majesty's Special Command, and was put into the Gazette.


C. All this Honor had his Sermon of Hell above told; of which, we have
formerly discoursed at large; and this shall have as fair dealing from me, to
be Impartially and honestly examined, without any Flattery.

First therefore, I will show the most Barbarous, Absurd, and Blasphemous
Notion he has of the Christian Religion in General.

And then, as to the Doctrine of Satisfaction, that he is Expressly Socinian.

His Notion of the Christian Religion, in these first Four, and this single
Sermon expressed, did I confess amaze me, beyond any thing ever I read, except
of the same Author: And if no name had been affixed, I should have guessed no
other than Muggleton, it is exactly his Size of apprehending the Scriptures, or
rathe ofr a Lucian, or a Julian to mock, and slander Christianity out of the
World.

But that you may know whether there be Reason for all this. First, I will show
you, That he makes the Foundation of Christion Religion to be some foolish and
wicked Fancies, which got into People's heads, he knows not, and says, no
matter, How, and instead of Reforming these, and commanding us to Renounce and
Abbor them; which one would have expected; and which Christ did to all other
Wickedness; The Dr's Scheme is, That God in Compliance with these, and to
indulge Men in these same Wild and wicked Phancies, did send Christ, Took his
Life, and Instituted the whole Aeconomy of the Christian Religion.

This appears so Dreadful, and astonishingly Impious, that you must have
patience to take it in pieces, and see by what degrees the Dr. arrived at this
New pitch of Super-Hobbism.

First, Those Revelations which all the Christian World has hitherto believed
God gave at the Beginning to Adam, and after to the Patriarchs and Prophets
more expressly of the Promised Seed; and those Types and Institutions which God
from the Beginning did appoint as Shadows and sensible Representations of the
Expiatory Death of Christ upon the Cross, such as Sacrifices, which for this
End were commanded to Adam, practiced by Cain and Abel his Children, and
descended by uninterrupted Tradition, even to his Heathen Posterity; tho they
knew not their Original, more than they did their own, or that of the World's;
All these the Dr. thinks to be only Fancies and Imaginations. which came (he
knows not how) into Men's Brains.

And that to comply with these was the End of Christ's Incarnation, Death, etc.
Whereas, on the Contrary, it has been the Received Opinion, that instead of
God's imitating or following the Inventions of Men, or Inspirations of the
Devil, That the Institutions of false and Idolatrous Religions, were but
Corruptions and Imitations of the True Religion Instituted by God; and that in
this the Devil was but an Ape of God Almighty, whence arose the saying, That
where God has a Church, the Devil has a Chapel, (i. e.) That the Devil does
Ape and Imitate the Institutions which God has appointed in his Holy Religion.
Hence the Devil had his Sacrifices, his Feasts, his Priests, etc. Not that
these Institutions were of the Devil's Invention; He did only imitate God's
Institution in all these things, as the Feast to his Calves, was in imitation
of God's Feast in Judah, (1 Kings 12.32. But this Author turns the Tables, and
would have the Devil, or wicked Men, by his Inspiration to have first invented
these Religious Rites; And then that God did follow their Steps, and framed his
Religion after the Pattern of theirs, or in Condescension to their wicked
Phancies or Imaginations, as this Author words it. By which means, instead of
the common Opinion, That God was the Author of all Religious Worship, and the
Devil the Corrupter of it; This Author would persuade us. That the Devil was
the Author and first Inventer of it, and that God came in but at the second
hand in imitation of the Devil, and to graft upon his Stock; So that, if the
Devil and Foolish men had let alone their Inventions, as of the Necessity of
Sacrifices, and Vicaricus Suffering, of a Mediator, and of Mysteries; we had
had no need of a Mediator, of a Christ to have been a Sacrifice for us, or of
any Mystery, or Religion at all: For all these the Dr. tells us, we owe to
these Fantastical, and even Diabolical Prejudices, and Gross Conceptions of
Mankind. And this was not out of Forgetfulness of what is said above of their
Institution by God. No, He mentions it several times, but so slightly and with
that Contempt, as if no stress at all were to be laid upon it.

Page 5. of the single Sermon. He says. This Notion of the Expiation of Sin by
Sacrifice, whether it had its first Rise from Divine Revelation, and was
afterward propagated from Age to Age by Traditiou^ I say, from whencesoever
this Notion come. -- And P. 11. He (God) seems either to have possessed Mankind
with this Principle, or to have permitted them to be so persuaded, that Sin was
not to be Expiated but by Blood; that is, either by the Death of the Sinner. or
of the Sacrifice.

Sermon. 4. upon John 1.14. p. 185. It is not easy to give a certain account of
the true Original of some Notions and Prejudiees concerning God and Religion,
which have generally obtained in the World. Several of these Notions he
mentions in the same place, as Expiation of Sin by Sacrifices; The Necessity of
Mediators to God, Reverence to Mysteries, etc.

And these Notions (however come by) He does not make to be grounded upon any
Truth, any solid Reason, but to be merely Fantastical, to be common Prejudices
of Mankind; Nay to be not only weak and fool^sh, but wicked and abominable.
Hear his own words, Beginning of Sermon 4th. p. 179. He calls these, The
Weaknesses and Common Prejudices of Mankind -- very weak and gross
apprehensions. p. 189. very edd and Fantastical -- very Lewd and Impious --
very Inhuman and Cruel, and every way unworthy of the Deity. p. 206. Inveterate
prejudices. Single Sermon. p. 7. Barbarous and Inhuman. p. 29. Enormities and
Cruelties. -- Vnreas^nable and Bloody way of Worship. p. 35. Inhumne and
Ineffectual way of Sacrificing one another, whereby instead of Expiating their
Guilt, they did inflame it; and by thinking to make Atonement for their Sins,
they did in truth add to the number and heinousness of them. Sermon. 4. p. 186.
He calls this Worship the Worship of Devils, and not of God. And Sermon. 3. p.
155. He confesses, The Devil and the World to be the two Great Enemies of our
Salvation, which Christ came to Conquer and Triumph over.

Now, who would imagine, that the End of Christ's Coming should be to gratify
these Enemies of his whom he came to Destroy; To comply and condescend to
these; and to indulge these Wild and Diabolical Notions of Mankind!

But this subtle Doctor has found it out. Sermon. 4. p. 179. The Wisdom of God
thought fit thus to order things, in Great Condescension to the Weakness, and
common Prejudices of Mankind. -- P. 184. For the Religion and Laws which God
gave them were far from being the Best, and most Perfect in themselves. In
which Sense some understand that passage in Ezekiel, where it is said, That God
gave them Statutes which were not good p. 187 God seems likewise to have very
much suited the D^spe^sation of the Gospel, and the Method of our Salvation by
the Incarnation and Sufferings of his Son, to the common Prejudices of Mankind,
especially of the Heathen World -- by Gratifying them in some measure, and in a
gracious Compliance with our Weakness, by bending and accommodating the way and
method of our Salvation to our weak Capacity, and imperfect Conceptions of
things. p. 186. God seems to have had great Consideration of some very weak and
gross Approhensions of Mankind concerning Religion. p. 206. And he has in
great Goodness and Condescension to our Inveterate Prejudices concerning these
things. -- app^ared in the end of the World to take away Sin by the Sacrifice
of himself. Single Sermon. p. 5. Anether reason of this Lispensation seems to
have been a Gracious Condescension and Compliance of Almighty God, with a
certain apprehension and persuasion which had very early and universally
obtained among Mankind, concerning the Expiation of Sin, and appeasing the
effendid Deity by Sacrifices. p. 6. God was pleased to comply so far with these
Notions and Apprehensions of theirs, as to make his own Son both a Priest and a
Sacrifice. Sermon. 4 p. 192. And indeed a great part of the Jewish Religion and
Worship was a plain Condescension to the General Apprehensions of Men
concerning this way of Appeasing the Deity by Sacrifice. p. 193. And with this
General Notion of Mankind, whatever the ground or foundation of it might be,
God was pleased so far to comply, as once for all to have a General Atonement
made for the Sins of all Mankind, by the Sacrifice of his Only Son. p. 195. The
World was mightily bent upon Addressing their Requests and Supplications, not
to the Deity immediately, because their Superstition thought that too great a
Presumption, but by some Mediators between the Gods and them, who might with
advantage, in this humble Manner, present their Requests so as to find
Acceptance.

This Notion of theirs he calls Superstition, to think that there needed any
Mediator betwixt God and Man. They indeed mistook the Mediator, and therein was
their Superstition and Idelatry: But the Notion was Right and Necessary; and
deduced to them from Adam. (to whom it was Revealed) though they knew it not. But
if their Notions of a Mediator and Sacrifice for Sin was wicked, Abominable,
etc. as this Author says, was it not wicked and abominable to comply with such
a wicked and abominable Notion? Nay, were not the very thing of a Mediator, or
Sacrifice for Sin, a wicked and abominable thing? How otherwise was the bare
Notion of it so wicked and abominable? I see not how he can escape upon this
Scheme, either to justify the Heathen Sacrifices, or Condemn that of Christ.
Either to say that there was no need of a Mediator, or to Confess that their
Notion of it, which he calls Superstition was just and good. But if it was
Superstition, is it not Superstition still? If a Mediator in General be
Superstition, is not this or that Mediator the same Superstition? Is not
appointing any Mediator a Superstition? And must it not be Superstition in any
to think it necessary? As the Heathens did.

And yet to Comply with this Superstition of theirs, the Dr. maker the end of
Christ's coming to be our Mediator, p. 196. In a Gracious Compliance with this
common Apprehension -- God was pleased to constitute and appoint One in our
Nature to be a perpetual Advocate and Intercessor in Heaven for us. Again we
know the Socintans are much offended, that there should be any Mystery in our
Religion. And for this the Dr. gives the same Reason, (viz.) That it was only
to comply with an odd Notion the World had got to have M^steries in their
Religion, Sermon. 4 p. 188. The World was much given to admire Mysteries in
Religion, p. 190. Since the W^rld had such an Admiration for Mysteri^s -- God
gave them a Mystery inde^d. The Mystery of Godliness, God manifest in the
Flesh, etc. 1 Timothy 3.16.

Otherwise we needed not have had any Mystery in our Religion, norany Mediator,
nor any Expiatory Sacrifice.

Blessed God! This Man makes no more of the Mysteries of our Religion than to
satisfy Men's foolish Curiosities. He that will have a May Pole. shall have a
May Pole. Since you will have Mysteries, here is one for you -- God manifest in
the Flesh -- This is to satisfy their foolish longing after Mysteries, and to
give you your fill of Mysteries -- Was there ever so impious a Burlesque upon
God and upon the Religion of Christ! As if he was Incarnate for no other end
but to make People wonder and Gaze, and because of the Mystery forsooth! And
that he was Crucified, only to outdo Raw-Head and Bloody Bones, the Inhumanity
of the H^athen Sacrifices! That is, to Cure the Wickedness and Folly of Men, by
Overacting them in both! For what are Mysteries, without any further.
Consideration than as Mysteries, that is, Wonders and strange things, but the
height of Folly, perfect Rary-Shows? And what an account is it of Religion to
say, That God was manifest in the Flesh to satisfy such Childish Curiosity,
and because the World was given to admire Mysteries!

They were given likewise to Sacrifice, not only Beasts, but to Sacrifice one
Man for another, an Innocent Person for the Guilty. But was not this a very
wicked and inhuman Custom? Yes. The Dr. confesses it to have been even
Diabolical. And yet to comply with this wicked and Diabolical Custom, and in
Imitation of it, he would have to be the reason why God Sacrificed Christ, an
Innocent Person for the Guilty?

It makes all my Flesh creep, and my Soul to tremble within me, but to repeat
such Blasphemous Schemes of Divinity, which makes God to be the Devil's Ape,
and to have followed his wicked Inventions in the Institution of the Christian
Religion.

But on the Contrary Christ himself assures us, That he came to destroy the
works of the Devil, not to Compound with the Devil, much less to Gratify him,
in following his wicked Suggestions which he had put into the Minds of Men; and
to carry them to greater heights of wickedness than ever the Devil himself
could have done, or so much as have imagined, viz. Instead of the Sacrifices of
Beasts, or of Men (which the Heathens practiced) to sacrifice the S^n of God
himself.


F. The Dr. puts this Objection, p. 28. of single Sermon. And gives two Answers
to it: First, That God did not command his Son to be Sacrificed, but his
Providence permitted the wickedness and violence of Men to put him to Death. --
And that this is no mo^e a Reslection upon the Providence of God than any
Enormities and Cruelties which by his Permission are daily committed in the
World.

1. But if there was no more than God's bare Permissions in the Sacrifice of
Christ, as in all other wicked Action, How was his Death a Sacrifice more than
the Death of any other Man? You say, that God's Govenant with him for Remission
of the Sins of the Penitent was grounded upon his Death, and made with him
before his Death; was not this a more than a bare Permission of his Death? How
did God make him both a Priest and a Sacrifice, by his Death, as the Dr. says
he did, if he concurred no otherwise to his Death than by such a bare
Permission as he suffers an honest Man to be murdered by Thieves? But

2. This cannot be called bare Permission. It was a Method of God's own finding
out, and Ordering; which exceeded the Inventions of Men and Angels. It is said,
Acts 4.28. That God did determine it before to be done. But tho God permits
evil, You will not say, That he does determine, or Order it to be done; And God
sent his Son for this very end and purpose. This was more than only permitting
it.


F. The Dr. Explains it, p. 32. by this Comparison, Suppose, says he, A
Malefactor condemned, and the King's Sin to save him -- is contented to submit
to great Disgrace, and Sufferings.


C. But suppose the King's Son prays and begs of his Father with Tears, That he
would excuse him from such Suffering, as Christ prayed to his Father. Mat.
26.39. That that Cup might pass from him?


F. You would seem to imply as if Christ's Suffering were not voluntary.


C. No, not all. But that it was not only his Father's bare Permission, but his
express will and pleasure that his Son should Suffer. Therefore Christ said,
Not mine, but thy will be done, And therefore because it was his Father's Will
that he should Suffer, he did voluntarily and resignedly submit to it. But I
hope you will make this something more than his Father's bare permitting of it.

It is said Isaiah 53.10. That it pleased the Lord to bruise him (Christ) and
to put him to Grief, and he made Christ's Soul an Offering for Sin. This
exceeds a bare Permssion, such as that by which God permits the Enormities and
Cruelties committed in the World, which is all this Author would have meant by
it.


F. His second Answer is, p. 29. That by this means God did at once put an End
to that unreasonable and bloody way of Worship, which has been so long
practiced in the World -- And it has ever since obtained this effect, of
making all other Sacrifices to cease, in all Parts of the World where
Christianity has prevailed.


C. This is only repeating the Objection, instead of answering it, (as if the
Sacrifice of Christ (upon this Author's Scheme) were not more unreasonable and
bloody than any other Sacrifices used before.

And this being all the Dr. says to the Objection, we must suppose that he
still thinks it to be so unreasonable. And it is the more, and not the less so,
that it was as he says, p. 22. to comply with an unreasonable Expectation Men
had of being saved by the Vicari^us Suffering of some other in their stead; and
that it was to gratify this unreasonable Expectation of theirs, That Christ
did suffer; for, if it was unreasonable for them to expect it, it was
unreasonable in Christ to suffer it.


F. Repeat the Dr's own Words --


C. We are now upon vindicating Gods Providence for the permission of Evil.
that is, starting another question, to divert us from this we are upon, which
is, The reason of Gods sending his Son to Expiate the Sins of Men.


C. But this Expectation how unreasonable soever, plainly shows it to have been
the Common apprehension of Mankind in all Ages that God would not be appeased,
nor should Sin be pardoned without Suffering: But yet so that Men generally
conceived good hopes that upon the Repentance of Sinners, God would accept of a
Vicarious Punishment, that is, of the Suffering of some other in their stead.
And very probably, as I said before, in Compliance with this apprehension of
Mankind, and in Condescension to it, as well as for other weighty Reasons, best
known to the Divine Wisdom, God was pleased to find out such a Sacrifice.


F. The Dr. says here, That it is only probable that was the Reason.


C. Is it probable that God would Sacrifice his Son, in Compliance with an
Expectation, How unreasonable soever?

But the Dr. in what I have quoted out of him before does not make any doubt,
or perhaps of it; but sets it down as a plain Case. As Sermon. 4. p. 192. And
indeed (says he, in a positive Asseveration) A great Part of the Jewish
Religion was a PLAIN Condescension to the general Apprehensions of Men
concerning this way of appeasing God by Sacrifice. And therefore he does not
scruple Impiously to Blaspheme that Religion which God gave to the Jews, and
therein to arraign God its Author. He says, as above Quoted. Sermon. 4. p. 184.
That the Religion and Laws which God gave them was far from being the B^st;
Nay, plainly, that they were not good, by applying to them that Text. Ezekiel.
20.25. or at least approving others Application of it that way, to which end he
produces it.


F. These Laws were not Good, that is, says the Dr. they were very imperfect in
Comparison of what he could have given them.


C. So you may say of the Christian Laws; they are Imperfect in respect to
those of Heaven. At this rate, nothing can be good but God. Yet God said of his
works, that they were very good. And said so of his Laws which he gave to the
Jews out of his own mouth. And sure it is a most presumptuous Blasphemy for any
Man to say, that they were not good. They were the same with the Christian
Laws, as much as could be before Christ came. They were all Types and
Forerunners of his coming; and therefore they are called Romans 7.14.
Spiritual; their meaning was all Spiritual; They are called Heb. ^^ 2.16.
the Gospel, and it is said, that the Gospel was first preached to the Jews, and
that Acts 15.11.
they were saved by the Gospel, as well as we. The preaching of Christ is the
Gospel; and he was preached and exhibited in the whole Jewish Aeconomy, as the
Seed promised, Genesis 3.15. which things the Angels desire (...) To stoop down
with Reverence and admire. 1 Pet. 1.12.
They exceeded all Created understandings ever to comprehend the full Glory,
and Goodness, and Wisdom which is contained in them, they far excel the whole
material Creation; and the least Mat.
Tittle of the Law is preferred before Heaven and Earth, 5.18. Luke 16.17.
and shall out-last them. And was this Law far from being the best? Could this
wise Dr. have found out better? Were these Statutes which were not good, and
Judgments whereby Men should not live? Was this the meaning of these words.
Ezekiel. 20.25? Whereas the Reason given in the very same Sentence, v. 24 for
God's threatening to give them Statutes which were not good, was as a just
Judgment upon them for despising those good Statutes which he had given them.
Such Statutes, says God, v. 11. which if a Man do he shall even live in them.
Yet this Author would have these to be the Statutes whereby men should not
live. This is an Excellent Interpretation! And for the word give, which I
suppose must have misled this Author, viz. That God is said to give them these
Statutes which were not good, and therefore he has Interpreted these to be the
Law which God gave them; God is said to give them these evil Statutes, v. 25.
no otherwise than as he is said to pollute them, v. 26. that is, to suffer them
to be polluted, and to follow Idolatry, there meant by the Statutes which were
not good. As God has threatened, Deuteronomy. 4.28. That it they would not serve him,
He would give them up to Idolatry to serve Gods of Wood and Stone, etc. But to
say that the Laws which God gave were far from being the best, that they were
not good, is such a bold stroke as stops nothing short of Blasphemy. Whereas to
express their exceeding Excellency, and that there was no manner of defect or
imperfection in them; They are often compared to Gold purified 7 times in the
Fire, till no dross at all was left. They were called Prove. 30.5.
Pure and Perfect, and therefore we are commanded neither to add nor diminish,
They are called our Deuteronomy. 32.47.
Life, Romans 7.2.
Holy, and Just, and Good, Psalm. 119.96.
far exceeding all Perfection; But Dr. Til -- t thinks they were nothing but a
Complaisance to the Folly and Wickedness of Men. O good God! Was the Glorious
Gospel and Salvation by Christ, not only exhited under its Types in the L^r,
but Tit. 1.2.
promised before the World began. Ephesians. 3.11.
Purposed from Eternity, Ps. 119.15 2.
Founded forever; was the Heb. 13.20.
Blood of the Everlasting Testament shed for no other Reasons but to comply
with Men's foolish Expectations, How unreasonable soever!

That such dreadful Blasphemy should ever be heard in a Christian Nation! That
it should pass uncensured!


F. The Dr. says there may be other weighty Reasons, best known to the Divine
Wisdom.


C. This is perfect shirting and putting off. No doubt the Divine Wisdom his
many reasons for every thing He does, which we cannot Comprehend. But the Dr.
gives no other reason; and it is to be supposed he would have given a better, if
he had it. Our dispute is not what God knows, but what God has Revealed. And
how this Dr. understands those Revelations, and whether according to the
received Doctrine of the Catholic Church, particularly as it is professed in
the Church of England, in that Great and Fundamental Point of the Satisfaction
of Christ, wherein if what is said be not sufficient. I will further show you,
that he is altogether a Socinian, even in this Sermon which he has published to
blind the Eyes of the World, and free himself from that Imputation.

First, He absolutely and avowedly cuts off the whole Doctrine of Satisfaction
due to the Justice of God for our Sins; or if due, that it need not be paid,
and therefore, whatever other reasons there may be, That can be none o^ the
Reasons of Christ's Dying for us; Not (says the Dr. in this Sermon, p. 11.)
That God could not have pardoned sin without Satisfaction made to his Justice,
either by the suffering of the sinner himself, or if a Sacrifice in his stead.
p. 26. God did not want Goodness to have forgiven sin freely, and without any
satisfaction.


F. Why? Will you say that God did want so much Goodness?


C. By Goodness here you mean Mercy; and we know it is the proper effect of
Mercy to forgive; and God's Mercy is Infinite; and so is his Justice, they do
not Thwart or Contradict one another, but they Exalt and Magnify one another.

Now the Dr. would put a Sophism upon us. To bid us deny that Goodness, or
Mercy will forgive; Or to say that God is stinted in his Mercy or Goodness. But
we will say, That Justice cannot be satisfied, without full Payment made; and
that God is not crippled or stinted in his Justice more than in his Mercy: for
He is Justice it self, and therefore what is necessary to the Nature of
Justice, must be so to His Nature, for they are the same. In your Sense, Gods
Atributes fight with one another, and one must overcome the other.

But, as we explain it, They all stand Full and Infinite, and no one Encroaches
upon the other: but they Rejoice and Exalt together, and one Extols and
Glorifies the other.

That Gods Justice is magnified in Requiring full satisfaction, His Wisdom in
Finding it; and his Mercy or Goodness in Giving that Satisfaction for us.

Now I appeal to your self whether this be not more Rational, than to make the
End of all the Glorious Dispensation of the Gospel to be nothing else than a
Compliance with a parcel of unreasonable; and even wicked and Diabolical
Fancies which had possessed Men's Minds, no matter how: Especially considering
that the Author and Preacher of this Glorious Conceit, Sermon. 4. p. 180.
confesses, That notwithstanding of all that he can say in favor of this Brat
of his own Brain, It may still seem strange to a Considering Man, that God,
who, without all this Circumstance and Condescension, could have done the
Business for which his Son came into the World -- should yet make choice of
this way for the Redemption and Recovery of fallen Man. That is to say, That
God should Sacrifice his own Son for nothing, to no purpose in the World, when
all that his Son came for, might have been as well done without it. And this
indeed must eternally seem strange to any Man of common sense.


F. But the Doctor defends himself in the words just following, (viz.) I make
no manner of doubt to say that it would be a great presumption and boldness in
any Man, to affirm that the infinite Wisdom of God could not have brought about
the Salvation of Men by any other way, than by this very way in which he has
done it.


C. This is the Doctor's usual Topic (which I observed to you in our last
Conversation concerning his Sermon of Hell) when Reason fails him to fly to
God's Omnipotence, and dare us to say that God cannot do this or that; and
therefore that what the Dr. says, may be true, for who dare say that God cannot
make it true?


F. But after all, will you say that God could not have saved Man any other way
than by the Sacrifice of Christ.


C. To avoid that Irreverent manner of Expression, of saving God cannot -- I
say that, from the very nature of Justice, which is God, there was a necessity
for a full and adequate Satisfaction to be made for sin.

Whether any other Satisfaction could have been found besides the Sacrifice of
Christ? is another question. And not to enter into the Depths of God, I will
give you these Reasons why no other way was possible by any Argument or Thought
imaginable to us. Because the Person must be Infinite, who could pay an
Infinite Debt, (for such is Sin, being an offense against Infinite Goodness)
and likewise must be Man, that the same Nature which offended, should make the
Satisfaction. And therefore that Christ took upon him the Nature of Man, and
not the Person of any Man; that he might make Satisfaction for Mankind, and not
only for any particular Person. Hence he took all our Natural, but none of our
Personal Infirmities. He was subject to Sleep, Weariness, Grief, Pain, and even
Death, all which are incident to our Nature: But not to Sickness, Blindness,
Lameness, or any Personal infirmities. Since therefore it was necessary that
our Redeemer must be God-Man, I think it will follow that it could be none
other but Christ.

Again, I think this Question is decided Matthew. 26.39. where Christ prays, That
if it were possible that Cup might pass from him. Which shows that it was not
possible for him to accomplish the Redemption of Man which he had undertaken;
without suffering death, Otherwise, no doubt, God would not have refused the
Petition of his Well beloved Son. And it is no impeachment of the Wisdom of
God, to say, there was no other way possible. But, on the contrary, it is
carrying the notion of Wisdom to the utmost height, that when there was but one
possible way, Wisdom should find it out.

And the Dr. himself stumbles upon this unawares: it is hard to be constant in
Error, which is it self all unconstancy. p. 10 of single Sermon. he said, That
nothing less than the perfect Innocence and Holiness of him who was to be a
Sacrifice for us, could have explated the guilt of our sins, and purchased
eternal Redemption for us. Secondly, Great Sufferings likewise in our nature,
even to the suffering of Death were requisite to the perfect expiation of Sin; I
say even to the suffering of Death.

These are the Doctor's words. From whence I argue, That none had perfect
Innocence and Holiness but God, and therefore that none but He COVLD have
Explated the Guilt of our Sins.

Secondly, The Sufferings, for Explating the Guilt of our Sins, must be in our
Nature, therefore the Expiator must be likewise Man.

Thirdly, These Sufferings must be even unto Death. From all which it follows,
that none could be this Expiator but Christ God and Man, and that he must
Suffer even unto Death.

If all which be true, then I desire the Dr. to answer his own Objection, and
tell us how it was possible for the Redemption of Man to have been effected any
other way?

I would recommend to him his own Advice upon this very matter. Sermon. 4th p.
181. which he says he follows, All along, to take the express Declarations, or
at least, the pregnant Intimations of Scripture, for his Ground and Guide: it
being always safest to take the Reasons of the Divine Counsels and Actions from
God himself.

Now we would gladly know (for he has no where told us) in what place of
Scripture it is revealed, that God's sending his Son and all the Aeconomy of
the Gospel was to Gratify and Indulge the Senseless and Wicked Prejudices,
which Men had picked up concerning Religion. For that is the account the Dr.
gives us of his Faith. And it is more Monstrous by far than any ever I heard
set up, even by the Socinians themselves.

Yet the Dr. does not forsake them, though he thus advances sometimes in
stretches beyond them. For single Sermon. p: 21. He sets up in express terms, the
account the Socinians give of the Remission of Sins by Christ, viz. That it was
not upon account of any Satisfaction made by Christ for our sins; but only an
Arbitrary Covenant, they cannot tell why, which God made with Christ, that if
he would be Crucified, God would remit the sins of the Penitent. And that there
was no need nor necessity for this Covenant, because God might have remitted
sins, as well without this Covenant; or upon any other Covenant, the turning of
a Straw, or what you will; or upon no Covenant at all. So that this Covenant
with Christ, was wholly Causeless, Needless and Arbitrary.

The same Socinian Covenant this Author sets up in the page above quoted, where
he says, That upon the Sufferings of Christ, God thereupon entered into a
Covenant of Grace and Mercy with Mankind, wherein he engaged himself to forgive
the sins of these who Believe and Repent.

Thus this Author holds with the Socinians by excluding the Satisfaction from
being any part of the Covenant or considered at all in it.


F. You would make one think it strange how the Dr. came to Preach and Publish
such a Sermon as this with a design against the Socinians.


C. It was really to do them service; And reconcile Men more to their
principles, by lessening the Differences which are conceived betwixt them and
us, (a Topic much in practice with the Jesuits in their Disputes with the
Protestants, as Mahomet went to the Mountain which would not come to him) which
he makes so small as to consist in nothing but words. p. 32. to signify just
nothing. p. 31. For an account of this you will find pp. 16. 31. and 32. He
sums up the difference 'twixt the Socinians and us, as to the Doctrine of
Satisfaction, to consist only in this, That the Socinians say Christ suffered
for us, or for our Sake; whereas others would have it understood that Christ
suffered for us, that is, in our stead. Which the Dr. proves, p. 32. to be a
mere Controversy about words. And so the matter is shortly reconciled, which
has so much taken up the Christian Church. And that very undeservedly and
uncharitably, if the difference be no more than this Author would have us
believe: Out of Friendship to which Party is easy to discover; for he has
turned the Doctrine of Satisfaction, which is the whole of this Controversy,
to be no part of the Controversy; and indeed without it all the rest is a
Contest about words, and he would make you believe, that there is more betwixt
the Socinians and Us, than, whether Christ died for our Sake, or, in our Stead,
which, he says, are the same.

Having thus cleverly brought off his beloved Socinians, Witness the sweet and
gentle Epithets of Brutal, False, Nonsense, etc. which in one page of the
History of the Unitarians (p. 24.) are bestowed on us. That our Faith is
absurd, and contrary both to Reason, and to it self: Impossible, inexcusable,
and that not to disern it is not to be a Man. Ibid. Besides many other the like
Endearing Complements, in other places. As Impudent, Blasphemous, and even
Diabolical, and Idolatrous; Polytheisme, Depths of Satan: Thus they call the
Christian Doctrine which we profess.
he no longer conceals his Dear and Intimate Affection to them. He prefers them
before all sorts of Men in the World, and says, 2 Sermon. p. 72. That even the
Protestant, the Popish, nay, the very Jesuits themselves, are in Comparison of
them, but mere Scolds and Bunglers. And p. 70, 71. He says, To do right to the
Writers on that side ( The Socinians) I must own generally they are a Pattern
of the fair way of Disputing, and of Depating matters of Religion, without Heat
and unseemly Reflections upon their. Adversaries.

They generally argue matters with that Temper and Gravity; with that Freedom
from Passion, and Transport which becomes a serious and weighty Argument. And
for the most part they Reason closely and clearly, with extraordinary Guard and
Caution, with great Dexterity and Decency, and yet with Smartness and Subtilty
enough, with a very gentle Heat; and few hard words.

A Man could hardly describe his Mistress in a softer Air. The Socinians must
be very ill natured if they take any thing amiss which this Gentleman has said
against them. It was mere necessity; they see how unwillingly, and artificially
he has done it; and when rightly understood (no doubt they understand him) what
he has said is with a design to give a better account of them than has been
done, to take off that frightful Character with which some have painted them,
not allowing them the very name of Christians. Whereas, alas! The Dr. has told
us that there is nothing betwixt them and us, but a mere Controversy about
words, which all mean the same thing. And then, that they are the best
Tempered, the Goodest sort of People in all the World. So that we need not be
afraid of them, nor stand upon our guard against them. And then they are the
most Ingenious, and the Sweetest Men, that we should love to Converse with
them, and Read their Writings; all the Christian writers are but Scolds and
Bunglers to them.

This is our Author's Method of opposing Socinanism, nor are they behind him in
their Civility and due Respect, in the Answer they have Published this year
1694. to his abovesaid four Sermons, with other Discourses against them. He
(say they, that is, Dr. Tid. whom they call Arch Bishop of Cant.) is the Common
Father of the Nation, Considerations on the Explications of the Doctrine of the
Trinity. Occasioned by four Sermons Preached by his Crace the Lord Arch Bishop
of Cant, etc. p. 43.
) and has Instructed the Socinians themselves, with the Air and Language of a
Father, not of an Adversary, or a Judge -- He is Respected and Loved by All,
but those that are also known to Hate their Country; He has no other
Maligners, but the Enemies of the Nation it self, etc.

CLAW ME AND I WILL CLAW YOU -- Here is Love and good Correspondence in abnudance
These Gentlemen know their Friends; And the Cause of Christianity is like to be
well Defended, when it is maintained by some of a Party, on purpose that it may
be soundly an-swer'd by others of them, who play Booty to one another Hands.
And commend and recommend one another to all Men's Esteem and Veneration.

But that this may not be discovered, they Argree sometimes, like Counsels at
the Bar, to fall foul upon one another, even to Scold, and call Names: which,
to the wise Observers, serves only to expose either their Contradictory Banter,
or otherwise their Hypocritical Malice, and Deceit.

Thus notwithstanding of Dr. T's Honey Words, above told, and all his
Love-fits, to the Socinians, he sends them a Bit and a Blow. Amantium Ira -- He
plays with his Clog.

First, I will give you his Character of Secinus himself, the Head and Founder
of that Order, and then of the Socinians his followers.

1st Sermon. p. 17. 18. He tells the method of Socinus in Interpreting
Scriptures, which was, merely by Criticizing upon words, and searching into all
the Senses they are possibly capable of, till he can find one, though never so
forced and foreign, that will save harmless the Opinion, which he was before
hand res^lved to maintain, even against the most Natural and Obvious Sense of
the Text which he undertakes to Interpret. p. 44. That he puts quite another
Sense upon the Scripture, than the Dr. believes, was thought of by any
Christian Writer whatsoever before Socinus, p 45. He accuses the Novelty --
great Violence and Unreasonableness, and utter Inconsistency of Socinus's
Interpretations of Scripture. And, that it may not be forgot, he repeats all
this again, 2 Sermon. p. 57. and in p. 58. he calls Socinus's Interpretations
Strained and Violent -- Pitiful and wretched shifts -- Precarious and Arbitrary
-- without either Reason or Modesty (p. 68.) And as to the Novelty of it,
Socinus himself makes no difficulty to own it, nay, he seems rather to rejoice
and Applaud himself in it. Unhappy Man! That was so wedded to his own Opinion,
that no Objection, no Difficulty could divorce him from it. (p. 77.) Socinus --
Imposing a new and very odd and violent Sense -- Contrary to the Sense of the
Christian Church in all Ages down to this time -- And all this only to serve
and support an Opinion which he had entertained before, and therefore was
resolved one way or other to bring the Scripture to comply with it. And if he
could not have done it, it is greatly to be feared, that he would at last have
called in question the Divine Authority of S. John's Gospel, rather than have
quitted his Opinion.

And to speak freely, I must needs say, that it seems to me a much fairer way
to reject the Divine Authority of a Book. than to use it so Disingeniously, and
to wrest the plain Expressions of it, with so wuch straining and violence from
their most Natural and Obvious Sense: for no Doctrine whatsoever can have any
certain foundation in any Book, if this Liberty be once admitted, without
regard to the plain Scope and Occasion of it, to play upon the Words, and
Phrases. p. 80. Socinus by a dangerous Liberty of imposing a foreign and
forced Sense upon particular Texts (has) brought the whole (H. Scriptures) into
uncertainty. p. 82. -- Any one that reads him may see he was sufficiently
conscious to himself (of the Novelty and Boldness of his Interpretation) p. 83.
Socinus was the first Author of this Interpretation, because it was impossible
he could ever have been so fond of so ill favored a Child, if it had not been
his own. p. 114 Of which (Antiquity) as Socinus had but little Knowledge, so he
seems to have made but little account.

This is our Author's Character of Socinus, a Man of no Learning, despising
Antiquity, because Ignorant of it. Arrogant and Conceited, past all Modesty,
Boasting that none in the World understood the true meaning of Scripture before
himself. Of which the Dr. gives several Quotations out of his own words. 2
Sermon. p. 69. Yet that his Shifts were Pitiful and Wretched, Strained and
Violent, Precarious and Arbitrary, without either Reason or Modesty; That he
was so positive an Opiniator, that he would rather have denied the H^ly
Scripture. than been convinced of his Error; that he dealt so Disingeniously
with the Holy Scripture, wresting the plain Expressions of it in such a manner,
that the Dr, thought it preferrable to reject their Divine Authority, rather
than to abuse them as he has done: Nay, that no Writing whatsoever can have any
certain meaning, if Socinus's Liberty be allowed of playing with the Words and
Phrases.

Thus much for Socinus himself. Let us now see whether this Author gives a more
favorable Character of his Disciples, to make good the High Eulogiums above
told? Sermon. 2. p. 69. speaking of Schlictingius, one of the first Form in his
School our Author says, he carried himself with more Confidence, but much less
Decency than his Master; That he spoke so Extravagantly, and with so much
Contempt of these Great and Venerable Names, who were the chief Propagators of
Christianity in the World, and to whom all Ages do so justly pay a Reverence,
That (he said) those Ancient Interpreters went so far from the Apostles
meaning, as if they had Raved and been out of their Wits.

And the Dr. says in general of the Socinians Sermon. 1st p. 39. That their
Interpretations of the Holy Scriptures were strange and extravagant. (p. 44.)
did contradict not only the Ancient Fathers, but the General Consent of all
Christians for 1500 years together. p. 61. That they avoid the plain and
necessary Consequence of Holy Scriptures by strained and forced Arts of
Interpretrtion. p. 62. Than which nothing can be more unnatural and violent. p.
65. Which I dare say no Indifferent Reader of St. John, that had not been
preposess'd and byas'd by some violent prejudice would ever have thought of. p.
75. The plainest Text for any Article of Faith, how Fundamental and Necessary
s^ever, may, by the same Arts and ways of Interpretation, be cluded and
rendered utterly ineffectual for the establishing of it. p. 92. 93. This is so
Arbitrary and Precarious a supposition, that I must confess my self a little
out of Countenance for them, that Men of so much Wit and Reason should ever be
put to so sorry and pitiful a Shift. p. 96. This is so Inartificial, not to say
Absurd a way of avoiding a Difficulty -- that no Man of common Ingenuity would
make use of it. p. 99. A Sense so very flat, that I can hardly abstain from
calling it Ridiculous. p. 113. We may plainly see by this, That they can
Interpret a Text right when necessity forces them to it, and they cannot,
without great Inconveniency to their Cause, avoid it: But when Men have once
resolved to hold fast an Opinion they have taken up, it then becomes, not only
Convenient but Necessary to understand nothing that makes against it: And this
is truly the present Case: But in the mean time, where is Ingenuity and love of
Truth? p. 115. They Triumph without Modesty, and without Measure. p. 125. Do
they see no Absurdity in all this? Nothing that is contrary to Reason and Good
Sense? Nothing that feels like Inconsistency and Contradiction? p. 129. Which
way (the Socinians way) of dealing with them (the Holy Scriptures) seems to be
really more Contumelious to those Holy Oracles, than the downright rejecting
of their Authority. And single Sermon. p. 18. He that can deny this (the Doctor's
Argument against the Socinians) is perverse to the highest degree, and I fear
beyond the possibility of being Convicted. p. 20. Men may generally wrangle
about any thing, but what a frivolous Contention, what a Trifling in serious
matter, what Barretry in Divinity is this? p. 30. So little do Men in the heat
of Dispute and Opposition, who are resolved to hold fast an Opinion in despite
of Reason and Good Sense, consider that they do many times in effect, and by
necessary Consequence, grant the very thing in express terms, they do so stiffly
and pertinaciously deny. p. 32. And this for no other reason, that I can
imagine, but because they have denied it so often; and so long.


F. These so different Characters which the Dr. gives of Socinus, and the
Socinians, may be Reconciled, by saying, as I suppose the Dr. means, that this
later Evil Character belongs to them, only in this present Controversy of the
Trinity, the Divinity and Satisfaction of Christ. But that the former High and
most Extraordinarly Excellent Character is due to them, in other matters of
Religion, as against the Church of Rome; which the Dr. seems to intend, 2.
Sermon. p. 79. where he says. That the Socinian Writers have managed the Cause of
the Reformation against the Innovations and Corruptions of the Church of Rome,
both in Doctrine and Practice, with great acuteness and advantage.


C. And yet in the very next words. he says, That the Socinians have put into
their (the Papists) hands better and sharper Weapons than ever they had before
for the weakening and undermining of the Authority of the Holy Scriptures. And
p. 129. That nothing has given a greater force to the Exceptions of the Church
of Rome against the Holy Scriptures, being a sufficient and certain Rule of
Faith, than the uncertainty into which they ( the Socinians) have brought the
plainest Texts imaginable for the Establishing of Doctrines of the greatest
Moment in the Christian Religion, by their Remote and Wrested Interpretations
of them. And p. 124. That to avoid the shadow and appearance of a Plurality of
Deities, they ran readily into it. And into downright Idolatry.

Now how invalidating the Holy Scriptures, and introducing Idolatry is managing
the Cause of the Reformation, with Accuteness and Advantage against the Church
of Rome, I leave to the Worthy Dr. to Explain. And likewise how Men can deserve
such extravagant Commendations for Wit, and Modesty; and all Discretion and
Temper in one point of Controversy; and in another to be quite void of all
these, to fall into all Ridiculous Absurdities and Contradictions, and to
manage either without Reason or Modesty; to be so Wedded to their own Opinion,
as rather to Renounce the Holy Scriptures than endure to be convinced by them,
in their most foolish and groundless Errors, taken up against the whole
Christian World since the days of Christ.

Modesty and Sweetness in a-Mans Temper, will show it self in all his Actions.
And a strong Reason cannot overlook a Contradiction in one case more than
another, at least not to be obstinately so Wedded to it, as to be deaf to all
Conviction.

But we have spent too much time upon this Author's Character of these
Socinians; which is not material, otherwise, than to show his own Unconstancy,
and Inconsistency with himself; How unwillingly he is brought to appear against
them; And what Salvoes and Shifts he makes use of to make them understand him,
That he might not lose their Favor.

God grant Him and Them true Conviction, and Save Unstable Souls from their
Snares.


POSTSCRIPT.
SInce this was wrote, the Author before spoke of Dr. T. has Printed A Sermon
concerning the Unity of the Divine Nature, and the B. Trinity.

And here if ever we might expect full Satisfaction in this point: But it is so
far from it, that of all the others we have considered, this Sermon does most
palpably bewray his wretched Socinianism, if not something worse: for he not
only speaks the very Socinian Language of the Trinity, but he really undermines
the Unity of God, by his setting it up upon a Foundation, which he himself, in
this same Sermon, quite overthrows. His great Proof is p. 10. The General
Consent of Mankind concerning the Unity of God that, the Unity of the Divine
Nature, is a Notion wherein the Greatest and the Wisest part of Mankind did
always agree. p. 4. And yet, speaking of the Heathen Idolatry (which was all
the rest of the World except the small Nation of the Jews) he says plainly, p.
9. that, The generality were grossly guilty both of believing more Gods, and of
worshipping false Gods. p. 10. And did terminate their worship there (in the
Idol) as being the very Deity it self, which was certainly (says he) the Case
of the greatest part of the Heathen World. And yet upon the Belief of this
Greatest part, he builds, the Unity of God; when he confesses that this
Greatest part did not believe the Unity of God. All the Salvo for this most
palpable Contradiction is what he offers p. 9. viz. That the Unity of the
Divine Nature -- was the Primitive and General Belief of Mankind, and that
Polytheism and Idolatry were a Corruption and Degeneracy from the Original
Notion which Mankind had concerning God.

I do not doubt but Adam worshipped the True God. And it is as true that
Idolatry came in very soon; some say Cain introduced it. And that there was a
very great defection so quickly made, that it is Recorded of the Birth of Enos,
That then began Men to call upon the Name of the Lord, Genesis 4.29. as if they
had never done it before. And the Scripture tells of the General Corruption
before the Flood. After the Flood we know the whole World was swallowed up in
an Universal Idolatry, except only the Family of Abraham, and after him of the
Jews, who also were continually lapsing into it.

what then becomes of this Author's Greatest part of Mankind? And his always?
That this Greatest part did always agree in the Notion of the Unity of God?
Whereas he, in the same place, makes this Greatest part to have been always
since the World was Peopled, Believers and Worshipers of more Gods and false
Gods, in such gross Idolatry (as I cannot believe ever befell one Man since
Adam, or that it is possible to besal any Man, being so apparent a
Contradiction, viz.) to terminate our Worship in the Image or Idol as being the
very Deity it self. For how can any Man believe such a thing to be the Image,
or Picture of another thing; and yet to be that very thing of which it is the
Image? Or is it in any Man's power to believe that a thing can be the Image, or
Idol of its self? Could Solomon believe this? Or was not he an Idolater?

We know whom this favors and there may be a time to Recant even our Nestrum
against Transubstantion. It won'd be no greater change, than what has been
already! And there is no stop in Art, nor are we ever, too old to learn.

Thus much for his betraying the Unity of God, by placing it upon a Foundation,
which he himself has overthrown.

Next to show that, as to the Trinity of God, he speak the very Socinian
Language.

All that he says of it is in Sect. 3. p. 19, 20. Because he must say
something. He is soon weary of it, and first he gives a Broadside against it
in direct Opposition to what the Divines say of it (He desires not, or deserves
not to be reckoned one of the number) for the Dispute is not about the words
Trinity, or Person, but as to the Sense of these words, in which they are used
by Divines. The Socinians own a Trinity; and they have lately Reprinted and
Published Bidle's Confession of Faith touching the Holy Trinity. But all the
matter is in what Sense the word Trinity is used by our Divines, and by the
Socinians, and in this he peremptorily determines against the Sense of the
Divines as Anti-Scriptural. He says, That neither the word Trinity, nor perhaps
Person, in the Sense in which it is used by Divines when they treat of this
Mystery, are any where to ^e met with in Scripture. This is directly opposing
the Doctrine of the Trinity, as taught by Divines. Put he brings himself off
thus. Yet it cannot be denied (says he) but that Three are there spoken of by
the Names of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, [this no Socinian in the World
denies] in whose Name every Christian is Baptized, [this is likewise granted by
the Socinians] and to each of whom the highest Titles and Properties of God are
in Scripture Attributed. Neither does this offend the Secinians, who Plead the
same in answer to J^hn 1.3. as you have it in the Brief H^^^ory of the
Unitarians, which solves that Text, All things were made by him, (i. e.) by the
(...) or word, thus: The word (says he) begins here to be spoken of as a
Person, by the the same figure of Speech, That Solomon says, Wisdom has has
builded her House, and heaven out her seven Pillars, Prove. 9.1. And that David
calls Gods Commandments Councillors, Psalm. 119.24.

And, in conclusion, this Author is willing to Compound for the word Person (of
which we have spoke before) So long (says he) as we mean by it neither more nor
less than what the Scripture says in other words.

But he has told you before, that there is no such thing to be found in
Scripture, in the sense in which it is used by Divines; And what other sense he
means, is easy to tell. For the present Controversy is only betwixt the two
senses, of the Divines (as he calls them) and the Socinians: unless he means
something else by the word Divines, and so makes the whole a Banter upon us.
For he does not explain himself, nor say one word more, in all that Sermon
touching the Blessed Trinity; of the difference 'twxit the Socinians and us
concerning this great Fundamental of our Faith. And whether this be or whether
it be not, a sufficient clearing of himself as to what side he inclines. when
he could find no more to say against the Socinians upon this point, in a
Discourse which he Entitles, and so would make us believe to be, A Vindication
of the Christian Doctrines to the Blessed Trinity against that of the
Socinians, I leave to the Impartial Reader.

And now for a Conclusion, upon the whole, that has been said of all his
Sermons, they are all the Genuine effects of Hobbism which loosens the Notions
of Religion, takes from it all that is Spiritual, Ridicules whatever is called
Supernatural; it reduces God to Matter, and Religion to Nature. In this School
Dr. T. has these many years, held the First Form, and now diffuses his Poison
from a high Station. It is many years ago since the E. of D. one Sunday, that
Dr. T. Preached at White Hall, told K. C. 2d that Mr H^bbs was got into the
Pulpit, his Politics are Leviathan, and his Religion is Latitudinarian, which
is none; that is, nothing that is positive, but against every thing that is
positive in other Religions; whereby to reduce all Religions to an uncertainty,
and determinable only by the Civil Power; against whose Command Dr. T. does not
think it lawful to Preach the Gospel, Preached before K. C. the ad at
White Hall, the 2d of April 80 upon J^sh. 24.15.
without such extraordinary Commission as the Apostles had; and that we were
able to vouch it with Miracles, as they did; which is as much as Hobbs himself
could have asked, if he had got into the Pult it in Person, and not sent his
Deputy: He is owned by the Atheistical Wits of all England, as their true
Primate and Apostle; They Glory and Rejoice in him, and make their public
Boasts of him; He leads them not only the length of Socinianism (they are but
slender Beaux have got no father than that) but to call in question all
Revelation; to turn Genesis, etc. into a mere Romance, to Ridicule the whole as
Blunt, Gildo^, and others of the Doctor's Disciples have done in Print. They
now cry there is nothing but Natural Religion. All that which is called
Revealed, is at most but Gods Compliance with the Superstition of the vulgar,
and what does that concern Men of Wit and Sense? Since Religion has no deeper a
Root, what Reverence, what Veneration is due to it? All the Ordinances and
Constitutions of the Law and Gospel are but Politics to secure Government and
the threatenings even of Hell it self are no more, and therefore, there is no
necessity, no certainty that they will be inflicted; as our Primate has boldly
asserted in the very Face of the Government, and his Sermon was Printed by
their Majesty's special Command. Thus to the Deists Triumph! And thus, actum
est d^ Religione, if none dare oppose these depths of Satan, and the Spiritual
wickednesses which are now set up in high places. When this Sermon of Hell was
first Published, it was handed about among the great Debauchees, and small
Atheistical Wits, more than any new Play ever came out, He was not a Man of
Fashion who wanted one of them in his Pocket, ot could not draw it out at the
Coffee-House, and read a Lecture of the Priest-Ridden Ages, who were frighted
with the Eternity of Hell, only to keep them in absolute subjection to the
Church forsooth! And then to run two or three Divisions in praise of Dr. T. as
a Man of Sense and Reason, and not afraid to undeceive the World, and break off
from a Company of formal and narrow-spirited Churchmen, who going on in the
track of their Fathers, durst not understand the Scriptures, out of the ancient
Road, in a Generous Latitude, over the Pailes of any Church or Profession
whatsoever; but crept on still in their straight and narrow way to Heaven;
which Dr. T. like another Prometheus, having stole the Divine Secret, has
opened so broad and wide as to let in the Latitudinarians, that is all the
World; and after some reasonable time even Hell it self: For God has only
threatened, that they shall not enter into his Rest; and the Dr. has determined
in that Hellish Sermon p. 13. and 15. That God is not obliged to Execute his
Threatenings, though he is to perform his Promises. But having spoke at large of
this in a former Conversation with you, I will not Repeat.

I am now only from the c^nstant Tract of all his Sermons (as well before as
since this Revolution, but now highly improved and grown bolder) showing you
what a Face he puts upon Religion; he gives it quite another turn from what all
other Divine, Ancient and Modern (except those infected with H^bbism) have told
us. They make the chief business of Religion to respect another World, though it
is likewise highly useful, and the most efficacious of any other means
whatsoever to preserve the Peace of this. But Mr. Hobbs, Dr. T. etc. make its
chief, and indeed almost only consideration to respect the Peace and Quietness
of this World. Which is largely set forth in his Sermon before the House of
Commons the 5th of November, 1678. upon Luke 9.55, 56. where, as if Religion
were good for nothing else but to secure Temporal Government and Peace in this
World; He demands Magisterially, and with great vehemence in these words And
for God's sake what is Religion good for, but to Reform the Manners and
Dispositions of Men, to restrain Human Nature from Violence and Cruelty, from
Falsehood and Treachery, from Sedition and Rebellion? And then, In the very next
words, he roundly and without mincing the matter, comes to the Objection, That
if this be all the end of Religion, it were better to have no Religion at all,
than to disturb our outward Peace and Tranquillity for it: Because the End is
always to be preferred before the Means; And therefore if the End of all
Religion be only to preserve the Peace of this World, it follows necessarily
that Religion must give place to the Peace of this World; so that if both
cannot stand together, we must part with our Religion to preserve the Peace of
this World.

Here the Dr. does distinguish, and puts in a Salvo for his dearly beloved
Natural Religion, because he can make of that what he will. But he plainly and
in terms gives up the Cause as to all Revealed Religion: That it were better
have no such thing, that is, no Christ, or Christianity, rather than to disturb
our Peace in this World for it.

Better it were, says he, there were no Revealed Religion, and that Human
Nature were left to the Conduct of its own Principles, and Inclinations, which
are much more mild and merciful, much more for the Peace and Happiness of Human
Society, than to be acted by a Religion that is continually supplanting
Government, and undermining the Welfare of Mankind. This is their outward
Welfare he is still speaking of. And above in the same page, aggravating the
mischiefs of disturbances upon account of Religion, (viz.) setting a keener
edge upon Men's Spirits, and making them more Cruel and Bitter to one another,
he concludes thus. For let any Man say worse of Atheism and Infidelity, if he
can, Here is a bold Challenge, and the Dr. could not but foresee the Answer
which would be ready in every Man's Mouth, That Hell and Damnation, which are
threatened as the punishment to Atheism and Infidelity, were much worse than
any Embroylments could be in this World. But he has made Hell precarious, and
consequently Religion to look no further than this World, at least with any
certainty.

But it is not only matters of such consequence as Government which the Dr.
prefers to Revealed Religion: But, to show his utmost Contempt of it, he has
found out so very mean a thing to compare to it, and prefer before it, as must
surprise and astonish every Christian Reader.

He makes a Woman's giving out her Child to Nurse to be a more heinous matter,
than to renounce Christ, and all Revealed Religion. His words are these.

And this; (says he, that is, a Woman's Nursing her own Child) is a Natural
Duty; and because it is so, Six Sermons Prined together, 1694. Sermon. 3.
Concerning the Education of Children, p. 103.
of a mere necessary and indispensable Obligation than any positive Precept of
Revealed Religion.

Now the Belief of Christ is nothing else but a positive Precept of Revealed
Religion. Christ is the only truly Revealed Religion. God never Revealed any
other: For the Gospel was Preached to the Jews as well as unto us. Heb. 4.2.
The Law and the Prophets taught Christ to come, as the Gospel showed him, when
he was come. From the first Revelation of him Genesis 3.15. to the end of the
World, it is the same Gospel, the same Christ that is Revealed.

And Dr. T. even since he came to Cant, has Printed it, and Published it to all
the World, that he thinks, a Woman's Nursing her own Child is more necessary
than the Belief of Christ, and of more Indispensible Obligation.

And his poor Reason, because it is a Natural Duty, will advance every Passion
or Vice that we think to be Natural, above all the Commands of God in Scripture.

We know what sins the Libertines do plead for as Natural; and they think that
Marriage, which is but a Positive Precept, ought not to supersede the Natural
Freedom.

These Men measure Good and Evil by their present corrupted Nature, and thereby
give their Lusts the Ascendent, and a Superior Authority to the Written Word of
God. By which means they have shaken themselves loose from all Discipline of
Religion; But what they know Naturally, as Brute Beasts, Jude 10. in those
things they corrupt themselves.

What our Nature was before the Fall, we cannot n^w tell. And that only can be
truly called Natural; that is, what was agreeable to our Nature in its Purity
and in its Perfection; not now in its Broken and Corrupted Condition.

Which is therefore much more safely conducted by unerrable Revelation from
God; than to have those Sacred Oracles overruled, and superseded by our very
Fallible Notions of Nature; which every Man may make to mean what he pleases:
For what is counted very vile and abominable in some Nations, is practiced
without scruple, among other People, and thought very Natural, and therefore
very Good.

Nay, a Man may think that to be Natural to day, which to morrow he may think
quite otherwise. Which shows the Fallibility of this Rule.

Even this great Natural Dr. himself, in the Reign of K. C. 2d thought (at
least Preached it before the K.) that Sedition and Rebellion, Perfidiousness
and Perjury, were contrary to the Natural Notions; 3d Vol. of his Sermon. 3d
Sermon. upon 1 John 4.1. p. 76. 77.
and therefore that no Revelation was to be credited which did but Allow of
them; no, not though even Miracles were done in confirmation of any such
Revelation.

And yet, this notwithstanding, he justified the Present Revolution from the
visible Finger of God in it, Thanksgiving Sermon. for our Deliverance by the P.
of O. p. 68. 69. 70, 71, 72.
and the plain Signatures and Characters of a more immediate Divine
Interpositon. Such as the uncertainty of the Weather, the Infatuation of the
Jesuits Councils, and other such like Signatures of a Divine Interposition,
which he mentions: And from such Miraculous Interpositions, he Justifiers those
(whom he calls, The Worthies of our Nation) who Deserted, Betrayed, and took
Arms against K. James. So that we find the Doctors Nature, and his Natural
Notions varied in a very little time, and upon a small variation of
Circumstances; insomuch that what one day, he would not trust to Revelation or
Miracles for; the next day, the turning of the Wind shall be Argument
sufficient.

For some Men's Notions of what is Natural, are suited to what they find
agreeable to their Nature, that is, to their Ease; their Convenience, or
sometimes to their Lusts and Pleasures, or even their Resentments and basest
Passions.

I would not here be misunderstood, as if I meant to Decry all Natural Religion
and Reason. No doubt, there is such a Light imprinted in our Nature by God* But
it is much darkened since to Fall, and needs the assistance of Revelation to
direct our way to Heaven. And it ought to be subservient to Revelation, which
is all I plead for; and not set up against it, and preferred before it, as this
Dr. and others of his Principles have rashly done.

I compare our Natural Light or Knowledge to the Creation of the First Day. And
it is the Light of the First Day which we enjoy still: But not as it was that
day Created. It was Regulated and Modeled the Fourth Day into the Sun, Moon;
and Stars: And now we have no Participation at all of the Light of the First
Day, but what we have from its Regulation on the Fourth Day, and conveyed to us
from the Sun: Which I compare to Revealed, that is, the Christian Religion, God
is called Light, 1 John 1.5. and Christ ( Mat. 4.2.) is called the Sun of
Righteousness: and though there is a Precedent Natural Knowledge of God; like the
Light of the First Day; yet now that Christ is Revealed, the true Knowledge of
God is to be had, as the Scripture speaks, only in the Face of Jesus Christ:
For none know God truly but the Son, and he to whom soever the Son will Reveal
him. Mat. 11.27,

And to go back now from the Revealed to Natural Religion, is, as if we should
forsake the Light of the Sun, to grope after the Light of the First Day.

And as Christ is Superior to our Natural Light, or Reason; so the
Institutions of his Revealed Religion, do take place of our Natural Instincts.

Thus shall a Man leave his Father and Mother, which are Natural Relations, and
shall cleave to his Wife, which is a Positive Institution.

Kings and Bishops, our Governors both in Church and State, our Spiritual and
Political Fathers have greater Authority over us than our Natural Parents.

So far is it from being true which Dr. T. has set up as a Maxim, that what he
calls. Natural Duties, are of more necessary and Indispensible Obligation, than
any Positive Precepts of Revealed Religion.

On the contrary, the Precepts of Revealed Religion, as they are of far Greater
and Higher Authority than our own mere Natural Notions; So are they the surest
Indication of what was the First and Original, Pure and Vncorrurted Dictates of
our Nature.

I have here only mentioned these short passages out of some of Dr. T's
Sermons, to show his plain and downright H^bbism; upon which I could enlarge,
and show you the same Thread to run through all his Works: But this I intend
for a Task by it self, my present Work being his Socinianism. And I think it an
Indispensible Duty to warn the World, especially this poor Kingdom, of this
Man's Diabolical Principles, because he is got now into so high a Sphere, as to
be able to do much mischief among the Clergy, by preferring those of his own
Principles, the Latitudinarians; and by this means, he may bid fair to Pervert
the whole Nation; he has deeply poisoned them already. And if this be not a
time to speak, we may for ever after hold our Tongue. He that would not, in
this Case, expose his Life, and all that he had, would never do it for any
Cause of Christ; for the Ax was never laid more palpably at the very Root of
all Christianity.

I hope what I have said will at least provoke abler Pens to Engage in Defense
not only of Christianity, but of the first Principles and Foundation of
Religion in General; which the Hobbiss; have depressed far below that of the
Heathen; who acknowledged Divine Revelation though they mistook it: But these
make it a perfect Tool and Engine of State, hung at the Belt of the Civil
Magistrate, and disposeable by him at his pleasure, These are yet more
dangerous, more affronting to God, than the Socinians: For the Socinians argue,
tho from a false Topic, for the Honor of God, as if more Persons were
Dishonorable to the Divine Nature; But these dare Blasphemously to make God an
Ape to the Devil himself; and to be beholding to his Imvention, and the
Capricio's of Foolish and Wicked Men, for all the Institutions of his Holy
Religion; and to have sent our Lord Christ into the World, and Sacrificed Him
upon the Cross for no other End than to comply with the wickedness of Men, and
instead of destroying the works of the Devil, infinitely to outdo them, to put
them out of Countenance, and make them ashamed of their Littleness in
Sacrificing Beasts and Men, instead of which poor Butcheries and Murder, and
to make them no more regarded, Here the Son of God shall be murdered, to show
how little mischief the Devil could do in Comparison of God! And to frighten
and amaze Mankind, the most wicked of them, and to stop their hand from the
further pursuit of their little Insignificant Cruelties to one another, by
being struck with the horror of such Super-wickedness, and unnatural Barbarity;
As the K. of Moab Sacrificed his Eldest Son, to stop the pursuit of his
Enemies. (2 Kings 3.27.) by over glutting their Revenge and out-doing their
Cruelty.

These are not Tares Sown in the Night, and by Stealth; But it is Rooting up
all Revealed Religion in the Noonday, and exposing of Christianity to the
Contempt and Buffoonery of Atheistical Wits. And if the Husbandmen take no no
notice of it; They are not Asleep but Dead. God awaken them by a timely sense
of their Duty, and not by a Total Extirpation and Removeal of their
Candlestick. Amen.

Some REFLECTIONS upon the Second of Dr. BURNET's Four Discourses, concerning
the Divinity and Death of Christ. Printed 1694.
I Had ended the Reader's Labor and my own, but that I am called back by a
Book now lately Published; Licensed by this Great Dr. Himself Jo. Cant. to give
it the greater Authority; and wrote by his Colleague Dr. Burnst, now called
Bishop of Sarum; It is Entitled, Four Discourses delivered to the Clergy of
the Diocese of Sarum, etc. Printed 1694.

One of these Discourses is Concerning the Divinity and Death of Christ;
wherein there is such a Notion of Christ's Divinity set down as would make any
Christian Ear to tingle. He gives the very same account of it as the Brief
History of the Unitarians, in Answer to John 1.14. The Word was made Flesh;
that is, says that Socinian Author, the Word dwelt in, or did Inhabit the
Person of Jesus Christ. There is none that is unprejudiced but must see how
very far this is from the full Import of that Text, and what a force is done to
the words of the Text (...), was made Flesh. This is sure a degree beyond bare
Inhabitation. It is true our Soul may be said to dwell in our Body: But there
is something more, It is Impersonated with our Body, whence there arises what
the Schools call Communicatio Idiomatum, between the Soul and the Body; That
is, that the Properties of each are attributed to the Person who partakes of
Both. Thus Man is called Mortal, because his Body is such; and Immortal,
because his Soul is such. And thus it is that Christ is called God, in respect
to his Divine Nature, and Man in respect to his Human. Neither of these can be
predicated of the other. The Divine Nature, is not the Human Nature, nor the
Human Nature the Divine. The Soul is not the Body, nor the Body the Soul: But
each of these is predicated of the Person who partakes of Both. All the
Atiributes of the Divine, and Properties of Human Nature, are predicated of
Christ; as all Properties of Soul and Body are predicated, though not of One
another, yet of Man, who is made up of Both.

This is the true Notion of Impersonation, and without this Christ could never
be made Flesh.

The Spirit of God did Inhabit, or Inspire the Apostles, Prophets, and Holy Men
of Old: and will do every Saint, or Holy Person to all Eternity. But this does
not make God to become Flesh.

If you answer that the Spirit of God, or the Word (as the Socinians say, did
inhabit or inspire that Man Jesus Christ, in an Higher Degree than other Men:
That will make nothing, as to the Word's becoming Flesh: God was no more Flesh
in Abraham or St. Paul, than in the Meanest Saint, though he inspired one much
more than another.

Nothing short of Impersonation could make him to become Flesh; or make that
Flesh Adorable without the highest Idolatry. Dr. B. thinks to solve all this by
comparing God's Indwelling in Jesus, to the Indwelling of God in the Cloud of
Glory in the Temple, and he says, p. 127. That the Jews, worshipped the Cloud
of Glory, because of God's Resting upon it, and therefore that they could make
no Objection to the Christians Worshipping of Christ, by vertus of the
Indwelling of the Eternal word in Him.

Make no Objection* Yes sure; and Retort the Argument, to the Confusion of such
Christians. For they did not worship the Cloud of Glory. That had been Rank
Idolatry, Notwithstanding of any Inhabitation of God there, and therefore from
this Reasoning, it must have been Idolatry to have worshipped Christ,
notwithstanding of any Inhabitation of God in him.

Nor will it solve this, that the Dr. says, p. 116. That there was a more
perfest Indwelling of God in Christ, than in the Cloud.

So there was in the Cloud more than in the Temple; yet it had been as great
Idolatry to have worshipped the Cloud as the Temple.

God's Presence was never more visibly exhibited in any Apparition under the
Law, than when he descended upon Mount Hereb in Fire, Cloud, etc. He spoke out
of that Fire with an Audible V^ice, which he did not out of the Cloud of Glory
in the Temple. And yet he strictly forbids the worshipping of any thing they
there saw, or the making any Resemblance or Similitude of any thing that there
appeared, lest it should corrupt them to Idelatry, Deuteronomy. 4.15. etc.

As before observed, the Degrees of Inhabitation say nothing to the making the
thing inhabited to be God: No less Inhabitation than an Impersonation can do
that, because no lesser or other sort of Inhabitation does carry with it the
Communicatio Inli^matum, so as to make God be called that thing, or that thing
be called God.

And therefore it is a gross Error which the Dr. asserts p. 113. That the
Indwelling of the Jehovah was according to the Scripture Phrase, said to be
Jehovah,

It is so far from Scripture Phrase, that all the Holy Scriptures do detest it
as Idolatry.

This distinction would justify the worship of the Sun, as being a Glorious
Tent or Tabernacle of God. And no doubt, God does Inhabit it, as he does every
Creature in their several Degrees, and this will justify all the wild Heathen
Idolatry. For Higher or Lower in Creatures, that is, different degrees of God's
Inhabition make no difference as to the worship of them. It is as much Idolatry
to worship the highest Angel as the meanest Worm.

Therefore the Dr's Argument is most Heterodox, that the Inhabitation of God in
Christ, makes Christ to be God: If by Inhabitation he means any thing short of
Impersonation. Which if he had meant, he had never thought of explaining it, by
the Inhabitation of God in the Cloud: Or thrust himself upon such a Precipice
of Idolatry, as to aver that the Cloud was Jehovah, and that they worshipped
the Cloud because of God's dw^lling in it.

Yet as the former Dr. who Licenses what this his Second has wrote, will not
(as before told) stand out, or loose any thing for the word Person: But then
you must take what he means by it; So this Stickler, does now and then slip it
in, that he may have it to say; but will not let himself be mistaken, in
explaining it, as above.

The design is to wear Men off from this Personality by degrees; never making
use of the word, but some way or other to expose it, and to lead Men from the
true and full meaning of it, as it was necessarily used, on purpose to
distinguish such direful and wasting Heresies as now infest the Church under
much Sheeps Clothing.

For if God has not assumed our Nature into his own Person; only dwelt in
Christ, as in the Temple, as in the Cloud, though in an higher degree: Christ
cannot be our God, and we are Idolaters in worshipping Him; as much as the
Heathen in worshipping their Idols from the supposed Inhabitation of God in
them. And God has not taken upon him our Nature, more than the Nature of Angels
(as the Apostle argues Heb. 2.16.) Nay, God dwells more visibly with his
Angels, or Inhabits them more sully, and intimately, than Mankind. Therefore
God's dwelling in a Man does no more make him God, than God's dwelling in the
Angels of his Presence, makes all them to be God. If this Argument hold,
Lucifer was in the right when he pretended to be God: for he was the most
Glorious Angel; and consequently God did dwell in him in an Higher Degree than
in other Angels.

This Example shows that no degrees of Inhabitation gives any Title to Divine
Nature.

What then has Mankind gained by God's Inhabitation in the Human Nature of
Jesus Christ, if that be all? What is that to other Men? What better am I for
that, than for his Inhabitation in the Human Nature of Moses, or even in the
dead Walls of the Temple?

O, yes, says the Dr. p. 120. The Great God is also our Faderal God, or
Jehovah, by his dwelling in the Human Nature of Jesus Christ.

Was He not Jehovah likewise, or a Faderal God, to the Jews? And that by his
Dwelling in the Temple, and affording his Presence there? Does he not call them
his Faderal People? Gather my Saints together unto me, those that have made a
Covenant with me by Sacrifice. Psalm. 50.5.

How is the Human Nature advanced beyond that of Angels? Or, as it is expressed
in St. Athanasius's Creed, how is the Manhood taken into God, if there be no
more than a bare Inhabitation of God in the Flesh? Christ is our Lord (says the
Dr. ibid. p. 120.) nos by an Assumption into an High Dignity, or the
Communicating Divine. Honor to him, but as the Eternal Word dwelt Bodily in
him.

Well then, Dr. You say that the In-dwelling of the Eternal word did not
Communicate Divine Honor to Christ. How then, I pray you, is he Adorable? How
is he God by Nature? Since (as you quote it in the next page 121.) it is the
Definition which St. Paul gives of Heathenish Idolatry 4 Gal. 8. to worship
those who by Nature are not, Gods. And you your self p. 110.) Give this
Description of Idolatry, that is, Either the worshipping of other Gods besides
the true, or the worshipping the true God under a Bodily Representation.

Now you confess that the Eternal word dwelt Bodily in Christ Jesus, which I
suppose you will not say of his dwelling in the Temple, or in any other Holy
Man. and therefore to worship God only in Christ (which you would be at) is the
worshipping of God under a Bodily Representation, more than worshipping him in
the Sun, or in any Image, because he is not so Bodily Represented in them or in
any thing else as in the Human Nature of Jesus Christ. I say the worshipping of
Christ must, by this Rule, be the most direct Idolatry, if we suppose no more
than an Indwelling of the Divinity in him; and not that his Human Nature was
Exalted, and even Impersonated with the Divine Nature, whereby he was as truly
and really, that is, Naturally God, as he was Man.

But rather then let Christ be a Divine Person, the Dr. Would be content to
loose his own Personality, and Confound the very Notion of Subsistence or
Personallity; at least 'twixt Flesh and Spirit; which he takes upon him to
Explain in a New and Extraordinary Manner, for several Pages to gether. At last
he comes to this. p. 106. These are all the ways (says he) That we can
apprehend of a Minds assuming matter, and being united to it, which is the
having it under i'ts actuation or authority; So that the Acts of the mind give
such Impressions to the Body, as Govern and Command it.

This Description would Impersenat all the Angels which have appeared in Bodies
with that matter which they assumed: for there is no doubt but they did
perfectly well Command and Govern those Bodies: better much than we can do
ours. Made 'em Fly and Mount as they pleased.

And upon this account the Eternal word was often Impersonated with Matter,
before his being made Flesh in the womb of the Blessed Virgin; if we believe,
as it is Generally believed, That it was He who appeared to Moses in the Bush,
to Joshua as the Captain of the Lord's Hist, to Abraham, in the form of an
Angel, etc.

But all this was not assuming any of these forms, in which he appeared, into
his own Person; for then would have followed the Communicatio Idiomatum, such
Fire, or Body in which he appeared would have been truly and Really God, and
God would have been that Fire, or that Body. which as it is Blasphemy to
affirm, so this shows us a stricter Notion of Impersonation than the Dr. sets
up; which is only the Minds Commanding and Governing of matter. In which Sense,
God must be Impersinated with every Body in the World, for he Commands and
Governs them Absolutely; and he Inhabits and Dwells in every one of them, for
in Him they have their Being.

The Dr. in his Vindicatory Letter to Dr. Williams, before Quoted, p: 99. adds
further, That this indwelling is a vital one, like that of the Souls dwelling
in the Body, and not an assisting one, like Inspiration, or the Gift of Tongues
or Miracles.

But this will not hinder the Consequence above told. For in God we Live and
Move, as well as have our Being in Him. Acts. 17.28; Therefore He may be even a
VITAL Indwelling, and yet short of Impersenation.

He says, That this Indwelling of the Word in Christ, is LIKE that ^f the Souls
dwelling in the Body.

It may be like it, but not of the same sort. Every like, we say, is not the
same.

He says above, in the same page; That the Union of the Divine and Human Nature
in Christ, is represented in Scripture as the Compounding one Person, as much
as in other Men the Union of Soul and Body makes one Man.

This, indeed is fairly said, if it be as sincerely intended.

For, if this be so, there must follow the Communitio Idiomatum betwixt the
Divine and Human Natures in Christ, as much as betwixt the Soul and Body of
Man. Which the Dr. will not allow. For, if he allowed this, there could be no
Cause of Dispute. And if he had thought thus, he could never have explained it
by the Indwelling of God in the Cloud; nor found any scruple against the word
Person; nor have been forced to new and uncouth Expositions of Personality: Nor
would he have made a Distinction (as before told) betwixt the Man-hoed of
Christ or the Man Christ being advanced into God (as the Athanasian Creed
expresses it) or the Communicating Divine Honor to Him (as Dr. Burnet words it
p. 120. of his Discourse above Quoted) I say, if he had Really and Truly
believed the Impersonation of the Divine and Human Nature in Christ, as the
Soul and Body are Impersonated in Man, as he would seem to speak in his
Vindication, he could not have made a Distinction between Christ's Assumption
into an High Dignity, or the Communicating Divine Honor to Him, and betwixt
the Dwelling of the Eternal Word Bodily in him.

For if by Bodily here he had meant a Bedily Impersonation as betwixt MAN'S Soul
and Body, then that Man CHRIST had not only Divine Honor Communicated to Him
(which the Dr. denies) by the Indwelling of the Word, but He Himself was the
Word. But the Dr's true meaning is, that the Bodily dwelling of the Word in the
Man Christ, was only a dwelling in his Body, without Impersonation, or
Communicating His Divine Attributes to Him; and therefore that no Divine Honor
was thereby Communicated to Him; which the Dr. asserts, as above Quoted, in the
120th p. of his Discourse. And instead of correcting this, in his Vindication,
he re-asserts it more positively in another as he thinks, more odious Form of
words, For there p. 96. He puts the Case of a Man's being made a God, and that
was so called, and was to be worshipped as such. And this he calls a new
Doctrine, that it seems (says he) scarce conceivable how any one can entertain
this, and yet retain any value for Religion: I must confess (says he) I cannot;
and it is so natural for a Man to judge of others by himself, that I do not
think others do it, or indeed can do it. These are his words. And, by this, it
is very plain that he does not think the Man Christ to be God, or, that Christ
is God and Man, but only God in Man. And consequently, that there is no
Hypostatical, that is, Personal Union betwixt the Divine and Human Nature of
Christ, as there is betwixt the Soul and Body in Man; For if there were, then
the Communicatio Idiomatum must necessarily follow; that is, the Properties or
Attributes of each of their Natures would belong to the Person who did partake
of both. And the Man Christ would be as truly God as he was Man.

And as for the Dr's Bugbear word of a Man's being made Gods. with which he
thinks to frighten us, as if God could be made, let him know that there are
none so absurd as to think that God can be made; and that this is not the same
thing as a Man's being made God; because, though the Godhead cannot be made; and
in that Sense, nothing can be made God; yet a Man by being taken into a
Personal Union with God, becomes really God, as much as the Body becomes a Man,
by its Personal Union with an Human Soul: Notwithstanding of which Union, the
two different Natures of Body and Soul remain nothing the less distinct and
Unconfounded in themselves, and in their several Properties, Incommunicable to
each other. though all equally Predicated of the same Person who partakes of both
Natures.

And therefore Dr. Burnet by this Phrase, in this place, does plainly declare
against the Divinity of Christ, and that he neither does nor can believe it.
Nay he Ridicules it, and Blasphemes it, in setting up the Notion of a Man that
was made a God.

And though as he says, p. 99. The Union of the Divine and Human Nature in
Christ, irrepresented in Scripture as the compounding one Person, as much as in
other Men, the Union of Soul and Body makes one Man. He must mean, by this,
only that this was a Comparison or Representation used in Scripture whereby the
Dwelling of the Word in Christ was in some manner, shadowed out, or
represented, not that it was strictly so. For if he had thought it strictly so,
that the Divine and Human Natures in Christ were as much Impersonated, as Soul
and Body in other Men, he would never have made it an absurdity that a Man was
made God, more than that the matter of a Man's Body is made a Man. or part of
the Person of a Man.

He could never have stumbled upon such broad Blasphemy as to say, That no
Divine Honor was Communicated to Christ, and that he was not our Lord, by an
Assumption into an High Dignity, as before quoted.

Hence we must learn how to understand many of his Plausible sayings, as thus
p. 127. of his Discourse, where, having Explained Personality, as above told,
to mean no more than a Power in the Soul to Command and Govern the Body; he
brings in a Plausible Sentence for the Personal Union of the Divine and Human
Natures in Christ; but yet with a Salvo to secure his secret meaning.

So that upon these Reasons (says he, and not otherwise) we may well and safely
determine that Christ is truly God and man: and that the Godhead did as really
dwell in his Human Nature, and became United to it, as our Souls dwell in our
Bodies, and are United to them.

This sounds very Orthedox. But it is all to be understood only upon these
Reasons. That is, which dwindle down Personality only to a Power to Command and
Govern; and by Christ is God and Man, he means no more than that God dwelt in
that Man Christ; and so He was both God and Man; but not that they were one
Person, any otherwise than as God did Command, Govern, or Enliven that Man; (as
he does all Men.)

Christ was truly God. That is, as the Cloud was Jehovah, which the Dr. asserts
in this same page, and is one of the Premises from whence he draws this
Conclusion.

2. The Godhead dwelt in Christ and was United to him, as our Souls dwell in
our Bodies, and are United to them, that is, as the Dr. has Explained it, only
to Command and Govern them.

Thus you see what true pains is taken by these two Great Doctors to Elude and
totally to Enervat the whole Christian Doctrine, and all the Terms wherein for
suppression of Heresies, it has been conceived and delivered down to us from
Christ and his Apostles through all Ages of the Catholic Church.

If it be not so. Why are not they content to set down their Faith in the plain
Terms used by the Church? Why all these New and Laborious Expositions? Why do
they thus Entangle and Perplex? Why can they not say three Persons in the
Trinity, as well as three differences, three somewhats? Why do they confound us
as this Dr. p. 96. with the difference betwixt distinct and distinction? viz.
That by Person, in the Trinity, we must not mean a complete Intelligent Being
distinct from every other Being. But only that every one of that Blessed Three,
has a peculiar distinction in Himself, by which he is truly different from the
other Two.

Different but not distinct; Not distinct but that has a Distinction!

What is the meaning of this? What is the Quarrel at the word Person? O that
these Dr's would speak out! That they would go fair over to the Socinian side!
Or do they stay, that they may more Effectually undermine the Christian
Doctrine by distinguishing and Accommodating all to the Socinian Hypothesis.
And by this means draw Men Insensibly into it? Therefore we must deal plainly
with them and tell (because they will not) what they would be at. Which is, to
make the 3 Persons of God. only 3 Manifestations of God; Or, the same Person
of God considered under 3 different Qualifications and Respects, as our
Creator, Redeemer, Sanctifier. But we must Ask, if it was only a Manifestation
that was made Flesh? If we are Baptized into the Faith and worship of a
Manifestation? why but 2. or 3 Manifestations of God, are there not Hundreds?
is God, or the first Person, one of his own Manifestations; Why then is He
reckoned as one of the Three? Are these three all one and the same Person? Is
this then the meaning of Mat. 12.32. That whosoever speaks against one of
these One shall be forgiven, but whosoever speaks against Another of the same
One shall not be forgiven? That we are Baptized in the Name of the Father, and
of the Son (who is the Same person with the Father) and of the Holy Ghost (who
is the same Person with them both (or in the Name of the Father, and of
Himself, and of Himself?

This is the plain, Easy, and Intelligible Socinian System of Divinity! This
is the Rational account of their Faith.

And this (Doctors Both) you must stick to, or give us leave to use the word
Person in the already known and Received Notion of that Term, and as the Holy
Catholic Church has always understood it in Expressing the Glorious Trinity
of God.

Dr. B. Concludes this point with referring to the four bove-said Sermons of
Dr. T. and clawing him for the Grace of this Imprimatur, by giving his Judgment
of that work, as performed with great Strength and clearness of Reason. p. 128.

Thus these two Pillars stand bound jointly and severally for one Another
Ingenuity and Performances.

And that they may keep even pace, Dr. B. now passes on to the other great
point of Socinianism, the Sacrifice, and Death of Christ. p. 134. Wherein he
Copys after, and comes up to the full of that Diabolical Heresy, so barefaced
set up by Dr. T. against the Satisfaction of Christ, which is the only
Foundation for the Remission of sin. He first. p. 134. Endeavors to Remove the
Great Groundwork of any Satisfaction being due to Gods Justice for sin, by
Advancing that Notion of Justice which Dr. T. does in his Sermon of Hell. He
calls it only a Right of punishing which is vested in Himself, and therefore
which he may either use or not use at his pleasure. Upon this is grounded the
precariousness of Hell, that God not being Obliged in his Justice, to inflict
Hell, notwithstanding of his threatening it, It is not certain whether he will
do it or not.

Dr. B. Says that this Justice is a Right, vested in God Himself; and which
therefore, He argues. God may dispense with at his pleasure. So far he argues
truly, That God is not, nor can be accountable to any other; And therefore, in
this sense, he may do, in every thing, as he pleases; That is, as to any
Outward Compulsion, or giving an Account of his Actions to any whatsoever.

But, on the other hand, God is (as I may so say) Tied up to his own Inherent
Rectitude, and all the Perfections of his Nature. It is not being Tied up, or
any way Limited, It is the Highest and most absolute Liberty, that he can never
be otherwise. If he could lose his Liberty, He would not be so free. Thus God
cannot Die, cannot cease to be God, Cannot make Himself not to be Eternal,
Infinite, etc. And that he cannot depart from any of his Attributes (not
withstanding the sound of the word Cannot) is no Stinting of his Prerogative,
but the Height of it.

Now Justice is as much an Attribute of God as his Mercy. He is not only just,
that is, has Justice, or a Great deal of Justice in him, but he is Justice it
self, Justice in the Abstract; Justice is of the Nature of God. And therefore,
He can no more depart from it than from Himself. The Highest Notion of Justice,
as of Love or Goodness, that is God, it is the very Nature of God. God is Love.
1 John 4.8. God is likewise Justice. And as all the Love or Goodness in us, is
but a participation of the Infinite and Eternal Goodness; so all the justice,
all the Notion we have of Right or Wrong, is but a Ray Sent down to us from the
Eternal and Essential Restitude and Justice which is God. Now here is the
difference betwixt God and us, We have a Mixture of Justice, and of Mercy in
us: and sometimes we Exert an Act of Justice, and sometimes of our Mercy;
Justice has the Ascendant in some, over Mercy; and in others Mercy has it over
Justice.

Therefore, if a Man Remits without Satisfaction; We say not that it is unjust
in him, because he then Exerts an Act of Mercy only. But none say that this
proceeds from his Justice. To forgive is no part of Justice, that is
all-together Mercy. Justice will Exact to the uttermost farthing. Justice MUST
do it, it were not otherwise Justice.

And if Justice cannot do it; God cannot do it. For God is Justice; and
therefore whatever is Essential to Justice must be so to God.

Mercy and Justice do not thwart or overcome One Another in God, as in Man:
because each is Infinite in God.

If you cannot apprehend how Infinite Justice and Mercy can stand together:
Behold in the wonderful Redemption of Man, Justice Requires full satisfaction:
and Mercy Finds it: And thus the Attributes of God Exalt and Magnify one
Another; One Raises the other to the Height, and each Exert themselves to the
utmost, that is, Infinitely.

But Dr. B. says, Ibid. p. 135. That the Scripture sets none of these
speculations before. What! Does not the Scripture tell us that God is Just? and
these Speculations are but Necessary Inferences from the Nature of Justice.

But even as to the Exactness of God's Justice. Does the Scripture say nothing
to give us a true and high Idea of it? God's Justice is there represented as
exacting the uttermost Farthing (what stricter Notion of Justice? Matthew. 5.26.
Deuteronomy. 4.24. Exodus 34.7.
) as Consuming Fire. Burning Jealousy, Heb. 1.13. Matthew. 12.36. Matthew. 9.53.44.
that will by no means clear the Guilty, of purer Eyes than to behold Evil,
that cannot look on Iniquity. Who will take an Account of every idle word. A
Worm that never dies, and a Fire that never shall be quenched. Whatever Dr. T.
and his Brother B. have labored to the contrary; to persuade the World, in the
words of the first Deceiver, that though ye sin, yet ye shall not surely die.
Genesis 3.4. Notwithstanding that the Scripture has said so in plain Terms That
the Fire of Hell, that is, of God's Justice is everlasting, shall never be
quenched; yet these D^ctors would have you venture against all this, a pretty
distinction they have found out (of which the H^ly Scriptures are totally
silent) that Remunerative but not punishing Justice is Essential to God. Which
is the g^ound-work of Dr. T's Sermon against the Truth of Hells Eternity. And
repeated here by Dr. B. p. 135. and yet, in the very same Breath, he pretends
to answer all the Arguments brought from God's Justice, by saying, That the
Scripture sets nine of these Speculations before us. Whereas Dr. T. does
plainly confess in his above said Sermon of Hell; That there is no ground or
light in the World so much as to be expected from the Scripture, to support his
Hypothesis of the No-certainty of Hell; and he gives a Reason for it. Because,
says he, less than the threatening Eternal punishment was not sufficient to
deter Men from sin; and therefore that in the same Revelation which told us of
the Eternity of Hell, it was not to be expected that we should find any thing
which should give the least Vmbrage to the contrary. This is very subtle! But
then it would be enquired how these Doctors came by it, since they confess
there is not the least footstep to be found of it in Scripture? Dr. T. in the
aforesaid Sermon does allow, for the above Reason, that God did, by his wording
of the Scriptures, design that Men should believe the Eternity of Hell, without
which the threatening of it had been to no effect. It seems then that God could
not keep it from these Doctors! But if they were either too Wise for God's
design, or could not be Imposed by God like other Men; or that God did, by a
particular Revelation, discover the mighty secret to these Men, sure it was not
with a design that all the World should know it; For, as the Dr. says, the
contrivance of concealing it, in Scripture, was on purpose, lest Mankind should
know it, or have the least suspicion of it; but that they should believe the
Eternity of Hell, to keep them to their Duty, I say, if these Doctors were so
perfect as not to need such an Awe upon them; and that therefore God had opened
their Eyes; Why would they Blabb this, and spoil God's design, upon other Men?
I dare say, he will tell them no more Secrets for this trick.

It terrifies me while I must expose the wicked presumption of these
Blasphemers. Who when God has said plainly, That Hell is Eternal; and Christ
has assured us, as a true Doctor and Teacher of his Church, That the Fire shall
never be quenched, would persuade us to believe Them contrary to all this;
whereby they plainly insinuate that they are wiser than God: or design better
for Mankind, in revealing to us, what they confess, God would have kept secret.

And, to carry on the Argument of their Folly, that they should object against
the Christian Doctrine, That, as they say, it is not told plain enough in
Scripture, when they confess their own to have no foundation at all in
Scripture, They think they have a right to call God to an Account for his
Remunerating Justice, to perform his Promises to them, and that this is
Essential to his very Nature: But not so of his Punishing Justice: They will
not have that to belong at all to the nature of Justice, though they can give no
other Reason, than their not desiring it. For I am confident there is hardly a
Man in the World but thinks that Pun^shing as well as Rewarding does belong to
the Nature of Justice. It is a Principle as selt-evident, and rooted in the
first Notions of Men as any whatsoever that can be named. So that these Doctors
will find Reason as much their Enemy as Revelation, and it is a just Judgment
that those who prosumptuously go against the latter, should discover their
extreme folly in the other, wherein they boast themselves.

And this they do, with all their Socinian Brethren in most palpable manner, by
the account they give of the Death of Christ. For upon their ground of the no
necessity to satisfy God's Justice for sin. They cannot find out any Reason
why he should die. Sometime they say to confirm the Truth of his Doctrine. But
that does not confirm it, or say any more than that he was fully persuaded of
it himself. For Men have died for Errors. And Christ vouched his Miracles, not
his Death, to confirm the Truth of his Doctrine.

At other times, they say, It war only to show God's Abhorrence to sin. How! To
excuse the Guilty, and punish the Innocent! This, upon their way of Reasoning,
shows rather God's acceptance of sin, and abhorring of Innocence. Were it not
more reasonable what Solomon says, Prove. 21.18. That the Wicked should be a
Ransom for the Righteous, and the Transgressors for the Upright? Or as he
otherwise words it, Chapter 11.8. The Righteous is delivered out of trouble, and
the Wicked comes in his stead. Is not this more Justice than that the
Righteous should be punished in the stead of the Wicked? It cannot stand with
Justice any other way than upon the Doctrine of Satisfaction, nor can the Death
of Christ be otherwise rationally accounted for.

In short the Socinians can find no Reason for it that has the least Pretense.
And therefore they settle here as I have shown above. That God made a Covenant
with Christ (tho for what Reason they do not know) to Remit the Sins of the
Penitent, if he would suffer himself to be murdered, by those whose sins were
to be Remitted by virtue of that Murder. They say there was no need for any
such Covenant, for that God might have Remitted sins without it, or without any
Covenant, or upon any sort of Covenant. For as Dr. B. Says. p. 151. It is the
Appointment and the Acceptance that makes the Satisfaction.

But then if the Appointment and Acceptance of the Sacrifice of a Bullock
could have made Satisfaction, what need was there for Christ being Sacrificed?
Why, no need at all, say our Dr's. that we can tell: But we find in Scripture
often Mention of Gods Covenant in Christ and we suppose this to be it.

But the Siripture gives a quite different account of it, viz. That in order to
Remission, there was a necessity for Christ's Suffering. Luke 24.46. That it
behoved Him to Suffer, Because it was not possible that the Blood of Bulls and
of Goats should take away sins. Heb. 10.4. c. 7.13. That there was a
disanulling of the Legal Commandments and Institution, not for want of
Appointment, (for they were Appointed) but for the weakness and
unprofitableness thereof. Here respect is had to the Nature of the means, and
not only to the Appointment. Romans 8.3. For what the Law cannot do, in that it
was weak through the Flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful
Flesh, and for sin, condemns sin in the Flesh. Gal. 3.21. For if there had been
a Law given which could have given Life, verily Righteousness should have been
by the Law -- For if Righteousness came by the Law, then Christ is dead in
vain. c. 2.21. And in vain did He die, for all the account these Men give of
it, or can give, upon these Socinian Poinciples which they maintain.

And they bewray their Erros to that degree, that sometime they fall foul upon
God's Justice, for suffering Christ an Innocent Person to die. Thus Dr. B. p.
148. says that Christ had nothing to fear from a Just and Good God. Why?
because he was conscious to him self of no sin. And therefore, he says, he
cannot apprehend what could have raised such amazing sorrows in so pure and
unspotted a Soul that was conscious to it self of no sin, and so could fear
nothing from a Just and Good God, and therefore, says he, we must not pretend
to explain what we cannot understand. But if he could have understood Christ
then laying under the weight of all the sins of the World, which he had
undertaken, as our Surety to answer for, and satisfy the utmost demand of
God's Justice for them, he would have found the reason of that unexpressible
Agony of Christ our Redeemer, who had an Adequat Notion of the Infinite demerit
of Sin, and what was due to it; and had taken it all upon himself, and was to
present to God a Sense and a Sorrow for it, fully propotrionable to the whole
Offense, which all the Damned in Hell can never do; No, nor all Creatures; for
they are not all able to comprehend the full Heinousness and Obliquity of an
Offense against an Infinite Being. And when we conceive such an Infinite Sorrow
lodged in the Soul of Christ, and so strong a sense of the hatefulness of Sin,
and its Monstrous Deformity, and of the full Wrath of God which lay upon that
Accursed or Devoted Head who was to answer for it, Gal. 3.13. such a Sense, I
say, and a Sorrow (which is always proportionable to the Sense we have of the
sin) as all the Capacities of all Creatures to Eternity were not large enough
to contain; when we perceive Christ our Savior under such a Sorrow and
Apprehersion as this, we cannot wonder at his so terrible an Agony.

But indeed, without this consideration of Christ's satisfying the Justice of
God for our Sins, there can be no account given of his Agony. It is altogether
unintelligible, as Dr. B. says. For he had no sin of his own to answer for, and
unless we suppose that he took our sin upon himself, he had nothing (according
to Dr. B.) to fear from a Just God. And Dr. B. denying the necessity of any
Satisfaction, to be made to Justice, and consequently thinking that Christ did
not make any satisfaction, or that our Sins were laid upon him, consequently
must think that as Christ had nothing to fear from a Just God, so that God was
not Just in inflicting Death upon Christ. elso Christ had something to fear
from a Just God.

Dr. T. likewise runs into the same strain, in his Sermon before spoke of
concerning the Sacrifice and Satisfaction of Christ, wondering at the great
Severity showed to Christ, he says p. 34. That God seemed, in that, to have
gone almost further than Goodness and Justice could well admit; to afflict
Innocence it self, to save the Guilty -- And, that it looked almost like hatred
of INNOCENCE and bis only Son. Now to almost ordoubt of God's JUSTICE or
GOODNESS, is next door, if not the same as denying it: Because God is a
Necessary Being; if this Being, or if any Attribute he had were doubtful, he
could not be God: therefore to doubt of God, or of any of his Attributes, is
almost and altogether not to believe a God.

To such straits are these Men driven, who would give an Account of the
Sacrifice and Death of Christ without the Doctrine of Satisfaction. I will end
this Discourse with showing that the Doctrine of Satisfaction as I have set it
down, is strictly pursuant to the Doctrine of the Church of England, and
consequently, That these Doctors T. and B. have Apostatized from that Church,
and from that very Doctrine, which they once professed. Therefore my Proof
shall be out of the Common Prayer Book, and the Homilies.

And first for the Common Prayer Book, in the Prayer of Consecration of the
Elements of the Lord's Supper, it is said that Christ made, upon the Cross, a
Full, Perfect, and Sufficient Sacrifice, Oblation, and Satisfaction for the
sins of the whole World.

And in the first Homily for Good Friday it is expressly said, That without
Payment (of our Debt by Sin) God the Father could never be at one with us. And
through all that and the following Homily, it is insisted on as necessary to
the Pardon of Sin, that Christ himself should come down from Heaven, be
Incarnat and Dis; and that no Prophet or Angel, or less than the Eternal Son of
God, could have wrought our Deliverance. And this is agreeable to the Scripture
Language, as before told: That Christ OUGHT to have suffered; that it BEHOVED
Him to suffer. Luke 24.26.46. That thus it MUST be. Mat. 26.54.39. That it was
not POSSIBLE the Cup should pass from Him, if He would complete the Redemption
of Man.

In the Homily of the Salvation of Mankind, etc. you have these words. God sent
his Son -- to fulfill the Law for us, and by shedding his most precious Blood
to make a Sacrifice and Satisfaction, or (as it may be called) Amends to his
Father for our sins -- And whereas i^ lay not in us to do that, he provided a
Ransom for us -- And so the Justice of God and his Mercy did embrace together
and fulfilled the Mystery of our Redemption. He would not by his Mercy deliver
us clearly, without Justice or Payment of a Just Ransom, but with his endless
Mercy he joined his most upright and equal Justice -- Upon God's part, his
Great Mercy and Grace, Upon Christ's part, Justice, that is, the Satisfaction
of God's Justice -- So that in our Justification there is not only God's Mercy
and Grace, but also his Justice -- The Grace of God does not shut out the
Justice of God in our Justification -- And whereas all the World was not able
of themselves to pay any part toward their Ransom. It pleased our Heavenly
Father of his Infinite Mercy without any of our desert or deserving, to propare
for us the most precious Jewels of Christ's Body and Blood; whereby our Ransom
might be fully paid, the Law fulfilled, and his Justice fully satisfied. This
Faith the Holy Scripture teaches us, is the strong Rock and Foundation of
Christian Religion. This Doctrine all Old and Ancient Authors of Christ's
Church do approve; This Doctrine advances and sets forth the true Glory of
Christ, and beats down the vain Glory of Man, this whosoever denies, is not
to be accounted for a Christian Man -- but for an Adversary to Christ and his
Gospel.

Yet these Adversaries Rear in the midst of our Congregations, and set up their
Banners for Takens. O God, in what a Condition is this poor Church, these
miserable, misled People of England when such Doctrine is taught from the
Throne of Canterbury! When Addresses are made to the Clergy by their Bishops,
publicly and in Print, to teach and propagate these Damnable Heresies! When
these Men are made Primates and Bishops of our Church, whom our Homilies think
not fit to be accounted as Christian Men, but Adversaries to Christ and his
Gospel! The whole Head is sick, and the whole Hears faint! It is for the fins
of these Nations, that such Priests are sent to them, according to the words of
the Prophet, Hos. 4.9. There shall be like People like Priest. 9.7. The Prophet
is a Fool, the Spiritual Man is Mad, for the multitude of thine Iniquity, and
the great Hatred -- 8. The Prophet is a snare of a Fowler in all his ways, and
Hatred in the House of his God. Jer. 23.9. My Heart within me is broken,
because of the Prophets. all my Bones shake -- For the Land is full of
Adulteries, for because of SWEARING, the Land mourns -- 5.31. Their cause is
Evil, and their force is not Right. A wonderful and horrible thing is committed
in the Land. The Prophets Prophesy falsely, and the Priests bear Rule by their
means, and my People love to have it so, and what will ye do in the end thereof.

POSTSCRPT.
I Am the more encouraged in what I have here undertaken, that Dr. Sherlock,
who formerly was so rankly Socinian as to the Doctrine of Satisfaction, not
only to Blaspheme but Ridicule it, as Dr. S. has severely shown from his Book
of the Knowledge of Christ, has now at last come off from these two Doctors,
and Disputed expressly against them, upon this point, and answered their
Arguments against the Doctrine of Satisfaction, in his Sermon Peached at
White Hall last Trinity Sunday, 1694. which it is much desired that he would
Publish, though he could get no License from Lambeth. It gave great satisfaction
to many of his Auditors, from some of whom I had a very good Account of it.
Particularly in answer to Dr. T's main, and (he thinks) unanswerable Objection,
where he Dares any Man to say that God could'not save Man otherwise than by the
Death or Satisfaction of Christ. To which Dr. Sherlock Replied (as it was
Represented to me) that if this was understood of any Compulsion from without,
God could not be Compelled or Obliged in any Case: But if the necessity
proceeded from what is Internal, and consequently Eternal in God, that is his
Justice, it was no Imperfection to suppose such a Necessity in God of requiring
Satisfaction, etc. But I will not Anticipate, nor Prejudice the Dr. We desire
it in his own words.

FINIS.
A SUPPLEMENT upon Occasion of A History of Religion lately Published, supposed
to be Wrote by Sir R.H -- d.
Wherein likewise Charles Blount's GREAT DIANA is Considered; And both Compared
with Dr. TILLOTSON's Sermons
READER.
THis comes to you upon occasion of a Book Published this year 94. since the
foregoing Observations were wrote. It is called, A History of Religion, And
gives a like account of Religion as what I have already told out of Dr. Till.
but in somewhat another Form. And it quotes him with great Applause in the
Preface, as the true Pattern of Orthodox Divinity; that is, such Principles as
he there sets forth; and so much in the Doctor's Style and Air, that if he be
not the Author, it comes from some of his Disciples that have Copied after him
very exactly.

He Ridicules all Revealed Religion, and turns it into what he calls
Priestcraft; This was but borrowed from a work of that Execrable Charles
Blount, one of the Atheistical Club, and very intimate with Dr. Tillotson. It
was Printed in London Anno 1680. and is Entitled, Great is Diana of the
Ephesians, Or, The Original of Idolatry, together with the Politic Institution
of the Gentiles Sacrifices.

The Design and whole Import of that Book, is under the Name of the Gentile
Sacrifices, and Religion, to Blaspheme, and, like a Mad Dog, to Curse and
Reproach the whole Institution of God, as well under the Law as the Gospel. And
he Builds upon the very same Foundation as Dr. Till. in the Sermons above
Quoted, of Sacrifices and all the other Institutions of Revealed Religion,
being merely an Invention of Men. Though he does not go the length of his
Master Dr. Till. to make the Sacrifice of Christ, and other Institutions of the
Christian Religion, to be only a Compliance with the Wicked and Diabolical
Fancies of Men, in their Bloody Sacrifices of Beasts and Human Kind, etc.

But that you may see the Thread and Progress of this horrid Mastery of
Iniquity (the like sure never known or Tolerated in any Christian Country) let
me give you a short view of this Book of Blounts: Then I will show how this new
History of Religion agreet with it, or was taken out of it: And how exactly
both do square with Dr. T's Notions and Scheme of Religion, which I have laid
down in the Discourse going before.

First, Blount makes it known, That there are no Martyrs in their Religion, for
he tells you Sect. 11. p. 23. That they are too wise to hazard their own Ruin
for the Instruction of foolish Men -- knowing that if any Man should be so
vain, as to oppose the Common Belief, the Mobile would ( as they did to
Socrates) Oppresi and decry him for an Atheist. Therefore the Wisest among the
Heathens followed this Rule, in their Converse. LOQUENDUM CUM VULGO, SENTIENDUM
CUM SAPIENTIBUS, SI MUNDUS VULT DECIPI, DECIPIATUR.

And, in the next words, he Blasphemously brings in our Savior as observing
the same Poor and Wicked Craft, and that this was his Reason for speaking to
the People in Parables.

He Instances almost in every Circumstance of our Savior's Life, and Death,
his Miracles and Proofs of his Divinity; by telling over the Story, in
something that he finds or makes like it among the Heathens; and for which he
gives all the ill Names can be to the Heathen Worship, as being contradictory
to Reason, with a But the Christian Religion is not so -- when he has made them
the very same, and no more Grounds for believing the one than the other, and
that so plainly, that none who have but half an Eye can help seeing that the
whole is meant to Ridicule and Blaspheme the Christian Religion, in this most
Malicious and Provoking manner. p. 39. He thus Ridicules our Commemoration of
Christ in the Blessed Sacrament. As all Entertainments (says he) the Company
are apt to drink the Founder's Health.

The whole Book, from beginning to ending, is of the same strain, that I must
Transcribe it all if I should undertake to set down all his Blasphemies and
Profaneness. And I am very glad to be released from the Repetition of such
Wickedness as curdles my Blood, and shakes all my Frame. And the less that
others hear of it the better. Would God it had never been heard or wrote, that
there might have been no necessity of ever mentioning of it.

Having thus made Christ himself to be Beelzebub. the Great Deceiver, you cannot
expect he should treat his Church and Servants better than their Master. And
indeed he deals more roundly with them. He spares not to Name them plainly and
above board. By which he puts it out of doubt that it was the Christian
Religion which he Battles through all this Book. Sect. 18. Telling one of the
Politic Ends of the Institution of Sanguinary Sacrifices, to be the enuring
People to War and Blood: But, says he, p. 45. The Primitive Church did prohibit
the Christians such Bloody Sights, they chose another way, i e. To Govern in
the Spirit of Meekness and Innocence, Hopeing thereby to gain a greater
Submission.

So that Ambition was the whole End of all that Meekness and Innocence, which
is taught in the Christian Religion -- Hopeing thereby to gain a Greater
Submission! And this he meant against Christ Himself, though Here he only names
the Primitive Church: for Christ first taught that Meekness and Innocence which
they afterward Preached; and He was the Head of the Church, whom this Black
Infidel traduces; and he downright names the Christians, that you may know
against whom he writes. And that not only these later corrupted Times, but the
Primitive Church, in which the Times of Christ and the Apostles are included:
And it is of these, and all other Christian Priests, that he means what he says
in the same page, under his Cobweb Vell of the Heathen Priests, who were
certainly (says he) the Wickedest and the Craftiest of Men. You must know he
never Conversed with any in his life, except Dr. Tillotson (because he was a
Politician) and those of his Recommendation.

Sect. 10. p. 22. He argues against Future Punishments (but not Rewards) at
least the Eternity of them. (Exact Dr. Tilletson's Notion in his Sermon of Hell
before spoke of) and Disputes (as Dr. T. does; as If they were inconsistent
with the Goodness of God. And from their Invisibility deduces their
Uncertainty; He makes them nothing else but the Invention of Government to keep
their Subjects in Awe. Which Dr. Tillotson words (in the said Sermon of Hell)
That God is under no other Obligation to Justice (or the Proportioning the
Punishment to the Crime) than so far as it may tend to secure His Government.
Nay, he says, that to Proportion the Punishment to the Crime, does not belong
to Justice at all, but is only a Consideration of Politics, to secure
Government.

Thus while these bold Miscreants are straining their Wit to turn all Revealed
Religion into Priestcraft; they have reduced the whole Notion of Justice
(which is God, who is justice in the Abstract) into nothing else but a piece of
State-Craft!

And have, in all their lewd Harangues, but Copied after the old Roman
Atheists. Primos in orb Deos Timor fecit. Which Blount repeats in the same
page above quoted, in these words, Animo tortore Eagellum. And having made the
Belief of Eternal Punishments to be contrary to the Goodness of God, and so
Irrational, and altogether Pracarious, as being Invisible and Imperceptible by
any Natural means, he t^en, in his Method above-told, lays the Absurdity upon
the belief of the Stygian-Lake. But, So Rational (says he, thrusting out his
Tongue) and so Natural is that Article of our Christian Faith!

In like manner he deals with the Institution of Sacrifices. Sect. 7. p. 15.
which Superstition (as he calls it) suffers neither God nor Man to live at
rest, as evidently appears by th^se Heathen Sacrifices. But instead of
Reproving them for that wherein only they were faulty, so far as they were
Aberrations from the Divine Institution, and were Offered to Devils and not to
God; I say, instead of this, he vents such Reasons against them as equally
involve the Sacrifices of the Jews which were made to God, and by him
Commanded; and consequently the Sacrifice of Christ our Lord. This Wild Beast's
Reasons against Sacrisices are in the words Immediately following those above
quoted, viz. What could be more Sottish and Irational, than to think that the
slaughter of a poor Innocent Creature (who followed the simplicity or his own
Nature, without ever offending God) should be so Grateful to the Deity, as
thereby we might Expiate our Sins, and render a sufficient Atonement for the
most exerable Villanlei of Mankind? As if the Almighty Justice could be no
otherwise appeased for the Errors of the Wicked, but by the Sufferings of the
Innocent. [ This I desire his Tutor Dr. T. to Answer, upon his Scheme of no
Satisfaction being due to the JUSTICE of GOD for our Sins But Blount goes on.]
Now as Sacrifices were the most Ancient and Universal, so the Greatest and most
Mysterious Fourbs that ever were invented, or imposed upon. Mankind. What have
Sacrifices to do with Sins? Could none but their Enlightened Priests make Peace
between God and Man, when Sins were committed? Thus Blount. And in what
follows, he tells you what he would be at. That is, to throw off all outward
Ordinances, Sacrifices, Sacraments, etc. and resolve all to Inward Repentance.
Which is the very Notion of the Quakers, whither his great Wit has carried him.

Now I will show you how he agrees with his Tutor in all this. I will set down
their words over against one another.

As if (says Blount, as above quoted) the Almighty Justice could be no
otherwise appeased for the Errors of the Wicked, but by the Sufferings of the
Innocent.

In this Dispensation (says Tillotson as before quoted, in his Sermon of the
Sacrifice and Satisfaction of Christ p. 34.) of God's Grace and Mercy to
Mankind, by the Death of his Son, God seems to have gone to the very Extremity
of things, and almost further than Goodness and Justice will well admit; to
afflict Innocence it self, to save the Guilty -- It looks almost like Hatred of
Innocence and his own Son.

These two Almosts, are like two Greek Negatives, which make an Affirmative.
And show this Dr. to be both almost, and altogether such a Christian as his
Disciple Blount.

And indeed, without the Doctrine of Satisfaction, there can no Rational
account be given for the Typical Sacrifices before Christ came, and much less
for His Sacrifice, who was Innocence it self. But, according to the Doctrine of
Satisfaction, He could not otherwise have been an Expiatory Sacrifice for Sin:
And God's Mercy and His Justice do equally Magnify one another in this
Glorious and most Rational Dispensation. But this has been discoursed in the
foregoing Observations. Wherein has been shown, that Dr. Tidotson's Account of
the Legal Sacrifices, it as Atheistical and Profane as this which I have
quoted out of Blount.

Both of them agree that this was a Trick and Barbarous Invention of Wicked and
Foolish Men. Bu^ Dr. T. gets, I think, beyond Blount; where he makes the Jewish
Religion and Sacrifices (as well as the Christian) to be a Compliance in God
with all this Barbarous Wickedness. And indeed (says he, in the above quoted
Sermon of the Sacrifice and Satisfaction of Christ, p. 6.) a very great part of
the Jewish Religion, which was Instituted by God Himself, seems to have been a
plain Condescension to the General. Apprehension of Mankind, concerning this
way of appeasing the Offended Deity with Sacrifices.

This is the most Irrational and Blasphemous Account which those who deny the
Satisfaction of Christ (because as they pretend, against their Reason) are
forced to give of the Sacrifice and Death of Christ. [But I have Treated
largely of this elsewhere.] And while they set up for the only Men of Reason,
they have shown themselves utterly Incapable of Reason.

To think (as Blount here) that there was no other End or Design in God's
Institution of Sacrifices, but the pleasure he took in the death of a Beast!
How blind and wretched is the Reason of such Men! How totally Ignorant of the
Great Designs of God! Of the Glorious and ever Adorable Methods of His Wisdom
and Goodness in the Redemption of lost Mankind! In the Satisfaction of His
Infinite and exact Justice! Together with the Exaltation of equal Infinite
Mercy! Which things the Angels delight to look into; but the wicked Arrogance
of poor miserable Men presume madly to Blaspheme; measuring the Eternal Wisdom
by their short Plummet! Void of common sense, as well as modesty, or any
Reverence to that Being, whom, in words, they own to be Almighty and
Incomprehensible!

How just is it in God to suffer these Men to Expose themselves most
shamefully, even in the point of Reason; their Great Diana, wherein they so
vainly magnify themselves!

Which appears, very plainly, in the present Case, of the Account they give of
the Original of Sacrifices, and the Possitive Institutions of Revealed
Religion. Perhaps (says Blount ibid. Sect. 8. p. 17.) Melancholy Men might at
first sight upon this Frenzy, He means of Sacrifices (calling the Institution
of God, after the Delirium of his own Brain, a Melancholy Frenzy) and the
highest he can derive Sacrifices is from the Egyptians, among whom, he says,
they were first used, and from them derived to the Hebrews (Sect. 15. p. 39) as
if he had never heard, or did not believe, that Cain, Abel, and Noah,
Sacrificed, long before there were either Hebrews or Egyptians in the World. If
he lay no greater stress upon the Scriptures, than upon other Common Hystories,
this must betray the most stupid or wilful Ignorance.

There is nothing more plain than how the Heathen came to the Knowledge of
Sacrifices, viz. That Cain, though he corrupted the True Religion, yet preserved
the Institution, and derived that Worship of Sacrifices to his Posterities:
Though, in process of time, they forgot both the Institution and the true Ends of
it; as they did of the Creation of the World, or their own Origination.

But they preserved, along with the Sacrifices so much of the true Import and
Meaning of them, and of that to which they pointed, which was the Expiatory
Sacrifice of Christ, that they retained a Traditionary Belief of the necessity
of a Vicarious suffering for Sin: which was a sort of implicit and dark Falth
in Christ, though they knew him not, nor had any true Notion of him; as the
generality of the Jews had not, no nor the Apostles themselves till after the
Resurrection of Christ.

How far this Intitl'd these very Heathens to a degree of Faith in Christ, and
of Salvability by it, at least, till He was Preached, and more plainly
Exhibited to them, I will not now dispure. The ways of God are unsearchable,
and with Reverence to the Adored, even where they exceed our Understandings.
But thus much we may conclude from hence, that the Representation which I have
shown above Dr. T. has given of the Heathen Notion of a Vicarious Suffering, as
a Foolish and Wicked Notion, Groundless, and of their own Fancy: And then his
making this the Reason and Foundation of the Sacrifice of Christ, as a
Gratification and Compliance with such Unreasonable and Bloody Notions and
Practices; I say all this shows the Dr's exceeding Ignorance of the true
Principles of Christianity; and the Brutality of these his Disciples and
Followers, who give this senseless and malicious Account of the Gentile
Sacrifices, on purpose to wound Christianity under that Cover.

And though they have no Account from the Heathens, how their Sacrifices began,
yet these Gentlemen are very sure, they were first introduced by Priestcraft.

That is the word! And every thing must be laid upon that. Though in this, they
fall out among themselves. And are not constant three pages together, to their
own No-Hypothesis. Thus, when they are angry with Kings (the malice to Them and
to Priests commonly go together) then Idolatry and Sacrifices were the
Invention of Kings; and Priests came in but at second hand, to keep it up, and
improve it. This Blount (Sect. 2. p. 7.) endeavors to prove. The Primitive
Institution of Idolatry (says he) received its Birth from Princes: at whose
Charge it was afterward Educated by Ecclesiastics. Again Sect. 3. p. 8.
Idolatry (and Sacrifices, which were the Worship Instituted to the Idol) being
thus Instituted by the Civil Power, the Ecclesiastic was left to build upon
that Foundation.

But the History of Religion p. 6. makes Priests to be the first Inventers; and
that Kings, seeing the Veneration and Authority they obtained by it, became
Priests themselves; and joined that Title to the Imperial Dignity; thus Casar
and other Emperors of Rome were Priests; and among the Egyptians, their Kings
were chosen from among the Priests.

Thus they preserve to themselves a double Handle (though by this, in true
Reason, ^hey lose both) and make Religion to be Priestcraft or State-Craft, as
it serves their purpose. For these Latitudinarians in Religion are always the
same in Government.

But this History if Religion, being the latest Effort, brings the matter
closer. Blount Ridicules Religion in the Person of the Heathen: This, in the
same Form, exposes it in the Church of Rome. Whose Errors [they have given too
much occasion for it] he makes use of, not to Reform, but undermine
Christianity it self: and makes all to be Nothing but Priestcraft. though he
forgets not the Heathen Parallel, and to spit his Venom at the Mosaical
Institution, when it comes in his way, to show that he Grafts upon the same
Stock.

Page' s 8: Speaking of the Religious Institutions before Christ, he calls them
Strange and Puziling Methods of Religious Ceremonies and Mysteries, and of
various Rites of Sacrificing, good for nothing but to confound and distract the
Minds of Men.

Then coming down to Christianity, he borrows the Socinian Arms against it: And
so exactly in their very words, as points to us plainly, out of whose Quiver
this Arrow came.

He sets up Irreconcilable War against all Mystery; And making
Transubstantiation his Mark, he levels directly at the Trinity, Incarnation,
Divinity, and Satisfaction of Christ, and every thing that there is the least
pretense of Mystery in.

And yet these Gentlement endeavor all they can at Mystery, while they wound
Christianity, covertly as they think, through the sides of the Heathens, Jews,
and Roman Catholics: But the Clov^n-Foot does plain appear: for their Wit is
not so great as their Malice.

They confess God to be Incomprehensible, and his ways past finding out, yet
they cry out upon Mystery in his Religion.

There are Mysteries, Irreconsilable to them, in their own Natures, and in the
Natures of every thing they see before them; yet they would have every thing in
a Supernatural Religion Revealed from Heaven to be so plain, that their Reason
should be able to dive to the very bottom of it: which if it were, it would be
no Revelation, or perfectly to no purpose: for what needed Revelation in things
which are Plain and Obvious without it?

Physic is an Art, and a Mystery to those who know it not. Which leads only to
the preservation of Health; in those Bodies whose Constitutions we know, and
their Original, as much as of any thing that we see or touch.

And yet we will let nothing be Mysterious (that is, nothing but what every Man
in the World perfectly understands, with all the Reasons, and hidden Causes of
it) in the saving of a Soul, whose Substance, Origination, Constitution,
Operation, and every thing of it, but that we know it is, and feel it by its
Effects, is altogether hidden from us.

Our coming into this World is totally a Mystery. No Human Reason can attain
unto it. And must there be no Mystery at all in our Re-Generation, and being
Born into the never-ending World of Spirits?

Is not the other World, is not Heaven a Mystery to us? Do we understand it
Perfectly? Can we Describe it?

And is it not Reasonable, is it not Necessary that the Methods of fitting us
for it, and of conveying us thither should be very Mysterious to us?

If we know not the End of out Journey, how do we pretend to understand every
step of the way?

But let us hear this Author's Reason against Mystery. You find it p. 60. and
61. in the very words of the Defense of the History of the Unitarians, and
other Socinian Books lately Printed for the Instruction of this Age, viz. That
no Revelation can be a Mystery, more than a Secret when it is told, can be a
Secret still.

But these strong Reasoners should know, that a Mystery is not that of which we
know nothing at all. But that of which we know some part, but darkly and
obscurely, as in a Glass, which is the Comparison the Apostle makes use of, 1
Cor. 13.12.

Thus it is we know Heaven. Yet it is Revealed. And thus we know the Trinity,
Incarnation, and Divinity of Christ. If they had not been Revealed, we should
have known nothing of them: Yet we understand them not Perfectly, nor can give
the Reason for every Modus of them, Why it is thus and thus, and the manner
How. For that is not Revealed: Nor are our Understandings capable of
Comprehending the whole Nature of God; for nothing but Infinite can Comprehend
Infinite. And to attempt it, or go about it, and reject every thing we do not
understand in it, is not only Wicked and Profane, but it argues the greatest
Weakness and Folly in any Man who is capable of such a Thought, of any other
Instance that is possible to be given.

Christ says to his Apostles, Joh. 16.12. He had many things to tell them,
which they were not able to bear.

If I have told you Earthly things, (says He to Nicodemus, that is, concerning
the Re-generation by the Spirit of God in this life) and ye Believe not (that
is, cannot Comprehend it, for the Difficulty and Mysteriousness of it) How
shall ye Believe, if I tell you of Heavenly things? Joh. ^.12. Will not these
be much more Mysterious to you?

This Author would have called him a Mystery-Monger, as he does his Disciples
for Preaching what he Taught. p. 62.

He laughs at any thing that is called Sublime in Religion, or above the reach
of Servile Reason, as he thinks he Rallies, p. 43. And it is a Servile and Poor
Reason indeed that can see nothing above it self; that can find nothing Sublime
in God, or His Religion; in those Infinite Promises of an Eternal Heaven; and
the wonderful Methods by which He has appointed to Conduct us thither, in ways
suitable to His Justice, which is as much Himself, and as Indispensible in Him,
as His Mercy.

The truth of the matter is, These sort of Gentlemen do not love to Think.
Their Wet is Frothy and Superficial; but will endure no Test. Therefore, to
save themselves further Trouble, they take up with a short thought of Religion;
and reduce all to what they call Morality (though they agree not among themselves
what that is; and keep to it the least of all Mankind) which being what every
Man pleases to make of it, they are sure that it shall not be uneasy to them,
for they keep the Dispensing Power in their own Hands

Whereas Revealed Religion puts them under Discipline; and that managed by
others; and sets them out of all Hopes of future Happiness, without Conforming
themselves to the Rules und Methods therein prescribed.

Therefore they Roar against this. And because to decry Religion by Name is not
so Popular (and their S^mmuns Bonum being EASE, they never run any hazard for
their Opinion) therefore they cry out against the Priests, which have the
Administration of Religion, which is the same thing as to decry Religion it
self: Because without Priests there can be no Religion. There may be a Belief
of those things which Religion teaches (that is, it is barely Possible; for
without Teachers that would soon decay) but Religion is not only a Belief or a
Persuasion, which is sufficient indeed to Entitle a Man to a Sect, to be an
Epicurean, a Stoic, or other Sect of Phylosiphers, to which no more is
required than to be of such and such an Opinion; but Christ has settled his
Religion not only in a Sect of Believers; but He has Formed those Believers
into a Society, or Corporation, which is called His Church, to which He has
anne^ed great and unconceavable Privileges and Promises; upon Conditions
therein required; and under the Government and Administration of the Officers
the Bishops whom He has appointed in that Society, with Power to Expel out of
the Society, and admit into it, according to the Rules prescribed in their
Charter: And which when they do, pursuant to those Rules, He has given his
Infallible Promise to ratify every such Sentence of theirs in Heaven: But Men
cannot be Excommunicated or hindered from an Opinion. Therefore Religion is
something more.

From hence it follows, That instead of there being no Revealed Religion (as
these Moralists would have it) there is nothing else Religion but that which is
Revealed. Because my Believing according to the Light of my Nature, which we
call Morality, does not Entitle me to any Privilege, beyond what I have by
Nature, which every Man has as well as I; it does not distinguish me into any
distinct Society from other Men, put^ me under no other Rules, Conditions, etc.

And therefore these Moral-Men may be any thing, but a Church, which is a
Society. And She is a Society founded upon such a Belief, which is called Her
Religion: But such a Religion or Belief cannot be merely Natural, otherwise all
Men must have it, and consequently all Men must be of that Society; which
destroys its being a Society; because a Society is a particular Company of Men,
Exclusive of others, else it is no Society.

And every Society must be by Possitive Institution, by which the Officers and
Rules of the Society are appointed.

So that the Church being a Society, and Religion being that Belief upon which
the Society is Founded; the consequence is necessary that Religion can be
nothing else but that which is Revealed.

I do not speak against Morality, or undervalue it. No, by no means. On the
contrary, that can be no True Religion, which goes against Morality: Religion
improves and heightens Morality. But Morality it self could never carry us to
Heaven, more than our own Natural strength could lift us up to the Skies.

Again, I do not take upon me to vindicate all Priests: No doubt there have
been many wicked of them (never more than in this Age) and such wicked Priests
are no where more severely Reprehended than in Scripture: But upon this handle,
to turn all Religion into Priestcraft, and to make that Craft to be all
Imposture and Villainy, is to place the same Character upon Christ Himself, for
He was a Priest, and is so at this day, and for ever. And indeed all these
Mystical Harangues are levelled only at Him; for His is the only truly
Reavealed Religion; and His Priests are the only Priests in the World; all
others do but falsely bear that Name. And therefore to deny Priesthood in the
General, or set up this Common place of Priestcraft, is downright to destroy
Christianity, and all Religion out of the World.

I will not Retort upon these Men, that what they call Priestcraft appears, by
their own Arguments, to be more Lay-Craft, or State-Craft: Because true
Religion is neither: And it would serve these Antichrists to have it any
Craft, whereby it might be thought a Cheat, and lose its Force; and be no
longer a Yoke (as they think it) upon them.

The true Religion (of God's Institution) has been corrupted by Kings, by
Priests, by Laymen: and, if it were to any purpose to make the Comparison, as
much, or more by Laymen, by Parliaments, than by the Priests themselves.

But it does not seem so direct a blow to Religion, as when all is made to be
Priestcraft: Because, if that be believed, or but suspected, the Regard to the
Office of Priesthood is taken away; and consequently Religion must infallibly
sink with it, for the Reasons above told.

It was never known but that the Respect and Reverence to Priests and to
Religion rise and fell together. They are so inseparably annexed, that the one
cannot be without the other.

Wicked and Profligate Priests cannot be respected as the Good and Pious are.
But this is Personal, and touches not the Office. Where That is brought into
Contempt, Religion must bear it Company. It was never otherwise, nor ever can
be. And that is the whole Design of this Modish word Priestcraft. Which though
not Pardonable upon the Stage, I and others have heard it often from Dr. Burnet
in the Pulpit, where he Acted, in Lawn or Scotch Cleath Sleeves.

I think of all Mankind such sort of Priests, who undermine, who Betray, who
Disgrace Religion, are the most Vile and Contemptible, most Nauseous and
Loathsome: But, that is no more an Argument against Priesthood than the Devils
are against the Angelick-Order in Heaven. And there is as much pretense for
Harangue against Angel-Craft. as against Priestcraft.

The Ancient Prophets while they inveighed so severely against the Corrupt
Priests of Israel; and our Savior against the Scribes and Pharisees, yet
preserved the Reverence due to the Office Sacred and Inviolable. Mat. 23.1.3,
Christ Commands his Disciples as well as the Multitude to pay entire Submission
to them. Heb, 5.5. No Man takes (that is, ought to take) this Honor to
himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron: 6. So also Christ
Glorified not Himself to be made an High Priest, but He that said unto Him --
Thou art a Priest for ever after the Order of M^lchisedeck.

Was it a Glorification even to Christ to be made a Priest And how it that most
Sacred Office become (amongst us) Contemptible!

It is in Veneration to that High Character that I expose these Cursed Priests,
Latitudinarians and Socinians, Enemies to the Cross of Christ, the Ministers of
Satan transformed into His Ministers; as Satan himself into an Angel of Light:
and then he is most a Devil.

It is a true saying, That the Corruption, of the best thing proves the worst.
A Corrupt Angel is a Devil; and a Corrupt Priest the next in wickedness to him.
False-Christs and False-Prophets are much the greater Enemies ^o Christ that
they come in His Name. As False-Friends can do much more Mischief than
Open-Enemies.

Vice is most dangerous when it is recommended under the Notion of Virtue.
Barefaced Wickedness, Atheism, and Infidelity create a Horror in any Mind not
thoroughly debunch'd, and hardened. Therefore we are Cautioned against the
Mystery of Iniquity.

And that is it which now works in these Men who Dispute against any Mystery
in Religion; where it is necessary, and cannot be otherwise, unless we were
able, clearly and fully to comprehend the whole Nature of God, in which there
is something which is and ever will be Mysterious, that is Dark and Hidden, not
fully Understood by all the Angels of Heaven to Eternity: And yet where there
is no necessity in the World, so much as can be pretended, except that of
Knavery, they write all Mystery, and work under ground that they may not be
discovered.

They dwell all in Generals, in which as the Proverb says; Dolu^^later, there
is always Deceit at the bottom: They will not tell plainly what they would
beat: But wound side-ways and by stealth, as these Authors whom we have
Examined. And their admired Teacher Dr. Tillotson, in his ad Sermon concerning
Family Religion, p. 61. gives special Caution not to have Children bred up in
the JARGON of any Party: But will not tell what Party or what JARGON he means.
You may apply it to all, to Christianity it self (as it was intended) but so,
that you shall not fix it upon him, he dwells in the Clouds, and Mysterious
Politics; more Subtle than any of which Aristotle was ever Master: Whose
Philosophy the History of Religion takes pains (from p. 74. to 80.) to prove
was brought into such esteemation by Priestcraft, on purpose to advance
Mystery. Great Wits make strange Discoverys! It is the Bishop's Foot in the Pot
which singes the Milk.

Among these Mysterious Arts of Priestcraft, there is none moves this Author's
Spleen so much as Creeds, and Rules of Faith. Against which he vents his
Indignation. Hist. Rel. p. 64. In very deed (says he) Creeds were the Spiritual
Revenges of Dissenting Parties upon one another.

These Creeds are strange sort of things! That a Man (whatever he believes) may
not have Liberty openly to Profess and Preach what likes him best. But must go
about the Bush and take pains to Blaspheme! And that Atheists, Socinians, and
Latitudinarians cannot get in to the Preforments of the Church without
Swearing; Subscribing, or Declaring I know not how many Lies: And all to no
purpose! For that will never keep them out.

He calls these Creeds p. 115. The Insolent value of Opinions. Yet he values
his own Opinion highly; and would have others to value it, above that of the
Generality of the whole World, in all Ages, who have ever retained a great
value for Religion, and what he Blasphemes, under the opprobrious New-made
JARGON of Priestcraft. He calls Their valuing, an Insolent Value. This was to
show his Modesty and Good Breeding. Insolent for any to be Pessitive but
himself. He has Prescription and would have the Monopoly, he may have the
Reward of it.

He shows great Respect to the Socinians, because they retain nothing of
Christianity but the Name.

Therefore, in the same page, he falls foul upon St. Athanasius his Creed,
knowing that most offensive to the Socinians. And p. 85. He abuses the
Homo-ousians, that is, the Christians, and the whole Council of Nice, which (he
says) Showed a Spirit of Contention, rather than of Peace and Charity. This was
for their Insolent Value of their Faith, so as to Express it in a Creed. And p.
116. He thinks to make great advantage to the Socinian Cause, by the difference
'twixt Dr. Sherlock, and Dr. South, concerning the Trinity.

But this was only a difference in their Exposition of what both acknowledged.
The Holy and ever Blessed Trinity.

Whereas I can tell you, Sir Possitive (and ask your Priestcraft at Lambeth if
it be not true) that the Socinians do differ, not only in their Exposition of
the Object of their Worship, but in the thing it self: and that not only two
Doctors, or so, but whole Parties and Nations of them.

The Brief History of the Unitarians upon Act. 9.14.21. tells us, that the
Polonian Unitarians were so Zealous for Divine Worship to be paid to Christ,
that they Excommunicated, and Deposed from their Ministry such of their own
Party as denied it. Which, I think, they generally do in England.

Where likewise they are of most different Faiths; though they call themselves
Unitarians, and own one another (in odium Tertij) as Christian Brethren.

John Biddle's Confession of Faith touching the Holy Trinity, [Printed in the
Devil's Reformation of 43. and now Reprinted, with other Works of his, among
Volumes of Socinian Treatises which are with great Industry, distributed Gratis
since this Revolution] owns Three Persons in the Holy Trinity: But make the
Second and Third Persons to be Creatures.

The rest of our Socinians (as those that wrote The Brief History of the
Unitarians, which is Printed in the same Volume with Biddle's Confession of
Faith abovesaid) do acknowledge a Trinity, that is, Three in Heaven, but the
Second and the Third, i. e. The Word and the Spirit, they would have to be the
very same with the First, that is, the Father.

So that theirs is the only Contradiction in the Doctrine of the Trinity, who
would have Three to be Three, and yet all the Three to be really but One. It is
they who are out in Counting or Reckoning, which the Hist. of the Unitarians
calls Brutal in us.

The Christians and Biddelite-Socinians do confess Three in Heaven, whom they
acknowledge to be Three distinct Persons, this is fair and plain Reckoning.

But then the Biddelites are guilty of very gross Idolatry, in joining two
Creatures into the same Holy Trinity with God.

On the other Hand, how is it, that these Biddelites, and the other Socinians
do own one another to be of the same Faith? and Print their Books together, as
setting forth the same Doctrine?

The Trinity of the one is Three, who are One Person (a most palpable
Contradiction, which no Distinction can solve) the Trinity of the other is God
and two Creatures (which is rank Idolatry) One Party of them say, That the Word
and Spirit are Persons, the other say, not. One, that they are God, the other
that they are not God; one, that they are Adorable, the other say, No.

Here are differences, not only concerning the Explanation of their Faith (as
that Objected 'tiwxt Dr. Sherlock and Dr. South; and may happen to any of the
same Faith; as different Expositions of a Text in Scripture, does not infer, in
either, a disbelief of the Scripture; and different Explanations of the Nature
of God, which often happens among Divines, does not conclude any of them to be
Atheists) but this difference among the several Sects of Socinians, is
concerning the very Object of their Faith and Worship, those whom one Part of
them make to be God, the rest of them say are but Creatures. Then which it is
impossible to imagine a Greater or more Fundamental difference. Yet these are
the Men who cry out upon Mystery! Whose Faith is flatly contradictory to it
self, as these Unitarians stand Divided from one another: And if you take the
Hypothesis of any of their Sub-Divisions by it self, it is nothing but Mystery:
If by Mystery you mean an Unintelligible thing.

If Three in one Nature (which is the Christian-Trinity) is not fully
Explicable to us; (though there is something very like it even in Human-Nature,
which contains in it several Persons) yet Three in One Person (which is the
Socinian-Trinity) must be flat Contradiction, and has no Parallel or Image in
any Created Nature.

And Two Creatures to make up One Holy Trinity with God (which is another
Socinian-Trinity) though not so contradictory, is yet more Blasphemous.

Great is the Mystery of Godliness. God dwells in Light Inaccessible, in thick
Clouds and Darkness (caused by Light too strong for our weak Senses) because of
the Incomprehensibility of his Nature, so far exalted above all
Created-Vnderstandings.

But the Devil and his Socinian-Latitudinarian Ministers, wrap up the Mystery
of their Iniquity in Darkness, lest it should be Detected: Whose Form would be
so Monstrous if seen in its own Native Colors, as would deter all, but invite
none, to enter into the Black and Dismal Regions of Error.

But these Libertines would fain persuade themselves and others, that there is
no Condemnation for Error.

Though our Savior says, Mark 16.16. Those who Believe not, upon the Preaching
(the Sufficient Publication) of His Gospel, shall be Damned.

But what is their Reason why they should not account for Error.

Sir Possitive tells, p. 96. Because Error proceeds from our Innocence, that is
(says he) our Weakness and Ignorance.

These are they who accuse the Church of Rome, and laugh at them for making
Ignorance the Mother of their Devotion!

But when Ignorance is set up to Countenance Infidelity and Irreligion, then it
is all Innocence!

They decry all Mystery as being a Subterfuge for Ignorance: And plead their
Ignorance as an excuse for not Believing in Mysteries!

But is all Ignorance, Innocence? Why then do these Uncharitable Pretenders to
Wisdom, seek to Rob us of our Innocence? Why do they say such severe and bloody
things against the Papists, the Jews, or the Heathens for their Ignorance?

But if there be an Affected and Wilful Ignorance; an Ignorance that proceed;
from our Negligence, from our Vice; If we spend that time in Debauchery or
Idleness, which, if well Employed, would have improved our Understandings; If
our Ignorance proceeds from such Causes as these, and therefore will be rather
an Aggravation than an Excuse to us; then can none trust to their Ignorance,
who have not been all their lifetime, perfectly Innocent; and who have not
improved every minute to the best advantage of informing their Understandings.
Which since no Man in the World can pretend to) and that there is no Remedy for
misspent time, but to Employ the remainder more diligently* Ignorance will be
an excuse for very few of our Faults: And it will be very hard to determine
which these are.

But it is much easier to guess what they are not. Not Sins of Affectation and
Pride, for a true sense of our Ignorance would make us Humble and Modest:
Therefore neither Possitives nor Poslings will have any share in this Excuse.

Nor Sins of Ingratitude. Because Forgetfulness, in that Case, is the Sin. Else
Posling's turning his Father out of Door, proceeded from his Innocence, that
is, his Ignorance. However it may serve as a Fescue to Sir Possitive; he
having, not long before assisted in the same sin against a Neighbor, who never
injured him; and who had done more for him than all the Friends and Relations
he had in the World.

Nor, Lastly, in Sins of Intriegue and Design; to Circumvent and Deceive when
we cannot Persuade by plain Reason, which is the drift of these Books, and of
all the Party. For Ignorance cannot be pretended in that Case, more than of
direct Lying; in which their Ability are much approved and have been made use
of.

And I believe the sense of what they deserve for this, is that which chiefly
moves them so Zealously against what they call Persecution, hopeing to include
within that Appellation, the Just Punishments for their Crimes: for if all
Errors are Innocence, it would be very hard to Punish them. Blasphemy,
Idolatry, and Treason too may escape at this rate, for they are but Errors.

But this Author's Proofs against Persecution, p. 94. are these. 1. That Force
does not Convince. 2. That the Prescriptions of the Gospel are all Gentle and
Meek, not Force and Arms:


I confine my Answer to the Point of Blasphemy, and seeking to turn Men away
from the Worship of God. For these are the Errors of which we now Dispute. I am
far from thinking every Error Criminal, much less Capital. And am as much in my
Opinion as any body for that Gentle and Persuasive Methods as to Errors which
proceed merely from Weakness, and have no Malice in them.

But in the present Case of Blaspheming, and which is worse, Ridiculing of God
and of Religion; God Himelf has Pronounced it to be Death.

Nor would those Sons of Belial have escaped it, if they had lived in any
Christian Country.

Shall the Honor of the King be Guarded with Death; and God be Blasphemed
Impune in Print, and in the streets!

Has not this Propagated Atheism to the Degree we now see it! Not only to pass
unpunished, but to be thought a Grace in Conversation, and the mark of a Wit!

Shall not God visit for these things! Will not his Soul be avenged on such, a
Nation as this!

As to the two foresaid frivolous Objections; for the first, That Force does
not Convince. Answ. Punishments are inflicted for other ends than Converting
the Criminal, though they often too work that effect, where they meet with Minds
not thoroughly hardened. They are intended to vindicate the Honor of the
Government, chiefly of God, the Governor of Heaven and Earth. In the next place
to prevent the Infection of others, and to deter them from the like.

As to the ad Obj. That the Prescriptions of the Gospel are all Gentle and
Meek. Answ. That is as to the Preachers. Who might not make use of Force, nor
Usurp the Sword, which God had committed to the Civil Magistrate, who Bears
it not in vain, but is a Revenger to execute Wrath upon them that do Evil. Romans
13.4. And that Blasphemy is not one of the Evils which is within his Commission
to Punish, I believe will not be found in all the Gospel. Christ urged no such
thing when He Himself was Condemned for alleged Blasphmy. But on the contrary
He Confirmed the Magistate's Power, in that very Case; and owned that it was
given Him from Heaven. John 19.11.

Christ Commands, if a Man smite us on one Cheek, to turn the other. If a Man
take our Coat, let him have our Cloak also, and not to avenge an injury done to
us. Will any Man say that these are Rules for Judges to go by, in distributing
Justice 'twixt Man and Man?

There is no better pretense, from the Injunctions of Meekness and Forgiving of
Injuries, to conclude against the Power of the Magistrate in case of Blasphemy,
or to call this a Persecution

But they are in no fear of the Laws at present. They cry before they are hurt.
But they think, by this Argument, to raise an Odium against Kings as well as
Priests; and to Curtall the Power of both: for they are equal Enemies to both.
There are none of these Latitudinarians that are not Commonwealth-Men: They are
against Monarchy in Heaven or on Earth: and indeed against all Government, if
they could tell how: that is, all that is not in their own Hands. They cannot
bear to be under the Discipline of any other. This is the true ground of their
Quarrel at Religion. It is not the Mystery of it, that they would not trouble
their Head with: nor spend their Breath to undeceive those Fools (as they call
them) who believe it: they would not concern themselves at Priestcraft, or
care if Priests wore Fools-Caps, so they were not under their Correction. It is
the Law not the Doctrine of Christ which is Grievous to them. They would break
his Bonds asunder, and cast away his Cords from them. Psalm. 2, 3. And they will
fly in the Face of the Civil Government if it tie these faster upon them, or
restrain their Libertinism in this, or in any other Instance. Religion enforces
and strengthens Government; and Government Protects and Encourages Religion:
therefore both are equally Obnoxious to these Filthy Dreamers, who Defile the
Flesh, Despise Dominion, and speak Evil of Dignities, of those things which
they know not, Jude 8. But what they know naturally, as Brute Beasts, in those
things they corrupt themselves. 10. Woe unto them, for they have gone in the
way of Cain, 11. and ran greedily after the Error of Balaam, for Reward, and
perished in the gainsaying of Core: 12. Clouds they are without Water, carried
about of Winds; Trees whose Fruit withers, without Fruit, twice dead, plucked
up by the Roots; 13. Raging waves of the Sea, foaming out their own shame,
wandering Stars, to whom is reserved the Blackness of Darkness for ever.

Is not this a lively Description of these Men? And are these Men to be
Tolerated in any Government? Will God Bless that Church or Government? Is it a
Christian Lenity to Indulge this sort of Men? God Commends the Church of
Ephesus Rev. 2.6. because they hated the Deeds of the Nicolaitans (who gave way
to the sins of the Flesh, though under color of Religion) which I also hate,
says God. And he threatens to fight against the Church of P^rgam^s, because
they had amongst them those that taught that Doctrine. 15. And who held the
Doctrine of Balaam to cast a Stumbling Block 14. before the People (and are not
these Stumbling Blocks which I have mentioned out of these Men's Works?) The
Church of Thyatira 20. was condemned for suffering that wicked Woman Jezebel to
seduce the Servants of Christ: Who will spue those out of his Mouth, Chap.
3.16. who have no more Zeal for his Religion, who are neither Hot nor Cold, who
have a Latitudinarian Indifferency. Let every Man go his own way. --

I would thou were either Cold or Hot ^ 15. being perfectly Cold. That is,
having no Religion at all, is preferable to this Lukewarm Loadicean temper, to
profess ^^e Religion of Christ, and be so careless and unconcerned what becomes
of it.

The Kings of Israel were Blamed and severely Punished by God, for permitting
of Idolatry, which could not be, if it did not belong to their Office to
Restrain it.

And those Kings must be very weak indeed who will be gained by the sometimes
servile soothings of these Priest-Craft-Men, and not see that all they Belch
out against the Priests, is equally levelled against them. They cannot keep it
(always) Concealed.

^lount bestows his loving Glances upon them. Sect. 16. p. 41. where he
represents them under the Figures of Beasts of Rapine, Lions, Dragons, etc. But
for petty Princes (says he) a Fox may be the better Emblem.

And these Men who cry out of Persecution, at the same time, endeavor to raise
all Mankind against those whom they Hate or Fear. They would stir up
Persecution against those whom they call Persecutors. That is to say,
Persecution is only Evil when it touches them.

And of all Mankind none were more violent Persecutors than the Arians (that
is, the Socinians) when they had the Power: who now speak against Persecution,
because they have not the Inflicting of it: yet go in it, as far as their Power
reaches, that is, their Wit and Malice.

But though the Sword of Justice be (at present) otherwise employed than to
Animadvert upon these Blasphemers; is the Cause of God, is the Christian (not
to name the Protestant) Religion so sunk, that none must oppose, and that
boldly and openly, such loud Contempt of all that is Sacred!

And when the Chief and Father of them is advanced to the Throne of Canterbury;
and thence infuses his deadly Poison through the Nation; Preaches it Publicly
at White Hall; and gets it Printed by Their Majesty's Special Command, to give
it greater Countenance and Authority; and another Colleague of his at Salisbury:
Recommends the same in Print, to be Preached and Taught through the Diocese
which (Indignatione Divina) is committed to his Charge, and all the other
Bishops and Clergy of their Communion let it pass, with at least Silent Consent:

When the Braves of this (at best) Theistical Junct^, Place Dr. Tillotson's
Name (not only in his private Capacity, but as Archbishop of Canterbury) in
the Front of their Antichristian Haranguea in Print; and he shows no
Displeasure in it. And (to Recapitulate a little of what is said before.)

He himself has exceeded them in the Barbarous Account he has given of the Rise
and Foundation of the Christian Religion. They make Religion to be the
Invention of Wicked Men, or of Devils; and he improves it, making the Christian
Religion only a Compliance with that Wickedness. As before is sufficiently
shown.

When he dares so openly and barefaced Attack all Revial'd Religion as to
make: it good for nothing but to preserve outward. Peace in this World. As he
does in his Se^^on upon Luke 9.55. which is quoted with Magnificence in the
Preface to this History of Religion. But this Historian himself, had the
Modesty or Cunning to leave out those broad words of the Doctors, which I have
shown above, viz. That it were better there had never been any Revealed
Religion; that is, that Christ had never come, than to make uneasiness in the
World, and disturb Government for it. And though, as I have shown above, The
Christian Religion is the greatest Security to Government, and the outward
Peace of this world; yet that Notion could never have come into the Head of a
Christian, that we had better never have had any Christ, than that any Worldly
Government should be disturbed.

Nay, farther, when, as I have shown above, this Dr. makes a Mother Suckling
her own Child, to be of a more Necessary and Indispensible Obligation than to
believe in Christ, that is, than any possitive Precept of Revealed Religion
(which are his words) for the Belief of Christ is nothing else but a Possitive
Precept of Revealed Religion.

When He Disputes openly against the Satisfaction of Christ; and makes all our
Thirty Nine Articles, or the Belief of any particular Church, but the Jargon of
a Party, and Commands all the Children of the Nation to be bred up loose from
any such Narrow Principles.

When He makes not only the Eternity but the Being of a Hell wholly Precarious.

And lastly, when (as I have shown from Dr. Burn^t, Licensed by Dr. Tillotson)
That Christ is made to be no otherwise God than the Cloud of Glory in the
Temple.

When such Wickedness is set up in our High Places, shall we not give warning!

First, to the Clergy in these Men's Communion, quickly and speedily to separate
from them.

I meddle not (Here) with the point of Schism. (That stands a Dispute by it
self) but as the 15th Canon of the Synod of Constantinople which was omitted in
Mr Hody's Edition of the Baroccian MS. expressly ordians, That if any Bishop
(though a lawful Bishop) do hold Heretical Opinions, and shall PUBLICLY Teach
and Preach the same barefaced in the Church, all, even the meanest Laick is
Obliged to Separate from such wicked Teacher, even before Synodical
Condemnation.

And whether the Opinions before told are not, in the grossest manner,
Heretical: And whether Preaching them at White Hall, and Printing them, be not
a public Teaching and Preaching the same, is left to the Judgment of the
Reader.

And then what an Indispensible Obligation must lie upon all the Clergy
(especially) in their Communion to Separate from them! and, as publicly and
openly as they have done, to Disclaim, Renounce, and Confute their Damnable
Heresiel, Otherwise the Blood of all those Souls who shall be infected by them,
and of all their Posterities, whom they shall likewise infect, will be required
of every single Clergyman, who but by his Silence and continuing in their
Communion, shall, so far, give Countenance to their Errors. Silence can never
be an excuse in a Watchman, whose Office it is to cry aloud: And if he ^low
not the Trumpet, he cannot deliver his Soul.

And though immediate Death attended it, this he ought to do. But there is not
that Hazard. The Government is not concerned in this. It is the Common Cause of
Christianity: And I see no Reason but to expect that every such Clergyman
would be esteemed and valued, even by this Government, which would (besides)
think it some sort of a Vindication of the Government, from what share it may
be supposed they have in the Abetting or Encouragement of such Heterodox
Principles Preached before them, by those in such High Place with them, and
said to be Printed by Their Special Command.

And for the People, such Clergy would certainly be greatly regarded by them;
as Men of Conscience, and Zeal for their Religion.

But if the Clergy (which God forbid) should prove so Laodicean as not to think
this worth their while, and so leave the Imputation to fall upon their whole
Communion:

Then I must Admonish all the Godly Laity, that they are obliged, in their
Station, as much as the Clergy in theirs, to Separate from such wicked
Teachers: and that by the above quoted Council of Constantinople, they are not
to be Reputed Schismatics for so doing, but a^ Preservers of the Unity of the
Church, whose Unity consists chiefly in the Unity of their Doctrine. But they
have a greater Authority than that of any Council. Gal. 1.8. Though we (says one
of the Apostles) or an Angel from Heaven Preach any other Gospel unto you, than
that which we have preached unto you, let him be Accursed.

And as all the Laity are hereby obliged, under the penalty of, Sin, to
Separate from the Church Communion of these Heretical Bishops, and of all who
Communicate with them: so is it likewise required of them to abstain, as much
as is possible, even from their private Conversation: with such a one, says St.
Paul, not so much as to eat.

And let them think that these are Trying Times, sent on purpose to distinguish
God's Elect from the Reprobate, to Separate His Little Flock from the World of
Iniquity.

For there must be also Heresies among you, that they which are approved, way
the made manifest among you. 1 Cor. 11.19.

FINIS.

