A True Copy of the Imperial Decree, and of the Declaration that was delivered
to the Envoys of the Electors, Princes and Estates of the Empire, by Prince
Herman of Baden: By which the late Insinuations of the Papists does appear
wholly groundless. (viz.) That the Catholic Princes were grown jealous of his
Royal Highness the Prince of Orange's Designs, and that therefore a Peace would
speedily be Concluded between his Imperial Majesty and France, and a League of
all the Catholic Princes ensue, for maintenance of the Romish-Religion.
DECREE of his Imperial Majesty against the French Ministers.
BY the Express Command, and in the Name of his most Sacred Imperial Majesty,
Our most Gracious Lord; This is to give notice to the French Plenipotentiary
Residing at Ratisbon, That as it is manifest to the whole Christian World, and
to himself particularly, how unjustly of late, His Most Serene Majesty the King
of France, has broken the Truce for twenty years, and without any Previous
Declaration of War, has on a Sudden, and in an Hostile manner, set upon His
Sacred Imperial Majesty, and the Electors, Princes and States of the Empire,
who suspected nothing less, being wholly taken up with the Prosecution of a War
against the Common Enemy of Christendom. Nor was he content partly by Force to
subdue, and partly by Fire and Sword, to lay waste a great many Cities,
Villages and Towns, But not sparing the Seat of Justice it self; he seized upon
Spire, the Imperial Chamber, and caused the Public Deeds, Writing and Records,
pertaining to all the Electors, Princes and States, of the Sacred Roman Empire,
and their Innocent Subjects, to be Sealed up, and as we are given to
understand, to be carried away to Strasbourgh; And further he continues to
exercise all manner of Hostility against those that are within the reach of his
Army. Since then by this very Fact, His Most Christian Majesty has declared
himself the Capital Enemy of the whole Roman Empire, and therefore His Sacred
Imperial Majesty thinks it no longer reasonabe to suffer the aforesaid French
Plenitopentiary to reside in any of his Courts or Teritories, both as he is the
Minister of his declared Enemy, and as he has in an Eminent Degree, found him
to have labored nothing more then to create Disturbances in the Empire, and
misunderstanding amongst the several Members of the same, so as to endeavor to
divide them from their Supreme Head. I am therefore Commanded by these
Presents, to Signify to him the said Plenipotentiary, that he depart from
Ratisbon, together with his Domestics, and all that appertains to him within
the space of three days, to be computed from the notification hereof; And that
he retire in the space of 14 days more, out of the Borders of the whole Roman
Empire; to this end His Imperial Majesty, tho after so high and manifest a
Violation of the Law of Nations, by the French, in carrying away the Acts and
Records of the Imperial Chamber, He might justly detain him and seize his
Papers, yet he has been pleased to give him Safe Conduct, and all manner of
security for his Journey, but which is to cease and determine when the time
before mentioned shall be expired.

Ordered and Signed at Vienna, under the Privy Seal of His Sacred Imperial
Majesty, this ninth day of December, 1688. The Seals place. Leopold William
Count of Honnigreck. Combruck.

Decretum Sacrae Cesarea Majestatis.
SAcrae Caesareae Majestatis Domini Nostri Clementissimi jussu, Et nomine
Plenipotentiario Gallico Ratisbonnae commoranti hisce significandum, ipsi non
minus ac universo Christiano orbi manifestum esse, quam inique Nuper
serenissimus Galliae Rex (rupto armistitii vicennalis foedere; Nulla
denuntiatione praevia Sacram Cesaream Majestatem and Imperii Electoris,
Principes ac Status, nihil tale suspicantes, belloque contra communem
Christiani nominis hostem prosequendo intentos) Hostilibus Armis improviso
adortus sit, and non tantum plures urbes, pagos and oppida tum vi subegerit,
tum ferro, flammaque devestaverit, sed nec justitiae sacris parcendo spiram,
Nemetum discasterii Imperialis sedem occupaverit, and acta scriptaque publica
ad universos sacri Romani Imperii Electores, Principes and Status eorumdemque
innocents subditos pertinentia obsignari, and ut fama fert argentoratum abduci
fecerit denique nihil non Hostilitatis in eos, quos Armis suis attingere potest
exercere pergat: Cum itaque Rex Christianissimus hoc ipso suo facto se
Capitalem totius sacri Romani Imperii Hostem declaarverit, and proinde sua
sacra Caesarea Majestas Prefatum Plenipotentiarium Gallicum, ut pote declarati
hostis Ministrum tanto minus in comitiis, terrisque Imperii diutius tolerandum
Censeat quod eundem turbandae Reipublicae, and seminandis inter Imperii Status
diffidentiis, eis denique a supremo suocapite alienandis unice hactenus studere
compererit; hinc denique Jussiit, hisce eidem indicari ut intra triduum a die
insinuationis computandum una cum suis domesticis and quidquid ad illum
pertinuerit Ratisbona excedat, and spatio sequentium quatuor decim dierum extra
Romani imperii fines sese recipiat, quem in finem sua Cesarea Majestas eundem
apposito salvo conductu, tametsi alias post violata tam enormiter ex part
Galliae gentium sura and ablata Dicasterii imperii acta non injuria una cum
scriptis suis detineri posset, denique munire, eidemque omnem in itinere sue
securitatem, elapto tamen termino cessaturam

impertiri voluit signatum Viennae sub sigillo altissimae memoratae sacrae
Cesareae Majestatis secreto, nono die mensis decembris, 1688. L.S. Vt Leopoldus
Wilhelmus. Comes in Honigreck. Combrick

Given at Ratisbon this 15. Day of December, 1688.
HIS Imperial Majesty has given Order to his Highness Prince Herman of Baden,
his Plenipotentiary at the Diet at Ratisbon, to make known by these presents,
to the Envoys of the Electors, Princes and States of the Empire here Assembled,
The weighty and important Reasons which have persuaded him to dismiss Monsieur
the Count of Lusignan Envoy of France to the Court at Vienna; As also Mounsieur
the Count de Cr^sy Plenipotentiary of his most Christian Majesty, at the Diet
at Ratisbon, to which end, his imperial Majesty has given Order to furnish him
with a Passe-port, in which, the way he is to take is appointed him, and from
which, for his greater Security he is not to deviate, nor to delay his
departure for any longer time, than is therein allowed him. Whereupon his above
mentioned Highness remains most Affectionate to the Envoys of the Electors,
Princes, and States of the Empire.

Signed at Ratisbon, the 14. day of December, 1688. The Seals place Herman
Marquess of Baden.

Done a Ratisbonne, le 15 jour de Decembre, 1688.
SA Majeste Imperiale a done order a son Altesse le Prince Herman de Baden,
son Plenipotentiaire a la Diette de Ratisbonne, de fair scavoir par ces
presents aux Envoyes des Electeurs, Princes, and Etats de L'Empire assembles
icy, Les importantes raisons, qui L'ont portee a Congedier monsieur Le Conte de
Lusignan Envoye de France a Vienne, comme aussy Monsieur Le Conte de Crecy
Plenipotentiare de sa Majeste tres Chretienne a la diette de Ratisbonne; pour
cette fin sa Majeste imperialle luy a fait donner un passeport, par lequel on
luy a marque le Chemin qu'il doit tenir, duquel pour sa plus grande seurte il
ne se doir ecarter, ny outre passer le term qui luy est prescript, surquoy
saditto Altesse demeure tres affectionee a messieurs les Enuoyes des Electeurs,
Princes, and Etats de L'Empire

sign a Ratisbonne le quatorizieme Decembre, 1688. L. S. Herman Marquess de
Baden.

London, Printed by John Wallis, in White Friars, 1688.


