A Brief Account OF THE Socinian Trinity.

IN A LETTER TO A FRIEND, June, 1694.

LONDON: Printed for Charles Brom, at the Gun, West End of St. Paul's, 1695.

A BRIEF ACCOUNT OF THE Socinian Trinity. In a LETTER to a FRIEND.
SIR,
THE Socinians hold a Trinity as well as we: They have lately Published Bidle's
Confession of Faith touching the Holy Trinity. But in the Explanation of this
is all the difference: He, and one part of the Socinians, make the Second and
Third Persons to be Creatures, wherein they are guilty of a very gross sort of
Idolatry, beyond what was acknowledged by any of the Heathens, To join
Creatures into one Holy Trinity with God, and to Baptize Men into the Faith and
Worship of Creatures. The Arians could never answer the Charge of Idolatry in
giving Divine Honor to Christ, while they acknowledged him to be but a
Creature: Nor can the Worship of Christ, supposing him but a Creature, be
excused from Idolatry, by any manner of way, which will not at the same time
justify the Excuses not only of the Church of Rome, but of the Heathens
themselves for their Idolatry.

Another sort of Socinians deny the Second and Third of the Trinity to be
Persons: And make them no more than the Power and Wisdom of God, one called
his Word, the other his Spirit, but yet that they are nothing different from
God; as by a Man's Spirit, you mean the Man himself. Thus the Brief History of
the Uni-tarians.

But, by this Rule, they cannot stop at a Trinity in God, but must go through all
his Attributes, Justice, Mercy, Providence, Omnipotence, Eternity, and Twenty
more; and instead of the Three in Heaven (which they acknowledge) they must go
to a Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, and without End.

In the next Place, where it is said, John 1.14. The Word was made Flesh, they
say that no Person was made Flesh: This Second of the Trinity they say is not a
Person, but only God's Power, or the Manifestation of his Power, which they say
Inhabited an Humane Person; i. e. the Person of Jesus Christ.

So God Inhabited or Inspired the Prophets, Apostles, etc. but this did not
make Him to become Flesh.

But he inspired Christ in a Higher Degree.

The Degree signifies nothing as to the being made Flesh. No Inspiration or
Inhabitation of God, or any thing less than an Impersonation; i. e. taking our
Flesh into his own Person, so as to be one Person with him, nothing less than
this can make him to be Flesh.

And it is certain that nothing can be made Flesh but a Person. A Manifestation
of God, or of any thing else, is nothing in it self; it is but our manner of
Apprehending what is manifested or shown to us: And to talk of this being made
Flesh, is the grosest Nonsense and Contradiction: Therefore if there be but One
Person in the Trinity (as this Set of Socinians do hold) then the whole
Trinity was made Flesh; and then they must come to Muggleton, who says, as they
do, that there is but One Person in the Godhead, which is God the Father; and
that He was Incarnate, and really Died, so that there was then no God: But
Muggleton says that Elijah governed in his absence, Raised him from the Dead,
and Restored him his Throne, and then He was God again.

But, on the other hand, if there be Three Persons in the Holy Trinity (as the
rest of our Socinians do hold) But the Second and Third only Creatures, and
that the Word (the Second Person) was Incarnate; then they must answer for
their Idolatry, in Worshipping a mere Creature; and answer the Cloud of Texts
which require and attest Divine Honor to be due to Christ, and Command the very
Angels of God to Worship Him.

But, to turn again to those Socinians who will have but one Person in the
Trinity, they put this Meaning upon Matthew. 28.19. that we are Baptized in the
Name of the Father, and of the Son (who is the self-same Person with the
Father) and of the Holy Ghost (who is the same Person with them Both.)

Again, Matthew. 12.32. if you sin against one of these you shall be forgiven;
but if you sin against another (who is the very same with that one) you shall
not be forgiven.

Now, I pray you, compare their Trinity and ours. They make Three in Heaven who
are not only Three, but may be Threescore, and yet all but one and the
self-same Person.

We acknowledge the Three in Heaven, whom the Scriptures tell us of, to be only
Three, and that they are Three Persons.

One of these was made Flesh, the other not, yet they will not allow them to be
different Persons, but that He who took Flesh, and He who did not take Flesh
were the same, or that they were not Two.

These are the Men who cry out upon Mysteries; and pretend to Explain their
Faith wholly by Reason and Demonstration, and to make it easy and intelligible
to the meanest Understanding!

Besides, they differ more (if more can be) betwixt one another, than they do
from us. What greater difference can there be concerning the Object of our
Worship than one to make it GOD, the other but a Creature? As it is among the
Socinians, in their Opinion of the Second, and Third in the Holy Trinity. What
greater difference, than for one to say they are Persons, another no Persons?
One to say they are Adorable, the other not? Must not one of these think the
other Idolaters? And the other think them Profane, and Erroneous in Faith, who
deny Divine Honor to whom it is Due?

These call themselves Unitarians; yet there is not, nor can be in the World,
greater Division, and at farther distance, than betwixt the several sorts of
these, who own themselves by one Name, and would have the World believe that
they have the same Faith: Which, when so contradictory to it self, it can be
Ill expected to agree with the Holy Scriptures, and with the Holy Catholic
Church.

We acknowledge a Great and Sublime Mystery in the Holy Trinity of GOD: That is
a Mystery to us, which exceeds our Understanding. And many such Mysteries there
are, to us, in the Nature of God which we all acknowledge; A First Cause
without a Beginning! A Being which neither made it self, nor was made by any
other! Infinite without Extension! In every place, yet circumscribed in no
place! Eternal and Perpetually Existing, without any Succession! a Present,
without Past, or Future! and many other such un-Explainable, un-Intelligible,
Incomprehensible Mysteries; which yet hinder not our Belief of a God. And
therefore not being able fully and clearly to explain the Trinity, which is the
most hidden and secret Attribute of the Nature of God, can be no Reason for us
to reject such Revelation which God has given us of Himself. Yet do we not want
several Shadows and Resemblances of one Nature communicating it self to many
Individuals, without either a Multiplication or Division of the Nature. We say
that the Soul is all in all, and all in every part of the Body; yet that the
Soul is neither Multiplied nor Divided among the several Members of the Body.
It is impossible for us either to Explain this, or to Deny it; for we feel it
to be so, though it is wholly unconceivable to us how it can be. Now if the
Soul, which is but an Image of God, at an Infinite distance, can communicate it
self to several Members, without breach of its Unity; why should it be
Impossible for the Eternal and Infinite Mind to communicate it self to several
Persons, without breach of its Unity; I will be bold to say, you will not find
so near a Parallel in Nature whereby to conceive of God's Eternity, or his
Infinity, as this, and a great many more, whereby we may conceive of His
Trinity and Unity, by what we feel in our selves, and see in a thousand things
that are before us. We see Extension not Divided but Distinguished into its
three Dimensions; and Communicating its whole Nature to each of the Three, for
Each is Extension; and yet there is but one Extension in all the Three.

The Soul is not Divided betwixt its several Faculties; they remain perfectly
distinguished, though not divided from one another: To understand what is
present, is a quite different thing from Remembering what is Past; and to Love
or Hate, is different from both of these; yet these Three Faculties, the
Understanding, the Memory, and the Will, partake all equally of the same Soul.

Light and Heat are so different, that some are capable of the One, who are not
of the Other; and yet they are not Divided in the Sun; but flow equally and
naturally from it without any Division of its Nature.

I say not that any of these Parallels do come up to the full explanation of
the Communication of the Divine Nature to several Persons, without any Division
or Multiplication of the Nature: But I am sure they take away the Contradiction
alleged to be in it, while we see the same Difficulty in our own and other
Natures, which we can as little Explain.

But, instead of solving this difficulty, the Socinians have made it a
downright and Irreconcilable Contradiction. They would have Three to be One
and the self-same Person. This cannot be saved from a Contradiction. They
acknowledge the Three in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Spirit. If these
are one and the self-same Person, they cannot be Three. If they are one Nature,
and several Persons; this is a Difficulty, it is a Mystery; but it is no
Contradiction, because they are not One and Three in the same respect; for that
is necessary to make it a Contradiction. In one Respect, that is of their
Nature, they are One; in an other Respect, that is, of their Persons, they are
Three. But if they are One in Person, as well as in Nature; and yet are Three
(as these Socinians do confess) then they are Three and One, in the self-same
Respect, which is a full Contradiction.

FINIS.

