bookplate VIRTUTE ET OPERA
The Right Honble. My Lord Bracco.



Primitive Heresy REVIVED, IN The Faith and Practice Of the PEOPLE Called
QUAKERS:

Wherein is shown, in Seven Particulars, That the Principal and most
Characteristick Errors of the Quakers, were Broached and Condemned, in the Days
of the Apostles, and the first 150 Years after Christ.

To which is Added, A Friendly Expostulation with William Penn, upon Account of
his Primitive Christianity, lately Published.

By the Author of The Snake in the Grass.

LONDON: Printed for C. Brom, at the Gun, at the West End of St. Paul's. W.
Keblewhite, at the Swan in St. Paul's Churchyard. And H. Hindmarsh, at the
Golden-Ball over against the Royal Exchange. School.

THE CONTENTS.
The Seven Errors, wherein the Quakers are Compared with the Ancient Heretics.
I. THeir Denial of the Incarnation of Christ, that is, of the Hypostatical, or
Personal Union of the Divine and Humane Natures, in His being made Flesh. page
2. II. Their Denial of the Truth and Reality of His Death and Sufferings. p. 3.
III. Their Denial of the Resurrection and Future Judgment. p. 7. IV. Their
Abstaining from the Sacraments and Prayers of the Church. p. 9. V. Their
forbidding to Marry, and preaching up of Fornication. p. 12. VI. Their Contempt
of Magistracy and Government. p. 14. VII. Their Stiffness in not taking off
their Hats, or giving Men their Civil Titles. p. 17.
The Conclusion,
Wherein, 1. The Quakers are Invited to view their Errors in those Primitive
Heresies. p. 18. 2. Their Complaint of being Misrepresented. 3. Their Modern
Representation of their Principles; leaves not Difference enough betwixt us, to
Justify their Separation: Whence an Invitation to them to Return.
The Friendly Expostulation, Concerning,
1. Mr. Penn's Notion of the Light within. p. 20. 2. This not sufficient to
Justify his Separation. p. 28. 3. For he owns that we are of one Religion. p.
29. 4. His Exposition of Justification in his Primitive Christianity most
Orthodox, and agreeing exactly with us. And his whole ix. Chapt. of the Inward
or Spiritual Appearance of Christ in the Soul.
Some Objections of his solved, so far as not to be any Justifiable Causes of a
Separation, as Concerning,
1. Forms of Prayer. p. 30. 2. The Spirituality of the Ministry. 3. Their being
Witnesses of Christ. p. 31. 4. Their Receiving Hire (as he calls it) for their
Preaching. 5. Tithes. 6. Swearing. 7. War. 8. Holy Days. p. 32.
Errata.
PAge 11. l. 29. f. one r. only. P. 17. l. 21. r. Discriminating. P. 21. l. 11.
dele?

Primitive Heresy Revived, etc.
IN my Discourse of Baptism, I promised something upon this Subject, in hopes
that the Quakers, seeing the Original of their Errors, may bethink themselves,
and Return from whence they have Fallen.

And particularly, as to Baptism, that I might confirm my Expositions of the H.
Scriptures, with the Concurrent Testimony of the H. Fathers, who were
Co-temporarys with the Apostles, and learned the Faith from their mouths; and
those who immediately followed them, to 150 Years after Christ. Though we have
very little Remaining of the Writings of the Fathers in that early Age. Yet I
would descend no lower (where I might have had Clouds of Witnesses) to avoid a
Groundless Cavil, which the Quakers have learned from our Elder Dissenters, to
Run down the Primitive Church, by wholesale, because it was so Full of
Bishops, and, in all the Pretenses of their Schism, went so Directly contrary
to them. But the Fathers of the First Age, that next to the Apostles, and of
which the Apostles were a Part, though as much Bishops, and as much against them
as those following, yet for Decency sake, they Pretend to Reverence, lest in
allowing them off, they should seem to throw off the Apostles with them, from
whom they could not be parted.

And because, even in this first Un-controverted Age, we have Proofs
sufficient, I would avoid Needless Disputes, and Argue from Topics that are
allowed on all hands.

The Greatest Part of the following Discourse was wrote at the time with the
Discourse of Baptism, and Intended to have been Annexed to it, but being
Prevented at that time, it has since been neglected. Till I was stirred up
afresh by a Book lately Published (though said to be Printed in 1696.)
Entitled, [Primitive Christianity Revived in the Faith and Practice of the
People called Quakers.] This came Directly to my Subject, therefore I have
Examined it thoroughly, and leave the Reader to Judge, whether the Primitive
Christianity or Heresy does belong most to them: At least, whether it did,
before the late Representations of Quakerism, which have given it quite another
Turn and Face than it ever had before. Such a Turn, as has left nothing on
their side, whereby to justify their Schism. And therefore we hope that their
Conversion is nigh; or if already Converted, their Full Reconciliation to the
Church. That the Present Quakers, chiefly the Valuable Mr. Penn, may have the
Honor, and the Happiness to Heal up that Breach, which now for 48 Years has so
Miserably Torn and Divided this once most Christian and Renowned Church of
England.

In this following Discourse, I will not take up the Reader's time to Prove the
several Positions which I name upon the Quakers; only Briefly Recite them, and
Refer to the Places in The Snake in the Grass, and Satan Dis-Rob'd, where they
are proved at large. And to Repeat them Here, would swell this to an
unreasonable Bulk. And this being intended in the Nature of a Supplement to
these, it would be Needless. The proper Business of this, is, to Compare the
Quaker-Heresies with those of the first 150 Years of Christianity.

Where I Quote The Snake, the Reader is desired to take notice, that it is the
Second Edition.

And now to our Task. The Seven Particulars wherein the Quakers have, if not
copied after, at least Jumped with the Condemned Heretics before mentioned.

I. The First is, as to their Denial of the Incarnation of Christ. They confess
that Christ or The Word took Flesh; that is, That He Assumed or Dwelt in an
Human Body, i. e. the Body of that Man Jesus; who was therefore called Christ,
because that Christ or the Word Dwelt in Him. And for the same Reason, they
take the Name of Christ to themselves; and say that it belongs to every one of
the Members as well as unto the Head, i. e. as well as to that Man Jesus, who
was Principally and Chiefly called The Christ, because that Christ Dwelt in
Him, or did Inspire Him in a Greater Measure than other Men. But they Utterly
Deny that the Man Jesus was Properly the Son of God. In a large Sense, every
Christian may be called a Son of God; and so, and no otherwise, they allow
Jesus to be the Son of God. But that He was Properly the Son of God, we utterly
Deny, -- says their serious Apology, p. 146. which was Printed 1671. See this
Proved at large in The Snake in the Grass, Sect. x.

Now I Proceed to show, That this Heresy was Broached and Condemned in the
Days of the Apostles. This is it which St. John Reprehends, 1 John iv. 3. Every
Spirit that confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh, etc. or as
Socrates (Hist. Eccl. l. 7. c. 32.) tells us it was wrote in the Ancient Copys,
Every Spirit which separateth Jesus from God, is not of God. And he observes
that this Text, and other Parts of this Epistle were altered by those who would
separate the Divinity of Christ from His Humanity. Though as it now stands in our
Copys, it means the same thing; for he that denis Christ to have been made
Flesh, only says that he took it upon Him for a Cloak or a Veil, as Angels
assume Bodies when they appear in them: He denis Christ's coming in the Flesh,
so as to become Truly and Really a Man; he takes away the Humanity of Christ,
and so separates Jesus from God: Which, in the sense of this Text, is to Deny
His coming in the flesh. St. Polycarp, in his Epist. to the Philippians, n. 7.
Disputes against these Antichrists, in the words of his Master St. John, whose
Disciple he was, (...) (says he) (...). i. e. Whosoever does not confess that
Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh, is an Antichrist.

II. The Second point is the Quakers Denial of the Truth and Reality of the
Death and Sufferings of Christ. This is Consequential to the former Heresy;
for if Christ took not the Body of Jesus into his own Person, but only dwelt in
the Body of another Man, as he dwells in his Saints; if Christ and Jesus are
two Persons; if the Body of Jesus was only a Veil or Garment for Christ to
shroud himself in, as the Quakers speak; then, though Jesus suffered, yet Christ
could not; and the Sufferings of Christ were but in Appearance and show, as if
a Man's Cloak or Garment only were Crucified.

What are then those Sufferings of Christ which the Quakers do own as
Meritorious in the sight of God, for the Atonement of our sins? Why, an
ALLEGORICAL Suffering, Death, and shedding of the Blood of their Light within;
which they call Christ; of which Jesus, or the outward Christ, they say was but
a Type; and that his Sufferings were only an Historical Transaction of the
Greater Mystery of the Sufferings and Atonement performed by their Light
within, as I have fully shown in The Snake in the Grass, Sect. x. p. 127. and
Satan Dis-Rob'd, Sect. xii. p. 11.

But now I am to show, That the Devil had Broached these Heresies, against the
Truth of the Incarnation of Christ, and consequently against the Reality of his
Death and Sufferings, within the first 150 Years after Christ: and that they
were then Condemned by the Holy Fathers of the Church.

Ignatius that Glorious Martyr of Christ, Bishop of Antioch, who flourished
about the Year 70 after the Birth of Christ, and was Disciple to St. John the
Evangelist, writes thus in his Epistle to the Magnesians, instructing their
Faith, in what sort of Sufferings of Christ we were to Believe and Trust, not
these Inward in our hearts, but to distinguish most effectually from these,
those that He suffered under Pontius Pilate. I would have you Preserved, that
you fall not into the snare of vain Doctrine; but that ye may abound, and be
filled with the knowledge of the Birth, Passion, and Resurrection, which truly,
and firmly were of Jesus Christ our hope, in the time of the Government of
Pontius Pilate, from which let none of you be turned away.

Stop your ears therefore ( says he in his Epistle to the Trallians) when any
shall speak to you without Jesus Christ.

(...).

(...).



What Christ was this? the Outward Man Jesus, or the Light within? That Jesus,
who was of the stock of David, who was of Mary, who was truly Born, did both
Eat and Drink; was truly Persecuted under Pontius Pilate, was truly Crucified
and Dyed -- And who truly Rose from the Dead, his Father Raising of him; and
his Father will, after the like fashion, Raise us up in Jesus Christ, who
believe in him, without whom we cannot truly live.

But some Athiests, that is, Infidels, do say, That He only appeared to be a
Man, but took not a Body in Reality, and in appearance only seemed to Suffer,
and dye, etc.



(...) (...).

(...), etc.

And in the beginning of his Epistle to the Smyrnaeans, after having Described
that Christ who is the Object of our Faith, in the fullest manner, to obviate
the Deceit of applying it to an Inward Christ, by calling Him the Son of David,
Born of the Virgin, and Baptized of John, truly Crucified under Pontius Pilate,
and Herod the Tetrarch; none of which can be applied to The Light within. He
adds that we can only be saved by the Faith in this OUTWARD Jesus. By the
Fruits of whose Divinely Blessed Passion, we are Saved -- For he suffered all
these things for us, that we might be saved. (...) -- (...).

And to Obviate the two Heretical Pretenses, of making the Meritorious
Suffering of Christ, to be His Suffering within us. And that His outward
Sufferings, were not Real, but, in appearance only, as not being Really a Man,
but only Residing in that Man Jesus, as in a Veil or Garment. Ignatius adds in
the next words. And he truly suffered, and truly Raised himself; not, as some
Unbelievers say, that he only appeared to suffer, they but appearing to Exist.
And as they Believe, so shall it be unto them, when they come to be out of the
Body, and in the state of Spirits; (...). that is, they shall justly Forfeit
the True and Real Benefits Purchased for True Believers, by the death of
Christ; since they will have it to be only in Appearance or False show; and
take the Merit from the Outward death of Christ, which he suffered upon the
Cross, and place it in a Fancied Suffering of the Light within them.

And as He asserts the Faith in Christ's outward Death, so does he, in His
Resurrection; not the Inward Rising of Christ in our hearts, but in His Outward
Resurrection, that which was proved by their Handling of Him, and Feeling of
His Flesh, and His Eating and Drinking with them, after His Resurrection.

But, in the next Paragraph, he has a Prophetic Exhortation, which looks
terribly upon the Quakers, among others. He tells the Smyrnaeans, that he gives
them these Admonitions, not that he thinks them Guilty of these Heresies.

But I Guard you before hand (says he) against Beasts in Human shape, whom you
ought not only not to Receive; but if it be possible, not so much as to meet
with them, only to pray for them, if they may at last Repent, which will be
difficult.

And again, says he, speaking of our Lord Jesus Christ, Whom some not knowing,
do deny, or rather, are denied by him, being the Preachers of Death, rather
than of Truth.

They abstain from the Eucharist, ( that is, The Sacrament of the Lord 's
Supper) and from the Prayers (of the Church) because they do not confess that
the Eucharist is the flesh of our Savior Jesus Christ, which suffered for our
sins; and which the Father in his Goodness Raised up. But these speaking
against this Gift of God, die in their Inquiries.

(...).

(...).

(...).

And vain and Death must those Inquiries be, which, leaving the Gifts of God,
the Sacraments of his own Institution, and to which His Promises are Annexed,
seek for Salvation in ways and means of their own Devising.

But it was unavoidable, that they who had left the Body of Christ, as a
forsaken veil or garment, to Rot for ever in the Grave; or are careless what is
come of it, as a thing now of no Virtue or Consequence to us, should Reject the
Sacrament of it, which is a continual Exhibition of its virtues and efficacy to
us: Or that they who hope for no Resurrection of their Bodies out of the Dust,
should continue the use of those Sacraments which were ordained as signs and
pledges of it.

But, if it please God that they ever Return to the Faith, it is to be hoped
that they will then Reassume these Guards, and Confirmations; which are the
outward vehicles, and assurance of it.

III. The Third point is their Denial of the Resurrection and Future Judgment.
For the Proof of this upon the Quakers, I Refer to The Snake in the Grass,
Sect. xii. p. 152. and to Satan Dis-Rob'd, Sect. iii. and iv. beginning at p.
26. and p. 21. of the Gleanings.

Now we find full Proof, that this Heresy was Broached in in the Days of the
Apostles; and by them Condemned, as is plain from 1 Cor. xv. 12. etc. and 2 Timothy 2.18. in which last Text, the very Quaker-salvo is expressly set down, by
which they have Betrayed themselves into this Fatal Heresy, viz. Saying that
the Resurrection is Past already, that is, Perform^d Inwardly, to those who
follow the Light, (see Satan Dis-Rob'd, p. 21. of the Gleanings) and Mr. Penn
understands that Full and Elegant Description of the Resurrection, 1 Cor. xv.
all of this Inward and Allegorical Resurrection; for in his Book; Entitled,
The Invalidity of John Faldo 's Vindication, etc. Printed 1673. repeating ver.
44. of this Chapt. viz. It is sown a Natural Body, it is Raised a Spiritual
Body, he says p. 369. I do utterly deny, that this Text is concerned in the
Resurrection of Man's carnal Body, at all. And p. 370. I say this does not
concern the Resurrection of carnal Bodies, but the two states of Men under the
first and second Adam. And though as he objects, the 47 and 49 verses seem to
imply a Bodily Resurrection, But (says he) let the whole verse be considered,
and we shall find no such thing.

To the Arguments of the Apostles against this Heresy, let me add some
Testimonys of others their Co-temporary Fathers, or rather explain the Texts of
the Apostles by their Comments, who learned this Article of the Faith from
their mouths. The Texts above Quoted were wrote by St. Paul, who ( Phil. iv.
3.) mentions Clement as his Fellow Labourer, and whose Name is in the book of
Life: And he was as likely to know St. Paul's meaning, as Mr. Penn, whom I
desire to read his 2d. Epist. to the Corinthians, where, N. ix. he will find
these words.

Let none of you say, that this same flesh is not judged, nor shall rise again.
Understand, in what have ye been saved; was it not while ye were in this flesh?
therefore it behooves us to keep our flesh, as the temple of God. For as ye
have been called in the flesh, so shall ye come in the flesh. Jesus Christ the
Lord, who saves us, was first a Spirit, and then made flesh, and so he called
us. So shall we Receive our Reward, in this very flesh. (...). St. Polycarp,
Bishop and Martyr, who flourished about the Year of Christ, 70. and was
Disciple to St. John the Evangelist, in his Epistle to the Philippians, n. 7.
says that Whoever does not confess the Martyrdom or suffering of Christ upon
the Cross, is of the Devil: And he that will wrest the Oracles of Christ to his
own Lusts, and say that there is no Resurrection nor Judgment to come, he is
the Firstborn of Satan. (...).

And Hegesippus, who lived near to the Days of the Apostles, in his Fifth Book;
as Quoted by Eusebius (Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 23.) speaking of these Ancient
Heretics, says, that they did not believe either the Resurrection, or the
coming of Christ to render to every one according to his Works. (...).

IV. The Fourth Point, is their abstaining from the Sacraments and Prayers of
the Church. And for this, I have before quoted Ignatius to the Smyrnaeans,
where he tells of those who Abstained from the Prayers of the Church, and the
Lord 's Supper, because they did not believe it to be the Flesh of Christ,
which Suffered for our sins, and was Raised up, etc. For how could they who (as
the Quakers) made no more of the flesh of Christ, than a Garment or a Vail, but
no part of his Person, and consequently could never call the Bodily Garment,
Christ: And thought their own Flesh and Blood to be the Flesh and Blood of
Christ, as well as the Flesh and Blood of that Man Jesus, in whom they say that
Christ or the Light dwelt, as in themselves (see Satan Dis-Rob'd, Sect. ii. n.
2. and 3. p. 2. and 3. of the Gleanings) and placed the Meritorious Cause of
our Redemption, and Justification, not in the Blood of Christ outwardly shed;
but in the Allegorical or Inward Blood of their Light within, Inwardly and
Invisibly shed, etc. I say, How could these endure a Sacrament so contrary to
their Belief? For the Bread cannot be called the Flesh of their Light within;
but it was of His Outward Flesh that Christ spoke, when he said, This is my
Body, and His Outward Blood was said to be shed for The Remission of Sins.

And the Eucharist was such a visible Representation of this, as could not but
shock these Enthusiast Heretics.

And where the Sacraments are Practiced, such mad Enthusiasm cannot take place.
And we see, by woeful Experience, that where these Guards of the Truth and
Importance of Christ's Outward Sufferings are taken away, Men fall, from the
True Faith, in them.

But the Quakers have not only thrown off the Use and Practice of the
Sacraments, and left them as things Indifferent, or Lawful to be Practiced by
such as may be conscientiously concerned for them, but Damn them as Carnal, and
Doctrines of Devils. G. Fox, in his News out of the North, Printed 1655. p. 14.
makes them the like Witchcraft as turned the Galatians to Circumcision. And
their Sacrament (says he) as they call it, is carnal -- And their Communion is
carnal, a little Bread and Wine -- Which is the Table of Devils, and Cup of
Devils, which is in the Generation of Serpents in this Great City Sodom and
Gomorrah, so dust is the Serpents meat, etc. And p. 39. You say that Matthew,
Mark, Luke, and John, is the Gospel, which is carnal -- You say, that
sprinkling Infants is the Baptism, which Baptizeth them into the faith, and so
into the Church, which is carnal: And you tell People of a Sacrament, bringing
them to Eat a little Bread and Wine, and say, that this is a Communion of
Saints, which is carnal, and all this feeds the Carnal Mind, etc. And he
Blasphemously says in his Title Page, that all this was Written from the mouth
of the Lord.

Edward Borough, p. 190. of his Works, Printed 1672. says, Their Doctrines are
of the devil, who -- say sprinkling Infants with water -- is Baptism into the
faith of Christ, this is the doctrine of the devil. And p. 191. These have
filled the world with damnable Heresies, as holding forth, That sprinkling
Infants with water is Baptism into the faith of Christ, etc. These are damnable
Heresies, even to the denying the Lord that bought them. And p. 644. That it is
not lawful for the Saints of God, to join themselves to your Ordinances.

This Hideous Blasphemy and Outrage against the Divine Institutions of our
Lord, I hope will appear to be such to the well-disposed among the Quakers, who
will be at the pains to Read my Discourse of Water Baptism. It seems to have
had some Effects already, even with George Whitehead himself. For in his Answer
to The Snake (whereto he adds a chapter upon that Discourse of Baptism) he
seems to come off that former Rigor of the Quakers, and says, p. 114. That as
for those who are More conscientiously tender in the observation thereof, we
are (says he) the more tender to these so as not to censure or condemn them
merely for Practicing that which they believe is their duty, either in breaking
of Bread, or Water Baptism.

So that, by this, he yields the Practice of the Sacraments to be at least
Lawful, contrary to Borough, Fox, and the Primitive Quakers; for, if it were
not Lawful, I suppose he would not have that Tenderness for the Observation
thereof, but would censure and condemn it, as those others have done. I pray
God perfect his Conversion, and let him see the Necessity as well as Lawfulness
of it. And I would desire him to consider that if it be Lawful, it must be
Necessary: For if Christ has not commanded Water Baptism, it cannot be less
than Superstition to Practice that as a Sacrament, and consequently as a Means
of Grace, which he has not Commanded: Even the Church of Rome does not pretend
to a Power to Institute a Sacrament, that can be done by none but God alone:
Therefore if Water Baptism was not Instituted by Christ, it cannot be Lawful to
Practice it: And if he did Institute it, it is not only Lawful, but Necessary,
and a Duty. Now, in Aid of George Whitehead, and by way of An Antidote against
the venom of G. Fox, Borough, and other sour Quakers; and to pursue the
Design of this present Paper, I will, to the Authoritys of H. Scripture, which
I have Produced in The Discourse of Baptism, add in this place, as a sure
Comment and Explanation of them, the Testimonys of some of those Fathers, whose
Works we have Extant within the Compass of Years proposed, that is, 150 Years
after Christ, in witness to this Divine Institution of Water Baptism, and to
show what stress they laid upon it.

St. Ignatius, who was (as beforementioned) bred under Saint John the Beloved
Disciple, makes our Baptism not only the Badge, but the Arms and Defense of our
Faith; and the quitting of it to be a Deserting of Christ.

Let no one of you ( says he, in his Epist. to St. Polycarp) be found a
Deserter, but let your Baptism remain as your Armor. (...). And St. Barnabas,
who was St. Paul's Fellow-Traveller, mentioned so often in the Acts, speaking,
in his Catholic Epistle, chapt. xi. concerning Water and the Cross, says,
that, It is written concerning Water to the People of Israel, that they should
not receive that Baptism which was sufficient to the Pardon of sins. (...).
Which they did not under the Mosaical Dispensation. But they Instituted a
Baptism to themselves, whereby to admit Men as Proselites to the Law: But that
was not the Baptism which could take away Sin. No, nor the Baptism of John:
That was the Peculiar one of the Christian Baptism.

A little after St. Barnabas says, that God had joined the Cross (that is, the
Faith in CHRIST Crucified) and the Water (that is, Baptism) together, viz. the
Inward Faith, and the Outward Profession and Seal of it.

Consider (says he) how He (God) has appointed the Cross and the Water to the
same end. For thus he says, blessed are they who hoping in the Cross, have
gone down into the Water. (...). And again, pursuing the same Argument, he
Magnifys the great Efficacy and Power of BAPTISM, when duly Received, a few
lines after what is above quoted, saying, For we go down into the Water full of
sins and filthiness; and come up again bearing fruit in our hearts by the fear
and hope which is in Jesus, which we have in the Spirit. (...).

After the same manner, and in the like words speaks St. Hermas (whom St. Paul
salutes Romans 16.14.) in that only Remaining Work of his, called The Shepherd of
St. Hermas, there in the 3d. Book, and 9th. Similitude, he speaks thus: Before
a Man receives the Name of the Son of God, he is designed unto death: but when
he receives that seal, he is delivered from death, and given up to life. Now
that seal is Water, into which Men go down, liable to death, but come up again,
assigned over unto life. Antequam enim accipiat homo nomen Filii Dei, morti
destinatus est: at ubi accipit illud sigillum, liberatur a morte, and traditur
vitae. Illud autem sigillum Aqua est, in quam descendunt homines morti
obligati, ascendunt vero vitae assignati.

I have taken this out of the Ancient Latin Translation, according to the
Oxford Edit. 1685. For the Greek was, in great part, lost, and came not down to
us entire, as this old Latin Version did.

St. Clement, in his 2d. Epist. to the Corinthians, Paragr. 8. calls Baptism by
the same name of our Seal, and applys to it that Text, Isa. lxvi. 24. which he
renders thus.

They that have not kept their seal, their worm shall not die, etc. Or, as he
expresses it in the Paragr. before this, Unless we keep our Baptism pure and
undefiled, with what assurance can we enter the Kingdom of God? (...), etc.

(...)

V. The Fifth Point is their forbidding to Marry, and Preaching up of
fornication. I charge not All the Quakers with this; no, nor the Greatest
Number of them. Only those called New-Quakers in America, of whom, and this
their Principle and Practice, an Account is given in The Snake in the Grass
Sect. vi. n. x. Par. 11. p. 74. and Sect. xii. p. 160. But the Quakers are thus
far answerable, That all this Wild Extravagance is a Natural Consequence of
their Common Principle and Notion of The Light within, as such an Absolute Rule
and Judge, that is not to be Controled by Scripture, or any Law or Rule
whatsoever: Which leaves every Man in such an Un-limited Latitude, that there
is no Restraint to whatever the Wildest Imagination (so it be Strong enough)
can suggest: Nor any Cure upon their Foundation) but to bid him follow it still
on. Listen to that within you That is all their Advice, and all their Rule.

But besides, I would fain know what Answer the Old Quakers can give to the New
ones, upon their Principle; for the New threw off their Wives, because they
found it Written, That the children of the Resurrection neither marry, nor are
given in marriage. Now, as shown in The Snake, Sect. xii and before spoke to,
the Quakers General Notion is that the Resurrection is Spiritual, and that
every Regenerate Man has obtained it already. And some of the Chief and Oldest
of them have declared, that they expect no other than what they have obtained
already, or at least, shall attain before they leave this body. See Satan
Dis-Robed p. 21. of the Gleanings.

Now let me ask the Old Quakers: Are they the Children of the Resurrection?
They must answer Yea, or go against their own avowed Principles. And if Yea,
then the Text is plain against their Marrying.

Let me ask again. Are they the Children of this World? They will all say, Nay,
for that is the common Epither by which they describe the Wicked; and is a Term
that they put in opposition to the Children of the light, which they bestow
upon themselves. Now it is written, That the children of this world marry.
Therefore, say the New Quakers, Marriage is a Wicked Thing, and consequently of
the Devil: And the Old Quakers have not yet answered their Arguments, that I
can hear of. And the New Quakers do vouch themselves to be the only True and
Genuine Quakers, who follow their Principles up to the height. Nor do they want
Antiquity in all this. The Gnostick Quakers, who boasted in their Light beyond
all other Men, and called themselves (as the Quakers do) the Purest and most
Perfect of Christians; held these same Principles, and Practiced them, in the
very days of the Apostles, And they are Reprehended, and our Later Heretics,
who should follow their steps, Prophesied of 1 Timothy iv. 1, 2, 3.

VI. The Sixth Point is, Their Contempt of Magistracy and Government. This is
shown, as to the Quakers, in The Snake, p. 94. and in Sect. xviii. and xix.
more largely. George Fox in his Great Mystery, Printed 1659. p. 76. says, The
Power of God -- strikes down Government of Men and Governors. And p. 90. And
so (says he) for the Lord 's sake the Saints cannot be subject to that Power.
And he Argues (though very falsely) that, The Jews of old time could not obey
the Heathen Magistrates -- Nor the Apostles could not bow to the Authority of
the Jews -- Nor that among the Gentiles, held up by the Magistrates. I say all
this is most False; for the Jews did obey the Heathen Magistrates; and the
Apostles both the Jews and and Gentiles, and that, not only for Wrath, but also
for Conscience sake. But it showed what Fox meant, viz. That the Saints are not
under the Dominion of the Worlds Rulers, whom they think to have no other
Authority than that of the Devil. Accordingly Fox says (ibid.) For it was the
Beasts Power has set up your Tithes, Temples, and Colleges. This will include
all the Governments upon the Earth: For there is none but have some of these;
hardly any but have them All. And then down go All, if the Quakers prevail.

But to come to our Point. This Wicked Heresy was born into the World in the
days of the Apostles, and set up by the then Quakers, That the Receiving of
Christianity did Exempt Men from the Service of Vn-believers, whether Masters
or Magistrates. Which occasioned the many Repeated Exhortations in the
Epistles, especially of the Apostle of the Gentiles, to be subject both to
Masters and Magistrates, though Vn-believers. And there were those Jews in our
Saviors time, who, upon the same account, thought it not Lawful to give
Tribute to Coesar, being then an Heathen. They thought that the Jews were not
to submit to the Dominion of the Heathen. And Judas of Galilee, mentioned in
Act. 5.37. drew away much People after him, upon the same Pretense, of not
paying Taxes to the Romans, Joseph. (de Bell. Jud. l. 2. c. 7.) says, he Taught
that no Tribute should be paid to the Romans. But he went further (a through
Quaker) for he would have had all Magistrates taken away, and God only to be
King. I suppose (as the Quakers) he would have been Content that the Government
should have come into his own hand, and to some Saints under him, as Deputys
from God! Such he made his Gaulonites or Galileans who followed him. For the
meaning of those who find fault with the Government of others, is commonly to
seize upon it for themselves, (and they seldom mend the matter) though their
pretense is always to set up the Kingdom of God and His Saints.

Such Gaulonites or Galileans are the Quakers, who, in a Declaration to the
Present distracted Nation of England, (Printed 1659. Penned by Edw. Borough,
and subscribed by Fifteen of the Chief of the Quakers, in the name of all the
rest) p. 8. do Proclaim that they have chosen a King, (viz. their own Light
within, which they call the Son of God) and that it is His only Right to Rule
in Nations, and their Heirship (as being only his Faithful Subjects) to possess
the uttermost parts of the Earth: And that He may command thousands and ten
thousands of (these) his Saints, at this day, to Fight -- mark that, to Fight,
even with the Carnal Sword, to Regain their Right. But in the Reprinting of
Burrough's Works, 1672, it was thought convenient to leave out this Passage (p
603. of his works) though it was said to be given forth by the Spirit of God, and
in His Name. It is set down more at large in The Snake, p. 209.

The same Universal Monarchy and Heirship of the Quakers is asserted by Samuel
Fisher, in a Collection that he Printed of several Messages which he said he
had, By Commission from God, to deliver to the then Protector and Government,
1656. The last of which bears this Title. The Burden of the Message of the Lord
it self, there p. 32. speaking of the Quakers and their King, says, He in them,
and they in him shall Rule the Nations with a Rod of Iron, and break them to
pieces as a Potters Vessel -- And every tongue that rises up in Judgment
against them shall they condemn. And p. 33. he brings in God, saying, yea, I
will never rest till I have made all their Foes their Footstool: And howbeit
the Powers of the Earth are of me -- I will utterly subvert and overturn them;
and bring the Kingdoms and Dominions, and the Greatness of the Kingdom under
the whole Heaven into the hands of the Holy Ones of the most High, and give
unto my Son, and his Saints to Reign over all the Earth, and to take all the
Rule and Authority, and Power that shall stand up against my Son in his Saints.
There is the Mystery couched in the last words. In his Saints, that is the
Light within (which they call Christ) in the Quakers: And to which they ascribe
all that is said of Christ in the Scriptures.

Edw. Borough writing from Dublin in Ireland to the Quakers in England, in the
Year 1655. Directs thus, To the Camp of the Lord in England. This is p. 64. of
his Works. And he was then for their beginning of their War to Conquer the
whole Earth. He Exhorts them, p. 67 in their Conquests to be very severe and
bloody, to spare none. Give the great Whore (says he, that is Rome) double into
her bosom; as she has loved blood, so give her blood, and dash her Children
against the stones. This was for all the Popish Countries, and those who partook
of their Abominations, which in their Account were all the Protestants too,
whom they, in contempt called Professors; and All sects in these Nations, whom
Borough includes in his Epist. 10 the Reader, p. 1* and declares War against
them. But were the Heathens then to escape? No, their Conquest and Empire was
to be Universal, their Heirship did extend to the uttermost parts of the Earth.
For thus he goes on, (Vt supra) Let none of the Heathen Nations, nor their Gods
escape out of your hands -- but lay waste the fenced Cities, and tread down the
high walls, for we have proclaimed open War betwixt Michael our Prince and the
Dragon -- And cursed be every one that rises not up, to the help of the Lord
against the mighty. Put on your Armor, and gird on your sword, and lay hold on
the spear, and march into the Field, and prepare your selves to the Battle, for
the Nations does defy our God, and says in their hearts, who is the God of
the Quakers, that we should fear him, and obey his voice? -- Our Enemies are
whole Nations, and multitudes in number, of a Rebellious People that will not
come under our Law (a great Fault indeed!) stand upon your feet, and Appear in
your terror as an Army with Banners; and let the Nations know your power, and
the stroke of your hand: Cut down on the right hand, and slay on the left; and
let not your eye pity, nor your hand spare, etc. And in his Trumpet of the
Lord sounded, which he calls An Alarm and Preparation for War against all
Nations where Gog and Magog resideth, Printed 1656. p. 32. he says to the
Quakers, your despised Government shall rule over Kingdoms, and your laws shall
all the Nations of the earth become subject unto. And p. 41. He expostulates
with God, When will thou appear to lay their honor in the dust of Confusion?
Thy Host and Chosen waits for a Commission from thee to do thy will. And thy
Camp waits to see the honor of Kings and Princes overthrown by thee, etc.
But it seems the Quakers would make use of the swords of the wicked, till their
own were ready. Therefore in the Year 1659. they had great Hopes in the Rebel
English Army; who having Destroyed the King, and the Church in these Kingdoms,
Borough Hoalloos them (in his Epist. to them, p. 537.) upon Italy and Spain,
and all the Popish Countries: For what are these few poor Islands (says he) that
you have run through? in comparison of the great Part of Christendom, in which
Idolatry -- do abound -- wherefore, Hew down the Tops, strike at the Branches,
make way, that the Ax may be laid to the root of the Tree, that your sword, and
the sword of the Lord may neither leave Root nor Branch of Idolatry -- to
avenge the blood of the Guiltless through all the Dominions of the Pope, the
blood of the Just it cries through Italy, and Spain -- and it would be your honor
to be made use of by the Lord, in any degree, in order to this matter. They
were to be made use of, in some degree, to clear the way for the Quakers, who
were, at last, to have All. Now whether these have not out-stript their
Forerunner Judas, and his Galileans, I leave the Reader to judge. And Proceed
to the next.

VII. The Seventh and last Point which I intend to speak of, is now come, and
is so near of kin to the last, that I shall dispatch it quickly. It is, Their
stiffness in not taking off their Hats, or giving Men their Civil Titles. There
needs no Proof of this, as to the Quakers, for they All own it, it is their
Liscriminating Character.

And now to find a Precedent for them in Antiquity, the same Judas Galilaeus is
ready at hand. Josephus tells ( Antiq. Jud. l. 18. c. 2.) that he was the Head
of a Fourth Sect among the Jews, which he himself (like George Fox) Founded.
And that as he acknowledged but one Lord and Master, that is, God; so as a
consequence of this, he would pay honor to none other; and so Obstinate were
his Sect in this, That, as Joseph. tells in the chapt. last quoted, they would
rather expose themselves, their Children and Relations to the most cruel
Torments, than call any mortal Man Lord or Master. So that George Fox has not
the Honor of this noble Invention, as he would make us believe in his Journal,
p. 24. where he says, When the Lord sent me forth into the world, He forbad me
to put off my Hat to any -- And I was required to Thee and Thou all men and
women. He would call none Lord or Master more than Judas. And their
Inspirations came from the same Author; the Spirit of Pride, under the Guise of
Humility; so that in this, and all the other Instances before mentioned, George
Fox is deprived of the Glory of being an Original, and to be No man's Copy, as
is Boasted of him, in the Preface to his Journal, p. 31. I do not suppose that
he knew a tittle of these Ancient Precedents, only Good wits Jumped; and so
exactly, as shows, That they were all Taught by the same Master.

The CONCLUSION.
1. What Application now needs to be made, from all that has been said, to the
Quakers? The thing shows it self. Let them not call it Malice and Envy and what
not, to oppose them. We oppose the Primitive Heresies in them. We cannot but
oppose them: Unless we would Condemn the Apostles and Primitive Fathers, who
have Condemned them. I charitably believe that the Quakers, at least, the
Generality of them, do not know, nor, may be, have heard of these Ancient
Heresies, or that they have so literally licked them up. But now they do know,
let them consider, and see how they have put Darkness for Light, and Light for
Darkness!

2. But if the Quakers say, as of late they have begun to do, That they are
Misrepresented, that they do not hold these Vile Heresies, and Errors Charged
against them, nor ever did hold them. Let the Reader judge of that by the
Quotations which are produced out of their most Approved Authors, in The Snake,
and Satan Dis-Rob'd; of all which G. Whitehead, in what is called his Answer,
does not deny one: But pleads Not Guilty, without offering to Disprove the
Evidence brought against them. However, That is not my Business now. I am
willing they should come off as easily as they can: Provided they do come off,
and mean not this to Deceive us.

3. Let it then be supposed, that the Modern Representations they have given of
their Notion of The light within, and of other their Doctrines (since the
oppositions they have lately met with) are the True and Genuin sense of what
they held from the beginning: And, when truly explained and understood, the
same, and no more than what the Chapter of England, and all sober Christians have
always held.

If so, then they must begin again to give a new Account of their Separation,
and so violent a Separation as they have made, not only from the Chapter of England
but all the Churches in the World, as Edw. Borough, p. 416. of his Works, And
so all you Churches and Sects, by what name soever you are known in the world,
you are the seed of the great Whore. And p. 17. of his Epist. to the Reader he
tells him, Thou may fully perceive we differ in Doctrines and Principles; and
the one thou must justify, and the other thou must condemn, as being one clean
contrary to the other in our Principles. And p. 1. he says, We have sufficient
cause to cry against them, and to deny their Ministry, their Church, their
Worship, and their whole Religion. What shall we do now! Now we Agree in
nothing! our Whole Religion is Condemned: And there is no Compounding: we must
Condemn the One, and Justify the other. Here is Foul-Play on some side! By
some Modern Accounts, it is hard to distinguish wherein the Doctrines of the
Chapter of England, and those of the Quakers, do differ. Particularly in their
Fundamental Principle of The Light within, on which all the Rest do Depend, as
it is Explained by Mr. Penn in his late Primitive Christianity, and in The
Snake, Sect. i. and Sect. xxii. except the Particular hereafter excepted, they
are the same; and Mr. Penn asks no more (upon the Main) than what is not only
Allowed, but Practiced, and always has been, and that Daily, in our Common
Prayers, by the Chapter of England; yes, and by our Dissenters too; so that now we
are very Good Friends again! And the Difference betwixt us, upon this Point, is
no ways sufficient to Justify any Separation. And so of the other Points of
Doctrine, as, of late Explained. And for the Sacraments, G. Whitehead allows
them to be Lawful, and let such Practice them, as so think fit. Then there is no
ground for their Separation from us, for our Practice of what themselves Allow
to be Lawful. And for Episcopacy, that is a matter of Government, not of
Worship, so that we might join in Worship for all that. And the Bishops
Exercise no other Power than what is used amongst the Quakers, to Disown those
who will not walk according to the Rules of the Society. And their Power herein
is much Curbed by the Laws, and Appeals lie from their Sentence to the Secular
Courts, which are not Allowed in the Quaker-Discipline.

Now, to bring this matter to an Issue, in a Friendly manner, without Ripping
up or Confronting Former Testimonies, it is desired, That Mr. Penn, or any
other for him, would show such Differences betwixt his Explanation of the Light
within, and that in The Snake, as are so Material, to justify a Separation;
and so of the other Points Treated of in his Primitive Christianity.

And herein let him and them Consider the Grievousness of the Sin of Schism;
even as Enforced by them against their own Separatists; it is a Tearing the
Body of Christ in pieces; and turning the Heaven of Christianity, into a Hell
of Confusion. Let us Act herein Manfully; for we Fight for our own Souls, the
Union and Joy of Christendom, the Honor of Religion, and the Glory of God, who
knows our Hearts, and will Reward our Sincerity. He, through whose Holy
Inspiration only, we think those things that be Rightful, Prevent us, in all
our Doings, with His most Gracious Favor; Further us with His Continual Help,
and Pardon all our Infirmities, in the Prosecution of these Glorious Ends,
through Jesus Christ, our Lord; who for these same Ends, Dyed, Rose, Ascended,
and will come again, in that same Body, to Reward and to Judge every Man
according to what he has been Useful, or Prejudicial to these Ends. To whom
with the Father, and the Eternal Spirit, be All Power, Honor, and Glory, from
All Creatures, Converted Sinners especially, now, and for ever.

Amen.
A Friendly Expostulation with Mr. Penn, upon Account of his Primitive
Christianity, lately Published.
1. I Have said before, how near Mr. Penn has brought the Quaker Principles (as
he has, of late, Represented them) to the Doctrine of the Chapter of England, and
the Common Principles of Christianity. But I would desire to Expostulate a
little with him upon one Part of his Exposition of The Light within, p. 29.
where he is not satisfied with what we allow, viz. that it does Influence and
Assist our Natural Light; but he will not grant that we have any Natural Light
at all, or any other than that Divine Light of the Word, which is God; which he
says, some, mistakenly, call Natural Light. As G. Fox says, in his Great
Mystery, p. 42. where he opposes this Tenet, That no man by that Native Light
inherent in him, had Power to Believe, etc. G. F. Answers, The Light that does
enlighten every man (which is their description of the Light within) he calls
it Native and Inherent: The names he gives of Native and Inherent, are his own,
out of the Truth. Here he denis any Natural Light, and will have none other but
the Divine Light within. But to go on with Mr. Penn, he says, p. 30. and 31.
That the Scripture makes no distinction between Natural and Spiritual Light,
and Provokes any to give so much as one Text to that Purpose; he makes it as
Absurd, as to talk of a Natural and Spiritual Darkness within. He says, There
are not two Lights from God in man, that Regard Religion. Not that Reproves or
Condemns a Man for Sin.

But how then does he Answer the Objection, which he puts against himself, of
the many False Religions in the world? It was not the True Light which guided
men into them. And if they have no other Light, how came they by them? He says,
it was because they did not follow the True Light. But why did they not follow
it? How could they help following of it, if they had nothing else to follow?
What was it that Resisted It? Or, What could Resist It, if we have no Natural
Light or Understanding to Refuse its Dictates? But suppose our No Light or
Understanding could shut its eyes, and not follow this light; then it might
lose the True Religion? But could no-understanding invent another Religion? For
that is something Positive; and something must Guide and Direct Men to it. The
Absence of Light is Darkness, not a False-light. But an Ignis Fatuus, or Will
in the Wisp, is a Light that leads Men wrong. Men that are in Error follow a
Light, but it is False-light, and they think themselves to be in the Right. Our
Understandings have a Natural, which is a Fallible-light; and therefore often
leads us wrong. What else is the meaning of Prove. 3.5. Trust in the Lord with
all thine heart, and lean not unto thine own Understanding. It is true, that
Understanding and the Natural light of it, was given us by God: And He made it
Right and True; but Fallible, else it could never be mistaken. God has placed a
Natural light, as a Candle in our Hearts; and His Supernatural light does
Influence and Direct it, when we seek to Him for it, and serve Him according as
He has commanded: Solomon says, Prove. xx. 27. The Spirit of man is the Candle
of the Lord, searching all the Inward Parts. You will not call the Spirit of
Man the Eternal Light, which is GOD. This was the Mistake which drove George
Fox to make our Soul a Part of God, without Beginning, and Infinite in it self,
etc. as shown in The Snake, Sect. ii. and to make us even Equal with God, as
shown, Sect. iii. And Mr. Penn, p. 15. of this Book, (Primit. Christian.)
allows no Natural light to the Understanding, For (says he) Man can no more be
a Light to his Mind than he is to his Body: And thence inferrs, that as the Eye
has no Light in it self, so neither the Understanding: He makes our Nature and
Minds wholly Dark of themselves, only succeptible of Supernatural light, when
sent into our Understanding: And that all the Light we have is thus
Supernatural; and only called Natural, because, as he says, It is Natural to
Man to have a Supernatural light. I will not take advantage of the Philosophy
of this; for, I suppose his meaning to be, that it is Natural to the
Understanding to Receive a Light that is infused into it, as for the Eye to see
by an Extraneous light; that is, it is an Organ fitted to Receive Light, though
it has none in it self; as the Understanding to Apprehend, though it has no
Reason or Light in it self. Thus he expresses it, p. 50. All Men have Reason,
(says he) but all Men are not Reasonable; which must be taken with the same
grains of Allowance. For every Man is a Reasonable Creature, that is, the
Definition of a Man. But according to his Hypothesis, though all men have Reason,
yet not Natural, but super-naturally put into their Understanding: And so, though
they have Reason, yet are they not Reasonable, because that Reason is none of
their own, only as Gifted, that is, Accidental, but not Natural to them; and so
they can no more be called Rational, than a Bagg can be called Rich, that has
Money in it. For he says, p. 15. That God, is the Light of our Nature, of our
minds, and understandings. If it were meant as an Assistant, Guide or Director,
to the Light of our Understanding, there were no difference betwixt us: But
quite to put out the Natural light of our understandings, and make it but only
Passive, that is, succesptible of another light, that is the point on which I
would Reason now with Mr. Penn. It is said 1 Cor. 1.21. That the World by
Wisdom knew not God. What Wisdom was this? it could not be a Divine light; and
if Man have no Natural light; it must be the Quaker third sort of light, that
is, No light at all. But if by Wisdom here, you mean Men's Natural light or
Reason, the Text is Plain and Easy.

It is Written, 1 John 3.20. If our Heart Condemn us, God is greater than our
heart, and knows all things. Now, by Heart, here must be meant the Natural
light; because, if it means the Light which is God, God is not Greater than
Himself. And it is supposed here that the Heart does not Know all Things:
Therefore this must be meant of our Natural Conscience, and not of God. And now
here is a Natural light, which does Reprove of Evil, which Mr. Penn supposes
cannot be shown, p. 30. Our Savior says, Luke xii. 57. Yea, and why even of
your selves judge not what is Right? But why of your selves, if we have no
Light at all of our selves whereby to Judge?

I find a great Light of the Quakers, Edw. Borough, owning these Two Lights
within, in his Warning to Vnderbarrow, 1654. p. 16. and 17. of his Works
Reprinted 1672* where speaking of some of the Worlds People, whose Light (says
he) is only Natural and Carnal, and does only make manifest Carnal
Transgressions, and who Judge by the Natural light, etc. This being Objected by
John Stalham, in his Reviler Rebuked, p. 282. as a Contradiction to what other
Quakers had said of the Light. Richard Hubberthorn (a Quaker of the First Rank)
undertakes the Defense of Borough, which you find in his Works, Reprinted
1663. p. 144. where he says that Borough was Misrepresented, in that Stalham
would have had him say, that the Light of Christ was Natural and Carnal, which
he says Borough did not mean; but the Light of Man (says he) by which Carnal
Men do judge of Carnal Transgressions, is Natural -- And Man's light, by which
Carnal men do Judge of any thing, is one thing, and the light of Jesus Christ,
which is Spiritual men's Guide, is another thing. Here are Two Lights within
most plainly, which Mr. Penn does so positively Oppose.

But which of these Lights guided Mr. Penn, and which Hubberthorn and Borough?
For it could not be the same Light that guided to Two Lights, and not to Two!

And now it will be time, to ask from Mr. Penn a Solution of the Difficulty
which he Proposes p. 29. that is, To assign us some certain Medium, or Way,
whereby we may truly discern, and distinguish between the Manifestations and
Reproofs of the Natural Light within, from those of the Divine Light within. He
proposed this as a Difficulty upon the Opinion of Two Lights within, a Natural,
and a Divine. And presses it against those who held that the Natural Light
could Reprove of Evil; if which were granted, he would yield that there must be
Two Lights. But he supposes that nothing but the Divine Light could Reprove of
Evil. The Contrary of which has been shown from 1 John 3.20. and allowed both
by Borough and Hubberthorn, who both (in the places above Quoted) do assert
that the Natural Light does Reprove of Carnal Transgressions: And therefore, if
Carnal Transgressions be Evil, the Natural Light does Reprove of Evil.

But that which I would Improve from this, and for which I have been so long
upon it, is, to Represent to Mr. Penn the Consequence of this Opinion of his.
For if I think that my Understanding is a Perfect Blank, incapable to Judge any
thing of it self, that is, by the Natural Light which God has given it: But
that every Thought of my Heart, concerning Religion, is Supernatural, Darted
in there Immediately by God Himself, by the very Life of the Word Eternal, Then
must I follow every such Thought, even without Examination, and Refuse to let
it be Overruled, either by the Written Word of the Scriptures, or by All the
Reason or Authority of Men or Angels. And if such Thought be Erroneous, I am
Vn-moveable and Irrecoverable! This is the most Desperate Condition of which
Man is Capable in this world. Therefore this stumbling Block must be Removed
before we can proceed any further. And this is that, which keeps the Quakers so
Deaf to all Arguments, Charm we never so wisely!

It was this which Confirmed Gilpin, Toldervy, Milner, and other Quakers, that
their Diabolical Possessions (owned now as such by all the Quakers) and the
Quaker-witches who Attempted the lives of Henry Winder and his Wife (see the
Story in The Snake, p. 300.) and though Disproved, Confuted, and Confounded many
ways in all their Accusations against them, yet still to stick to it, and could
never be brought to Repentance, or to own themselves Mistaken. Why? Because
they had this Notion, That what came into their minds, was the Light of Christ.

And so it must be, if there be no other Light in the mind but that of Christ,
except we allow of a Diabolical. And then there are three sorts, Natural,
Divine, and Diabolical.

Unless you will say, That a False-light (as the Diabolical is) ought not to be
Reckoned a Light. But that will not do. Because what Guides, or Directs, or
Persuades, that is called a Light: And you may as well say, That a False-Guide
is no Guide, as that a False-light is no Light: Thus it is, that Satan
Transforms himself into an Angel of Light. And, as our Savior has forewarned
us, That the Light in some Men is Darkness. Not that Light is Darkness, but
what Men take for Light; and that is a Light or Guide to them, though a False
One. And then how we shall know the one from the other? That is a Material
Question which you have asked, and which now Returns upon you.

What is that Spirit of the Prophets, that is Subject to the Prophets? Is it
the Divine Light within? is God Subject to the Prophets? Must you not then
allow a Natural Light? Cease from thine own Wisdom, Prove. xxiii. 4. Can there be
Wisdom without Light? Wisdom is Light. Must I then Cease from the Divine Light?
or is there not Another? And how shall I know mine own Light, from the Divine
Light?

We are Commanded not to Believe every Spirit, but to Try the Spirits, 1 John
iv. 1. How shall we Try them? By Themselves! Must I Try the Spirit or Light in
my Heart, by it self? Ask it, whether it be a True Light, or not? It says it
is. So do all Deceivers say, so does every False-Spirit say; then I must not
take its word: But I must Try it. And I ask again, How Try it? Therefore it
must be by something else than it self. And what is that? Now we are near the
Truth. For, Mr. Penn, the Case stands thus.

God has given a Natural Light to our Understanding, but a Fallible one;
therefore it needs Help, and our own Endeavors. The Principal Help is the
Influence and Light, of the Holy-Spirit of God, which works together with our
Light, and Enables it to work. Besides this, God has given us a Rule to walk
by. Plain Directions in writing, which we may Study, and have always Before us.
That is, The Holy Scriptures; and His Light, will open, that is, Help our
Understanding in the Reading and Studying of the Scriptures; but that Implys we
must Read and Study; we must use our Endeavors, else He can not Help our
Endeavors: We must not Ly in the Ditch, and cry God Help us; use no Outward
Helps, which God has Appointed; but fold our Arms, and sit still, and gape for
Extraordinary Inspirations, which is a Tempting of God, instead of waiting upon
Him.

Then God has Appointed other Helps besides the Scriptures, He has Constituted
a Church, and an Order of Men to Teach us, to Help us to Understand the
Scriptures; and to Administer the Sacraments to us, which Christ has Commanded;
and Promised the Assistance of His H. Spirit to those who shall Reverently, as
He has Appointed, approach unto them.

We have likewise the Helps of Historys, and Human-Learning, to know former
Times, to observe the Rise and Growth of Heresies, and to beware, lest we Fall
into the like Snares of the Devil.

But if we will Neglect all these Helps; nay, Vilify and Despise them, cry out
upon them as Low, Carnal, and what not; and Direct God to work Miracles for us,
while we Refuse to work, to send such an Irresistible and Infallible Light into
our Hearts, as may, without any Pains on our side, secure us Absolutely; and
there is an End on it! If we will thus Alter our own Frame, and the whole Method
of God's Dispensations, it is but just with God to give us up to follow our own
Imaginations, and let us feel the Effect of our Folly.

But now, on the other hand, if we will be Content to follow God in His way: To
acknowledge what we Feel and Know, that we have a Free Will within us, and an
Understanding, which has Natural Powers, to Judge, and Discern, and Consider;
and will use the Helps God has given us; then, and not till then, are we in a
Capacity to be Reasoned with; to Judge and Try our own Spirits, and other Men's,
by the Plain Rule of God's H. Word; and if we find they speak not according to
that, then to Reject them. Then may we Expect the Assistance of God's B. Spirit
to Inform our Understandings, and lead us into All Truth necessary for us.

For, what ever the Quakers think, the Chapter of England has always Acknowledged
the Influences and Inward Operation of the B. Spirit of God upon our Hearts, as
the Cause of All the Good that is wrought in us; which is sufficiently shown in
The Snake, Sect. xxii.

And this has been all along the Doctrine of the Catholic Church, which I might
Prove at length; but that is not the Point in which we are, at Present,
engaged: Yet for the satisfaction of the Quakers who may not know this, I will
set down two Canons of the Council of Carthage, which was held in the year of
our Lord, 419.

Can. 113. Whoever says, That the grace of God, by which a man is Justified
through Jesus Christ our Lord, avails only for the Remission of sins that are
already past, but does not also give strength to resist sin for the future, Let
him be Anathema. For the grace of God does not only give us the knowledge of
what we ought to do, but also inspires us with love, whereby we may be enabled
to Perform those things which we know to be our duty. Likewise whosoever shall
say, that this grace of God, which is through Jesus Christ our Lord, does help us
to avoid sin, only as the knowledge of sin is made manifest to us by it,
whereby we know what we ought to seek after, and what to avoid; but that
strength is not given us by it, that what we know we ought to do, we may also
love it, and be enabled to perform it, Let him be Anathema.

Can. 114. Whosoever shall say that the grace of Justification was therefore
given unto us, that what we could perform by our own free will, we may do the
more easily by grace; insomuch, that though grace had not been given, we might,
though with difficulty, perform the divine Commandments without it, Let him be
Anathema. For, concerning the fruits of the Commandments, The Lord did not say
that without me, ye shall do them with difficulty; but He said, without me, ye
can do nothing.

(...) (...).

(...).

This Constant Doctrine of the Church, the Quaker Infallibility did not know
that she had ever held; and therefore set it up as a New discovery of their
own, and broke with the Church for it. And to Advance Divine Grace, they would
extinguish Human Reason, which is a Divine Grace it self, and the Subject given
unto us by God, whereupon His B. Spirit should work.

And to Divest us of it, is to make us cease to be Men, instead of being Saints.

It makes God the sole Author of all our Sin; for if we have no Natural-Light,
we can have no Free Will; are only Passive in God's Hands, acted by Him, but do
nothing of our selves, and therefore are not answerable for any thing that we
do; more than a Sword or a Pen are Blameworthy for whatever use is made of
them.

This Arraigns the Wisdom of God, in all the Institutions and Ordinances that
ever He gave to Men. For, what need of such Helps to the Divine Light! and Mr.
Penn says we have no other. Why then does he Preach? To whom does he Preach? To
the Divine Light in Men? (as G. Fox, and the Primitive Quakers used to speak)
Can he Teach that? Cannot that guide Men without his Preaching? If he says that
he only Preaches to persuade Men to follow that Light. But cannot the Light
Teach even that too? Or has it Forgot it? Does it need Help in that? Then why
not in other things? then is it not self-sufficient without something else.

Nay, by this Principle, there was no need of Christ's coming into the World, at
least of His dying for us: For Men had the Divine Light before. And what could
the Man Jesus add to that? Was it not sufficient without Him? If not, then you
want something else besides your Light within: But if it was sufficient without
Him, then could not His Coming be Necessary. I desire to know what you differ
herein from the Deists? They hold a Divine Light Planted by God in the Heart of
Man, which they call Reason: And that this is sufficient, without any thing
else, to Teach a Man all that he ought to Know or Do. This Divine Light you
call the Light within: So that you Differ from them but in Words: Both of you
Reject the Necessity of any Outward Revelation, that is, of a Christ without.
And so are the same with all the Pagan or Gentile World. For they too (and the
latter Mahometans) allow Jesus to have been a Good Man; and to have had this
Divine Light (which you call Christ) within Him, as all other Men have: But
this does not make Him Properly the Son of God; which you also utterly deny Him
to be, as said before, p. 3. This is Literally that Anti-Christianism which is
Reprehended, 1 John 2.22. of Denying Jesus to be the Christ. For having of the
Light in me, does not make me to be the Light: But Jesus not only had the Light
in Him, but He was the Light, or Christ; which it is Blasphemy to say of any
other. And yet, if Man have no other Light in him but the Divine, and that be
made Part of his Nature, it must follow that he is God: For whoever does
Properly partake of the Divine Nature, is so.

2. But now whatever Mr. Penn thinks of my Reasoning, (which by his own
Principle, must be the Immediate Dictate of the Holy Ghost, if I have no
Natural Light which taught it me) yet he can have no Reason to break Communion
with us, upon this Account, more than with Hubberthorn, Borough, or other
Quakers who held the same, as James Naylor, and others. I could show, if that
were worth the while. And though James Naylor was Censured by the Quakers for
other things, yet never for this; and he was Received again into Favor, and
Lived and Died in their Communion.

3. This hinders not, by Mr. Penn's own Acknowledgment, they and we being all
of one Religion. For he says, p. 62. I know not how properly they may be called
of diverse Religions, that assert the True God for the Object of Worship; The
Lord Jesus Christ, for the only Savior; and the Light or Spirit of Christ, for
the Great Agent and Means of Man's Conversion and Eternal Felicity.

Now all this, Mr. Penn, the Church of England does most sincerely and heartily
Believe, and ever have Professed it: And therefore, if we be not of diverse
Religions, why of diverse Communions!

4. Again, your Exposition of Justification, p. 79. That you acknowledge
Justification only for the sake of the Death and Sufferings of Christ; and
nothing we can do, (say you) though by the Operation of the Holy Spirit, being
able to Cancel old Debts, or wipe out old Scores: It is the Power and Efficacy
of that Propitiatory offering, upon Faith and Repentance, that Justifies us
from the sins that are past; and it is the Power of Christ 's Spirit in our
hearts, that Purifies, and makes us Acceptable before God. All this is most
Sound and Orthodox. And your whole Ninth Chapter concerning the Inward and
Spiritual Appearance of Christ in the Soul, I not only Approve, but do very
much Congratulate with you, that you have so Christianly and Pathetically
Pressed it. I know you will not suspect me of Flattery: For, where there is
occasion, I speak Plain enough. This Cause Requires not Dodging. Let us Contend
for the Truth, on whatever side it lys. It is for our own Souls. And we must
give an Account.

How do you keep up a Schism, if you agree with us in these Fundamentals of
Religion! Small Matters, you know, are not sufficient to excuse a Schism. Great
things are to be done, and much to be Born to Compass such good of souls.

Therefore let me consider All your Objections.

1. Chap. x. Sect. 1. You Insist much upon the Spirituality and Life of Prayer.
In the name of God, carry that as High as you can, you shall find no opposition
from us: For without this, All Prayer, in whatever words, whether Ex-tempore,
or Pre-meditated, are but Dead Forms. And an Ex-tempore Prayer, is only
Ex-tempore as to the Speaker, if he has not thought of it before: But it is as
much a Form to the Hearers, as if he had thought of it; if they join with him,
they are tied to his words and method, and every thing else of his Prayer. So
that the Question is ill stated, to call Pre-meditated Prayer a Form, and the
other not. Both are Forms, and equally Forms to the Hearers: But the True State
of the Question is this, whether an Ex-tempore, or a Pre-meditated FORM, is
most Beneficial to the Hearers? Which can be freed from most Defects? And which
best fitted to the Common Exigencies of the People?

If the Heart cannot be supposed to be Spiritually lifted up in the use of any
Form, then must All Public Prayer cease. Then was The Lords Prayer Un-fitting
ever to be used; or the Psalms of David, which were daily Read in the Temple,
and composed for that End.

But if the soul may be spiritually lifted up in the Use of a Form, then is it
Great Un-Charitableness to Censure those who use it: And this can be no
sufficient Cause for a separation.

Besides that it is Impossible for any of your Hearers to know whether they
make use of (that is, join in) an Ex-tempore, or a Pre-meditated Form: For how
do they know whether the Speaker has thought of it before? These are too
slender Causes for a Separation.

But in our Churches, the Ministers are not tied to the Common Prayer, but take
the same Liberty as yours, to Pray according to their own Conceptions before
and after Sermon. So that herein you may join quite free from this Exception.

2. Your next Exception, Sect. 2, and 3. is concerning the Ministry, That they
who undertake it, ought to be Guided and Influenced by the Holy-Spirit. Herein
you differ not from us. We assert the same. And it is Demanded in the
Examination of Persons to be Ordained, Whether they are persuaded that they are
moved thereto by the Holy Ghost? If Men will be-ly their own Consciences, and
thrust themselves Unworthily into the Ministry, that is not to be objected
against the Constitution: And, Mr. Penn, you know that your Communion has
Labored under this Inconvenience as well as ours. I need not go to Instances.
I know you will not put me to it. Therefore this is no Cause for Separation.

3. Your 4. Sect. That Ministers are Christ's Witnesses, and applying to this 1 John 1.1, 3. That which we have heard, seen with our Eyes, and our hands have
handled, etc. seems Strange; for this was spoken by St. John in relation to the
Person of Christ, whom they had seen, felt, etc. And such sort of Witnesses I
suppose you do not Pretend to be: You Pretend not to have seen our Lord in the
Flesh. But if you take this spiritually, (as I perceive you do) then we Witness
it as much as you. And here can be no Cause of Separation.

4. Your 5. Sect. against Men's offering money to be made Ministers. I would
fain know what Caution you can advise against Symony that is not taken. But if
you think it utterly unlawful for Ministers to Receive ought from the People,
to whom they Preach, How got G. Fox so much Money? And I would desire to know
how you answer 1 Cor. ix. 7, 11, 14. Gal. vi. 6. Phil iv. 14.16. However, here
can be no Cause of Separation.

5. Chap. xii. Sect. 1. You say nothing against Tithes, but that you will not
Support our Ministry: And that depending upon what is said before as to them, I
dismiss it. Though you might Grudge them their Tithes, and yet not break
Communion: For you are no less Liable to them now, than if you were in our
Communion. And, not now to enter upon the Jus Divinum of Tithes, (which I think
is very Plain) yet till you can show it to be a Sin for the King and Parliament
to give Allowances or Estates to the Clergy, as well as to other Men, you can
never countenance a Separation upon the account of Tithes. There are many in our
Communion who are not yet persuaded of the Divine Right of Tithes.

6. As to your 2. Sect. against Swearing. You have obtained an Act of
Parliament to Swear in your own Form. Therefore that Objection is taken out of
the way. At least it can be made no Pretense for a Separation.

7. As to your 3. Sect. concerning War, you say no more of it, than that it
ought to Cease among Christians. And who does not wish it? But that it may
sometimes be Necessary and Lawful you have allowed, in Engaging to the
Government to maintain Soldiers in Pensilvania. But however you may keep that
opinion, and yet not make a Separation. As you may, what you mention Sect. 4,
5, 6, and 7. That is, The Salutations of the Times. Plainness of Speech. Not to
Marry from among your selves. Plainness in Apparel. And to Refrain Sports and
Pastimes.

8. As to Sect. 8. against our Public Fasts and Feasts, they are little enough
observed amongst our selves. You Will not be much Quarreled for that. But your
Reason against them, because they are of Human Institution, needs another
Reason why that is one, which you do not Give us. All Churches, both before and
since Christ, have done the same. And there is no Prohibition against it.
However, if you cannot comply with it, you may stay at home on those days. That
is no Reason for a General Separation.

And these are all the Causes you have Instanced or Hinted at in your Book. And
I hope, upon serious Consideration, you will not think that any or all of them
are sufficient for a Separation.

Remember what you said to your own Separatists of Harp-Lane, when they desired
to put up past Quarrels; you bid them then to Return from their Separation.
Take the Good Advice you have given. Sure the Cause is more Important. And our
Church can Plead more Authority over you, than you could over them.

And if you think that she has Errors and Defects, (wherein I will join with
you) yet Consider, that no Errors can justify a Breach of Communion, but those
which are Imposed as Conditions of Communion.

We shall have many things to Bear with, to Bemoan, to Amend, to Struggle with,
while we are upon this Earth.

And he that will make a Separation for every Error, will fall into much
greater Error and Sin than that which he would seek to Cure. It is like tearing
Christ's seamless Coat, because we like not the color, or to mend the Fashion
of a Sleeve.

God Direct you, and us all. To His Grace I commend you, and the Influences of
His Blessed Spirit, to show you what Great things it is in your Power to do for
Him and His Church; and give you a Heart to do them, that it be not laid to
your Charge.

ADVERTISEMENT.
I Would not have the Reader or the Quakers think, because I have instanced but
in Seven Particulars, wherein the Quakers have Copied after the Ancient
Heretics within the first 150 Years of Christianity, that therefore there are
no more. But I would not swell this matter to too great a bulk. I have shown in
The Snake, Sect. ix. how George Fox falls in with the Patripassians, who Denied
any Distinction of Persons in the Godhead; and consequently held that it was
God the Father who was Born of the B. Virgin, and Dyed for us. And whoever will
compare the Tenets of the Quakers with the Account which Epiphanius and others
later, have given of the Gnostics, and other Heretics of those times, will
find many other Particulars wherein they agree. But because the Quakers, and
others of our Dissenters, have (for no cause but their own Guilt) excepted
against the Account of former Heresies, given by those of After Ages, I have,
to take away all Umbrage, fetched my Authoritys from those who were
Co-temporaries with those Heretics which they mention.

FINIS.

