Tempora Mutantur. OR, The great Change from 73 to 93. In the Travels of a
Professor of Theology at Glasgow, from the Primitive and Episcopal Loyalty,
through Italy, Geneva, etc. to the Deposing Doctrine, under
Papistico-Phanatico-Prelatico Colors at Salisbury; Together with his great
Improvement during his short stay at Cracovia.
To the Clergy of the Diocese of Sarum.
Reverend Sirs,
YOur present Diocessan wrote last Year 1693. Four Discourses, which he has
Addressed to you in a long Epistolary Preface; and Printed this Year 1694.

I have already made some Reflections upon the Second of these Discourses,
Concerning the Divinity and Death of Christ, and shown, I think, very plainly,
that he is rank Socinian in both. He makes Christ to be God no otherwise than
by the Indwelling, as he calls it, of the Divine Word in the Person of that Man
Jesus Christ, which is the very answer the Socinians give; as you may see in
the Brief History of the Unitarians, in their answer to John 1.14.

He explains this in an astonishing way, by the Indwelling of God in the Cloud
of Glory which was in the Temple, Worshipped the Cloud, because of God's
Resting upon it; so the Christians worship Christ, because of God's Dwelling in
Him. And the Reason he gives for all this, is, That the Indwelling of Jehovah
is Jehovah.

The Indwelling it self cannot be Jehovah: for that is nothing but our
Conception of God's dwelling in any thing: Therefore he must mean that the
Thing in which God dwells is Jehovah, and then the Temple was Jehovah as well
as the Cloud; and the Sun is Jehovah, and therefore Adorable: and so is every
Creature; for God Dwells in all, because All have their Being in Him.

But no Indwelling short of Impersonation, upon which follows the Communicatio
Idiomatum, that is, that all the properties of each of the Natures Impersonated
are attributed to the Person, who partakes of both Natures, as Eating,
Drinking, Growing, Sleeping, Dying are said of Man, because his Body is subject
to all these; as likewise Immortality, and other Properties of the Soul are as
truly said of the same Man. And thus it is that Christ is called GOD, in
Relation to His Divine Nature; and Man in relation to his Humane Nature, which
could not be if both these Natures were not Impersonated; I say no Indwelling
of God short of this Impersonation, can make that Thing in which God dwells, to
be truly and really God. And therefore neither the Temple, nor the Cloud were
God; nor were they Adorable: and the Jews did not Worship the Cloud of Glory,
as your Diocessan strangely avers. That had been Rank Idolatry. And so would
the Worship of Christ (by his Parallel) if there be no more than an Indwelling
of the Divinity in Him, Nor will the Degrees of Indwelling (any I mean short of
Impersonation) make any Difference, in this Case. God's Indwelling is more in
Angels than in Men, or inferior Creatures; And yet it would be as great
Idolatry to Worship the greatest Angel, as the meanest Worm: and therefore your
Diocessan's saying that God dwelt more Intimately in Christ than in the Cloud,
will not make Christ to be God, more than the Cloud; unless he carries such
Indwelling the full length of Impersonation, which if he had intended, he would
never have brought in the Parallel of the Cloud, and made it to be Jehovah and
Adorable, that it might be a Parallel.

As to the other point of Socinianism concerning the Death of Christ, your
Diocessan pleads expressly in Opposition to the Homily of Salvation, by
rejecting the Doctrine of Satisfaction, paid by Christ, because, as he says,
not Due to the Justice of God. But the abovesaid Homily does not account him,
who holds thus, as a Christian Man, but for an Adversary to Christ and his
Gospel. As you may see in the Homily, to which I Refer you. And to what I have
more at large said upon this Second of your Diocessan's Discourses.

I will at this time, only invite you to look over again with me, his long
Dedication to you of these his Discourses

Wherein, with much Episcopal Authority, he does Teach and Dictate to you. High
Calling, and how that ye ought to walk as becomes the Sons of God, and to shine
as Lights in the World.

Among the necessary and spiritual Duties of your Profession, he is most
earnest with you to Preach up the Present Government, Flocks with the most
terrible Apprehensions of K. J's Return. To express an affectionate and hearty
Zeal for Their Majesty's and Their Government; to endeavor to keep your People
always in mind of the Extreme Miseries, as well as of the visible Dangers of
Popery and Tyranny [never greater danger of both!] we ought to set Popery and
Slavery before them in their true Colors [and you have done it] with all the
light and life that we can give them: Church of England but are not; and are of
the Synagogue of Satan.

Now, Gentlemen, you know very well, that thi^ is turned upon your Diocessan,
with all the rest of the Swearing Clergy; that they are the False Brethren, the
Synagogue of Satan, who falsely pretend to be of the Church of England, but are
not. And the Vindication of the Deprived Bishops, with other Proofs for this,
have not yet been answered. And this your Diocessan should, if he had argued
fairly, have done first: For till that be done to Satisfaction, all these
Harangues are not only Precarious, Begging the Question, which is the poorest
sort of Argumentation: But, which is worse, they seem to conclude against your
selves, while you are not able to clear your selves from the Charge of Schism,
which is, with so much Reason, Learning and Authority proved against you.

You ought likewise to be fully, and without any the least Doubt or Hesitation,
settled and convinced in your Consciences of the Lawfulness of the Present
Constitution before you Preach it up, at this rate, to your Flocks. And you
know there are a great many shrewd Books wrote of the contrary Side; which are
generally very well received, even by the Learned, and are thought too Knotty
to be answered. Whereas your Diocessan's Measures of Obedience, his Phoenix
Pastoral, and what ever else has been said by him, or any else in Defense of
the Constitution, has been thoroughly Refuted, at least generally so Esteemed;
even to stop Reply, and make Sherlock himself fly to his Wife for help; and cry
that She has tied up his Hands from answering these Jacobites, and it is well
for them!

But your Diocessan brings a strong Argument, that you are all fully convinced
of the Lawfulness of the Present Constitution, and that is because you are
otherwise a Pack of the Vilest and Wickedest Atheists in the World. For I
cannot (says he) admit so had a Thought of any of you, as to imagine that you
could take the Oaths, and continue to perform the Divine Offices, Ordinary and
Extraordinary, unless you were fully satisfied in your Consciences, concerning
the Lawfulness both of the one and the other. This is so black an Imputation,
to suppose that Men of common Probity, not to say, Men that ought to be the
Patterns, as well as the Instructers of others, should swear an Oath, and
Adhere so long to it, which is an Interpretative Renewing of it, ever till it
is openly Retracted; and should in those frequent Returns of daily Prayers,
besides the special Offices of Fasts and Thanksgiving-Days, offer up Devotions
to God, contrary to their Persuasions, that no Man is capable of so Heinous,
and so continued a Provocation, unless he is either a Determinate Atheist, or a
Man of a seared and hardened Conscience. -- This is of so odious a Nature, that
indeed it is not easy to find words severe enough to set it out by, etc.

Which or how many of you, Gentlemen, find your selves concerned in This so
severe Reproof of your Diocessan, I leave to your own Consciences.

But I must observe to You, and to the World, that he has said all this against
Himself; for in the Chapel of Her Royal Highness at the Hague, he did often
not only Pray for the P. of Wales by Name, whom at the end of his Measures of
Obedience, he calls a Base Imposture; but in the Daily Prayers of Our Liturgy,
which was there used; he prayed for Victory to K. J. over all his Enemies, at
the same time he was busy (and most busy he was) to carry on an Invasion
against him, to pull the Crown from off His Head, or else his Head from his
Shoulders; and in order to it, Penning Declarations, and spreading virulent
Pamphlets to Imbitter the Nation against K. J. particularly of the Base
Imposture, as he calls it, for which notwithstanding, he continued to Pray,
till it was time to take off the Mask.

If he says that he knew of no Design to De-Throne K. J. But that his
Abdication was Occasional, and not foreseen or Desired, I must acquaint you,
that I have it from the Mouths of Persons of Honor and Reputation, who heard
it more than once from his own mouth, That he was the Man, who was Pitched upon
three Years before this Revolution, to break the Design to Her Royal Highness
of Deposing Her Father, and setting Her upon the Throne: to which he said, She
consented, (after some little Surprise upon the first Proposal) provided the
Prince might be likewise King; and this he told by way of magnifying her great
Love and Deference to her Husband; and to show how good a Wife --

Whether in these Prayers for K. J. and the P. of W. he was a determinate
Atheist, or only A Man of a Seared and hardened Conscience, is left to his
Choice, and your Determination? For, by his Censure of some of you, he has left
himself no other Choice. Good God! How will it go down with Atheistical, and
Light Wits to see such a Man inveigh so Piously against Hypocrisy in Prayer, or
any Immorrality! It is the greatest Prejudice in the World to Religion, to be
set up by such sort of Men. If they would serve their Intererests of Religion,
let them never name it, Lest, for the sakes, they bring the Whole to be thought
a Cheat. How much have they done it already? The Nation is run, into Direct
Atheism, since this Revolution!

But you, Gentlemen, must not have the least Scruple against the Lawfulness of
this Constitution, upon pain of being as ill as words can make you. And
therefore it was very necessary your Diocessan, at the same time that he warned
you of the Danger, should provide you a sure and certain Remedy, and build you
up upon such a Foundation as should not fail; because by His, and your own
Confession, if it fail you, you perish with it, with the Blood of all those of
your Flocks upon your heads, whom by your Dissimulation you have seduced.

Now then come we to this strong Foundation. He ushers it in with Great
Expectation p. 19. he speaks of it as a New and Happy Discovery, which had
taken mightily with You, when he first told you of it. You often heard me (says
he) Enlarge on it with much seeming Satisfaction: and because you thought that
I laid it out in a more Particular Manner, than you had otherwise met with it,
I will now spread it out before you.

This Foundation is two Precedents, he brings for the Justification of taking
Arms against our Lawful Governors, for Defense of our Religion, etc.

The one, the known Story of the Maccabees taking Arms against Antiochus; the
other of Constantine against Licinius, when he Persecuted the Christians in the
East. But these are old Stories. How came you to be so mightily taken with
them, at this time, as if you had never heard of them before?

Your Diocessan hints that it was not for the sake of these Precedents
themselves; but for that Particular Gift he has in Spreading, and Laying out;
which you know gives quite another Turn and Air from the same thing clutch'd
up, and huddl'd together, like a Juggler's Box when it is shut, all the Rarity
is in the Unfolding.

Well then. Look sharp. He begins. The first of these (Precedents) is taken
from the History of the Maccabees; which I desire you will consider by these
Steps. We will, Sir, and will give you as few Interruptions as will keep us
within sight of you.

The first step is, That the Jews were Subjects of Autiochus. I suppose you
mean, De jure, and not De facto Subjects;

Second step. Maccabees never pretended to any Special Authority from any
Prophet, (i. e.) for taking Arms against Antiochus.

Third step. The Prophesy. Dan. 11.31, 32, 33, 34. Maccabees.

Fourth step. As is likewise that Text. Heb. 11.34. 24.


And now it is spread. And if he trips upon the first step, he tumbles to
bottom without stop.

Therefore it is denied to him, that, when the Maccabees took arms against
Antiochus, the Jews were Lawfully his Subjects. The Government of that Tyrant,
(says Bishop Overal's Convocation Book. l. 1. c. 31. p. 76.) being not then
either Generally received by Submission, or settled by Continuance, which
appears from the First Chapter of the Book of Maccabees. And therefore there
was no need of the Extraordinary Mission of a Prophet to enable the Maccabees
to take arms against a Foreign Usurper, who was invited by some Wicked men of
Israel, who went out of their own Country, 1 Mac. 1.11.
Out of Israel, to make a Covenant with him; and then fought for him, to
Establish his Tyranny over all the Nation of the Jews. Antiochus, by means of
these Treacherous Jews, had gotten Possession. of the Government, and overthrew
their Church, as it was before by Law Established (as is complained in
Scotland, and in a Great Measure in England) and the Maccabees took arms
against the Invasions of this Usurper upon their Religion and Liberties (as was
pretended by Dundee, etc. in Scotland) but this has no Relation to the Case of
Subjects taking arms against their Lawful and Hereditary Monarchs; to which
Case your Diocessan applies it; and before him, Pope Sixtus Quintus, who
compared the Rebellion of the Holy League against Hen. III. of France, to the
Zeal of the Maccabees for Defense of their Religion, and he exhorted them to
fight Gloriously against their Lawful King, for the Advancement of the Church.
D'Avila's History of France. l. 9. p. (of English Edit. 1678) 355.

From the Pope and Conclave this noble Precedent of the Maccabees was picked
up, by our Poor Fanatics: and is very well spread by one Isotinus a little
Presbyterian, who put the Objection in these words (which leave out nothing of
your Diocessan's) But what say you, (says Isotinus) to the Resistance used by
Mattathias and his Children, who killed the King's Officers, and Armed against
him? Which Resistance, as it was foretold by Daniel; so it is said by the Author
of the Epistle to the Heb. That by Faith they waxed valiant in fight, and
turned to flight the Armies of Aliens: Which by all is applied to the
Maccabees. And who are you to condemn that which the Holy Ghost calls the Work
of Faith in them?

To this it is answered by Basilius a Royalist, in these words agreeable to our
Convocation; That the Title Antiochus had to command the Jews, is not
undoubted: For Josephus. lib. 12. c. 7. and 8. shows how the Jewish Nation was
tossed betwixt hands, and sometimes in the Power of the Kings of Egypt, and
sometimes of Syria; And that the Factions amongst the Jews gave the Occasion to
their being so Invaded; for ambitious Pretenders to the High Priesthood, sought
the Favor of these Kings; and so sacrificed the Interest both of Religion and
their Country to their own base Ends: Which was the Case in Antiochus Epiphanes
his Time, who, after his Attempt upon Egypt, came against Jerusalem, to which
he was admitted by the Men of his Party, who opened the Gates to Him. After
which, he Polluted their Worship and Temple, and fell on the Cruellest
Persecution imaginable: Now his Title over them being so ill Grounded, their
asserting their Freedom and Religion against that Cruel and Unjust Invader, was
not of Nature of the Subjects Resisting their Sovereign. Besides, what is
brought from the Epistle to the Heb. Chap. 11. for Justifying these Wars, seems
ill applied: For from the end of the 32th Verse, it appears he only speaks
there of what was done in the times of the Prophets; and none of these being
during the time of the Maccabees; that is not applicable to them. Next, as for
Mattathias, I must tell you, That God often raised up Extraordinary Persons to
judge Israel, whose Practices must be no Rule to us: For God set up Kings and
Rulers at his pleasure: and in the Dispensation, He frequently sent
Extraordinary Persons to do Extraordinary things, -- And, it will be no hard
task to make it appear that Mattathias was a Person Extraordinarily Raised up
by God, as were the Judges; And though no mention of that be made, neither by
Josephus, nor the Book of Maccabees, that is not to be stood upon; for we have
many of the Judges of Israel, of whose Call no account is given, and yet
undoubtedly they were warranted to act as they did, otherwise they had been
Invaders.

But if that Practice of Mattathias conclude any thing by way of Precedent, it
will prove that Churchmen may invade the Magistrate's Office, and kill his
Officers, and Raise War against him.

Now, Gentlemen, Will it not astonish you, when you know that every word here
Repeated are the Words of this same Diocessan of Yours, when Professor of
Theology in Glasgow, thus Spread and laid out 20 Years ago? (so long since he
was in hopes it would have been forgot) in his Vindication of the Church and
State of Scotland. Printed at Glasgow. 1673. p. 26, 27, 28, 30, 31. And p. 62.
he likewise answers the other Precedent of Licinius, which he brings in his
Dedication to you. For your Story of Licinius (says the Professor) the pure
account of it will clear mistakes best (as it is given by Eus. 10. c. 5.)
Constantine after he turned Christian; being then Emperor of the West, called
for Licinius, whom Galerius had made Emperor of the East; and they both from
Millain, gave out Edicts in favor of the Christians, giving them absolute
Liberty, and discharging all Persecution on that account, which is reckoned to
have been in the Year 313. afterward he allied with Licinius, and gave him his
Sister in Marriage, and acknowledged him his Colleague in the Empire. But some
years after that Wars arose betwixt them, which Zosimus and Eutropius impute to
Constantine's Ambition, and Impatience of a Rival: But if we believe the
account Eusebius gives of it, Licinius provoked with Envy at Constantine, and
forgetting the Laws of Nature, the Bonds of Oath, Alliance and Agreement,
raised a Pestiferous and cruel War against him, and laid many Designs and
Snares for his Destruction, which he attempted long by secret and fraudulent
ways, but these were always by God's Providence discovered, and so Constantine
escaped all his Designed Mischief: at length made War against Constantine. And
as he was preparing for it, he made warlike wise against God, and persecuted
the Christians, because he apprehended they all Prayed for Constantine, and
wished him Success: whereupon he made severe Laws against the Christians,
forbidding the Bishops ever to meet among themselves, or to instruct any Women.
Afterward he Banished all that would not worship the Gods, and from that he
went to an open Prrsecution; and not content with that, he by severe Laws
discharged any to visit and relieve such as were in Prison for the Faith. Yet
notwithstanding of all this, none that were under his Part of the Empire did
Resist him; nay, not so much as turn over to Constantine against him, for ought
that appears: But upon these things a War followed betwixt Constantine and Him;
wherein Licinius was defeated, and forced to submit to what Conditions
Constantine was pleased to give, who took from him Greece and Illyricum, and
only left him Thrace and the East. But Licinius returning to his old ways, and
breaking all Agreements, a second War followed, wherein Licinius was utterly
Defeated, and sent to lead a private Life at Thessalonica, where he was some
time after killed, because of new Designs against Constantine. This being the
true account of that Story, I am to divine what advantage it can yield to the
Cause of Subjects Resisting their Sovereign; For here was a Superior Prince
defending himself against the unjust Attempts and Hostile Incursions of his
Enemy, who was also Inferior to him, as Eusebius states it, whom consult Book
10. Chap. 8. First Book of Constantine's Life. C. 42 and B. 2. C. 2. etc.

These are the Words of the Learned Professor, who could not Divine how his
Understanding would Improve by the time he came to be a Bishop! That he should
turn about again, and take up the old Exploded Rebel Pretenses, which Himself
had put into the Mouths of Presbyterians, on purpose to Confute them! And
without answering what Himself had then so Orthodoxly and Soundly delivered! Or
so much as letting of us know that he had ever said any such things in his
Life! But to bring them in now as spick and spannew! And on how he tickled you
with shem up and down his Diocese! as Himself boasts over again at the End of
his Delicious Epistle. I have now (says he) opened these two Precedents very
particularly to you; they seemed to weigh much with you when I have laid them
out to you in some Conferences that I have held with you upon this Subject. I
hope you will both feel (at least your Lordship) the Force that is in them, and
will be able to manage them with more advantage, now that you have them lying
before you.

Yes, and now that you have likewise the Professor against the Bishop; that you
may srread, and lay them out, and turn them; and take your choice of them. And
let your next Conference be toward Reconciling of them; and let the Bishop
either Convince or Excommunicate the Professor. But beware the Professor gain
not a Greater Party among you than the Bishop; for he has the Reputation of the
honester Man of the two, and much the better Reformer.

I have several other Exceptions both as to the Composition, and the spreading
of this Plaster your Spiritual Druggist has provided for the Sick and Wounded
Consciences. But having given you the Opinion of the Renewed Dr. Burns; and
thinking it very sufficient to awaken you out of your Lethargy, if you will
follow his Prescriptions, set down in that Excellent Dispensatory of his, The
Vindication of the Church and State of Scotland, whence I have taken this
Catholicon, to expel the Poison of these two Goliath Objections taken from the
Maccabees and Licinius; I will reserve the rest, till I see the Effects of
this; and dismiss you to your next Visitation, which may be sooner than you are
aware.

FINIS.
Printed in this Year. 1694!


