A PROCLAMATION: Being His Imperial Majesty's Act of Oblivion to the Hungarian
Rebels.
WE Leopold, by the Grace of God Elect Emperor of the Romans, always August,
and King of Germany, Hungary, Bohemia, Dalmatia, Croatia, Sclavonia, etc.
Archdeke of Austria, Duke of Burgundy, Brabant, Styria, Carinthia, Carniola,
Marque's of Morevia, Earl of Habspurge, Tyrol, and Gorisia, etc. Do hereby make
known to all, and every the Inhabitants of our Kingdom of Hungary, and of the
States and Councils of all Places thereto adjoining, to wit, Prelates and
Barons, Peers and Noblemen, as also to the Free and Royal Cities, and to all
others of what Estate, Degree, Rank and Condition soever, whom in any wife it
may concern: That as all Christendom cannot but remain satisfied of the
effectual and Fatherly Care we have hitherto employed for the redeeming our
Realm of Hungary from the Domestic Troubles in which it has been involved, and
thereby brought to great Extremities, and restoring it to a Peaceable and
Flourishing Condition; so the same may more fully appear by the Directions we
have given to Persons of the greatest Quality, and eminently affected to Peace,
by the Conditions offered at several times to the Rebels, and lastly by the
Diet held at Oedenburg, which we summoned as the only Expedient to remove the
present Distempers, and at which, not without eminent Danger to Our Self we
assisted in Person, not doubting but that our continual Labors and Vigilance,
for reducing that Noble Kingdom to its former Obedience to its Lawful King, and
its own Quiet would prove very succesful and profitable. But on the contrary,
so far has the Disaflection of certain Persideous Men, and the Private Ambition
of others by their private Malice prevailed, that they have defeated the
Sincere Hearty Designs of Loyal Patriots; for such was the Wicked Impudence of
these Rebels, that by False Persuasions they seduced many other Inhabitants of
this our Kingdom to their Part, having by Purchase and Contract sold thus
Apostolical Kingdom to the Turkish Yoke, actually joined themselves with the
most Barbarous and Hereditary Enemy of Christendom, and Consumed with Fire and
Sword the Inhabitants of their Own Country, and our other Loyal Provinces, till
it pleased God, in Assistance to our Just Cause, to give us repeated Victories,
as well over the Turks as our Rebels. What King or Prince can with Patience
bear such Obstinacy of their Subjects, and their Disobedient taking up Arms
against their King? but will not rather proceed against them with all Severity?
But although We might with justice employ Our Conquering Arms against them, yet
such is the Native Affection, and the Singular Love We have always retained
for this most Ancient Kingdom, and Constant Bulwark of Christendom, that We
have rather made choice to extend Our Mercy, then inflict condign Punishment
upon them, and do still make it Our business to rescue, by all Favorable Ways
and Methods, the Seduced Vulgar from the Bonds of perpetual Misery, to wit, the
Turkish Yoke, whereunto the Heads of the Rebellion deceiptfully endeavor to
subject them. Being therefore desirous, out of Our Fatherly Affection, to
remove all Specious and Wicked Pretenses, which we find are represented to the
Unwary, after having in vain tried so many and so differerent Ways to reduce
those that had Erred, We have thought fit by this Our Fatherly Love, to Invite,
and Restore unto Our Mercy All and Every the Accomplices in the late Rebellion
and Revault (None execpted) who sensibly and firmly Repent; hereby Promising
Seriously and Firmly, upon the Word of a King, That they who shall before the
Last Day of the Month of February next ensuing, make Abjuration of the Horrid
Rebellion, and their Wicked Associating with the Turks and Obstinate Traitors,
before the Commissioners thereunto empowered by Us, and who are to enter the
middle of this Month upon the said Function at Presburg, and shall again take
the Oath of Allegiance due from them unto their Kings, and continue Dutiful
Subjects hereafter, All and Singular such Subjects have a general Indemnity and
Oblivion, and be moreover restored to their Ancient Nobility, Fame, and
Honors, as also to all their Goods, as well Immovable as Moveable, which
shall be found, and shall be put in Actual Possession of what they have lost,
by Our Commissioners aforesaid, in this behalf appointed. Still provided, That
if any of those that shall return, had heretofore any Dignity, Employment, or
Office in the Kingdom, such Persons shall give a particular Account thereof
unto the aforesaid Commissioners, who shall treat with them about receiving the
said Dignities, and upon Representation of his or their respective Cases, shall
receive Our Royal Pleasure. And to the intent that the Common Soldiers of
Hungary, and their Officers, perticularly those that have been formerly dismissed
from Our Royal Service, may, not be Deprived of their Necessary Maintenance, We
will take Effectual Care, by Our said Commissioners, that they be Immediately
and Actually received into Pay in the Guarrisons of the Kingdom through the
Generalties, or in the Trained Bands of Hungary. Furthermore, Our Counties and
Cities have Leave by their Deputies, being thereunto sufficiently Authorized,
to appear before Our said Commissioners, and make their Submission, as
aforesaid, to whom as likewise to all others who design to Resort to Our
Commissioners, all and every Our Military Officers shall without Fees give
Passes and Safeguards, for their Going and Return. And whereas we have amongst
other things enjoined Our said Commissioners, that upon Complaint grounded upon
the Resolutions of the late Diet of Oedemburg, (which we resolve shall be
wholly and inviolably observed) Right shall be respectively done unto them,
either in Restoring them to their Goods on Tirles or in Pursuance of the 25th
or 26th Articles of the said Assembly and Resolution of the Diet, to the free
Exercise of their Religion, or Churches, and Schools, such Person shall by Our
said Commissioner, be put into actual Possession thereof, who shall have
Liberty to demand the Assistance of Our said Commissioners to make good their
Claim. And whereas the Proclamation so much spoken of by all Pepole, that was
Issued at Our Coronation, in the Year 1655. is liable to so many Ambiguoas and
several Obscure Interpretations, that according to the Meaning and Construction
of some People, the very Basis and Foundation of Royal Authority and
Government, as Experience has shown, must of necessity be shaken by it, and the
very States and People be divided among themselves with Discord and Hatred: We
have therefore given Order to Our Commissioners, to Advice and Consult with
Persons expert in the Interests of Hungary, and lovers of Peace, concerning the
true meaning of that Proclamation, and the Assertaining the same, to the end
that that which is the chiefest thing in all Kingdoms, to wit, a true
Understanding, may be had between the King and his People, and a lasting
Foundation may be laid to the Public State, as well in Spiritual, as Temporal
Affairs. Moreover that an Equal Administration of Justice to the Highest and
Meanest, and a certain Method and Order may be established in Our Royal
Exchequer, and in Military Affairs; that by Our previous Endeavor and Study in
the next Diet, which we shall not fail so suddenly to call, as by God's
Assistance the present Troubles will permit, the aforesaid Proclamation may by
farther Consent and Agreement of the Nobility and States, according to the
Custom of the Land, be made a Firm and Perpetual Ordinance, to the end that
this Famous Kingdom and Nation may be Restored to its Ancient Splendor and
Glory, and that the Subjects thereof, may with united Minds and Strength
contend with their King in order to the Delivery of Themselves, their Churches,
their Wives, Children and Country, from the most Barberous Yoke of the Turkish
Tyrant. We therefore most earnestly exhort all of what State and Condition
soever that they make use of this Our most Merciful and Fatherly Intention, of
Composing the Troubles of this Noble Kingdom, and of providing for them and
their Posterity, that they adhere not to the Fallacies of Ambitious Men, who in
these Troubles seek only their own Advantage; but that rather by a due
Submission, they return to the Duty they owe their King, and endeavor to
Restore to their Country, the sweetness of a lasting Peace; and to this end we
do of our more abundant Grace declare our Willingness to Pardon them. But
against such as shall obstinately refuse or neglect this Our tender Grace and
Indemnity, and to apply themselves to Our aforesaid Commissioners within the
time appointed, and shall consequently Persevere in Contriving the Ruin of
their King, their Country, and all Christendom; We will proceed according to
the utmost Severity and Rigor or the Laws, as People by that very Fact
Convicted of Treason, Condemned and Outlawed. Wherefore we Protect before God,
Our Posterity, and the whole Christian World, that we are Clear and Innocent,
as to all the Desolations, Calamities and Miseries which shall by this Occasion
happen to our Kingdom, the Inhabitants of the Neighboring Provinces, and all
Christendom, as having used all Imaginable Means for the Redressing of them,
and consequently are only to be Imputed to those, who Preferring their
Unlimited Ambition and License to Plunder, before their own Country and State,
refuse the offers of the Royal and Paternal Indulgence so often Repeated to
them. Given at Our Castle at LINTZ, January the 12th. Anrio Dommini 1684. Of
Our Reign over the Romans the 26th. over the Hungarians and the rest, the 29th.
but over the Bohemians the 28th.

Leopold
JOHN GUBASOIRY, Bishop of NITRIA. JOHN MAHOLAU.
L.S.

LONDON, Printed for James Partridge, at the Post House between Charing Cross
and Whitehall, 1684.


