NO Blind Guides, In ANSWER To a seditious Pamphlet of J. MILTON'S, ENTITLED
Brief Notes upon a late Sermon Titl'd, the fear of God and the King; Preachd,
and since Publishd, By Matthew Griffith, D. D. And Chaplain to the late KING,
etc. Addressed to the Author.

If the Blind lead the Blind, Both shall fall into the Ditch. LONDON, Printed
for Henry Broom April 20. 1660.

NO Blind Guides, etc.
Mr. Milton,
ALthough in your Life, and Doctrine, you have Resolved one great Question; by
evidencing that Devils may indue Humane shapes; and proving your self, even to
your own Wife, an Incubus: you have yet Started Another; and that is, whether
you are not of That Regiment, which carried the Herd of Swine headlong into the
Sea: and moved the People to beseech Jesus to depart out of their coasts. (This
may be very well imagined, from your suitable practices Here) Is it possible to
read your Proposals of the benefits of a Free State, without Reflecting upon
your Tutours -- All this will I give thee, if thou will fall down, and worship
me* Come, come Sir, lay the Devil aside; do not proceed with so much malice,
and against Knowledge: -- Act like a Man; -- that a good Christian may not be
afraid to pray for you.

Was it not You, that scribled a Justification of the Murder of the King,
against Salmasius: and made it good too, Thus? That murder was an Action
meritorious, compared with your superior wickedness. It Is There, (as I
remember) that you Common place your self into Set forms of Railing, two Pages
thick: and lest, your Infamy should not extend it self enough, within the
Course and Usage of your Mother Tongue, the Thing is Dressed up in a Travailing
Garb, and Language: to blast the English Nation to the Universe; and to give
every man a Horror for Mankind, when he Considers, You are of the Race. In
This, you are above all Others; but in your ICOMOCLASTES, you exceed your self.

There, not content to see that Sac^ed Head divided from the Body; your
piercing Malice enters into the private Agonies of his struggling Soul; with a
Blasphemous Insolence, invading the Prerogative of God himself: (Omniscience)
and by Deductions most Uuchristi^n, and Illog^cal, aspersing his Last Plet^es,
(the almost certain Inspirations of the Holy Spirit) with Juggle, and
Prevarication. Nor are the Words III fitted to the Matter. The Bold Design
being suited with a conform Irreverence of Language. (but I do not love to Rake
long in a Puddle.)

To take a view in particular of all your Factious Labors, would cost more
time, than I am willing to afford them. Wherefore I shall stride over all the
rest, and pass directly to your Brief Notes upon a Late SERMON, Titl'd,

The Fear of God and the King.

Pr^ch'd, and since Published by MATTHEW GRIFFITH D. D. and Chaplain to the
late KING, etc.

ANy man that can but Read your Title, may understand your Dri^ and that you
Charge the Royal Interest, and Party thorough the Doctour's sides. I am not
^old enough to be his Champion, in all particulars; nor yet so Rude, as to take
an Office most properly to him Belonging, out of his Hand: Let him acquit
himself, in what concerns the Divine; and I Will adventure upon the most material
parts of the Rest. (but with this Profession, that I have no design in exposing
your Mistakes, saving to hinder them from becoming the Peoples.)

Your Entrance is a little Peremptory, and Magisterial, methinks, (but that
shall be allowed you) 'please you, we will see how Pertin^nt it is, and Rational.

I Affi^md in the Preface of a late discourse, Entitled, The ready way to
establish a free Commonwealth, and the dang^rs of readmitting Kingship in this
Na^ion, that the humor of returning to our old bondage, was instilld of late by
some deceivers; and to make good, that what I then affirmd, was not without
j^st ground, one of those deceivers I present here to the people; and if I
prove him not such, I refuse not to be so accounted in his stead.

TO the First: give me leave to mind you, that you make an Observation of
things Past, amount to a foretelling of what is to come. This Sermon was not
Preached, when that Humor you mention, was Instilled. Next; You Will as hardly
satisfy the people, that you your self, are no Deceiver, as prove the Doctor
one of those you meant. And thus I Will I^stance; KINGSHIP, is your old Bondage;
RUMPSHIP, ours: (Forgive the Term) You were Then, pas^ the One: we are now (God
be thanked) past the Other: and should be as loath to Return, as You. Yet you
are Tampering to delude the People, and to withdraw them from a Peaceable, and
Rational expectancy of good, into a mutinous, and hopeless attempt of mischief.

By your own Rule now, who are the Deceivers: We, that will not Return to our
old Bondage; or you, that would persuade us to it?

Your next Paragraph talks of Purgatives, Myrrh^, Aloes, etc. -- It may be an
Apothecaries Bill, for ought I know, and I have no skill in Physique.

As little shall I concern my self in your unmannerly descant upon the Epistle,
which is the Business of your Second Page. The Third, conteins your Gloss upon
the Text, and that I shall examine.

The Text.
Prove. 24. 21. My son, fear God and the King, and meddle not with them that be
seditious, or desirous of change, etc.

Letting pass matters not in controversy, I come to the main drift of your
Sermon, the King; which word here is either to signify any supreme Magistrate,
or else your latter object of fear is not universal, belongs not at all to many
parts of Christendom, that have no King; and in particular, not to us. That we
have no King since the putting down of Kingship in this Commonwealth, is
manifest by this last Parliament, who to the time of their dissolving not only
made no address at all to any King, but summond this next to come by the Writ
formerly appointed of a free Commonwealth, without restitution or the least
mention of any Kingly right or power; which could not be, if there were at
present any King of England. The main part therefore of your Sermon, if it mean
a King in the usual sense, is either impertinent and absurd, exhorting your
auditory to fear that which is not; or if King here be, as it is, understood
for any supreme Magistrate, by your own exhortation they are in the first place
not to meddle with you, as being your self most of all the seditious meant
here, and the desirous of change, in stirring them up to fear a King, whom the
present Government takes no notice of.

NOt to contend about the Large, or Limited Sense of the word KING: since it is
agreed upon, at all hands, to signify Supreme Authority; and, where a Single
Person governs, to denote the Monarch. The issue rests upon this Point: Is
there, or is there not at present, any King of England? You say, No; I Am of
another mind: Compare our Reasons.

You Argue; First, the Putting down of Kingship; and then, -- the Tacit
confirmation of that Act, by the last Session: who without any Address to any
King, or Restitution of any Kingly Right, summoned the next to come by the Writ
formerly Appointed of a Free Commonwealth.

To your Assumption, that Kingship was put down; I cannot subscribe, till I am
better satisfied, by what Authority: for no Form of Government can be altered,
but by consent of all the Parties to it. In short, the late King was Destroyed,
Kingship Abolished, the House of Lords Disauthoris'd, and at least 7. parts of
8. of the Commons Members secluded -- by the same Power.

Come to your Inference now; That, halts of all four, There was no King,
because they did not mention him: you are a little bold methinks, to lay your
Brat at the Parliament Door: and Father your opinions upon them, that in the
case, would not declare their own.

Reasons of State, of Honor, and Convenierce, might very fairly move them to
suspend. Suppose they thought it Prudence to refer all to the next Convention,
without so much as a Debate; whether a King, or No: and upon this point of
extreme necessity (the Nation running headlong, into another War without the
Interpose of a new Representative) rather dispense with something of
Informality in the Writs, than otherwise to hazard the main Issue of the
Public weal. If all this be not yet enough, I hope the re-minding the Nation
of the COVENANT; and their own refusal of the Oath of ABJURATION, will content
you.

Your 4th Page, runs away in some mistakes concerning Gideon; -- (a Person,
Called and set apart by God himself; guided by Divine Inspirations; and Acting
without Partnership, the work he was employed upon)

A little further, you deny the King, the Power of life and death; urging [Page
4.] that it is against the declared Judgments of our Parliaments, nay of our
Laws; which reserve to themselves only the power of life and death, etc.

I WILL not deny, but a Parliament is above the King: (That is: The King is
greater in Conjunction with his two Houses, than by Himself) but still this
weakens not the force of my assertion; which is; that Kings must necessarily
have that power: without it, they are no Kings (and it is the same thing in all
Governments whatsoever, it is one of the Prerogatives Inseparable from supreme
Authority) But since you urge the Declared Judgments of our Parliaments, in
favor of your opinion, I should be glad to see them.

Now for the Laws; it is true; they Pronounce Life, or Death; but the King's
left at Liberty to Take, or to Remit the forfeiture, at pleasure. Enough is
said of this.

If I were b^nt to Cavil; your 5th. Page would afford matter: abundantly, where
you extravagate upon the word Anointed: but That is more Peculiarly the
Doctor's Business, and I refer you to him. So are your slips, [Page 6.] but
Those, I cannot pass without a marque: For There, you show your Teeth. (I
might have said, your Ears to boot)

But how will you confirm one wrested Scripture with another: I Sam. 8. 7. They
have not rejected thee, but m^: grossly misapplying these words, which were not
spoken to any who had resisted or rejected a King, but to them who much against
the will of God had sought a King, and rejected a Commonwealth, wherein they
might have lived happily under the Reign of God only, their King. Let the words
interpret themselves: v. 6, 7. But the thing displeased Samuel, when they said,
give us a King to judge us. And Samuel prayed unto the Lord. And the Lord said
unto Samuel, barken unto the voice of the people in all that they say unto
thee; for they have not rejected thee, but they have rejected me, that I should
not reign over them Hence you conclude, so indissoluble is the Conjunction of
God and the King. O notorious abuse of Scripture! when as you should have
concluded, So unwilling was God to give them a King, So wide was the
disjunction of God from a King.

Mr. Milton, when your hand was In, another verse methinks should not have
over-charg'd you: and it is the very next too. As they have ever done (says God
to Samuel) since I brought them cut of Egypt, even unto this Day, (and have for
saken me, and served other Gods) even so do they unto thee. This, would have
given you light to read the Rest by; and (possible) have done you the same
service, which you pretend to do the Doctor. (But none so Blind as they that
will not see especially, had you but taken in likewise the verse next
Antecedent to your Quotation, which speaks the motive to their such Desires; as
the other does fairly imply the Reason of Gods Disapproval of them, 'twas a
hard miss, and an industrious one (I fear) to escape the 5, and 8, verses,
without the which, the 6 and 7, (which you make use of) have no intelligible
Coherence. Make us a King, (say they) to Judge us like the NATIONS v. 5. and
after That, v. 8. God charges them with inclinations to Idolatry; so that the
inference is open; They had a hankering after the Gods of the Nations, as well
as the Kingship; and That moved the All seeing wisdom, (that knew their
hearts) to tell Samuel, saying, they have not Rejected Thee, but Me: a Speech
applyable to their Disobedience, rather, than to their Proposition: God is
r^jected, in the rejection of his Ministers. -- This is a stubborn Text Sir,
and will not mould as you would have it.

Had not they against the will of God, sought a KING, and rejected a Common
wealth, you tell us, that they might have l^v'd HAPPILY under the reign of God
only their King. (Indeed you have the best intelligence) -- -- I beseech you
how do you know this? whom God loves, he chastens: and persecution, in this
world; is the Portion of the Saints. It Is true; their obedience to God here,
would certainly have rend^ed them Happy hereafter; but this is not the
Happiness you drive at. Look back now upon the 3. verse of the same Chapter;
and there you will find some Reason to apprehend the contrary. For Samuel being
Old, and having made his sons Judges over Israel; the Text says, that his
sons walked not in his ways, but turned aside after Lucre, and took Rewards,
and perverted Judgment, etc. now, if from hence, you can persuade your self
into a good opinion of a Popular Government, I cannot blame your stickling for
the Rump; But that this mis-rule should please God, your modesty I hope will
not pretend to offer. You Will say however, that the Popular form did; I Will not
contend about it; Did not the Regal too, as much in David; a King of God's
particular choice, and a man after his Own Heart? So that you gain little by
the odds of a Free State in balance against Monarchy. In one word: The Savior
of the World was a KING, and a King of Jews.

Grant, or Deny at pleasure, I have you in a Net. Why would you meddle with a
Chapter, that you were sure would burn your fingers? There Is no Relief you see,
against Authority. It Is well you stopped short of that Lex Regni which Samuel
opens to the People; (beginning at the 11. verse of the same Chapter;) from
whence, lies no Appeal. Truly, your insincerity in this Section, is more
exposed, than I could wish it.

Under the Reign of God only their King you say. This expression, doubtfully
implies you a Millenary. Do you then, really expect to see Christ, Reigning
upon Earth, even with those very eyes you Lost (as it is reported) with staring
too long, and too saw^ily upon the Portraiture of his Vicegerent, to break the
Image, as your Impudence Phrases it? (It is generally indeed believed, you
never wept them out for this Loss.)

In my Passage from hence, to your Frog-morall: I cannot but remember you that
there was a Plague of Frogs as well as a Fable. Frogs that crept into the Kings
Chambers, and into the Houses of his Servants, etc. -- Now to your Fable.

Nor are you happier in the relating or the moralizing your Fable. The frogs
(being once a free Nation ^aith the Fable) petitioned Jupiter for a King: he
(...) amongst them a log. They foun^ it insensible: they petioned then for a
King that should be active: he sent them a Crane (a Sto^k says the fable)
which straight fell to pe^king them up. This you apply to the reproof of them
who desire change: whereas indeed the true moral shows rather the folly of
those, who being free seek a King; which for the most part either as a log lies
heavy on his Subjects, without doing ought worthy of h^s dignity and the
charge to maintain him, or at a Sto^k is ever pe^king them up and devon^ing
them.

Mr. Milton, (to agree with you as far as possible) if One Log be so
Intolerable, for the Burden; or One Stork, for the Cruelty, and Greediness:
what do you think of 40. Storks, and every Stork a Log in his belly?

What do you think of a Grand, Arbitrary, and Perpetual Counsel; and no more
Parliaments? (according to your Gracious Proposition, [Page 8.] of your Free
and easy way, etc.) And, in regard that in a free Commonwealth, (...) who are
greatest, are Perpetual Servants, and Drudges to the public, at their own
cost and Charges, neglect their own Affairs; yet are not Elevated above their
Brethren, L^ve soberly in their Families, walk the Streets as other men; may be
spoken too freely, familiarly, friend^y, without Adoration, [Page 4.] What do
you think of the Rump Parliaments Perpetuating it self, under the name of That
grand Counsel? [Page 10.] the Government being in so many Faithful, and
Experienced hands, next under God, so Able; especially Filling up their number,
as they intend, and abundantly sufficient so happily to govern us: [P. 11,
etc.] Alas, these Gentlemen are very Pigeons, not a Stork among them; do not
deceive your self Sir; you're one of those they have Fed: of the same Plume,
and Kind; ask but the honest party of the Nation, and they shall tell you, that
Tom. Scot, and his Associate Patriots, can Peck, as well as Bill.

Now we have Played, let us to our Book again, and be a little Earnest.

You charge the Doctor, in your 8. Page, for saying,

That by our Fundamental Laws, the King is the highest power, Page 40. If we
must hear mooting and Law-lectures from the Pulpit, what shame is it for a Dr.
of Divinity, not first to consider, that no law can be fundamental, but that
which is grounded on the light of nature or right reason, commonly called moral
Law: which no form of Government was ever counted; but arbitrarie, and at all
times in the choice of every free people, or their representers. This choice of
Government is so essential to their freedom, that longer then they have it,
they are not free. In this ^and not only the late King and his posterity, but
Kingship it self has been abrogated by a law; which involves with as good
reason the posterity of a King forseited to the people, as that Law heretofore
of Treason against the King, attainted the Children with the Father.

MEthinks you might have spared your Criticism upon the word Fundamental, being
a Term, that Usage has authorized; were nothing more in it: and soberly, I do
not find but it may stand a nicer Test, than perhaps you will impose upon it.

No Law (you say) can be Fundamental but that which is grounded in the ^ight of
Nature, or right reason, -- which no FORM of Government was ever counted, etc.
-- So that though GOVERNMENT it self directs to Fundamentals: yet the
Specification of it, into such or such a FORM, does not. You are Queint, Sir:
show me Government without a Form, further than in Notion; and only Notional
must be the Laws too that support it. Obedience to Superiors, is a Moral
Fundamental: and wh^re, to One, or More, vested with unconditionate Dominion,
(I mean, as to the Power of Revocation) we ^n e Contract a Duty; as the Person,
and Authority are Inseverable, so is the Obligation Indispensable, which by a
Fundamental Law is become du^; as well to the King himself, as unto Kingship.
I shall be tedious if I unty all your knots.

The Choice you say is Arbitrary; so it is in Marriage, that is, till we have
passed away our Freedom. (but you are for Divorce, I see, as well of
Governors, as Wives) Your next now is a shrewd one, (is it your own I pr^y^e?)
This choice of Government (you tell us) is so essential to the Peoples
Freedoms, that longer then they have it, they are not free. In truth, you're in
the Right. Is any People Free, where there is any Government? This is somewhat
worse, than the Doctors FUNDAMENTAL. FREEDOM and GOVERNMENT (in Politiques)
Contra-Distinguish one another. (have a care of this argument; for if the
People are Free to Choose, they will never Choose any of your Friends again)

But if the King, his Posterity; nay, and Kingship it self, have been abrogated
by a Law; That Is another matter.

By what Law I beseech you? By the Law of a little Faction, that dares not put
their heads upon a Trial by the Established Law of the Land? (your next shift
is wretched)

If that no Law must be held good, but what passes in FULL Parliament, then
surely, in exactness of Legality no Member must be missing, etc. --

I Answer you, that it is not the Actual sitting of All, but the Liberty of All
to Sit: not the Fulness of the House, but the Freedom of the Members. It is
one thing; a Law that is made in the Absence of many of the Members, that might
have been Present, if they would; (and are possibly fined for non-attendance)
and another thing; the Vote of a tenth Part of That Body, which it self entire,
is but the third Part of the Legislative Power: This Remnant too by force of
Arms violently ^cluding the Rest.

But you have no Conscience with you. Kingship Abolished will not do your work
it seems.

You suppose it never was established by any certain Law in this Land, nor
possibly could be: for how could our forefathers bind us (...) certain form of
Government, more then we can bind our (...) (...) (...) a people be put to war
with their King for his misgovern^, and (...)come him, the power is then
undoubtedly in their own (...) (...) (...) will be governed. The war was
granted just by the King (...) the beginning of his last Treaty; and still
maintain^ to be (...) (...) (...) Parliament, as appears by the qualifications
prescribed to the M^bers of this next ensuing, That none shall be elected, who
have (...) (...) against the Parliament since 1641 I^ the war were just, the
Conquest w^ also just by the Law of Nations And he who wa^ the chief enemy, in
all right ceased to be the King, especially after (...), by the deciding verdit
of war; and royal^ie with all her Laws and pretentions, yet remains in the
victors power, together with the choice of our future Government.

IF Kingship was never established, what was I beseech you? had we no
Government?

Nor could it be, you say: Alas then for your ready, and easy way to ESTABLISH
a FREE COMMONWEALTH, what will become then of YOUR STANDING COUNCIL? If no
certain form of Government can bind our posterity (as you affirm) Then is it
free at any time for the People to Assemble, and Tumult, under the color of a
new Choice

Your next for altering the Form of Government upon a Quarrel only in point
of maladministration: I think that cleers it self.

You say that the War was granted just by the King himself, etc. and (a while
after) if the War were just, so was the Conquest also, by the Laws of Nations;
-- and that the victors, are free to choose, a Future Government.

What would you give that I Would dispute the Original of the Quarrel with you?
Come, we'll not differ about the Kings Concessions: Take it for granted, that
the War was just: That is, The War was Just to such intents, and with such
limits, as were the evident, and declared scope, and Bounds of it. The Reasons,
and the Tendency thereof, methinks they should know best that L^vied, and were
Parties in it, and for That, take but one passage of above a Hundred, to the
same purpose.

We are (say they) so far from altering the Fundamental Constitution, and
Government of this Kingdom, by King, Lords, and Commons (that we have only
desired, that with the consent of the King such Powers may be sett^ed in the
Two Houses, etc. -- -- This Declaration bears date Ap. 17. 1646. and is
entitled -- -- A Declaration of their true intentions, concerning the Ancient
Government of the Nation, etc.

Now if the Prospect of the War was bounded; in Reason, and in Honor, the
Conquest ought to be so likewise. Especially, where only, extreme necessity
was pleaded to make it appear warrantable; and where the dispute was Lawful
Liberty, and Safety; not Dominion.

Again; 'twas not against the King, the war was raised, therefore the
Conquest cannot in Reason Reach him. His Honor, Safety and Support, the two
Houses Vowed and Covenanted to maintain.

Further; those Things that you call Victors, may, by the same Pretense, claim
to a Conquest over the Lords, and their Fellow Members, whom they Forcibly cast
out; as well as over the King, and his Pretensions.

Lastly; if Victory gives Title, your Masters are gone too.

You fall now into a vein of weighing Governments: (your old Trade; and the
very Coffee-Boyes have got the knack on it al most as well as you.) As you order
the Scales, the Commonwealth goes Down most usually, but now your great
Civility gives Us the Better on it. FREE-COMMON-WEALTHS (as you will have it)
have been ever counted fittest, for CIVIL, VIRTUOUS, and Industrious Nations,
etc. believe me then, That Form's not Fit for you, and your Adherents.

MONARCHY, Fittest (as you hold it forth) to curb DEGENERATE, CORRUPT, IDLE,
PROUD, LUXURIOUS People; This, does your business then.

Upon necessity yet at last, I find, a Single Person you will (...) to entertain;
provided, such a one as has best aided the People, and best merited against
Tyranny. (That Is your Caution) this must be one of those that turned the Rump
out: for never was a more meritorious Service to the Nation.

Your next Page is a very Angry one. You Will have the Parliament Kide the King,
you say, as well as Bridle him; and you will persuade the People that there is Law
for it too. The Question's trivial; to cut it short: Rumps are no Parliaments.
But if they be so Sacred, as you argue them; how bold are you, that durst
propose the final Abrogation, and extinction of them! (As in your Ready way
you have, in Terminis, so often done.)

In the next place; I^ as you idly seem to imagine, all our Kings are created
by Parliament, or Conquest. What becomes of that Maxim, Rex non moritur? and
why do you swear Allegiance to Him and his Heirs positively, if there be any
uncertainty of his being admitted to the Crown? [In short, his Birth entitles
him to the Sovereignty.] I do not delight my self in these contests, but I am
willing to lay open your little Tricks to the People.

You urge next his Coronation Oath, but Deceitfully, you make him by his Oath,
accomptable to Act, (in Effect, according to the Judgment of the People, but
he swears to Govern according to his own (neither does this suppose him at
Liberty to Rule according to his Will.)

Once more; You say, That the Kings principal Oath was to maintein those Laws
which the People SHOULD choose. (Consuetudines quas Vulgus Elegerit) Reconcile
Consuetudines (referring necessarily to what is Past) to Elegerit, in the
Future Tense, and I have done.

FINIS.
HEnce-forward, there was little left to do, but to take Names, and Prisoners:
for the Party Fell without a Blow. Lambert was taken (Apr. 22.) near Daventry,
by Col. Ingoldsby; His Party Scattered, and Gathered up as they were Found.
Apr. 24. the City-Forces Mustered in Hide-Park, at which time, Lambert was
brought up a Prisoner; and the Day following, the Lords and Commons assembled.

I Have now Finished, what I dare scarce reflect upon. Yet it is no more, than
what the City of London, and several Countyes have done in the same Case. That
there are Rogues, there is no Question, but yet I should be loath to pass for
One, if I can help it. Having discharged my Duty, first, to my Prince, and
Country, I hope I may be now admitted to do my Self Right; with what Event, I
do not much concern my self. To deal Liberally; I look upon him that opposes a
Multitude; as One mad man against Many. Nor do I know, which is the Greater
Folly; to Submit the Judgment of Truth and Reason, to the great Patron of
Passion, and Opinion, the Common People; or to Dispute it with them. Methinks
the Case of Calumny does in some sort agree with the Tradition we have of a man
that encounters the Devil, in a House that is Haunted: he Labors at it,
Thrusts, and Fences; but in the End, he comes off, Bruised, and Foiled; Tired,
and Baffled, with a Shadow. Rumor is but a Phantome; every Fool can Raise it,
but the whole world can hardly Lay't again. The best on it is, though it may
Fright, and Startle sober Persons; it can Harm only those that struggle with it.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 48 Line 27 For Design, Read Diligence 54 27 For to Choose, r. to Sit 62 24
dele Have, 86 25 For Parliament, r. Parliaments 91 ult. For him as, r. for him
in a^ 95 13 For Cardinal, r. Carnal 96 20 For Cheat, r. Cheated 103 8 For to
the work, r. to work 106 8 For were, r. where 107 27 For to Prey, r. a Prey 108
24 For Disclaim, r. Declaim 128 18 For without, r. Beyond 129 8 For the
Declaration, r. a Declaration 8 11 For This Loss, r. his Loss 9 10 For these
very Gentlemen are Pigeons, r. These Gentlemen are very Pigeons.

A Catalogue of some Books Printed for Henry Brom at the Gun in Ivy-Lane.
The Aliance of Divine Offices, exhibiting all the Liturgies of the Church of
England since the Reformation: by Hamon L'estrange Esquire

The Souls Conflict, being 8. Sermons, preached at Oxford, and so much
recommended by the late Dr. Hewyt.

Dr. Browns Sepulchral Urns, and Garden of Cyrus.

Two Essays of Love and Marriage.

The Queens Exchange, by Mr. R. Brom.

Five New Plays, by Mr. R. Brom, never before printed.

Adam out of Eden, by Mr. Speed.

Poems on several Persons and occasions, by No body must know whom.

Crumbs of Comfort.

Most of Mr. Prynnes books.

Shepherds Duty of Constables.

St. Bonaventures Soliloquies.

Healths Improvement, in 4o.

Mr. Baxters treatise of Conversion, in 4o.

That long-expected piece, The Survey of the Law; containing directions how to
pros^ute, or defend Actions brought at Common Law: by William Glisson Esquire

A Second Ternary of Sermons, by the Learned Dr. Stewart.

The Elements of Water-drawing, in 4o.

Mr. Sprat's Plague of Athens, in 4o.

Jews in America, by Mr. Thorowgood.

The Royal Buckler, in 8o.

Treason Arraigned, in Answer to that Dangerous Libel, Plain English, Condemned
by the Council, against our King and Nation.


