The Observator's Observation How Narrowly He escaped Hanging. A piece of
London-News from Oxford, People swallow Shams, Bones and all. Several
Objections answered, and the Slanders cleared. Christian Religion does not
pretend to destroy Christian Charity. The danger of Dividing.
TRIMMER. Hark ye Nobs. Thou have one old Proverb yet to Friend. Threatened
folks live long. Thou art to be turned out of the house, thy soul is to roar in
Hell; And the Wizzards say, thou have a cloud in thy face that will certainly
bring thee to the Gallows. These are tragical things, Nobs. The Fiddlers and the
Balad-singers are but a Fleabiting to the rest. Now for my part, I never
despised any man for his quality; a Fiddler or a Balad-singer may have more
virtue in him for ought I know, then many a purring, mewing --


OBSERVATOR. Let me kiss thy hand, Trimmer, before thou go any further, for
that same seasonable Vindication: But for your Calculators, and your Wizzards*
I defy them all: For, betwixt thee and me, Trimmer, my Fortune's told me that
I Am to dye in labor.


Trim. But fooling a part, were not you within aumesace of the Gallows once?


Obs. Yes that I was twice, and I came off the first time by mere providence.
The second I even consulted a fair pair of heels, and humane Industry.


Trim. How do you mean by mere providence?


Obs. Why faith I Will tell thee for once, if thou't but promise me to keep
Council: For yonder is a Conjurer not far from the Bantamer, that is under a Vow
to truss me up upon the Act of Reconciliation; and the Bantamer himself is to
prove, in verbo Sacerdotis, the very House that I say Mass in, every hour of
the day. But to my deliverance now, Father Whitebread, and Mr. Mico; (that Mico
was instructed by Otes, in the elegancy of the Dative Case.) These two
Gentlemen I say ( under the Rose,) were great Lovers of Music; and it was my
hap to be diverse times in there company upon that occasion: And in good Faith,
Trimmer, I smelt nothing in the World of a Plo^ about 'em; though my nose, let
me tell ye, will take Treason in the wind as far it may be as another bodies.
Now I look upon this to have been the narrowest escape of my life: for if
either Otes, Prance, Bobron, Mowbray, Stephens, Curtis, or Fletcher had but had
the least inkling of it, I had gone to pot as sure as a Gun. My second was a
kind of a Law escape, with a fugam fecit* when the good Gentlemen
abovementioned, swore only false fire at me: That is to say, They swore Short,
with a design to have the defect supplied afterward by fresh Evidence:
Pickering's miscarriage was a curse, it seems, upon the whole project; He
forgot to charge with Bullets, and so did my Customers too: But upon this
Alarm; however, I took counsel with my Pillow, and crossed the Water: And so
the Business was postpon'd till the hanging of honest men should come next in
season*


Trim. Come, come; I shall spoil your sport. What news from Oxford, do you hear?
If the Story be true that I was told 'tother day, take my Word for it, it goes
to a sorrowful Tune. Don't you hear of a Convocation called there* And an Act
passed to prohibit all the Students, upon pain of Expulsion, from Reading of
your Observators?


Obs. There was a very honest Gentleman about a week ago, that told me the
tidings as they were told him, it seems by another very honest Gentleman, that
had it from one who was newly come from Oxford. And then comes another Spark
upon Thursday last into a Coffee-house in Fullers-rents, that said the
Observator had now done his own business* For the paper was suppressed by
Authority; And a Blade at hand to second him too; That it was publicly burnt
at Oxford by the Order of the Vice Chancellor. Pray will you ask your Brother
Trimmer now, if in all his Evangelical searches for hidden Treasure, he ever
heard yet from any of his Subterranean Familiars, of Ranker, Lying, and
Slandering, even in hell it self, then what you find practiced daily, and
Baresac'd too, by the Lucifers themselves of our pretended godly party. No
truth, no mercy, no conscience, any more then serves them for Impostures,
Tyranny, and Impiety, to the highest degree: And yet with the help of a little
oil of sweet Almonds, to glib the passage, I will undertake thou shall swallow
this Sham, bones and all, as the thirteenth Article of thy Creed.


Trim. Nay I cannot undertake for the truth on it: But People, I must tell ye,
are under a great dissatisfaction, and there is one objection particularly,
which I forgot to tell ye, This last Saturday, that lies heavier upon ye than
all the rest. This Paper of yours (as you pretended in the time of the late
King) was written and published by his Majesty's Commission. So that you draw a
scandal upon the Government, by suppressing Books against Popery, because
people are apt to think you have an Authority for so doing. This, to be plain
with ye, has the most of weight in it of any thing I have met with.


Obs. This is their Masterpiece, and I Will give ye a clear and a distinct
answer to it. In the first place, I did say indeed, that I had a Commission to
inquire into the business of Otes; and that I did nothing in that matter, but
pursuant to my duty, in the discharge of that Commission: But I do positively
deny the having had any particular Commission for the publishing of this paper.
So that the foundation of the calumny is gone already. Secondly, I never
suppressed, or pretended to suppress any Book, or Discourse against Popery
whatsoever, upon that consideration: But I am not, upon any terms in the World,
for a Book with No Popery in the Title, and No Monarchy in the Matter: Or for
making Religion the Bawd to a Sedition; at the rate of your True Protestant
Petitions, and Addresses; that, instead of [ Humbly Shewing] the Subjects
Grievances to their Sovereign, most audaciously expose the Honor of the Prince
to the People, and only tack the Preface of a Supplication to the Body of a
Libel. Now if I neither had such a Commission, nor ever said, I had such a
Commission, as these Dreamers of Dreams imagine: If I never suppressed; no, nor
so much as complained of any Discourse against Popery, for the Popery=sake; Or
with a respect to any opinion of the Church of Rome; the whole Frame of this
calumny falls to the Ground; and I defy the whole Herd of my bellowing
Adversaries to produce but any thing like a reason for the noise they make. I
do not find that any of the Primitive Christians either propagated or
maintained their Faith by the Dint of Rogues and Rascals. That Is the Salamanca
Idiome, and according to the modern way of planting the Gospel; upon the
foundation of the Damnable Hellish Popish Plot. Prithee is our Religion; that
is to say, our Religion established by law) ever the better, or that of the
Church of Rome ever the worse, for treating the controversy in ribaldry and
foul language? Is it not possible for a man to go to Heaven without being
unmannerly?


Trim. How comes it to be so unmannerly, I prithee, to say a Spade's a Spade?
or to call any sort of Villain by his right Name? besides that, it is a point of
general prudence, in all cases whatsoever, for people to make a common enemy as
black as they can: For if you bring 'em to have a kindness for their persons
once, 't^s a fair step to the carrying 'em over to their opinions: For my own
part, Nobs, I could be well enough content if every Papist had eyes as big as
saucers, and that his shape and figure were as uncouth as his Religion. I am
not for complementing King-Killers, after the Observators way of a company of
fine Moral Gentlemen. The Westminster Parliament was much in the right sure,
when they pitched upon the trimming up of the Protestant commoners of England,
in the dread and hatred of Papists; as the only effectual security against
Popery.


Obs. Oh wretched man! that by the same reason, would divide Nations against
Nations; and set the whole race of Adam (upon the same Principle) a cutting of
Throats! As if men were to be no longer Reasonable, charitable, Sociable, Just,
no longer, Effectually, to be flesh and blood. when they come once to be
Religious: And no agreement left, in Nature but uniting of the gallimawfry of
no religions, into one religion, for the confounding of all the rest. Thou have
two Eyes in thy Head, Trimmer, as well as two Ears; and yet thou can neither
See, nor hear, but on one side. Why this looks like suspecting thy cause, if
thou dare not Venture thy self with an open Enemy in a plain Field. Why
should not we Take as well as be Taken; and rather hope to Make converts, then
fear to be Perverted? This is a principle, that makes Reasonable creatures more
Miserable then Wild Beasts, and superadds the Damnation of their Souls, to the
Destruction of their carcases. Prithee what is This, but a Diabolical spite, in
the very Teeth of the Text? Love one another, says the Gospel; Hate one another
says the Schism: and when there are as many Minds, as Men, set all people
together by the Ears, that cannot be of the same Opinion. Set the Multitude a
gog, to worry the Papists, and then, on the other side, give the Papists a
c^urse at the Protestants: and while ^hese two Parties, are carrying one
another, the People of a Hundred Religions, run away with the Stake. Prithee
let me speak ha^f a dozen words to thee now. There is a mighty Bussle with
Popish, King-killing, Principles; Pray let us have a care of King-killing
Principles among our selves; and not countenance a true Protestant Regicide,
while we condemn a Popish one. What a Noise have we had with one little
Vagabond Invisible Jesuit's Flourishing a Visible Sword over his Head, upon the
Murder of Charles the First; without so much as any Notice taken, of a
Fanatical High-court^ of Justice, and twenty thousand Dissenters in Arms, to
authorize, to Abbett, and Execute the Villainy!


Trim. It Is an Extraordinary deal of Cost that you are at to Dress-up your
beloved Friends, the Papists.


Obs. That same Rude* Kancorous position of Creating, and Maintaining Feuds
among the Kings Subjects must be suppressed; Or the First unlucky Season will
throw all into a Flame, and those pretended Protestants, are neither true Sons
of the Episcopal Church of England, nor Loyal Subjects to the Crown, that after
the Exemplary Allegiance, of the Roman Catholics, in conjunction with the
Protestants of the Church of England, under the two last Kings, will not join
as Heartily with the Roman Catholics under this. In one word: It is the common
Interest of the People of both these Persuasions, to Unite, and to keep close.
One to another, in all the Offices of Service to the Government, and of a fair
understanding among Themselves. Distrust is the highest Folly, and Ingratitude,
Both in one; And only a Quack-pollicy, that is fitter for the Stage, then the
Stake. Fair Reasoning, is not only. Allowable but Needful: But He that throws
Stones at a Papist, may Chance Hit a Better Man then himself.


Trim. One word more yet before we part. Did not you charge Mr. Aylmer yonder,
in Cornhill, to Print any more Books against Popery?


Obs. Neither that, nor any thing like it. And if you will not take My word in
the Case, here is an Affidavit for it

The Enformation of Richard Pocock, etc.

This Enformant says upon Oath, that about Three weeks since, Mr. Roger
L'Estrange sent to speak with Mr Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons in
Cornhill, Bookseller, about a Book that he had published; And that, upon Mr.
Aylmer's coming to him, Mr. L'Estrange told him of a Dangerous passage in the
said Book, for the putting of Fears and Jelousies into the Peoples Heads, as if
they were not in safe Hands; Charging him to have a care how he meddled in such
Matters. The Treatise in Question being upon a point of Dispute betwixt the two
churches: If you please Sr (says Mr. Aylmer,) I Will never meddle with any thing
of controversy again. To which Mr. L'Estrange Replied do not mistake your self,
I have nothing to say to the controversy in Religion, but to what concerns the
Civil Government; And to distinguish betwixt the passage I tell you of, the
subject of the Book: Mr. L'Estrange bidding him over and over to take notice of
what he said; and that his Exception was not to the Subject of the Discourse

This Enformant D^clares, that the Matters above were delivered in words to
that Effect.


Rich^ Pocock
Jurat 25 die Aprilis. 1685 coram me,

Edw Guise.



DUBLIN.

Reprinted by Andrew Crook and Samuel Holsham; And are to be Sold by William
Weston Bookseller in Christ-Church-Lane.


