LESTRANGE'S NARRATIVE OF THE PLOT.

Set Forth for the EDIFICATION Of His Majesty's LIEGE-PEOPLE.

LONDON, Printed by I. B. for Hen. Brom at the Gun at the West End of S.
Paul's, 1680.

L'ESTRANGE'S NARRATIVE, etc.
IN This Age of Narratives, We should do with our Books, methinks, as Vittlers
do with their Ord'naries; every Author hang up a Table at's Door, and say,
Here you may have a very good Narrative, for Threepence, a Groat, or Sixpence,
or H^gher if you pl^ase ^or we have 'em of all Sorts and Sizes: The only Danger
is, the Popping of Catt and Dogs Flesh upon us, for Cony, and Venison. For take
'em one with another, at the Common rate of Narratives, there is hardly One of
Five that will pass Must^r. But what is a NARRATIVE? you will say.

A Narrative is a Relation of something that may be seen, felt, heard, or
understood: Or otherwise; It is a Relation of something that Cannot be either
seen, felt, heard, or understood: For we have Our Narratives of things Visible
and Invisible; Possible and Impossible; True and False: Our Narratives of Fact,
an^ our Narratives of Imagination. In One word: There was never any thing Said,
Done, or Thought of, Since the Creation; nor so much as the Fansy of any thing,
though it was never Said, Done, or Thought of, but it will Bear a Narrative. So
that the only point will be, out of This Infinite Diversity of Narratives,
Which is the Narrative here in q^^stion.

NOW the Narrative here in question, is the Narrative of The PLOT; but then
there will arise Another Question; Of WHAT Plot? For there are as many sorts of
Plots as there are of Narratives. There are Pl^ts of Passion, and Plots of
Interest; Plots Genera^l and Particu^ar; Public and Private; Foreign and
Domest^que; Ecclesiastical and Civil: There are Plots to U^dermine
Governments, and Plots to Support them; Plots Simple, and Counter Plots; Plots
to make Plots; and Plots to Spoil Plots; Plots to give Credit to Sham-Plots;
and Plots again to Baffle, and Discountenance Real Ones: Plots Jesuiticall,
and Phanatique; Plots Great and Small; High and Low; In short, There is not any
thing under the Sun, that may serve us either for Pleasure, or Convenience, but
we have a Plot upon it: And the Master-Plot of all, is the Plot how to get the
Money out of One Pocket into Another; as is well Observed by one of the
Ancients. For what is it that sets all Trades and Professions a work, Nay and
all wickedness too; As Murder, Calumny, Oppression, Perjury, Subornation,
Corruption, etc. But a Plot upon Money?

NOW to come to my point. This Discourse is not a Wild and Rambling Narrative
of some Indefinite Plot, that no body knows what to make of, or where to find
it: But it is a Narrative (by way of Excellence) of THE Plot: that is to say,
the Capital and Hellish Plot which is now in Agitation, for the Destruction of
Our Prince, Religion and Government, to the Horror and Amazement of all the
Reformed Catholics in Christendom. I call them Reformed Catholics, rather
then Protestants, because I take the Catholic to be the Antienter Family of
the Two: The Denomination being used in the Primitive Church; and not only to
denote a Generality, or Universality of Profession: but also to Distinguish
Orthodox, and Obedient Christians, from Schismatiques, and Heretics. It Is
cast in my Dish I know, as a Reproach, that I will not own my self to be a
Protestant. Now so far as Protestant is a Catholic, or as the Church of
England is That which They call Protestant, it is all one to me, whether I pass
for a Reformed Catholic, a Church of England-man, or a Protestant. But when
Heresy, and Schism comes to shelter it self under the Cover of Protestantism,
(which is but too common a Case) I have no Ambition to be accounted any of
those Protestants. So that my Crime is only that I am a
Church-of-England-Protestant. But to return to my Theme.

LET the Reader take notice, that as these Papers are only a Narrative of that
Plot which is notoriously known, and distinguished from all other Plots, by the
Emphasis of THE Plot: So it is L'Estrange's Narrative of That Plot; from whom
no more Light can reasonably be expected then what arises out of matters within
the Compass of His Observation. He does not pretend, either directly, or
indirectly, to have been Entrusted by any of the Priests, or Jesuits; Or to
have been present at any of their Bloody and Desperate Consults; or Privy to
any of their Letters, Messages, or Commissions: So that We can say nothing at
all to the Particulars that have been given in by the Kings Witnesses: Or if we
Could, the doing of it would signify no more then the holding of a Candle to
the Sun: For whoever carefully peruses Their Writings and Depositions, compares
their Testimonies; and yet doubts of the Plot, is litt^^ better, certainly,
then Sealed up under the spirit of Blindness, and Delusion. Let no body
therefore expect from These Sheets, any Repetition of what the Kings Evidenc^s
have Delivered, and Deposed with so much Solemnity already; but rather repair
to the Memorialls that they have committed to the Public, which are many, and
Copious, for a Full, and Final Satisfaction. And in the mean time I shall
apply my self to the making out of the Plot here in Question, my own way,
(which, in strictness of speaking is not so properly a Plot, as an Intrigue.)

THE Difference betwixt a Plot, and an Intrigue, I take to be This; a Plot may
be Solitary, as when a man contrives or casts about with himself how to get a
Dinner, (for the purpose) an Office, a Pension, etc. He brings his Ends about
by his Own Wits, as by Cogging, Wheedling, Hectoring, Swearing, Lying, or the
like, as best makes for his purpose; but an Intrigue is alwa^s Social, and
menag'd by Intelligence and Confederacy; So that it seems to be a kind of a
Plot with Accomplices, and yet it is not absolutely That neither. For the
Critiques will have a Plot to import only a General Resolution, or Agreement
upon some Common End; and an Intrigue to signify a Certain Artifice, or
Mystery in the manner of bringing it about. Of Intrigues, some are direct
Conspiracies; as where a Design is Governed by the Contrivance, Advice, and
Consent; and Emproved to the Common Advantage and Behoof of all the Parties
therein concerned. Of This Kind, were the late Intrigues of the Fanatiques
against the Government; where, as they all contributed to the Ruin of the
Pub^ique, so did they all, in some measure, Partake of the Quarry. There are
Other Intrigues which are not so much a ^^rmal Confederacy as a Blind
Cooperation of sev^ral Part es, toward the gaining of such or such an End, by
wo^king upon the Passions and Weaknesses of one another, without ever
Concerting the matter betwixt them* and This is the Quality of the Plot whereof
I am now about to Treat.

WE have been told abundantly of the Popish Plot, The Booksellers Ware houses
are Crammed, and there Stalls charged with the Memorials of it; All our Courts
of Justice, and Journals of State bear witness to it. It has set all Tongus and
Pens agoing; and all Christendom Rings of it; So that since nothing can be
added to what is already delivered upon This Single Subject, my business will
be only to take up the Story where the great Evidences of the Truth of it have
been pleased to let it fall.

AFTER a Nice and Particu^ar Deduction of the mayn Plot, they do unanimously
Close upon This Assertion; that it was a Jesuiticall Influence that Ruined the
Late King, and Irritated the Faction: and that it is a Popish Ferment still at
This day, that puts all the Sch^sms into motion. And for P^oof thereof, Doct^r
Oats refers us to the Instance of the Four Jesuits, and the Dominican that
mingled with the Fifth M^narchy men, for the Burnin^ of London; (Deposition
3^.) And to the Care that ^as taken for Tampering Scotland into a Rebellion as
ap^^ars in everal Other Parts of his Depositions. The Dr. having made it out
upon Oath that the Papists make use of the Fanatiques to compass their Own Ends
upon the Government; So soon as he has done This, he gives over the point. It
must be My part now, to Tack my own Observations to the Doctors; and, by
showing, on the Otherhand, what Advantages the Sch^smatiques make likewise of
the Papists, for the Compassi^g of Their Ends, to lay open the Effects of so
dangerous a Complication. This Addition we must take for granted would have
been supplied by the Dr. himself, both as a ^oyall Subject to his Prince, and
as a True Son of the Established Church, if matters of gr^ater Moment had not
taken him off at Midway: So that in Truth, This is rather a Continuation of
the Drs. Narrative, then a Composition of my own. We are not to imagine that
These Interests are Tied up by any Instrument of Compact, or Covenant; to Join
in a League Offensive against the Government; but our mischief arises from a
Resemblance of their Principles and not from any Correspondence of
Understanding betwixt them. And yet while they seem to be blowing up and
Countermining one another, they do really destroy Us; and it is the Church in
the Middle that Suffers by the Distemper of the Two Extremes.

NOW though I cannot allow it upon any T^rms that they help one another by
Consent; nothing can be plainer yet then that while they play, each of them
their Own Game, the One still leads into the Others hand. If Popery Influences
Sch^sm, That Schism Slides as naturally into Popery, as Motion from One place
of Rest tends to another. There Is the Principle espoused already, and the Rest
is only the Changing of the Name; The very Unfixing of a man is half the work
done already; for he is so far advanced upon his way toward a new Settlement.
It is a thing worthy of Note, the different manner of dealing with the Church
of Rome, betwixt the Episcopal Clergy, and the Non Conformist; The ^ormer
proceed by Dint of Argument, the Otoer only by Opprobrious Clamor, and
Reviling; and ^or one fair Blow at the Pope, they make a hundred Rude ones at
the Bishops; and (which is yet a fouler Scandal) the most Eminent, and
Venerable Champions that ever put Pen to Paper in the Defense of the Reformed
Communion, have been the Persons which they have still singled out for the
Subject of their Exemplary Cruelty, and Rigor. which shows that their
(Pretended) Quarrel is to the Name rather then to the Opinion. I call it a
Pretended one: For if they Quarrel in Earnest with the Name of Popery, they
fall foul upon the Best Friend they have in the World: For it is That single
Pretext that Supports their Cause. It is observable also on the Other side;
that notwithstanding all their Fierce and Virulent Exclamations against Priests
and Jesuits, the Church of Rome does not vouchsafe them so much as one syllable
in Return; and the Reason is This; The Conventicles are doing the Papists
business to their hands; and the Enlarging of the Schism is the readyest way
imaginable for the bringing in of Popery: So that it is but Commuting a Real
Service for a little Dirty Language.

BUT is it True then, that the Popish Emissaryes are so busy, and bear so great
a sway among Our Dissenters? Yes (says Dr. Oats in his Dedicatory to the King)
They were the First Authors and Contrivers of the Late Unnatural War; and of
his Late Majestyes Unspeakable Sufferings and Barbarous Usage. It was These
(says the Dr.) that brought him to his end, etc. And again, They were in most,
if not all the Counsels that Contrived his Ruin. Two Jesuits (Simmons and
Compton) were to pay the Thousand Pound promised to the Discoverer of the King
after the Battle of Worcester, and Milton was a Known Frequenter of a Popish
Club; Lambert a Papist of above Thirty years standing. What promises (says the
Dr. again) did they make to Cromwell after his Majestyes Escape, to persuade
the French King for Our Sovereigns Banishment out of France?

AND is not This now as clear an Evidence as a body would wish, to prove the
Industry, the Power, and the Malice of That Restless Party; and to show how
they were In at all Destructive Plots and Counsels? Was it not a strange zeal
too, that when Cromwell was Master of the Three Kingdoms, and had so great an
Interest at Stake; the King might have Escaped yet for want of a Price upon his
Head, if Father Simmons and Compton had not engaged for the Thousand pound
Reward that was promised to Him that would deliver him up? Nay they were fain
to Quicken Cromwell himself, to get the King Banished out of France. Which shows
First, that the Papists trusted more to their Power with Cromwell, though a
Schismatique, then to their Power with the French King, though a Roman
Catholic. And Secondly, That they thought the French King would do more for a
Schism, then for the Holy Church it self: Which Implies a High Degree of
Mutual Confidence betwixt Their Priests and Our Dissenters.

IT is a Common Objection in This Case, that the Dr. is too young to speak many
of these things upon Knowledge; and that it would have been well, if he had
produced some Historical Authority in Confirmation of the Reports, that
Lambert was a Papist, and Milton a Frequenter of a Popish Club: And so in other
like Cases. This is a doubt easily Resolved, for the thing it self being a
Privacy in its own Nature, It was only Proper for the Registries of the
Society, and not of a quality to be Inserted into Our Public Annals. The Dr.
tells us Further, Page 29.) that Father Moor and Brown were sent into Scotland,
with Instructions to carry themselves like Non conformist Ministers, and to
Preach to the Disaffected Scots, etc. He tells us likewise ( Page 67.) of
Seditious Preachers, and Catechists, set up, sent out, maintained, and directed
what to Preach in their Own, or Other Private Conventic^es, and Field meetings,
etc. Now This, I am told, is no Proof of the thing Done; but only of a
Proposition and Design for the doing of it. But yet we find in the Drs.
Reflections upon the Late Times, that the thing was there really done; and Page
8. that Blundel did actually teach Treason in several places of London.

NOW if it be True, (As who dares question what the D^. Averrs?) that the
Papists managed the Separatists in the late War; and that all Our Miseries
proceeded from the Influence of Their Counsels; and that they are at This day,
as Active, and as Powerful as ever: It follows, that the D^nger is as great
No^, as ever it was; and that there is no security for ^his Nation, so long as
the Agents for P^pery have This Retreat. We should never have known that the
Papists had had so great a hand in Our late Broils; and in the Counsel, and
Execution of the Murder of the Late King* if Dr. Oats had not Discovered it.
For the Late King himself knew nothing of it and all the Memorialls we have of
those Times, even from the most Popular Writers, are wholly Silent in it, in
such sort as we find it, Here to be represented. There was a Seditious Clamo^r,
I remember, against an Army of Papists, (as they called them.) that were on the
Kings side; but not One word of a P^p^st that was to be found among the
Schismatiq^es, in their Conventicles* Nor should I readily believe the Story at
large, as it is now Reported, if any man but Dr. Oats had said it. I have run
through the List of the Re^ici^es I have had Opportunities of knowing the
Princip^l men of the Party and tracing all their Committees; and I cannot say
that I found any one man upon That Roll, wh^m I so much as suspected for a
Papist. So long as the work went Smoothly on* they called themselves (I
remember) a Covenanting, a Fasting and a Praying People: But so soon as ever
the Wind Turned, the Godly Party was presently Transformed; and those that I
took before for Dissenting Protestants, are now made appear to have been, the
greater Part of them, Priests, and Jesuits. It seems to be somewhat Unequally
Divided, that the Schismatiques should have the Benefit, and the Papists
Support all the Scandal of the Rebellion; Would it not be better to let them
fairly share the Profit and the Loss, betwixt them? And That Is the Drs. sense
too; for he does not deny but that the Separatists Acted Their Parts also: though
only as men Imposed upon, and Outwitted, and under the Guidance, and Direction
of the Papists.

I shall now Appeal to any man: that has either Seen, or diligently read the
Transactions of Those Times, whether or no he could ever have imagined that
such a world of Priests, and Papists had worm'd themselves into the Counsels
and Congregations of That Faction, as the Dr. now Assures us there did. And
what was the business, but This? The Papists carried the matter so Close, and
looked so like Schismatiques, that it was morally Impossible to discern the One
from the Other, Now upon the Admission of the same Mixture, and Danger, at
present, and the same difficulty likewise of distinguishing a Disguised Papist
from an Outlying Protestant; we are lost unless we absolutely Clear those
Kennells, since there is no Pu^ging of them. And the means of doing it, is
Fair, Honest, and Obvious; and I would sa^, (if I durst open my Mouth so wide)
of ABSOLUTE NECESSITY too. Let but the Laws be vigorously put in Execution, and
the great Work is done. We shall not need to declaim upon the Probable
Inconveniences that will arise from a longer Sufferance of This License: But we
shall in good time show the Approaches they have already made, toward the
Government; and that the Non-Conformists make as good use of the Papists, One
way, as the Papists do of the Non-Conformists, Another.

THE Increase of the Schism is the True measure of the Churches Detriment; for
the One Looses just as much as the Other Gets. But the greatest mischief of all
is the Dissolution of Order; For it is not only the Double Loss and
Disadvantage of so many Friends, degenerated into so many Enemies; but the
Loosening of the Band makes all fly to pieces; And turns That Community into a
Multitude, which, ere while, was a Government. And This Dissolution does highly
gratify our Adversaryes, on Both hands; for Once out of Discipline, we are as
bad as out of Protection: and in the Condition of a routed Army, when Twenty
men in Good Order Value a Thousand Fugitives; For O^r Strength, as well as Our
Reputation leaves us with our Union; and the Bulwark of the Reformation is left
naked, and without either Honor, or Defense. If This should come to be the
Case, what can we expect, but either to be at the Mercy of a Forreigner, or for
want of a Common Enemy to become a Prey to one another? It is as natural, This,
(though we know it upon Experiment too) as it is for one Grain of Sand to fall
from Another, for want of a Mortar, or Ciment to bind them together: Or as it
is for point blank Contradictions to Cross one Another. And when the day of
Controversy comes, what will all the Fractions of Dissenting Protestants
signify, more, then so many Loos^ Atoms that will need a more miraculous
Concourse of Accidents then ever the Philosopher dreamt of* to Jumble them into
a Body. I will not deny but that they may so far Unite as to make head against
a Common Danger; but they must live then like Salamanders, allways in the fire;
as being by their very Principles in a perpetual State of War; Impatient of one
another, and consequently Encapable of any Political Establishment. He that
thinks otherwise needs only look behind him to be convinced; where he will
find, that thorough all the late Turns and Changes of State, the Prevailing
Party did still set up for it self, to the Exclusion of all Others:
Endeavoring to Erect a New Government, by Order, and Restraint, out of the
Ruins of the Old one, which they had destroyed by Liberty, and Confusion. How
wretched now is the Condition of those people who by dividing themselves, (upon
mere Capricio's) from Regular Societys, do in effect, cut themselves off from
their Claim to the Ordinary Comforts of Providence, and Nature; turning Peace
it self into a Curse, which to all men in their Right Wits is undoubtedly the
greatest of Blessings.

AFTER a long, and I hope not (altogether) an Impertinent Preface, I shall now
draw near to my Text. The Kings Witnesses have given Evidence of a Popish
Conspiracy; and not only of a Conspiracy carried on among Themselves, but of a
Practice also upon the Schismatiques, by casting of Scruples into their Heads;
by Instilling dangerous Positions: by Preaching, in fine, and Catechizing among
them in Disguises; to Embroil the Government. Now let the World bear me Witness
that I have nothing at all to do with the Original Plot; or the Priests
Artifices of Moulding, and Cajolling the Dissenters any further then in a
resignation to Truth and Authority: My purpose being only to set forth the
Emprovements that have been made, under the Cover of One Plot, toward the
Advancing of Another. I shall Date This my Narrative from the Transmigration of
the Conspiracy; and so carry it on through all the steps of its Progression; as
the Manner of Representing matters, the Probable Intent, and Effect of That way
of Proceeding; The Translating of a Popular Odium, from the Papists, to the
Government, and so mounting by degrees from a Zeal against Popery, to a
Sedition against the State.

IT is no Lessening of This Execrable Plot, to say that Subjects ought
dutyfully to acquiesce in the Resolutions of their Superiors: And that all
Clamorous Appeals from the Magistrate to the Multitude are only so far
pardonable, as the Abundance of Good will may help to excuse the want of
Moderation and Discretion. So that a great part of those Fierce and Unmannerly
Transports that have been employed upon This Unhappy Occasion, and without any
regard, either to Quality or Sex, or, in truth, to the very Foundations of
Christian Charity, might have been much better let alone; since they serve only
to inflame the Vulgar, without any sort of avail to the Cause in question. It
is no better, then either a Translating of the Judicature from the King and his
Courts of Justice to the Rabble; or else a Complaint to the People brought in
with a side-winde, against the Government; which are two dangerous Points;
striking at his Majesty's Sovereignty the One way, and at his Reputation the
Other: And yet all This is Tolerable, if it goes off so; and without blowing up
a Passion into a Design. But we shall better understand the Drift of it by the
Sequel. If it rests Here, it is only a laudable Zeal Ill menag'd: For it is
not the Cutting Strictures of a sharp Tongue or a Virulent Pen, but the Sober
and Impassionate Sentence of Law; that by Prisons, Axes, and Gibbets,
determines These Controversies. In one word, let them vent their Indignation
against the Principles and Practices of the Church of Rome, in what Terms they
please, and make Popery as Odious as they can, provided that they do not
encourage Tumults; and that they contain their Passions within the Bounds of
Truth and Justice. If they once pass those Limits, Knowingly, and by Consent,
it is no longer Zeal, but Confederacy.

This Caution of keeping so strictly to the Rules of Truth, and Justice, has a
respect, First, to the manner of representing both Persons, and Things; and
Secondly, to the matter of Fact. Now if to the Intemperance of Words there be
added a Malicious Aggravation of Circumstances, with Fiction, and Imposture
over and above; it is to be feared that all is not right at the bottom. I shall
be here encountered with a Reproof, for being so Tender, forsooth, of the
Reputation of the Papists; and yet any man that is not Intoxicated with Popular
Fumes, or led Hood-winkt into a False Conception of things, must necessarily
see, that my great Concernment is for the Honor and Dignity of Christians; It
being our Duty, to proceed according to the measures of Good Faith, and
Justice, even with the worst of Infidels. But people you will say may be mistaken,
and give Credit to False Reports, without either Malice or Design. This is
Confessed, and none of those Errors shall be put to account. If you ask me, To
what End? Or, What Is the Benefit of Imposing these Flams upon the Nation? It is
easily Answered, First, that the Plying of the Multitude perpetually with
Allarms, and Terrors, does in a manner turn their very Brains, take away their
Judgments; and render them fit Instruments for the boldest, and most
Unwarrantable Undertakings. So soon as they are once touched in the Crown with
These Conceits: it is but Sadling their Noses with a pair of State-Spectacles,
and you may persuade them upon New Market Heath that they are Tumbling down
Dover Cliff. Secondly, the very Persons that so artificially make the People
Sick, are to reap the Profit of the Cure; which is such another kind of Remedy
as if a man should beat out his Brains for fear of the Headache. Briefly, they
do first make the people M^d, and then by the Consent of the Madmen they
themselves ar^ m^de Governors of the Bedlam. But without any m^^e Des^anting
upon the Good or the Evil the Grounds or Cons^quences of Matters; we shall now
deliver some few Instances to our present purpose.

AT the time when Mr. Powell the Merchant was so long missing, what a Rabble of
Formal Relations went about then, of his being T^epann'd a Shipboard, in what
Company; what Money in his Pocket* what Forebodings of his Fate: and all
terminating in a peremptory Conclusion that he ^as Murdered by the Papists;
and not so few as five and Twenty or Thirty Pamphlets Trumpetting these Tidings
all over the Kingdom. And yet not one Syllable of Truth in it at last.

What a Noise was there about Sir Harry Titchbourn's House: Even to the very
Catalogue of the Arms that were There taken: as 166. Muskets, 54. Case of
Pistols, 37. Saddles, 47. Daggers, 2. Barrells of Bullets, 3. Bundles of Match;
Letters sent express to Certify the Truth of the Story; and Copies of them
dispersed presently at St. Albans, and elsewhere, without any Color in the
World for the Report. And so for the Hearse full of Arms that was Intercepted at
Banbury, the Hampers of Fire balls that were found in the Savoy, and
Somerset House; which were only certain Rockets, Serpents, and other
Artificial Fireworks which Mr. Choqueux had publicly prepared for the
Entertainment os a Solemn Festival: And yet all these Shams were blown up and
down the Kingdom, by News-letters and Printed Libells, with as much Confidence
as if they had been Articles of Faith; and no doubt of it, but many Thousands
of his Majesty's good Subjects believe them to This day, for want of being
better informed. What a Bustle there was about Mr. Langhorns being Buried in
the Temple, and what Remarks upon the Government for showing That Countenance
to Papists? And upon the persons also that Assisted at That Funeral; when all
This while, there was no more in the Case then only the Body of a Gentleman
that died in Holburn, and was There Interred, upon the night to the day of Mr.
Langhorns Execution.

THE History of Bedingfields being privately Conveyed out of the Gate house,
and a Dead Body left in his place, past so Current, that Sir William Waller
himself (though he perhaps could smell a Jesuit as far as another body) took a
long Journey into the North upon it, to catch the wrong Bedingfield. The
Circumstances of that Adventure would be too Comicall for This place. We could
tell you the Conduct of the whole Stratagem, and what names here at London went
into the Black Book for not believing it. A man would really bless himself to
see the Romances, the Glosses, and the Scurrilous Buffoneries that were
published by the Ribald Scriblers here about the Town, upon This Subject.

BUT then, the landing of Forty Thousand French upon the I Will of Purbeck, shook
the very Foundations of the Earth: The Factions drew presently into Cabals,
upon the Tidings of it, with Horrible and Contumelious Reflections upon Those
in Authority, as Parties to the Conspiracy. At Coventry they brake up the
Market upon the News on it; and the Common people Immediately divided into
Knots, and Consultations; some of them coming very Fayrly to This Resolution,
that there was no way but cutting the Papists Throats, to hinder them from
Joining. But This Advice was soon Contradicted, and so the Mischief went no
farther: Who knows what This Invention might have produced, if the Credit of it
had continued but four and twenty Hours longer?

THE most Formidable Story of All, is the Conspiracy of the Prentices: and
there was such Work made with Capt. Tom, as if the Grand Seignior had been
pouring down Highgate Hill with a hundred and fifty thousand men at's heels.
There were so many Thousands of them upon the List by Tale and most of them
Papists too; An account of what Contributions to the Charge, (alas!) of a
Three-penny or Groat-Clubb; whose Throats were to be Cut; and through what
Constables Teritoryes they were to take their March; and This Scandal upon the
Body of this Loyal, and Honorable City, exposed in Ballads and Libells by
every rascally Pamphletier. And what was all This mighty matter at last, but a
parcel of good Jolly Ladds that had been busy at the burning of the Pope, and
prevailed upon to set their hands to the Petition that was then afoot? These
Blades, finding that the Petition had given Offense, propounded the doing
something on the Other Side too, that might show they were neither Fanatiques,
nor Papists; and so they gave public Notice in Thompsons Intelligence of
their Intentions upon the Anniversary of his Majestys Restoration to burn the
Rump. The First time perhaps that ever a Conspiracy against the Government was
notified in a News-Book. I shall now show you in an Instance or two, how bold
they make with the Kings Witnesses, as well as with the rest of his Majestys
Subjects; and what Slurs they put upon the World (the Citizens of London
Especially) under the Countenance of the Plot, and Authority of the Kings
Evidence.

THERE IS a Pamphlet entitled, A Narrative of unheard of Popish Cruelties toward
Protestants beyond Seas: Or a New Account of the Bloody Spanish Inquisition,
Published as a Caveat to Prot^stants, by Mr. Dugdale. Printed for, etc.

THIS New Account (as I am credibly Informed) is only an Old thing Reprinted;
The Subject Suited to the Humor of the present Season, and Mr. Dugdale upon
the Title Page exhibited as the Author of it, and Ric. Dugdale Subscribed to
the Dedication. This was the Second Slur that past the Press under That name.
The First Impression went off Clear with Mr. Richard Dugdale in the Title page,
as the Composition of Mr. Dugdale the Witness; but the Booksellers finding the
business to be Smoakt, the Witnesses name being taken notice of to be
Stephen, and not Richard, he very prudently left out the Christen name in the
Second Impression, and made it only Mr. Dugdale, and so it went for the
Witnesses again. His work being only to find out a Witnesses Namesake, by great
good Fortune he pitched upon an Alehouse-keeper in Southwark of That Name, to
carry off his Project; and the man (as I am told) is a very Honest man. Now
here are Three Abuses fobb'd upon us at once, First, an Old Book for a New one;
Secondly, one that knows nothing of the matter in question, under the Semblance
of one of the Kings Witnesses. And Thirdly the Counterfeit of a False Author.
But the most remarkable piece of all is yet to come.

IT was my Hap, some three or four Months since, to cast my Eye upon a Book,
Entitled, A Narrative and Impartial Discovery of the Horrid Popish Plot:
carried on for the Burning and Destroying of the Cities of London and
Westminster, with their Suburbs, etc. And Dedicated to the Surviving Citizens
of London ruined by Fire, etc. I came to This Pamphlet with Expectation of some
Notable Discovery; especially finding a Promise in the Title page of
Depositions, and Informations NEVER BEFORE PRINTED: But when upon the Perusal,
I found the Narrative part of it to be taken, Verbatim almost, out of two or
three old Seditious Libells against the Government, that were printed by
Stealth, some ten or a dozen years ago, (before Mr. Bedloes time of Action)
and scattered up and down in most of the Public Houses upon the great Roads
of England* by half a score sometimes in a place, according to the Ordinary
Method^ of the Faction in such Cases; I made a strict Enquiry into the matter,
and this was the business.

There was a Consult of three or four Booksellers over a bottle of Wine, what
Subject a man might venture upon at That time, for a Selling Copy: One of the
Company was of Opinion that a Book of the Fires would make a Smart Touch; and
so they all agreed upon it; and propounded to get some of the Kings Witnesses
hands to it; Naming first one, and then another, they came at length to a
Resolution; and pitched upon Trap ad Crucem, and The History of the Fires; as
two books that would afford matter enough, if they could but get them put into
a Method, and have a Certain persons hand to the Owning of them. Hereupon they
applied themselves to One to draw up the Story; and so it went to the Press
under his hand, all but what was Printed Copy; and he made Several Alterations
too in the Epistle, out of his own head, after it was composed at the Press.
So that here are a Couple of Old Libells turned into a New Narrative, and the
Kings Magistrates, and Officers defamed afresh, and the menage of This Scandal
committed to the hand of a Common Calumniator. As to what Concerns Mr. Bedloes
Evidence I have nothing to Say; nor to the Papists burning the City; nor to any
one point in the Pamphlet which Mr. Bedloe can pretend to Speak to upon
Knowledge; but This I shall Say; that there are Several Groundless and
dangerous Passages in it; and that the most Inslaming and Seditious of them are
only Libels of Ancient Date, Reprinted; That it was a Contrivance Set afoot by
Booksellers for Profit, drawn up according to their Order and Direction, and an
Abuse in the very Original Intendment: The Citizens and the Kings Witnesses
being only propounded as a Property toward the gaining of it some Reputation.

IT is Sufficiently known, with what Greediness These, and a Thousand other
Impostures, and Aggravations have been Swallowed by the Common people; and made
use of as Instances to Illustrate and Confirm the Plot. But What? you will Say,
There Is a Mourneval of Booksellers upon a Trial of Skill in their Own Trade:
One Knave Invents a Story, and a Thousand Fools Believe it. How does all This
amount to the Proof of a Faction? Why truly; though it looks very Suspiciously,
considering Who they are that Advance and encourage, and the Interest that is
promoted by these Mistakes: Considering also with what Violence, and Industry
they are carried on, and that the Cry too run all one way: I shall yet content
my self with a Probable Surmise that there may be a Factious-Intent; as if I
should See a man riding Post from Barnet toward London, I would lay ten to One
that This man is going for London; and yet it is not Impossible neither but he
may take up by the way: if I find afterward that he went thorough, I should
think it a hundred to one that his purpose was for London, when he First Set
out: This is the very Case. These Practices are the High way to Sedition, and
it is Ten to One that they will come up to it at last: which if they do it is a
Hundred to One that they Designed it, from the Beginning.

IT is a very Ill Sign too, the Fierceness of the Abettors of these
Shameless, and Ridiculous Forgerys ag ainst any man that has not Faith enough
to believe that the Moon is made of Green Cheese: And This they call a
Ridiculing of the Plot; and making Sport with Sentences of Parliament, and
Judicial Proceedings. I would fain see where either the King, the Parliament,
or any Court of Justice has verified any Single point that I have reflected
upon: And I defy the Devil himself, in any of his Servants, to Say wherein I
have not paid all due Respects, as well to the Persons of the Kings Witnesses,
as to their Evidence. What Diminution is it to Dr. Oats his Narrative, to say
that the Contrivances of the Mercenary Booksellers, and Scriblers herein
mentioned are Shams. What Contradi ction or Abatement in it to the Truth, or
Credit of the Popish Plot, to show that there is a Schismatical Plot afoot too;
and that One moves under the Countenance of Another: Now to Pretend a Plot,
where there is None, is next door to the Denial of it where it Is. Shall any
man Argue that the Disparagement of a Juggle, weakens a Truth? Sr. Edmondbury
Godfrey was never the Less Murdered, because Mr. Powel escaped. Shall any man
Infer That there were no black Bills Provided, because there were no Arms found
in Sr Henry Titchburns house? Or because the Prentices were but in Jest, that
therefore the Bloody Pilgrims were not in Earnest: The Justification of Mr.
Choqueux's Fireworks has no effect at all upon the Teuxbury mustard-Balls. What
is my Affirming that Langhorn was not Buried in the Temple, to the Business of
Valladolid, or Salamanea? The Hearse of Arms was a Flam. And what Then? must the
Evidence therefore of the Pistol and the Dagger be one too? And I would fain
know what Relation Bedingfields escape out of the Gatehouse, (after he was
Dead) has to the Consult at the White horse Tavern in the Strand.

As to the Popish Plot that is Sworn by the Kings Witnesses, I lay my Faith at
their Feet, without any further Enquiry, or Dispute. But where I find Rank and
Palpable Falsehoods and Contrivances Imposed upon the World for Certain Truths,
and nothing but Passion and Confidence to Support them; I reckon my Self bound
in Duty (so far as in me lies) to lay open the Abuse. For this way of Bruiting
up a Plot where there is none, is a Design of a most dangerous Consequence, and
a Snare to all Honest men. It is a kind of Experiment upon the Humor of the
Multitude, to try what they will Bear, and whether they be yet mad enough or
not, to swallow Impostures without examining. If they find the People in Tune
for their Purpose, and Charmed into such an aw, that at the very name of a Plot
they shall Dare like Larks under the dread, even of a Painted Hobby; There Is
the Foundation of a Civil War, and an Arbitrary Power laid already. They
shall make what Plots, and what Plotters they please; and every man that stands
in their way, shall be a Papist or a Traitor, according as they think fit to
represent him to the Rabble. If this be the fruit of being given over to
believe Lies, we have great reason sure to take all possible Care that we be
not deluded, and to distinguish betwixt the voice of Authority, and That of
Rumor. The Common way of Reply upon This Topique is to break out into
Exclamations, and to hit a man in the Teeth with the Sham of the Meale-Tub, and
Twenty Such Fooleries; as if there were no more in the business then a
Malicious Imagination; and only a more colorable Invention to discredit a Real
Plot, under pretense of a Counterfeit, and casting a Mist before the Peoples
Eyes, that they should not know one from the other. My Answer is Short; that we
have the matter of Fact in proof Here before us: That the True Plot and the
Counterfeit are in such manner Separated, that the One is not at all in
dispute, and the other is Condemned. And we shall now show you what use is made
by a Faction under the Disguise of prosecuting Papists, to Defame, and to
Destroy several of his Majestys Loyal Subjects and Church of England
Protestants. For let a man's Actions, his Conversation, his Religion be what
they will, it is but besmearing him with the Scandal of being Popishly-Affected,
and his Work is done. There is a kind of Spell in the Word Popery. It
transforms a Man into a Beast: And like the Great Medicine, it turns ^hatever
it touches into Plot. If a man will not believe it to be Christmasse at
Midsumer, he is in the Plot; If he loves his Church, his Prince, and his
Country, and stands for a Burgess or a Common Councell-man, it is but Saying
that he is Popishly affected, and he becomes presently as an Heathen or a
Publican. If he refuses to Associate, or Petition, he shall be Marked; and well
too if he escape So; For we have gotten a Trick, when men will not do as we
would have them, of laying them up for Treason; (no matter for Evidence) and
when we have put them out of Reach of a Habeas Corpus, it is but showing them a
Payr payr of Heels our Selves, and leaving Them to Struggle with the Law. As
for Example.

ON the 6th of April last, about 7. in the Morning, Major Ovington and Mr.
Thomas King were taken out of their Beds and Charged with High Treason; their
Boxes and Papers Rifled, and Themselves Examined apart; but nothing of Ill
appeared against them. The Magistrate began with the Major; and when he had
tried both by fair means and foul, to get him to sign such Papers and
Informations as he himself had ready drawn; finding that he would not be
wrought upon, he left the Major, and went to Mr. King, telling him how sorry he
was to see him drawn into such a horrid Business: How that his Majesty had the
matter before him, and that there were 6. or 7. Witnesses that appeared
against him. Mr. King, in great Admiration, asked what this mighty business
might be: but he went back to the Major, without giving any Reply: and after a
little while returned to Mr. King. Major Ovington (Says he) has dealt
Generously with me, and he shall fare the better for it; for I do not desire the
Destruction of any man: But still professing more kindness to Mr. King, for
his Fathers Sake, and looking upon Him as a Person only drawn in. So he pressed
Mr. King to a Confession, and told him, if he would but Subscribe Such a Paper
as he would draw up, and knew to be True, he would not Commit him, and it
should be the better for him. Mr. King asked him what he would be at, and told
him that if the Major had charged him with any Ill thing toward the King, or
the Government, he was an Unworthy man. Whereupon he went his way, and
Committed the Major to the Gate House.

The Magistrate having left Mr. King at his own House, came back to him
immediately, and told him, it is well Mr. King (says he) that you are fallen into
my hands; for if I please, there is but a step betwixt You and Death; I am loath
to Commit you, because I know it will be your Ruin; every thing being made out
so clear against you; Mr. King still urging to know what all This meant, the
Magistrate went to the further end of the room, and fell to writing; Mr. King,
being desirous to see what he wrote; He held the Paper in his hand and asked
him if he did not know of a Design to Seize the Tower, and rescue the Lords;
and several other lewd Things. To which Mr. King replied, that it was all
Villainy. The Magistrate gave Mr. King a Bottle of Syder, and Treated him with
an Appearance of much kindness. After a while, he took Mr. King in his Arms;
telling him he saw he was resolved upon his Own Ruin. Mr. King desired that he
might apply himself to the Secretaries of State to be Examined by Them; which
the Magistrate took Ill, pretending that his Majesty had left the business to
Him. He was trying a long time to prevail upon Mr. King to swear against Major
Ovington; but not succeeding, he threatened to lay him in Irons; and so
Committed him to the Gate House, with Order to the Keeper, that the Gentlemen
should not come together, nor receive any Message, without having taken any
Examination upon Oath, before his Commitment; neither after it, was there one
word of Treason Sworn against him. He was Committed betwixt Twelve and One upon
the 6th, and the Deposition against him was taken the day after he was
Committed, at the Rhenishwine house in Channel Row, Threatening also to lay the
Witness, in Irons, if he would not Depose what he the Magistrate had drawn up.
The Copy of the Mittimus follows.

WHEREAS Oath has been made before Me, that the Person I herewith send in
Custody to you (Mr. Thomas King) has Treasonably contrived a Rebellion, and
falsely Designed the accusing several of His Majesty's Loyal Peers and Subjects
of the said Treason. These are therefore to Will and require you in his
Majesty's Name to receive and Keep the Body of the said Thomas King in safe
Custody. until he shall be Discharged by due Course of Law. Given under my
Hand and Seal the 6 th Day of April. 1680. THESE Gentlemen being brought into
the Court by their Habeas Corpus the next Term, the prosecution was looked upon
to be Illegal, and Ridiculous, to the highest Degree; there appearing no color
from the Information, or Examination, either for the matter Charged upon them,
or so much as the bare Commitment; Only it was observed, that beside the
Injustice of a Commitment without Evidence, the Crime was laid Treason, on
purpose that they might not be bailed in the Vacation.

THIS I hope will not be denied to have been a Sham-Plot; and promoted by a
Faction too: For it was the work of Twenty Libells to defend the Proceeding:
The Persons accused are Gentlemen of approved Loyalty, Fair and Honorable
Conversation, and men zealously affected to the Church of England. There was an
attempt made by the same Magistrate at the same time upon another Gentleman in
the same House, (a Cavalier of unquestionable Loyalty and Honor) and upon a
like pretense too; But That Trepan was let fall again.

HERE IS the Fruit of taking up Plots upon Trust; and running Headlong from the
Fear, nay, from the very Name of Popery, into the Thing it self. Let any man
show me a more Imperious Tyranny, if he can, or a more Implicit Faith; then
for men to be worse then Spirited away thus, contrary to the Law, and without
Remedy; and and run down for Criminals by a Popular Consent, without
understanding one Syllable of the matter in question. These Practices and
Excesses are the Subject of my Narrative; and so far from misrepresenting the
Popish Plot, that there is not any sort of Correspondence, in This Case,
betwixt the One, and the Other. And I defy any man to show, wherever I let
fall so much as One word of the Popish Plot, but with a modest and due Respect
to the Government. Neither, in effect, am I become the Mark of every Paultry
Libeller, for reflecting upon the Reality of the One Plot; but for the exposing
the Juggle of the Other. And it is Time certainly for every man to look about
him, when our Lives, Liberties, and Fortunes lie all at mercy; and every Honest
man exposed to the Animosities of Faction, and Revenge: For we are not judged
by what we are in Our Selves, in Our Conversations, and Opinions; but by what
we are said to be. What becomes of Magna Charta, at This rate, and the
Privileges of an English man's Birth right? If men shall be hurried into Jayls
without Evidence, because they will not Subscribe either Confessions, or
Accusations, touching matters which they know nothing of, and Witnesses
Tampered afterward by Menaces, for Proofs ex post Facto, to color such Illegal
Commitments? We have had but too much of This already; and no body knows whose
Turn it may be next: Since what was the Case of these Gentlemen, may be any
man's.

DOES it not behove us, now, to distinguish betwixt Reason, and Clamor;
betwixt Truth, and Calumny, betwixt the Acts of Authority, and the License of
Tumults; betwixt the Just and Temperate Deliberations and Resolutions of
Government, and the violent Heats and Partialityes of the Common People? How
come the Multitude to be Judges of Plots, and Popery, more than of Other Crimes
and Misdemeanors? For That Is the Tribunal of the Faction, where every man is
to be made a Traitor, or a Papist, as They think meet. And it is not enough
neither to be fairly acquitted upon a Trial before a Court of Justice; for the
Bench and the Jury are presently arraigned upon it by an Appeal to the Rabble.

It is a great point gained, where a Faction has gotten so much the Command of
the People, as to make them believe every thing that They Say, and approve of
every thing that they do. There is a Plot no doubt on it; but That Plot does not
yet create Another Plot, where there is no Plot at all. The Popish Plot has
Bounds, and Limits; the Kings Witnesses tell us what it is, and where it lies;
and we have had nothing New of That Plot, now a good while. But this Imaginary
Plot, is a Plot upon a Perpetual Plot, and to keep the Nation So long in Awe of
the Popish Plot, till the Faction may execute Another Plot of their Own. And
what is that Other Plot of their Own, but, First* to break in upon the
Ministers and Friends of the Government; and Secondly, to undermine the very
Foundations of it. This is no more Said, then what their Practices make good*
and the Series of the Design hangs as Naturally, one piece to Another, as if
they were but so many Links of the Same Chain.

As to what Concerns the Capital Plot, in the proceedings upon the
Conspirators, and the Subsequent Severityes upon the Papists; all This is an
Act of the Government. But the Superfaetation of Other Plots, which neither the
State, nor the Witnesses take any notice of: Plots that have no Affinity or
Connection with the Principal; nor, in Truth, any Existency in Nature, other
then in the Forge of a Phanatical, and Republican Brain. These Plots are not so
Sacred, I hope, but a body may ask, Whence they Come, and Whither they Go,
without any Offense, either to Authority or Good manners. Nay, what if a man
should examine them, by what Commission it is, that they change their Style,
and render Papists, in the Original, into Popishly Affected, in the
Translation? How it comes, of a Down right Popish-Plot, to be a
Popishly-Affected-Plot? This stretch puts the Church-of-England Men into a
worse Estate then the very Papists. For there are certain Known and Political
Conditions, whereupon a Papist may come off, by satisfying the Law; But
Popishly-Affected is such a Drag Net, it sweeps All. In Other Cases, there must
be Probata, as well as Allegata; but Here, the simple Allegation does a man's
business; for how is it possible for any man to prove a Negative, and a
Thought, which he must do, to discharge himself of being Popishly-affected?

The Common People take Popishly Affected I know, for one of the Devlishest
things that can be said of a man; especially as it is dressed up with Plots,
Massacres, Conflagrations, etc. to make it the more Terrible. And therefore
whenever the Faction has a mind to expose any man to the Outrages of the
Rabble, they are pleased to give him the Honor of This Character; which
presently raises the Country upon him, as if he were a Woolf, or a Common
Enemy. Now This Brand of Popishly Affected is not Set upon a man for any
Correspondency of Dangerous or Erroneous Principles that he has with the Church
of Rome; but they make use of it as a Discriminating Mark betwixt themselves
and Other men. He that will not believe all the Fooleries They tell him, nor
join in all the Iniquityes that they propound to him: He that will not
Contribute, Swear, Petition, Vote, Associate, as They would have him, That man
comes Immediately to be Popishly Affected. He that ^peaks Reverently of the
Dignity, or the Persons of Bishops; the Orthodox Clergy, the Ministers of State
and Justice; the Service Book, the Rites and Appointments of the Church in
opposition to the Assemblyes-Directory, with the Practices of their Slovenly
and Licentions Conventioles; That man's Popishly Affected. To Preach up
Obedience to Civil Magistrates; To cry down Schism; To choose a Good Friday
rather, or an Ash Wednesday, for a Fast, then a Whitson-Tuesday; to lay more
stresse upon the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, then the Solemn League and
Covenant; To Advance the King above the Two Houses; To deny the Sovereignty of
the People; and to maintain that God is the God of Order, and not of Confusion,
All This is to be Popishly-Affected.

But let us now Consider how This Calumny comes to be taken up; What Is the
Drift, and (if This work goes on) what will Probably be the Issue of it.

It may be observed, that so long as we were upon the Scent of Priests and
Jesuits; the Plot in motion; and that every day presented Fresh Game of
Papists, and Conspiracyes: So long, I Say the Faction joined with the
Government in a Common Care, for the Peace and Safety of the Public: Only
with This Difference; that whereas the Magistrate proceeded to the Necessary
Punishment of Offenders, according to the Gentle, and Impartial Methods of Law
and Justice: and with Humanity and Compassion for their Persons and Errors,
the Faction, on the Other hand, precipitated all things with Violence, and
Clamor. Not contenting themselves with the bare Oblation of so much Blood, for
the Satisfaction of Public Justice, unless they turned the Tragedy into a
Farce too, and made Sport with the Calamityes of the Miserable. And what was
All This Vehemence and Pudder, but to Elevate the Opinion of their Zeal (in
proportion to the Noise they made) above all others, and Tacitly to reproach
the Government for their Candor, and Moderation.

Nor did they keep themselves within the Bounds of Inferences, and Tacit
Implications, long neither; But so Soon as ever any man came off, whether
through the Insufficiency of Proofs, or the Incompetency of Witnesses, they
flew open-mouthed in the face of the Bench and Jury: and in so bold a manner
too, as if the Tribunal were only to Hear the Cause, the Jury to stand with
their fingers in their mouths, and the Pit to Decide it? What is become of the
Manhood, and Generosity of the English Nation; That we are fallen into This
Insatiate Thirst of Blood? Where Is our Respect to our Superiors; while we thus
Arraign Authority? Where to our Selves, in the Seditious Usurpation of a Right
that does not belong to us; and in Contradiction to the Duties of Allegiance,
and Common Prudence? Where to our Fellow Subjects; in our Needless, and
Unmannerly Importunities, for more Rigor then the very Letter of the Law will
bear? Is This doing as we would be done by? Or is it doing either as we Have
been done by? But I shall now come to the Transition of the One Plot into the
Other, and the turning of Papists into Popishly-affected; wherein I must
distinguish betwixt the Words and Intent of Authority, and the Unwarrantable
Application and Construction of the Faction.

In all Changes of State the Pillars must first be removed, before the Frame of
the Government can be dissolved. And therefore it is discreetly done, for a
Faction to begin with Persons, ere they broch their Opinions; For it would be a
great Oversight to pick a quarrel with the Administration, and at the same
time to be laying of New Foundations. It is also another point of Skill, the
Running of People down (as I find it in a Coffee house Author) without the
Assistance of the Penal Statutes, or the Formality of trying men by their
Peers. And nothing does That Exploit more effectually, then the Device of
Popishly Affected. It is a snare, that all the Precaution in the world cannot
avoid; and a most Insensible slip from Religion, to Sedition; as we find in the
Progress of our present Distempers. For the business of Popery is now in a
great measure laid aside; and the Dissenters and Republicans at work as hard as
they can drive; the One to undermine the Church, and the Other the Monarchy;
and jointly engaged in a Common Endeavor and Design for the Ruin of Both. So
that the same Plot, in Effect, is carried on still, but in Other Names, and by
Other hands. The Original Quarrel was to the Papists: This is to the
Popishly-affected. The Church of Rome was struck at in the One, and the Church
of England is struck at in the Other: And what the Jesuits began, the
Schismatiques are now to Finish. Let no man question the Truth of This, unless
he will First put out his Eyes for his Credit; or bring a Certificate from the
College that he is Non-Compos, and does not know Chalk from Cheese. Provided
allways, that These People prove not at last to be Dr. Oates's Jesuits in the
shape of Schismatiques; as I have heard of some Schismatics too in the shape
of ^esuits. I shall be told that This is only a Blind to cover the Popish Plot;
whereas in Truth that Pretext is only a Blind, to cover the Other; and all
their shifts are but so much Lime thrown in the People Eyes, to Blear, and
Confound them that they may not distinguish Prelacy and Popery, Papists, and
Church-Protestants, the One from the Other.

AND another Trick they have got; which is, to run canting with their Appeals
to the King and Parliament; as if the very Suggestion of This Plot were a
Contradiction to the Evidence of the Other; and consequently to the Authority,
Justice, and Resolution of his Majesty and the Three Estates. Are not our
Impost^rs come now to a prodigious degree of Boldness, when they shall dare to
Father such Shams as These upon the Supreme Authority of the Nation. But what is
all This, to the old Story of Fathering Murder, Sacrilege, and Rebellion upon
God Himself. It Is very True, that the King and Parliament have agreed upon it,
and declared themselves fully fatisfy'd that there is a Damnable Popish Plot,
but not one word of a Popishly-Affected Plot; neither do I find that our
Refiners, and Improvers of Mischief have any Commission for the extending of
the Popish Plot so far; and themselves at last to be the Judges of That Popish
Affection: Much less for the turning of That Reproach upon the Church of
England, which was intended only against the Opinions, and Practices of the
Church of Rome. It will be said that they do not blast the Church of England,
but here and there a Rotten member of it, that carrys on the Popish Interest
under That masque? It Is very right, that, take them in the good Humor, and
they will yet allow Two Bishops of the Twenty six to be Protestants; And Four
Protestant Divines in the City of London; So that here is no Formal Attaque made
as yet upon the Body of the Church; Only Dr. Owen, Mr. Baxter, and two or three
more of them ly Pelting at the Outworks, while the Lay-Brothers are employed,
some in Mining; others in Drawing here and there a Principal Stone, or Timber
out of the Building; and every man, in his place, and station (according to the
Covenant) contributing toward a Total Ruin: Only the work is now carried on by
Other hands; or at least under Other Appearances. The Plot in Substance seems
to be much the Same, saving only the Exchange of Popery for Schism. We shall
now briefly Touch upon the Methods by which these Ends are to be brought about.

BY This Invention of Popishly Affected they can Pick their Men, and cast out
all that are not for their Turn; the Word being only made use of for a
Distinction betwixt the Adherents to the Church, and the Protestant Disenters.
Pray'e see (says the Author of Englands Great Interest) that you choose Sincere
Protestants, Men that do not play the Protestants in Design; and are indeed,
Disguised Papists; ready to pull off their Masque when time serves. [When the
barefaced Papist cannot do it, (says the Instrument of Association, Page 4.)
the Protestant in Masquerade shall; the Stratagem of This very day: And above
all to be watched against.] And in an Account from Guild Hall, they are called
Protestants in Masquerade, in good time to be taken notice of, and receive the
Reward due to their Merits. [To be marked (says Another) as the worst of
Papists, and so dealt with in City and Country.] Now for Variety-Sake they call
them Courtiers; Pensioners, and the like; and the Clergy are Treated (as upon
the late Election of Knights of the Shire at Chelmsford in Essex (in the style
of Jesuitical, Dumb Dogs; Dark Lanthorns; Baals Priests; Damned Rogues; Jacks
and Villains; The Black Guard; The Black Regiment of Hell, etc. And a General
Exception made (by the Writer of the Seasonable Warning) to all men in Office,
Preferment, Salary, or Court-Employment. So that here is in a manner the one
Half of the Kingdom (and the Legal Half too) as much as in Them lies) excluded
from a share in the Common Interest of the Nation* with what A^m^ and Intent,
let the World judge.

THE Popish Plot is Sworn by all the Witnesses to have been Levelled at the Life
of his Sacred Majesty, the Subversion of the Government, and the Destruction of
the Protestant Religion. Now Whosoever well considers the manner of
Proceedings, together with the S^ile, and Doctrine of the Positions that are
now afoot, (though pretendedly upon Another Bottom) will find many Passages
that look Untowardly the Same way.

First, as to the Life of the King, and the Direct Subversion of the
Government, the Faction is not advanced so far yet; for That Is a Villainy that
must be Imposed upon the People, as a thing in such and such Cases to be
Lawful, before there can be any Thought of putting it in Practice. And herein,
Our late Reformers have outdone the Jesuits Themselves: For over and above the
Exposing of a Prince, on the One side, for Heresy, and, on the Other side, for
not submitting to Christ on his Throne; and equally on Both sides to the Utmost
Extremities; we have got Here the start of them, in Erecting a Principle that
makes the S^vereign further Accountable to the People, upon a point of State;
as we shall presently make appear by several Instances. Now if it be once laid
down for a Maxim, that upon such or such Conditions, the Subjects may take away
the Life of their Prince if they will; it is Damnable Odds that upon such a
Supposition, some Reprobated wretch or other will do it if he can.

I shall begin with the Acute Author of the Weighty Considerations Considered.
I will hope (says he) Page 6. there are very few in This Nation so Ill
Instructed, that do not think it in the Power of the People to DEPOSE a Prince
who really undert^kes to Alienate his Kingdom, or to give it up into the Hands
of Another Sovereign Power; or that really Acts the Destruction, or the
Universal Calamity of his People. The Author of the Plea to the Dukes Answer
says that when Kings themselves be Ill ones, God not only Approves of their
Removal, but even Himself does it.

The Political Catechism places the Government in the Two Houses of Parliament.
The Late Letter to a Person of Honor, etc. says, there may be a
Self-Deposition of a Prince actually Regnant. And again, The Weighty
Considerations Considered, lodges the Government in the Major Part. And almost
every Fresh Libeller speaks to the same Purpose. Now do but once admit, that a
King May Forfeit his Royal Authority, and you shall never fail of those that
will say, he Has don't; So long as there are men in the world that had rather
Govern, then Obey: And the stress does not lie upon the Quality of the Kings
Actions neither, but upon the Construction that shall be made of them, by any
Reprobated Band of Conspirators, that shall presume to Censure them. Whatsoever
the Faction shall think fit to call Mis-Government, must be so Interpreted, and
Reputed: and to Them only must we repair, as to the Oracles of Law, and
Conscience. The Safety of the King and Government, our Religion, Laws, and
Freedoms, are only, according to This Position, dependent upon the Humor of
the Multitude: So that it is but Their bare Saying, that the King has Forfeited
his Cronn, the Church their Privileges, the Nobility their Session of Peerage;
the Commons their Chara^ter of Representation; the Merchants their Liberty of
Trade; the Gentry* and Commonalty their Lives, Freedoms, and Estates, and the
work is done. This was the Course of all our late violent Changes of
Government; and the Positions which are now every day recommended to the Nation
toward the Playing of the same Game over again, were the Groundwork of all our
Late Miseries and Confusions.

Now as to the Church: Are not the Dissenting Ministers at work again Tooth and
Nayl against the Act for Uniformity; and Preaching up a Schism, under the
Color of Formalizing upon Scruples? Do they not first Instigate the People (in
Contempt of Law, and Order) to a Separation; and then furnish them with the
best pretenses they can, for their Disobedience? What will become of the
Protestant Religion, when the Restraint of Ecclesiastical Discipline and
Jurisdiction shall be taken away; and men left to Themselves to go their own
ways, and choose their own Religions at Pleasure? If This be not an attempt upon
putting the Last ^ranch of the Popish Plot in Execution by an Extirpation of
the Protestant Religion; then the Church of England, (as it is legally
established) must be confessed, in Their Opinions, not to be Protestant: And
consequently be called to an Account for That supposed Defect, as not being
Comprehended within the Equity of their Good Will and ^rotection.

I could multiply These Instances without end; but here is enough said to give
Evidence of a Pestilent Design. But whether it be a Design of a Popish
Contrivance, though set a foot by the Fanatiq^^s; or purely a Fanaticall Design;
I shall not Determine; but leave the Animadversion of it to the Consideration
of Authority, and appeal to the most Partial Reader for the Truth on it;
Concluding with This Observation. That there is great Malice as well as Danger
in the Project: For Thorough all this Audacious License of Libelling the King
himself, the Privy-Councell, the Judges, the Jury; etc. of Tearing the Church
to pieces, and Treasonably undermining the very Foundations of the Government,
by the Erecting of Republican Maxims wholly Inconsistent with, and utterly
destructive of This Imperial Monarchy: I do not find yet so much as One
Dissenters Pen engaged in the Vindication of His Majesty, or the Support of the
Government, to expiate for the Numberless Pamphlets they have Published toward
the Scandal and Destruction of both; Or in Justification of Themselves to the
World, that they are as great Enemies to the Substance of the Popish Plot as
they would be thought to be, and as great Friends to the King and Government.

The End.

