A LETTER OUT OF SCOTLAND, FROM Mr. R. L. S. To His Friend, H. B. IN LONDON.
Honest Harry!
ACcording to my promise, I should have Wrote to you long since, to have given
you an account how squares go, but the grief and affright of heart I was in,
and the long and tedious Journey, had so tired me, that I was forced to lie a
Bed and think of my wicked fate; and whilst I was musing, I received the
Skeldry, or that damned picture of Towser, which so enraged me, that it put my
before-heated Blood into a Feavor. What Rogues were these, to tie my dear
Friend to my Arse too? I must confess they are now even with me for my
Iack-an-Apes on Horseback. I know Hal, thou want me, for I do not hear of
any great Feats thou have done since I left to brandish the Pen: And I as much
long to be Scribbling again, and having a longing desire, after I had rested a
while, I had begun a Dialogue between Iockey and Blew-cap, but a Friend of mine
coming in, made me burn my papers, for he told me, That 'twould prove to me
more fatal than Citt and Bumpkin, or that between Richard and Baxter, or any
other Dialogue I had ever wrote, for that these plaguey Scots, if they but smelt
I was writing of Dialogues would knock out my Brains, and would never take it
so patiently as the English had done, He advised me therefore not so much as to
think of writing in this place. I find indeed they are a company of surly
Fellows, and that they but look a squint at greater persons than my self. I am
not here known to be R. they would take me then for a Papist in Masquerade, and
then I should surely go to pot, for they have an invetrate Hatred against all
Papists, so that I am now putting on a new shape, and appear like a
Presbyterian: what a sad thing is this, that I should feign the thing I so much
hate? but Hal, Life is sweet, and though I am old, I care not to leave this
World, for I know not if there be any Scribbling in that to come; and since I am
now at the worst pass, except Hanging, I desire to live to see a little more
Mischief. Well Hal, let me tell thee there are some besides my self of my mind,
and I am now scouring up my old Pistols, which I must now handle instead of my
Pen; we are preparing, and things will not always run with so smooth a stream,
we are pudling the Waters all we can, and let the Citts look to themselves, we
may chance to have a brush at their Jackots. Those Furious Gentlemen at
Westminster, that go on so vigorously, may perchance find some repulse, if the
interest and power of my Master and the Popish party, are able to do it: We yet
believe that it will not be so easy a matter for you to put the Duke besides
the Saddle, what do you think he has no Friends? no Money? no Interest? nor
Allies to help him? we are yet upon Terra Firma, and it will not be long e're
my Master will give you a Civil Visit, he has Intreagues in his Head, and some
Friends at the Helm who yet know how to Steer for his Interest. I confess that
my Hopes are not so very great as they have been, for I did once believe that
you should not have been able to have taken off any of the Heads of the Lords
in the Tower, but I see I was mistaken, for one of them is taken off: You have
droven furiously like Ieheu, impeached the Judges, and almost all my Masters
Secret Friends: On my Word it is high time for him to look about him, least they
pull the painted Iezabell of the Plot out of the Windows, that the little Currs
that have worried her hitherto, may lick her Blood. I had your Peers Speech
too, it is brave that any durst speak so plain English, but this comes of the
Liberty of the Press; when I sat at the Helm, these things never were, I would
have given it a squeese, you know my Fingers were like Pitch, what ever they
laid hold of, stuck to them so fast, they could never be got from them; I tell
thee that Speech was almost as Bad as the Appeal, a dangerous Libell. Had I
been at London, I would have Answered it, but I tell thee that I have been so
terrified with the inveterate hatred of these Blew-Caps against Scriblers, that
I am fain to make them believe I never wrote in my Life: I dare not adventure
to give you a Visit, though my Master should come, and though the Parliament, that
Bugbear, should be Prorogued, for I dare not be seen, least the Bailiffs
should seize me, for I have not yet got the Money I was promised, and therefore
I now write to you to certify my mind; but I know my Master is just to his
Word, and I have hopes Hal, if we Thrive, I shall requite your kindness. I am
thinking of some great place for thee, I will be thy True and constant Friend,
and that Broom which was tied to Towsers Tail, shall be Advanced to thy Crest,
ever hereafter. But if we fail of our Hopes, I cannot be worse than I am, and
therefore give me leave to Hope a little. I intend, when I dare to Write again,
to Write a New History of the Popish-Presbyterian-PLOT, I will License it my
own self, and no Body shall Print it but you, I will set them forth in their
Colors, I have an excellent Defamilory Black taught me by an Italian Jesuit.
But yet I cannot but sigh to think of the dismal present time; I am got into a
Cold Country, where in silence I often hear my self Railed at most profoundly.
I was asked by a Pyde-mouth'd Rogue the other Day, because I was an
Englishman, whether I knew R. L. S. or as they term it, the S. R. and showing
me the Picture of Towser, asked me if it was not like him, and if it was Drawn
by the Life? I could willingly have dashed his Teeth out if I durst: But Hal,
since I cannot write as I was wont, because I must be Employed, I am now
learning to play upon the Scotch Bag-pipes, which I will Endeavor to set up
instead of the Organs in Churches: I am also learning to speak thorough the
Nose, and am getting by Heart the Scotch-Covenant, I may be a Proselite at
last, and put on that Vizard, as well as that of the Protestant. I know not how
to end when once I have begun to you, but all I have now to desire of you, is,
That you will send me all the News you can, both good and bad. I long to know
if the Parliament shall Sit again, for some of us have here Great Expectations:
I saw all the Votes and Resolves you sent me; God Bless me, said I, from
falling under the Clutches of a Parliament; I think I did more wisely than
Justice Scroggs, when I fairly run away; 'twas a madness I thought to Fight
with Four or Five Hundred Resolute Men. I remember that Black Prophet Dr.
Oats, once told me at White Hall, twirling his Hat about, well Sir, we shall
have a Parliament; but I did not then believe him; I now acknowledge him as
great a Prophet as Mother Shipton, which the Scots I assure you have in
Veneration. Our Astrologers here predict strange things from the Comet that has
been lately seen here; some say it portends the Downfall of the Pope, another
of the Popish-Plot, another of Monarchy, some of the King of France, others of
the Hierarchy of the Bishops, they cannot agree, and to tell you the truth, I
believe none of them; I rather think it signifies the Advancement of some Great
Man in our Northern parts, to high Honor and Dignity; though a bold Fellow with
his Bonnet on his Head, the other Night, looking at the Star, told me, when my
Masters Beard was as long as the train of that Star, he should be King of
England, and not before; Thus the World goes, and people I see will speak their
minds, and I cannot help it, I am forced now to endure all. I have no present
to send you, if I had any thing by me for you to get a Penny by, I would. If
you please, you may print this Letter, which I wrote by stealth, for if my Name
be set to it, you know it will sell, what ever stuff is in it: Pray you
therefore accept this as a New Years Gift, for I have nothing else to send you.
Let me hear from you as soon as you can, and direct your Letter for Mr.
Crack-fart, Lodging at Old Sawny's the Bagg-pipe-Maker, in the High Street in
Edinborow.

Farewell. I am Your Faithful Friend, R. L.
January 10.
FINIS.
Printed for N. F. in the Year, 1681.


