THE Observator's Observations UPON THE BILL of EXCLUSION.
Let every one mend one, and begin the Reformation at Home. Do as You would be
done by, is no Text for Excluders.
TRIMMER. There Is more a Stir with You, and your Politiques, Morals and Duties,
than with half the Town beside. As if there were no brains forsooth. but under
your Nightcap; no conscience or loyalty but under your doublet. Prithee let us
have no more of these invidious, and grating reflections upon Controversies that
are now dead and buried; no raking of Exclusions, and Associations out of their
Graves again: Reform at home first, before you break-in upon the Province of
your Neighbors. Let but every man mend one, and we shall quick'y have a good
World on it. In fine, do as you would be done by, is a good Lesson.


OBSERVATOR. Would thou have the History of the Exclusion so forgotten, as to
leave the common people still poring, and bro^ding upon the Principle of it? Or
would thou have such an Amnesty passed upon the Association* as utterly to
suppress the memory of the Crime, and yet uphold the reputation and credit of
the Position: and consequently, support the lawfulness, and the authority of
the Practice? So that all this while here is but private meddling on the one
hand, to the hazard and dishonor of the Crown, the Royal Family, and the
public Peace: and private med^ing on the other hand, to detect the Rottennels,
the Hypocrisy, and the pernicious Tendency of those Doctrines and Doings. How
comes it to be more lawful, (nay and laudable too.) for a Quack to give the
Kings Subjects Poison in their Po^ridge, then for an honest man to ofter them a
plain Doss of Sallet-oyle to setch it up again? And now to go on with ye, It Is
good advice for every man to Reform at home, before he takes upon him to reform
others: And it is as good advice taken, as given. If you find that I do not
practice my self, what I inculcate to others; do but say Wherein, and I shall
take it well to be minded of it: And in the mean time, I would have you to
consider a little, of Governing your self by those measures that you prescribe
to others. What are all your Petitions but Invectives against your Superiors,
and Censorious Reflections upon the management of public Affairs? How many
thousands of bodies and souls; How many millions of Money might have been
saved, if your Weavers, your Butchers; Tinkers and Cobblers had been kept to
their Looms, their Kettles, and their Stalls, instead of trooping to
Westminster to advise with the Close Committee, about the settling of Religion,
and State; the Rights and Privileges of Parliament, the Liberties of the
Subject; and the Reformation of England and Ireland, in Doctrine, Worship,
Discipline and Government, according to the word of God, and the Example of the
best Reformed Churches; And I know nothing to the contrary, but that the late
King might have ordered the business of Calling and Dissolving Parliaments; or
of making War and Peace; Every jot as well by his Authority Royal, or the
advice of his Privy Council, without troubling so many Bumkins and Mechanics
to leave their Ploughs, their Shops, and their Trades, only to lend a Helping
Hand* to the keeping of the Ark steady. The very support of your Interest is
the license of the multitude, and the only Argument for your Cause, is the
madness of the people. What are all your Vox-Populi's, and Patriae's, but the
Usurpations and Encrochments of Fools upon the business of Wise Men; and the
setting of the Government upon the Head, with the heels uppermost? what are all
your Popular Remonstrances, and Addresses, I say, but so many Attempts of the
Mobile, to confound and subvert the order of the Public, by intermedling in
matters which they have nothing to do withal? Why do you not live-up to the
moderation that you Preach, and keep within the compass that you prescribe? The
Subjects part is Resignation, and obedience; and that which you impose upon the
world for Reformation, is downright Sedition* and it is not the Name, or Color
of Liberty, or Religion, that will bear-out private men in any Enterprises
whatsoever, upon the work and authority of their Governors. In one word, your
Conversations are a direct Contradiction to your Precepts, and your Discourses.


Trim. As in what Particulars, I prithee?


Obs. Why truly, in the Whole Course of what you either Recommend, or condemn,
you are the greatest meddelers in Nature, your selves, and yet at the same time
the Greatest Complainers of other peoples meddling; as if the Reputation of a
Trimmer, were more Sacred, on the One hand, then the Honor of the Government,
on the other* And it is much at the same Rate, that you manage the Doctrine of,
do as you would be done by* As for the purpose; How would all your popular
Sticklers for the Sovereignty of the People, take it, to be Beaten out of doors
by their Own servants, and to have their Children rise in Rebellion against
their Fathers? What a hurry have we had; what Plotting, Swearing and
Conspiring, to cut off the unchangable Succession of the Crown, as the only
Expedient under the Sun, to deliver us from Death and Damnation? To say nothing
of the Imposture, both of the Fears, and of the Dangers: To say nothing of the
Treason that was Covered under the Cloack of That Exclusion: To say nothing
again, of the Malicious Manage of the Contrivance which was as Rude, and
unmannerly, as it was Wicked and unjust: But to speak a word now, to parity of
Reason in the Case. How would the Agitators of the Exclusion of a Lawful
Prince, take it to be paid in their own Quoyn and Disinherited, themselves? If
either Conscience, or Policy may be heard upon the Point, the Equity lies
Infinitely Stronger Against the Subject; If they shall pretend to be Jelous,
without Reason; Pragmatical, against Law, and Impossing, beyond president. In
one word? according to your Rule of Do as you would be done by, Every man that
would disinherit deserves to be disinherited.


Trim. Nay, I have nothing to say to the contrary, but that it was an Ill
Business, Though the Devil* let me tell ye, is not always so black, as they
paint him.


Obs. But for the Devil of the Bill of Exclusion, I Defy All the Painters in
nature, to make him blacker then he is But no man can Sufficiently Abominate
That Execrable Project, without laying it in All the Hideous Colors, before
his Eyes. Do but Read it there a little; and if thou have but one Drop of
Honest, English, or Christian Blood in thy Veins, 'twill fire the very Soul of
thee, with Indignation, and Horror.

James Duke of York is by this Bill, in the First place to be made [ For ever
Incapable to Inherit, Possess, or enjoy the Imperial Crown of this Realm, and
of the Kingdom of Ireland* and the Dominions, and Territories to them, or
either of them Belonging, or to have, Exercise, or Enjoy Any Dominion, Power,
Jurisdiction, or Authority in the same Kingdoms, Dominions, or Any of them.
Bill of Exclusion] Now go on your self there.


Trim. [If the said James Duke of York shall at any time hereafter Challenge,
Claim, or Attempt to possess, or Enjoy, or shall take upon him to use, or
Exercise Any Dominion, Power or Authority, or Jurisdiction withn the said
Kingdoms, or Dominions, or any of them, as King or chief Magistrate of the
Same, that then he the said James Duk of York, for every such Offense shall be
deemed, and Adjudged Guilty of High Treason, and shall Suffer the Pains,
Penalties, and Forfeitures, as in Case of High Treason Ibid]*


Obs Plain-Dealing is best among Friends.


Trim. And further [That if any Person, or Persons whatsoever shall Assist, or
Maintain, Abett, or Willingly adh^re unto the said James Duke of York, in such
Challenge Claim, or Attempt, or shall of themselves attempt, or Endeavor to
put, or bring the said James Duke of York into the possession, or Exercise, of
any Regal power, Jurisdiction, or authority, within the Kingdoms and Dominions
aforesaid, or shall by Writing or Preaching advisedly publish, Maintain, or
declare, that he has any Right, Title, or authority to the Office of King or
Chief Magistrate of the Kingdoms and Dominions aforesaid, That then every such
person shall be Deemed, and Adjudged guilty of High Treason: and that he
Suffer, and undergo the pains, Penalties, aforsaid* Ibid.] and forfeitures


Obs. Prithee tell me what did all the Engagements, Negative Oaths, and
Abjurations, effectually, more then This Bill of Exclusion? Or what did
Cromwells High Court of Justice, do more, or Worse, to Charles the First, then
the Treatment that This Bill had provided for James the Second? But go on with
it still.


Trim. [That he the said James Duke of York shall not at any time from and
after the 5th of November. 1680. Return, or come into, or within any of the
Kingdoms or Dominions aforesaid, And then He the said James Duke of York, shall
be deemed, and Adjudged Guilty of HighTreason; and shall Suffer the penalties,
and Forfeitures, as in Case of High Treason. And further, that if Any Person or
persons whatsoever, shall be aiding and Assisting unto such Return of the said
James Duke of York, that then every such person shall be deemed, and Adjudged
Guilty of High Treason, and shall Suffer in Cases of High Treason.]


Obs. Turn the Text now, of, Do as you would be done by, and see what will come
on it. But what if the Duke should have Returned after all this, with his
friends about him, to Stand by him in the Vindication of his Right?


Trim. Why then [It shall and may be Lawful to and for any Magistrates,
Officers, and other Subjects whatsoever of these Kingoms and Dominions
aforesaid; And they are hereby Enjoined to apprehend, and secure the said James
Duke of York, and every other person offending in any of the premises; and
with him or them in case of Resistance, to Fight, and him or them by Force to
Subdue: For all which Actings, and for so doing, they are, and shall be by
virtue of this Act Saved Harmless, and Indemnifyed. Ibid.]


Obs. Wel^! And now read this Last Enacted:


Trim. [That during the Life of the said James Duke of York, this Act shall be
given in Charge, at every Assizes, and General Sessions of the peace within the
Kingdoms, Dominions, and Territories aforesaid, and also shall be Openly read
in Every Cathedral, and parish Church and Chapels within the aforesaid
Kingdoms, Dominions and Territories, by the several Respective Parsons, Vicars,
Curates, and Readers thereof, who are hereby required Immediately after Divine
service, in the forenoon, to read the same twice in every year, That is to say,
on the 25th of December, and upon Easter day, during the life of the said James
Duke of York Ibid.]


Obs. Prithee take Notice, for a Conclusion; That the Motion was First Opened
upon a Sunday; and now for the Memorial of This Holy Work, Christmas and Easter
were the two days Chosen out of the whole Ca^lendar, for the solemnizing of the
Act: And it is not All neither, that you have here, the most Violent, and
Temerarious Resolution perhaps, that ever was Taken: But the Design was
manifestly Fore-lay'd: And It Is little less then a Miracle for Any Reasonable
man to Engage in it, and not see through it.


DUBLIN.

Reprinted by Andrew Crook and Samuel Helsham; And are to be Sold by William
Weston in Christ-Church-Lane.


