Father La Chaise's PROJECT FOR THE EXTIRPATION OF HERETICS.
In a Letter from him to Father P -- rs.
Worthy Friend,
I Received yours of the 20th of June last, and am very glad to hear of your
good Success, and that our Party gains Ground so fast in England. But
concerning the Question you have put to me, that is, What is the best course to
be taken to Root out all the Heretics? To which, I answer: There are diverse
ways to do that, but we must consider which is the best to make use of in
England, I am sure you are not Ignorant how many thousand Heretics we have in
France, by the Power of our Dragoons, Converted in the space of one year; and
by the Doctrine of those booted Apostles, Turned more in one month than Christ
and his Apostles could in ten years. This is a most Excellent Method, and far
excels those of the great Preachers and Teachers, that have lived since
Christ's time. But I have spoke with diverse Fathers of our Society, who do
think that your King is not strong enough to accomplish his Design by such kind
of force, so that we cannot expect to have our Work done in that manner, for
the Heretics are too strong in the three Kingdoms, and therefore we must seek
to Convert them by fair means, before we fall upon them with Fire, Sword,
Halters, Gaols, and other such like Punishments: And therefore, I can give you
no better Advice than to begin with soft easy means, wheedle them in by
Promises of Profit, and Offices of Honor, till you have made them dip
themselves in Treasonable Actions, against the Laws Established, and then they
are bound to serve for fear. When they have done thus, turn them out, and serve
others so, by putting them in their Places; and by this way, gain as many as
you can. And for the Heretics, that are in Places of Profit and Honor, turn
them out, or Suspend them on pretense of Misbehaviour, by which their Places
are forfeit, and they subject to what Judgment you please to give upon them.
Then you must form a Camp, that must consist of none but Catholics, this will
make the Heretics heartless, and conclude all means of Relief and Recovery is
gone. And lastly, take the short and the best way, which is to surprise the
Heretics on a sudden; and to encourage the Zealous Catholics, let them
Sacrifice them all, and wash their Hands in their Blood, which will be an
acceptable Offering to God. And this was the Method I took in France, which
has well, you see, succeeded, but it cost me many threats and promises, before
I could bring it thus far, our King being a long time very unwilling.

But at last, I got him on the Hip, for he had layn with his Dnughter-in-Law,
for which I would by no means give him Absolution, till he had given me an
Instrument, under his own Hand and Seal, to Sacrifice all the Heretics in one
day. Now as soon as I had my desired Commission, I appointed the day when this
should be done, and in the mean time, made ready some thousands of Letters, to
be sent into all parts of France in one Post Night. I was never better pleased
than that time, but the King was affected with some compassion for the
Hugonots, because they had been a means to bring him to his Crown and Throne;
and the longer he was under it the more sorrowful he was, often complaining,
and desiring me to give him his Commission again, but that I would by no
persuasion do, advising him to repent of that heinous sin; and also telling
him, that the trouble and horror of his Spirit did not proceed from any thing
of Evil in those things that were to be done, but from that great Wickedness
which he had done; and that he must resolve to undergo the severe burden of a
troubled mind for one of them or the other, and if he would remain satisfied as
it was, his Sin being forgiven, there would, in few days, be a perfect
atonement made for it, and he perfectly reconciled to God again. But all this
would not pacify him, for the longer the more restless, and therefore I
ordered him to retire to his Closet, and there spend his time constantly in
Prayer, without permitting any one to interrupt him; and this was in the
morning early, when the evening following I was to send away all my Letters. I
did indeed make the more haste, for fear he should disclose it to any body, yet
I had given him a strict charge to keep it to himself, and the very thing that
I most feared, to my great sorrow, came to pass; for just in the nick of time,
the Devil, who has always his Instruments at work, sent the Prince of Conde to
the Court, who asked for the King; he was told that he was in his Closet, and
would speak with no man; he impudently answered, That he must, and would speak
with him, and so went directly to his Closet; he being a great Peer, no man
durst hinder him. And being come to the King he soon perceived by his
countenance that he was under some great trouble of mind, for he looked as if
he had been going into the other World immediately. Sir, said he, what is the
matter with you? The King, at the first, refused to tell him but he pressing
harder upon him, at last, the King with a sorrowful complaint, burst out, and
said, I have given Father La Chaise a Commission under my own Hand, to Murder
all the Hugonots in one day, and this Evening will the Letters be dispatched to
all Parts, by the Post, for the performing it; so that there is but small time
left for my Hugonot Subjects to live, who have never done me any harm:
Whereupon this cursed Rogue answered, Let him give you your Commission again;
The King said, how shall I get it out of his hand, for if I send to him for it,
he will refuse to send it? This Devil answered, If your Majesty will give me
order, I will quickly make him return it: The King was soon persuaded, being
willing to give ease to his troubled Spirit, and said, Well, go then, and break
his Neck, if he will not give it you; whereupon, this Son of the Devil, went to
the Post House, and asked if I had not a great number of Letters there, and
they said, Yes, more than I had sent thither in a whole year before; then, said
the Prince, By Order from the King, you must deliver them all to me; which they
durst not deny, for they knew well enough who he was. And no sooner was he got
into the Post House, and had asked these Questions, but I came also in after
him, to give order to the Post Master, to give notice to all those under him,
in the several Parts of the Kingdom, that they should take care to deliver my
Letters with all speed imaginable. But I was no sooner entered the House, but he
gave his Servants order to secure the Door, and said confidently to me, You
must, by order from the King, give me the Commission which you have forced from
him: I told him I had it not about me, but would go and fetch it, thinking to
get from him, and so go out of Town, and send the contents of those Letters
another time; but he said, You must give it me, and if you have it not about
you, send some body to fetch it, or else never expect to go alive out of my
hands, for I have an Order from the King, either to bring it or break your
Neck: And I am resolved either to carry back that to him in my hand, or your
Hearts Blood on the point of my Sword. I would have made my escape, but he set
his Sword to my Breast, and said, You must give it me or dye, therefore deliver
it, or else this goes through your Body.

So when I saw nothing else would do, I put my Hand in my Pocket and gave it
him, which he carried immediately to the King, and gave him that and all my
Letters, which they burnt: And being all done, the King said, Now his Heart was
at ease; now how he should be eased by the Devil, or so well satisfied with a
false Joy I cannot tell: But this I know, that it was a very Wicked and Ungodly
action, as well in his Majesty as the Prince of Conde, and did not a little
increase the burden and danger of His Majesty's Sins. I soon gave an account
of this Affair to several Fathers of our Society, who promised to do their best
to prevent the aforesaid Prince doing such another act; which was accordingly
done, for within the space of six days after the damned action he was Poisoned,
and well he deserved it. The King also did suffer too, but in another fashion,
for disclosing the Design to the Prince, and harkening to his Counsel. And many
a time since, when I have had him at Confession, I have shook Hell about his
Ears, and made him sigh, fear, and tremble, before I would give him Absolution;
nay, more than that, I have made him beg for it on his Knees, before I would
consent to Absolve him. By this, I saw that he had still an Inclination to me,
and was willing to be under my government, so I set the baseness of the action
before him, by telling the whole Story, and how wicked it was; and that it
could not be forgiven till he had done some good action to balance that, and
expiate the Crime. Whereupon, he at last asked me what he must do? I told him,
that he must root out all the Heretics from his Kingdom: So, when he saw there
was no rest for him without doing it, he did again give them all into the power
of me and our Clergy, under this condition, That we would not Murder them, as
he had before given orders, but that we should by fair means, or force, Convert
them to the Catholic Religion; to which end, he gave us his Dragoons to be at
our Devotion and Service, that we might use them as we saw convenient, to
Convert them to the true Religion. Now when we had got the Commission, we
presently put it in Practice, and what the issue of it has been, you very well
know. But now in England, the work cannot be done after this manner, as you may
perceive by what I have said to you, so that I cannot give you better counsel,
than to take that course in hand wherein we were so unhappily prevented; and I
doubt not, but that it may have better success with you than with us.

I would write to you of many other things, but that I fear I have already
detained you too long; wherefore I shall write no more at present, but that I
am,

Paris, July 8th. 1688. Your Friend and Servant, La Chaise.


