NOTES UPON Stephen College.

Grounded Principally upon his own Declarations and Confessions, And freely
submitted to PUBLIC CENSURE.

By Roger L'Estrange.

LONDON, Printed for Ioanna Brom; at the Gun at the Westend of St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1681.

To the Reader.
IT is not the part of a Christian, nor indeed of a Man, to Insult upon the
Miserable, either in their Memories, or in their Persons: Beside that the
Criminal here in question has already satisfied Public Justice, and is gone
to his Place to receive according to his Works. This does not hinder yet, but
that a man may honestly endeavor the putting of a Check to those Clamorous
Out-crys that are daily sent forth against the Government upon this occasion;
as if the whole business of College were only a Perjurious Combination of
Papists against Protestants, in the Person of that Wretched Malefactor; and the
Protestant Religion to stand or fall with the Protestant Joyner, It is the
Intent now of these Papers, to lay open the Malice, and the Falsehood of these
Calumnies: Not so much for the Vindication of the Proceeding, as for the
Disabusing of the Common People; for the Best Argument for Authority is the
Reason of the Laws; and in these Cases the Vigorous Execution of them upon the
Seditious, is the only effectual Remedy.

It is not that I pretend to Illustrate the Justice of the Court, or of the
Verdict, by any Additional Remarques of my own, but effectually (upon other
Grounds and Evidences) to bring the Offender to a new hearing; wherein I shall
remit my self to the Judgment and Conscience of any Indifferent Reader, whether
there be not Matter sufficient, from whence fairly to Infer, and to Presume him
Guilty of the most material Parts of his Accusation, even without the aid of
anything that was produced against him at his Trial.

As for those that are curious to be more particularly informed, I must refer
them to the Printed Trial it self; and so I shall close up my Preface with my
Lord Chief Justices Opinion upon the Verdict.

Lord Chief Justice (to the Prisoner.) These things when I look upon them, and
consider the complexion of your defense, it makes an easy Proof have Credit.
But I think there was a full Proof in your Case; yet I say, if there had been a
great deal less Proof, the Jury might with Justice have found you Guilty. And
because you now declare your self Innocent of all you are charged with, I think
my self bound to declare here in Vindication of the Country, and in Vindication
of the Justice of the Court, that it was a Verdict well given, and to the
satisfaction of the Court, and I did not find my Brothers did dislike it. This
I say to you out of Charity, that you may incline your mind to a submission to
the Justice that has overtaken you, and that you may enter into Charity with
all men, and prepare your self for another life.

NOTES UPON Stephen College.
. 1. The Proceeding against College Represented as a Design against the
Protestant Religion.
THE main stress of the Cause here in Controversy, lies upon a Pretended Zeal
for Religion, and in such a manner too, as if the very Name of a Protestant
were a Supersed as for a Traitor, and an Exemption from the Ordinary Methods of
Law and Justice. [This Design (says College) is not only against Me, but
against all the Protestants. Trayal, p. 5.] And again [This is a most Horrid
Conspiracy to take away my life; and it will not stop here; for it is against
all the Protestants in England. Ibid. p. 6.] ['Tis time to have a Care (says
Aaron Smith) when our Lives and Estates and Al are beset here. Ibid. p. 13.]
[My Lord (says College again) I do not question but to prove this one of the
Hellishest Conspiracies that ever was upon the face of the Earth: And these the
most Notorious Wicked Men; an absolute design to destroy all the Protestants in
England, that have had the Courage to oppose the Popish Plot. Ibid. p. 36.] And
then in his last Speech, [I am as certainly Murdered by the hands of the
Papists as Sr. Edmundbury Godfrey himself was, though the thing is not seen.]
And once again in his other Speech, Printed for Edith College, [I dye (says he)
by the hands of the Enemies of the Great God, his Christ, his Servants, his
Gospel, and my Country, to which I willingly submit, and earnestly pray mine
may be the last Protestants Blood that Murdering Church of Rome may shed in
Christendom.]

It is no wonder if the Ringing of this Emphatical Reflection [the Blood of
Protestants; a Design upon all the Protestants of England, etc. over and over
in the Ears of the Multitude, create Unquiet Thoughts, and work some
extraordinary Effects upon the minds of the common People. It will be well
therefore to ask Stephen College what he means by that Protestant Religion that
is so much Endangered; and who and where those Papists are, upon whom he
Charges this Hellish Conspiracy: for we have none as yet in sight that can fall
within the compass of his Challenge; but his Majesty himself, and the Ordinary
Ministers of Justice acting according to the Known Laws, and in the Regular
Methods of Judicial Proceedings. Now upon a due Examination of this matter,
there will be found a great difference betwixt Colleges Protestants, and Ours;
and betwixt Our Papists and His: So that the Snare lies in the double
acceptance of the Word, by which they labor to Impose upon the World, that
the Schismatiques are the only True-Protestants, and those of the Church of
England, in a Confederacy against them with the Papists: But we shall take
Colleges Religion as he has delivered it with his own lips; and gather from
thence what may be the Cause, and the Profession that he contends for.

. 2. The meaning of Colleges Protestants.
I Was ever a Protestant; (says College) I was born a Protestant; I have lived
so, and so, by the Grace of God, I Will dye: Of the Church of England, according
to the Best Reformation of the Church, from all Idolatry, from all
Superstition, or any thing that is contrary to the Gospel of our Blessed Lord
and Savior. Colleges last Speech.

In this Clause he Declares himself upon his Death, to be a Protestant of the
Church of England, according to the Best Reformation, etc. Now there is No
Church of England but that which is Established by Law, both in Doctrine and
Discipline; unless you will make the Dissenting Protestants, to be Assenters,
and Consenters; and Feake's, Owen's, Ralphson's, Baxter's, Meade's, Ienkins's
Separate Congregations to be severally the Church of England; which no man
certainly in his Right Wits will pretend to do. So that either he died a True
Son of the Established Church of England, according to the Genuine Import of
the Expression; (and as most manifestly he would have it thought, he did) or
else his Design was to go off with a Desperate Equivocation betwixt his Teeth,
if he was any other than what he Pretended to be: and it comes all to a Case,
as to the Truth of his Profession, whether ye take him the One way, or the
Other. There may be Another Note upon it, which is, that he would give to
understand by This Profession that he had always Lived, and that now he Died,
the same sort of Protestant; which is a Point-Blank-Contradiction to that which
now follows.

Upon the Sheriffs Desiring him, for the satisfaction of the World, to declare
what Church he meant; whether Presbyterian, or Independent, or the Church of
England; or what? His answer was [Good Mr. Sheriff, for your satisfaction, for
Twenty years and above, I was under the Presbyterian Ministry, till His
Majesty's Restoration. Then, I was Conformable to the Church of England, when
that was Restored; and so continued, till such time as I saw Persecution upon
the Dissenting People, and undue things done in their Meeting-Places. Then I
went among them, to know what kind of People those were; and I take God to
Witness, since that time I have used their Meetings, viz. the Presbyterians;
others very seldom, and the Church of England. Last Speech.

By this it appears that College was a Presbyterian before the Late Rebellion,
as well as quite thorough it. He says nothing, what brought him over to the
Church of England at last; but that it was the Persecution of the Dissenters
that carried him off again: And yet he told us but just before, that he was of
That Reformation which was Freest from Superstition and Idolatry; though there
was nothing of that we see in this Pretended Cause of his Relapse. The
Remainder of this Paragraph is Mysterious, and Perplexed; and there is too much
Reason to fear that it was Intricated on purpose that he might be Understood
one way, and Mean another. But however, if there be any thing to be made out of
it at all, it is, that he died of the Presbyterian Persuasion. I would not
force any thing, to Discredit the words of a Dying man; but if any man can
reconcile this Passage, either to it self, or with several other Expressions of
his in Prison, some two or three days before his death, they will do him a
Kind, and a Charitable Office; for I must confess, I cannot bring them to any
sort of Consistence.

A matter of two or three days before his Execution, two Divines of eminent
Piety and Worth, gave the Prisoner a Visit, and among other Discourses suitable
to his Condition, and the occasion, It was asked him, Q. What Church are ye of?
A. Of the Church of England. Q. As by Law Established? A. No, I am not. Q. How
do you mean the Church of England then? A Presbyterian? A. No. Q. An Independent?
A. No. Q. An Anabaptist? A. No. Q. A Quaker? A. No. Q. Where Is that Church in
Christendom then, that you will own your self a Member of? A. That Is to my
self; I will not tell ye. And he gave at another time his Reason for it. If it
were known (says he) what Church I am of, my faults would be laid upon my
whole Church. How does this agree now with his Profession at the Place of
Execution? Or where shall we find that Individuum Vagum of Colleges Protestant?

There were some Circumstances concerning my Lady Rochester, of which
hereafter; and others grounded upon the Information of a Somersetshire
Gentleman, that have prevailed upon many People to take him for a Papist, which
Information runs thus.

That the Informant Lodging at the House of one P. a Victualler in Wich-street,
in Michaelmas Term, 1677. there came into the Room where he was (upon a Sunday
in the Evening) a certain Person who was called by the name of College; and
sitting down there, entered into a discourse concerning the Lord of Rochester,
whereupon the Informant told College that he heard the Lady Rochester was
turned Papist; who thereupon demanded, what he meant by a Papist? to which he
answered, One that maintained the Tenants of the Church of Rome, mentioning
some of them; as Purgatory, Prayers to Saints, etc. whereupon the other
undertook to defend the said Tenants, and with great Vehemence told him, that
he would bring him Books the next day that should overthrow all Arguments to
the contrary: And told him farther, that his name was Gollege, and not College;
and that he had wrought for my Lord of Rochester at Eumore: But the Informant
never saw him before, nor since, only his Landlord told him that he was a
Joyner, and lived at the backside of his House.

Colleges Answer to this Point was, that he believed this might be his Brother,
who was a Ioyner by Trade, and died a Papist, in October, 1678. He wrote his
name Gollege; Lodged near Which street, and (as he conceived) had done work for
my Lord Rochester at Eumore; which seems to have been the ground of that
mistake. Beside that, College had several times Confessed that he had strong
and frequent Impulses on his spirit against Popery: Insomuch that if he did but
see any book in defense of it, he would prefently set all his work aside to get
it answered; declaring himself also against it at the place of Execution, in
these words, [I do with all my soul, and did ever since I knew what Religion
was, Abhor and Detest the Church of Rome, as Pernicious and Destructive of
Humane Society.]

I shall leave it now to the Readers choice whether a Papist, or not? Although
for my part, I am strongly persuaded of the Negative; but what kind of
Protestant to make of him, we are yet to seek. We shall see next how he stood
affected to the Church of England; but so as to separate his Opinions from his
Practices, which are reserved for another place.

He received his Sentence, Aug. 18. and Suffered upon the 31. In this Interim
the Bishop of Oxford provided all that was possible for his Relief and
Consolation, with infinite Compassion and Honor; appointing several eminent
Pious and Learned Divines to Administer unto him in his Distress. The Reverend
Dr. Marshal went to him first, who being called away by business, Dr. Hall
supplied his place, from whose hand he received the Blessed Sacrament soon
after his Sentence; but his Devotion-duties were still distracted with some
interjected Excursions of his own; and he was heard to say, that as he did not
disdain the Prayers of the Church, so he did not delight in such Prayers,
neither could he join heartily with those that did not pray by the Spirit. It
was observed by one of these Reverend Gentlemen that assisted him, that when he
came to the Prayers for the King, Queen, and the Bishops, instead of Amen, he
said Lord have mercy upon them, though he joined in an Amen to all the rest.
Two days before his Execution, one of them desired him to prepare himself for
the Holy Eucharist, to whom he returned this Answer. It is no more than a Shell
and Form of your own making; as if I eat a piece of Bread, and drank a glass of
Wine, and at the same time remembered my Savior. In this manner he refused it:
Nor would he suffer this Gentleman to pray with him at all upon the day of his
Execution; declaring that nothing gave him satisfaction but Extemporary Prayer.
The Doctor Administered to him by the Liturgy, and so did Dr. Marshal pray with
him likewise; but still he would have sallies also of his own. Little
Schismatical Ianeway tells a long story, (and against himself too) (Number. 42.)
where he says that College was urged with diverse Arguments to make a Public
Confession; whereas it was only propounded to to him to Confess, Conditionally,
and not Absolutely, as he maliciously represents it. True it is, that he gave
hopes at first of some tractable inclinations toward the Entertainment of the
Liturgy; but upon Monday morning there was found with him a certain unknown
Quaker; and from that time till the next Wednesday (the day of his Execution)
he was hardened against all Attempts; and this Obstinacy of his was said to
arise from a suggestion of the Quakers, that without dashing the Credit of
those Witnesses, the Protestant Cause would be in danger to be lost. He pressed
very earnestly that Titmarsh, the Preaching-Anabaptist-Tanner, might come and
Pray with him; and he was privately sent for, but not suffered to come at him.

You have here an account of the Protestant-Ioyners Religion from his own lips,
which is Resolved at last into a mere Enthusiastical Whimsie. The Quaker
pleases him; the Anabaptist pleases him; and yet he is neither the one nor the
other, nor a Presbyterian; nor an Independent; nor a Church-of-England-man, and
yet a Friend to all but the Right; and Conciliable even to those Opinions that
are yet at an Inconciliable Variance one with another. Let the Reader now
determine under these Circumstances, whether that Protestant Persuasion that
makes such a noise in this Controversy, be a Religion or a Faction; or how it
is possible either to Destroy or to Defend that Religion which is no where to
be found.

. 3. What is meant by the Papists in Conspiracy against Colleges Protestants.
THE Protestant Ioyner has left us at a great loss in the foregoing Section,
about the meaning of his Protestant Religion: But then he makes some amends
for it in telling us very plainly what he means by the Papists. It is a part of
his Charge, That he reckoned the Church, the King, and all his Adherents for
Papists; and we have his own Words and Papers to prove every jot as much as
that amounts to, even to the minutest Circumstances of the Accusation.

[This (says he) is not the first time, my Lord, the Papists have designed to
take away my life; though it be the first time they went about to take it away
by a Law. Trial. p. 39. What is this now to say, but that the Ordinary
Ministers of Justice, in the Orderly Execution of their Duties, are Murderers
and Papists? And it is yet more explicitly set forth in the first Section, as
we have seen already. How often has he been heard, even in the presence of Mr.
Harleton of St. Paul's Churchyard, to whom he appeals from Mr. Masters's
Evidence, that old Rowly (his Cipher for the King) was a Papist? and it was his
common discourse in Coffee-Houses at a venture, as numbers of Persons are able
and ready to justify, if need should require it. What Is the meaning of his
drawing the King with Two Faces in his Raree Show, one toward Popery, the
other toward Protestantism? And the Two Houses at his Majesty's Back, in a
Chest of Rome (as he calls it) in the Ballad? What Is the meaning of the English
Clergy Riding Tantivy after a Jesuit in another of his Prints? With these
words of Explanation, Room for the Church? For Rome Boys: with this Conceit at
the Church-door, Out Phanatiques; In, Popery: And the Bishop of Bath and Wells
Personated in it, with a Patch on his check, and the mark upon him of a
Church-Papist? Or what say ye of the same Bishop again, kissing the Popes Toe
in another of his Pieces, Entitled Hats for Caps; with the whole Hierarchy
in it, making Court to his Holiness for Preferment? And then there is the Learned
device of a Scale to the Papacy, 1. Servitor. 2. Pupil. 3. Batchelors. 4
Master. 5. Priest. 6. Doctor. 7. Dean. 8. Bishop. 9. Cardinal. 10. Pope. With
these words to it. [The Gradual way to make a Pope Infallibly: All done by the
Sign of the Cross, and a little School Conjuring. Here Is abundantly enough to
show What, and Who they are that he calls Papists, without need of any other
Evidence or Explication. But it will be said perhaps that these Pictures, and
especially the Raree Show are not yet proved to be Colleges.

. 4. The Libellous Pictures, and Particularly the Raree Show proved to be
Colleges.
MY Lord, (says College) as to the Papers Charged upon me to be mine, I declare
I know not of them. Trial. page 74. I cannot deny but that they were in my
House; but that I was the Author, or did take them in, is as great a Mistake as
ever was made. Ibid. I know nothing of the Printing of them, nor was I the
Author of them. Ibid. I do declare I know nothing of the Original, the Printer,
nor the Author. p. 75. There Is a great deal more of this stuff in the Trial, to
the same purpose; but I shall lay no hold of any thing he says in his Defense,
save where he Confesses: But it will be allowed, I hope, that some weight might
be laid upon what he delivers in that which is published under the Title of A
True Copy of the Dying Words of Mr. Stephen College, left in Writing under his
own hand, and confirmed by him at the time of Execution, Aug. 31. 1681. at
Oxford, Published by his own Relations, and Printed for Edith College.

As to the Printed Papers (says he) which Dugdaie produced in the Court, I do
declare, I never saw them, called the Raree Show, and Intercepted Letter [in
his hand] before that time, (the meaning of these words [in his hand] I do not
understand) and therefore could not, and did not decypher any of the Pictures
to him. It Is utterly false. I was not the Author of those Verses called the
Raree Show, neither do I know who was, or the Printer, or ever owned my self
the Author of either of them Papers to him in my life.

Now by this train of wild Circumlocutions, a body would think that College had
been wholly Innocent of any hand in the Promoting of that Scurrilous and
Malicious Libel, especially considering some passages of his in the other
Speech that was Printed for T. Basset. I take God to witness (says he) and do
freely acknowledge, I have sought my God with tears several times, to inform me
if so be I had with any Word transgressed at any time.] He does not find
himself Guilty it seems, of so much as one Word amiss, but appears to purge
himself upon his Death, as to that particular, which naturally resolves into
this Conclusion; that either he had nothing to do with that Paper, or otherwise
that he approved the Design and Contents of it, though one of the most Insolent
Pieces of Seditious Ribaldry that ever saw the light. [Monstrous foul Beast,
Thief, Child of Heathen Hobbs.] This is the Language of the Protestant Ioyner
to his Sovereign. Let the world judge by this of his Religion, and of theirs
too that side with him; and in so doing, become Abettors and Partakers of his
Crimes. But we shall now make it as clear as the light it self, that he went
off the Stage with a sad account to answer for upon this very Point.

First, He owned to Mr. Atterbury* the Messenger, all the Papers that were
found in his House to be his own, whereof the Raree Show was one; telling him
moreover, that If there was any Treason in those Papers, the Wisest man in
England was mistaken. And so says Aaron Smith in his Paper of Instructions to
him at Oxford. [The Raree Show, etc. and the Pictures are not Treason.] Taking
for granted that the Raree-Show, etc. would infallibly be made out against him.

The Design of this Raree-Show, drawn with a Pencil upon Dutch Paper in
Black-lead, was found, it seems, lying upon his Table, and afterward
mis-lay'd. So that College dodg'd them upon that point, at the Trial, and
disowned it in these words [I am sure you could never find the Original of any
such thing in my House.] But though this was a point blank denial of a Truth;
there is this to be said yet in Extenuation of it, that his Life was at stake,
and he made the best of his Plea. But this is no Excuse yet for his
Double-dealing after his Sentence, and upon the place of Execution. He was
Interrogated in the Castle some few days before he suffered, whether he did not
with his own hand draw the design for the Ballad of A Raree-Show? and whether
that very Draught was not taken with the other Prints, in his House? His Answer
was, that he was neither the Author of the Verses or Ballad, nor did he know
either the Author, or the Printer. And then for the Design, he bad them show it
(knowing it to be lost) and he would own it, if it were his.

Now to expound this Riddle, it is probable he did not know the Author, nor the
Printer; and yet it is clear that the first design was of his drawing; and by
him accommodated to the Verses, without so much as knowing who was the Poet. He
might possibly deliver that Draught also to have it Cut, without knowing the
Graver; as it is certain that he did deliver the Verses to be Printed, though
perhaps without knowing the Printer: And this does evidently appear from the
Testimony of the Printer himself.

The Printer confesses and declares upon the sight of one of the Papers found
at Colleges, that it was wrought at his Press; that he did it for Franck Smith,
who told him that it was a Merry* Ioking thing, but a Truth* which Corresponds
with the Evidence, that College said it was [as true as that Gods in Heaven.
The Printer Informs likewise, that Francis Smith, upon the reading of the
Staves to him Expounded them; (but without the Picture) and told him that there
was a Captain with a Pack at his back, and that was the King; and that He in
the Mire was the King; and that He with the Two Faces was the King again* and
that it was a Merry Iocose thing, and had been sung before several Lords at
Oxford: Which Particularities do punctually agree with the Evidence against
College, from whom undoubtedly Franck Smith received the Manuscript; and
College, it seems, told Smith no more upon this occasion, than what he had told
before to other People. The Bookseller, I find, knew well enough what he did
too, being very earnest with the Printer not to discover his Name, but to say
that he had the Copy from a Gentleman, to him unknown; adding moreover these
words [A body may be Troubled about it, but there is no Treason in it*]

Now after all that is said, lest it should be suggested that there is no
positive Proof yet against College, that he had any thing to do with this
Libel, we shall now put that Question out of all dispute. There was a Paper of
Colleges Intercepted, which upon Examination he utterly denied at first; but
finding himself Discovered, he Confessed it. This was some few days before his
Execution. The Paper here intended, was the Speech, word for word, that was
Printed for Edith College; which being (...) to the Joynor, he acknowledged it
to be of his own Handwriting; and so is the Manuscript also of the Raree-Show
from whence that Ballad was Printed; and I have the Original at this Instant by
me, to satisfy any man that shall make a doubt whether or no it was of
Colleges Writing. Besides that, he sung the Ballad in several places, and
particularly at Sir Philip Matthews's, at Southcot, as diverse Persons of Credit
are ready to attest: And by the token that Sir Philip charged him to forbear,
for he would not suffer any such thing in his House; or to this effect.

I cannot but deplore the Infatuated blindness of this Unhappy Creature, that
should now at his last Extremity, instead of discharging his soul by a public
and sincere Repentance, be troubling of his head with Shifts and Reservations,
as if he were contriving how to cast a mist before the Eyes of God and Man; and
in a case so open too, that half an eye sees through it. And yet I cannot but
have more Charity for his endeavor to shuffle it off in the one Speech, than
for his saying just nothing at all of it in the other: Unless as he has wrapped
up the particular Crimes for which he suffered, in his last general Act of
Charity and Confession. [Whomever I have of fended in word or deed, I ask every
man's pardon; and I forgive the World with all my soul all the Injuries I have
received] This is the best that can be made on it: And without large allowances
for distraction of thought, and want of consideration, it is more than a man can
justify. In Basset's Speech, he cannot so much as charge himself with any
offensive Word, though upon the Scrutiny, he had sought the Lord with Tears for
Information. [I as little thought (says he) to come to this as any man that
hears me this day; and I bless God, I have no more deserved it from the hands
of men, than the Child that sucks at his Mothers breast, I bless God for it.]
Now in the Speech Printed for Edith College, he seems to contradict this, but
it is in terms so entangled and dubious, that I must leave the Reader to make
his own ghess upon it, only recommending this to his observation; that he
speaks Intelligibly enough in all other cases, but where either his Religion,
or his Crime is the Question: As for example,

There be some other Scandalous and Malicious Reports thrown upon me, as that I
should own all that was Sworn against me, except Hains's Evidence, and the
like: To all which I have been examined by Dr. Marshal, whom the Bishop of Oxon
did voluntarily send to me the day after I was Condemned; and that Worthy and
Pious Dr. Hall, who came to me, and from whom I received the Blessed Sacrament
on Sunday last, to whom I did make the same Confession and Acknowledgment as I
have here Inserted; particularly the which I do again affirm is Truth, as I
shall answer it to God Almighty: Only I did acknowledge as my fault, I did
believe I might have been Guilty on some Occasions, and in heat of talk, to
have uttered some words of Indecency, not becoming my Duty, concerning the King
or his Council; and if so, I do beg their Pardon.] Now the Reader is left to
his choice, whether to understand [ONLY] as an Exception to the Truth of his
Confession, as who should say It Is all True but that; or to take it for an
acknowledgment, of having been Intemperate that way: Or otherwise, as a bare
supposition, as if he had said, I do rather incline to think I might sometimes
lash out that way; but if I did, it was in a Passion; and if I ever did any
such thing, I ask their Pardon. So that here is nothing clear and open, to
answer, either the expectation of the world, or the duty of a Person in his
Condition; but only a wandering vein of Ambiguity, and Incoherence, to amuse the
Reader, and to perplex the Period. Or if it means any thing else, it bears only
the Countenance of a faint acknowledgment of a Mildemeanor, in a direct
Contradiction to what he delivered by word of mouth at his death; Confirming
the Truth of what he Confesses in the One Paper, and denis in the other ( in
his own words) with his last b^eath, and sealing it with his dearest. Blood.

It is with great unwillingness that I have entered upon this office; but since
the Faction has taken the freedom to arraign the Justice of the Nation, on the
behalf of this Pretended Innocent, I reckoned it my duty on the other hand, to
expose in some measure the Fraudulent Practices of the Prisoner; and I make no
doubt but to Evince unto any man whatsoever, that will but hear and attend
Common Reason, that over and above the Proofs and Circumstances that appeared
at his Trial, there is in these Sheets sufficient to make out the Credibility
of his Accusation. But in my way to the main business, I shall give ye in the
next Section some short touches of his disingenuous proceedings in other cases.

. 5. Colleges Doublings and Mistakes about the Business of the Lady Rochester,
and Father Thompson, and his Entertainment of Mr. Sergeant. Some Notes upon the
Evidence of Sir William Jennings, and Mr. Masters, and his Complaints of Ill
Usage.
I shall not charge my self with a Critical Dissection of all Colleges
Disguises and Mistakes, but make my Observations upon such, and so many of them
as may serve for a Foundation to the Reader, for some competent judgment upon
the rest. And first to the Report concerning the Lady Rochester.

It passed for current here in the Town, that the Lady Rochester, upon her
Deathbed declared that College was the man who first brought the Priest to
her, that Perverted her to the Faith of the Church of Rome; which being a thing
true in it self, is not unlikely to have been in such manner declared by the
said Lady; but whether it was or was not so, it matters not. But this Rumor
however opened all Peoples mouths about the Town, that College was a Papist.
Upon his Report, College, pretended to purge himself of that Calumny, in both
the Speeches before said formerly cited, and first in that of Edith Colleges, in
these words,

It Is Reported I should be the occasion of Perverting the Lady Rochester, and
brought a Priest to her; one Tomson, alias Conyers: I deny it, all I did was at
the Request of the Earl of Rochester, who gave me a Letter to deliver to him;
which I did, but knew not the Contents; neither did that Lady report any such
thing of me at her death.

There be a great many other strange Reports that I have heard since I have
been a Prisoner; That I should be a means to Convert the Countess of Rochester,
by bringing one Thompson a Priest to her. Truly all that I was concerned in,
was some fifteen or sixteen years ago, I Lodged at Col. Vernors, that Married
the Lady Brooks: The Family were Papists, the Brooks's were Papists, and there
was this Thompson; and I did suppose him a Priest in the House, though I never
saw him at Popish Service, or Worship, though I was there half a year; but
comeing afterward to my Lord Rochester's, about some business I had to do for
him, and several other Persons of Quality, he sent for me one Afternoon from
the Parsonage in Adderbury, to his House, and his Lady and he stood together:
He sent to me, and asked me if my Horse were at home? said he, I would have you
carry this Letter to Mr. Thompson, if you are at leisure this Afternoon: My
Lord I am at leisure to serve you. So I took a Letter from his hand, and his
Lady's too, as I remember, (he made an offer that way) Sealed with his own
Seal, and carried it to Thompson, and delivered it to him, and he told me that
he would wait upon my Lord, for it was for some Lands my Lord did offer to
raise money for some occasions. This is the truth of that Scandal.

Note that in the former Speech he says, all I did, was, etc. and in the other
All that I was concerned in, was, etc. And at the bottom [This is the Truth of
that Scandal.] Giving the Reader to understand by this way of delivering
himself, that he had spoken the Truth, the whole Truth, and nothing but the
Truth; so help him God.

Now to Confront these Peremptory Assertions of his, It is certain, that the
day before the Lady Rochester fell sick, she said that College was a Papist, in
the hearing of several Persons; having said the same thing also before,
publicly at the Table of a Lady in that Neighborhood, as will be
sufficiently attested by many People of unexceptionable Credit, living near the
place; if the matter shall be in such sort questioned, as that it may be worth
the while to prove it, and that the persons concerned in the Enquiry shall
think fit to own their Names. The ground of this Honorable Ladies mistake, is
supposed to have been the Zeal of Colleges Interessing himself in the good
Offices of bringing the said Priest unto the Lady.

That which he says of carrying a Letter to Thompson, upon such considerations,
and in such manner as he represents it, is probably a Truth: But it is not as
he renders it, [All that he did, or [All that he was concerned in upon that
affair; for he has several times told a worthy Gentleman, a Trustee to the Lord
Rochester, and diverse others, That he the said College being about Fourteen
years since a Trooper under the Earl of Rochester, my Lord employed him to
bring one Thompson a Priest to his Lady, to draw her to the Romish Faith; and
that he brought him to my Lady several times; and that by this Thompsons means
she was perverted. This will be proved (if Insisted upon) by several Persons of
Worth and Credit in and about Bridgwater. The Inducement to the employing of
College upon this Errand, was his being in League at that time with a
Maidservant of my Ladies, who was afterward his Second Wife, and made use of
as a Proper Instrument for the Obliging of College to a Service of that kind.
Nor was this the only Letter, as may be undeniably proved, that College carried
upon that subject. We Will see now what he says to the business of Mr. Sergeant.

It Is said I Harbored Priests and Jesuits; and they instance in one Sergeant,
who lay at my House in Carter-Lane, Nine years since, by the name of Dr. Smith,
a Doctor of Physic; brought to me by one Monless an Apothecary in the Old
Baily; and one Mr. Field a Wollen-Draper within Ludgate; and was there as a Dr.
of Physic, and I knew for no other, (Speech by Edith College.

It is said that I had a Priest several years in my House, viz. Sergeant that
came over from Holland to Discover. About some ten years ago, that very same
man came to me, but was a Stranger to me; and he came to me by the name of Dr.
Smith, a Physician, and there was an Apothecary in the Old Bailey, and a
Linnen-Draper within Ludgate that came with him. They brought him thither, and
took a Chamber, and lay about half or three quarters of a year, at times, by
the Name of Dr. Smith, and as a Physician. This is the Truth of that, and no
otherwise. This is the Entertainment of Sergeant. (Bassets Speech.)

Upon the comparing of these two passages, you will find in the former, that he
denis the Knowledge of Sergeant, any further than as a Dr. of Physic; and in
the latter, slips it over with saying only that he was a Stranger when he came
to him. Now it is a certain Truth, (and proveable beyond dispute, so to be)
that College knew this Dr. of Physic to be Mr. Sergeant, even while he Lodged
in his House. And then for the Draper (whom he makes to be a Linnen-Draper in
the one Speech, and a Woollen in the other, It is absolutely averred (as I have
it from a sure hand) that this Draper never knew where Mr. Sergeant Lodged,
till he himself told him his Lodging.

Next to the business of Sir William Iennings, and Mr. Masters, it is
remarkable, that though he fenced and shifted upon his Trial, and takes express
notice of them in his Speech Printed for Edith College, yet he makes no
particular mention of them at his last Speech by word of mouth, notwithstanding
the weight and effect which those Witnesses had with the Jury: But in his
Written Speech, which was Published by his Relations, you have these words.

As to what Mr. Masters Swore, he was Unjust to me in omitting that part of our
discourse concerning the Parliament in Forty; For when he Cursed them, and the
Last Parliament at Westminster also; and said they were alike; and charged them
in Forty with beginning the War, and cutting off the Kings Head: I denied both,
and said it was the Papists that began that War, and the Death of the King was
the Fatal Consequence of it, which Mr. Charleton the Draper in Pouls
Churchyard countessisse; the discourse being at the further end of his Shop,
and he present; into which, Masters seeing me go, came apace from toward his
own Shop, and as I believe, on purpose to Quarrel with me, for which God
forgive him.

I shall have occasion by and by to handle this Point more at large. So that no
more needs to be said at present, but that College has several times in Mr.
Charletons Company, Iustifi'd the Proceedings of 1641. and pronounced the King
to be a Papist, as Mr. Charleton I presume will easily call to mind, if there
should be any occasion to refresh his memory upon that subject. [And that which
he says to Sir William Iennings likewise, is no more than an Empty Cavil,
without any color of a Defense.]

To come now to the Ill Usage that he Complains of [I was (says he in his last
Speech) under most strange Circumstances as ever any man was. I was kept
Prisoner so close in the Tower, that I could have no Conversation with any,
though I was certain the Popish Lords had it every day there, though I could
have none. I could not tell the Witnesses that were to Swear against me; I
could not tell what it was they Swore against me; for I could have no Copy of
the Indictment, nor no way possible to make any preparation to make my defense,
as I ought to have done, and might have done by Law. I had no liberty to do any
thing, as I am a dying man.]

Now for the Truth of this, I shall refer the Reader to his Two Petitions to
his Majesty; the one of July 28. and the other of August 11. prefixed to his
Trial, and two Orders of Council thereupon. In the Former, he prays that leave
may be given to Mr. Thomas Smith, and Mr. Robert West, to come to him; and also
to have the use of Pen, Ink, and Paper, in order only to make his Legal and
Just Defense; and also to have the Comfort of seeing his two Children; which
was all granted him as he desired. In his Second Petition of August 11. he
makes a Preambular Acknowledgment in these following words.

In full assurance therefore of the great Justice and Clemency of your Majesty,
and this Honorable Board, which he has lately had some Experience of, and
does with all Humility and Thankfulness acknowledge, etc. And then he further
prays,

Your Petitioner does humbly beseech your Majesty and this Honorable Board,
that he may have a Copy of the Indictment against him, or the particular
Charges of it: That his Council and Solicitor may have free Access to, and
private Conference with him; and because their own private affairs, or other
accidents may call away some of his Council from his Assistance, that Mr.
Wallop, Mr. Smith, Mr. Thompson, Mr. Datnel, Mr. West of the Middle Temple, Mr.
Holles of Lincoln's Inn Mr. Rotherham, Mr. Lovel, Mr. Rowny of Creys-Iun, Mr.
Pollexsin, Mr. Ward of the Inner Temple, may be assigned him for Council; and
Aaron Smith for his Solicitor, and that he may have a Copy of the Jurors to be
returned upon his Trial some days before his Trial. Hereupon it was Ordered by
his Majesty in Council, That the Friends and Relations of Stephen College, a
Prisoner in the Tower, shall have liberty of Visiting, and freely Conversing
with him, and the Lieutenant of the Tower, (having first caused their Names to
be taken in Writing) is to suffer such Friends and Relations to have Access to
the said Stephen College without any Interruption from time to time accordingly.

Here Is a Clamor, ye see, upon a False and Groundless Suggestion, delivered
upon the Credit of a Dying Man, as the true state of his Condition, when yet it
was no other in effect, then the saying over of his Lesson from the dictate of
his Solicitor.

Before ye Plead (says Aaron Smith in his Paper of Instructions) speak to this
purpose.

My Lords, I have been used not only unlike an Innocent, or an Englishman, but
I believe more barbarously than any Convicted Villain under the Tyranny of
Turkey, or France: When I was first Apprehended, I was, contrary to the
Privileges of a Citizen of London, hurried out from thence before a Secretary
of State. Here Is the King and his Government Charged with Tyranny, and his
Majesty's Authority subjected, even in a case of Treason, to the jurisdiction
of my Lord Mayor. [I might with as much Justice have been hanged at Tyburn by
the way, as to be brought hither to be Murdered, with a little more Formality.
And then a little lower: [I will not be Murdered in Hugger mugger.] Answer thus
(says Aaron Smiths Paper) if the Attorney General, or any other of the Kings
Council Interrupt ye; or when you have done, tell ye, you Arraign the Justice
of the Nation.

When you come to open your own Evidence (says Smith's Paper again) speak to
this purpose: [I hope you will not bring so much Scandal upon your selves [My
Lords and Gentlemen of the Jury] as to be the Popes Drudges; and give the first
blow to the Protestant Cause, by Convicting me upon such Infamous Evidence. And
lastly, Give an Account of your going down to Oxford, and that you went,
because Haines had Sworn the Papists designed to destroy the Parliament there.]
So that College, ye see, was Instructed, not only in a Scandalous method of
Reviling the Court, but he was also told what Cause he should Assign for his
going to Oxford, and directed to cast it upon Haines' s Oath, as a color
rather of his Sollicitors Invention, than the true and real Motive that carried
him thither.

Before I go any further, it will become me to distinguish betwixt Colleges Two
Speeches. The one was delivered by word of mouth, upon the Cart, at the time of
his Execution. The other was conveyed from him out of the Castle, to some of
his Relations in Writing; and this was the Paper, which at the first he denied
the sending of, and afterward confessed.

Having now laid open what it is, or rather what it is not, which in Colleges
case is called the Protestant Religion; the meaning of Colleges Protestants and
Papists: Having proved the Libellous Pictures upon him, and given the Reader a
taste of his Unfaithful dealing, even to the last: We shall here proceed to a
fair and impartial Deliberation upon the subject matter of his Charge, and
leave the Reader to his own thoughts, whether Guilty or not Guilty upon the
whole matter.

. 6. Notes upon Colleges ordinary way of Discourse and Conversation.
IN my way to the Capital Branch of his Charge (i. e. the Design of Seizing the
King, and Subverting the Government) it will not be amiss to take some notice
of the humor of the man in the ordinary way of his Behavior and Conversation:
The Biass of his Inclinations and Opinions, and other circumstantial
Discoveries of his Imaginations and Purposes, with a respect to those Seditious
ends. And yet it may be looked upon, perhaps as an Idle and a Superfluous
undertaking, to put my self to the trouble of proving that by Particular
Instances, which might be as well done by a General Appeal to all the Clubs and
Coffee-houses about this Town wheresoever he haunted: for they can every one of
them bear witness to his Intemperances against the Government; and that when he
was not making himself and the Company sport in his way of Ridiculing the King,
the Duke of York, the Church, and the Court, the man was as good as out of his
Element.

They told me (says he, speaking of some of the Lords of the Council) there was
Treason Sworn against me; truly they surprised me when they said so; for of all
things in the world I thought my self as free from that, as any man. I asked
them if any man living had the confidence to Swear Treason against me? They
said Several, Three or Four, as I remember. Last Speech.

As to what Dugdale, Smith, Turberville, and Hains Swore against me, they did
Swear such Treason that nothing but a Madman would have Trusted any body with.
Ibid.

And again [It is a very unlikely thing that I should speak Treason to Dugdale.]

There are two things now worthy of Consideration in this Point (even setting
aside the positive Proofs of the Treason spoken.) First, Did he speak the
Treason whereof he stands Accused ot not? Secondly, It may be a Question, What
it is that he calls Treason? It is notoriously known to most that ever knew the
man, that it was his common Guise to talk of his Majesty at such a Desperate
Rate, that People were afraid to give him the Hearing; and that he has been
cautioned hundreds of times to keep his Tongue in's Head; or, if he did not, he
would talk himself at last to the Gallows. Why should it be such a Surprise,
now, to this Rash and Violent Man, to hear that there was Treason Sworn against
him; when every man (almost) that kept him Company, warned him of it, and
foretold him what it would come to at last? And then, how frivolous again is
the Manner of his Discharging himself from the Treasons Sworn against him by
the Witnesses? None but a Madman (he says) would have Trusted any body in such
a case. And yet it appears from the Tenor of his whole Conversation, and the
frequent Advices of his Friends, that he Trusted any man that came next, with
as much as that amounts to. And now once more, to the unlikelihood of his
speaking such things to Dugdale: Let the Reader ask and answer himself, as to
the Probability of his being as free with Dugdale, as he was with other people.
Let not any man take this for a Rambling Story upon a bare Hearsay; for I am
ready to prove and justify the truth of every particular: Not as the Author of
the No Protestant Plot takes upon him, with an [I do assure all the world, etc
(Page 19.) My self and diverse others have seen the Original, etc. (Page 18.)
And this same I, and My Self, a Quidam all this time, that a man does not know
where to find: But for the Satisfaction of any man that doubts, I have here
exposed the Authors name with this Pamphlet.

They told me (says College again) it was Sworn against me that I had a design
to pull the King out of Whitehal, and to serve him as his Father was served, or
to that purpose: The Loggerhead, his Father, or that kind of Language. I did
deny it then, and do now deny it, upon my Death. Last Speech.

This Denial I suppose, speaks to both the Members of this Period: The Design
upon the Person of the King; and the Villainy of the Foul Language upon his
Late, Blessed Father. To the Former we have allotted a Section by it self, and
the Latter may be fairly concluded (I think) out of his own mouth. First (says
he) I thought that the Parliament that sat last at Westminster, did stand up
for the Peoples Rights after the same manner that the Parliament in Forty did,
(Trial, Page 83.) So that after a most abominable Scandal upon the last
Parliament at Westminster in the Comparison, he justifies the Rebellion in the
Application. And then again, I did maintain (says he) that they (the Parliament
of Forty) were an Honest Good Parliament, and much of opinion with the
Parliament that sat last at Westminster, which was for the true Interest of
the Nation, Page 81. Now if I understand this matter aright, It is Tacitly to
call the King all the Tyrants and Murderers which that Traitorous Faction
called him. And besides, What Is the meaning of [Like Father Like Son] in his
Raree Show? But First, as appears by the Context to Involve them both in the
same Fate: And Secondly to represent them both under the same Character. That
is to say (in short) to apply all those Brutalities of Language which he has in
that Libel and elsewhere, bestowed upon the Son, to the Reproach and Dishonor
of his Martyred Father. To finish this point, He had a kind of Idiome by
himself, and seldom Discoursed of his Majesty, his Royal Highness, the
Hierarchy, or the Privy Council, but in the Style of Old Rowley, Mack,
Tantivies and Tories. [Old Rowley (says he) is as errant a Papist as his
Brother.] And this was his note at every turn. [Old Rowley (says he again)
cares not a halfpenny what becomes of the Crown, or how he leaves it in Debt,
or what becomes of his People as to matter of Religion, etc.] At an other time
[They are come (says he) to change Candles at Court already; but we will make them
eat 'em too, before we have done. [When we have done with the Papists (says he
in another Company) We Will do well enough with the Bishops.]

Now here is another Passage to a very honest man of his own Trade, and a Loyal
Subject. This person being out of Town about a week before the opening of the
Oxford-Parliament, fell into Company with College; well Mounted and a Case of
Pistols before him, not far from Enfield. Mr. College (says he) what will the
Parliament do at Oxford? By God (says College) I know what they will do. They Will
begin with the Bill of Exclusion. The King has no money, and he gets not a
penny without it. Well (says the other) but what if his Majesty will not pass
it? We shall see then (says College) who are the Papists. We Will run them down
first, and then we shall do well enough with the Clergy. We Will level them with
the Ground. We are Ten to One. Is not this a Broad sign made at the King? And
does it not precisely answer the very Pinch of the Evidence? And methinks he
spoke home to another Ioyner too, that charged him with the neglect of his
Trade; and all the reply he made, was the laying his hand upon his Sword, as if
he had said, This is it that I intend to trust to.

There are so many instances of his Pragmatical meddling Humor, that the recital
of them would cost more Time and Paper than the thing is worth. A Gentleman in
discourse with College in the Castle at Oxford, was telling him (after many
professions of his Innocence) Mr. College (says he) you know I have my self at
Cornbury heard you many times talk undutifully of the Government. Now methinks,
you that are but a Mechanic should not presume to meddle with things so much
above ye. Was it any harm (says he) for Amos to leave his Cows? Nay he was so
Bold and Inconsiderate when things went otherwise than he would have them, that
upon the Dissolution of the Last Westminster Parliament, he went presently away
to Dick's Coffee-House in a Hufl. Well (says he) I perceive here is no good to
be done. We must even draw our Swords and Fight it over again. These were the
words, or to this effect.

The Turbulence of his Spirit was seen upon all occasions, where there was but
the least color for the fastening of a Scandal upon the King, the Church, and
his Majesty's Ministers of State and Justice. His Vein lay much toward Doggerel
and Designing, as he has plentifully given the world to understand in his
Learned Drawings, which are still charged with the utmost Rudeness, Malice, and
Scurrility imaginable: Insomuch that the Treason of his Heart is laid as open
in those Cuts, as that of his Tongue was at his Trial; with this single
Difference, that the one was only a wish, and the other an Overt Act, and a
declared Resolution.

This device called the Catholic Gamesters, is a venomous Libel upon all the
Orders of the Government; and first upon the King himself, charging all the
Pretended Miscarriages of State, in Show, upon the Papists, but in Truth, and
Effect, upon his Majesty.

It is a Libel upon the House of Peers, by the Culling out of so many Lords by
Name, under the Title of Protestants, and Representing in that number only Two
Bishops, that is to say, Hereford and Lincoln, implying all the rest to be
Papists. In the House of Commons, he tells us of Pensioners who Voted by
Contents, got Bills to Pass against the Common Good, etc.

And then he descends to the Bench, and the Jury, where he brings in the Pope,
speaking of the Priests and Jesuits in these words: Hell keep the rest from
Justice (we call Fury,)
And send them Wakeman's or a Gascoign Jury:
Picked, Bribed, Instructed how to murder Truth,
From Grand St. Martins Bull, and Cits Wide Mouth.
And take them quite through, they are all of the same Style and Design: And I
would have any man tell me now, if a body may not charitably enough conclude,
that whosoever Defames the Government at This rate, wishes it Overturned; and
if he had but Power and Opportunity, would do his part toward it. I should be
ungrateful, now I am upon this subject, if I should not acknowledge the Honor
he has done me in diverse of his Emblematical Pieces. He has presented the world
with Six Towzers, and L'Estrange with Four Fair pair of Gallows.

Here Is nothing hitherto, but what may very well pass for the Preamble to a
Conspiracy, and he that considers his Haunts, the Company he kept, the Access
he had to the Private Cabals and Consultations of the Faction; together with
his forwardness to thrust himself into all Popular Brawls and Contests, and
that Stubborn Obstinacy which was natural to him, will undoubtedly look upon
him as an instrument every way qualified for such a purpose. As they were
carrying away Sam. Harris about the Treasonous Libel that cost Mr. Fitz-Harris
his Life, and a Crowd of People about him, a very honest Gentleman, a friend of
mine, saw College whispering with a Person then in Power, from whom he went
immediately to make his way to Harris; but the press was so great that he was
forced to deliver his Message to him over Three or Four Heads, and so called to
him just over the shoulder of the Gentleman, my friend. Come Sam. (says he)
take a good heart, Mr. Such a one -- (naming the person) makes no doubt but to
bring ye off.

And to show ye now what Credit College had with his Party, (but to what
purpose in this particular I cannot say) He took his Hat which was very broad
Brim'd, and holding it in his hands with the inside upward, I have given away
(says he) twice as much money as this Hat would hold, Brims and all. Now I
suppose this money was not thrown away to make Ducks and Drakes; so that I
cannot reconcile this Declaration of his to a certain Passage in his Last
Speech, viz. [I take God to witness, I never had one Sixpence, or any thing
else, to carry on any Design; and if it were to save my life now, I cannot
Charge any man in the world with any design against the Government (as God is
my Witness) or against his Majesty, or any other Person.]

The Explication of this Clause depends upon the knowledge of what is meant by
these words, [ANY DESIGN:] for the Expression is too large to be True, if it be
taken in the Latitude: and if it be understood with a Restriction, i.e. that he
knew of no Design against the King, or the Government, the Principle of Forty
one (by him asserted in his Trial) brings him off, when the Rebellion it self
was declared to be FOR the King, and the Government; so that it is but his
placing the Government in the People, or the Two Houses, to Countenance the
Equivocation: And finally, The disclaiming of a Design against any other person
goes a little too far methinks; for by his own Confession there was a Design
carried on against the Papists.

It would be proper enough in this place to render some Account of his
Deportment at Oxford in the Prison. He was, at first coming, Stubborn and
Captious, Insisting upon the Rights of an Englishman, and Menacing his Keeper
till he was brought to better Terms, by telling him plainly what he was to
trust to. Nothing put him more out of Patience, then telling him of his
Pictures. In his behavior in Company he seemed always to be very little
concerned; but his Keeper says he had terrible Agonies when he was by himself
that kept him waking sometimes whole nights. A little before he died, Mr.
Gregory the Sheriff came into his Room with an Order to have his Body delivered
whole to his Friends. Upon the sight of the Seal, he leapt from his Bed with a
great deal of Joy; expecting it might have been a Pardon; but upon finding the
mistake, he threw himself down again in a deep Disquiet. He says in his Dying
words (Printed for E. College) That the Messenger who brought him the Message
of his Death, told him he might save his Life, if he would confess who was the
cause of his coming to Oxford, and upon what Account, which was ill done of the
Messenger; for it was not only without, but contrary to Orders.

He was in the main very ignorant of any thing of Religion; and he would say
that he found, and that he was guided by the Spirit; and this was his perpetual
Refuge. What Principles he had were Enthusiastical. As for Instance, He said
that Eating and Drinking in the Eucharist, and so washing in Baptism was to be
understood in a Spiritual Sense, and declared that he received no benefit by
the Prayers of the Church. He spoke of the Quakers as the People of God, and
particularly of one that had been with him as the honestest man that ever he
knew. It was replied to him by a Reverend Divine, that the Quakers denied in
effect, Christianity it self: As the Two Sacraments, and a Succession of
Ministers. And next they denied both the Divinity, and Satisfaction of our
Savior; naming Pen, whom College said he very well knew, but did not own him
in that Principle. His Favorite was Mr. Baxter, whom he heard more than Dr.
Owen; and his Opinion was, that God had a Church in all the Sects in England.

7. College Iustifies the Grounds and the Proceedings of the late Rebellion.
AFter these Pregnant and Undeniable Proofs of so many Virulent and Audacious
Outrages upon the Person, and Dignity of his Majesty, and the very Form, as
well as the Administration of the Government. It remains now only to be
considered how far the Malefactor was Principled toward the Actuating of that
Malice, and by what Methods he proponnded the putting of those Disloyal
Inclinations into Execution.

First, As to his Opinion of the Sovereignty, according to the Constitution of
this Kingdom, we shall not need to look any further for it, than into his own
words, and the inevitable Conclusion which naturally arises from them. He
appeals from Mr. Masters to Mr. Charlton in St. Paul's Churchyard, about his
Justifying the Parliament of Forty, and yet it is a known Truth, that he has
several times justified that Parliament in the hearing of Mr. Charleton. He
does acknowledge in his Trial (Page 82.) That he said, That Parliament did
nothing but what they had Just Cause for, and that the Parliament that last
sat at Westminster, was of the same opinion. Now in saying this, he takes upon
himself the Owning of all the Principles, whereupon they proceeded in that
Controversy betwixt the King and the Two Houses: And in so doing, strips the
King of all his Regalities, and Lodges the Supremacy in the Lords and Commons.
[The Papists began the War (he says) The Papists broke off the Treaty at
Uxbridge; and the Papists cut off the Kings Head, Page 81.] And in that case,
He Justifies the Old Parliament. What can be clearer now, than that if this
King should have been pressed upon the same Terms with his Royal Father, After
the same manner as the Papists Began, and Pursued the Former War, and brought
his Late Majesty to the Block, Just so it should have been called another
Popish Exploit, the Reducing of this King to the same Extremities: And as they
made the Late King, the Church, and the Royal Party, Papists in the One
Rebellion, they would have treated this King, Church, and all his Faithful
Subjects too, as Papists too in another Rebellion. These are the Oxford Papists
fairly Expounded. And under this Ambiguity it is, that he Covers and Disguises
his pretext of Faith and Affection to the King and his Government: That is to
say, as he intends the Kings Authority to be Virtually Resolved into the Two
Houses: And this Seditious Maxim is a little more expressly set forth in his
Raree Show. In which Libel, there is a Figure of a Man with a Chests at's Back,
which he Explains to bemeant of the King, with the Lords and Commons in a Box,
and Plucked down in the Mire by Three Fellows, with these words to illustrate
that Passage, So, so, the Gyant's down,
Let Us MASTERS out of Pound, etc.
In which two Verses is laid open, both the Design of Dethroning the King, and
in the word MASTERS the Doctrine of the Supremacy of the Two Houses.

Now for a further Confirmation of his Opinion, He declared to Mr. Crosthwait
in the Castle at Oxford, That he believed it lawful to Resist the King, in case
he should invade his Property; and he endeavored to defend it by several
Arguments, till at length he was (at least) seemingly Convinced of his Mistake.
This makes it abundantly Evident what he thought of the Lawfulness of such
Resistance, if the Case of Property should come to be the Question; And it
rests only now to make it out that he did take Property to be the Question; and
then all his Pretensions of Respect to the King, and to the Government fall to
the Ground: As what is the meaning of that Passage in his Raree Show, where he
charges the King with Fleecing Englands Flocks,
Long Fed with Bits and Knocks, etc.
but to denote the King to be a Tyrant and an Oppressor?

Now to sum up briefly what is already delivered; Here are all the Forerunners
of, and Dispositions to a Rebellion, as clear as the Noonday, and College
deeply engaged in every Point. First the General Pretense of a Design upon the
Protestant Religion, as the Foundation of a Popular Discontent. 2dly. That
General Religion, in such a manner as it is represented, is not any where to be
found. 3dly. Under the Notion of the Papists, to Invade this Religion, the
Church Established, the King and his Party are most apparently struck at.
4thly. All manner of Defamatory Libels are Contrived, Published, and Promoted
by College himself toward the Enflaming of a Sedition. 5thly. It is Remarkable,
Colleges Shuffling and Equivocating, to Evade the Charge, which is,
nevertheless made out against him at last. 6thly. There is an Undeniable
Discovery of his Disaffection, even to the Degree of a Mortal Hatred, both to
Church and State. And 7thly. Considering the Method of Colleges Proceedings,
with the Tendency of his Practices, Principles, and Persuasions, what could any
man believe less (even without any further Evidence) than that College
Meditated, and Designed the Improvement of all Occasions to the Subverting of
the Government; and, in such manner too, as it is imputed to him?

. 8. There was a Design upon the King at Oxford, and College manifestly Engaged
in the Conspiracy.
THat there was a Plot to be Executed at Oxon, will be granted, I presume, by
any man that has but eyes in's head, and looks that way: And this a Republican
Plot too, carried on under the pretended Apprehension of a Popish one. But the
Multitude were to be moved and prepared for it: And see the course now that they
took to work upon the Passions of the Common People. The first thing to be done
was thoroughly to possess them that the Papists had a Design upon the Parliament
at Oxford; and consequently upon the Protestant Religion; the Liberties and
Properties of the English Nation. To this purpose, How many Impudent and
Ridiculous Shams, by Counterfeit Tickets, and Letters were Exposed in the daily
Papers of Intelligence, which at that time were swallowed whole, as the very
Oracles of the Vulgar? [Several Papers (says the Protestant Mercury, Numb. 24.)
have been dropped about the City, that there would be a Massacre at Oxford on the
25th. instant, and that the 5th. of November will be turned into the 25th. of
March, (1681.) and one of these was thrown into a Shop in Grace Church Street.
But you shall now have the Letter it self at large, with all its appertinences.

London, March 16. This very morning, Letters were found in several places in
this City, unsealed; purporting a warning of a Dangerous Design to Destroy the
Parliament; particularly one Letter was found in Mr. Brett's Shop, a
Linnen-Draper in Grace Church Street, which was supposed to be put in at a
Cleft in the Window: His man finding it when he opened the Shop, Communicated
the same to his Master, who caused him to subscribe the Paper, that he might be
able to testify it was the same that he found; and then Presented it to one of
our City Magistrates, who we suppose by this time has made his Majesty
acquainted with the Contents, which were as follows:

To all the Noble Members of this most Honorable ensuing Parliament in General.
Noble Lords and Gentlemen,
Though I dare not, nor am I in a condition to discover the whole substance of
some Hellish Designs now on foot against his Majesty's Royal Person, and
against you all at Oxford; yet though I was sure to be Racked for it, I must
and will give you a Hint of them as follows.

Remember the Fifth of November, which is now to be the 25th. of March; which,
if not prevented, will be the utter destruction of both King and Parliament,
and all True Protestants in his Majesty's Dominions.

And if that fail, beware of many thousands that lie in wait for your Lives,
whose Design is so closely carried, that it will, I doubt, be a hard matter to
discover it, until it be too late.

Mark well what I say, and make not slight of it, as ye tender your Lives and
Fortunes, and the Kingdoms safety. I say, make not slight of it, as you tender
your Lives and Fortunes, and the Kingdoms safety.

I am in a mean condition, and under many Afflictions, but cannot discover my
self as yet. Thus wishing you all happy success, I take leave.

This Letter was Superscribed as follows.
To all True Protestants, who love the King and Parliament, whosoever finds
this Note, let him with all speed repair to some Elected Members of the
Parliament, and present it to them. (Ben. Harris' s Protestant Domestique,
Numb. 107.)




You shall see now how the humor is followed, Numb. 110.

A Letter importing some Cursed and Treasonable Designs still Carrying on (by
the Ever Plotting Papists) against his Majesty's Royal Person, and the
Protestant Religion, being lately found in the Wood of Bally-Holly in the
County of Cork, in the Kingdom of Ireland, by a Gentleman of the County of
Lymrick as he Traveled through that Wood: He thought it of that Concern to the
Public, that he immediately gave it to the Earl of Barrimore, to be by him
transmitted to his Grace the Duke of Ormond, Lord Lieutenant of that Kingdom,
which was done (as we are informed) by the said Earl accordingly. A True Copy
of which Letter follows, viz.
Brother David,
I received a Letter lately, wherein I understand that we shall go on with our
Design before Easter Day. We shall have Encouragements to destroy Heretics,
Lord Br. will be one of the Persons to destroy the Heretical King, and
Monmouth. Encourage all our Friends to keep their Arm private. I am

Yours till death, Allen Condon.
Jan. 8.

Superscribed to David Raach, Parish Priest of Bally-Holly. This was Published
April 1. 1681.

There would be no end, if I should go through with all the Cheats upon that
Juncture, of the same stamp. One more only and I have done.

Letters from Ireland say that there was a Great Leading Priest, a man of great
Request among the Popish Party, having been very Active in carrying on their
Designs, was somewhat troubled in Conscience (being upon his Deathbed) at some
things which he had kept secret, sent for some Protestants of the Neighborhood,
unknown to the Papists, whom he had formerly been obliged to, to come and see
him e're he departed; who coming according to his request, the Priest Expressed
himself to this Effect.

God has put it in my heart to warn ye to have a care of your selves; for you,
and all the rest of the Protestants are designed to be Massacred; It was to
have been done some time since, but an accident obstructed it; so that the day
is not certainly appointed, though the thing is fully concluded on: therefore
defend your selves as well as you can. The same thing is designed in England.
Ib. Numb. 112.


Now as all these Stories were only Forgeries and Contrivances to put the
Hotheaded and credulous Fools of the Faction into a Ferment, and prepare them
for any violent Attempt; the Project did so far also take effect, as to draw
together armed multitudes into a Resolution and Confederacy, to oppose
whatsoever should be presented unto them under the color of a Popish Design:
And they that had so little Wit or Honesty, as to run to Oxford, and so
Accoutred, upon such an April-Errand, would undoubtedly have gone through with
their work upon a good occasion, when they were so far onward in their way.
Here was a very extraordinary Concurrence of Palpable Impostures, accommodated
to the same End, and meeting upon the same nick of time too. And this is not
all neither; for there were several Printed Papers, of Clamor, and Complaint,
against the Kings taking his Guards with him, under a Pretext that they would
hinder the Liberty of Debates, and overawe the Parliament. This Circumstance
does very much favor the Presumption of a Plot upon the Government; far if
they were afraid of a Popish Attempt, his Majesty's Guards would have been a
good Security against it, and no inconvenience to them at all, unless in case
of a Phanatical Conspiracy: so that their apprehension of the Guards is a very
fair Interpretation of what they meant by the Papists.

If there was not a Plot, what meant the Distinguishing Marks of the
same-Colour'd-Ribbon in their Hats, with No Popery No Slavery in them, for
their Motto: and such quantities of them distributed for the discrimination of
the Party? And why that Motto either? but first to intimate a notorious Scandal
upon the King, as if his Majesty were Popishly, and Tyrannically Inclined. And
2dly. As an Ostentation of their Force and Resolution to Oppose any Power
whatsoever, even under the color of that Bare Pretense.

From this Probability of a Seditious Design, we shall come closer now to a
Proof of the thing it self; and see how far College was concerned in it, both
from his own Words and Actions; and from the Agreement of other Evidences with
the Points of his Accusation: Not meddling at all with the merits of his Cause,
as they appeared upon his Trial.

As for what Arms I had (says he) and what Arms others had, they were for our
own Defense, in case the Papists should make any Attempt upon us, by way of
Massacre, or any Invasion or Rebellion, that we should be ready to defend our
selves. God is my Witness, this is all I know: If this be a Plot, This I was
in; but in no other. But never knew of any Numbers or Times appointed for
Meeting; but we said one to another, that the Papists had a Design against the
Protestants when we did meet, as I was a man of General Conversation; and in
case they should rise, we were ready: But then they should begin the Attempt
upon us. Last Speech.

It is to be noted first, that they were all Armed. 2dly. That they
Communicated among themselves, and entered into a kind of League of
Conjunction. 3dly. That they Reputed themselves strong enough to Encounter such
a Body of men, as (if we may believe them) threatened Destruction to the
Government. And 4thly. That they were resolved to put it to the hazard, if the
Papists should attempt any thing: So that here is a Formed Conspiracy
acknowledged; and so many men as good as listed, but however linked in a common
Design, without any Authority or Commission: And we know very well what the Law
says in this case, let the intent of it be what it will. We said to one another
(says he) that the Papists had a design against the Protestants; and then that
we were Ready, but They should begin the Attempt; which may seem to qualify
the matter by making it only a Defensive War. But still, even that War it self,
without the Kings Commission, is a plain Rebellion. And this is not yet the
worst on it; for in Vindicating the War of the Two Houses in 1640. etc. and
their Proceedings under the same disguise of calling the Kings Friends Papists;
and pretending that the King in his Person made War against his Authority in
the Lords and Commons; and under that color, representing themselves to be
only upon the Defensive: In Vindicating that War (I say) which was a Hellish
Rebellion, it is but Consonant to their Principles, to justify the same
Proceedings over again, under the same Pretensions.

He says further in his other Speech, [I never was engaged in any manner of
Plot or Conspiracy whatsoever in my life, against the Kings Person, Laws or
Government, or know of any that is or was, the Papists only excepted -- It is
utterly false that I was to have seized the King, either at White Hall, or at
Oxon; and I do here solemnly declare I knew not of so much as one single Person
on Gods Earth that was, or would have stood by me in that Attempt.] And to the
same effect he says over again in his last Speech.

I shall not force these words of his beyond a fair Congruity with the tenor
of what he says in other places upon this subject; though the liberty he has
taken throughout, of speaking more or less than the just and naked Truth, and
wrapping himself up in Disguises and Reserves, so as best to serve his purpose,
might justify me in the freedom of taking him at the worst, where there is any
place for a double meaning. [He never engaged against the Kings Person (he
says, etc.) Did not that Parliament, whose Cause, Doctrine, and Proceedings,
College has so highly approved, say the same thing? And not only Disclaim their
being AGAINST the Person of the late King; but declare openly to the World, the
greatest Tenderness and Veneration for him that was possible? What shall we say
then of him that speaks their very Words, upon the same Grounds, and under the
same Circumstances; but that he has the same Thoughts also (which he in truth
Confesses too) with those, who under that pretense advanced a Rebellion against
their Sovereign? What does he mean again by saying that [HE was not to have
Seized the King, etc.] Is it that He himself was not to do it with his own
hands? Or that the Sovereignty being lodged in the Two Houses, his PERSON might
be Seized, and the KING remain untouched? There is another Sentence in the same
Speech, that speaks a little plainer yet. [I did not understand (says he) but
when I served the Parliament, I served the King too.] Which in the Acceptance
of Forty and Forty-One, sounds as much as King and Parliament on the one side,
in opposition to Charles Stuart on the other.

Now as to the Plot of Seizing the Person of the King, if the Witnesses had not
made it out accordingly to the very Letter, I should rather have suspected a
design under the countenance of Loyal Service, to interpose a Force betwixt his
Majesty and some Pretended Danger. And this officious zeal to be followed with
seizing half a dozen (perhaps) of his Majesty's most necessary Ministers and
Friends. And then a Proclamation immediately of some damned Hellish Plot; a
parcel of good Statutable Knights of the Post to make it good, and there had
been the work done. This would have been no Ridiculous thing to imagine, if his
Majesty had not had over and above his Guards, the Honor and Fidelity of the
Two Houses of his Security.

There are a great many slippery Passages in Colleges two Speeches [Had the
Papists (says he) or their Party offered to destroy the Parliament, as was
sworn, and feared they would, I was there to have lived and died with 'em.]

Here Is a Disjunction of the Papists, OR their Party; which I cannot tell what
to make of, unless he ranges the Servants of the King, and the Church in a
Confederate subserviency to the Papists, which is but consonant to what he has
said elsewhere. There is a doubtful Clause too in his last Speech [Men (says
he, speaking of the Presbyterians) without any manner of design; but to serve
God, serve his Majesty, and keep their Liberties and Properties.] Now Colleges
way of keeping his Property, is to Fight for it, in case the King should Invade
it, as he professed to a Divine a little before his Execution: Beside that the
word [KEEP] seems to lean a little that way, especially from a man that first
supposes his Property to be Invaded; and then declares his resolution to resist
the King, in case of such Invasion.

We shall now as briefly as may be, apply matter of Fact to the Capital parts
of his Charge. The Designing of the Sculpture to his Raree-Show is proved upon
him so point blank, that he himself had not the face to deny it: And that
Draught made him as Guilty of, and as Answerable for the Malicious intent of
it, as if the Ballad had been originally his own: His Publishing of it was a
further Aggravation of the Crime; and the Pleasure he took in Singing it up and
down (as he did to several eminent Persons of quality) and in Exposing it, made
all that was in it his own too. In that Doggrel Copy there is Chalked out the
very Train of the whole Conspiracy; and so plainly too, that it will not bear
any other Construction: As for example. Help Cooper, Hughs and Snow, with a
Hey, with a Hey,
To pull down Raree-Show, with a Ho.
So, so, the Gyant's down,
Let Us Masters out of Pound,
With a Hey Tronny Nony Nony No.


Here Is first the King to be pulled down (under the Rarce-Show) and Cooper,
Hughs, and Snow (being Officers belonging to both Houses) are to represent the
Lords and Com^^^^s in the doing of it; which reflects as odious a scandal upon
the Two Houses as upon his Majesty. In the next place he supposes the King to
be down; and to answer that fancy, there are three Fellows in the Plate,
lugging of him in the Dirt: And then follows [Let's Masters out of Pound:]
which is only to say, That now the King is down, the Lords and Commons are to
take upon them the Administration of the Government. But let us see how he goes
on. And now you have freed the Nation, with a Hey, etc.
Cram in the Convocation, with a Ho;
With Pensioners, All and some
Into this Chest of Rome,
With a Hey, etc.


The first line here makes the Freedom of the Nation to ensue upon the Deposing
of the King. The second sends the Convocation after him. The third, all those
whom he is pleased to call Pensioners: And the fourth makes them all to be
Papists. Here Is the King, the Convocation, and the Pensioners gone already. Now
see what is next. And thrust in Six and twenty, with a Hey, etc.
With Not Guilty, good plenty, with a Ho:
And Hoot them hence away,
To Cullen or Breda:


We have here the very Track of the Conspiracy, as it was proved at his Trial.
The Bishop's are to be dispatched away too, and the Not Guilty-Lords, in the
Vote upon my Lord Stafford. And at best, to be all of them driven out of the
Nation, as the Late King was, and a great part of his Adherents. We shall now
conclude this point with the two last lines: Halloe, the Hunts begun, with a
Hey, etc.
Like Father, like Son, with a Ho, etc.


I have in my hand the Manuscript of Colleges own writing, from whence this
Ballad was Printed; where it is to be noted, that instead of Halloe, it was in
the Original, Stand to it; but that struck out, and Halloe interlin'd in the
place of it; the other being too broad a discovery of the Violence they
intended. Let me further observe, that this Song was Calculated for Oxford;
that is to say, both for the Time, and the Place, When, and Where this Exploit
was to have been executed. And now for a close; What can be the meaning of Like
Father, like Son; but a design and encouragement (as appears from the
Connection) to serve them both alike; and to conclude both Father and Son, under
one and the same Condemnation.

The Faction did, without dispute, flatter themselves that they should find
Friends, even in the Parliament it self, to Authorize them in their Enterprise;
(but they were egregiously mistaken it seems in their measures.) And they
grounded their Hopes upon the Interest they had made in most places of the
Kingdom to secure an Election for their turn. This Prospect and Confidence does
most notoriously appear in the contrivance of the Raree-Show, which in truth
looks liker a Song of Triumph, as for a thing already done, then a bare Project
and Exhortation toward the doing of it: Insomuch that they have in this Ballad
delineated the very Scheme of their Intentions. It is a thing very remarkable
too, that the same Pulse beats still in all their Pamphlets of Appeal to the
Multitude; which speaks them clearly to be animated with the same souls, and
directed to the same end. As Vox Patriae for the purpose, (among forty others.)
What is it, but under the Notion of Petitions and Addresses, in the name of the
People of England, a certain Compendium of Instructions toward the Forming and
carrying on of a Conspiracy? This Libel lays out the very Model of the Plot,
for which College was Tried, Condemned, and Executed. It prescribes the Removal
of Counselors and Officers, the ordering of the Militia, the Retrenching the
Power of the King, the Dissolving the Order of the Church, the setting all
sorts of Heretics at liberty, the Calling and Continuing of Parliaments at
the Peoples pleasure. And all this Addressed to the Commons in Parliament in
such a manner; as if his Majesty were scarce worth Consulting upon the matter;
only instead of Seizing the King, and Governing without him, they have found
out a way of giving their Representatives some blind and general hints of what
they would be at; and then honestly tell them, that they will stand by them with
their Lives and Fortunes, let them do what they please.

It is also a further Confirmation of this Plot, the Correspondence betwixt Mr.
Fitz-Harris's Declaration, and the several Points given in Evidence against
College.

Mr. Fitz-Harris declared that there was a design to Seize the King. Of this he
spoke often, and said, when the Party had Seized the King, they would have
obliged him to call a Parliament, which should sit until the Bill of Exclusion
against the Duke were passed; all evil Counselors removed, and men of their
Choosing put into places of Trust; the Militia settled, and the Navy put into
Good hands; all Grievances Redressed; and all things ordered to their own
liking. And had this Design succeeded, he said the Bishops and others of the
Clergy would have suffered severely. (Dr. Hawkins's Narrative, Page 4)

This Account of a Combination does not only Nick the several parts of the
Evidence against College, but it does most exactly answer the Method of One and
forty, which College justifies; and consequently approves of the same thing
over again in so doing.

Now Mr. Fitz-Harris being demanded as a Dying man, whether this that he had
declared concerning the Design to seize the King were true; He called God to
witness that it was every word true.

And does not the Information against George Wetheridge, taken September 21.
1681. speak as home to the same effect?

Is not the tide strangely turned (says he) Were not the Parliament men at
Oxford, and those that were with 'em, (being to the number of 40000 men Armed)
great Fools that they did not seize the King there? And if that they had wanted
strength (says he) I would have been one to have assisted them: And that they
should have brought the King to London, to Guild Hall; and there the Parliament
should have sat, and have kept his Majesty there till they had made their own
Terms with him. And the same Information adds further, that Wetheridge said the
King was a Papist; and had a design to bring in Popery and Arbitrary Power, and
Reign as the King of France, etc] To m^ltiply Instances would be to over-do the
thing that I pretend, wherefore this shall suffice.

If I were bent upon unnecessary Cavils, I might enlarge my self abundantly in
farther Observations upon the Insincerity both of College himself, and some of
his Evidence, and prove that one of his prime Compurgators (how honest a man
soever he reputed him in the Court) has more than once declared what warnings
he had given him to have a care of his tongue; and that he talked at such a
desperate rate, that it was not safe for any man to keep him company. Colleges
dying words are, that he rode his own Horse, spent his own Money, and neither
was invited, or had dependency on any person whatsoever: When yet the People of
the Red Lion in Henly do affirm, that he and a Companion of his drank one quart
of raw Sack, one of Mull'd, one of Buttered, and then a Pint more of the last;
beside one Quart of Buttered Sack in the Morning, which was all placed to the
Account of another Person. It will not become me to descant upon any
Inconsistencies among Colleges Evidence's at his Trial, out of the Respect and
Veneration that I both owe, and bear to the Honor of the Court, and to the
Methods of Public Justice: I could otherwise in the case of Lun, and even of
Dr. Oats himself, find Mr. Colleges Advocates picking-work. Nay they were so
hard put to it, that they brake in upon Justice Warcup himself; a Person that
has been, even by themselves celebrated all along for his zeal in the Discovery
of the Horrid Plot; a Person particularly Interessed by the Lords, in several
Examinations; and by their Lordships particularly recommended to the King for
his Faith and Sedulity in that great affair. But these People understand no
other measures of Honesty, then as it squares with their designs. As to
Turbervile and Dugdale (the two Principal Evidences) College himself had very
little to say against them.

In one word, the matter is here plainly and nakedly set forth. The Protestant
Ioyner has left the World wholly at a loss for his Religion: He has both in his
Words and Practices declared himself a deadly Enemy to the Government. His last
Speech is a Compound of Equivocations and Disguise: He Justifies those that
destroyed the late King; and by the same reason he may justify the same design
upon This. To conclude, let the Reader judge upon what is here delivered,
whether or no there was a Design against the King at Oxford; and how far
College was engaged in the Conspiracy.

THE END.

