Dissenters Sayings. The Second Part. Published in their own Words, FOR THE
INFORMATION Of the People. And DEDICATED to the GRAND JURY of LONDON, August
29. 1681.

By Roger L'Estrange.

LONDON, Printed for Ioanna Brom, at the Gun at the Westend of St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1681.

To his Unknown Friends, the GRAND JURY for LONDON, August 29. 1681, viz. Will.
Whitehill, Foreman, Henry Strode, Ioas Bateman, Tho. Shepherd, Ralph Cook,
Joseph Caril, Valentine Adams, Joseph Bowls, Anthony S^oman, Andrew Boult,
Theophilus Hawson, Maurice King, J^. B^ll, John Cutlo^e, John Cowley, Jonathan
Leigh, William Pendlebury Daniel Mercer.

Gentlemen,
THE Kindness you have already showed to the Observator, I cannot but in Common
Honesty take as done to my self, and I dare here assure ye, that what
Obligations soever you shall hereafter lay upon L'Estrange, shall be
acknowledged by the Observator.

You were pleased, on Wednesday the 31. of August last, at Justice-Hall, in the
Old Bailey, to Present Nathaniel Thompson, Benjamin Took, and Joanna Brom, for
Maliciously Printing and Publishing or causing to be Printed or Published,
three Scandalous and Seditious Papers and Libels, Entitled, 1. The Loyal
Protestant, and True Domestic Intelligence: 2. Heraclitus: and 3. The
Observator, tending to the Advancement and Introduction of Popery, and to the
Suppression and Extirpation of the True Protestant Religion within his
Majesty's Realms and Dominions: And this Terrible Presentment was Ushered into
the World with this Preface, [We the Grand Jury, Sworn to Enquire of Offenses
committed within the City of London, do upon our Oaths, Present, etc.

Now there are Three Quaeres (Gentlemen) which (if I durst be so bold) I would
presume to offer ye upon this Prologue. First, Being Sworn to Enquire: Have you
Impartially Inquired, or not? 2ly. If ye have Inquired, Are these Three
Pamphlets all the Enormities that you have Discovered upon that Enquiry? 3ly.
What Is become of all the Rest? for you are as well Sworn to Present, as to
Enquire.

These are Quaeres that I have sometimes formerly moved; and the Answer was,
That these Three Papers were thrown in your Porridg-dish. Now if ye stumbled
upon 'em by Chance, where is your Enquiry upon Oath? Or if ye found any thing
else, what is become of your Oath of Presentment? If ye had but taken me to your
Assistance, I Would have carried (...) where you should have (...) and Sedition;
Pulpits, Cabals, and Coffee-houses of the same Cloth and color. I Would have
brought ye acquainted with the Voxes, Vindications, and the Black-Box men: A
New Set of Jack Straws and Wa^ Tylers: (But where is Old Walworth with his
Dagger?) I Would have showed ye Twenty New Schemes of Christianity, as well as of
Policy; the Doctrine of the Insufficiency of Christ's Death and Passion; of
Deposing Kings; of Placing the Fountain of Power in the People;
Scripture-Proofs for speaking Evil of Dignities: And in one word, the Scenes
disposed, and the Stage fitted for the Second Part of the Tragedy of Muncer,
and the Curtain ready to be drawn. I could have gotten ye a Key to the
Soul-Saving-State-Confounding-Sheriffs Case, and let ye into the Mystery of
that Incomprehensible Dispensation. It is a great Blessing to a Government, for
men upon their Oaths, in the Administration of Public Duties, to be Nicely
and Casuistically Instructed in the Bounds and Measures of Swearing: And this
is a Piece that cuts out Perjury from Damnation, to a hairs breadth; and will
bring ye a True-Protestant Conscience within the very smell of Fire and
Brimstone, and yet carry him off again as whole as a Fish, into his ready way
to the Land of Promise. Now here would have been Enormitywork, even as much as
ye could have turned you (...) to. But what is all (...) (...) the (...)? (...)

Dick Janeway's Paper says that, First, He has Wickedly and Maliciously
Endeavored to Sow Dissension and Discord amongst Protestants, thereby to
render them an easier prey unto their Common Enemies the Papists.

Pray Gentlemen, do you call this the Presentment of a Grand Jury, or a Final
Verdict upon the Merits of the Cause, to say First, that a Man has done such a
thing, and then to Pronounce that he did it with such an intention, or to such
an end? But now to the Article.

So far has the Observator been from Laboring Dissension and Discord, that no
man has more declared himself against it, or taken more pains to lay open the
Moral Impossibility of Peace in the State according to this Constitution,
without a strict Uniformity in the Church: But if you would have fixed your
Presentment aright upon this Head, you should have presented the Enemy in the
Parable that Sowed the Tares: And if you will but look into the Third Section
of this Book, for your better satisfaction, you will find that the Dissension
and Discord that you talk of, was Sowed Forty years ago; and that what we see
now, is only an After crop.

The Second Point is, Countenancing and Abetting the Villainous Contrivances of
the Popish Conspirators, who have endeavored to cast Fictitious Plots upon
Protestants, thereby to make way for their own Hellish Plot to take effect.

That is to say, The Observator is in the Popish Plot. Why do ye not inform
against him to the King and Council then, and say Where, and When, and How, and
What? Why do ye not Name the Contrivances, and say who are the Conspirators? Or
what if ye should set forth your Grievances in a Protestant Mercury, or get
little Hancock to open your Case in one of his News-Letters? He Will do it for
Pence a piece, and that is just Eighteen pence for his Reward. I do assure ye
Gentlemen, I am in no other Contrivance then to do the Part of an English
Protestant, a Loyal Subject, and an Honest man, toward the Upholding of the
Government; and I was once within a Trifle of a Halter, for being in that
Popish Conspiracy (as they called it once before) with the Late King: And if
the same Word, and the same Humor be now taken up again, I am in just such
another Plot.

The Third Charge is the Vilifying and bringing into the Disesteem of his
Majesty, and the whole Nation, the Commons of England, when Assembled in
Parliament, by Arraigning and Impudently Condemning their Proceedings.

You forget (my Masters) that Impudence is the Surname of the Greatest
Phanatique in the Three Kingdoms; and that the Epithete, Villainous, fits him
too as if it had been made for him. Therefore for the future, I would advise ye
to put your Slanders (...) better language. And now to the Accusation, The
Observator does first defy ye to show One Line in all his Writings that will
bear the sense you have Imposed upon it. And 2dly, The late Long Parliament
which the Fanatiques have Laden with so many Reproaches, had at least as many
Good Patriots, Protestants, and Subjects in it, as any Parliament since. Nay,
there is One of your Number (at least) who has said Positively that L'Estrange
is a Papist, which is as False, as if Mr. Presenter had gaped, and the Devil
himself had spit in his mouth. But it is come to that pass now, that a man
cannot speak a word in favor of the Ecclesiastical Order and Discipline, but
it comes presently to be an Arraigning of the Commons in Parliament.

4. The Observator is Charged with Endeavoring to Render his Majesty's
Protestant Subjects in general, and more particularly those in this City,
suspected to him by mis-representations of, and odious Reflections upon their
Legal proceedings in their Common-Halls, and Common-Councils; as also by False
and Ignominious Reflections upon some of their Magistrates; and by Arraigning
the Integrity of Juries of this City, for bringing in Verdicts according to
their Judgments and Consciences.

Be you your selves now the Judges (my Masters) which are the rather to be
Complaind of; Those that Defame the most Eminent of your Citizens, or those
that Vindicate them: Those that make it a Crime to be Dutiful to the King and
the Church; or those that Assert the Honor and Conscience of that Obedience?
And this is the very Case betwixt those Seditious Scriblers, whom you have not
touched at all, and the Observator. And which is yet more Remarkable; After all
your seeming Fierceness against Popery, ye have not so much as Presented one
single Papist. What ye mean by odious Reflections upon your Common-Halls and
Common-Councils I cannot Imagine, unless it be that some Notice has been taken
of the Freedom of a Gentleman that said he knew beforehand, London was to be
Burnt, and had several Checks (as is reported) from the Court it self for it. If
that be the Point, I shall take the freedom to tell ye, that it is wondered at
to this day, that it was never put home to him, how he came to the knowledge of
it. And though I am not Conscious of any one Disrespectful thought toward this
Famous City in my whole Life; saving in the Late Rebellion, when the Fanatique
Rabble had torn the Government of it to pieces by the same Methods that are now
Prescribed and Practiced over again by Hundreds of Enflaming Libels; yet if
such a thing had been, I do not know how your Common-Halls, and Common-Councils
come to be more Sacred than the Debates of the House of Commons, and of his
Majesty's Privy Council; which are daily abused by Malicious Forgeries; by
Contemptuous and Defamatory Reflections without Control: Provided only that the
Misrepresentation be made on the Right side; as in the Printed Copies of
several Loyal Speeches, and Unanswerable Reasonings in the Right of the Crown,
where only the general drift of the Speech is set forth without any thing
mentioned of the Argument.

As to the Abusing of your Magistrates, I am of opinion they would have found
it out themselves, if any such thing had been. And then for your Juries
bringing in Verdicts according to their Consciences, they are Sworn to find
according to Allegations and Proofs, and not when the Law determines one thing,
for them to think another; for at that rate, it is at their Choice to make an
Honest man Guilty, or a Criminal Innocent, and at once to overthrow the Reason
and the End of Government. The Law says it is Treason in the People to Conspire
the Death of the King; but the Phanatiques make it Treason in the King to deny
the Sovereignty of the People, as you will find abundantly, and particularly
cleared in several Sections of this Pamphlet. But neither is the Observator
Chargeable even with this Article.

The Observator is lastly Presented for Endeavoring to Disgrace and
Discountenance Religion it self, by an Ironical, Immoral, and Atheistical of
writing against such as he endeavors to Stigmatize by the name of True
Protestants.

Now if I were well enough acquainted with ye, Gentlemen, I would most humbly
beseech ye to Expound this word Religion. Is it one Persuasion that is single
and true to it self? Or is it a Medley of Various and Disagreeing Opinions in
the matters of Holy Worship? Tell me now (I beg of ye) how it is possible to
bring one and the same Truth to a Consistence with a hundred and fifty Divided,
Implicated, and Inextricable Errors: Nay, and they are Boundless too; for there
are Monsters in Heresies as well as in Bodies, which by a Promiscuous Liberty
of Mixture and Confusion, must necessarily produce still New and New
Diversities to the end of the world. But you shall have this Religion better
Decypher'd by some of your own Doctors in the following Papers; and I shall
particularly remit ye to the Oracles of Dr. J. O. W. J. and R. B. And you will
find in the Conclusion that the Uniting of Dissenters is just such another
piece of Nonsense, as the Separating of your selves together.

Now for the Appellation of a TRUE Protestant, It is but calling of those
People by the name, which they have given themselves: And not with any Regard
to the Reformed Religion neither; but in a Reflecting way of Discrimination
from those of the Establishment; for in the naming of themselves True
Protestants, and taking the whole Schism into that distinction, what is this
but to intimate that those of the Church are False Protestants, from whom they
have divided. This is the first step toward the explaining of those False
Protestants to be Papists. But what they are they will tell you themselves, if
you will but consult their Sayings: And I do not find that there belongs any
great matter of Complement to this sort of True Protestants.

I should not have been thus free with ye, Gentlemen (before Company) if the
Observator had not prevailed upon me to follow your Example, in giving
Countenance to the Publishing of so many thousand Copies up and down the City,
at the Election on Michaelmas day last, and all over the Kingdom, by a Scum of
Mercenary Intelligencers: Insomuch, that whosoever gives Credit to those
Papers, must necessarily believe the Observator to be one of the greatest
Rascals upon the face of the Earth: And I do confidently Affirm, that they are
infinitely greater that Publish him so to be. If the Presentment had taken
place, and the matter gone on in a due form of Law, a man might have had a
Speech yet for his money, but this way of Proceeding runs to the Tune of Four
and Forty, and Condemning the poor Rogue to the Gallows over again, without a
hearing.

I would not be Ungrateful to any man, any manner of way; and I could not tell
how to pitch upon a more suitable acknowledgment than by this Dedication.
First, It was your Pleasure to set your Presentment abroad with a kind of a
Noverint Universi; and I have taken the best care I could here, to make it
twice as Public as it would have been otherwise. 2dly, You were pleased to do
Honor to the Observator, by Printing your Names to the Scandal; and for that
Reason they are here likewise Exposed with his Vindication. 3dly, In regard
that ye are men of Business, and not at leisure perhaps to turn over Books; and
zealously affected over and above to the Reputation of an odd sort of
Christians that style themselves True Protestants, what more agreeable Present
in this World could I make you, than this Collection of
True-Protestant-Sayings, ready drawn up to your hands, where you shall see all
their Virtues Common-plac'd, their Graces drawn to the life, their Agreement
among themselves, their Affection to the King and Church; the Moderation of
their Principles, and the tenderness of their hearts toward their Sovereign,
Faithfully and Impartially set forth and transmitted to Posterity by
themselves, and effectually Signed, Sealed, and Delivered to the World, for the
use of future Generations by their own Rabbis. Gentlemen, I am with all
Reciprocal Affection,

Your most Humble Servant, Roger L'Estrange.

THE CONTENTS.
. 1. OF Toleration, page 1.. 2. The Fruits of a Toleration, p. 7.. 3. The
Dissenters Harmony among themselves, p. 13.. 4. The Dissenters Behavior toward
the Government; and first the Clergy, p. 22.. 5. The Dissenters Behavior
toward the Civil Government, p. 30.. 6. The Presbyterians Opinion of the
Covenant, p. 34.. 7. Dissenters Liberty of Conscience, p. 37.. 8. The Power of
the Kirk, p. 39.. 9. Principles and Positions, p. 45.. 10. Tumults Encouraged.
And chiefly by the [Able, Holy, Faithful, Laborious, and Trulypeaceable
Ministers of the Gospel] p. 51. (Petition for Peace, p. 4.). 11. The War
Justified, p. 55.. 12. Reformation by Blood, p. 59.. 13. The Murder of the King
Encouraged, p. 67.. 14. The King's Murder Iustifi'd. p. 70.
. 1. Dissenters Sayings, etc.
(1) TOleration has done much more toward the Rooting of Religion out of the
Hearts of many men in seven year, then the Enforcing of Uniformity did in
Seventy years. Cawdrys Independency, a great Schism, 1657. P. 14.

(2) A Toleration has All Errors in it, and All Evils. Edwards Gangreen. P.
58.

(3) A Toleration would be the putting a Sword in a Mad man's hand; a Cup of
Poison into the hand of a Child, a Letting loose of Madmen with Firebrands in
their hands; An appointing a City of Refuge in men's Consciences for the Devil
to fly to; a laying of a stumbling Block before the Blind; a Proclaiming
Liberty to the Wolves to come into Christ's Fold to Prey upon the Lambs. Neither
would it be to Provide for Tender Consciences, but to take away all Conscience.
The Harmonious Consent of the Lancashire Ministers with their Brethren in
London. Subscribed by 84. 1648. P. 12.

(4) A Toleration would make us become the Abhorring, and Loathing of all
Nations, and being so palpable a Breach of Covenant, would awaken against us
the Lord of Hosts to bring a Sword upon us, to Avenge the Quarrel of his
Covenant. Mr. Noise of New England of the Power of Magistrates. P. 13.

(5) That Doctrine that cries up Purity, to the Ruin of Unity, is Contrary to
the doctrine of the Gospel. Vindication of the Presbyterial Government and
Ministry. 1649. P. 124.

(6) That Religion which carries in the Front of it a Toleration of Different
Religions, and not sufficient to keep the Body of Christ in Unity, and Purity,
is not the Government of Christ. Ibid.

(7) Liberty in all matters of Worship and of Faith, is the open and Apparent
way to set up Popery in the Land, Bax. Non-Con. Plea. Pref.

(8) Must he have his Conscience, that makes no Conscience? What? he that has
sinned away his Conscience? If Conscience be a sufficient Plea, the Papists may
come in for a Child's part. If Conscience goes against the word; Deponenda est
talis Conscientia. Get Conscience better Enform'd. The Conscience of a Sinner
is Desil'd. 1. Tit. 15. Conscience being desil'd, may Err; Conscience erring
may suggest that which is sinful. There is nothing can bind a man to sin.
Watson to the Commons. Dec. 27. 1646. P. 17.

(9) A Toleration of Independent Churches, and Government, with Opinions and
Practice, against the Magistrates Duty laid down in Scripture. Edwards Full
Answer. P. 237. [It is against the Solemn League and Covenant for Reformation.
P. 238.] [A shrewd Temptation to make many fall, and a means of Confirmation
in the way of Error. P. 244.] [A Toleration of One or more Different ways of
Churches and Church Government, from the Church, and Church Government
Established, will be to this Kingdom very Mischievous, Pernicious, and
Destructive. P. 247.] [It has ever been from first to last, a Fountain of
Evil, and a Root of Bitterness, of many bitter Divisions and Separations among
themselves, of Manifold Errors and other Mischiefs in those Churches and Places
where they lived. P. 248.]

(10) Will Merciful Rulers set up a Trade for Butchering of Souls, and allow
men to set up a shop of Poison, for all men to Buy, and take, that will: yea,
to Proclaim this Poison for Souls in streets, and Church Assemblies, etc?
Baxters Self-Denial. Epist. Monitory.

(11) We must either Tolerate all men to do what they will, which they will
make a matter of Conscience, or Religion, and then some may offer their
Children in Sacrifice to the Devil; and some may think they do God service in
Killing his servants, etc. Or else you must Tolerate no Error or Fault, in
Religion; and then you must advise what measure of Penalty you will Inflict.
Baxters Church-Divis. P. 363. 364.

(12) I have known too many very honest hearted Christians, Especially
Melancholique Persons, and women, who have been in great doubt about the
opinions of the Millenaryes, the Separatists, the Anabaptists, the Seekers, and
such like; and after Earnest Prayer to God, they have been strongly resolved
for the way of Error, and Confident, by the strong Impression, that it was the
Spirits Answer to their Prayers; and thereupon they have set themselves into a
Course of sin. Ibid. P. 162. [It is very ordinary with poor Fantastical Women,
and melancholique Persons to take all their deep Apprehensions for Revelations.
Ibid. P. 167.

(13) If we do through weakness, or Perverseness, take Lawful things to be
Unlawful, that will not excuse us in our disobedience. Our Error is our sin,
and one sin will not excuse another. Baxters 5. Dispute. P. 483.

(14) Oh what a Potent Instrument for Satan is a Misguided Conscience! It will
make a man kill his Dearest Friend, yea Father or Mother, yea the holiest
Saint, and think he does God good service by it. And to Facilitate the work, it
will first blot out the Reputation of their Holiness, and make them take a
Saint for a Devil. Bax. Saints Rest, P. 133.

(15) Take heed how you tolerate Schism; for in little time without great care
it will open the door to Heresy. Hodges to the Commons. Mar. 10. 1656. P. 55.

(16) Divisions, whether they be Ecclesiastical, or Political, in Kingdoms,
Citys, and Familyes, are Infallible Causes of Ruin to Kingdoms, Cities and
Familyes. Calamy to the Commons. Dec. 25. 1644. P. 4.

(17) Lies would not take, if they were not Commended by the Holiness of the
Person, and Gilded over as a Rotten Nutmeg with Gold. Vines to the Commons.
Mar. 10. 1646. P. 27.

(18) We must not Judge of Faith by the Person, but of the Person by the Faith.
Ibid.

(19) That Horse of Superstition and Idolatry, upon the Back of which, the
Devil has in Former times made War against the Church, is slain under him, and
now he is mounted upon a Fresh Horse of another Color, called Liberty of
OPINION; falsely called Liberty of CONSCIENCE. Ibid.

(20) If Conscience be warrant enough for Practices and Opinions; and Liberty
of Conscience be a sufficient License to Vent or Act them, I cannot see but the
Judicatories either of Church or State may shut up shop, and be resolved into
the Judicatory of Every man's Private Conscience, Ib. P. 60.

(21) The several Bands of Anabaptists, Antinomians, Familists, Libertines and
Separatists are so multiplied, that they begin to threaten and speak Big words.
Walker to the Commons. Jan. 29. 1644. P. 18.

(22) The Hand of God is apparently gone out against your ways of Separation
and Anabaptism. Baxter to the Separatists. April. 20. 1655.

(23) We do again renew our Solemn League and Covenant, wherein, the securing,
and ^reserving the Purity of Religion. against all Error, Heresy, and Schism,
and namely Independency, Anabaptism, Antinomianism, Armintanism, Socinianism,
Familism, Libertinism, Skepticism, and Erastianism, and the carrying on the
work of Uniformity, shall be studi'd and Endeavour^d by us before all worldly
Interest. Nepthaly. Engagement to Duties.

(24) Ob. There are many of em (the Sectaries) Holy and Pious men.

A^s. Why should you think to say, he is an Honest or a Pious man, should be a
Foolish Plea, in the Case of abusing Coin, Theft, Treason or the like; and yet
should be of weight and force in this far greater Business? Hodges to the Com.
P. 58.

(25) Now if Profane, or Erroneous Persons shall Excommunicate themselves from
the (...) Ordinances of Christ, either by Negligence, or going a whoring after
any Sects or Schisms, and say, their Conscience must be free to do so, then the
Magistrate by his Positive Laws must fetch them in, and Command Obedience to
those Public. Ordinances in the Church, as the Kings of Judah did, 2. Chron.
17. etc. The Ordinances of Excommunication Stated; and Licensed. John Downham.
Feb. 17. 1645. P^ult.

(26) If the Parliament and Synod shall by Public Consent Establish a
Presbyteriall Church Government, as most consonant to Gods word. --
Independents and all others are bound in Conscience to submit unto it, under
the pain of Obstinacy, Singularity, and c. In case they cannot really, by
direct Texts and Precepts prove it diametrically contrary to the Scripture. --
-- Prins Full Answer to Io. Goodwin. P. 13.

(27) That Courtesy, which no man can obtain of the Independents, where they
have Authority, viz, in New England; That Courtesy, should they not be Suitors
for here in Old England. Adam Stewarts Duply. 1644. Part. 2. P. 162.

(28) The Late General Assemblyes of the Church of Scotland, and their
Commissioners have born Testimony against Independency, Erastianism,
Antinomianism, Anabaptism, etc. A Testimony against Toleration from the Kirk of
Scotland, 1949. P. 2.

(29) Sins Committed by the Misunderstanding of Gods word may be Punish^d,
therefore Sins of Conscience. Mr. Noise Minister of New England, of the Power
of Magistrates. P. 72.

(30) Schism of it self, even with sound Doctrine in every Point is a most
Grievous wickedness, which exceeds all other wickedness. I might out of the
Fathers Enlarge and show the great Evil of Schism both in it self, and the
Effects of it; How it is a greater evil to Rend the Church, then to worship
Idols: Yea that Martyrdom it self cannot profit a Schi^matique; That it is so
great an Evil, that the ^loud o^ Martyrdom cannot blot it out. (So Cyprian, and
Chrysostom) And God has more Severely punished it then Murder, and other
great Crimes. Korah, Dathan and Ab^ram, for their Schism were punished more
severely with the Earth opening and Swallowing them up Quick then Cain, and
then those who made an Idol. Edwards Further Discovery, P. 197.

(31) If the Devil had his choice whether the Hierarchy, Ceremonies, and
Liturgy should be Established in this Kingdom, Or a Toleration granted, he
would choose and Prefer a Toleration before them; and give up all those for a
Toleration of diverse Sects, and different Churches. Edwards Full Answer. P. 257.

32. A Treatise against Toleration, and Pretended Liberty of Conscience:
wherein by Scripture, sound Reason, Fathers, Schoolmen, Casuists, Protestant
Divines of all Nations, Confessions of Faith of the Reformed Churches,
Ecclesiastical Historics, and constant Practice of the most Pious and wisest
Emperors, Princes, States, the best Writers of Politics, the Experience of all
Ages; yea, by diverse Principles, Testimonies and Proceedings of Sectaries
themselves, as Donatists, Anabaptists, Brownists, Independents, the
Unlawfullness and Mischief in Christian Commonwealths and Kingdoms, both of an
Universal Toleration of all Religions and Consciences; and of a Limited and
Bounded of some Sects only, are clearly Proved and Demonstrated, etc. Edwards's
Casting down the Last and strongest hold of Satan.

Notes upon. 1.
TOleration destroys Religion. (1) All Errors in it. (2) Instead of Easing
Consciences, it takes away all Conscience. (3) A scandalous Breach of Covenant.
(4) Contrary to the Gospel (5) And the Government of Christ. (6) The ready way
to Popery. (7.) Erroneous Consciences not to be permitted. (8) A Toleration of
Independency is Intolerable; contrary to the League and Covenant. A Temptation
to, and a Confirmation in Error. Destructive of Government. The Root of
Bitterness, and Divisions, and of manifold Errors. (9) An Erecting of a Trade
for the Butchering of Souls. (10) A License to all Iniquity, (11) It gives a
Countenance to Euthusiasms, and leads to Diabolical Illusions. (12) And trains
us from one Sin to another. (13) A Misguided Conscience is an Instrument for
Satan. (14) It carrys us from Schism, to Heresy. (15) Ruins Kingdoms Cities
and Familys. (16) The Piety of a Person cannot Justify the Error. (17. 18) The
Horse of Superstition and Idolatry (19) It Dissolves all Iudicatoryes. (20) And
threatens the Public Peace, (21) God has declared himself against it. (22) A
breach of Covenant, (23) A Sectary, as Criminal as a Felon. (24) Erroneous
Persons Excommunicate themselves. (25) Independents bound to submit to the
Parliament, and Synod. (26) They that will not allow Liberty ought not to ask
it. (27) The General Assembly of Scotland Expressly against it. (28) Sins of
Conscience Punishable. (29) Schism worse then Murder, or Idolatry. (30)
Toleration is the wish of the Devil. (31) Scripture, Reason, Fathers,
Schoolmen, Casuists, Protestant Divines and all the Reformed Churches against
it. (32)

How comes it now to be so Criminal to deny these People a Toleration, which
they themselves account to be wholly Intolerable; Or with what Face can they
call the Refusal of that Liberty to themselves by the name of a Persecution,
which they look upon in all other Cases, as against the Rules of Government and
Conscience to Grant? This shall suffice as to their Judgment of a Toleration
in it self. We Will take it next in the Consequences, and Effects.

. 2. The Fruits of a Toleration.
(1) THe Incursions of the wild Boars of the Forest upon the Vineyard of the
Lord, cannot but flow from the not setting up of the Hedge of Discipline; and
that when in the Kirk of Christ, there is not one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism,
there must arise many False Christ's, and False Prophets, insomuch that (if it
were possible) they should deceive the very Elect. The Kirks Testimony against
Toleration, to the London Ministers.

(2) Will any Parliament, State, or Nation (think you) suffer such a Government
to take Root among them, which will Un-King, Un-Parliament, Un-Church,
Un-Nation them altogether, and make Each several Congregation, an Absolute
Monarchy? etc. Prins full Reply upon Io. Goodwin. P. 8.

(3) Satan and his Ministers Transform themselves into Angels of Light, false
Teachers usually come to Seduce men in sheeps Clothing, there is no Heretic,
Schismatique or Sectary whatsoever so Pernicious, Gross, and detestable, but
pretends his way, Doctrine, Practice, to be the way and Truth of Christ. Prinns
full Answer Cited by Io. Goodwin. Innocence and Truth. P. 33.

(4) This New way, and the Separation of Independents from their Parish
Churches, is an Encouragement, to all the Separatists, Brownists, Anabaptists,
Antinomians, Socinians and Libertines, that are in and about the City. The
Antidote against the Contagious Air of Independency. P. 12.

(5) All sorts of Mechanics take upon them to Preach and Baptize, as Smiths,
Taylers, Shoomakers, Pedlers, Weavers, etc. Edwards Discovery of Sectaries P.
26.

(6) From all these Errors, Here syes, Blasphemies, and Practices of the
Sectaryes, you may see what a great Evil and Sin, Separation is, from the
Communion of the Reformed Churches; and how highly displeasing to God, for men
to make a Schism and Rent in the Church of God in a time of Reformation: God
punishing the Schism and Separation of our Times with so many Heresies,
Blasphemies, Wicked Practices, etc. Edwards further Discovery. P. 195.

(7) The Punishment of Schism and Separation from the Church is Separation from
God; Heresy, Blasphemy, Atheism, Uncleanness, Unrightcousness, etc. Ibid. P.
167.

(8) One asked what kind of Bird the Holy Ghost was. The Virgin Mary has been
called a -- They could write as Good Scriptures as the Apostles. Paul was a
Novice, and understood not Christ in the Promise. Edwards Gangrena. P. 33.

(9) One W^b, Blessed God that he never trusted in a Crucified Christ; nor did
he believe him to be the Son of God, nor the Scriptures Divine; but Human
Invention. -- He affirmed there was no more Resurrection of a Man then of a
Beast. Edwards Catalogue and Discovery of the Sectaryes, P. 5. [Christs Human
Nature is De^il'd with Original Sin, as well as ours. P. 6.]

(10) One maintained that God was the Author of sin; that all Lies came out of
the mouth of God, and quoted a Place in the Book of Kings sor't, that no man
was sent to Hell for any Sins, but cast thither only because God would have it
so. Edwards Catalogue of Errors. P. 24. [An Anabaptist, and a great Sectary
came to Mr. Greenhill, and said he might as safely baptize a Dog, as a
Believers Child. Ibid. P. 25.

(11) A Brick-layer, of Hack^ey affirmed that he for his part understood the
Mystery of God in Christ better th^n St. Paul; and he said of the Scriptures,
they were as other writings of men. Every one writ as they had Conceived. Ibid.
P. 26.

(12) On February 27. 1644. It was Delivered at a Conventicle in Bell-Alley,
that Christ was no more God then he, or any of them there, and that they were
as much God as Christ was. And Mr. Noy spoke it in the hearing of some Divines
of the Assembly, that to his knowledge the denying of the Divinity of Christ
was a Growing Opinion. Ibid.

(13) One S. O. a Dipper is Reported by Mr. Edwards after he had Baptized a
woman to bid her Gape, and she Gaped, and he did blow three times into her
mouth, saying words to this purpose, either Receive the Holy Ghost; or now thou
have Received the Holy Ghost. The same Person was also Questioned at Ch^lmsford
1646. for the Death of a Young woman that died upon Dipping. Gangr^na. Part. 2.
P. 147.

(14) A Preacher at Sandwich in Kent (a Washball-maker) prayed to the Trinity
to take care of these Three Kingdoms. God the Father of One; God the Son, of
the Second; and God the Holy Ghost, of the Third. ^b. P. 150.

(15) Where is your God? (says one B^ggis) In Heaven, or in Earth? alo^t or
Below? or where does he sit? etc. Gangraen. P. 163. Par. 2d.

(16) A Woman having a desire to be Re-baptiz'd, and having pulled off all her
Clothes to the naked skin, ready to go into the water; but forbearing, during
the time the Dipper prayed; she covered her secret Parts with both her hands,
the which the Dipper Espying, told the woman, that it was an unseemly sight to
see her hold her hands downward; It being an Ordinanee of Jesus Christ, her
hands with her heart should be lifted up toward heaven; (as he showed her how
he did) but she Refusing for Modesty's sake, could not be Re-baptiz'd. Edward's
Catalogue of Errors. P. 5.

(17) Christmas day is a Superstitious day; and will (if observed) bring in
Idolatrous Worship. Pearn at S. Dunstans in the West. De. 24.

(18) O Lord thou have given us never a Victory this Long while for all our
Frequent Fasting. What do thou mean, O Lord, to fling us in the Ditch, and
there leave us. Vines at St. Clements Temple Bar.

(19) O Lord, do not thou stand a Neuter; but take One side, that we may see
which it is that is thy Cause. Cradock of Nun* Eaton. Aug. 1. 1647.

(20) If the Devil, the Turk, and the People should think to Compound with
Christ, and say, Thou Christ; Thou shall have so many Kingdoms, and let us
Enjoy the rest quietly. Christ will never do it. He will either have All, or
None; He will either Kill, or be Killed* Feakat Blackfriars Aug. 8. 1653.

(21) I Prosess (Saints) we must go lay our heads together, and Consult what we
shall ask God next; for he will give us whatsoever we Ask; and so he has done
these Seven years. Id. Ibid.

(22) We must agree together to ask something now for Jesus Christ; for we have
enough for our selves already. We have Peace enough, prosperity enough, and
enough of every thing. Feake. Aug. 11. 1653.

(23) O Lord, when shall we hear the sound of Christ's Horseheels. Feakat Black
Friars, Sep. 5. 1653.

(24) What ailed you, ye Mighty Armies at Keinton, Newbery, York, Naesby, that
ye fled, and were driven backwards? What ailed you ye strong Treasons, Close
Conspiracyes, that ye trembled and Fell, and your Foundations discovered before
you could take Effect. They saw thee O Jesus! They saw thee appearing in the
Midest of us, so they fled before us. Sterry to the Commons. No. 26. 1645. P.
23.

(22) When Christ was Crucified, did not all forsake him? Had but a few of that
Inconstant multitude, which but a while before had cried Hosanna, stuck close
to Christ, in likelihood they had delivered him. Carter to the Commons Aug. 31.
1642. P. 12.

(26) This year God by a Providence has buried this Feast ( Christmas day) in
a ^ast, and I hope it will never rise again. Calamy to the Commons, Dec. 25.
1644. P. 41.

(27) I ask whether the Repetition of these words, [ Our Father, etc.] after
men have been long praying for the things contained in them, as the manner of
some is, be not so remote from any Pretense or Color of Warrant in the
Scripture, as that it is in plain Terms, RIDICULOUS. D. Io. Owen. Vindiciae
Evangel. P. 669.

(28) As men set Traps to catch Vermin, so God appoints Heresies to Ensnare
Arrogant, and Self-presuming, or Vicious and Self-defiling men, Bagshaw of
Heresies. P. 8.

(26) Where is the God of Marston-Moor? and the God of Nase^y? is an Acceptable
Expostulation in a Gloomy day. O what a Catalogue of Mercyes has this Nation to
Plead by, in a time of Trouble! God came from Naesby, and the Holy One from the
West, Selah, etc. D. Owens Eben-Ez^r, P. 13.

(30) God had so wonderfully wrought upon the Spirits of men, particularly on
those Soldiers who were to fight the Bishops Battles in Scotland, that they
pulled down the Railes, threatened the Priests, and kept such a Visitation in
their Progress, as the Bishops hardly ever had done since Q. Elizabeth's days,
Case to the Commons. Gods waiting. 1642.

(31) Let me tell ye, if ever (Gentlemen) you might use this Speech, O happy
penny, you may use it now, Happy money that will purchase my Gospel, happy
money that will Purchase Religion, and Purchase a Reformation to my Posterity;
O happy Money; and Blessed be Cod that I have it to Lend. E. Calamy's Speech at
Guild Hall. Oct. 6. 1643.

(32) The Lord Jesus has his Concubines, his Queens, his Virgins, Saints in
Remoter Forms, Saints in Higher Forms; Saints Unmarried to any Forms, who keep
themselves single for the Immediate Embraces of their Lord. Sterry's Englands
Deliverance. Epistle.

(33) God did not Measure Job in his Wallops, but when he was Cold, As we do
not measure Milk when it Wallops and Seeths but when it is Cold: Bridge's First
and Last in Suffering. P. 47.

(34) I will gently lead those that are with Young, that is ( says he,) Christ
will be very kind to those Saints that step aside; and he thus Comforts those
that are big with young in a sinful sense; O ye Sinning Ewes who have been big
with young! has not he gone after you, and sound you, and laid you upon his
shoulders rejoicing? It may be thou have been wandering, like Dinah from thy
Fathers House, and art big with young, and afraid to go home; but fear not, Go
and Try; he will not cast you out of Doors, though you come with Big Bellyes,
he will deal gently with you though with Young, And then, It is our Glory to be
Christ's Ewes, and that when a MAN is Big with Young, and Cries out O my Belly,
my Belly! here is a Point of Comfort that Christ is Sweet to such Persons. --
Afterward He cries out: O Blessed Ewes! O Believing Ewes! And O Believing Bees
that suck the Honey of Sin-Hatred out of the Wormwood of Sin-Acted. In another
place he tells us, that Christ accounts their very Stammerings sweet; Meih,
Meih, says the Little One, and the Mother Counts it music. Durant's Sips of
sweetness upon Isaiah 40. 11. Reprinted 1662.

(35) I dare speak it as Confidently, as I Believe the Revelation to be Divine
Scripture, that what Viol soever is pouring out, the Issue will be, Antichrist
shall loose, and Christ shall gain. Marshall to the Commons. June 15. 1643. P.
45.

(36) Not only is that Covenant which God has made with us, founded in the
Blood of Christ, but that also which we make with God. Caryl Oct. 6. 1643. P.
33.

(37) Beloved can ye forget the Soldiers? I say, the Soldiers, who have spent
their Blood for Christ, as Christ did for them, even their own Precious Blood
in Gods Cause at Newbery. Evans to the Earl of Essex at St. Clements. Sept. 26.
1643.

(38) You who sit at the Right hand of the Lord Jesus in this Commonwealth, as
the Lord Jesus sits at the Right Hand of his Father in that Kingdom which is
over all, etc. Sterry to the Commons. No. 26. 1645. Epistle.

(39) All you that have Contributed to the Parliament, come and take this
Sacrament to your Comfort. Case.

(40) One Redman of Castle-Dunnington in Leichestershire in Opposition to the
Order of the Church, delivered the Sacrament in the Afternoon, in Ale.

Notes upon. 2.
TOleration will make way for False Christ's, and False Prophets. (1) Destroy
all Government (8.) Introduce Schisms, and Heresies. (3. 4.) Authorize
Mechanics to Preach (5.) Tear the Church to pieces. (6) Divide us from God.
(7) Give Encouragement to Blasphemy, Profaneness and Dissolution of manners.
(8) And so to the End.

How can the Dissenters Press for a Toleration now, after this agreement among
themselves, that it must Inevitably draw after it the Ruin, and Confusion,
both of Church and State?

. 3. The Dissenters Harmony among themselves.
(1) Does not the Apostle Prophesy, That in the Presbyterian.
last days Perilous Times shall come, for men shall be lovers of themselves,
Covetous, Boasters, Proud, Heady, Highminded, having a Form of Godlyness but
denying the Power thereof. Ever learning, but never able to come to the
Knowledge of the Truth. Yea, such as will not Endure sound Doctrine, but after
their own lusts, will heap to themselves Teachers, having itching Ears, turning
away their Ears from the Truth; and will be turned into Fables and Fictions,
New lights, and Revelations. And are not your thus pretended New-lights, the
very Persons; thus delineated, by your own Confessions, and practices too, even
Murmurers, Complainers, desirous to walk after your own lusts, and having men's
Persons in admiration for Advantage. Yea, take heed (I say) ye be not found to
be those Clouds without water carried about with W^des, and those wandering
Stars which the Apostle Jude speaks of, which know not when, or where,
Immutably, to fix your faith and Judgments: Whereas our Presbyterians, and all
other True Believers, are allways (1. Cor. 15. 58. Phil. 1. 27. and Chap. 4. 1.
etc.) steadfast, Unmovable, standing fast in the Lord in one spirit, and in One
mind, striving together for the faith of the Gospel, and not tossed to and
fro, like Children, carried about with Every Wind of Doctrine by the slight of
men, as too many Scepticall Independents are, to the Great Obloquy and Scandal
of Religion. Picture of Independency. P. 9.

Independent (2) You complain of your Misery, and Bondage, Sorrows, and
Oppressions, and Troubles of the Church. What ails you? What Troubles you? Who
Oppresses you? Where is the least show of Oppression, or Cause of Complaint
Minister'd to you; except it be because you are not suffered to oppress your
Brethren? Can you feed upon nothing but Blood, yea, the Blood of your Brethren;
that though you have every thing else, you so complain of sorrow and
Oppression? Is this your sorrow and Oppression, that you cannot Oppress?
Pulpit-Incendiary. 1648. P. 45.

P. (3) Our Sectaries, in their Sermons, Prayers, Pamphlets, Discourses,
Petitions, all cry out of Persecution, and accuse the Orthodox Presbyterians of
Persecution; yea, when for their Seditious, Tumultuous Libellous Scoffing,
Wicked Lying, Scandalous Reports, Books and Practices, they have been
Questioned, there is nothing in their Mouths but Persecution, and of Unheard Of
Prosecution of the Godly. I am of the mind if any of them should come to be
Imprisoned and Hanged for Stealing, Killing a Godly Presbyterian, Plotting
against the Parliament and City, in seizing upon their Forts, or some
Parliament Men; One or other of them would cry out of Persecution. Edwards
Gang. P. 37.

I. (4) The way Surnamed Presbyterian, conjures all men's Gifts, Parts and
Industry, into a Synodical Circle, and suffers them only to Dance there. Jo.
Goodwins Theomachia. P. 33.

P. (5) Independents are Beasts, Grolls, Puffoists; Wild-Geese, a Company of
Juglers, sticklers against Parliament and Presbytery; a Generation of cunning
Deceivers, and Fighters against God, Violaters of all the Laws of God and
Nature; the most dangerous Sect that ever yet the world Produced; a Company of
Rats among Joyn'd-stools; Despisers of Magistracy, a Generation of men not
worthy to give guts to a Bear, Moon-Calves; All the Independents put together,
have not so much learning as one of a thousand other Ministers. A Wheel-Barrow,
(such as they trundle white wind Vinegar on) fitter for them then a Coach.
Bastwick Cited by Burton in his Brief answer. P. 28.

I. (6) That Reformation which is forward, Rough, Peremptory, Impatient,
Imperious, and will gather where it has not strewed, and reap where it has
not sowed; exact Obedience, and Subjection from those, to whom it has not
Effectually taught, or Persuaded Obedience, and Subjection; nor ever gave any
tolerable account unto truly Conscientious, and Considering, and Disinteressed
men of any worthyness in it, why it should be submitted unto, and cannot be
Judged a Reformation according to the word of God. Jo. Goodwins 12 Cautions. P.
5.

P. (7) The Independents are Railers, Revilers, Slanderers, Covenant-Breakers
with God and man, Ordinary Liars, Notorious Calumniators and False accusers
(such as in holy Scripture are called, Diaboli, Devils) Heretics, open
Seducers, and Causers of Division, and Offenses, contrary unto the Doctrine of
Christ; such as all Christians have a special Command to take heed of, and to
shun; and are prohibited to receive into their Houses, or bid God speed, or so
much as to eat with, they are no Visible Saints, nor Good Demons: and
therefore no True Formed Churches, nor to be Communicated with in Holy things.
Burton, Cited by Bastwick. Independency not Gods Ordinance. P. 310.

I. (8) Mr. John Goodwin says in his Theomachia; That the presbyterian is a
Bloody, Unpeaceable, and Persecuting way, a way much Damping and Deading the
Flourishing Improvements of the Gifts and Graces of the Saints. Picture of
Independency. P. 12.

P. (9) Independency, a Seminary of Schisms, and Dangerous Divisions in Church
and State -- A Floud-Gate to let in an Inundation of Heresies, Errots, Sects,
Libertinism, and Lawlessness, without means of Suppressing them, when
Introduced. Prinn Cited by Burton. Vindication of Independency. P. 40, 41.
[Pharisaical, Spiritual Pride, Vainglory, Singularity, Self-conceitedness, of
Superlative Holiness, Ib. 43.

I. (10) If Ephraim be against Manasseh, is it any ways like but Manasseh will
be against Ephraim? And God himself, Prophesying of Ishmael, told his mother,
that he would be a wild man: and that his hand should be against every man; and
Every man's hand against him. Undoubtedly that way, whose hand shall be against
every way, will find that the hand of every way will be against it: and then
what manner of Peace can reasonably be expected under the Predominancy of such
a way? Goodwins Theomachia. P. 30.

P. (11) The Independents have now the sword in their hands, and they think
their party strong enough to Encounter any adverse and Opposing Party; and they
Profess they care not how soon they come to cutting of throats; and speak of
nothing but the slaughtering and butchering of the Presbyterians. Bastwicks
Postcript to Burton.

I. (12) At the beginning of this Parliament, the whole Kingdom sided with Both
Houses in the Vindication of their Liberties, and so it continued until such
as did overmuch Idolize Presbytery, prevailed for a Bill to Damn Episcopacy,
Root and Branch, that Presbitery might succeed it, with it is Fascibus, and
Fustibus, with its Pontificalibus, and Synodalibus, nothing to be ahated which
concerned either Wealth, or Jurisdiction, only an Episcopal Tyranny to be
Exchanged for a Presbyteriall Slavery. Answer to Prinnes 12. Queryes P. 19.

P. (13) With what Faces and Consciences can ye think to Obtrude your
Independent ways and Fancies upon us, etc. Picture of Independency. Licensed by
Cranford. 1645.

I. (14) As the Bishops would call men Puritans, and Non-Conformists, and so
Persecute them; so will the Presbytery call men Schismatics, Heretics,
Antinomians, Separatists, and do the like. Jo. Goodwins Answer to Mr. Prinns
Full Reply. P. 15.

P. (15) The Assembly of C^renton, judging the Sect of Independents to be not
only Prejudicial to the Church of God, in so far, that it endeavors to bring
in Confusion, opening a Gate to all kinds of Singularities, and Extravagancies,
and taking away all means of any remedy to the Evil, but also most Dangerous to
the State; where (if it had place) there might be as many Religions set up, as
there be Parishes, or particular Congregations; does enjoin to all the
Provinces, and particularly to the Maritimes, to take heed that the Evil takes
no foot in the Churches of this Kingdom; to the end, that Peace, and
Uniformity, as well in Religion, as in DISCIPLINE, may be Inviolably Preserved;
and that nothing be brought in amongst us, which may alter in any kind the
Service due unto their Majesty's. An Extract of the Act. Dec. 26. 1644.

I. (16) The Spirit of the Ten-horned Beast (Rev. 17.) is now making war with
the Lamb, (which is likely to be his last War, Babylons fall following in the
next Chap.) and this Spirit warreth under new Colors; not red, but white,
whose word is Reformation, and this under a Fair Color of a Covenant, by
Virtue whereof, pretending a just Title to the War, he hopes by the help of the
Remonstrance, and the Prime Authors thereof, and their Adherents, to enact a
New Bestiall Tyranny, over Souls, Bodies and Estates, under new Names, and
Notions. Burton's Conformities Deformity. Ep. Ded.

P. (17) The Independents worse then Diotrephes, or the Pope, most Diabolical
Tyranny, Lording it over Gods Clergies, Fellows of Goatham College, not knowing
their Primer in Politics, nor their Cat^hisme in Divinity.

I. (18) The Church of England is a True whorish Mother, and they that were of
her, were base begotten, and ^ astardly Children, and she neither is, nor ever
was truly married, Joined, or United unto Jesus Christ in that Esponsal Ba^d,
which his True Churches are, and ought to be, but is one of Antichrists
National Whorith Churches, and Cities spoken of Revel. 16. 19. etc. The Church
of England is False and Antichristian; and as she is a False and
Antichristian Church, she shall never make True Officers and Ministers of
Jesus Christ -- As I^nnes and Jambres, withstood Moses, so do these Men also
Resist the Truth. Li^urn Cited by Bastwick. Indep. etc. P. 315. [ Yea, when
they write most mildly against the Presbyterians, they call them Lions, Bears,
Wolves, Tigers, Baals Priests, The Limbs of Antichrist, the Antichristian
Brood, the Devils Ministers, Presbyterants. Ibid. P. 316.]

P. (19) The Independents are taken up in Biting and Devouring one another; in
Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Heresies, Envyings,
etc. Bastwick's Indep. not Gods Ord. P. 330.

I. (20) I Challenge our Brother for taking Christ's name in vain, when in stead
of finding Christ set upon his Throne in their Congregations, we find there no
more then an Image, such as Michal had made up instead of King David; or as
those that in Mockery made of Christ a Pageant King, Stripping him, and putting
on him a Scarlet Robe, and on his head a Crown of Thorns, and in his hand a
Reed; Saluting him with Hail King of the Jews. Burton cited by Bastwick.
Independency not Gods Ordinance. P. 312.

P. (21) I here present ye with a Catalogue, or Black Bill of the Errors,
Heresies, Blasphemies and practices of the Sectaries of this Time; Broached and
Acted within these Four last Years in England: And that in your Quarters; and
in places under your Government and Power, for which I tremble to think lest
the whole Kingdom should be in Gods Black Bill. Edwards Gangren. 1646. Ep. Ded.
to the Lords and Commons.

I (22) This whole Postcript ( of Bastwick) is a very Cento, and farrago, or
hodge-podge of Invectives, Sarcasms, Scurrilous Scoffs, Incendiary Incentives
to stir up the State, and all sorts of People, to root out, and cut off all
those that are of the Independent way, as they call it. Burtons Brief answer to
Bastwick. Postcript.

P. (23) Oh the Faithfullness, Dutifullness, Patience, Long-Suffering,
Forbearance of the Presbyterians! Their Dutifullness and Patience in waiting
upon the Parliament; their Faithfullness in not abating in their zeal and
Respects to them; Oh their Love, Kindness and Tenderness to the Independents,
yea to other Sectaries also, who have had something of Christ, and Grace in
them; and have not fallen into Errors, and Blasphemies, rasing their
foundations. But now on the other hand; the Sectaries, (though a Contemptible
number, and not to be named at the same time with the Presbyterians) have not
waited upon the Parliament and Assembly, for the Reformation, but Preached
against it, and stirred up the People to Embody themselves, and to Join in
Church Fellowship, gathering Churches, setting up Independent Government;
Re-baptizing; and Dipping many hundreds, etc. Edwards Discovery, P. 51.

I. (24) Such an Oracle of Infallibility, and such a Supremacy as (...)*
True-bred-English-Christian can Interpret for other then Antichristian
Tyranny; And all under the name of a Christian-Presbyterian Church Government.
Burtons Conformities Deformity. P. 21.

P. (25) Ambitious, Proud, Covetous men -- Libertines and Loose Persons, who
have a Desire to live in Pleasures and Enjoy their Lust, and to be under no
Government, they are Fierce and Earnest for Independency, and against
Presbytery. All wanton-witted, Unstable, Erroneous Spirits of all Sorts; all
Heretics, and Sectaries, Strike in with Independency, and Plead they are
Independents. Edwards Further Discovery. P. 185.

I. (26) Their Ordinary Counsels ( the Presbyterians) drive at two Main things
( yet both reduced to One Head, to wit, Tyranny) The one, Tyranny over our
Bodies, Estates, Free-holds, Liberties, Laws, and Birthrights of all English
Freeborn Subjects: The other, Tyranny over our Souls, and Consciences. Burtons
Conformities Deformity. Ep. Ded. 1646.

P. (27) Independents are most Obstinate Rebels, both in Opinion, and
Practice; and Perfidious Violators of such a Main and Principal Foundation, as
will Inevitably Ruinate all other Fundamentals of True Religion, if allowed
unto them. Colemanstreet Conclave Visited. Pref. 1648. [I say and hold that all
sorts of Independents among us, (Separating themselves into their Private
Conventicles, and Unwarranted Church Way, as they call it, against all
Authority and Power of the King and Parliament, the Unquestionable Sovereign
and Supreme Magistracy, ordained by God himself; and in resisting whose
ordinance, they apparently oppose and resist, even the Lord God of Heaven
Himself; are not by any means to be admitted or permitted (...) (...), ^. (...)
is their Separation, or Division from us, to be so (...) or so (...) by us, as
to give any the least allowance to them. Ibid.]

I. (28) Is Presbytery, because Parochial, Classical, Provincial, l^ss
Tyrannical, then Episcopacy, because many Rule in that, and in this but One? Or
rather not more Tyrannical, because One Tyrant is not so much as many together?
Evil in a Community, is stronger, and more diffusive then in Unity.
Saltmarsh'es Answer to Ley. 1646. P. 5.

P. (29) Korah, Dathan, and Abiram rose up against Moses and Aaron, as our
Independents do now adays, against the most Just and Righteous Authority of
Parliaments, and their Power; in constituting under them for their assistance,
in matters of Religion, the Synods, or Assembly of Divines at Westminster, Even
as the Lord appointed and constituted Aaron under Moses in Holy things.
Colemanstreet Conclave, Parallel to the Reader. 1648.

I. (30) The Idolatrous Heathen, sought to maintain their Idolatrous Religions
by the same Stratagems, Methods, and Ways, which the Ord'nance for the
Preventing of the growing, and spreading of Herefies, proposes for maintaining
the Religion of Christ. Modest and Humble Queries Printed, London. 1646. p. 2.

P. (31) The Apostles, in many Places of their Writings, speaking of
Heretics, and false Teachers in their times, and Proph^sying of those in
after times, both the Popish Faction, and the Sectarian, speak of them as
Apostates, Antichrists, False Prophets, Seducers, Deceivers, Idolaters,
Blasphemers, and their Doctrines, and ways, as Apostasy, Idolatry, Blasphemy,
worshipping of Devils, Seducing, and such like. Edwards against Toleration.
1647. P. 185.

I. (32) In the Latter days, False Christ's and False Prophets shall arise,
saying, Lo! Here is Christ, Or Lo! there he is, etc. -- Wherefore if they
shall say unto you, ( see here how our Savior Ingeminates the Caution as a
thing of Serious Consideration,) Behold he is in the Desert; Go not forth;
Behold he is in the Secret Chambers; ( Mark her* (...) how near our Savior
comes to our Sectaries Practices, and Rebellious Church-ways, as they call
them, now adays: Or he is in Shops, Barns, and such like Private Conventicles.)
Believe it not. Colemanstreet Conclave Visited. P. 1. 1648.

P. (33) The Congregationall men swore to Endeavor Uniformity; and yet
practice this day, Multiformity of Religions, and have put to the sale the
Blood of many Gallant men in Scotland, that so they may buy with their lives,
Cursed Liberty of Conscience. But will it not be bitterness in the End?
Rutherfords Free Disputation. 1649. P. 256. [We know no service to the State
done by these men, but that they set up with the sword, all the Blasphemous and
Heretical Sects and Religions, that Tho. Muncer, or John of Leyd^n fancied
contrary to the Oath of God. Ib. 259.]

I. (34) Was there ever any thing done in the Bishops time, or any thing
attempted to be done by this Generation of men, in the day of their Greatest
Interest and Power in the Kingdom; of that Bloody Consequence to those Godly
Persons, Ministers, or others, whom they most hated, and sought to crush as
this Ord'nance, (to Prevent the Growing and spreading of Heresies, etc.) if
once Established, is like to be to far greater numbers, of truly Pious and
Conscientious Men. Some Modest and Humble Queries. P. 7.

Notes upon. 3.
I Shall not need to cut up this Section by Paragraphs; but rather recommend it
whole, to the Consideration of any Indifferent Reader. These are the People
that assume to themselves the Title of the Kings best Subjects, and the Church
of Englands True-Protestants; when yet at the same time, they do with their own
Lips, and Pens, declare themselves the Implacable Enemies of Order, and of One
another. They call for Indulgence contrary to Law, from those whom they
themselves destroyed for Living and Acting according to the Law; and to whom
(so far from Mercy) they never showed so much as Humanity, or Common Pity. They
demand a Comprehension with that Church, which they do Jointly pronounce to be
Antichristian. They make use of Religion, and Tenderness of Conscience, as
their Plea for a Common Union with the Church: and yet what is it, but the same
Pretense of Religion and Conscience, that Causes all those Mortal Feuds among
themselves? What Religion can be expected from men of these Outrageous
Principles? What Peace with so many Implacable Antipathies, and Oppositions?
What Truth, from such a Medly of Pernicious Errors? and what Trust can be given
to those, that never kept Faith either with God or Man? Nor ever agreed, but in
order to the Ruin and Confusion of the State? Would they be United? ye see
it is Dangerous and Impossible. Dangerous in respect of the Public; and
Impossible among Themselves; for they make it no less then Matter of Damnation,
to Suffer one Another. Now according to these Practices, and Positions, let the
world Judge of the Design.

. 4. The Dissenters Behavior toward the Government; and first, the Clergy.
(1) PErnicious Deceivers, Presumptuous Shepherds, Baalamites, Blazing-Stars,
Glosing Hypocrites with God, Fasting-Pharisaicall Preachers, Miserable Guides,
Counterfeit-False Prophets, Sycophants, Trencher-Priests, Conscience-Brokers,
Dangerous and Pestilent Seducers, Sectary-Precise Preachers, Treacherous
Watchmen, Sworn Soldiers of Antichrist, etc. Barrow and Greenwood. Cited in
Bancrofts Survey of Holy Discipline. P. 355.

(2) This new Parcel of Mockery, and Iesuited Popery, as bad as any in the
Mass Book [i. e. A Collection of Prayers and Thanksgivings used in his
Majesty's Chapel, etc. and published by his Majesty's Command. 1644.]

(3) Croaking Frogs Clergy) that crept into the Kings Chambers, who are known
by the Gutter whence they came, out of the Dragon, out of the mouth of the
Beast and the False Prophet. They are the Spirits of Devils, who go forth unto
the Kings of the Earth to gather them to Battle, etc. The Frogs Heads are like
their Caps [ Quadrata Ranarum Capita.] Here is work for the Parliament, that
the King may have no more Croakers in his Chambers. Wilson to the Commons, Sep.
1642.

(4) A Stinking Heap of Atheistical and Roman-Rubbish, a Rotten Rabble of
Slanderous Priests and Spurious Bastard sons of Belial, who by their Affected
Ignorance, and Laziness, their False Doctrines, and Idolatrous and
Superstitious Practices, in Gods worship; by their most Abominable Evil Lives
and Conversations, had, like Hophni and Phinehas, made the Lords Ordinances to
be even abhorred by the People. Vicars Iehovae Iireh. P. 88. 1644.

(5) Who among us 7. years ago Imagined that this Land should be healed of the
two Great Plague-Sores of this Land; viz. The Common-Pruyer Book and
Episcopacy; of the lesser Scabs, of Deans, and Prebends, Chancellors,
Archdeacons, Queristers, Promoters, etc. Together with the Spiritual Courts,
and all the Trumpery of their Superstitious Ceremonies. Loves Sermon. at
Uxbridge Ian. 30. 1944. P 29.

(6) If Justice be at a stand, and cannot take hold of Living Delinquents, to
keep the Ax from rust, Let Justice be Executed upon Liveless Delinquents. Are
there no Altars, no High Places, no Crucifixes? etc. Greenhill to the Commons.
Ap. 26. 1643. P. 37.

(7) Throw away the Rubbish, out with the Lords Enemies, and the Lands; Vex the
Midianites; Abolish the Amalekites, else they will vex you with their Wiles, as
they have done heretofore. Let Popery find no favor, because it is
Treasonable; Prelacy as little, because it is Tyrannical: but Establish God,
his Truth, and ways. Coleman to the Commons. Au. 30. 1643. P. 64.

(8) God was weary of our New Mons and Sabbaths, and the Calling of our
Assemblies! He could not smell in our Common Feasts; our Sacrifices were an
Abomination to him, through the Noisomness of those Corruptions which Hophni
and Phinehas (Superstitious and wicked men in the Priesthood) mingled with
them. Strickland No. 1944. P. 33.

(9) The Hierarchy is become a Fretting Gaugreen, and Spreding Leprosy, an
Insupportable Tyraany; Up with it, Up with it to the Bottom, Root and Branch,
Hip and Thigh; Destroy these Amalckites, and let there Place be no more found.
Coleman to the Par. Au. 30. 1643. P. 39.

(10) Our Cathedralls are in a Great part of late become the Nest of Idle
Drones, and the Roosting Place of Superstitious Formalities. Coleman to the
Commons Au. 30. 1643. P. 39,

(11) How was this Honorable and Famous City of London furnished? Even just as
Jeroboam furnished Bethel, with the Idlest, the most Superstitious of all the
rest. Id. Ibid.

(12) An Ungodly Generation that weep with a Loud Voice, and Complain their
Gods are gone; their God Episcopacy, their God Liturgy, the Organ, and the
Surplice, the Cross, etc. Stanton to the Commons Ap. 24. 1644. Epistle.

(13) Our Religion and Liberties are settled by the Laws of the Land, not so
Isreal's in Egypt. And therefore the Antichristian Party, in their attempts to
wrest them from us, are more Unjust and cruel, then of Old was Egypt. Ibid. P.
5.

(14) How many Dumb Devils are now casting out of many Parishes in the Land?
Bond to the Commons, Mar. 27. 1644. P. 44.

(15) What had we got if the Prelaticall Party had been set up? What could we
have Expected from them, but superstitions, Innovations, Illegalities, Bondage
of our Estates, I iberties and Consciences? Buroughs to the Commons. Sep. 7.
1641. P. 40.

(16) I profess that I cannot Expecta Complete deliverance from these and other
like Oppressions, but by the Extirpation of the Frame [of Prelatical
Government] Ash to the Commons. Mar. 30. 1642. P. 61.

(17) The Violence that is done to me, and my Flesh, be upon thee O Papacy,
shall the Inhabitants of Ireland say: And my Blood upon Thee O Prelacy, shall
England say. Newcomen to the Commons, Nov. 5. 1642. P. 38.

(18) Profane sons of Belial, (the Clergy) who like Ely's Sons made the People
Abhor the Offering of the Lord. Love, Ian. 30. 1644. P. 18. The two
Plague-Sores, Episc pacy, and Common Prayer Book. P. 22. Episcopacy, Iure
Diabolico. P. 28.

(19) The Church Committed to Persons Illiterate and Insufficient; Dumb Dogs --
Men swallowed up with wine and strong Drink, whose Tables are full of Vomit and
Filthyness, Whoremongers and Adulterers, who as fed Horses neigh after their
Neighbors wives -- Priests of Baal, Bacchus, and Priapus, Sons of Belial etc.
Whites first Century. Epistle to the Reader.

(20) Of all the Nations that have Renounced the Whore of Rome, there is none
in the world so far out of Square as England, in retaining the Popish
Hierarchy. Epist. before the Demonst.

(21) The English Prelacy is the Product of proud Ambition, and Arrogance, and
Contrary to the Express Command of Christ. Baxters 5. Disputations P. 45.

(22) Bishops are Thorns and Thistles, and the Military Instruments of the
Devil. Baxters Concord. P. 122.

(23) Prelacy is a Government which Gratifieth the Devil and wicked men. 5
Disputations. P. 36. Contrary to the word of God, and Apostolical Institution.
Ibid. P. 51. Against the will of Christ, and the welfare of the Churches.
Ibid. Pref. 16.

(24) Your Churches bear with Drunkards, Whoremongers, Railers, Open Scorners
at Godlyness, 5 Disputations P. 37. The most Ungodly of the Land are the
forwardest for your ways. You may have almost all the Drunkards, Blasphemers,
and Ignorant haters of Godliness in the Country to Vote for ye. 5. Disp. Pref.
P. 17. to the Adherers to Prelacy.

(25) What is this Prelacy? A mere Antichristian Encroachment upon the
Inheritance of Christ. D. Owen. Thanksgiving Sermon Oct. 24. 1651. P. 5.

(26) They ( the Episcopal Clergy) are as zealous for Crosses and Surplices,
Processions, and Perambulations, reading a Gospel at a Cross-way, the
Observation of Holy days, the Repeating of the Litany, or the like Forms in the
Common Prayer, the Bowing at the Name of the word Jesus, (while they Reject his
Worship) the Receiving of the Sacrament, when they have no Right to it, and
that upon their Knees, as if they were more Reverent and Devout then the true
Laborious Servants of Christ; with a Multitude of things which are only the
Traditions of their Fathers; I say they are as zealous for these, as if Eternal
Life Consisted in them. Where God forbids them, there they are as forward as if
they could never do enough; and where God Commands them, there they are as
backward to it; yea as much against it, as if they were the Commands of the
Devil himself. And for the Discipline of Christ, though all parts of the world
have much opposed it, yet where has it been so fiercely and Powerfully
resisted? The Lord Grant that this Hardened, wilful, Malicious Nation fall
not under that Heavy Doom Luke. 19. 27. But those mine Enemies which would not
that I should reign over them, bring them hither and Slay them before me.
Baxters Saints Rest. Part 3. P. 91.

(27) If the Parliament should hereafter see a Convenience in Prelacy for this
Kingdom, were not this Oath then Prejudicial either to the Parliaments Liberty
or the Kingdoms felicity? This Objection Supposes that the most Wicked
Antichristian Government may be a Lawful Government in Point of Conscience.
Coleman at St. Margarets Westminster upon Entering into the Covenant Sep. 29.
1643. P. 37.

(28) Who cannot witness the Superstitious abuse of Englands Liturgy?
Superstitious, say I? nay, Idolatrous; What was by the Smectymnuan
Episcopo-Mastix alledg^d of the Liturgy twenty year ago, I doubt is verified of
it still. Ierubaal Ridivivus P 22. 1663.

(29) The Church of England Evidently Declare themselves Limbs of Antichrist;
Therefore there is no Communion to be kept with such in their Public worship.
Vindicia Cultus Evangelici. 1668. P. 39.

(30) The Ministry of the Church of England is False, Superstitious, and
Idolatrous; therefore it is Unlawful for the People of God to Join in it.
Ibid. P. 42. [The Persons Performing the Public worship in the Church of
England, are no Officers appointed by Christ; but an Antichristian Ministry,
such as Designed the Ruin of Godlyness, and Idolaters. Ibid.]

(31) I mean to make the Godly Reader see the distress and Danger we were
Plunged in by the Nefarious Plots of Jesuitical Priests and Perfidious
Prelates; for I may most Justly link them together, like Simeon and Levi,
brothers in Iniquity, Combining, and Complotting to reduce us to the accursed
Romish Religion. Vicars. Jehovah Iireh. P. 6.

(32) How comes it to pass, that in England there is such Increase of Popery,
Superstition, Arminianism. and Profaneness, more then in other Reformed
Churches? Does not the Root of these Disorders proceed from the Bishops, and
their Adherents, being forced to hold Correspondency with Rome, to uphold their
Greatness, and their Courts and Canons, wherein they Symbolize with Rome? and
whether it be not to be feared, that they will rather consent to the bringing
in of Popery, for the Upholding of their Dignities, then part with their
Dignities for the Upholding of Religion? Smectymnuus P. 66.

(33) The Prelates Late Canonsand Oath purposely contrived for the perpetuating
of their Hierarchy, and their other Treacherous Endeavors against the State,
joining with the Papists, and with them laboring to bring all into Confusion,
has helped thus far toward the taking them away Root and Branch, Marshall to
the Commons, June 15. 1643. P. 19. [The Roman Emperors wasted the Saints in Ten
several Persecutions; but all these were nothing in Comparison of this
Destroyer, all their loins not so heavy as the little finger of Antichrist.
Ibid. P. 25.]

(34) We may answer all Queries about the Reign of Christ thus, the Blind begin
to have their Eyes Unsealed, the Lame do walk at Liberty, Proud ones are
abas'd, the Mighty ones are put from their Seats, Errors Discountenanced,
Truths Inquired after, Ceremonies and Superstitions are cast out, Monuments of
Popery and Paganil^i cast down. Caryl to the Commons April. 23. 1644. P. 35.

(35) Never were there Grosser Idols in Rome then those things, as they were
used by some, and what is abused by Superstition; ought not to be retained.
Sedgwick. I^n. 6. 1643. P. 33.

(36) Such a Generation of men there were amongst us that by Complyances with
Idols and Idolatry went about to Drive God away, and what Consistence can there
be between the Ark and Dagon, between God and Idols. Strickland, No. 5. 1644.
P. 32.

(37) It Is now more then manifest that Rome and Hell had long since taken
Council; by working to Extirpate all Protestant Religion; as for Dissolving
our Laws, the Introducing Arbitrary Government, it was but a design on the by
to Cajole, and Hire the Court to their Party. Ward, Deuteronomy. 33. 16. P. 16.

(38) Israel will not be cured without a Full and Total Extirpation o all the
accursed things and Persons also. Fair-Cloth on Josh. 7. 25. P. 25.

(39) These Ecclesiastical Offices, Ceremonies, and Discipline, are set up by
the Pope, and are an Appendix or Tail of Antichrist. D. Holmes on 2 Pet. 3. v.
13. 1641. P. 33.

(40) They are Butchers and Horse-Leeches; These Dragons Tyranny, and
Bloodthirsty Proceedings are Inexcusable. Ha ya any. P. 28. and Martins
Protestat.

(41) Episcopacy must not be Moderated nor Reserved; but presently and wholly
taken away. Answer to London-Petition, fol. 33.

(42) The Church Ministry, and worship in England, are all Antichristian, from
which, all Gods People are in Duty and Conscience bound to separate themselves.
Eight Propositions.

(43) The Bishops must be utterly Extirpated, no less then the Romans Rooted
out the very name of Tarquins, for the Tyranny they had Exercised: A Wind to
Fan or Cleanse will not serve their turn; but it must be a Full mighty Wind to
root up, and carry away the very foundation of their being. Sions Plea, and
Christ on his Throne.

(44) Strike neither at great nor Small; but at these Troubles of Israel. Smite
that Haza^l in the Fifth Rib; yea, if Father or Mother stand in the way, away
with them, Down with the Colors of the Dragon, Advance the Standard of Christ.
Sions Plea. P. 240. and 200.

Notes upon. 4.
YOu have here the Spirit of the Godly Party, and the False-True-Protestants,
set forth in their own words: and in such Terms too, as Paganism it self would
Blush at. There never was any Design Managed with so little regard to the Rules
of Government, or the Measures of Charity; Truth, Good Manners; or (in One
word) of Humane Society. Never any Order of Men certainly; Never any
Constitution, treated at that Scurrilous, Barharous, Scandalous, and Malicious
Rate. And yet all this while, these Sanguinary, and Violent Incendiaries are
Iuggled, and Imposed upon the Multitude, as the only Men to Reform our Manners,
and Advance the Purity of the Gospel. Let but the Reader now Compare this
Ribaldry with the Language of the Holy Ghost; This Reviling of Dignities with
the Practices, and Precepts of Christ and his Apostles; This Uncharitable
Censoriousness, with that Caution of our Saviors, Judge not, that ye be not
Judged; This Cruelty of Rigor, and Persecution with the Dictate of Christian
forbearance; The ways and Consciences of our New-Gospel Professors with those
of former times; and He will easily resolve himself whether these Methods, and
Motions be from Heaven, or Hell; and how far, even in the point of ordinary
Prudence, as well as of Christian Piety, we may safely deliver our selves up to
the Conduct of these Guides; whose Example, as well as Doctrine runs directly
Counter to that which has been transmitted unto us by our Savior Jesus Christ.
It will not need any Artifice, or Flourish to render these Impious
Extravagances odious to any man that shall duly Consider them; for they carry
their Shame, and their Condemnation in their Foreheads.

. 5. The Dissenters Behavior toward the Civil Government.
(1) WHat Iunto's of Hell have been found out? what Plots Discovered; what
Cabinets of Letters Detected; what Actions Described; what Hearts anatomized?
Popery, Prerogati^e, Protestations, Plotters, Prelates, all come to light, and
found Desperate, and Devilish. Lightfoot to the Commons. Au. 26. 1645. P. 17.

(2) The Same Spirit that Actuated Cain to Kill his Brother Abel; Actuated the
Pharisees to kill the Servants, the Sons of God; the same has Actuated these
men to kill the Saints. They all walk by the same Bloody Principles: They have
the same Enraged Spirit: with the same Hellish Rage; Rage which reaches up to
Heaven, by which they have shed any of the Blood of the Saints, they would have
shed all; If all the Blood that was shed from Abel to this time, did run in the
Veins of any one Child of God, they would open that Vein, and let out that
Blood, and Spill it as water upon the Ground. Caligula's Bloody wish is in all
their Hearts; Oh that all the Saints and Servants of God had but one Head, that
with One Blow I might strike it off. Heyrick to the Commons, May. 27. 1646. P.
23.

(3) What shall we think of that Legion ( of Devils, I had almost called them)
who now possess the Land; and after the manner of Devils indeed, seek all to
rent and tear it in pieces? I mean that Colli^vies, that heap, or gathering
together of the Scum and Dross, and Garbage of the Land; That most accursed
Confederacy, made up of G^bal and Ammon, and Amalek, Philistines, with the
Inhabitants of Tire, of Jesuits, and Papists, and Atheists; of Schismatic
and Infamous Persons in all kinds; with that Bloody and Butcherly Generation,
commonly known by the name of Cavaliers. Io. Goodwins Anti-Cavalierism. P. 2.

(4) Qu. What is your Name? An. Cavalier. Qu. Who gave you that name? An. My
Seducers and deceivers in my Innocence, wherein I was made a Member of the
Church of Rome, and consequently a Limb of Antichrist, an Enemy to all
Godliness, a Child of the Devil, and an Inheritor of the Kingdom of Darkness,
amongst the Infernal Spirits that Rule in the air of this Terrestrial Globe.
Watsons Cavaliers Catechism. 1643. P. 25.

(5) To Call a man Defender of the Faith, who is a Persecutor of it: o call a
Profane Tyrant, Gracious; O what Abomina^ le Falsity and Flattery is this? To
call Wicked, Perjured, Profane Lukes, or Bloudy-minded Popish Archbishops,
your Grace; what is it less then Blasphemy? it were Fitter to call them your
Vice, then your Grace. Mean Tekel, P. 60.

(6) There is very little Difference between Devils and Wicked men. I may say
without breach of Charity, Devils Incarnate are made Subject this day; and
their Subjection's the Subject of this days rejoicing. Caryl on Luke 10. 20. P.
22.

(7) This is the Curse of God on that Party; Notwithstanding God sets himself
against them, yet they will not come in and Repent, for God takes no pleasure
in them to give them Repentance. Butroughs on I say 66. 10. P. 58. 59.

(8) If the Retinue of Iim and Ojim about his Majesty's Person, Those Hairy
Apostates from Humanity it self, be in the Bishops Judgment, the service of
God; well may he say that the King suffers for the Protection of the Service of
God. Or if the Ruin or Destruction of the Lamb by those walking Sacks of
Blood, the Cavaliers, be the Preservation of our Laws from Corrupt
Interpretation, It is somewhat a Tolerable Conjecture to think the King may
suffer by it. Os Ossorianum. Io. Goodwin. P. 21.

(9) The Cavaliers Catcekism: Or the Reformed Protestant, Catechizing the
Antichristian Papists, Malignants, Incendiaries, and other ill-Affected
Persons under the name of CAVALIERS.

(10) I went (says he [ The King] of his going to the House of Commons)
attended with some Gentlemen; Gentlemen indeed; the ragged ^fantry of Stews and
Brothels; the Spawn and Shipwreck of Taverns and Dicing-Houses. Iconoclastes.
P. 25.

A Prayer for the Preservation of his Majesty's Person, etc.
Priest. Right Responds. (11) O Lord Guard the Person of thy Servant the King.
From Jesuits, Papists, Irish Rebels, and Evil Counselors about him. People.
Resp. Who puts his Trust in thee. Not we hope in the Arm of Flesh, as
Cavaliers, Delinquents, and such Enemies to the Kingdom. Priest. Resp. Send him
and his Armies help from thy holy Place. Not from Denmark, Belgia, France,
Spain, and Ireland. People. Resp. And evermore mightily defend them. From the
Insinuations of Incendiaries and other Promoters of this War. Priest. Resp.
Confound the Designs of all those that are risen up against him. To withdraw
him from his Parliament, and the Protection of his best Subjects. People. Resp.
And let not their Rebellious Wickedness approach near to hurt him. Nor any more
to Rob, Spoil, and Kill the Poor People of this Nation. Priest. Resp. Oh Lord
hear our Prayer. That our King may speedily return home from destructive
Misleaders. People. Resp. And let our Cry come unto thee. And the Cry of thy
Peoples blood, in Ireland, and England.

Cavaliers New Common Prayer Book Unclasp'd. P. 3.

(12) The Woeful Miscarriages of the King himself, which we cannot but
acknowledge to be many and very Great in his Government, that have Cost the
Three Kingdoms so Dear, and cast him down from his Excellency into a Horrid Pit
of Misery, almost beyond Example, etc. Vindication of the 59 London Ministers,
P. 6. 7.

(13) The Kings Letter, full indeed of much Evil, and Demonstration of no
Change of Heart, from his former Bloody, Cruel and Unkingly Practices, of the
Ruin of himself and his Kingdom, as much as in him lay. Vicars Chron. P. 43.

(14) All Good Consciences shall Condemn that Course: It shall be Easier for
Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of Judgment, than for such a Court. Admonition to
the Parliament. P. 3.

Notes on. 5.
THis Section is of the same Spirit with the former, and only a Malevolent
Continuation of the same design, for the overturning of the Government, by
rendering the King, his Majesty's Ministers, and his Friends, and the whole
Frame of the Civil State, Despicable, and as Odious as the other did the
Bishops and the Clergy. What a Rabble of Bug-words have we here hudled together
in the First Paragraph? (Number. 1) What a Diabolical, and Uncharitable Judgment
pronounced upon the whole Party of the King? ( 2 and 3) What an irreverent
Mockery upon the Catechism of the Church? (4) What can be more Insolent toward
the Person of our Sovereign? (5) How Rude, and how Un-Christian is the
Character pronounced upon the Cavaliers? ( From 6 to 11.) And then see the
Turning of his late Majesty's Devotions, in his distress, into Droll and
Buffon. (11) The lewd Reproaches cast upon That Pious Prince in the depth of
his Afflictions, by the London Ministers, even in their Pretended Service to
him: (12) The Clamorous Outrage of Vicars's Revilings: (13) And the Parliament
as ill treated by Others of the same Stamp, as these People treated the King.

. 6. The Presbyterians Opinion of the Covenant.
(1) THE Covenant was the Parliaments Sword and Buckler; for when the Cavaliers
shall see ye come Armed with the Covenant, they will Run, Run, Run from the
Presence of the Lord of Hosts. Colemans Exhortation-Sermon to the Commons.

(2) As God did swear for the Salvation of Men, and of Kingdoms; so Kingdoms
must now Swear for the Preservation and Salvation of Kingdoms, to Establish our
Savior Jesus Christ in England. Nigh upon the Covenant.

(3) We Know (O Lord) that Abraham made a Covenant; and Moses and David made a
Covenant, and our Savior made a Covenant; but Thy PARLIAMENTS Covenant is the
Greatest of All Covenants. A Lay-Preacher at Banbury in his Prayer.

(4) Look upon your Covenant, I beseech ye, and do Justice upon Delinquents
Impartially, and without Respect of Persons. Palmer to the Commons, Aug. 13.
1644. P. 48.

(5) None but an Atheist, Papist, Oppressor, Rebel, or the Guilty Desperate
Cavaliers, and Light and Empty men can Refuse the Covenant. Coleman, Sep. 27.
1643. P. 23.

(6) This Despised Covenant shall Ruin Malignants, Sectaries and Atheists: Yet
a little while, and behold he comes, and walks in the greatness of his
strength, and his Garments Dyed with Blood. Oh for the Sad and Terrible day of
the Lord upon England; their Ships of Tharshish; their Fenced Cities, etc.
Because of a Broken Covenant. Rutherfords Letters. P. 555.

(7) I think it my last Duty to Enter a Protestation in Heaven, before the
Righteous Judge, against the Practical and Legal Breach of Covenant, and All
Oaths Imposed on the Consciences of the Lords People, and All Popish,
Superstitious Mandates of men. Ruth. Let. P. 575.

(8) In the League and Covenant, that have been so Solemnly and Publicly
Sworn, and Renewed by this Kingdom, the Duty of Defending, and Preserving the
Kings Majesty's Person, and Authority, is Joined with, and Subordinate to the
Duty of Preserving and Defending the True Religion and Liberties of the
Kingdoms. Gillespy's Useful Cases of Conscience. P. 55, 56.

(9) Look upon the Covenant to which we have Lift up our Hands. I Tremble when
I read it. We Covenanted, not only against Prel^ey, but Popery; not only
Hierarchy, but Heresy; not only Sin but Schism. Watson to the Commons. December.
27. 1649.

(10) Will not these Abjurers of the Covenant, of All others, be the very Chief
of Sinners, whilst they become Guilty of no less then the very Sin against the
Holy Ghost? Or at least border as near to it as possibly may be? O amazing
Vengeance! Oh most dreadful of all Judicial Strokes that can fall upon the
Reprobate minds of men! May not the dismal Doom of Francis Spira be here
remembered? and Solomon's Backslider in Heart, who shall be filled with his own
ways? Prove. 14. 14. Though to commit Murder upon the Highway, and to do it
deliberately, and in cool blood too, be a most horrid Crime against the very
Light of Nature, and against the second Table; yet how short does it come of
This; the highest of all Crimes imaginable? A Crime that murders Conscience!
that murders Souls! that murders Religion it self! a Crime against the First
Table! most immediately against the Sovereign God! and the greatest of that
nature, that men can be guilty of. Three Men's Speeches. P. 6.

(11) Q. Whether seeing the Covenant was made to God Almighty, All Persons by
the Covenant were not bound to bring Delinquents to Punishment? And whether the
Long Parliament did not Declare the Late King to be a Delinquent, let God and
the World judge? The Valley of Achor, 1660. Q. 16.

(12) I do Solemnly declare, as a dying man, who dare not dissemble; that as I
thought, and still aver that the Erecting of this Abjured Prelacy is the Cause
of much of the Sin in the Land, and of all the Sufferings of the Lords People*
So I had no worse Design, then the Restoring of the work of Reformation
according to the Covenant, and more Particularly, the Extirpation of Prelacy*
etc. Naphtali. The Testimony of Alexander Robertson, P. 229.

(13) Oh might this Privilege be offered to the Apostate Angels, which kept not
the Covenant of their Creation, nor consequently their First Estate, and to the
rest of the Damned Souls in Hell? Would God send an Angel from Heaven to Preach
unto them a Second Covenant, upon the laying hold whereon, and closing
wherewith, they might be received into Grace and Favor: How would those poor
Damned Spirits bestir themselves? What Rattling of their Red hot Chains? What
shaking of their Fiery Locks? In a word; What an uproar of Joy would there be
in Hell, upon such Glad Tidings? Case's Quarrel of the Covenant. Dec. 1643. P.
60.

(14) There is much Sin in making a Covenant on sinful Grounds, and there is
more Sin in keeping it; but when the Preservation of True Religion, and the
Vindication of Just Liberties, meet in the Groundwork, ye may Swear, and not
Repent; yea, if you Swear, you must not Repent. Caryl, Oct. 6. 1643. P. 18.

(15) Let them first shave their Heads, and pare their Nails, as the strange
Virgin of Old was commanded to do, and so let them enter into that Sacred and
Dreadful Covenant. Bond to the Commons on Isa. 25. 9. Oct. 8. 1645. P. 37.

Notes upon. 6.
IT is but suitable that the Blasphemy, Heresy, and Sedition that went to the
Framing of this Oath of Conspiracy, should be followed with an answerable
measure of Wickedness, in the promoting of it, and in the Execution: Whereof
you have here Three Notorious Instances. ( Number. 1, 2, 3.) And a Clause that
draws Blood upon the King himself. (4) A Brand upon all the Refusers of it; (5)
And another Sanguinary Clause. (6) A Protestation against Sovereign Authority.
(7) And a Jesuitical Exposition of the meaning of it. (8. 9.) The Breach of it,
no less than a Sin against the Holy Ghost. (10) And the Murder of the Late
King Iustifi'd, upon the Obligation of it. (11) The Malice of the Confederacy
owned at the last Gasp. (12) A most Impious and Fantastical Exaggeration of
the blessed Privileges of that Brand. (13) The Cheat. (14) And a Foppish
Allusion to the pretended Solemnity and Sacredness of it. (15) So that upon the
main, the Covenanters do assert, First, the Indissolvable Tie of That Oath:
Secondly, the Intent of it to be the Dissolution of the Government: And in the
Third place, so often as every they move for a Toleration, they do as good as
desire the King in plain Terms, That he will be Graciously pleased to give them
leave to serve his Majesty as they did his Father.

. 7. Dissenters Liberty of Conscience.
(1) THat there may be a Thorough and Speedy Proceeding against Blind Guides,
and Scandalous Ministers, by whose Wickedness People either Lack or Loath the
Ordinances of the Lord; and Thousands of Souls Perish, and the removal of the
Ark from among us, is (to the Trembling of our Hearts) evidently Threatened. And
that your Wisdoms would find out some way to admit into the Ministry such Godly
and Hopeful men as have prepared themselves, and are willing thereunto; without
which, there will be such a scarcity of Able and Faithful Ministers, that it
will be to little purpose to cast out such as are Unable, Idle, or Scandalous.
The Assemblies Petition to both Houses of Parliament, July 19. 1643. Husbands
Collections, (Part 2) fol. 241.

His Highness, by the Advice of his Council does Publish, Declare, and Order
that no Person or Persons aforesaid, do, from and after the First day of
January, 1655. keep in their Houses or Families as Chaplains, or Schoolmasters
for the Education of their Children, any Sequestered or Ejected Minister,
Fellow of a College, or Schoolmaster, nor permit any of their Children to be
taught by such, upon pain of being proceeded against in such sort as the said
Orders do direct in such Cases. And that no person who has been Sequestered, or
Ejected out of any Benefice, College, or School, for Delinquency, or Scandal,
shall from and after the First day of January, keep any School either Public
or Private, nor any Person who after that time shall be Ejected for the Causes
aforesaid.

(3) And that no Person, who for Delinquency, or ^candal, has been Sequestered
or Ejected, shall from and after the First day of January aforesaid, Preach in
any Public place, or at any Private Meeting of any other Persons then those of
his own Family; nor shall administer Baptism, or the Lords Supper, or Marry any
Persons, or use the Book of Common Prayer, or the Forms of Prayer therein
contained, upon pain that every Person so offending in any of the Premises,
shall be proceeded against as by the said Order is provided and directed.
Olivers Declaration, Nov. 24. 1655.

A Confession of Faith to be agreed by your Highness, and the Parliament,
according to the Rule and Warrant of the Scriptures, to be asserted, held forth
and recommended to the People of these Nations, so that this Liberty be not
extended to Popery or PRELACT. Humble Petition and Advice. May 25. 1657.

Notes on. 7.
NOT to cloy the Reader with Repetitions out of my First Part, upon this
subject; I shall pass over the whole History of the Late Persecution, with this
short Note upon it: That as it was levelled at the Destruction both of Church
and State, so it fell heaviest upon persons of Condition, Honesty, and Letters,
as the men most sensible of the Ties of Honor and Duty. And I shall now
content my self with these few Instances of the Rigor of those times; which
methinks might stop the mouths of those that cry out so loud against the
Uncompassionate severity of the present Age.

What were the Blind Guides, and Scandalous Ministers, etc. ( Number. 1) but the
Canonical Clergy, that were forced away from their Livings, and their Families,
by a Popular Rage and Violence, under the countenance of that Diabolical
Slander? Neither was the loss of their Lawful Possessions, and the Ordinary
Comforts of Life sufficient to Expiate for their Piety, Integrity and Virtue,
without their Adversaries doing as much as in them lay, to Starve them too. ( 2
and 3) And this was the Liberty of Conscience of those days. Is it not a
Reasonable Proposition now, for those men that gave no quarter to the Church
upon that Revolution, to Mutiny for the same Liberty again of Destroying it?
And for the whole Schism that from time to time, by Common Agreement, Excluded
the Prelacy, to Expect that the Ecclesiastical Government should be now torn to
pieces in their favor?

. 8. The Power of the Kirk.
(1) IF the Prince, with Gideon, Nadab, Abihu, and Saul, will intermeddle with
Gods Warrant, as she (Q. Eliz.) has done with matters of Religion, with God's
matters, she must think it no Injury to be Disobeyed. Soldier of Berwick Cited
by the Author of an Answer to a Factious Libel, Entitled, An Abstract of
several Acts of Parliament, etc.

(2) Kings no less then the Rest, must obey and yield to the Just Authority of
the Ecclesiastical Magistrates. Ecclesiastical Discip. P. 142.

(3) The Consistory may, and ought to admonish the Magistrate, which is
negligent in Punishing Vice. Danaeus. Par. 2. Isag. li. 2. Cap. 62. And also
may upon Knowledge of the Cause taken, Excommunicate, even the Chief
Magistrate, unto the which he ought to submit himself. Ibid. ca. 67.

(4) Princes must remember to subject themselves to the Church, and to submit
their Scepters, to throw down their Crowns before the Church; yea to Lick the
dust of the Feet of the Church. T. Cartwright. P. 645.

(5) Every Eldership is the Tribunal Seat of Christ. Beza de Presb. P. 124.

(6) The Holy Discipline ought to be set up, and All Princes to submit
themselves under the Yoke of it: What Prince, King, or Emperor shall Disanul
the same; he is to be reputed Gods Enemy, and to be held unworthy to Reign
above his People. Knox Exhort. to Eng. P. 91. etc.

(7) Our Church History tells, that Mr. Andrew Melvin, that Faithful and
Zealous Servant of Christ, would not answer before the King and the Council for
his Alleged Treasonable Discourse in a Sermon, until he had first given in a
Plain and Formal Protestation; and the like was done by Worthy Mr. David Blake
upon the like occasion; and the Protestation was Approved, and Signed by a good
Part of the Church of Scotland, 1596. Hist. Indul. P. 14.

(8) The Irreligiousness, Antichristianism and Exorbitancy of this Explicatory,
and (as to some things) Ampliatory Act, and Assertion of the Kings Supremacy in
Church Affairs (of Nov. 16. 1669) this Supra-Papal Supremacy. Hist. Indul. P.
27.

(9) The Accepters of the Indulgence are Chargeable with High Treason against
the King of Kings, our Lord Jesus Christ. Hist. Indul. p. 86.

(10) Christ breaks and moulds Commonwealths at his Pleasure. He has not spoke
much in his Word, how long they shall last, or what he intends to do with them:
Only this, That all Kings and Kingdoms that make War against the Church, shall
be broken a pieces; and that in the end, All the Kingdoms of the World shall be
the Kingdoms of our Lord, and his Saints; and they shall reign over them.
Marshal to the Commons, June 15. 1643. p. 47.

(11) What was our Posture and Practice, after we had so stupidly stood by,
till we saw the whole work overturned, without offering to Interpose
effectually to prevent its ruin, or to fall with it? Hist. of Indulgence,
Pref. 1678. ( Speaking of the Action of Bothwell-Bridge.)

(12) The Father having given to Christ all Power, both in Heaven and in Earth,
and the Rule and Regiment of this Kingdom, he has Committed to Monarchies,
Aristocracies or Democracies, as the several Combinations and Associations of
the People shall between themselves think good to Elect and Erect. God leaves
People to their own Liberty in this Case. Case on Isaiah, 43. 4. p. 26.

(13) They were carrying on a Malignant Interest; to wit, The Establishing the
King in the Exercise of his Power in Scotland, and the Re-investing him with
the Government in England, when he had not yet Abandoned his Former Enmity to
the Work and People of God; and the securing of Power in their own hands under
him. Gillespies Useful Case of Conscience. p. 66.

(14) There was a sin in the Peoples Joining, because few or none of those who
did Join, did give any Testimony against the Magistrates Employing of the
Malignant Party. Ibid.

(15) After the Treaty was brought to some close, the King did, before his
coming to Sea, Receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper from one of the
Prelatical Chaplains, and according to the Service Book, etc. notwithstanding
the Commissioners of the Kirk did represent the Evil thereof to him. Gillespies
Useful Case of Conscience Discussed. p. 56. Another Exception, That the King
did not think his Father Guilty of Blood. Ibid.

(16) Was there not Cause to Scruple at the taking of this Oath [ of
Allegeance] which would have Imported, 1. A Condemning of the Convention of
Estates in Scotland, 1643. 2. A Condemning of the Parliaments, An. 1640. 41.
44. 45. 46. 47. 48. As also the Committees and Parliaments thereafter, An.
1649. 1650. 1651. 3. A Condemning of all the Acts made by These Parliaments. 4.
A Condemning of all the Meetings, Councils, and Conventions of the Subjects, at
the beginning of the Late work of Reformation. 5. A Condemning of the League
and Covenant. 6. A Condemning of Scotlands Joining with, and Helping of England
in the day of their straight. 7. A Condemning of the Renewing of the National
Covenant, 1638. 1639. 8. A Condemning of the General Assembly, 1638. and
several others thereafter. 9. A Condemning of Scotlands Rising in Arms in their
own Defense against the Popish, Prelatical, and Malignant Party. 10. A
Condemning of their seizing upon Forts and Castles in their own Defense [ An
Apol^getical Relation of the Sufferings of the Scotch Ministers, 1665. p. 127.
128.]

(17) We ought to consider ( the Conditions of the Kings Letter of Indulgence
to the Kirk, June 7. 1669.) what is accounted living Peaceably, and Orderly, by
such as propose this Qualification: And that sure to speak it in the smoothest
of Ter^s, is a Negative Compliance with all their Tyranny, Oppression of Church
and Country, Bloodshed, Overturning of the Work of God, Establishing Iniquity
by Law, Perjury, Apostasy, Re-establishing of Perjured Prelates, and Abjured
Prelacy. Hist. of Indulg. p. 7.

(18) We Remarque further, that the Letter says, that none of these Ministers
have any Seditious Discourses or Expressions in Pulpit or Elsewhere: And what
is understood here, by Seditious Discourses or Expressions we cannot be
Ignorant? But now what Conscientious Ministers can either Tacitly promise such
a thing, or upon the Highest Peril, forbear to Utter such Discourses? Or who
can think that any such thing can be yielded unto, who considers what God
requires of Ministers, in Reference to a Corrupted and Apostatized state? And
what the weight of the Blood of Souls is. Hist. Indul. p. 11.

(19) The Unparalled Perfidy, and Breach of Covenant: The most Abominable,
Irreligious, Inhumane, and Tyrannical Acts made for Establishing of this Wicked
Course of Defection. Hist. Indul. p. 12.

(20) Christ and his Apostles were the Greatest of Conventicle Preachers, and
almost Preached no other way, wanting always the Authority of the Supreme
Magistrate, and yet not waiting upon their Indulgence. Hist. Indul. p. 17.

(21) They have power to Abrogate and Abolish all Statues and Ordinances
concerning Ecclesiastical matters that are found Noysom and Unprofitable; and
agree not with the time, or are abused by the People. 2 Book of Discipline,
cap. 7. [To Discipline must all the Estates within this Realm be Subject, as
well the Rulers, as they that are Ruled. 1 Lib. Disc. cap. 7.

(22) As the Ministers, and others of the Ecclesiastical State are subject to
the Magistrate-Civil, so ought the Person of the Magistrate be subject to the
Kirk Spiritually, and in Ecclesiastical Government. 2 Lib. Disc. c. 1.

(23) As Ministers are Subject to the Judgment and Punishment of the Magistrate
in External things, if they offend; so ought the Magistrates to submit
themselves to the Discipline of the Kirk, if they transgress in matters of
Conscience and Religion. Ibid.

(24) The National Assemblies of This Country (called commonly the General
Assemblies) ought always to be retained in their own Liberty, and have their
own place; with Power to the Kirk to appoint Times and Places, and Convenient
for the same: And all men, as well Magistrates as Inferiors, to be subject to
the Judgment of the same, in Ecclesiastical Causes, without any Reclamation, or
Appellation to any Judge, Civil, or Ecclesiastical within the Realm. 2 Lib.
Disc. c. 12.

(25) The Princes and Magistrates not being Exemed, and these that are Placed
in the Ecclesiastical Estate, Rightly Ruling, Governing, God shall be
Glorified, etc. 2 Lib. Disc. c. 13.

(26) The Ministers Exerce not the Civil Jurisdiction; but teach the Magistrate
how it should be Exercised according to the word.

(27) To Disobey or Resist any that God has placed in Authority ( while they
pass not over the Bounds of their office) we Confess, or Affirm to be sin.
Large Confess. Art. 15.

(28) We Confess and Avow that such as resist the Supreme Power, doing that
thing which appertains to his Charge, do resist God's Ordinance, and
therefore cannot be Guiltless, Ibid. Art. 25.

(29) Blasphemy, Adultery, Murder, Perjury, and other Crimes Capital, worthy of
death, ought not properly to f^ll under Censure of the Kirk, because all such
open Transgressors of Gods Law ought to be taken away by the Civil Sword. 1
Book of Discip. cap. 7.

(30) In the fear of God, we signify unto your Honors, that whosoever
persuades you that ye may pardon where God Commands Death, deceives your
Souls, and provokes you to offend God's Majesty. 1 Book of Disc. cap. 9.

(31) The Magistrate Commands External things for external Peace and
Quietness among the Subjects: The Minister handles External things only for
Conscience-cause. 2 Lib. Disc. cap. 1.

(32) If the Offender abide an Assise, and by the same be Absolved, then may
not the Church pronounce Excommunication; but justly may exhort the man, by
whose hand the Blood was shed to enter into Consideration with himself how
precious is the Life of man before God, and how severely God commands Blood,
howsoever it be shed, except it be by the Sword of the Magistrate, to be
punished: And so may Enjoin unto him such satisfaction, to be made public to
the Church, as may bear Testification of his obedience and unfeigned
Repentance. Psalm-Book in the order of Excommunication.

(33) Wanton and Vain words, Uncomly Gestures, Negligence in hearing the
Preaching, or Abstaining from the Lords Table, when it is publicly Ministered;
suspicion of Avarice, or of Pride; Superfluity or Riotousness in Cheer or
Raiment: These We say, and such others, that of the world are not regarded,
deserve admonition amongst the Members of Christ's Body -- -- If he continues
Stubborn, then the Third Sunday ought he to be Charged Publicly, to satisfy
the Church for his Offense and Contempt, under the pain of Excommunication.
Psalm Book in the Order of Public Repentance.

(34) It is Ordained, that every Thursday, the Ministers and Elders in their
Assembly or Consistory, diligently Examine all such faults and suspicions as
may be espied, not only amongst others, but chiefly amongst themselves.
Psalm-Book. Sect. of the weekly Assembly.

(35) In every Notable Town, we Require that one day beside the Sunday be
appointed to the Sermon and Prayers; which during the time of Sermon, must be
kept from all Exercise of Labor, as well of the Master as the Servant. 1 Lib.
Disc. cap. 9. of Policy.

Notes on. 8.
THere can be no better Antidote against the Poison of a Presbyteria^
Government, than the very Orders of their Discipline, which are the most
Unanswerable Condemnation of the Party. You have here a more than Papal Tyranny
in the Usurpations of the Kirk over Kings and Princes in the 6 first Clauses:
Treason it self exempted from the Cognizance of the Civil Power. ( Number. 7.) The
Kings Supremacy not only disclaimed, but the bare acknowledgment of it made
Criminal. ( 8 and 9) All the Governments of the World subjected to the Holy
Discipline, and Rebellion it self abetted and maintained. ( 10 and 11)
Sovereign Power Vested in the Multitude. (12) The Restoring of the King
Condemned. ( 13 and 14) And the Objections against it; his receiving the
Sacrament from a Prelatical hand, according to the Order of the Church, and the
Charging his Father with the Guilt of Blo^d. (15) The Taking of the O^th of
Allegiance and the Acceptance of the Kings Indulgence pronounced utterly
Unlawful (17 18, 19) Conventicle-Preachers Warranted from the Precedent of
Christ and his Apostles. (20) The Ministers above their Sovereign. (21, 22, 23
24.) Princes upon their Good Behavior, and accountable to the Presbytery, if
they transgress their Bounds (25, 26, 27, 28.) The Power of Life and Death
taken from the Magistrate. (29, 3^,) The Minister Us^rps the Civil Power. (31)
The Presbytery take upon them to punish Malefactors when the Law has acquitted
them. (32) And call People to account for their very Thoughts, Clothes,
Gestures, etc; nay a suspicion is enough to make a body liable to their
Censure. (33) They make Two Sabba^hs in the Week more than God ever Commanded;
and by the same Authority they may set apa^t all the rest. (34. 35.) This is
enough said to show the Shameful and Intolerable Rigor of that Government.

. 9. Principles and Positions.
(1) WHEN the Supreme Magistrate will not Execute the Judgment of the Lord,
those who made him Supreme Magistrate under God, who have under God, Sovereign
Liberty to dispose of Crowns and Kingdoms, are to Execute the Judgment of the
Lord, when Wicked men make the Law of God of none Effect, 1 Samuel 15. 32. so
Samuel killed Ag^g, whom the Lord expressly Commanded to be killed, because Saul
disobeyed the Voice of the Lord. Lex Rex. p. 173.

(2) Shall it Excuse the States to say, We could not judge the Cause of the
Poor, nor Crush the Priests of Baal, and the Idolatrous Mass*Prelates, because
the King forbad us? Lex Rex. p. 175.

(3) The Kings Power is Fiduciary, and put in his hand upon Trust, and must be
Ministerial, and borrowed from those who put him in trust, and so his Power
must be Less, and derived from the Parliament. Lex Rex. p. 177.

(4) The Magistrate has no Power to suppose things Doubtful and Disputable,
upon the Practice of any in the Service of God; and therefore it cannot be
lawful for any to obey him when he so Imposes. E. Bagshaw of things
Indifferent. Part. 2. p. 3.

(5) Our Fundamentals were not made by our Representatives, but by the People
themselves; and our Representatives themselves limited by them; which it were
Good that Parliaments as well as People would observe and be faithful to: For
no Derivative Power can Null what their Primitive Power has Established. The
Englishman. p. 11.

(6) Royal Primogeniture alone, without the Peoples consent, is no Rightful
Title to the Government; nor has the Eldest Son, or Heir of the King, any
Right to the Government by Birth, unless the People consent to choose him
thereto. Mene-Tekel. p. 10.

(7) The Parliaments of England, and often the People without the Parliament,
have (in their Addresses to the King) given him the Title of Lord, in a way of
Honor and Respect; but when he has refused to perform his Duty to them, and
endeavored by his Unlawful Prerogative to abridge them of their Liberties,
they have made him understand his Relation, and by force of Arms Asserted their
own Privileges, and sometimes compelled the King to Perform his Duty, other
times Deposed him from the Government; as the People of Israel did Rehoboam
upon the same account; and so have most, if not all the Nations in the World
done the same. Ibid. page 36.

(8) Rising up against Authority it self, the Ordinance of God, and Disobeying
the Powers therewith vested, standing and acting in their Right Line of
Subordination, is indeed Rebellion, and as the sin of Witchcraft; but to
Resist, and Rise up against Persons Abusing Sacred Authority, and Rebelling
against God, the Supreme, is rather to adhere to God as our Liege Lord, and to
Vindicate both our selves and his Abused Ordinance from Man's Wickedness and
Tyranny. Naphtali. p. 157.

(9) The Power of the King Abused to the Destruction of Laws, Religion, and
Subjects, is a Power contrary to Law, Evil, and Tyrannical, and Tyeth no man to
subjection. Lex Rex. p. 261.

(10) If we consider the Fountain-Power, the King is Subordinate to Parliament,
and not Coordinate, for the Constituent is above that which is Constituted.
Lex Rex. p. 377.

(11) Whenever a King, or other Supreme Authority Creates an Inferior, they
Invest it with a Legitimacy of Magistratical Power to punish themselves also in
case they prove evil doers; yea, and to act any other thing requisite for the
Praise and Encouragement of the Good. Io. Goodwins Right and Might well met,
1648. p. 7.

(12) The People is not King formally, because the People is eminently more
than the King; for they make David King, and Saul King. Lex Rex. p. 156.

(13) The Laws are in the hands of the Parliament to Change or Abrogate as they
shall see best for the Commonwealth; even to the taking away of Kingship it
self, when it grows too Masterful and Burdensome. (...). p. 101.

(14) The Parliament sit in that body, not as his Subjects, but as his
Superiors, called, not by him, but by the Law; not only twice every year, but
as often as great affair require, to be his Counselors and Dictators, though he
stomach it, nor to be Dissolved at his pleasure, but when all Grievances be
first removed, all Petitions heard and answered. Ibid. p. 110.

(15) Our Covenant was not taken without the Royal Authority of the King,
though it be Condemned by his Personal Command; for as long as this Parliament
of England continues, the Royal Authority and Power is annexed to it, by
virtue of that Act of Continuance: So that the King of England, in his Power,
may still be at Westminster, though King Charles in his Person be at Oxford, or
elsewhere. The Covenanters Catechism, 1644. p. 16.

(16) If a People that by Oath and Duty are obliged to a Sovereign, shall
sinfully Dispossess him, and contrary to their Covenants, choose and Covenant
with another; they may be Obliged by their latter Covenants, notwithstanding
the former. Ho. Com. p 188.

(17) Though the Perfidious Parliament (or rather Mock Parliament) have lately
betrayed their own Trust, and our Liberties; making it Treason for us to
mention the Cruel Tyranny and Oppression we groan under; yet by the Ancient
Laws of England, this Man that Rules at present, is no Rightful King of
England; but by Oppressing the Nation, and Persecuting the Lords People, has
loss the Title of a King, and the Name of a King does not agree to him, but
Tyrant is the Name due to him. Mene-Tekel. p. 63.

(18) Q. Whether the Title of Supreme, be not rather Nominal than Real? Valley
of Acbor. p. 1.

(19) Our War has been proved over and over (to Unbiast Consciences) to be
Just. Caryl to the Commons. April 23. 1644. p. 15.

(20) If the King raise War against the Parliament upon their Declaration of
the Dangers of the Commonwealth, in that case people may not only Resist him,
but also he Ceases to be a King. Baxter, H. Commonwealth. These. 368.

(21) It is our Duty to yield to this Authority all Active and Cheerful
Obedience in the Lord, even for Conscience sake. Ibid.

(22) A Refusal to be subject to this Authority, under the pretense of
Upholding the Title of any One upon Earth, is a Refusal to Acquiesce in the
Wise and Righteous pleasure of God. Ienkins Petition. Printed Oct. 15. 1651.

(23) The King must Command, not only according to God's, but Man's Laws: And
if he do not so Command, the Resistance is not a Resistance of Power; but Will.
Bridges to the Commons, Feb. 7. 1642. Pref.

(24) Let not the Sons of Belial say there is no Law now; let them not be as
when there was no King in Israel, every man doing that which was right in his
own eyes; let them know that the Kingly Power Resides in the High Court of
Parliament. Pickering. No. 27. 1649. Epist. Ded.

(25) Subjects do promise Obedience, that the Magistrate might help them; which
if he do not, they are discharged of their Obedience. Goodman. p. 190.

(26) Judges ought by the Law of God to Summon Princes before them for their
Crimes, and to proceed against them as against all other Offenders. Obedience.
p. 111.

(27) Scotland fought for themselves, and their own safety; and whatever Law
will Warrant Nations now to join together against the Turk, will Warrant
Scotland their joining with England against their Common-Enemy. Apologet.
Relat. p. 138.

(28) A War raised by the Parliament against the Common Enemy, in defense of
the Kings Honor, the safety of the People, and the Purity of Religion, cannot
be Condemned as Unjust and Illegal. Apol. Rel. p. 142.

(29) It was the common practice of the Parliaments of Scotland (and Lex currit
cum Praxi) to rise in Arms against their Kings, when they turned Tyrants. Ibid.
143.

(30) It is lawful for the Inferior and Subordinate Magistrates to defend the
Church and Commonwealth, when the Supreme Magistrate degenerates and falls
into Tyranny, or Idolatry; for Kings are subject to their Commonwealths.
Canterburies Doom. p. 290. etc.

(31) The Parliament have declared the Supreme Power to be in themselves
Exclusively without a King or House of Lords. And they are the Powers that now
are, as has been cleared. Saunders. Mar. 23. 1650. p. 24.

(32) It is altogether Lawful for the Parliament to take up Arms for the
Defense of the Liberty, or any other Imaginable Cause against any Party
Countenanced by the Kings Presence against his Laws. Baylyes Review. p. 83.

(33) The Votes, Orders, and Ordinances of the Lords and Commons in Parliament,
even without or against the Kings Personal Command, are to be obeyed and
observed. C^oftons fastening of St. Peter's Fetters. p. 118.

(34) A Reformation is settled by Highest Authority, in despite of Papists,
Prelate, Pope or Devil. Staunton to the Commons. April 24. 1644. p. 24.

(35) Is it so high a Crime for the Great Council of the Nation to determine
things necessary for the safety of King and Kingdom, without consent of his
Majesty, when it cannot be obtained? Newcomen to the Commons. Nov. 5. 1642. p.
48.

(36) You are Ambassadors of the Greatest King. The Great things of Heaven and
Earth are committed to your care; the Glory of Jehovah, the Gospel of Christ,
the Welfare of Churches, the Good of Kingdoms, and in some respect, of the
whole Christian world, is in your hands. Greenhil to the Commons. April 26.
1643. p. 45.

(37) There is no danger in Resisting Acts of Tyranny; for Tyrants exercising
Tyranny, are no Terror to Evil doers. Apol. Rel. 154.

(38) The Authority and Gods Ordinance can never do wrong; but the Corrupt
Person placed in Authority may offend, so that the King as King, is one thing,
and the King acting Tyranny is another thing. Knox Hist. Li. 2. p. 141.

Notes on. 9.
THE King rendered Accountable to his Subjects. ( Number. 1, 2.) His Power
Fiduciary, and not to be obeyed in doubtful Cases. (3, 4) The People the
Fountain of Power. (5, 6.) And may Depose their Sovereign if he fails in his
Duty. (7) The Abuse of his Power is the forfeiture of it. (8, 9.) His
Parliament is above him. (10, 11.) And so are the People. (12. The Parliament
are his Superiors, and may Depose him. (13, 14.) The Kings Power at
Westminster, though his Person may be at Oxford. (15) The People may discharge
themselves of their Allegiance. (16) The Crown forfeitable and f^rfeited. (17)
Supremacy only a Complement. (18) The late War justified, and the Resistance
Lawful. (19, 20.) Cromwell to be Obeyed for Conscienoe sake. (21, 22.)
Resistance allowable. (23) The Parliament are Supreme, and the Subjects
Obedience Conditional. (24, 25.) Princes Punishable as well as others. (26) The
Scottish Invasion defended. (27, 28.) And the taking up of Arms against
Tyrants. (29) Kings subject to their States. (30) The Commons, and the
Parliament-War defended (31, 32, 33, 34, 35, and 36.) Tyranny is not Gods
Ordinance. (37, 38.) Let the Reader judge now what any man can design, that
exposes and supports these Positions, but the Ruin of the Government.

. 10. Tumults Encouraged, And chiefly by the [Able, Holy, Faithful, Laborious,
and Truly-Peaceable Preachers of the Gospel:] Petition for Peace. P. 4.
(1) IT is not unknown, nor unobserved by the Wise, that the Ministers have
been very serviceable to the Civil State, and to the Military too: Not only by
their Supplications to God for good success in all their Undertakings, and
their happy Proceedings in all their Warlike Marches and Motions, as at the
Removal of the Ark, ( Number. 10. 35.) Rise up Lord, and let thine Enemies be
scattered; Let them that hate thee flee before thee. But (2) By their
Informations; and (3) Solicitations of the People to Engage both their Estates
and Persons in the Case of God and their Country. John Ley's Examination of the
New Quere, 1646. Epis. Ded. to the Lord Mayor.

(2) And we do not Repent of any part of our Pains, or Pressures, or Perils, so
long as we may be Serviceable to so good a Cause, and to such Good and Gracious
Masters, as under Christ they [ The Parliament] have hitherto approved
themselves toward us: And I hope we may without Boasting, say by way of
Apology, that we have not been altogether their unprofitable Servants, in
respect (1) of our Interest in, and (2) Endeavors with the People; (without
whom the Greatest Kings are rather Ciphers than Figures, and destitute both of
Honor and Safety, Prove. 14. 28) (1) To Inform their Judgments, and (2) to
Inflame their Zeal, and (3) to oblige their Consciences, and (4) to Fasten
their Affections in Loyalty and Fidelity to those worthy Patriots, whom they
have in their Choice and Votes of Election entrusted with the Religion, the
Lives and Estates of themselves and their Posterity. Hyde, p. 80. Sect. 22.

(3) After-Ages will Abominate their Baseness and Villainies, that have lifted
up their hands against the Parliament: But the Fsthers, the Mordecais, the
Religious Patriots, that have acted in this Sphere; the brave Soldiers, whose
Lives were not dear unto them; the FAITHFUL MINISTERS, (the Horsemen and the
Chariots of Israel) they shall be had in Everlasting Remembrance. Heyrick to
the Commons, May. 27. 1646. p. 16.

(4) You are required to Commend to God in your Prayers, the Lord General, the
whole Army employed in the Parliaments Service, as also in your Sermons
effectually to stir up the People, to appear in Person, and to join with the
Army; to stand up for our Religion and Liberties, as is desired and expected by
the Army, and the Committee for the Militia in this City. Penningtons Order to
the London Ministers, Ap. 1643.

(5) The work of Reformation still goes on. There we do get ground; as to
Perfect a Protestation into a Covenant; to ripen an Impeachment into a Root and
Branch: And in a word, to settle an Assembly of Divines as a General Refiners
fire, to try all Metals of the Church. Bond. to the Commons. March 27. 1644. p.
56.

(6) The Assembly Petitioned both Houses for a Fast, and the removing of Blind
Guides and Scandalous Ministers, destroying all Monuments of Idolatry and
Superstition; the Executing of Justice upon all Delinquents, according to the
Solemn and Religious Vow and Protestation for that purpose; that so God, who is
now by the Sword avenging the Quarrel of his Covenant, beholding the Integrity
and Zeal of the Two Houses, might turn from the fierceness of his wrath, hear
their Prayers, go forth with their Armies, and perfect the work of Reformation,
etc. Ex. Col. July 19. 1643. p. 242.

(7) I must truly tell ye, that before these Late Wars, it pleased the Lord to
call me by his Grace, through the work of the Ministry; and afterward keeping
a day of Humiliation in Fasting and Prayer, with Mr. Simeon Ash, Mr. Love, Mr.
Woodcock, and other Ministers in Laurence-Lane, they did so clearly state the
Cause of the Parliament, that I was fully convinced in my own Conscience of the
Justness of the War; and thereupon Engaged in the Parliaments Service, which
(as I did, and do believe) was the Cause of the Lord. I ventured my Life freely
for it, and now dye for it. Nine Men's Speeches. Axtel at his Execution. p. 89.

(8) It cannot be unknown how much we, and other Ministers of this City and
Kingdom, that faithfully adhered to the Parliament, have Injuriously smarted
under the scourge of evil Tongues, and Pens, ever since the first Eruption of
the Unhappy Differences, and Unnatural War between the King and Parliament, for
our Obedience to the Commands and Orders of the Honorable Houses, in their
Contests with his Majesty, and Conflicts with his Armi^s. London-Ministers
Vindicati^n. 1648. p. 1.

(9) When we consider how much it concerns the Honor of our Master, and the
good of all, to preserve our Ministerial Function Immaculate, we dare not but
stand by, and assert the Integrity of our hearts, and the Innocence of all our
actings (in reference to the King and Kingdom) for which we are so much
calumniated and traduced. Ibid. p. 3.

(10) Doubtless the Lord is highly displeased with their proccedings in the
Treaty at Newport, in reference to Religion and Covenant, concerning which they
accepted of such Concessions from his Majesty, as being Acquiesced in, were
dangerous and destructive to both. The Kirks Testimony against Toleration. p.
12. 1649.

(11) I pray look on me as one that comes among you this day, to beat a Drum in
your Ears, to see who will come out and follow the Lamb. Marshall. 1641.

(12) The Sabbath Day following, next after their Arrival to London from
Branford, the Godly and well-affected Ministers, throughout the City, Preached
and Praised the Lord publicly, for their so joyful and safe return home to
their Parents, Masters, and Friends, exhorting those young Soldiers of Christ's
Army Royal still to retain (...) be forward and ready to show their Courage and
Zeal (...) of Gods Cause, and their Countries welfare, showing (...) of their
Adversaries to have Introduced Popery and (...) Kingdom, and assuring them that
this War, on (...) (...) waged and managed by Papists, an Army of Papists being
(...) the Kings Command, contrary to his Vows, Protestations, and deep
Asseverations to the contrary. Iehova-Iireh. p. 212.

(13) My House was a Receptacle for Godly Ministers in the worst of times: Here
was the Remonstrance framed against the Prelates: Here were all meetings, etc.
Mr. Calamy's Apology against Burton. 1646.

(14) You must do, and you must do, and yet you must do, and yet ye must do, as
long as there is a Penny in thy Purse; as long as there is strength in thy
hand; as long as there is breath in thy body, etc. Sedgwick's Speech at
Guildhall. October. 6. 1643.

(15) I may not omit here to speak of all the Faithful Presbyterian Ministers
in this City, as well as through the Country; those Chariots and Horsemen of
our Israel, though now forgotten; many of the which, not only ventured their
Lives in Battle, but by holding up their hands as Moses did, when the People of
Israel fought against the Enemy, and by the lifting up their Hearts and Voices
to God with strong cries, made all our Armies abroad, and our Counsels at home
to prosper, and all our undertakings happily to succeed: Neither is that all,
but by their Wisdom, Vigilance, and Powerful and persuasive Preaching, they
were the principal means under God of keeping the People here, and every where,
in obedience to the Parliament, by resolving their doubts, satisfying their
scruples, and going before the People to their abilities, yea (many of them, to
my knowledge, out of zeal to the Cause) beyond their Abilities, in all
Contributions, animating and encouraging others to bring in their Plate and
Moneys, and whatsoever was of price and esteem with them; exhorting them, now
if ever, to stand for their Religion, Lives, Liberties, and the Liberty of the
Subject. Bastwicks Appendix to Indep. etc. p. 628.

(16) I am one who out of Choice and Judgment have embarked my self, my Wife,
Children, Estate, and all that is dear to me in the same Ship with you, to sink
and perish, or to come safe to Land with you, and that in the most doubtful and
difficult times. -- Pleading your Cause, Justifying your Wars, satisfying many
that scrupled; and when your Affairs were at lowest, and the Chance of War
against ye, and some of the Grandees and Favorites of these times were packing
up, and ready to be gone; I was then Highest, and m^st Zealous for ye:
Preaching, Praying, stirring up the People to stand for ye* by going out in
Person, lending of Money, etc. Edwards Gangraena. Ep. Ded,

Notes upon. 10.
AFTER these Proofs and Declarations of the Ministers Zeal and Industry, for
the promoting, supporting, and carrying on of the late Bloody, Impious, and
Unnatural War, let not any man take upon him any longer to acquit the
Nonconformist Divines of the Guilt and Consequences of that Execrable
Rebellion. You have here under their hands, and from their own tongues, not
only a Confession of the Fact, but a Valuing of themselves (even to the degree
of Vanity and Ostentation) for what they did toward the Advancing of that
Sedition, as a most Meritorious Service. Nay, they do not stick to acknowledge
that the War could hardly have proceeded without them. There Is no evading or
qualifying the dint of this Charge, since we have their own Papers in Judgment
against them.

. 11. The War Justified.
(1) LET us set hand and heart, and shoulder and all, to advance the Lords Sion
to a perfection of beauty, and to set up Christ upon his Throne. Whites
Centuries. Pref. 1643.

(2) Did ever any Parliament in England lay the Cause of Christ and Religion to
heart, as this has done? -- Did ever the City of London, the rest of the
Tribes, and the Godly Party throughout the Land, so willingly exhaust
themselves that Christ might be set up? Marshal to the Commons, 1643. p. 19.
And then let all England cry that our Blood, our Poverty, etc. are abundantly
repaid in this, that there is such a Concurrence to set up the Lord Christ upon
his Throne, to be Lord and Christ over this our Israel. p. 20.

(3) As the Spirit of the Lord came upon Sampson, and Iephta^, and David, so
has it been in our Conflicts: The Spirit of the Lord has come upon our Noble
General, and all our Commanders: The Spirit of the Lord has come upon our
Gallants. Gentlemen, Young men, Faithful Countrymen, Renowned Citizens: So
that he that was we^k among them is as David* and he that was as David, has
been as the Angel of the Lord. Case to the Commons, 1644. p. 28.

(4) Tell them from the Holy Ghost (says Beech) from the word of Truth, that
their Destruction shall be terrible, it shall be timely, it shall b^ total.
Sermon. Licensed by Mr. Cranferd, 1645 p. 1^. And ibid. O give th^nks unto the
Lord, for he is Gracious, and his Mercy endur^th for ever; who remembered us at
(...), for his Mercy endures for ever; who remembered us in (...) shi^e, for
his mercy endures for ever: who remembered us at Leicester, for his Mercy, etc.
who remembered us at Taunt^n, for his Mercy, etc. who remembered us at Bristol,
for his Mercy, etc. p. 9.

(5) As Sampson with the Philistims, so let us die with Babylon; if we cannot
outlive Anti Christ, and the Enemies of Reformation, let us adventure our
selves to death in the Cause, yea let us take h^ld of the Pillars of the Church
of Dagon, of the Temple of Antichrist, and say, Now let me die with
Antichrist, Rome and Babylon. Bond 1644. p. 59.

(6) God has put you in his own Place, God has graced you with his own Name,
Lord of Hosts, General of Armies; God has committed to your care what is most
precious to himself, precious Gospel, precious Ordinances, a precious
Parliament, a precious People; God has called forth your Excellency as a
choice Worthy to be a General, and the Champion of Jesus Christ, to fight the
great and last Battle with Antichrist in this your Native Kingdom. Palmer to
the E. of Essex, 1644. Ep. Ded.

(7) Whether the Stupendous Providence of God manifested among us in the
Destruction of the late King, and his Adherents, in so many pitched Battles, and
in this Nations Universal forsaking of Charles Stuart, and the total Overthrow
of him, and his Army; whether by these Providence, God has not plainly
removed the Government of Charles Stuart, and bestowed it upon others, as ever
he removed and bestowed any Government by any Providence in any Age? Whether a
Refusal to yield Obedience and Subjection to this present Government be not a
refusal to acquiesce in the Wise and Righteous pleasure of God, and a flat
breach of the Fifth Commandment? W. Ienkins's Conscientious Quaeries, 1651. p.
2.

(8) The Pren^ices and Porters were stimulated, and stirred up by God's
Providence; thousands of them to Petition the Parliament for speedy Relief.
Palmer to the E. of Essex, 1644. Ep. Ded.

(9) Remember how far I have gone with ye in the War: And shall I be afraid of
my old most Intimate Friends? Bax. Holy Com. Pref. to the Army.

(10) If I had known that the Parliament had been the Beginners, and in most
fault, yet the Ruin of our Trustees, and Representatives, so of all the
Security of the Nation* is a Punishment greater than any fault of theirs
against the King can from him deserve; and their faults cannot disoblige me
from defending the Commonwealth. Ho. Com. p. 48^.

(11) If the King Venture into Battle, and hazard his Person, we are sorry for
it; and he has been most humbly requested by the Honorable Houses of
Parliament not to expose his Royal Person unto such extremities. But i^ his
Evil Council prevail more with him, than the good Advice of the Parliament, we
wash our hands in Innocence, and plead Not Guilty of any Evil that may befall
his Majesty's Person in the like occasions. In the mean while we must not
forbear to defend our Religion and Liberties against our Bloody Enemies, but go
on courageously, and play the Men to fight for our People, and for the Cities
of our God. 2 Samuel ^0. and 12. The Covenanters Catechisms, 1644. p. 26.

(12) I think I have not read of many Assemblies o^ Worthi^r men since the
Apostles days. Bax. Answer to Dr. S^llingfleet. p. 84.

(13) Phinehas executes Justice upon great ones, and what followed? a
Commotion? No, G^d's w^ath was ^urn'd away, and a Covenant of Peace made.
Greenhil. April 26. 1643. p. 37.

(14) This is a time wherein we should all Unite against the Common Enemy that
seeks to devour us all. Calamy to the Commons. December. 25. 1644. p. 36.

Notes on. 11.
IT is no wonder, after the foundation of a War so fairly laid, to see the
Peaceable Preachers of the Gospel (as they call themselves) well enough
satisfied to reap the fruits of their own labors: Nor could any other be
expected, then that the Seeds of so Pestilent a Sedition should quickly grow up
into a rank Rebellion. The best that can be said for them, is, that the Broil
went farther then they intended; or otherwise, that they were misled into a
mistake of the question in hand: But even in this point also, they have left
themselves without excuse; for it is a clear Case, that their Zeal and
Confidence increased with their Successes. And all their care was at first for
his Majesty's Honor and Safety, and to bring him home to his Parliament, out
of the hands of Cutthroats and Papists. They were up at every turn, with the
Maxim, that the King could do no wrong; and all the blame was laid upon his
Ministers. This way of Pretended Tenderness for his Majesty's Authority and
Person, implys their secret Consciousness of a Legal Duty; only 'twas too early
days yet to take off the Masque. Now their judgment upon the Point was the same
afterward, as at first; but as they gathered Strength they grew Bolder too,
and the last Violence was no more than the putting of their first Thoughts in
Execution. And whoever observes the method and the scope of their Proceedings,
will find their Principles varying with their Fortunes; and the deepest
Professors of Veneration for the Dignity of the King, and his Government in the
Beginning prove the most daring Insulters upon his Imperial Regalities and
Honor in the Conclusion. But to the next Section.

. 12. Reformation by Blood.
1. ^ Have often thought that too much Mercy toward Malignants has made more
Delinquents than ever Justice has Punished. Mercy should not weigh down
Justice. Loves Sermon. at Uxoridge, Ian. 30. 1644. p. 26.

(2) Moses bids all the Levites Consecrate their hands to God. What to do? To
Kill Three-thousand. (No sewer) of the Idolaters f^ll that day, etc. How brave
a pattern have we here for those that are in Magistracy and Authority? All you
Honorable and Beloved, that God has called to any place of Authority and
Trust; Consider but this of Moses here, the meekest man upon the Earth, yet
what a Pattern is he to you herein? How excellent a Champion is he for God upon
the People? Herle to the Lord Mayor, etc. Land. 1644. p. 22.

(3) Probably the way to sheath one Sword, were to draw another; and if the
Sword of Justice did more, the Sword of War would do less: The Physician, by
way of Revulsion, stops bleeding by letting blood; and did England bleed enough
in the Malignant Vein* we have cause to think that other sad Issues of Blood
would be stopped and staunched. Staunton to the Lords, Oct. 30. 1644. p. 26.

(4) Josiah Executed the Justice and Vengeance of God upon the Instruments of
the Kingdoms ruin, the Idolatrous Priests; digging the very bones of some of
them out of their Graves, the same Lord direct you, etc. Then let not the man
Escape, whom God appoints out to Punishment. Marshal to the Commons, Dec. 22.
1642. p. 52, 53.

(5) Let none think it Bloody Divinity, if I say Execution of Judgment is good;
Phinehas stood up and Executed Judgment, and so the Plague was staid. Staunton
to the Commons, April 24. 1644. p. 28.

(6) How highly were Caleb and Ioshuah esteemed of God for being Courageous,
when others flagg'd in the business, and thrunk at evil tidings? Had not
Phinehas, the Son of Eleazar, a Covenant of Peace made to him and his
Posterity, for being Zealous in Gods Cause among the People? Why should I tell
ye of Gideon and Barak, and Sampson, and the rest? In a word* Men of this
Spirit, are the only Men in God's Book. Gypps. Ass. Div. Nov. 27. 1644. p. 28.

(7) It is somewhat a sad thing to Note, little Justice has been done upon
bloody* Traitorous Delinquents, Enemies to God and Man, more than what the Lord
himself has done by the hand of War. It may be that fearful way of Execution
has and will continue till the more desirable Sword of Justice be drawn to
purpose, in the cutting off the Incendiaries of our Combustions, the Sons of
Belial, whom God has put into your hand to punish. Hardwick Ass. Di. to the
Commons, June 26. 1644. p. 33.

(8) Moses was the meekest man on Earth in his days; a man full of pity, and
yet he hangs up many, very many of the heads of the People against the Sun
before the Lord. Staunton Ass. Di. to the Commons, October. 30. 1644. p 21.

(9 He is a Cursed Man that withholds his hand from shedding of blood, or that
shall do it fraudulently; that is if he do it as Saul did against the
Amalekites, kill some, and save some. If he go not through with the work, he is
a Cursed man, when this is to be done upon Moab, the Enemy of Gods Church.
Marshal to the Commons. Feb. 23. 1641. p. 9.

(10) If this work be to-Revenge Gods Church against Babylon, he is a Blessed
man, that takes and dashes the little ones against the stones, Id. ibid. p. 10.

(11) There is a sad Sentence (1 King. 20. 42.) which he was angry to hear to
whom it was pronounced, verse 43. But he found it true to his cost three years
aft^r, when it seems he had altogether forgotten it, (1 King. 22.) Therefore I
humbly entreat you to ask Gods consent first, whether he will spare such or
such, or pardon them; and if he will not, you must not. Palmer. Ass. Di. June
28. 1643. p. 70.

(12) By Wicked we must understand all known Transgressors and Delinquents
against the Law of God and Man; all dangerous Ma^ants. Shall David give you a
list of them in Psalm 101. Or shall (...) ^dd somewhat to the Catalogue? (1
King. 2) Hear what he says, First, an Ambitious, Traterous Favorite; so he
took off Adomjah. 2dly. A Rotten Priest; so he Cashe^r'd Eliathan. 3dly. A
Bloody Treacherous Cavalier; so he Executed Ioab. And 4thly. A Railing
Malignant; and so he cut off Shimei. Bond. Printed London, 1643. p 7, 8.

(13) Be not wanting to the Execution of Justice; you know there is a Curse
pronounced against them that do the work of the Lord, thou it be a bloody work)
negligently. Strickland to the Commons, December. 27. 1643. p. 32.

(14) Thou gav'st a Cup into the hand of England, and we drank of it. Then thou
carried'st it to Scotland and Ireland, and they drank of it. Now thou have
carried it to Holland; and they are drinking of it. Lord, carry it also to
France, to Spain, and to Rome, and let it never be out of some or other of
their hands, till they drink and be drunk, and spew, and fall, and never rise
any more. Feak at Black-^yars. S. p. 11. 1653.

(15) I will never believe that this Navy was made on purpose for the breaking
of our Neighbors in p^eces; and there an end. We shall at last join together,
and do such work for God as was never done in the world. We shall carry the
Gospel with our Navy up and down to the Gentiles, and afterward we shall gather
home the Jews out of the Isles first; for those are them shall first be called,
and the Ships of Tharsis shall do it. Beloved, what this Tharsis is, I have
made a little search, but shall enquire further; they i^ seems shall be the
first active, and I am sure there are none in such forwardness as ours at
pre^ent. Feak at Christ-church, Aug. 11. 1653.

(16) Blessed be God that you have now put into the Scales of Justice the
Archest Prelate of the Land. Bond. Ass. Di. to the Commons. Mar. 27. 1. 44. p.
49.

(17) The hearts of your true Friends are grieved that so many Delinquents are
(...) ^d, (...) (...) but very few of them brought to their Trya^. When E^jah
had done Execution upon ^aa* Priests, there was Rain enough. Salway. October
25. 1643. p. 23.

(18) Cut down the Malignants with the Sword of Justice; Root them out, and
Consume them as with Fire, that no root may ^ring again: Let the Mischief fall
upon their own heads, that the Land may be eased, which has a long time, and
does still groan under them as a heavy Curse. Walker. Jan. 29. 1644.

(19) Men wholye under the Guilt of much Innocent Blood, are not meet persons
to be at* Peace with, till all the Guilt of the Blood be expiated and avenged,
either by the Sword of the Law, or Law of the Sword; else a Peace can never be
sat nor just. Loves Englands Distemper. p. 42. at Uxbridge Treaty.

(20) The People of England bless their God, that he has taught your hands to
War, and laid the necks of your Enemies under your feet. Love to the Commons,
November. 25. 1646. Ep. Ded. to Lord Fairfax.

(21) Go on Courageously. Never can ye lay out your Blood in such a quarrel.
Christ shed all his Blood to save you from H^ll: Venture all yours to set up
him upon his Throne. Marshal's Panegyric, Jan. 18. 1643. p. 21.

(22) Why should any think that God will give into our hands those Delinquents
that are in Arms against the great Judicatory of the Kingdom? If Justice be not
done upon those that are in our hands already. Palmer to the Commons, Aug. 13.
1644. p. 48.

(23) You know how Isreal's sparing the Canaanites, ( Judge. 1. 2.) cost them
full dear. Id. p. 49.

(24) Show not the least Countenance to the Detestable Neutrality that is
practiced by many. God writes in his Books, write you in yours all Neuters,
Enemies. Heyrick, Ass. Di. to the Commons, May 27. 1646. p. 29.

(25) As for Apostates that are false to their Covenant, let not your eye pity
them, let not your hands spare them. Id. p. 30.

(26) Show your felves a Parliament of Justice; let the World know it; lay the
Ax to the root of Delinquency. Greenhil to the Commons, Ap. 26. 1643. p. 34.

(27) Some fear Execution of Justice w^ll kindle a fire; but Fiat Iustitia and
Ruat mundus. Id. p. 37.

(28) What Soldiers heart would not start, deliberately to come into a subdued
City, and take the little ones upon the Spears point: To take them by the
heels, and beat out their Brains against the Wall, What Inhumanity and
Barbarousness would this be thought? Yet if this work be to Revenge Gods Church
against Babylon, he is a Blessed man that takes and dashes the Little ones
against the Stones. Marshal to the Commons, Feb. 23. 41. p. 11, 12.

(29) It was Gideons Answer to the men of Succoth and P^nuel; When the Lord
has delivered Zeba and Zalmunnah into my hands, Then will I tear your Flesh
with Briars and Thorns of the Wilderness: Then will I beat down your Towers,
and slay the men of the City, and accordingly be did it. Such like Doom and
Execution shall Politic Neuters receive from the hand of Christ. Id. p. 23.

(30) We have mighty Sins, and mighty Sinners, which make mighty dangers.
Greenhill to the Commons, Ap. 26 1643. p. 35.

(31) You are the Supreme Court of Justice; let the Sun be dark, and the Sea
dry, before your streams do cease flowing. Id. p. 36.

(32) In public Calamities, the Sacrifice of a Wicked man is a
Peace Offering, and may prevent great wrath. Id. p. 37.

(33) It Is the Sword, not Disputes nor Treaties that must end this
Controversy; wherefore turn your Plow-shares into Swords, and your* Pruning
Hooks into Spears, to fight the Lords Battles; to avenge the Blood of Saints
which has been spilt. It must be avenged either by us, or upon us. Love at*
Uxbridge, Jan. 30. 1644. page 7.

(34) The Slaying of the Moabites is called the work of the Lord: The Children
of Moab are among us. The Lord give us Wisdom to see our way and work. I^. ibid.

(35) Works of Justice are a part of Gods general design at this time. You
cannot but remember the Service of Phinehas, in Executing of Judgment when it
was a sad time with Israel, and the double Reward that followed it. Bond to the
Commons, March 27. 1644. p. 49.

(36) They which stand out this year, I fear not to say they have sinned this
sin, which is to death, which God will not, which men should not pardon; but if
your Charity be yet above my Faith -- -- yet your Sense cries loud unto ye,
They have shed Innocent Blood, Precious Blood, the Blood of the Sons of God,
which God will not, nor you may not Pardon. Heyrick to the Commons, May 27.
1646. page 21.

(37) The mouths of your Adversaries are opened against ye. The hearts of your
True Friends are grieved, that so many Delinquents are in Prison, and yet but
very few of them brought to their Trial. I know that your occasions are many
and pressing; but I beseech ye, lay hold upon the next opportunity for the
doing of it. Remember your late Covenant, when Elijah had done Execution upon
Baals Priests there was Rain enough (1 King. 18.) Who knows how soon the Lord
may bless us with a Holy Peace, and Blessed Reformation, if Justice were more
fully Executed? Salway to the Commons, Oct. 25. 1643. p. 20.

(38) I have been in the heat of my zeal so forward to Changes and Ways of
Blood, that I fear God will not let me have a hand in the Peaceable Building of
his Church, nor to see it; for I have been always taken off when I attempted
it. R. Baxter's Letter from Kidderminster to Dr. Hill. Hypocrisy Unveil d,
1662. p. 11.

(39) You Fight for God; you Fight for Jesus Christ; you Fight for the Holy
Ghost. A Spiritual Knap-sack for the Parliament Soldiers. p. 67. Number. 43.

(40) Happy shall he be that takes this Cursed Malignant, and Prelatical
Brood, and dasheth him against the stones. Ravillac Redivivus. p. 27.

(41) Honorable Patriots, Christ is gone out with his Triumphing Army,
Conquering and to Conquer; and if you want Arms, or Money, or Horse for their
accommodation, God is the Great Landlord of Heaven and Earth. Art thou then
Gods Tenant, and do owe him Knight Service, and Plough-Service, and does he
want thy Horse, and shall not he have it, etc? T^sdale to the Commons. p. 15.

(42) It Is not Disputes nor Treaties must end this Controversy* therefore turn
your Plough-shares into Swords to fight the Lords Battle, to avenge the Blood
of Saints that have been spilt. Leech his Sermon, 1644.

(43) Up and be doing, you that are about the work of the Lord, your Enemies
are Bread ready to be eaten, and yield you Refreshment. Ibid.

(44) There is no virtue wherein men resemble the Lord more lively than in
executing Justice, and in extirpation of those Achans, you will cut off the
Wicked, and procure the felicity of the Chosen. Faircloth on Josh. 7. ^5. p. 34.

(45) Worthies of Israel, it lies on you to enquire out this Babylonish
Company, and to repay them an Eye for an Eye, Tooth for Tooth, Burning for
Burning, Ear for Ear, Liberty for Liberty, and Blood for Blood. Bridges on
Revel. 4. 8. p. 10.

(46) After the Firstborn of Egypt were slain, the Children of Israel were
delivered, and for the chiefest of these Incendiaries, certainly the Primogenit
being taken away, we may well hope for a glorious deliverance. Burton, June 20.
1641. p. 11.

(47) That which is best, though Evil, will be counted good, after Reformation,
as he is counted Innocent, who scapes at trial* Simpson on Prove. 8. 15, 16. p.
25.

(48) He who now startles and staggereth, delayeth and refuses, with the
Parliament and their Party, to bear and use Arms against the Prelates, Papists
and Atheists, with all the Fry of Antichristian Factors and Panders, is no
other than a Rebel and Traitor against God. Boden to the Committee of Kent,
Iun. 13. 1644. p. 16.

(49) Posterity may have cause to sit down and curse the day -- if we look
upon, and dash not in pieces the bones of Babylons Brats, thus boldly and
bloodily, contrary to Law and Reason, risen up amongst us and against us, and
God's True Religion Professed by us. Ibid. p. 17. [Let all th^se who are in
Authority hence learn to do Justice, and execute Vengeance upon those
Babylonians, which God has put into their hands: Do it speedily, do it
thoroughly: The doing of Justice upon the Wicked, is the way to safeguard the
Righteous. Without question the hand of God is upon us, and we lose many in the
Field, because we are too merciful to those in the Fold, Ibid. p. 32.]

(50) There is no dallying with God now, much delay has been used already* too
much. God is angry, and he seems to ask this once more; Will you strike, will
you execute Judgment, or will ye not? Tell me; for if you will not. I will, I
will have the Enemies blood, and yours too, if you will not execute Vengeance
upon Delinquents: The day of Vengeance is in my heart, and the year of my
Redeemer is come, Isaiah 63. 4. Case to the Commons, 1644. p. 13.

Notes upon. 12.
HERE are Three and twenty Divines* famous in their Generations, blowing the
Coal of a Civil War, and heating the furnace seven times better then ordinary;
calling, like Horse Leeches, fer BLOOD, BLOOD, and pretending (in a manner) to
expiate for that Horrid Rebellion, by so many Consecrated Murders, which are
only wrapped up in Scripture Phrases* as the Execution of Judgment, Justice
running down like a stream, etc. And the Wickedness looks then as if it were
Hallowed, which is no more, in short, then playing the Devil in Gods name, and
dedicating the Oblation of Humane Sacrifices to the Everliving God, as to an
Insensible Idol. But to what end serves Argument, in the face of so many
Pregnant and Undeniable Proofs? It is true, or not, that what I have here
recited, is an Authentic Evidence, both for the Words, and for the Authors of
them? And if the matter of Fact be honestly reported, let but any man consider,
if we follow these Guides, whither they will carry us at last, and how great a
scandal it is to Christianity to suffer such Hearts and Hands as these to serve
at the Altar.

. 13. The Murder of the King Encouraged.
(1) THOSE mine Enemies which would not that I should Reign over them, bring
hither and slay them before me* Let me see them Executed, KINGS, Rulers, People
Conspiring Rebellion against the Lord, and against his Christ. Maynard to the
Commons, October. 28. 1646. p. 15.

(2) Let us he Active against the KINGS and Prince, of the Earth, those Claws
of the cruel Beast. Feak at Black Friars, Sept. 1^. 1653.

(3) The Quarrel is not now with us only de Terminis and La^tibus, touching
Bounds or Landmarks, touching Privileges and Liberties; but whether Christ
shall Reign over us, or we shall basely y^ld our Necks under the Yoke of
Antichrist. Pet. Smith, May 2^. 1644. p. 42.

(4) The King is fallen from Faith in thee, and become an Enemy to thy Church.
Is it not He that has Sinned and done Evil indeed, but as for these Sheep, what
have they done? Let thy hand we pray thee, O Lord our God, be on him, and on
his Fathers House; but not on thy People, that they shall be Plagued. A
Lecturer in Southhampton, Aug. 1643.

(5) Nothing has so much deceived the world as the Name of KING, which is the
ground of all Mischiefs, in the Church of Christ. Corb^, a Lecturer in
Gloucestershire, July 1644.

(6) O Lord, if thou will not Eless us with a King, Bless us without one.
^arkin a Lecturer in Greenwich, June 31. 1^44.

(7) Neither let your eyes spare, though there are Great ones that are Guilty.
The Highest Court may reach the Highest Persons. Causes and not Persons are to
be heard in your Parliament, Heyrick to the Commons, May 27. 1646. p. 23.

(8) God will make the Sons of Princes bow down unto ye: The Greatest that have
Afflicted ye, and Despised ye, shall lie at your feet, Id. p. 31.

(9) If the KING be a Murderer, Adulterer, or an Idolater, he shall suffer
according to Gods Law; not as a King, but as an Offender. Knox Hist. 392.

(10) When Great Delinquents go unpunished, Divine Providence is brought to the
Bar and questioned* Greenhill to the Commons* April 26. 1643. p. 34.

(11) This Arrow (Prayer) will find a Joint in Ahabs Armor, (1 King. 22. 34.)
Draw this Arrow as Iehu did against Iehoram, with your full strength, and doubt
not but it will in Gods time smite our Romish Iehoram at the heart, (2 King. 9.
24.) and sink him in his Chariot and Chair of Pride. Green to the Commons,
April 24. 1644. page 17.

(12) Oh Right Honorable, take Glorious Resolutions to your selves, though
your Fathers may stand before you, and your Brethren and Friends press about
you; though your Mother should hang on you, I mean the nearest Relations; throw
down the one, and break through the other, and trample upon the third, that
your souls may cleave to the ways of God, to the ways of Justice and
Righteousness: You know the Rule is, Fiat Iustitia, and Ruat Mundus. Brooks to
the Commons, December. 26. 1648. p. 15. Ah Right Honorable, As you would not
have your Services thrown as dung in your Faces, look that Justice and Judgment
run down as a mighty stream. Ibid. p. 19. [Right Honorable, Guilty Persons
that be by you sinfully acquitted, their Sin God will charge upon your account.
And therefore, as you would not have the Guilt of other men's sins upon you,
hold on in the way of well doing: Let Justice and Judgment run down as mighty
streams, Ibid. p. 18.]

(13) Phinehas is the Man that Executes Judgment, a Man unthought of for such a
Service. Hence observe, that when God has work to do, he can find our
Workmen. A Phinehas, with Zeal in his heart, and a Iavelin in his hand, to
thrust through the Proudest Zimries and Cosbies, the most daring Sinners.
Staunton to the Commons, October. 30. 1644. p. 9.

(14) When Esther was advanced, she would not lose her opportunities; she will
in to the King, although contrary to a Law. She will have the Liberty of her
People, and Hamans head off, and venture her Life to accomplish it. If I
Perish, I Perish. Josiah, Hezekiah took their opportunities, and made a
thorough Reformation in Judah. You know what great things Elijah did,
Inspiciente, and Reluctante Rege. Greenhill to the Commons, April 26. 1643. p.
48.

(15) When the Kings of the Earth have given their Power to the Beast, these
Choice Soldiers will be so faithful to the King of Kings, as to oppose the
Beast, though Armed with King-like Power. Cheynel to the Commons, May 31. 1643*
p. 10.

(16 You see the Faithful People make no scruple at all of Fighting against the
Beast though their Enemies were like enough to say, that by Fighting against
the Beast they did Rebel against their own Kings. Id. Ibid.

(17) Others say, Rebellion against the King is the cause of Judgment upon the
Nation; but rather the not Timous Rising to help the Lord and his oppressed
People against the Mighty, is the cause. Rutherford to the Lords, June 25.
1645. p. 44.

Notes on. 13.
WE have now brought ye step by step* from the Blind and Pretext of a
Reformation, to the Highest pitch of Wickedness; and the Train was both laid
and fired in the Pulpit. Undutiful thoughts bring forth Seditious words; and
those Seditious words are naturally followed with Violent and Treasonous
actions; and when People come once to be Plunged into a Rebellion, all other
sins (even of the highest magnitude) flow like streams into that Ocean, till at
last men's Consciences grow C^llous and Obdurate, as under a Judicial
Reprobation. It could never be else, (if it may be said without offense to
Charity) that so many of the Principal and known Actors in the late Execrable
Tragedy, should now wipe their mouths after it, and fall so comfortably to the
old work again, without any sort of Reluctance, or Remorse. But it will be
said, perhaps, that it was not so much a thirst after the Blood of their
Sovereign that pusht them forward to these Extremities, but that they were
forced upon desperate Courses by their Interest and Despairs. This would be a
sorry excuse (God knows) for Committing one of the most Diabolical and
Flagitious Villainies imaginable: Even allowing that they had no other way left
them for their security. But alas! you will find in the Next and Last Section,
this Plea removed; where ye shall see the same Persons that here cried,
Crucify him, Crucify him, Triumphing, and (only for the Malice sake) Exulting
in the Contemplation of that Hideous Murder.

. 14. The Kings Murder Iustifi'd.
(1) IT is now high time (after so long an Interruption of Enemies) for the
Parliament, and Army, concurrently to appear to do their duty, not only by
Executing Justice upon the Person of the King, and his Adherents, but also in
New Modelling and settling such a Frame and Fundamental Constitution of
Government in the Kingdom, as God shall put into their hearts, to be most
Convenient and Useful for the welfare and safety of the People. Little
Benjamin. Licensed by Gilb. Mabbot. p. 11.

(2) Did not this Grand Pretended Father of this Nation, destroy a Multitude of
his best Children? And would he not gladly have Slain all the rest upon further
opportunity? Was it not high time the Parliament should Execute Judgment upon
him? Ibid. p. 12. [The General and his Council do, and have performed their
Duty in all their Proceedings, Concurring with the Parliament, to Execute
Justice upon the Grand Delinquent, and also upon some of the Chief of his
Wicked Counselors and Adherents. Ibid. p. 30.

(3) Has not the King been a Corrupt Fountain* Poisoning every Stream and
Rivulet he had access unto? And would he not have done so still, if he had not
been cut off? A^ is not Justice Executed, a good means to Establish the Faith
of the Land in Rest and Peace, with their Lives, Estates, Laws, Liberties and
Privileges, Anciently and Inherently in themselves? Ibid. p. 15.

(4) Shall the Parliament of England be now Blamed for cutting off that (...)
of U^pers, and Tyrants, and Reducing affairs to their first (...) and Right
Principle? Or will the People of England, after (...) Experiences. Center t^
Liberties and Freedoms in a C^ (...) (...) of Succession, and lose their
Commonwealth (...) Personal Glory of a Young Pretender? The Portraicture (...)
Kings of England 1650. p. 15.

(5) (...) (...) no Power but ^s of God. Is not the Late King with his Heirs
and S^ is D^p ^ssed by God? Saunders a^ ^ter to the Judges, March 23. 1^50. p.
24.

(6) God has been pleased of late to make a sad Breach among us, taking away
from us our former Pilot, the late Renew^d Protector, who when he had fought
the Nat^ons Battles, carried through the Wilderness, preserved us from the
(...) and Fury of our Enemies, and brought us within sight of the Premised
Land, gave up the Ghost laid down his (...) (...) and his Life together, with
whose fall the Nation was (...): His death covered all the Faces of Sob^ and
Considerate Persons with Paleness, and their Hearts with Sadness, as if Peace,
Prosperity, Reformation, the Gospel, all lay drawing on, and would be buried in
the same Grave with him. But blessed be God -- ther^ and her (...) placed in
his room. while he directs the Course, let us till the Sails with our Praying
Breath* Moses it is true is dead* but we have a (...) succeeding him: Let as
pray that what the other happily beg^n, this may more happily finish, and bring
the accomplishment of all your right-br^d hopes: And what they said to (...),
let us say unto his Highness, According as we heark^ unto Moses in all things,
so (...) we hearken unto thee. Only the Lord thy God be with thee, ^s he was
with Moses. Slater's Protectors Pr^ or the (...) (...) (...) by a Praying
People, October. 13. 1658. p. 57* 58.

(7) For my part, I have oppos*d the Tyranny (...) the King* Love's Speech.
Sect. 20 I did, it is true, (...) is my P^ce and Calling the (...) of the late
Kings and were he al^ve again, and should I live longer, the Ca^ being as the
it was) I should oppose him longer. Englands ^per, Sect. 14.

(8) As for the Title of this Prince, (who would fain be accounted the Right
Heir, let us but remember from whence he had it, and how it is now tainted: Were
it never so just, the Treason of the Father has cut off the Son. True Port. p.
39.

(9) Charles the Father is gone to his own Place, and so is Charles the Son
likewise; he being in his own proper Nation, Scotland; let us keep him there i^
we be wise, and intend to be happy, and let England disdain to be under the
Domination of a Foreign Power for the future. The True Portraiture. p. 42.

(10) If the God of Heaven, the God of Truth, have writ your Names aright, with
the Beams of the Noon day Sun in the eyes of all the Nations in the world: You
are the Saviors of the Oppressed, the Conquerors of Tyrants, and the Breakers
of those Clergical Yoaks, etc. The Beacons Quenched; Dedicated to the
Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, 1652,

(11) There are great and mighty works in hand in this Nation: Tyrants are
Punished, the Laws of Oppressors are broke, Bloody Revengeful People in War
disappointed. I. O. A Thanksgiving Sermon for the Scots defeat at Worcester,
Oct. 24. 1651. p. 2. [A Monarchy of some hundred years Continuance, always
affecting, and at length wholly degenerated into Tyranny, destroyed, pulled
down, swallowed up, Ibid. p. 6.

(12) If any Persons in the world had cause to sing the Song of Moses and the
Lamb, we have this day. The Bondage prepared for us was both in Spirituals and
Temporals. About a Tyrant full of Revenge, and a Discipline full of Persecution
has been our Contest: Whether the Yoke of the one or the other should by the
Sword and Violence be put upon our Necks and Consciences is our Controversy,
Ibid. p. 7.

(13) He that is Entrusted with the Sword, and dares not do Justice on every
one that dares do Injustice, is afraid of the Creature, but makes very bold
with the Creator. Owen to the Commons, Jan. 31. 1648. p. 15.

(14) Doubtless never was there any person under Heaven (speaking of the late
King) Sentenced with Death upon more Equitable or Just grounds in respect of
Guilt and Demerit. Jo. Goodwins Defense of the Sentence passed on the King. p.
91.

(15) Gods Providence, (that is, his permission of Events and Success) are
Antecedent Declarations of his Good Will and Approbation. [A Resusal to be
subject to this Authority (the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England)
under the pretense of upholding the Title of any one upon Earth, is a Refusal
to acquiesce in the Wise and Righteous Pleasure of God; such an Opposing of the
Government set up by the Sovereign Lord of Heaven and Earth, as none can have
Peace, either in acting in, or suffering for. W. Ienkins Petition, October. 1651.

(16) If there be any in this Assembly that thinks not this ( Union) a
sufficient Retribution and Satisfaction for all his Twentieth part, for all his
Contributions, for all his Payments and Hazards, I say he is blind; I say his
heart is not right with God. Marshal to both Houses, Jan. 18. 1643. p. 20. [All
Christendom, except the Malignants in England, do now see that the Question in
England is, whether Christ, or Antichrist, shall be Lord and King, Ibid. p.
21.]

(17) Q. Whether the whole Kirk of Scotland in their Letters sent to the King
at Oxford (as in Mays History) has not judged the late King Guilty of the
Blood of Thousands of his best Subjects -- And if so, whether the Laws of God
or Man give any Pardon or Dispensation to Kings, more than to others? If not,
whether his Judges are not sufficient to justify it? Valley of Achor. Q. 8.
[Q. Whether beside the Guilt of Blood contracted upon himself in the Wars of
England, and Scotland, he was not also Guilty of the Blood of Ireland? Ibid. Q.
9.]

(18) No Sober and Impartial Person can Condemn their Position, who denying
that a Tyrannous Magistrate was the Minister of God to them for their Good, did
plainly assert the Lawfulness of Self-defence, and Holy Reformation, without
the Violation of the Ordinance of God. Naphtali. p. 30.

(19.) As he, [ The late King] to acquit himself has not spared his
Adversaries, to load them with all sorts of blame and accusation, so to him, as
in his Books alive, there will be used no more Courtship than he uses; but what
is properly his own Guilt, not imputed any more to his Evil Counselors (a
Ceremony used longer by the Parliament than he himself desired) shall be laid
here without Circumlocutions at his own door. That they who from the first
beginning, or but now of late, by what Unhappiness I know not, are so much
affatuated, not with his Person only, but with his palpable faults, and dote
upon his Deformities, may have none to blame but their own folly, if they live
and dye in such a stricken blindness, as next to that of Sodom, has not
happened to any sort of men more gross, or more misleading. Miltons (...). Pref.

(20) The People exorbitant and excessive in all their motions, are prone
oft-times not to a Riligious only, but to a Civil kind of Idolatry in Idolizing
their Kings; though never more mistaken in the Object of their Worship;
heretofore being wont to repute for Saints those Faithful and Courageous
Barons, who lost their lives in the Field, making glorious War against Tyrants
for the Common Liberty, as Simon de Momfort, Earl of Leicester, against Henry
the Third. Thomas Plantagenet, Earl of Lancaster, against Edward the Second.
But now with a Besotted and Degenerate baseness of spirit, except some few, who
yet retain in them the Old English Fortitude, and love of Freedom, and have
testified it by their matchless deeds, the rest Embastardiz'd from the ancient
Nobleness of their Ancestors, are ready to fall flat and give adoration to the
Image and Memory of this Man, who has offered at more fetches to undermine our
Liberties, and put Tyranny into an Art, than any British King before him.
Ibid. Pref.

(21) Whosoever sheddeth Man's Blood, by Man shall his Blood be shed; we find
here no exception. If a King therefore do this, to a King, and that by men also
the same shall be done. Ibid. page 229.

(22) To have brought the King to Condign Punishment has not broke the
Covenant, but it would have broke the Covenant to have saved him from those
Judicatories which both Nations declared in that Covenant to be Supreme against
any person whatsoever, Ibid. p. 237. -- -- [God has testified by all
propitious and evident designs, whereby in these latter times he is wont to
testify what pleases him; that such a solemn, and for many Ages unexampled act
of due Punishment was no mockery of Justice, but a most grateful and
wellpleasing Sacrifice: Neither was it to cover their Perjury as he accuses,
but to uncover his Perjury to the Oath of his Coronation. Ibid.

(23) This is the Cause of the Kingdom, the King should have helped, etc. but
did not, then it became the Duty of the Parliament to have relieved the
Kingdom, but they did not; her necessities great, and many Petitions concerning
them were slighted and burnt, waited many years for help; our Oppressions not
removed, all complain dangers increase, no remedy appears, they not help us,
nor tell us how long it will be before this Parliament will be at an end, that
we may have another, to see if they will help us; when all falls, no ground of
hope of life is left, danger eminent, and no other means of help left, this is
a cause of Necessity. Now it is the duty of the Army to help, and if they had
not, it had been their sin, if not their overthrow; if they had suffered it to
Perish, the Kingdom had been well helped up with a remedy in extremity. An
Answer to John Geree, etc. 1649. p. 4.

(24) As to the Blood of the King, I have not in the least any Guilt lying upon
me, for I have many a time sought the Lord with tears, to know if I have done
amiss in it, but 'twas rather confirmed that the thing was more of God than of
Men. Nine Men's Speeches. Harrison. p. 2. [I go to suffer upon the account of
the most glorious Cause that ever was in the world. Ibid. p. 6. Blessed be the
Name of God, that I have a Life to lose upon so Glorious and so Honorable an
account. p. 10.

(25) I dye, not in the Lord only, but for the Lord, and think not that this
Blessed Cause shall be lost; for it shall reach to the end of the Earth. Think
not your Prayers lost, for your Prayers and Tears with our Blood shall come
down shortly upon Babylon. Mr. Carew's Speech, p. 15.

(26) I cannot Confess any Guilt: It is such a Cause that the Martyrs would
gladly come again from Heaven to suffer for, if they might -- I look upon it as
the most Noble and High act of Justice that our Story can parallel. Nine Men's
Speeches, Cook. p. 41.

(27) I Bless Gods Name, he has engaged me in a Cause not to be Repented of.
Scott. Ibid. p. 71.

(28) In all that is past, I could never yet suffer so much as a wish to pass
through my thoughts, Oh that I had not been engaged in this thing! Or that I
had before Forty-eight deserted this Cause! Barkstead to a Friend. Three Men's
Speeches.

(29) I do believe, at long-run there is not a man that Fears the Lord will
have any reason to be sorrowful for engaging in that Good Old Cause, which I am
now to Seal with my Blood again, as I have many a time done. I am satisfied in
my soul, that it is a most Just and Glorious Cause, etc. Three Men's Speeches.
Coll. Okey.

(30) As it is unquestionably lawful on serious and real grounds to Depose and
do Justice on Kings and Princes, as other Magistrates, so never was there a
greater and more Universal Concurrence of all Reasons and Circumstances, and a
greater harmony of the Laws of Nature, Reason, Prudence, and Necessity to
warrant any act then was found, and may be discerned in that act of Justice
upon the late King. English Translation of the Scot Declaration, 1650. p. 18.

Notes on. 14.
I Shall now briefly and plainly sum up the whole matter, and leave it with the
Reader to consider of.

You have in the First Section a full and unanimous Testimony of the
Presbyterians against Toleration; nay against any sort of Toleration, either in
Doctrine or in Discipline, and in what Degree or Measure soever, as a thing
utterly Impious, and therefore Insufferable. This, methinks, should be
sufficient to stop the mouth of a Presbyterian, when he demands a Toleration;
that he himself pronounces it a wicked thing to grant it.

In the Second Section, he sets forth the Fruits and Consequences of it to be
not only the certain Destruction of Church and State, but an Inlet to
Licentious Prostitution of Manners, and the most Blasphemous of Herefies. With
what forehead now shall a Presbyterian desire that Liberty from the Government,
which he declares in his own Conscience will be the Ruin and Damuation of the
Allowers of it?

In the Third Section, the Dissenters do not only make it a matter of
Conscience, to disagree among themselves, but fall even to Cutting of Throats
upon the very Question. What is the meaning then of their pressing for a Union
among men of so many several Persuasions not to be United? And what do they
talk of Brotherly Love, and Agreement for, among men of Principles as
Inconsistent as fire and water?

In the Fourth Section you may observe the Rude and Implacable Animosities of
the Dissenters toward the Ecclesiastical State, where they declare themselves
tied in Conscience to do their utmost endeavors toward the overthrowing of
it. What would you think of half a dozen good Fellows that should come to the
Ma^er of a House, and tell him, Sir, We are very Uneasy on the wrong side of
the door, you will do us a great favor to let us into your (...), that we may
Rifle ye, and cut your Throat for your pains. Is it not the same thing (...) a
Phanatique to make the same Proposition to the Church, when they declare before
hand that they will destroy it if they can?

And the Case of the Civil Government in the Fifth Section holds exactly with
the former of the Ecclesiastical; for Kings are to be pulled down as well as
Bishops, for the Establishing of Christ upon his Throne.

The Covenant ye see in the Sixth Section, is an Oath of Conspiracy, set up
against an Oath of Allegiance: And on the other hand, an Oath (if I may say so)
of Anti-Canonical Obedience. By this Oath, the Presbyterians reckon themselves
Indispensably bound to oppose the King and the Church. Would they have the King
now to Indulge any man without renouncing that Covenant, by which, every
Unrenouncer accounts himself obliged to Depose his Majesty?

In the Seventh Section is set forth in few words, the Inexorable Rigor of all
sorts of Dissenters toward the Episcopal Party. With what Equity now can these
several Schisms make it a point of Conscience in the Government to grant them a
Common Indulgence, who both jointly and severally agreed in the giving no
Quarter to those of the Religion Established?

The Eighth Section advances the Authority of the Kirk to a more absolute
Degree of Sovereignty over King and People, than ever the Papacy it self
pretended; and supported upon the same Pretensions too; so that to demand a
Toleration of the Presbyterial Government, is only to desire his Majesty that
he will d'off his Imperial Crown, and strike to the Consistory.

In the Ninth Section lies fairly exposed the hazard of abating any thing in
the strictness of Ecclesiastical Discipline, in regard of the Principles and
Positions of these People, even if the Men themselves were honestly inclined.
Take notice of the Positions, and never doubt it, but Men of Deposing
Principles will proceed (if they have opportunity) to Deposing Actions; and
reckon that they do God and their Country good Service too: Especially when it
seems no more to them than the placing of Authority upon the right Foundation.

In the Tenth Section you will find the Operation of the former Principles in
the Animating, Pressing, and Irritating of the People to Commotions and
Tumults, and still the Dissenting Divines in the Head of the Controversy; and
the Pulpits and Presses the Fountains of our Calamities. Never did any People
speak fairer at first, or do fouler things at last, then those pretended
Peaceable Ministers of the Gospel: And had they but come into the World time
enough, Boccalini would never have drawn his Intelligence from New-Spain of the
Shepherds Dogs being all turned into Wolves, when he might have found so much a
more lively instance nearer home of those that were set to Guard and Defend the
Sheep, transformed into the Merciless Devourers of them.

In the Eleventh Section you will find a Rebellion Justified, by the same lips
that had called God a thousand times over, to witness the Integrity of their
hearts, and the Loyalty of their intentions: And with Imprecations also, not to
be mentioned without trembling. Judge what Credit now is to be given to the
fair Professions of this sort of People.

In the Twelfth Section you would take these Godly Ministers (as they style
themselves) to be Members rather of a Corporation of Common Executioners, then
of an Assembly of Divines, by their Outrageous and Insatiable Thirst of Blood;
and yet th^se practices are recommended to the multitude, as the Inspirations
and Duties of the Gospel.

And it is not Common Blood will serve their turns neither; nor any thing less
than the Sacred Life of their Sovereign, to appease their Holy Wrath ( Section
13.) and to Atone for the sins of the Nation.

And in the Last Section, (as if it were to put themselves beyond the
Possibility of Repentance, and to Preclude the ordinary course even of God's
Boundless Mercies) they pass an Approbation upon the whole Tract of their
proceedings, and ascribe to Almighty God, one of the most execrable acts of
Cruelty and Injustice that ever was committed upon the face of the Earth, since
the Crucifixion of his Blessed and only Son. New as to the Contrivers, the
Principal Actors and Asserters of this Unexampled Wickedness, what clearer
Evidence can ye desire then what is here delivered unto ye in their own Words
and Writings?

THE END.

