Interest Mistaken, OR THE Holy Cheat; PROVING From the undeniable Practices
and Positions of the Presbyterians, that the Design of that Party is to enslave
both King and People under the Masque of RELIGION.

By way of Observation upon a Treatise, ENTITLED, The Interest of England in
the Matter of RELIGION, etc.

By ROGER L'ESTRANGE.

The Second Impression. Aug. De Civ. Dei. Nullo modo his artibus placatur
Divina Majestas, quibus Humana Dignitas inquinatur.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom at the Gun in Ivy-lane. 1661.

To the Honorable HOUSE of COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
Most Honorable,
TO beg your Pardon, or Protection, were to suppose a Fault, or Hazard, but
in this Dedication finding neither, I shall waive that Formality: humbly
submitting what I have to say; my Reasons, and my Self, to your Authority, and
Wisdom, without more Prologue, or Apology.

There is a Faction which under the note of Presbyterian, seems much concerned
to stickle against Bishops, and Church-rites, on the behalf of tender
Consciences. Their Writings and Opinions, are with great Freedom, Craft, and
Diligence, dispersed throughout the Nation; to the great Scandal of the true
Church, and the Encouragement of those of the Revolt. But this is yet the least
part of the Mischief, or in effect of their Design: Their Aim being to
Tumultuate the People, and make a Party against the Civil Power. Indeed their
Pamphlets wear the Face of Church-disputes, and Modells; but he that reads them
through, and marquis them narrowly, shall find the King's Authority the
Question.

That the late War against the King was Lawful; is a Position common to them
all, and this they publicly maintain, as the main Basis of the Cause. By
which assertion, they cast the Blood, and Guilt upon His Majesty; make his
Adhaerents Traitors: place the Supreme Authority in the two Houses: subject
the Law to an Ordinance: the Government, to a Faction: and animate the
Schismatiques to serve His Majesty in being as they did His Father. This is
the drift of their seditious Libells, and of their Projects too; if any
judgment may be made upon their strict conformity of Argument, and Method, to
those that first embroiled us.

How far this matter may require your Care, becomes not me to meddle: I
thought it might be worth your Honors Knowledge, and led by an Opinion of my
Duty, this state of the Affair, (such as it is) I do most humbly lay before
you.

His Majesty had no sooner set Foot upon English ground, but swarms of
Pestilent papers were in a Readiness to enterteyn him. Some of the sharpest of
them, I delivered to several Members of that Session, with the Stationers name
for whom they were Printed, (Smith, at the Bible in Cornhill, Croftons Agent)
but all too little to suppress them. One Passage is this that Follows; speaking
of the limited Power of Kings --

Douglas his Coronation Sermon, Page 10.
This may serve to justify the proceedings of this Kingdom against the late
King, who in a hostile way set himself to overthrow Religion, Parliaments,
Laws and Liberties.

Hand in hand with this Pamphlet, came forth Smectymnuus; Revived, and
recommended by Mr. Manton: and since that time, some Hundreds more of the same
stamp, whose common business it is, by Affronting of the Law, and Flattering of
the Rabble to cast all back into Confusi^n. Among the many other Actours of
Religion, I find not any man plays his part better, then the Author of That
Treatise which has extorted This: who indeed, abuses the People in very good
terms.

Some hasty Observations I have passed upon him, in favor of the easy, and
deceivable Vulgar; which Prailties I submit to your Honors Charity; but the
main Equity of the Cause, I hope, will stand the test of your severest
Justice: for doubtless much is due to the late King's Honor, as well as to
his Blood.

And somewhat (with submission to your Wisdoms) may be allowed to his Party:
at least sufficient to protect them from Popular contempt, and the Infamous
lash of every daring Libell.

I dare not trust my self further with my own thoughts, and yet I take them to
be such as very well consist with the Duty of

Your Honors most Obedient and Humble Servant, Roger L'estrange.

TO THE GOOD PEOPLE OF ENGLAND.
THe Cm mon good is the Common pretense of all seditious Combinations: and it
is no new thing for a Crafty Faction to impose upon a simple Multitude, empty
Appearances, for Truths and Reason. But our Reformers scorn to stop at this
dull, general method of Confusion. The Law of God must be subjected as well as
that of the Nation; we must call Treason, Loyalty, and commit Murder as a
point of Conscience.

No less than this is hinted in the Presbyterians Justification of the Scottish
League and Quarrel: nor have they any other aim, than by procuring an Allowance
of That War, to make way to Another. To this end, they disperse their poisonous
Infusions into all Quarters of the Kingdom, under those very Forms of Piety,
and Tenderness, by which they first betrayed us: and by those very means do
they now prosecute afresh their first Intentions. That is, they labor to
promote the Cause, by scandalous and rank Invectives, against the Church, and
stirring up of Tumults to Reform it: by a loud Pharisaical ostentation of their
own Holiness, and a sour churlish Censure of all Others: by sharp and saucy
Aspersions upon the Royal Party, and by Reflections yet more bitter and
Audacious, upon his Sacred Majesty, and his Murtherd Father.

To see these Libells pass with Freedom, and Impunitie, as if they were
Authorized: and to observe what foul Mistakes are grounded upon these gross
Allowances, to the Kings Disadvantage, and all without Control or Confutation.
This, and no other Reason (so God bless me) that is; of private Passion, or
Animosity of temper) has drawn this honest Folly from me. I reckon it my Duty
to my Prince and Country, to my own Honor, and to the Oath I have taken, Where
ever I find a public Enemy to discover him: And being thus Commissioned, both
by Authority and Conscience, I proceed.

The Benefit of this Treatise is directed to the People, and the Design of it
is only to lay open the Presbyterian Juggle, that in one Age they be not twice
deluded by the same Imposture. My Arguments are Drawn from their own Practices,
and Positions: from Presidents of Former times; ( Cartwright and his Disciples)
from what has passed within our own Experience; from what these very men have
done, and from the very Logique of their own Writings, what they profess, they
do intend to do.

As the Delusion is apparent, so is the Justice of Discoursing it.

Can it be thought, that by the Act of Pardon, his Majesty ever meant to
subject all the Sober and Legal Interests of the Nation, to be worried by a
Faction? Who of the Royal Party charges them? Or if they did, what has the Law
done to offend them? Or say the Law be sharp against them, his Majesty's
unparalleled Mercy has by his Royal Grace taken off the edge of it; hazzarding
himself to preserve these unthankful People, which are now practicing upon
that Authority, that saved them.

And I beseech you what is the goodly Subject of the Controversy? The
Presbyterian Discipline forsooth; and Ceremonies of Mystical and Humane
Institution.

Touching the Former; St. Augustine tells us, that Aerius turned Heretic upon
the miss of a Bishopprick. (the first assertor of Church-Parity) I am afraid
some of our Reverend Clergy are sick of his disease; for their design is not so
much to convert Bishops into Presbyters, as to make every Presbyter a Bishop.

And then for Ceremonies; they teaz and chafe the Common People into a pettish
scruple, that would be well and quiet enough without them. They make their
Consciences like Skittish Jades, that boggle at their own shadows, and start
into a Precipice to avoid a Feather.

They tell us too of Number, and press their Importunities in the Name of many
thousands of the good people of the Nation; so did the Kings insolent Judges,
and with as much truth the one as the other.

Let it be further noted, that in this case, the Factious and Schismatical
Clergy are but (with reverence) Bawds to a State-faction. A Tumult for
Religion, is within one step of Rebellion.

Nor do they only shape their loose Opinions to their lewd purposes, but by all
secret arts and practices, they form their Parties. But here I am confined. --

All I design is only a fit Caution to all Well-meaning Subjects, not to
believe their Ears against their Reason. If they can add one Syllable, of
Weight, to what they have already Promised, and Broken, I Will give my self up to
the Party.

This is not yet to cast a general Blot upon all persons of that Judgment, nor
to excite any unquiet thoughts toward the rest: but only to present a Modest,
and an Useful warning to the people.

So far am I from a desire to move any distemper, that I do positively affirm,
should the King (which is impossible) pick out of all his Subjects those very
persons, who upon twenty years experience, have proved through all extremities
how much they love his Cause and Person, above their Lives and Fortunes:
should, I say, these be picked out by his Majesty, and marqu'd for Slaves to
those that with an equal Zeal and Steadynesse have opposed him; Our Duty were
the same yet.

Severitie, and Kindness may move us as Men, but not as Subjects: Obedience to
Kings being a Divine Precept, and not subjected to those accidents which work
upon our Passions.

Nor shall this sense of my own Clearness betray me yet to a surprise; for I
foresee a thousand mischiefs may befall me, and all which either private
Malice, or open and bold Prejudice can cast upon me; I am provided for. To
those of the Presbyterian persuasion that truly love the King, I bear a more
then Ordinary Respect, because it is a more then Ordinary Virtue, and for the
rest, I care not.

I am not now to learn the temper of the Rigid Presbyterians. They did me once
the Honor to Condemn me, almost at Midnight, by a Packed Committee, and
without a Hearing; well-nigh four years they kept me in Newgate upon that
Account. This was a pretty taste of their good Nature. I do not now Complain,
but I Confess, it would have pleased me as well if the Bishop that Christens
still by the Directory, had chosen some other Chancellor, instead of my Judge
Advocate: -- But I desire only to make a sober use of these Mistakes; The King
knows nothing of them.

God Preserve his Majesty, Convert his Enemies, and Comfort his Friends.
Farewell.

THE HOLY CHEAT: PROVING, From the undeniable Practices and Positions of the
Presbyterians, that the design of that Party is to enslave both King and
People, under the Masque of RELIGION, etc.
IF the Author of the Interest of England, etc. had meant fairly to the
Question, he would as well have told us the Good of Bishops, and the Ill of
Presbyters, as he has done the contrary, and never have concluded For, or
Against Either, from the Best Actions of the One, and the Worst of the Other.
At least, a man would think this partiality of Method, might content him
without the further service of those little Arts he uses, to aid, and recommend
his Undertaking.

The Present state of things, he represents quite other then it is: and raises
thence a Political expedience of doing This, or That, -- of Linking Interests,
-- never considering, that he Himself Creates that Interest, and gives Affairs
the Face of that expedience. Page the 16. he lays his groundwork, In these
following words.

J. C.
Among the various dis-agreeing Parties within this Kingdom, which seem to
render it an indigested Mass of People; two main ones appear above the rest, of
so large an interest, that if by any means they might become no more twain, but
one; they would take in, and carry along the whole stream and strength of the
Nation. And these two are the Episcopal and Presbyterian Parties, each of them
highly laying claim to the Protestant Religion. And undoubtedly whilst these
two remain divided, the Kingdom of England, and the Protestant Religion is
divided against it self. This disunion is removed, either by the Abolition of
one Party, or by the Coalition of both into one. The former, if supposed
possible, cannot be accomplished, but by violent and perilous ways and means.
The latter is brought to pass by Accommodation, or mutual yielding. Moreover,
there is a third way imaginable, Toleration indulged to the weaker side. In
which of these ways lies the true Interest of the King and Kingdom, is the
greatCase of the time, and the Subject of this Discourse, which presumes not to
inform his Majesty, but in subordination unto his declared Moderation and
Condescension, endeavors, by showing things as they are, to convince and
persuade Interessed persons, that the Pacification begun for this Interim may
be entire and perfect, and fully settled for perpetual unity.

First, what the Difference is; Next, betwixt whom; In the Third place, the
Danger of it; And Lastly, the Expedient to remove it.

It seems, the Episcopal, and Presbyterian Parties, United in Religion, cannot
Agree yet about Discipline: and while These Two remain Divided, the Public is
in Danger. From hence results the Interest of Mutual Yielding -- (his Coalition
of both Parties into One) Upon which Hinge moves the whole frame of his Design;
and in two Pages, he gives the Presbyter possession of his Claim, Deciding with
exceeding ease, the Case of King and Kingdom.

Opinion is a great Mistress: for that which He so Magisterially Lays down and
Challenges, appears to me mis-stated, and worse Managed. I must confess, his
Reduction of all other Interests under Episcopal and Presbyterian, is, in some
sense, no ill Dichotomy, that is, intended of the two main Parties, whereof,
the One's against the Law, the Other for it: But why the single Presbyterian
should be Esteemed the Balance of the Nation, I cannot Comprehend. If they are
so, they should do well to cast their Cause upon a Popular Vote, and try the
Issue by the Poll.

For Quiet sake, no matter, Many or Few, there may be Equity where there wants
Number. We Will rather see in point of Right what it is they insist upon: Which, if
exemption from Episcopal Authority, in things Indifferent, and of Humane
Institution. We must plead judgment of Discretion too, as well as They: A
Freedom, and Capacity to distinguish betwixt a Scandal Given and Taken; betwixt
a Dis-conformity proceeding from Conscience, and from Passion; Where the
Dissent proceeds from Conscience, a Toleration clears That Scruple: but our
good peoples Liberty consists in Burthening Others, as well as Freeing
Themselves, and that is Intolerable.

How many strange Indecencies are here, one upon the neck of another I First,
here is the Minor part imposing upon the Major: Secondly, a Novel, and Vulgar
Imagination, bearing down an Apostolical Institution: Thirdly, a Private
Opinion, contesting with a Solemn, and Public Sanction: and Finally, the
Subject of all this Earnestness, in their own phrase, is but a very
Accommodable difference. From what I have said, I am persuaded that Severity to
the Pertinacious Presbyter, is the true interest of this Nation, allowing yet
Indulgence to the Conscientious.

Well, but our Author tells us, that Abolition if possible, is perilous, and
Toleration only an Imaginary Remedy. Is not this to intimate that the Party
makes less Conscience of a Tumult, than of a Ceremony: and to argue the
necessity of Complying, from the danger of Refusing? What would these people do
if they had Power, that are so Bold without it! And yet our Politician makes it
the Kings Interest to Close with them. He means perchance, According to the
Covenant: The Coalition, There, of all Schisms, and Heresies into One Interest,
was of great Reason, and Important Service to the Commune work: but we are now
advising how to Settle not to Disjoynt a Government, and to Incorporate
Dis-agreements, were to begin upon a Principle of Confusion. As the Case stands
with us, in my weak Judgment, Persons should rather be Indulged, than Parties.
My Reason is this, Some Individuals of that Persuasion, have done His Majesty
some Service, but (to the best of my Remembrance) the Entire Party, never any.

Yet one Reflection more. Allow these People all their Askings, in what concerns
their Discipline, will they rest Quiet There, without a further Hankering after
more? (the Legislative Power perhaps; the Militia; -- or some such Trifle) I am
the more suspicious, because I do not well remember, where ever That Party was
satisfied with less than All. Nor need I look far back for Instances to
justify my Fears; But having in some measure hitherto Discovered his
Foundation, we will forward now, and see what work he makes upon this Sandy
Bottom, taking his Title Page in my way, for, to my thinking, he stumbles at
the Threshold. -- It runs thus.

The Interest of England In the Matter of RELIGION, Unfolded in the Solution of
these three QUESTIONS.
I. Qu. Whether the Presbyterian Party should in Justice or Reason of State be
Rejected and Depressed, or Protected and Encouraged.

II. Qu. Whether the Presbyterian Party may be Protected and Encouraged, and
the Episcopal not Deserted nor Disobliged.

III. Qu. Whether the Upholding of both Parties by a just and equal
Accommodation, be not in it self more desirable and more agreeable to the State
of England, Then the absolute Exalting of the one Party, and the total
Subversion of the other.

Written by J. C.
The Matter of Religion, as it stands here related to Civil Interest? Doctrine
it cannot be, for That were to advise a yielding upon a Principle of Policy, in
Opposition to a Rule of Conscience: subjecting Interest of Religion, which is
Eternal Happiness, to Reason of State, which regards but Temporal Convenience.
If it be Discipline, What Is that to the Interest of England? Our Settlement
depends upon a due Obedience to the Established Law; not the Encouraging of
froward Humors, by an Audacious and Mis-govern'd Zeal, under pretext of
Conscience to Affront it. Let Authority Reform, and Private Persons either
Obey, or Suffer; we are to Answer for our own faults, not those of the
Government. And in fine, If the Hill will not come to Mahomet, let Mahomet go
to the Hill.

After a pleasant Breviate of the Story of our late Troubles, handsomely Penned
indeed) in his tenth Page he takes his Biass.

Page 10.
At length (says he) a full Tide of Concurring Accidents carries him (the Duke
of Albemarle, then General) to a closure with the sober part of the
Parliamentary Party, who from first to last intended only a Reformation, and
due Regulation of things in Church and State, but abhorred the thought of
destroying the King, or changing the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom.

the Act of Pardon and Oblivion had quieted all Animosities, and silenced all
Discourses of this Quality; but it is, it seems, The Interest of England in the
matter of Religion, to keep the Quarrel waking; and by Asserting the
proceedings of the two Houses in the late War, to engage this King within the
danger of his Fathers President. To be as free with the Author, as he is with
his Majesty, I Will put his meaning in a little plainer English.

Beside the Grand Division of the Nation into a Royal and a Popular Party; that
Party which he here calls Parliamentary, is again Split; and under this
Subdivision are Comprised, those which did Actually destroy the King; and those
which by good Fortune, did it not. ( Presbyterians, and Independents.) The
Sober part, (meaning the Presbyterian) He justifies from first to last, even to
their very Intentions. (I must tread warily, for I am here upon a narrow and a
slippery path.)

Not to Dispute the Gentleman's Intuitive Knowledge; we will rather modestly
believe that They mistook their way, then He, their meaning: for certainly, the
Murder of the King, was not the only Unlawful violence Acted upon that Sacred
Person, and he that stops there, does as much as nothing. I would not touch
upon this Subject, were I not bound by Oath, and Duty, to discharge my Soul, in
what concerns the Honor, and the Safety of my Prince.

Can the first Cause asserted by both Houses, in opposition to his late
Majesty, be justified, and not the King condemned? And is not the Honor and
Safety of his Majesty that now is, concerned in these Indignities upon his
Murdered Father? What was Then lawful, is so still: and he that but implicitly
charges the Last King, strikes at This. The Text will bear no other sense
without a Torture. But I shall by-and-by, compare him with himself. In the mean
while we may explain one Presbyterian by another. Douglas, in 1651. preached
the Kings Coronation-Sermon. Which since his Majesty's Return, is over and over
again Reprinted.

Douglas.
A King (says he) abusing his Power, to the overthrow of Religion, Laws, and
Liberties, which are the very fundamentals of this Contract and Covenant, may
be controlled and opposed; and if he set himself to overthrow all these by
Arms, then they who have power, as the Estates of a Land, may and ought to
resist by Arms; Because he does, by that opposition, break the very Bonds, and
overthrows all the Essentials of this Contract and Covenant. This may serve
to Justify the proceedings of this Kingdom against the late King, who in an
hostile way set himself to overthrow Religion, Parliaments, Laws and Liberties.

I think this needs no Comment, -- About the same time, Smectymnuus was revived
by Mr. Manton, (a most auspicious welcome doubtless to his Majesty) wherein
five Champions of the Cause take up the Cudgels against one Bishop, on the
behalf of scandalous Pamphlets, and Tumultuary Petitions against Episcopacy.
This is the naked Truth, what ever the Jolly Priest may tell the Reader, of the
Epistle to the Reader.
Faction against which they dealt. Five Orthodox Divines, he says, were the
Authors. Four of the Five I shall not mention, the Fifth was Marshal, of whose
Divinity, a Taste; that by the sweet Agreement, we may the better judge of Mr.
Manton's. In a Letter printed 1643. arguing for the Authority of the two
Houses, page 14. Thus.

Marshall.
Let every soul in England be subject to King and Parliament, for they are the
higher Powers ordained unto you of God; whosoever therefore resists King and
Parliament, resists the Ordinance of God; and they that resist shall receive
to themselves damnation.

The man was no Conjurer, yet he had wit enough, when Presbytery went down, to
Court the rising Interest; and 'though the Common Prayer was an Abomination, to
marry his Daughter by it, for fear of After-claps. But I suppose 'twas huddl'd
up, as it is in Mr. Manton's Church, that no man might be able to make Oath
'twas not the Directory. If the Case had been concerning Epistle to the Reader.
the Allowance of Christian Burial to a Gentleman that was Quartered for his
Loyalty. Or to determine in the great Point of the late Kings Death, (upon an
Anniversary Fast) whether or no 'twas Murder: Truly considering the potent
Arguments brought on both sides, it is possible that Mr. Marshal would have
contented himself (as well as his Neighbors) barely to put the Case, and leave
the point at last undecided to his Auditory.

Not to spend time, and paper needlessly, The whole stream of the
Disciplinarians runs this way: only perhaps more or less Bold, and Open,
according to the present strength, or weakness of the Faction.

But to return: Can any thing be more gentle, then A Reformation, and due
Regulation of things in Church and State? (words smoother than Oil, yet are
they very Swords.)

First, To Reform, and Regulate, belongs to the Supreme Magistrate; if they
intended That, they were to blame. Now to take it in a Qualified and softer
sense; 'twas a Due Regulation they intended. To put this General notion in more
Intelligible terms; upon this point depends no less then all that is dear to
every honest man. The Dignity of the King, the Liberty of the Subject, the
Freedom of Parliaments, and the Honor of the Nation. God knows my thoughts, I
do not envy any man, either the Benefit of his Majesty's Mercy, or the Blessing
of his Favor, that has the Grace at last not to Abuse it. I look upon his
Royal Act of Pardon with Reverence; and upon every Soul within that pale as in
a Sanctuary. But yet I do not understand a Pardon for one Rebellion, to be a
Dispensation for another; nor how the Argument lies from Fact to Right. Under
these two words, Due Regulation; Thus much is comprehended, (waiving less
Differences and Greater.)

Presbyterian Regulation.
1. The transferring of the Power of choosing Great Officers, and Ministers of
State; from the King to the Two Houses.

2. All matters of State in the Interval of Parliaments must be Debated, and
Concluded by a Counsel so chosen, and in number not above twenty five, nor
under fifteen; and no Public Act esteemed of any Validity, as proceeding from
the Royal Authority, unless it be done by the Advice and Consent of the Major
part of that Counsel; Attested under their Hands. And These too sworn to the
sense of Both Houses.

3. The Lords and Commons must be entrusted with the Militia.

4. His Majesty may appoint, but the Two Houses, or the Counsel (in such manner
as aforesaid) must Approve of All Governors of Forts, and Castles.

Lastly, No Peers hereafter made, must Sit, or Vote in Parliament, unless
Admitted thereunto by the Consent of Both Houses.

Exact Collections, page 310.
Upon these Terms; his Majesty shall be supported, in Honor, and plenty; by his
most Humble and Faithful Subjects, who have in their Thoughts and Desires
nothing more precious, (next to the Honor and immediate Service of God) than
their just, and faithful performance of their Duty to the King, and Kingdom.

This is the Due Regulation they Intended: (for sure they Meant what they
Proposed, to our Late Sovereign. I speak not this, of Persons, but of the Gross
of the Party; nor to reproach That neither, but to remove a Scandal from the
Ashes of that Blessed Martyr, and to direct a Reverence toward his Successor.
What provocation have these restless People, now to revive This Question: but
an unruly Impotency of Passion against the Government? This is their way. In
Generals, they justify from first to last, the Presbyterians Cause. The
multitude, they look into Particulars: and from those Injuries which the late
King suffered, draw Inferences Dis-honourable, and Dangerous to this.

In the next Periode, methinks he falls upon a Non-sequitur.

Page 10.
The Readmission of the Secluded Members, (he says) did necessarily draw after
it, the Restoring of King, Lords, and Commons, according to the ancient
Constitution.

Not Necessarily (under favor) according to the ancient Constitution:
Observation.
(I will not say nor probably: but) there were two shrewd Blocks cast in the
way. The First, in the Militia; where no Commissionated Officer was to Act,
that should not first acknowledge in these words, viz.

I do Acknowledge and Declare, that the War undertaken by both Houses of
Parliament in their defense against the Forces raised in the Name of the late
King, was Just and Lawful; and that Magistracy and Ministry, are the
Ordinances of God.

The Second, was in the Exclusion of the Royal Party from the next Choice, as
follows.

Resolved, that all and every Person who have advised, or voluntarily aided,
abeited, or assisted, in any War against the Parliament (since the first day of
January 1641.) his or their sons, unless he or they have since Manifested their
good affections to this Parliament, shall be incapable to be elected to serve
as members of the next Parliament.

Now how a Choice thus limited in the House, and Principled in the Field,
should Necessarily set us right, does not to me appear?

Perhaps it was the most the Time would bear: but God forbid, That Declaration
charging the Guilt, and Blood of the late War upon the King, should stand upon
Record to future Generations. Who ever affirms That War was lawful, does beyond
Question meditate Another; not to say more than needs, It blasts the Memory of
the late King, and upon the King that now is, it reflects many Mischiefs,
subjecting both his Dignity and Person, to his Fathers hazards. It administers
Argument for a New War; and shakes the very Foundation of Royalty. Grant That,
the Act of Oblivion is on the wrong side; If the King was in Fault, the
Presbyterians must Grant the Pardon. From the clear reason of the matter in it
self, and from the obvious Consequences; beside that Justice which both King
and People owe to the Ashes of a Father and a Sovereign, It seems to me of high
Concern, to Counter-State that Declaration, and place the Militia of this
Nation now in such hands, as will acknowledge the late Kings Quarrel was
Defensive. I am the bolder in this Particular, because I find the Faction
pressing beyond both Modesty and Reason, upon this Bottom.

Where Majesty it self is Affronted, it were a second Injury to allow the
Servant better Quarter than the Master. But they are very Exact and Careful in
this Particular: as will appear in what follows.

After a dreadful Earthquake, Page 12.
shaking all the Powers of the Kingdom, and over-turning the very Foundations,
and after a new frame of things erected standing for diverse years, and
seemingly stated for perpetuity, the Regal Family and Government is raised up
again, not by the power or policy of that Party, who fought under the Banner of
his late Majesty in the Wars, between him and both Houses of Parliament; But by
the restless desire of the Nation, and the vigorous actings of the City of
London, with the concurrence of the Secluded Members of the long Parliament, in
conjunction with that Renowned Person, who then held the power of the Sword.

Observation.
Let it be noted here, that (by His Confession) the War was between the King and
Both Houses of Parliament. Now to that Party who fought under the Banner of His
late Majesty. (Whom he might have spared for the General's sake.)

Truly, considering what havoc has been made of them, by Slaughters,
Extrajudicial Sentences, Plunders, Sequestrations, Imprisonments, Banishments;
shipping them away into Plantations, etc. -- And this for twenty years
continuance. It Is no great wonder to find some Abatement of their Power. But to
Affirm that they contributed nothing to his Majesty's Restoration, is very
unkind, and something Rash. The Nation did, (he says) the City of London, and
the Secluded Members of the Long Parliament; but not That Party. (A pleasant
and fantastical Dis-junction.) This way of barely Affirming, and Denying;
Crying One Party Up, and the Other Down, and proving nothing, is neither
Mannerly, nor Prudent. How comes this man of Metaphysical Inspection, that
reads the very Thoughts of the Presbyterians, and seems so well informed in all
the Actings of the Royal Party: How comes he by this wondrous Insight and
Intelligence? Does he not find that all he says is nothing, unless he can see
things Invisible, and prove Negatives? Is This the Work of the Spirit of
Pacification? or will he tell us, in the holy Dialect, that it is the Enmity
betwixt the Seed of the Woman, and the Seed of the Serpent?

So far were We, (for I write my self of that Party) from this Unfriendly and
Unchristian Temper of Dis-uniting, that we Declared unanimously against it,
binding our selves by all that is Sacred, to an Eternal Union with all Parties,
in order to the Restoration of His Majesty, all Differences apart; of what
Degree or Quality soever. In This, we had an eye to the King's Interest, and to
the Nation's; for it Referred both to his Majesty's Return, and to a Lasting
Peace; the Former being Facilitated by that Conjunction of Interests; and the
Latter, provided for by a Conciliation of Affections, to be wrought by
suppressing all Motions toward Revenge in the one Party, and the Fears of it in
the Other. It had been good Manners to have met us half way; but truly high
Discretion, as well as Common Equity, to Close with us, and entertain the
Offer. But far from this, we do not only get not one Good word, but many a Bad
one: Such, as those People that will never Leave the King, are to expect from
such as do not love Him. Our Adversary talks much of the Gospel. Is it a
Gospel-precept, to render Evil for Good* What I have showed already, that the
Kings Party did, amounts to somewhat more than nothing. We Will see a little
further, allowing yet to all that Acted in that work their share of Glory.

The Duke of Albemarle was the Leading Card, then in the head of an Army,
better disposed to his Command, than Design: and to him the Honest part of the
City and Nation were no ill Seconds. But till he had tasted and tried them, he
did well to walk warily: and rather take the middle and safer way, of
Gratifying all Interests then on foot, than the more Positive, and Hazardous,
of Disobliging any Two Parties, in favor of the Third.

For there were then Three several Interests in Play: the King's, the
Presbyterian's, and the Phanatique's: The Royal party pressed for a Free Choice
and Convention, without Prelimination. The Presbyterians urged a Readmission of
the Secluded Members. The Phanatiques, they were for filling up the House,
according to such Qualifications as the Rump should resolve upon. The course
the General steered was this; -- the Rump Continued; the Secluded Members
Returned; and the Royallists were satisfied with the Assurance of a new Choice
soon after. His Excellence acting in this Affair rather as a Conciliator, than
a Party, and in order to a Settlement, giving things the best Consistency they
would then bear.

But had the ancient Stock of Royallists no hand at all in this procurement? It
never came to blows, so that the matter Rests upon the Effects of Policy and
Counsel; whereof our undertaker cannot give any absolute account; nor shall we
in our just Apology, exalt our selves, and cry, We brought the King in. That Is
Presbyterian Language. We did not drive him out, we will say; and that we joined
with many Thousands, as honest as our selves, in Duty to Restore him. Whether
there was place for Action, and to do the King a Service that way, we never
Articled for Offices or Rewards, but without further care of Interest, persu'd
our Duties. In fine the Loyal part of the Nation was animated by the same Soul,
joined Stocks, and Counsels: and many Thousands of brave Fellows that never saw
the King, were forward and Ambitious to Die for him. I could say what was
undertaken by the old Royal Party, particularly, in Hewson's scuffle, (and
indeed where not) but that it casts a Slur upon some of his Majesty's new
Friends. This however, those Lads of the City, that would have done the work
without more ado, had they not been Muzzl'd by some of their Mungrel
Magistrates, that Dined with the Mayor, and Supped with the Committee of
Safety: those honest people will, if need be, bear witness for us, and in like
manner the whole Nation, that by Action, Counsel, Writing, we did all that was
possible in the Business. Neither does what I have delivered in defense of the
Royal Party, disagree with his Majesty's testimony of the Other, in His
Gracious Speech to the House of Peers for hastening the Act of Indemnity: which
yet our Author cites against us.

My Lords, His Majesty's Speech for hastening the Act of Indemnity.
If you do not join with Me in extinguishing those fears, which keep men's
hearts awake, and apprehensive of safety and security, you keep Me from
performing My promise, which if I had not made, I am persuaded that neither I
nor you had been now here: I pray you let Us not deceive those who brought Us,
or permitted Us to come together.

Brought Him in, as who Permitted His Restoring; implying, that He was fain to
Condition for that too; but withal, a great Earnestness to perform His promise.

Had but this Gentleman considered as well what the King said at the Passing of
the Indemnity, as at the Hastening of it, this wrangle would have been saved;
I Will do him the service to mind him of it.

His Majesty's Speech at the passing the Act of Indemnity.
I do very willingly pardon all that is pardoned by this Act of Indemnity, to
that time which is mentioned in the Bill. Nay, I will tell you, That from that
time to this day, I will not use great severity, except in such Cases where the
Malice is Notorious, and the Public Peace exceedingly concerned. But for the
time to come, the same Discretion and Conscience which disposed me to the
Clemency I have expressed, which is most agreeable to My Nature, will oblige me
to all Rigor and Severity, how contrary soever it be to My Nature, toward
those who shall not now Acquiesce, but continue to manifest their Sedition and
Dislike of the Government, either in Actions or Words. And I must conjure you
all (My Lords and Gentlemen) to concur with me in this just and necessary
Severity; and that you will in your several Stations, be so jealous of the
public Peace, and of My particular Honor, that you will cause Exemplary
Justice to be done upon those who are guilty of Seditious Speeches or Writings,
as well as those who break out into Seditious Actions: And that you will
believe those who delight in reproaching and traducing My Person, not to be
well affected to you and the public Peace. Never King valued himself more upon
the Affections of his People, than I do; Nor do I know a better way to make My
Self sure of your Affections, than by being Just and Kind to you all; and
whilst I am so, I pray let the World see, that I am possessed of your
Affections.

Thus far the Groundwork, now the goodly Structure.

His Majesty thus brought back to a willing and free-spirited people, Page 14.
by their own Act, beholds his undoubted Interest set forth to his hand, and
made plain before him; which is no other, than a well-tempered and composed
state of Affairs, both Religious and Civil, in all his Dominions, by the
abolishing of former Differences, and the reconciling of all reconcilable
Parties; and especially of those grand Parties, which (if made one) do upon the
matter carry the whole Nation. And this His Majesty's Wisdom has already
observed, in that excellent Proclamation against vicious, debauched, and
profane persons, in these words, [That the Reconciliation and Union of hearts
and affections, can only, with God's blessing, make Us rejoice in each other,
and keep Our Enemies from rejoicing.] And this is the earnest expectation and
hope of the Religious, and well affected to the public Tranquillity, that the
King, our supreme Head and Governor, whose gracious Disposition does not suffer
him to cleave to any divided part of his Subjects, and to reject others that
are alike Loyal, will, as a common Father, protect and cherish all those that
are found capable and worthy, and become our great Moderator by his Authority
and Wisdom, to lessen Differences, and allay Animosities, between dissenting
Brethren, which already agree in the main points of Religion.

Observation.
Having hitherto asserted, that those who fought under the late King's Banner,
were not his Majesty's Friends; and that those who fought against it, ever
were; he proceeds now to a Conclusion suitable to his premises, and states the
Interest of the King in favor of that Voluntary Mistake: directing an Accord
betwixt all Reconcilable Parties, and an indulgence toward all those that are
found Capable, and Worthy. In Both (and in All) Cases, the Presbyterian himself
must be the Judge: and then we know what will become of Royallists and Bishops.

The Kings Friends have ever had the Honor to be Divided (by these People) into
persons Popishly affected, Evil Counselors, and Loose Livers; and it is
evident, that they design, under these Limitations of Reconcilable, Capable,
and Worthy, to cast all such as Conscientiously, and frankly adhere to
Monarchy, and Episcopacy, out of the terms of their pretended Pacification. All
those that They find Capable and Worthy, and esteem Reconcilable, shall be
admitted. Now to the Question.

1. Quest. Whether in Justice or Reason of State the Presbyterian party should
be Rejected and Depressed, or Protected and Encouraged?

Presbyterian Party: We Will weigh the Justice and Reason of the Proposition
after. His own Remarque upon it is not amiss.

As concerning their true Character, Page 19.
the Notation of the name whereby they are called, is both too shallow, and too
narrow for it. The word Presbyterian has not sufficient depth to go to the
root of the Matter, nor breadth sufficient to comprehend this sort of men. That
Form of Ecclesiastical Government by Parochial and Classical Presbyteries,
Provincial and National Assemblies, is remote enough from their main Cause, and
those firm Bonds that make them eternally one, in respect whereof many that
approve a regulated Episcopacy, will be found of their number.

Cause is not the Form, but the Exercise of Government: for they like well
enough to have that Power Themselves, which they condemn in Others. Nor do I
doubt but that many of them approve a regulated Episcopacy; that is, a
Presbyter in a Bishop's seat, where the Office appears Regulated by the Person,
as it is in a Regulated Monarchy; Where the King's subject to the Law, and the
Law to the two Houses. But I condemn not All, that wear that Character. The
Wise, and Honest Few of that Denomination, who keep themselves within the terms
of Duty, and the Question; such as can talk of the Church, without disturbing
the State; and debate their private Opinions, without giving public Scandal:
For these, I have much Charity, and Reverence, and wish as great a tenderness
toward them, as they themselves desire. But where I see a Bold seditious
Faction, bidding defiance to the Civil Magistrate under the Churches Colors: I
find not any thing so Sacred in the Name of Presbyterian, as to protect a
Turbulent Party assuming that Appellation. It will be urged, that they do as
little Justify the Seditious, as I condemn the Sober Presbyterian. But to
agree that point, I Will prove, that the same Party, for whom they plead, and
against whom I engage, are no less Enemies to the King, and People, than to
Bishops: and, which is more, from their own practices and positions, I Will make
it good. Yet one would hardly guess this from their following Character.

As concerning their main and rooted principles, Page 20.
they admire and magnify the holy Scriptures, and take them for the absolute
perfect rule of Faith and Life, without the supplement of Ecclesiastical
Tradition; yet they deny not due respect and reverence to venerable Antiquity.
They assert the study and knowledge of the Scriptures, to be the duty and
privilege of all Christians, that according to their several capacities, being
skilful in the Word of Righteousness, they may discern between good and evil,
and being filled with all goodness, may be able to exhort and admonish one
another: Yet they acknowledge the necessity of a standing Gospel-Ministery, and
receive the directive authority of the Church, not with implicit Faith, but
the Judgment of discretion: They hold the teaching of the Spirit necessary, to
the saving knowledge of Christ: Yet they do not hold that the Spirit brings
new Revelations, but that he opens the eyes of the understanding to discern
what is of old revealed in the written Word: They exalt divine Ordinances, but
debase humane Inventions in Gods Worship, particularly Ceremonies properly
Religious, and of Instituted Mystical signification: Yet they allow the natural
expressions of Reverence and Devotion, as kneeling, and lifting up of the hands
and eyes in prayer; as also of those mere Circumstances of decency and order,
the omission whereof would make the service of God either undecent, or less
decent. As they worship God in the spirit, according to the simplicity of
Gospel Institutions, so they rejoice in Christ Jesus, having no confidence in a
legal Righteousness, but desire to be found in him, who is made unto us
Rigteousness by gracious Imputation: Yet withal they affirm constantly, that
good works of piety toward God, and of justice and charity toward men, are
necessary to salvation. Their Doctrine bears full conformity with that of the
Reformed Churches, held forth in their public Confessions, and particularly
with that of the Church of England, in the nine and thirty Articles, only one
or two passages peradventure excepted, so far as they may import the asserting
of Prelacy, and human Mystical Ceremonies. They insist much on the necessity of
Regeneration, and therein lay the groundwork for the practice of godliness.
They press upon themselves and others the severe exercise, not of a Popish,
outside, formal, but a spiritual and real mortification, and self-denial,
according to the power of Christianity. They are strict observers of the Lords
Day, and constant in Family prayer. They abstain from oaths, yea, petty
oaths, and the irreverent usage of Gods Name in common discourse; and, in a
word, they are sober, just, and circumspect in their whole behavior. Such is
the temper and constitution of this party, which in its full latitude lies in
the middle between those that affect a Ceremonial Worship, and the height of
Hierarchical Government on the one hand, and those that reject an ordained
Ministry, and settled Church Order, and regular Unity on the other hand.

In the main points of Doctrine they fully agree with the nine and thirty
Articles: and it is but peradventure, that they differ, in one or two passages,
so far as they may import the asserting of Prelacy, and humane Mystical
Ceremonies.]

Behold the mighty Subject of an Holy War; the goodly Idol, to which we have
sacrificed so much Christian blood. Can any man imagine this the true and
conscientious reason of the Quarrel? Or that the middle way our Presbyter
steers, betwixt Phanaticism and Popery, is the just measure of the Case: But
hear him on, and he will tell ye, the Party is Numerous as well as Godly.

Page 23.
Within these extensive limits the Presbyterian Party contains several
thousands of learned, godly, orthodox Ministers, being diligent and profitable
Preachers of the Word, and exemplary in their Conversation; among whom there
are not a few that excel in Polimical and Practical Divinity, also of the
judicious, sober, serious part of the people, (in whose affections his Majesty
is most concerned) they are not the lesser number. By means of a practical
Ministry, this way, like the Leaven in the Gospel-parable, has spread and
seasoned the more considerate and teachable sort in all parts of the Kingdom,
and especially in the more civilized places, as Cities and Towns.

Orthodox, and Learned Thousands upon the List* for that Party is a little
given to false Musters.

How many forged Petitions and Remonstrances; what Out-eries from the Press and
Pulpit, in the name of the People, when yet the forti'th part of them were
never privy to their own Askings! Of English and Scotch Presbytery, page 316.
ninety and seven Ministers within the walls of London, fourscore and five were
driven from their Churches, and Houses, at the beginning of our Troubles. And
notwithstanding the monstrous Clamours, which occasioned the Conference at
Hampton Court in 1603. Hist. of the Chapter of Scotl. p. 479.
Archbishop Spotswood tells us, that [ of above nine thousand Ministers, but
forty nine appeared upon the Roll, that stood out, and were deposed for
disconformity. Such a noise will a few Disturbers cause in any Society, where
they are tolerated.]

Touching his Practical Ministry; I Will grant, The Presbyterians practical
Ministry.
the Cause is much beholden to the Pulpit, and that, without the aid of
Seditious Lectures, I do believe the strife had never come to Blood: But yet
these Preachments did not the whole Business. Do not we know what Craft and
Violence has been used to Cheat and Force the People; what Protestations,
Covenants, and Negative Oaths have been imposed, upon pain of Imprisonment,
Banishment, Sequestration? Have not all Schools, and Nurceries of Piety and
Learning, been subjected to the Presbyterian mode, and many thousands of Godly,
and Reverend Divines, reduced to beg their Bread, because they would not
Covenant: yet all too little to procure either a General Kindess, or submission
to their Principles?

For the Reasons afore-going, the infringement of due Liberties in these
matters, Page 25.
would perpetuate most unhappy Controversies in the Church from Age to Age. Let
the former times come in, and give good Evidence. As touching Ceremonies, the
Contest began early, even in King Edward's Reign, between Hooper and other
Bishops. The Consecration of Hooper, Elect Bishop of Gloucester being stayed,
because he refused to wear certain Garments used by Popish Bishops, he obtained
Letters from the King and from the Earl of Warwick, to the Archbishop of
Canterbury and others, that he might not be burdened with certain Rites and
Ceremonies, and an Oath common^y used in the Consecration of Bishops, which
were offensive to his Conscience. Nevertheless he found but harsh dealing from
his fellow-Bishops, whereof some were afterward his fellow-Martyrs, and Ridley
among others, who afterward thus wrote unto him, when they were both Prisoners
for the Gospel. [However in time past in certain Circumstances and By-matters
of Religion, your wisdom, and my simplicity (I grant) has a little jarred,
each of us following the abundance of his own sense and judgment: Now be
assured, that even with my whole heart, in the Bowels of Christ, I love you in
the truth, and for the truth's sake which abides in us.] Some godly Martyrs in
Queen Mary's days disliked the Ceremonies, and none of them died in the defense
of Ceremonies, Liturgy, and Prelacy, in opposition to all other Ecclesiastical
Government and Order. It was the Protestant verity which they witnessed, and
sealed in blood, in opposition to Popery; especially the prodigious Opinion of
Transubstantiation, and the Abomination of the Romish Mass or Sacrifice. In the
same bloody days, certain English Protestants being fled for refuge into
Germany, and settled at Frankford, were divided amongst themselves about the
Service Book, even with scandalous breach of Charity and in the issue, the
Congregation was sadly broken and dissipated.

What is intended by Due Liberty, might be a Doubt, Observation. Presbyterian
Liberty.
did not the Coherence explain it to be a Freedom of Acting to all intents and
purposes at pleasure, (whether without Law, or against it, no matter) according
to such presidents of Former times, as our Resolver refers unto, and justifies.
He tells us, The contest about Ceremonies began early; and so in truth it did:
For in the time of King Edward, there was a wambling toward the Geneva
Discipline; but neither very earnest, nor very popular: and That (so far as I
can learn) procured even by the Author of that Platform, Calvin himself.
Concerning Godly Martyrs in Queen Mary's days; Some suffered that disliked the
Ceremonies, Others, that liked them. That none died in defense of them, is a
Remarque might have been spared; For the Question was matter of Faith, not
Discipline.

The Frankford Breach indeed was a sad Story, but yet, considering the
Dividers, of no great Honor, or Authority to our Friends purpose. Knox and
Whittingham were the prime Ringleaders in this Disorder, who upon some
Disputes started about the Service Book, joining with others of the
Consistorian stamp, drew such an extract of it, as they thought fit, and sent
it to Calvin, requesting his Opinion of it. Such was the Answer they received,
as blew the whole Congregation into a flame; from whence arose that scandalous
breach ensuing. viz. The English Service being established, Whitingham, Gilby,
Goodman, with some others, Divided, and went to Geneva, whence, both by Letters
and Discourses, they tampered the Ministers and People of England and Scotland
into a revolt, encouraging them to set up their new Discipline, in despite of
all Opposers whatsoever.

The Gospel returning under Queen Elizabeth, page 27.
these differences were revived and held up by Disputes, Writings, and
Addresses to several Parliaments; and there were great thoughts of heart for
these Divisions.

Elizabeth's Reign to understand these people, and unriddle the Due Liberty
they plead for. (But of This, in its proper place) Having drawn down the
Quarrel from Edward the Sixth, to the blessed Restoration of Charles the
Second, (whom God protect) he proceeds to descant upon the Present.

The greatest part of the Ministers named Puritans, page 28.
yielded conformity to those controverted Rites and Forms, that were by Law or
Canons established, as to things burdensome not desirable, in their nature
supposed indifferent, but in their use many ways offensive; and groaning more
and more under the yoke of bondage, (as they conceived) they waited for
deliverance, and were in the main, of one soul and spirit with the
Nonconformists. And even then the way called Puritanism, did not give, but get
ground. But now the Tenants of this way are rooted more than ever; and those
things formerly imposed, are no^ by many, if not by the most of this way,
accounted not only burdensome, but unlawful.

by Law established, in themselves Indifferent, and only Burdensome to day, (
rebu^sic stantibus) may become Unlawful to morrow? By the same Rule, The
consequents of Presbyterian Liberty.
Kings may be taken away as well as Bishops; all Dignities and Powers being
alike submitted to a Popular Level: For if the People shall think fit to say,
the Magistrate is unlawful, as well as the Ceremony, by the same reason he may
destroy One with the Other; and Virtually he does it. We know, the Rites and
Forms of Worshipping, are not of the Essence of Religion, and the huge bustle
about Discipline, is only an Appeal to Ignorance and Tumult. The Church must
be Reformed. By whom? Not by the Rabble. What means this application then of so
many factious Sermons, and Libels to the People? They are not Judges of the
Controversy. But in a Cause more capable of Force than Argument, they do well
to Negotiate, where Clamor, and Pretense, weigh more than Modesty and Reason.
If a man asks, by what Commission Act these Zelots? They answer readily: It Is
God's Cause, and better obey God than Man. He that said, Give not Credit to
every Spirit; I suppose knew as much of Gods mind, as our Illuminates. Is not
mistaken, or perverted Scripture, the ground of all Schism and Heresy?
Counsels may err, they say, and cannot Presbyterians? How comes this Party to
be more infallible than their Neighbors? If they are not, let but all other
people of Different Judgments take the same Freedom they do, of outcries
against any thing, under pretext of Conscience; let any man imagine the
confusion. For, where every man is his own Judge, All men shall dispute, till
each Particular condemns himself; so that the Strife is Endless, and the Event
Restlesness, and Confusion.

This comes of not submitting to some Final, and overruling Decision. Upon
this pinch at a dead lift, they fly to their Judgment of Discretion: which
leaves them still at Liberty to shape their Duty to their Profit. They tell us;
They Will be tried by the Word of God: not heeding, how That is again to be tried
by Them: so that in Issue, their private Interpretation of the Scriptures must
pass for the Law Paramount, to which both King and People are equally, and
indispensably subjected. Undoubtedly, what God commands, we ought to do, and
not to do what he forbids. This, in few words, comprises the Duty of Reasonable
Nature, without distinction either of Offices or Persons. But these inviolable
Fundamentals apart, the Accidents of Worship, the Modes of doing this or that;
The How, When, Where, etc. are left various, and variable, according to the
several Requiries of Manners, Times, and Places, at the Discretion of those
Rulers whom God sets over us. Where we find matters of this middle nature
orderly settled, and disposed, we are commanded to submit to these Humane
Ordinances for the Lords sake; and not to Obtrude upon the Word for Conscience,
such Disagreements, as effectually arise from Peevishness, or want of due
Enquiry. But why do I talk to those that stop their Ears?

Their minds are fixed in this Opinion, Page 29.
after a long time of search and practice, and are not like to be reduced to
the practice of former times.

This is but Martin Junior Revived, Observation.
who says, That it will be very dangerous to our State, to maintain two
contrary Factions; That the Magistrates are then bound, even for the quieting
of our State, to put down the one; That those that stand for the Discipline,
neither can nor will give it over, (so as they will not be put down) and that
the said Magistrates cannot maintain the corruption of our Church, namely,
Archbishops and Bishops, without the coffeehouse of their Subjects.

Methinks the man of peace grows peremptory. Will not this Argument from
Search and Practice, absolve them from Obedience to the King, as well as to the
Church? Has not the Regal Power been scanned and sifted, as well as the
Ecclesiastic? or have their practices been more favorable to his Majesty,
than to the Clergy? But ( their minds are fixed, and not to be reduced.) This
is to say, that if the Law and they cannot agree, they will tug for it, upon this
supposition, thus he concludes. That (in all reason, Page 29.
the imposing of such matters of Controversy, as by so many are held unlawful,
and by those that have a Zeal for them judged indifferent, not necessary,
cannot procure the peace of Church and Kingdom.)



From hence to his 40th. page, I find little but Rapture, in commendation of
the Presbyterians, with now and then a snap at the late Prelates, which is
beside my purpose. See now his Complement to the King.

Page 40.
Blessed be God for our gracious Sovereign, who makes it his care and study to
allay distempers, and compose differences by his just and gracious Concessions
already published concerning Ecclesiastical Affairs.

Just, as well as Gracious, to lessen the Favor, by intimating the Duty; what
Return gives the Presbyterian Party for this Indulgence? Are they not
troublesome as ever both in their Writings and Contrivements?

That Declaration was no sooner public, but a Petition was exhibited from
diverse Ministers in and about London, for more Liberty, with some formalities
indeed of Gratitude for That. How many bold and scandalous Invectives since
that time, both from the Press and Pulpit, against the Rites of the Church, and
the Episcopal Clergy: Nay, and against the Sacred Majesty of That very Person,
to whose Incomparable Clemency they owe their Heads and Fortunes? One
observation here, to show, that only severity can work upon this Faction; Note.
The single imprisonment of Crofton has quieted that Party more, than all the
multiplied, and transcendent Mercies of His Majesty.

That worthy Gentleman, in his Epistle Dedicatory to the Liturgical
Considerator, tells us, Crofton.
that [ The Common Prayer Book has been expelled by a lawful Authority,]
(referring to an Ordinance of January 3. 1644.) If this be not Treason, then
Scot and Peter's were no Traitors. The Considerator further assures us, Page 34.
[ That very few Christians that know the Power of Godliness, care for meddling
with the Liturgy.] I hope his Majesty may pass for one of those Few.

A great Assertor of his Principles is the Author of the Covenanters Plea,
although in some Respects more plausibly couched; in others Bolder; treating
His Majesty with a most unpardonable Insolence, and with a Suitable regard all
his Episcopal Friends as they fall in his way. I should exceedingly wonder how
he escaped a lash from the last Convention, especially Dedicating that reverend
piece to the Commons then Assembled, did I not consider, that Those very
Pamphlets, whereof His Majesty complains in His Declaration, touching
Ecclesiastical Affairs, were by my self, at their first coming forth,
delivered to several Members of that Session, which notwithstanding, they were
still sold in the Hall; all the Interest I had being too little to get them
suppressed. But now return we to our Author, who complains, that

Page 41.
The Presbyterians are loaded with many Calumnies; as, that they are against
the Interest of Civil Magistracy, especially of Monarchy; That they are giddy,
factious, schismatical, domineering, and what not?

Page 42.
But no such matter he assures us; for, They yield unto the Supreme Magistrate a
Supreme political Power in all Spiritual Matters; but they do not yield that he
is the Fountain of spiritual power, there being a spiritual Power belonging to
the Church, if there were no Christian Magistrate in the world. They assert
only a spiritual power over the Conscience, as intrinsecally belonging to the
Church; and acknowledge, that no Decree nor Canon of the Church, can be a
binding Law to the Subjects of any Kingdom under temporal penalties, till it be
ratified by the Legislative power of that Kingdom. And they do not claim for
the Convocation, or any other Ecclesiastical Convention, an Independency on
Parliaments; if they did, surely the Parliament of England would resent such a
Claim.

Neither are they Antimonarchical. Did the English or Scottish Presbyters ever
go about to dissolve Monarchy, and to erect some other kind of Government? In
no wise: for in the Solemn League and Covenant, they bound themselves to
endeavor the preservation of the King's Person and Authority, and declared
they had no intent to diminish his Majesty's just Power and Greatness.

Civil Magistracy or Monarchy, shall have a place by it self: yet I might very
well content my self with what arises from his own words, as they lie here
before us; to Prove what he Denies; for in the same Breath he both Starts the
Question and Resolves it. Did not the English and Scotch Presbyters go about to
dissolve Monarchy?

What is the Analysis of Monarchy, Presbytery Antimonarchical.
but a Government by a Single Person? (and, as I take it, the Injured Father of
our present Sovereign was That Person, to whom of Right the Regal Dignity
belonged.) Did not these Presbyters he talks of, place the Supreme Power in the
Two Houses, and under Their Commission, seize the King's Towns, and Forts; Levy
Arms; Tax the People; Plunder, and Kill their Fellow Subjects; Impose Oaths;
Share His Majesty's Revenues; Pursue, and Jewishly sell and betray His Sacred
Person?

If to do all this, not only Without, but expressly Against the King's
Commission, be not to go about to dissolve Monarchy, I know not what is. Or if
the Gentleman had rather dispute the Royal Prerogative, than confess his own
Mistake in this Particular, we will look a little that way too: but I doubt the
Prospect will be none of the pleasantest.

Upon the Trial of Cook and Peter's, This was Delivered for Law. See the
Narrative, Page 182 and 183.

The two Houses have no Coercive Power over the King.
It is the Law of this Nation, That no One House, nor Both Houses of
Parliament, have any Coercive power over the King: -- That the Imprisoning of
the King is Treason. And a little further, Thus, The King of England is one of
those Princes who has an Imperial Crown: What Is That? It is not to do what he
will; No, but it is, that he shall not be punished in his own Person, if he
does That which is in it self Unlawful.

This is a short and clear decision of the Case: nor will it serve the good
man's turn to argue their Integrity, from what they were bound to by their
Covenant and Declarations. It matters not what they Professed, but what they
Did. If this be all they have to say; some Heads are now upon the City-Gates
that said as much.

What was the Covenant, The Covenant an Oath of Confederacy.
but a Popular Sacrament of Religious Disobedience, a Mark of Discrimination,
who were against the King, and who were for him? And this the Marquis of
Montross soon found, who being at first unwarily engaged in it, with the
Kirk-party, quickly perceived his error, and retired; Living and dying the
Honor of his Nation, and of the Royal Cause. Mark this, Note.
His Loyalty was charged upon him at his Death, for Breach of Covenant.

The Presbyterian Casuists would fain persuade the Nation, to think themselves
obliged by that Engagement. Who Understands it first? (And certainly we cannot
be bound to do we know not what) Next, it is impossible either to Keep, or Break
it: it is made up of so many Contradictions. But once for All; there is a
Nullity in the Institution.

No man can oblige himself in things wherein he is subject, The Covenant
neither lawful nor binding.
without leave from his Superior. And again; The Oath of One who is under the
power of Another, without the others consent, is neither Lawful nor Obligatory.
Thus the Reverend, and Learned Bishop Sanderson. Now to my Presbyterian again.

After the violent change of Government, Page 44.
they came slowest, and entered latest into those new Engagements imposed by the
Usurped Powers, and some utterly refused, even to the forfeiture of their
preferments, and the hazard of their livelyhoods, when the Nation in general
submitted to the yoke; and many of those who thus object against them, did in
temporizing run with the foremost. The truth is, the generality of
Conscientious Presbyterians never ran with the current of those times. Some
more eminent among them, Ministers and others, hazzarded their lives, and
others lost their lives, in combining to bring our Sovereign that now is to the
rightful possession of this his Kingdom. And those in Scotland adventured no
more then all to uphold him; and when he lost the Day, they lost their Liberty;
and when he fell, it was said by the Adversary, Presbytery was fallen.

Where I must either leave the Story foul on the Kings side, Observation.
or prove it so on the Other, my choice is pardonable: but otherwise I shall be
very tender of engaging the Honest Presbyterians, Some honest Presbyterians.
with the Guilty. That many of them loved His Majesty, and suffered for him, I
will not question; and that they all submitted most unwillingly, to that
Violent Change here mentioned, I do as little doubt. But I must needs say, the
Action had been Nobler, and the Loyalty much Clearer, had they consulted the
Kings Security, before they lost their own.

This does not yet oblige me to the same Charity for the Scottish Party; who
first, during a Treaty with His Majesty, basely and brutishly murdered
Montrose, and after that, Treated the King himself, liker a Prisoner, than a
Prince.

He urges, Page 45.
that [ the Presbyterians first divided, and then dissipated the Sectarian
Party, and so made way for his Majesty's return in Peace.] Lambert, and his
Nine Worthies did as much. I do believe him too, Page 46.
[ that the sense of the Covenant quickened many men's Consciences in their
allegiance to the King.] So did the Cock-crowing mind St. Peter of the denial
of his Master. But he went out, and wept bitterly; So does not every body.
Alas, alas, the Saints have no faults; what should they weep for? It may be
peradventure said, the Presbyterians would enervate Monarchy; but surely (says
our Discourser)

I cannot find the rise of this Objection, Ibid.
unless from hence, that they were not willing to come under any yoke, but that
of the Law of the Realm, or to pay Arbitrary Taxes, levied without consent of
Parliament.

Yoke of Law. Suppose He breaks that Law, by what Law can we question him? At
best, it is but to punish One Transgression by Another. The Second Hint is
Dis-ingenuous: as if Arbitrary Taxes had been the subject of the Difference.
All the world knows, before a blow was struck, the King had stripped himself to
his Honor, and his Conscience, to gratify his People. But 'twas the
Government they aimed at, and that they fought for. Here is yet another gentle
slip: What are Taxes to Presbytery? But this is a Devil that will hardly be
kept within his Circle.

Just so in their Practices do they reduce all Civil Actions, under the
Cognizance of their Courts of Conscience, as he brings here by head and
shoulders, Arbitrary Taxes to Matter of Religion.

I confess (says he) there are none that more reverence their Liberties, page
46.
and value the native-happiness of the freeborn Subjects of England. And
verily their true knowledge and sense of the nature of Christian Religion,
makes a due freedom exceeding precious: For this Religion is not variable,
according to the will of man, but grounded upon an unchangeable and eternal
truth, and does indispensably bind every soul, high and low, to one divine Law
and Rule, perpetual and unalterable. And therefore does strongly plead the
expedience of a due civil Liberty on the behalf of its Professors; yet such a
liberty as will not enfeeble Monarchy, nor the Legal power of the Kings of
England.

Because Religion is not variable, but grounded upon an unchangeable and
eternal Truth, etc. -- Therefore the Professors of it must have a due civil
Liberty, etc. Is not a Due Liberty, Due to all people? Again, What is civil
Liberty to matter of salvation? And yet again. Why should the Presbyterians
challenge that liberty to themselves, which they refuse to others, upon the
very same Plea: and not rather submit their Discipline to the Law, then stoop
the Law to their Discipline? There is a Liberty which is a cloak for
Maliciousness: and I am afraid, Theirs and That are much a-kinn. One thing is
very notable; they never state what they would have, their terms are general,
and indefinite, hard to be understood, because they are resolved not to be
satisfied. A Due Freedom, a Due Civil Liberty, The Legal Power; -- What means
all this, but any thing they shall be pleased to make of it?

A King ruling a free People, Page 47.
has a Power much more noble and more free, than he that rules over perfect
Vassals, that have no Propriety. The power is more noble, because it has a
more noble subject of Government; it is more honorable to rule Men than Beasts,
and Freemen than slaves. Likewise the power is more free: For whatsoever Prince
has not his power limited by his people's legal freedom, he will be bound up
some other way, either by the potency of subordinate Princes and great Lords
within the Realm, or by a veterane Army, as the Turkish Emperor by his
Janissaries, and the Roman Caesar's by the Pretorian Bands and the Legions. Upon
which account, to be a powerful Monarch over a free people, is the freedom and
glory of our Sovereign Lord, above all the Potentates on earth.

A King ruling a free people, is a kind of Presbyterianism, and sounds better
in the mouth of a Lawyer, than of a Divine. The Correlate to Rule, is
Subjection: nor will their Title to a Propriety, yet justify the common usage
of the Term. It Is of a dangerous Intimation, and seems to give the people more
than comes to their share. (I speak with reverence to the benignity of our
English Laws, and the Indubitable right which every Subject has to the
Benefits thereof.)

That it is more honorable to Rule Freemen than Slaves, is but a Complement
For I can make those Slaves, Free, when I please, whereas the other way of my
power's confined; that is, in Equity, a Prince is bound to observe the Law, as
his own Act: and if he fails, the people may compel him to it, if they can show
a Law for it. To end this point; What Prince soever shall suffer every bubling
brain to controvert the bounds of King and Subject; the Royal Authority, and
the Peoples Freedom; that Prince, I say, runs a great hazard of his
Sovereignty. The very moving of the Question, is to profane the Sacredness of
Majesty; and by degrees begets irreverend and saucy habits in the people.

But Rebellion (he tells us) and Disobedience, is the loud outcry of some
against this Party. Page 48.
And this were a crying sin indeed. But let not sober minds be hurried into
prejudice by such exclamations and outcries. It were to be wished, for common
peace and amity, that the late public Discords were eternally forgotten. But
seeing some in these times of expected Reconciliation, will not cease to
implead and condemn the honest minded, and render them odious to the higher
Powers, a necessity is laid upon us to speak something Apologetical, at least
to mitigate the business, and remove prejudice.

this loud outcry of Rebellion aad Disobedience, comes from within himself;
for truly I have a little watched the Press, and since his Majesty's Return,
(nay, a good while before) upon my conscience I have not met with one syllable
of bitterness against that Party, but Defensive: Yet I dare undertake to
produce forty Presbyterian Pamplets, and Discourses, of fresh date, exceeding
foul against the King, and his Adherents. It really makes me blush and tremble,
to consider how great a mercy they abuse, how sad a vengeance they provoke.
Presbyterians seditious and impenitent.
Had but these people the least spark of natural affection and remorse, the
venerable ruins of a glorious Chuch and State would work upon them; Or now and
then a thought how matters stand betwixt God and their Souls: But their great
care of others make them neglect themselves, and become true Anathemaes for a
pretended public good. However they do well to cry Whore first; and call that
a Necessitated Apology, which seems to me a palpable and causeless Slander.

We have heard much and often of the Presbyterians Loyalty and Religion; we will
look a little now into their Law, which very fairly gives us to understand,
that the Vnbishopping of Timothy and Titus, will not do their trick. They are
at work already upon the two main props of Royalty; the King's Negative Voice,
and the Power of the Sword. A blessed Age the while, when the Pulpit shall
pretend to dispose of the Crown; Kerve out the Government; and every scribbling
Priest vent his seditious and crude Politiques to the People. But now it works.

page 49.
The Presbyterian Party in England never engaged under a less Authority than
that of both Houses of Parliament. I have read, that the Parliament of England
has several capacities, and among the rest, these two; First, that it
represents the People as Subjects, and so it can do nothing but manifest their
grievances, and petition for relief. Secondly, That by the constitution it has
part in the Sovereignty, and so it has part in the Legislative power, and in
the final Judgment. Now when as a part of the Legislative Power resides in the
Two Houses, as also a Power to redress grievances, and to call into question
all Ministers of State and Justice, and all Subjects of whatsoever degree in
case of Delinquency, it might be thought, that a part of the Supreme Power does
reside in them, though they have not the honorary Title.

Two Houses, the Parliament of England, The Two Houses, not the Parliament.
having already paid so dear for that mistake. Concerning the Power of the
Parliament of England. It Is beyond doubt, only inferior to the Fountain of
all Power, even God Himself. But then an Agreement is implied; neither King,
Lords, nor Commons, nor any Two of them, can pretend to a Parliamentary
Authority, without the Third. This is not to suppose Co-ordination neither. The
Two Houses are still Subjects: Their Office being only Consultive, or
Preparatory* The Character of Power rests in the final Sanction, and that is the
King's: So that effectually, the passing of a Bill, is but the granting of a
Request.

So much for Parliaments, in propriety of speaking. Now to the Power of the Two
Houses, by my Antagonist mis-call'd, The Parliament of England, upon which
Bottom stands the Presbyterian Fabric.

He tell us, They Act in Two Capacities. As Subjects, or Petitioners, first:
and Then, as Sharers of the Sovereignty: As if he said, They are sent to Ask
what they List, and Take what they Please. The Petitioning Capacity is not for
the Presbyterians purpose; wherefore he waves That, and sticks to the Other.
What their Power is, will best appear from the King's Writ of Summons, which
both Commands and Limits them, Pro QUIBUSDAM arduis, and urgentibus negotiis,
etc. -- ORDINAVIMUS, etc. -- He states it otherwise, and places a part of the
Legislative Power in the Two Houses, which is not Doctor-like. For the
Legislative Power is totally the King's. The Legislative power in the King.
They do but make the Bill, He makes the Law; It Is the Stamp, not the Matter,
makes it current. Nor do I comprehend what he can mean by Part of the
Legislative Power: to my thinking, he might as well have said, Part of an
Indivisible Point. This will come to a pretty Fraction, Two Thirds of a
Parliament, shall make Two Thirds of a Law. Is it not enough that the King can
do nothing without the Two Houses, unless they may do every thing without the
King? Grant this, and of all people living we are the greatest Slaves, as of
all Constitutions ours is the most Ridiculous.

Touching the power of the two Houses, to Redress Grievances, and Question all
Ministers of State and Justice,] The Power they have is either from
Prescription or Commission. To the Former, I think, Few will pretend; and to
the Latter, None.

Never was the House of Commons, at any hand reputed a Court of Justice. The
Two Houses no Court of Judicature.
They cannot give an Oath, impose a Fine: not indeed exercise any Empire but
over their own Members. It Is true, the Lords House has in some Cases a Right
of Judicature; but Claiming by Prescription, they are likewise Limited by
Custom. Further, Both Houses are no Court of Judicature, and (with due
Reverence to his Majesty) the King himself in Parliament, joined with the Three
Estates, claim not a right of Judication, but very rarely, and with great
Tenderness. It is the proper business of a Parliament to Make Laws, Alter, or
Repeal them, not to Interpret them, unless in matters of very great Importance.
That Is left to the Judges; and to determine of their Validity. For Acts of
Parliament, either Repugnant in themselves, or of impossible Supposition, or
against Common Right, are deemed not Binding.

The Common, and most specious shift of all the rest, is, that the Government
of this Nation is in King, Lords, and Commons. This must be swallowed with
great wariness, or 'twill choke half the Nation. By the KING, Architectonice;
and by the other TWO, Organice, (as Walker distinguishes it) the King, as the
Architect; and the Two Houses, as his Instruments. If there were neither
Practice, Law, nor Interest in the Case, methinks the very odds of Honor in
the Deputation, should be Enough to carry it. The King is God's Representative,
They are but the Peoples.

Say I should now admit them all they challenge, (as Delegated by the People)
so tickle is the point yet, that if any one single Person of the number, should
be illegally debarred the Freedom of his Vote; that nicety avoids, and nulls
the whole Proceeding. I can hardly think any thing clearer, than the error of
placing part of the Supreme Power in the two Houses. It implies a
Contradiction: A part of a Thing (with leave) Impartible. (But Drowning men
will catch at Straws) However, I perceive, that his Majesty's best Friends, and
the Church's (as they style themselves) are resolved to serve both King and
Bishops alike. Presbyters serve King and Bishops alike.
That is; just as the Bishop is to rule in Consociation with his Presbyters, so
shall his Majesty with his Fellow-Princes, the Presbyterian Members. It cannot
but exceedingly dispose the King, to grant these people all DUE LIBERTY, that
will give him so much. Crowns are but Troublesome; and Government sits heavy
upon the shoulders of a Single Person; They Will ease him of that Care and Weight:
and for the honor of their Prince, and their Country's good, divide the
Glorious load among themselves.

Exact Col. 316.
This being past, (which heaven avert) We may (says the late King) be waited on
bareheaded, we may have our Hand kissed, the style of Majesty continued to us,
and the King's Authority, declared by both Houses of Parliament, may be still
the style of your Commands; we may have Swords and Maces carried before us, and
please our Self with Sight of a Crown and Scepter.] -- But soft, the Man
relents, and tells us, (though the Law says, the King can do no wrong) [ That
This part of the Supreme power, page 49.
is indeed capable of doing wrong, yet how it might be Guilty of Rebellion, is
more difficult to conceive.]

could start twenty Suppo^itions more; but I Will stop here, and the rather,
because our Author professes, that [ in this high and tender point, it belongs
not to him to Determine.] Yet he goes on, and certainly believes, that the
world is divided into Fools and Presbyterians: he would not otherwise have
thrust upon us so gross a Juggle, as that which I am now about to examine.

Touching the much debated point of resisting the higher Powers, page 50.
without passing any judgment in the great Case of England, I shall only make
rehearsal of the words of Grotius, a man of Renown, and known to be neither
Anti-monarchical, nor Anti-prelatical, which are found in his Book, De jure
Belli and Pacis, by himself dedicated to the French King. (Si Rex partem habeat
summi Imperii, partem alteram populus aut Senatus, Regi in partem non suam
involanti, vis justa opponi poterit, quia eatenus Imperium non habet. Quod
locum habere censeo, etiamfi dictum sit, belli potestatem penes Regem fore. Id
enim de bello externo intelligendum est, cum alioqui quisquis Imperii summi
partem habeat, non possit non jus habere eam partem tuendi.) lib. 1. c. 4. s.
13.

Grotius cited, to justify, that the Lords and Commons may make war against
the King, Presbyterian Loyalty.
to defend their Title to the Supreme Power. ( Pythagoras his opinion
concerning Wild-foul, had been as much to the purpose) For the English Reader's
sake I Will turn it; and in this point desire a more than ordinary attention.

Where the Supremacy is in the King, in some Cases; in Others, in the People,
or Senate. That King invading the others Right, may be lawfully resisted; for
his power reaches not so far. And this I think will stand good, although I have
already placed the right of making War, in the King; for that must be
understood of a foreign War: Since whosoever has a part of the Supreme Power,
has consequently a right of maintaining such part as he has.] There is one
line yet remaining, which our Author has very prudently kept for a Reserve,
till the Presbyterians shall have gotten the better of the King. Quod ubi fit,
potest Rex etiam suam Imperii partem belli jure amittere; That is, Where thus
it happens, the King's encroachment upon the Peoples Right, may fairly amount
to a forfeiture of his own.

Is it not pity that people of these mild, and complying Principles, should be
charged with Disobedience? If this be the case of England, the Question is no
longer, the Presbyterians Liberty, but the King's Title to his Crown.

That Chapter of Grotius, whence he takes his Quotation, treats De Bello
subitorum, in Superiores; Where, and where not, Subjects may take up Arms
against their Superiors. This learned man, among other Cases, tells us, in this
they may, and the Reason is evident;: For where the Sovereignty is thus
disposed; half to the King, half to the People, that Prince is but a Subject to
some purposes, a King to others. So that in any point of Sovereignty, formally
vested in the People; He is not their Superior, but they his. How finely he
has matched the Case of England, where Kings have no Restraint, but what they
put upon themselves, for the Laws are their proper Acts! But mark the process
of his Reasonings: and how (in his own phrase) he feels his way step by step.
The Presbyterians were ever in the right; he says. Why, if he would be quiet,
who says the contrary? But then the King was in the wrong.

To bring the Case up to Grotius his determination: we must admit First, that
by the constitution of England, the Sovereignty is shared betwixt the King and
the two Houses: and Next, that the late King did actually invade the Popular
Prerogative: from whence arises the lawfulness of resistance; and after that,
Potest Rex etiam suam Imperii partem Belli jure amittere. They have at last the
same right to the Crown, they had at first to the Quarrel. He that peruses the
first eight Sections of the forementioned Chapter, will find Grotius no
favourer of his Opinions that quotes him. Be the Prince what he will, he tells
us, Bodin. de Rep. lib. 2. cap. 5. De Rep. lib. 1. cap. 8. lib. 3. cap. 1. Ibid.
Summum Imperium tenentibus resisti jure non posse. Bodin yet more expressly,
that England and Scotland are absolute Monarchies: That the Supreme Power is
only in the King; (Iura Majestatis, ac Imper^i summam, in unius Prinoipis
Arbitria versari. Further, In Senatu nullum est Imperium; Nor only so, but
whoever urges the contrary, meditates a Commotion, Isti qui Imperium Senatui
tribuunt, Reipublicae interitum, ac status eversionem moliuntur.

As to the point of Loyalty now in question, the subversion of the Fundamental
Government of this Kingdom could not be effected, Page 51.
till those Members of Parliament that were Presbyterian, were many of them
imprisoned, others forcibly secluded by the violence of the Army, and the rest
thereupon withdrew from the House of Commons.

To seize his Towns and Magazines; Hunt, and Assault his Royal Person; Part his
Revenues; Hang up his Friends: All this is Justified, in Case his Majesty
refuses to be ruled by his Two Houses. Alas, the Fundamental Government was
safe, (I warrant ye) so long as the Rights of Sovereignty were exercised, first
by the Assembly in Scotland, and then by a packed Party, in a close Committee:
And the Presbyterians never the less honest men for selling the King first;
Then voting him a Prisoner; and after that, for Pinching him even upon the very
Point of Presbytery. Surely they are much to blame that charge these Innocents
with disloyalty.

If the Presbyterian Members had not been Forced, (they say) all had been well.
Truly it may be so; yet if I mistake not, there was a time when the Episcopal
Members were Forced too; and had that Violence been spared, it had never come
to This. But I suppose, the City-Tumults against BISHOPS: the Outcries of the
Rabble at White Hall: the Multitudes that Baul'd for Reformation: Posting up
such and such for Straffordians, as honestly opposed the Torrent of the People.
This in the VVell-affected, passes for Christian Liberty.

But our Author follows his Opinion with a Proof.

For they (says he, Page 51.
meaning the Presbyterians) had voted the King's Concessions a Ground
sufficient for the Houses to proceed to settle the Nation, and were willing to
cast, whatever they Contended for, upon a Legal Security.

Non-Addresses, and that foul Declaration of their Reasons for it: We will in
Charity believe, they were over-awed, and that it was extorted by the Army. But
what excuse for the Matter of the Propositions? That they were actuated by a
Presbyterian Spirit, appears in This, that they demanded a Settlement of a
Presbyterian Government. It remains now only from Hence, to gather the Fair
Equivalence, of this Gentleman's Doctrine, and to discover what it is the
Presbyterian Faction calls a Legal Security.

Presbyterian Positions.
They hold, That if the King of England will not comply with the Two Houses, the
People may Chase, Sequester, and Imprison Him: And when they have him in
Distress, they may without Disloyalty press Him to these, or the like
Conditions for His Liberty.

1. By a Public Act to justify that Violence, and condemn himself. 2 ly. To
Renounce and Abolish Episcopacy, although bound by Oath and Judgment to defend
it. 3 ly. To Transfer the Right of Levying Men and Moneys, to the Two Houses;
by them to be raised and disposed of at pleasure, without rendering any Account
to his Majesty. 4 ly. To deliver up the Lives, Liberties, and Fortunes of all
that served him, to the Mercy of that Party. 5 ly. To grant, that all Offices
of Trust may be disposed of by the Appointment of Both Houses.
This is a short, and modest Account of Presbyterian Loyalty, the Due Liberty
they contend for: which being settled upon a Legal Security, with such further
Concessions, as their Modesty shall vouchsafe to require, puts an end to the
Dispute. His late Majesty observes (upon Uxbridge- Treaty) That it was a grand
Maxim with them, always to ask something, which in Reason and Honor must be
denied, that they might have some color to refuse all that was in other things
granted.] And so we find it. But what is the Reason of this peevishness?

Is there any thing in the Nature of Prelacy that frames the mind to Obedience
and Loyalty? Page 52.
Or is there any thing in Presbytery, that inclines to Rebellion and
Disobedience?

Prelacy a more orderly Constitution than Presbytery.
Nature and Providence do not move by Leaps, but by Insensible and Soft
Degrees, which give Stability and Beauty to the Universe. Is not the World
composed of Disagreements, Hot and Cold, Heavy and Light? -- And yet we see
those Oppositions are by the means of middle, and Conciliating mixtures wrought
into a Compliance? It Is the same case in Subject and Superior: Higher and
Lower, betwixt Top and Bottom, are but as several Links of one providential
Chain, where every Individual, by virtue of this mutual Dependency, Contributes
to the Peace and Benefit of the Whole. Some are below me; and This sweetens the
Thought that I am below Others: By which Libration are prevented those
Distempers which arise either from the Affectation of more Power, or the Shame
of having none at all.

As these Degrees of Mean and Noble, are beyond doubt of Absolute Necessity to
Political Concord; so possibly the Closer the Remove, the better yet, as to the
point of Social expedience; provided, that the Distances be such as to avoid
Confusion, and preserve Distinct Offices, and Powers from enterfering. Nor is
this Gradual method only suited to Humane Interest, as being most accommodate
to public Quiet, and to defend the Sacredness of Majesty from popular
Distempers: But it is the very Rule which God himself Imposes upon the whole
Creation: Romans 9.21.
Making of the same Lump, one Vessel to Honor, and another to Dishonor.
Subjecting by the Law of his own Will, This to That: That to what is next above
it: Both to a Further Power, all to Himself. And here we rest: as at the
Fountain of Authority. From God, Kings Reign; They appoint their Substitutes,
and so on to inferior Delegations; All Powers derive from a Divine Original.

This Orderly Gradation, which we find in Prelacy, must needs beget a Reverence
to Authority; the Hierarchy it self depending upon a Principle of Obedience;
whereas our Utopian Presbytery advances it self upon a Level of Confusion. It
is a kind of Negative Faction, united to dissolve a laudable and settled frame
of Government, that they may afterward set up they know not what. We may have
learned thus much from late and sad experience. Let him that would know more of
it, read the Survey of pretended Holy Discipline.

I think it would be hard to show one eminent Presbyterian, that stickles not
for an Aristocracy in the State, as well as in the Church: and he that said, No
Bishop, No King, gave a shrewd judgment; not as implying a Princes absolute
dependence upon Bishops, but in effect the King's Authority is wounded through
the Church; the Reformation of what is amiss, belonging to the Ruler, not to
the People. I do not yet condemn all Presbyters, nor justify all Prelates.

We are told, That in ancient times, Page 53.
and for a series of many Ages, the Kings of England have had tedious conflicts
with Prelates, in their Dominions.] It Is Right, and the same cause is now
espoused by our more than ordinary Papal Presbyterians; to wit, Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction over the Civil Power. But we are further Questioned.

If Presbytery and Rebellion be connatural, how comes it to pass, Page 53.
that those States or Kingdoms where it has been established or tolerated,
have for any time been free from broils and commotions.

that Presbyterians have never disclaimed or abandoned their lawful Prince:
Ibid.
that they have never ceased to solicit, and supplicate his Regards and
Favors, even when their power has been at the highest, and his sunk lowest.

This is something which in good manners wants a name. Observation.
How far the Presbyterians have Abandoned their Prince, I shall not press, but
rather refer the Reader to examine how far, and in what manner they have
Solicited him. (Cujus contrarium.)

His late Majesty, after forty messages for Peace, and a Personal Treaty,
finding himself most barbarously laid aside; in a Declaration from Carisbrook
Castle, Dated Janu. 18. 1647. Expostulates the matter in these Terms.

Rellquiae sacrae Corolinae. Page 158.
Now would I know, what it is that is desired: Is it Peace? I have showed the
way (being both willing and desirous to perform my part in it) which is, a just
Compliance with all chief Interests. Is it Plenty and Happiness? They are the
inseparable effects of Peace. Is it Security? I, who wish that all men would
forgive and forget like Me, have offered the Militia for My time. Is it Liberty
of Conscience? He who wants it, is most ready to give it. Is it the right
Administration of Justice? Officers of trust are committed to the Choice of My
two Houses of Parliament. Is it frequent Parliaments? I have legally, fully
concurred therewith. Is it the Arriers of the Army? Upon settlement, they will
certainly be paid, with much ease; but before, there will be found much
difficulty, if not impossibility in it.

Thus all the world cannot but see My real, and unwearied endeavors for Peace,
the which (by the grace of God) I shall neither repent me of, nor ever be
slackned in: Notwithstanding My past, present, or future sufferings. But, If I
may not be heard, let every one judge, who it is that obstructs, the Good I
would do, or might do.

Where the right lies, a Presbyterian may better Determine, than a Royallist
Question.

-- Magno se judice quisque tuetur. Here Is the Testimony of a Pedant, in
Balance against the Authority of a Prince.

He tells us by and by, that Profaneness, Intemperance, Revellings, Outrages,
Page 55.
and filthy lewdness were not at any time in the memory of the present age,
held under more. Restraint, than in the late distracted times, by means of a
Practical Ministry.

Scot and Peter's, at least a score, even out of the select Tribe of the
Reformers, (and these I think are not as yet Canonized for Saints.)

It Is no profaneness (is it?) to play the Hocus Pocus in a Pulpit, with Rings
and Bodkins; to talk Treason by Inspiration; and entitle the holy Ghost to
Murder and Rebellion. To appoint Mock-Fasts, and thank God for Victories he
never gave them. To swear for, and against the King, in the same breath. To
convert Churches into Stables, and for fear of Superstition to commit
Sacrilege.

Nor is it Outrage sure, or Intemperance to seize the Patrimony of the Church,
the King's Revenues; pillage and kill their Fellow Subjects. To set up
Ordinances against settled Laws, and subject the Ten Commandments to the
superior Vote of a Committee. To justify Tumults against Authority, and suffer
the most damnable Heresies to escape without reproof. But what if there were
Disorders; by whom were they caused?

It is most unreasonable to object, that the late wild postures, Page 59.
extravagancies, and incongruities in Government, were the works of Presbytery,
or Presbyterians. The Nation had never proof of Presbytery, for it was never
settled, but rather decry'd, and exposed to prejudice by those that were in
sway, and that in the more early times of the late Wars.

Presbytery was never settled, nor ever likely to be, so much did the whole
Nation stomach it; But yet how this agrees with his former Reasoning, page 29.
I do not understand. There he pretends, that by Note.
long practice men's minds are fixed in this opinion: and that the Party is
numerous. Here he contents himself to acknowledge, that the Presbyterians lost
their power early, and that they never recovered it since. This will not serve
his turn, to acquit the Faction (so denominated) of our late Miseries. Our
Sovereign (of blessed memory) brings the contest down, to his surprisal at
Holmby, and the Distractions in the two Houses, the Army, and the City, ensuing
upon it. These (says that excellent Prince) are but the struglings of those
Twins, which lately one Womb enclosed, the Younger striving to prevail against
the Elder. Note.
What the Presbyterians have hunted after, the Independents now seek to catch
for themselves.] In fine; One finished what the other began; for the King died
at last, but of those wounds which he at first received in his Authority.

His Majesty, upon his leaving Oxford, and going to the Scots, clears this yet
further: where he calls it, Adventuring upon their Loyalty, who first began his
troubles.

The truth of this matter (says he) is cleared Page 58.
by a passage of our late Sovereign, in a Let-to his Majesty that now is. [All
the lesser Factions were at first officious Servants to Presbytery their great
Master, till time and Military success discovering to each other their
particular advantages, invited them to part stakes, and leaving the joint stock
of uniform Religion, pretended each to drive for their party the trade of
profits and preferments, to the breaking and undoing not only of the Church
and State, but of Presbytery it self. -- (It follows) which seemed and hoped at
first to have engrossed all. Note.


Deacons, Elders, and their Parishmeetings; Those are but popular amusements:
We'll pass to what is more pertinent, and see how he acquits his friends of
joining with the Independents.

Page 60.
The truth is, Sectarianism grew up in a Mystery of Iniquity and State Policy,
and it was not well discerned, till it became almost triumphant by Military
successes.

what all others took notice of; and what the late King offered to prove, Exact
Collections.
[ In his Declaration of August the 12th 1642.] The Insolence of Sectaries
being not only winked at, but publicly avowed; Page 531.
and the Law thwarted to protect them. See what one says (no stranger to their
practices) to prove, and evidence the Combination.

The Leading-men, or Grandees, History of Independency.
first divided themselves into two Factions or Juncto's, Presbyterians and
Independents: seeming to look only at the Church, page 1.
but they involved the Interests of the Commonwealth. -- These having
seemingly divided themselves, page 2.
and having really divided the Houses, and captivated their respective Parties
judgments. -- Teaching them by an implicit Faith, Jurare in verba Magistri, to
pin their opinions upon their sleeves: They begin to advance their projects of
monopolizing the profits, preferments, and power of the Kingdom in themselves.
To which purpose, though the Leaders of each party seem to maintain a hot
opposition, yet when any profit or preferment is to be reached at, it is
observed, that a powerful Independent especially, moves for a leading
Presbyterian, or a leading Presbyterian for an Independent: And seldom does one
oppose or speak against another, in such Cases, unless somewhat of particular
Spleen or Competition come between: which causes them to break the
Common-rule. By this means, the Grandees of each Faction, seldom miss their
mark, since an Independent moving for a Presbyterian, his Reputation carries
the business clear with the Independent party: and the Presbyterians will not
oppose a Leading man of their own side.

I find we are not like to Agree, for these people cannot see their own Faults,
nor we their Virtues. I would take a good Journey to meet any man stiff in that
way, that would but Confess he was ever in any error.

Of all the prejudices and scandals taken against this way, Page 63.
there is none greater than this, that it is represented as tyrannical and
domineering, and that those who live under it, must (like Issachar) crouch
under the burdens.

Observation.
We do indeed account the Presbyterian Discipline very Tyrannical, and by and by
we will give our reasons for it. Not because this Discipline censures Scandalous
Disorders] (as he insinuates) but for that it subjects all Civil matters to a
Consistorian cognizance, and rapt by an Impulse of Passion, calls many things
Scandalous, which measured by the rule of Piety and Reason, are found
Praiseworthy, and of laudable Example. The usage of the Common Prayer book is
to Them, Scandalous, though settled by the Law: but to eject a Minister for
reading it, though both without Law, and against it, That, They esteem no
scandal; We, the contrary.

I Have now brought the Gentleman to his first Stage, where I might very fairly
leave him, for having already done my business; what I do more, is but for
Company. So far as I can judge, I have not escaped one syllable material to his
purpose: nor have I either broken his Periods, or unlink'd his Reasonings, to
puzzle, or avoid his meaning. How fairly I have dealt with what I have exposed:
whether in matter of Fact, Deduction, or good Manners, (the Subject of the
Difference duly weighed) That I submit to the Reader, and where the reason
lies betwixt us.

I have indeed omitted a great part of the Debate, as not at all related to my
Design, nor (to speak freely) much to the point in Question. His frequent and
Rhetorical Raptures, extolling to the Heavens, the Wisdom and Sanctity of the
Presbyterians; (but above all, the Legions of the Saints) what does this florid
vanity ^ignifie more than the putting of his own Name to a fair Picture, when
yet, for ought he proves, and for ought we discern, there is not one line
betwixt them of Agreement.

The contrary course he takes with the Prelatick party. They (forsooth) are Not
so and so: and from his Generals, There he is pleased to enter into prohibited
particulars, taxing in special manner the excesses of some of our late
Prelates: but without any instances of good in the Other Party, which does but
spitefully and weakly imply, that Bishops have more Faults, than Presbyterians
have Virtues. It will not be now expected, that we that differ in the Premises,
should agree in the Conclusion. But for that we'll take our Fortunes.

Page 65.
Vpen the whole matter aforegoing, we firmly build this Position:

That the Presbyterian Party ought not in Justice or Reason of State, to be
rejected and depressed, but ought to be protected and encouraged.

(This is but one Doctor's opinion; we think otherwise.) Nevertheless (says he)
there being a seeming complication in this business, Page 66.
and an other ample Party appearing in competition, a difficulty remains, and
the matter falls into a further deliberation. And thereupon we are fallen upon
the second Main Enquiry.

II. Quest. Whether the Presbyterian Party may be protected and encouraged, and
the Episcopal not deserted nor disobliged.

Bishops Party may yet be admitted into the Competition, and that the man of
the short Robe will vouchsafe to enquire into the Consistence of Episcopacy and
Presbytery: yet it was boldly ventured to Determine what Ought to be done
before he had examined, whether the Thing was Fesible or no.

I shall not spend my Time to Controvert Idea's, and wrangle about Governments
in the Air: we are for Plain and Practicable Contrivements, such as Authority,
Good Order, and Long Experience have recommended to us.

I suppose the agreeing of Both Parties in such Middle terms as he proposes, a
thing not utterly Impossible. Many things may be fair enough in Notion, yet of
exceeding hazard to be put in Practice; especially it is dangerous to try
Tricks with Politic Constitutions. Great alterations are scarce safe, even
where they are Lawful, and wrought with good Intention: Much less are those so,
which are promoted by a Disorderly, and Popular Earnestness, and with seditious
meaning. For this I dare lay down as a Position: Never did any Private Party
band against a Public Settlement, with an intent to mend it.

But what have we to do with the Imaginary Coalition of the two Church-Parties;
when the Kirk-Discipline affronts the Civil Sanction, and Actually invades the
Kings Authority? Let them first bring their Principles to their Duties,
Treating like Subjects, and Submitting as Christians. Can any man believe those
People Friends to the Church, that are Enemies to the State* or that the God of
Order can be pleased with the Promoters of Confusion?

Were there no other reason to deny the thing they ask, than their bare manner
of Asking; it ought not to be Granted. What signifies their talk of Number,
Power, Resolution, but a false Muster of the Faction, to make a party with the
Rabble? when yet, God knows, they are Inconsiderable: let every man but
overlook his Neighbor, and Count, he will find the Disproportion. Undoubtedly
the most Insufferable of all their Arguments is that of Danger; there is but one
step between that Word and Violence. First, it implies a Seditious
Complication. They move for such as they believe will Tumult: if not, where
lies the Hazard? Besides, those Subjects that dare tell their Prince, it is
dangerous to deny their Askings, do by that insolence render his Concessions
much more hazzardous. Persons of that audacious temper, will hardly make a
sober use of an extorted Bounty.

So far as Presbyterian, and Episcopal, purely refer to the Church, I shall not
much concern my self in Our Resolvers Second main Enquiry: (Equal to all the
World is the Incomparable Hooker, upon that Subject) but where these terms are
in a greater Latitude, applied to Civil matters, I shall be bold to pass some
further Observations.

Page 70.
The Dissenting side oppose not all Liturgy, but desire that the present onm
may be Changd, or reformed.

Majesty, the Law, and Forty for One of the Nation, should desire the
Continuance of it as it is: what Equity have the Dissenters to the Change; or
what would be the Benefit if Granted? Not the Tenth part even of the
Presbyterians, would be contented with it. Some of them are against all
set-Forms of Common Prayer whatever; Others (more moderate forsooth) do not
oppose a prescript Form, so it be not enjoined. A third sort, will vouchsafe to
permit the English Liturgy, provided they may have the purgeing of it
themselves. And when all is done, the Sectaries may claim as much right to
abolish That, as they to alter This. And now for Ceremonies.

They oppose not any Circumstance of Decency and Order, but desire, Page 70.
that mystical Ceremonies of humane Institution, may be abolished or not
enjoined.

First, the Dissenters are not the Judges of Decency and Order; Observation.
and for Mystical Ceremonies of humane Institution; (as Scaliger says of the
Sepia) Caliginem effundit, and evadit; He troubles the Water, and escapes in
the Dark.

Multiformity in Religion (says our Reconciler, Page 73.
pleading for Accommodation) publicly professed, does not well comport with
the spirit of this Nation, which is free, eager, jealous, apt to animosities
and jealousies, besides that it has ever had a strong propension to Uniformity.

Free, Eager, Jealous, and yet propense to Vniforformity. This seems to me a
mixture incompossible. But the good man means well, and writes so, when he
lists. His drift is, to persuade us, that to comply with the Presbytery, is to
comport with the spirit of this Nation: which being Free and Eager, seems to
Cry, Beware. How blessedly would these Free-spirited Worthies order their
Subjects, if they were once in power, that thus presume from their own Level,
to Menace and Control Authority.

If Toleration might compose the Difference, there were some hope; but That,
alas, is more than they can afford the Government, and much less will they
accept it for themselves. The temper of this Kingdom (says he) does not well
accord with extremes on either hand; Page 47.
] and to see the fortune of it, the Presbyterians are just in the Middle.

Toleration being not the Daughter of Amity, Ibid.
but of Enmity, (at least) in some degree supposes the party tolerated to be a
burden, especially if conceived dangerous to the way established, and commonly
holds no longer than mere necessity compels; and consequently neither party
take themselves to be safe, the one always fearing to lose its Authority, and
the other its Liberty.

learned Expostulation, and a dutiful. [ Where the party toelrated appears
dangerous to the way established: the one fears to lose its Authority, and the
other its Liberty.] There Is no great depth in the discovery, that from an
Opinion of mutual Danger, arises mutual Jealousy. But what is this case to the
Subject of our Debate?

By Toleration is not meant an Imprudential Yielding to an Untractable,
Toleration.
and Churlish Faction: but a discreet and pious Application of Tenderness
toward such as by their Fair Comportment in the Main of Order, and good
Manners, appear to merit it. True it is, God himself is the only Searcher of
Hearts, who sees our Thoughts, even in the bed of their Conception. Yet where
we find an inconformity of practice to profession: people that strein at a
Gnat, and swallow a Camel, We may without offense to Charity, rank those
incongruous Christians amongst Hypocrites: and with great Justice hold them to
the Law, that strive to bring the Law down to their humors. By the same rule
ought we to judge in favor of their Scruples, whose Lives are squared by a
conform severity and strictness.

It is most true, Page 76.
that such Proposals may suffice for Peace, which will not satisfy Humor and
Faction, and Carnal Interest.] Why do we not apply our selves then to the only
Umpire of the Controversy, the settled Law, which without either passion or
Design, lays down our Duty, and our Interest? These wranglings about Trifles do
but inflame the Difference, and start new Animosities, instead of quieting the
Old. The great pretense of Scandal (forsooth) is This.

Page 84.
The Presbyterians stick at Ceremonies properly Sacred, and significant by
humane institution, which they conceive to be more than mere Circumstances,
even parts of Worship; and whatsoever instituted Worship is not ordained of
God, they hold unlawful.

Observation.
This passage lies a little out of my Rode, but however, I Will make it my way. It
is much easier to call our Ceremonies Sacred, and parts of Worship, than to
prove them such; or that we understand them so. Is the manner of doing any
thing, part of the thing done? And for significant by humane Institution] the
Exception is as frivolous. Because that in some Cases even of External
Discipline, the Church is limited, does it therefore follow that it is free in
none? or tied up only to such Rites and Ceremonies, as hold no signal
proportion with the reason of their Institution? This Argument cuts their own
Throats, since by the significancy of the Sitting posture at the Communion,
they ma^ntain the Use of it; for (say their Admonitioners) It BETOKENS Rest,
and full Accomplishment of Legal Ceremonies in Christ.

They that scruple our mystical significant Ceremonies, Page 86.
conceive that they are properly and merely sacred, as having the honor of God
for their direct and immediate end.

These Reasons are but Snares for Woodcocks. Observe. Significant Ceremonies not
sacred.
That the ultimate end of all our Actions is, or at least ought to be) the
Honor of God, admits no Question; but it is not therefore the Immediate end of
every thing we do, nor in particular of Ceremonies. The Outward Forms and Rites
of public Worship, direct partly to Uniformity and Order; and partly to excite
due Reverence and Affection in the discharge of holy Duties, by sensible
Actions, and remarkable Circumstances. But he persues his Error; and Instances,

That the Surplice is not for gravity, nor merely for decent distinction, Ibid.
but a religious mystical Habit, the character or badge of a Sacred Office, or
Service conformable to the linen Ephod under the Law.

The grand Exception against the Surplice is matter of Scandal, Observation.
and that amounts to nothing, where people will be peevish, and carp at every
thing. Allow it what Original he pleases: If it be neither Unlawful in it self:
nor wickedly applied; and by Authority thought fit to be Imposed; why should it
not be used? What says the Incomparable Hooker, Ecclesiast. polit. lib. 5.
Sect. 29.
in this point? [ To solemn Actions of Royalty, and State, Ecclesiast. polity
lib.
their suitable Ornaments are a Beauty; are they only in Religion a steyn?]
And in another Place.

The names of our Months, and of our Days, we are not ignorant from whence they
came, 4. Sect. 12.
and with what dishonor unto God they are said to have been devised at the
first. What could be spoken against any thing more effectual to stir hatred,
then that which sometimes the ancient Fathers in this case spoke? Yet those
very names are at this day in use throughout Christendom, without hurt or
scandal to any. Clear and manifest it is, that things devised by Heretics,
yea, devised of a very Heretical purpose, even against Religion, and at their
first devising worthy to have been withstood, may in time grow meet to be kept;
as that custom, the Inventers whereof were the The Eunomian Heretics in
dishonor of the blessed Trinity, brought in the laying on of water but once, to
cross the custom of the Chur. which in Baptism did it thrice.
Eunomian Heretics. So that Customs once established, and confirmed by use,
being presently without harm, are not in regard of their Corrupt original, to
be held scandalous. But concerning those Ceremonies, which they reckon for most
Popish, they are not able to avouch, that any of them was otherwise instituted,
than unto good; yea, so used at the first.]

The signing with the sign of the Cross (they conceive) is more evidently
sacred than the former. Page 87.
As Baptism consecrates the child, so does the Cross. It is used as a sealing
sign of our Obligation to Christ, as the words used in the Application thereof
do manifest, and the Book of Canons does declare expressly, which says, [That
it is an honorable badge, whereby the Infant is dedicated to the service of him
that died on the Cross, as by the words used in the Book of Common Prayer it
may appear.] And therefore it is in that respect Sacramental.

England, when by the very letter of the Canon, an express care is taken to
prevent all possibility of exception, by a clear explication of the Churches
judgment in that particular. The Juggle is so gross, I need but cite the Canon
to confute it.

First, The Church of England, Can. 30.
since the abolishing of Popery, has ever held and taught, and so does hold
and teach still, that the sign of the Cross used in Baptism, is no part of the
substance of that Sacrament; for when the Minister dipping the Infant in water,
or laying water upon the face of it (as the manner also is) has pronounced
these words, I Baptize thee in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the holy Ghost, the Infant is fully and perfectly Baptized. So as the sign of
the Cross being afterward used, does neither add any thing to the virtue or
perfection of Baptism; nor being omitted does detract any thing from the effect
and substance of it.

Secondly, It is apparent in the Communion Book, that the Infant Baptized is by
virtue of Baptism, before it be signed with the sign of the Cross, received
into the Congregation of Christ's Flock, as a perfect Member thereof, and not by
any power ascribed unto the sign of the Cross; so that for the very remembrance
of the Cross, which is very precious to all them that rightly believe in Jesus
Christ, and in the other respect mentioned: The Church of England has retained
still the sign in Baptism, following therein the Primitive and Apostolical
Churches, and accounting it a lawful outward Ceremony, and honorable Badge,
whereby the Infant is dedicated to the service of him that died upon the Cross,
as by the words used in the Book of Common Prayer it may appear.]

If this will not suffice to prove, that nothing Sacramental is intended by it,
let it be noted, that in private Baptism the Cross is totally omitted.

Eccles. polit. lib. 5. Sect. 71.
His next exception is at Holy Days: But I shall pass my bounds too far. I Will
borrow one Maxim of the judicious Hooker, (upon that subject) which shall serve
for all. Those things which the Law of God leaves Arbitrary, and at liberty,
are all subject unto positive Laws of men: which Laws, for the common benefit,
abridge particular men's liberty in such things, as far as the rules of equity
will suffer.

After the Quality of our Ceremonies, the holy man will have one fling at the
number of them.

Page 88.
If the English Ceremonies be warrantably used, what hinders the use of diverse
other Ceremonies used in the Roman Church? Is it said, their multitude will
become burdensome and inconvenient? But who can determine the convenient
number? And however, an exchange of one Ceremony for another were not unlawful.
For what reason may not some other Romish Rites in Baptism be used as well as
the Cross, seeing they are nothing less significant or inoffensive; nay,
peradventure much more inoffensive, because the Papists by giving divine
worship to the Cross, have abused it to gross Idolatry.

what, and how many: being the proper Judge both in the point of Number and
Convenience. It Is not for us to Question the Authority, but to Obey it. What if
the Cross has been abused? So has the Knee been bent; the Hands and Eyes
addressed to an Idol. Are we, because of this mis-application, prohibited to
worship the true God, in the same manner, and posture? Now to the Liturgy again.

The Presbyterians are not satisfied in the present Liturgy, but desire it may
be laid aside, Page 90.
or much reformed. And what solid reason withstands the Equity of this desire?

This solid reason does withstand it. They beg like sturdy Cripples, for
Christ's sake, Observation.
with a Cudgel. And it is not safe for Authority to give ground to a Faction.

Whosoever observes impartially, shall find, that political prudence was joined
with Christian Piety, Page 91.
in composing the English Service Book.]

And the same Prudence is now joined with the same Piety, Observation.
both in the Right, and Interest of preserving it. His next grief is a heavy
one.

Canonical Subscription lately imposed, is a yoke of bondage, Page 94.
(Now mark him) to be considered by all those that have a true regard to such
Liberty in Religion, as Equity and Necessity pleads for.

seditious, and to inflame the people against Authority, or I am no Englishman.

The Canon (says he) requires a subscribing to the thirty nine Articles; to the
Common Prayer Book; Page 95.
to the Book of ordering Bishops, Priests, and Deacons; that all these contain
in them nothing contrary to the Word of God. Can. 36.
This is unreasonable, unprofitable, and unnecessary. Nay, let us take in the
third Article too, -- To wit, [ That the nine and thirty Articles are agreeable
to the Word of God.] And now the form of Subscription, viz. [ I do willingly,
and ex animo, subscribe to these three Articles above mentioned, and to all
things that are contained in them.

This is the Yoke of Bondage, which our Reverend Libertine complains of. First,
Observe.
to the unreasonableness of this subscription.

Touching the King's Supremacy, asserted in the first Article, he is silent;
and I suppose he would be thought consenting. As to the rest, what Reason is
there that any man should be admitted into the Ministry, without subscribing
to the Constitution of that Church, into which he seeks admitance?

If he cannot subscribe in Conscience, Canonical subscription defended.
he cannot be admitted in Prudence: and if he refuses in point of stomach, that
man is not of a Gospel-temper. In fine, he that holds a fair opinion of the
Doctrine, and Discipline of the Church of England, may very reasonably set his
hand to his opinion: and he that does not, may as reasonably be rejected
because of such disagreement. So much for unreasonable; Neither is it
unprofitable: for such as have any spark, either of Honor, or Shame, will in
regard to such a Testimony, be tender of giving themselves the Lie, whatever
they would do otherwise.

His third Cavil is, that it is unnecessary; (so are his Exceptions.) Let any
man consider; when all these Bars and Limits are too little to restrain
turbulent and sacrilegious spirits from dangerous and irreverent attempts: what
Seas of Schism and Heresy would break in upon us, were but these Banks
demolished. Page 97.
But he has found out an expedient, how [ Unity in Doctrine, and Uniformity in
practice, may be as well attained, and far more kindly, without this enforced
Subscription: (that is) If no Minister be suffered to Preach, or Write, any
thing contrary to the established Doctrine, Worship, or Discipline, nor
ordinarily for the main to neglect the established Rule.]

Not ordinarily for the main, that is; Always sometimes he would neglect the
established Rule.

If the Laws already in force against Revolters, had been duly executed, it is
likely the Interest of England, in the matter of Religion, had not been now the
Question. But still this supposition does not imply an absolute sufficiency of
that strictness to all intents and purposes of Order and Agreement. It Is what
we Think, not what we Say; the harmony of Souls, more then of Forms, which God
regards: without that sacred, and entire consent of Judgment, and Affections,
the rest is but a flat, and cold formality.

Not to act contrary to prescribed Rules, (where we are bound up by a Penalty)
is but a Negative and Passive Obedience; a compliance rather with Convenience,
than Duty, unless joined with a prone, and full assent, both to the truth and
equity of those determinations. For these and many reasons more, Canonical
subscription seems to me exceeding necessary. But for those people to decline
it, (upon pretense forsooth of Conscience) that upon pain of Freedom, and
Estates, nay, and of Hell it self, enforced the Covenant, is most unequal.

A Presbyterian Preacher, The late Kings Declaration concerning Scotland, Page
403.
refused to pray for Sir William Nesbett, late Provost of Edinburgh, when he
was lying upon his Deathbed, only because he had not subscribed the Covenant.
Let me be pardoned, if I understand not this incongruous Holiness.

As for the Decrees and Canons of the Church, Page 101.
what rightful Authority does make them, as the Law of the Medes and Persians
that alters not?

What rightful Authority? The Kings: and by a less Authority they cannot be
discharged. By that Authority, that Licenses Can. 6.
the Excommunication of the Impugners of the Rites and Ceremonies established
in the Church of England: -- the Opposers also of the Can. 7.
Government, by Archbishops, Bishops, etc. -- By that Authority, to which this
Gentleman has forfeited the Head he wears. Well, but he tells us,

The public state of these differences is such, that the Prelatists may, Page
97.
and ought to descend to the Presbyterians, in the proposed moderate way; but
the Presbyterians cannot come up to the Prelatists in the height of their way.

With the King's leave, had been good Manners yet. Observation.
By what Authority, does Presbytery pretend to unseat the Hierarchy? All the
world knows, (as much as they know any thing of that Antiquity) that Bishops
are of Apostolical Extraction: and we are not to Imagine, that They died
intestate, and their Commission with them. But Bishops have descended already,
and what was the event of it? Truly it was as moderate an Episcopacy as heart
could wish: But, as I remember, their Revenues were not employed to maintain a
practical Ministry. The Rule is, -- Si vis scire an velim, effice ut possim
nolle. But see the moderation of the Man.

Page 103.
Some change (he says) in the outward Form, and Ceremonies, which are but a
Garb, or Dress, is no Real Change of the Worship.

Observation.
I thought we had differed upon point of Conscience, about Pa. 84.
[ Ceremonies properly sacred, -- and parts of Worship.] But now it seems it is
but the Garb, or Dress we stick at. The good man has forgot himself; And yet we
had best be wary, for it is but an untoward hint he gives us.

Page 103.
Oftentimes (says he) moderate Reformations do prevent Abolitions, and
Extirpations.]

extirpation, Root, and Branch.

The present face of things looks so like Twenty years ago, I cannot choose but
fear the same Design from the same Method; the same Effects from the same
Causes. Is not that likely to be a blessed Reformation, where Faction dictates,
and Tumults execute? But our Pacifick Moderator is of another Temper sure; he
only advises a Yielding, for fear of worse: especially considering,

That the Party called Presbyterian may be Protected, and Encouraged, Page 111.
and the Episcopal not Deserted nor Disobliged. which is his Resolution upon
the Second Quaere

Presbyterian Improvements are commonly a little Sinister; (or, as a man may
say, Observation.
over the left shoulder) They have something an odd way of making a glorious
King, and a happy People. But we shall not dispute the possibility of doing
many things which may be yet of dangerous Experiment. I do believe it possible
for a man to fly; yet set him upon Paul's, and Lure him down, upon the Trial,
it is at least Six to Four he breaks his Neck. Truly in my Opinion, this
Proposal is all out as Impracticable. But it is all one to Me. What if the Two
Church-parties, can Agree, or what if they Cannot? My business is to keep the
Presbyterian from laying Violent hands upon the Civil Power, and to convince a
Party so denominated, of Sedition, not of Schism.

His third Enquiry follows.

Page 111.
Qu. III. Whether the upholding of both Parties by a just and equal
Accommodation, be not in it self more desirable, and more agreeable to the
State of England, than the absolute exalting of one Party, and the total
subversion of the other? (And thus he Reasons.

That state of Prelacy which cannot stand without the subversion of the
Presbyterians, and that stands in opposition to regulated Episcopacy, will
become a mystery of a mere carnal and worldly state, under a sacred title, and
venerable name of our mother the Church. For in such opposition, of what will
it be made up, but of Lordly revenue, dignity, splendour, and jurisdiction, with
outward ease and pleasure! What will its design be from age to age, but to
uphold and advance his own pomp and potency? Read the Ecclesiastical Histories,
and you shall find the great business of the Hierarchy has been to contest
with Princes and Nobles, and all ranks and degrees, about their Immunities,
Privileges, preheminences, to multiply Constitutions and Ceremonies for props
to their own Greatness, but not to promote the spiritual Kingdom of our Lord
Jesus Christ in the hearts of People, according to the life and power of
Christianity.

Let this serve for a taste of his Pedantique boldness. Whether the Scandal, or
the Danger of these Liberties is the Greater, may be One Question: and whether
the Usurper of this Freedom is the better Subject, or Christian, may be
another. If we respect the holy Order of Bishops, together with the sacred
Authority of Law, by which they are here established, how scandalous and
irreverend is this Invective! Or if the unsettled humor of the People, how
Dangerous! If we reflect either upon Christian unity, or Political Obedience:
how inconsistent is this manner of proceeding, with what we owe to God, and the
King!

That State of Prelacy, which cannot stand without the subversion of the
Presbyterians, etc. -- It Is very well; -- And why the subversion of the
Presbyterians? How those that never were Up, should be thrown down, I cannot
imagine. By what Law, or by what Equity, do these people pretend to any
Interest of Establishment in England? Those of the Presbyterian judgment, that
out of a real tenderness cannot comply in all particulars, will beyond doubt
receive from his Majesty such Favor and Indulgence, as may abundantly suffice
to their relief. But that pretense does not one jot entitle them to challenge a
further influence upon the Government. These wayward Appetites and Cravings,
are but the sickly longings of a peevish Woman: A kind of voluntary and
privileged Conscience they have, A voluntary Conscience.
which if it happens to take a fancy even to the Crown, Monarchy it self must
rather perish, than these poor Wretches lose their longings. Soberly I would
advise them by any means, to waive these troublesome and groundless pretenses.
It starts a scurvy Question, and makes men ask, how these people came by the
right they challenge? For the rest; Episcopacy is like to be well ordered, when
the Presbyterians have the Regulation of it.

There have been great contests (no question) moved by the Hierarchy; but I
suppose this Gentleman will not instance in many, ^ince the Reformation,
derogatory to the Jurisdiction Royal: Whereas the whole course of the
Presbyterian Discipline has been Tumultuous; and their avowed Principles are
more destructive to Royalty, than even the Rankest of the Jesuits themselves.

Having at length Talked his Fill against the Pomp of Prelacy; and Charged the
arrogance of Presbyters upon the Bishops: Thus he Concludes,

In very deed, the State here described, Pa. 114.
will never stand safely among a people that are Free, Serious, Searching, and
Discerning in matters of Religion.] Which to the Many, sounds thus much.

This is the pride and Tyranny of Bishops: Observe.
and none but a Slavish and Besotted people will endure it. He that makes other
of it, forces it. Having by the spirit of natural Divination foretold the
Effects which he himself intends to Cause; he gives this Hint to the Vulgar,
that [ a Hierarchy of this Nature has a strong bias toward Popery. Ibid.
]

No doubt, and so had Monarchy. Observe.
Was not this Imputation, by the same Party, cast upon the late King, and with
the same measure of Confidence and Bitterness? when yet we know, that those
that charged him with it, did not believe themselves; it was so rank, and
evident a Calumny. Nor to insist upon the Dying Testimony of that Incomparable
Prince; (which was but suitable to the Pious Practice and Profession of his
whole Life) That early Protestation of his Majesty's, before his receiving of
the holy Eucharist at Christ-Church in Oxon, 1643. will be more pertinent to my
purpose.

His Majesty being to receive the Sacrament from the hands of the Lord
Archbishop of Bibliotheca Regia, p. 58.
Armagh, used these public Expressions immediately before his receiving the
blessed Elements, he rose up from his Knees, and beckning to the Archbishop
for a short forbearance, made this Protestation.

My Lord,
His Majestys Protestation.
I Espy here many resolved Protestants, who may declare to the world the
Resolution I now do make. I have to the utmost of my power prepared my Soul to
become a worthy Receiver; and may I so receive Comfort by the Blessed
Sacrament, as I do intend the Establishment of the true reformed Protestant
Religion, as it stood in its Beauty in the happy days of Queen Elizabeth,
without any Connivence at Popery. I bless God, that in the midst of these
public Distractions, I have still Liberty to Communicate; and may this
Sacrament be my Damnation, if my Heart do not join with My Lips in this
Protestation.


This was not yet enough to allay the clamor, till with his Royal Blood he had
sealed this Protestation.

If the Objector can produce a fouler Injury, either to Religion, Duty, Truth,
Honor, or Humanity, let it be done, to save the credit of the Faction, unless
they reckon the Superlative perfection of their wickedness, a point of Glory.

His next remark is not amiss. [ Let it be well observed, page 115.
that the designs of suppressing Puritans, and complying with Papists, had
their beginning both at once, and proceeded in equal paces.

Puritans be meant those of the Separation, by Papists is intended such as kept
their Stations: These Squires of the Revolt, esteeming as Antichristian,
whatever stands in opposition to their heady purposes. We have this both from
Story and Experience, that it has been the constant practice of these
unmannerly Apostates, to speak evil of Dignities; and being fallen off
themselves, it is but carnal prudence, by damning of the Authority to justify
the Schism. No wonder then, if the designs of suppressing Puritans, and
complying with Papists, had (in his sense) the same beginning, and proceeded in
equal paces.

To bring himself off, he shifts it thus. [ According to a vulgar sense, Page
116.
we take Popery in the height thereof, for the Heresies and Idolatries; and in
the lower degree thereof, for the gross Errors and Superstitions of the Church
of Rome.] And it is against English Popery in the lower degree, that he plants
his battery: arguing so formally against our going over to Rome, that any
Stranger to the Story would swear, -- The Prelates and the Pope were more then
half agreed already.

Having at length with great good will advised the Church of England as to the
Main, Page 120.
he concludes, that [ All approaches and motions toward Rome are dangerous.]

Observation.
But are not all recesses from Truth, more dangerous: Because in every thing we
cannot agree with them, must we in nothing? To me this appears rather
petulancy, then pious reason. We are to hold fast the Truth, wherever it lies:
and to embrace what is good, and laudable in any Church, without adhering to the
contrary. Did not St. Paul become all things to all men, that by all means he
might gain some?

Page 120.
But if we walk upon the Brink (he tells us) we may soon fall into the Pit.)
These wary men forget, that there is a Gulf on the one hand, as well as a Pit on
the other: and that the narrow way is that which leads to eternal happiness.

Ibid.
But as to Reason of State (he says that) enmity with Rome, has been reputed
the Stability of England; concerning which the Duke of Rhoan has delivered
this Maxim; [That besides the Interest which the King of England has common
with all Princes, he has yet one particular, which is, that he ought thoroughly
to acquire the advancement of the Protestant Relig^^n, even with as much zeal
as the King of Spain appears Protector of the Catholic.

Allow this Maxim good in State, Observation.
he has but found a Rod to whip himself. The King of England ought to advance
the Protestant Religion.] Content. English and Scotch Presbyterians no
Protestants.
What now if these Disciplinarians prove no Protestants? but rather a
Schismatical, and dividing Party, driving an Interest of their own, under that
specious name, and with great show of Holiness, opposing not only the practices
and Rules of the Reformed Churches, but even the fundamentals of Christianity
it self? By whom will they be tried, or on what Judgment, and Authority will
they rest? They quarrel with the Order of Bishops; the Common Prayer; the Rites
and Ceremonies of the Church; the Law of the Land, with Customs, and
Antiquity: In short, with every thing but the Geneva Discipline. They do by
That too, as our Gallants do by French-fashions. The Court of France being the
Standard of queint Mode and Dress, to the one, as is Geneva of Church order to
the other: What is there used, though in it self extravagant enough, our humor
is to over-do; and if the French wear but wide Breeches, we forsooth must wear
Petticoats. Consult the learned and most eminent Assertors of their Discipline;
ask the grand Architect himself, or indeed, any of his Sectators, (of fair and
honorable credit) concerning the Subject of our present Controversy. And

1. Whether it be a Protestant Opinion, that the Hierarchy is Antich^istian?
II. Whether such Laws of Humane Institution, as neither contradict the general
Laws of Nature, nor any Positive Law in Scripture, be binding or no? III. In
case of Maladministration, either in Church, or State: Whether the People may
take upon them to Reform?
But this they are not so stiff in, as to maintain it, but by blind inferences
not worth regard.

This is the State of our dispute; and if in these particulars our
Anti-prelatists oppose the current of Reformed Divines: to advance their
Interest, is to undermine the common Interest of the King, Nation, and the
Protestant Cause. Needs must it move many Revolts, and keep off many
Proselytes, to see such principles declared of the Essence of Christian
Religion, as a good honest Pagan would be ashamed of. Nor less repugnant are
they to Rules of Society, than of Conscience; No Tyranny so cruel and
Imperious; no Slavery so reprochful. Set up their Discipline, and we are at
School again. Methinks I see a Presbyter with his Rod over every Parish; and
the whole Nation turning up their Tails to a pack of Pedants. Yet hateful as it
is, even that it self, established by Authority, might challenge our Obedience.

I have digress'd too far; yet in convenient place, I must say something
further upon this Subject.

If our new fangled Politician had considered, that the Kings Interest leads
him to support, that which the Presbyterians strive to overthrow, (the
Protestant Religion) I am persuaded he would have spared the Duke of Rhoan in
this particular. The Maxim even as it lies before us, affording matter of
dangerous Deduction to his disadvantage: but taken in Coherence, nothing can be
more sharp and positive against him.

That great and wise Captain the Duke of Rhoan, discoursing upon what reasons
of State, Q. Elizabeth acted toward Spain, France, and the United Provinces;
tells us particularly, how much she favored the Protestants in France, L'
Interest des Princes Discourse. 7.
and Germany. [Par toutes ces maxims, (dit il) cette sage Princess a bien
fait comprendre, a ses successeurs, que outre l' interest que l' Angleterre a
commun avec tous les Princes, etc. -- By all these Maxims (says he) this wise
Princess has given her Successors to understand, that besides the Interest
which England has common with other Princes, yet one particular it has, which
is to advance the Protestant Religion with the same zeal, the King of Spain
does the Catholic.

Be it here noted, that when the Queen was most concerned, and busy to promote
the Protestant Cause, Puritan-Protestants.
even at that very time was She as much employed to crush the Presbyterian
Faction, viz. Cartwright, Coppinger, Arthington, Hacket, and their
Confederates. The First of these was imprisoned, and fined for Seditious and
Schismatical practices against the Church and State. The Second starved himself
in a Gaol; The Third repented, and publicly recanted: The Fourth was put to
Death for horrid Blasphemies. (These people talked of a practical Ministry
too. -- (The Men are gone, but their positions are still in being, and only
attend a blessed opportunity to be put in execution. This may appear from
diverse late discourses, which are effectually no other then Cartwrights
Principles, and Model, couched in warier terms, and other Authority than these,
or such as these, I think the very Authors of them will scarce pretend to.

One Observation more. Our Paraphrast renders the advancement of the Protestant
Religion, -- Enmity with Rome, to the great scandal of the Reformed Profession.
We have no Enmity but with Error, which in a rigid Puritan, to us, is the same
thing as in a Papist.

But Popery (he tells us) has been ever infamous for excommunicating, Page 121.
murdering, and deposing Princes.

Observation.
I am no advocate for the Roman Cause, but upon this account, I think betwixt
the Jesuit, and the Puritan, Page 121.
it may be a drawn Battle. And yet he follows, with an assurance that the
Protestant Religion aims at nothing, but that the Kings Prerogative, and
popular Liberty, may be even Balanced. (That is, the Puritan, -- the
Presbyterian Religion, as he explains himself a little lower.

Observation.
I cannot call to mind one single passage in this whole Discourse, concerning
the Kings Power, or the Peoples Liberty; which is not either worded Doubtfully
or with some popular Limitation upon the Royal Authority. What does he mean by
even Ballancing? Cheek by Joul? Or by what Warrant from the word of God, does a
Presbyters Religion intermeddle with Popular Liberty? Unless the holy man
intends to bring Homage to Kings, within the compass of Ceremonies of Humane,
and Mystical Institution. Yet once again.

The Presbyterian Principle (he says) is for subjection to Princes, Page 122.
though they were Heretics, or Infidels; and if they differ herein from the
Prelatical Protestant, (I was afraid we had been all Papists) it is only that
they plead for Liberty, settled by known Laws, and fundamental Constitutiont.]

Still ad Populum? Observation.
these are the Incantations which have bewitched this Nation. This Charm of
qualified Disloyalty, and Conditional Obedience. Behold the very Soul of the
Faction in these five lines; a fair profession first to his Majesty, and with
the same breath a seditious hint to the People. What is that Liberty he talks
of, but a more colorable title to a Tumult? That Legal Freedom, to which both
by the Royal Bounty, and our own Birthright we stand entitled, we ought not
to contest for with our Sovereign, and (God be praised) we need not, Now for
another fit of kindness.

His Majesty our Native King, may govern as he pleases, Page 403.
without fear of Hazards, by continuing to show himself a Common Father.

To preserve and defend the Kings Majesty's person and Authority, in the
preservation and defense of the true religion, and Liberties of the Kingdoms,]
(as who should say, if, he does otherwise, let him look to himself.

Ibid.
The excessive Dominion of the Hierarchy, with the rigorous imposition of
humane Ceremonies was accounted much of the malady of former times, which ended
in those deadly Convulsions of Church and State.



If the Bishops excesses were the Cause of War, how came the Kings ruin to be
the effect of it? But it is no new thing for a Presbyterian to saddle the wrong
Horse. Just in this manner did the Covenanters treat his late Majesty: and by
those very Troops that cried down Bishops was the King murdered. Ridiculous
Brutes, to boggle at a Surplice, and yet run headlong into a Rebellion.

The grand source of our Miseries was the Covenant, by which, as by a Spell (in
the Name of the blessed Trinity) the people were insensibly bewitched into an
aptness to work any wickedness which the Interpreters of that Oracle should
say was the Intendment of it.

The first notorious Rupture was in Scotland, in 1637. attended with a
COVENANT, which without Question was formerly agreed upon by the confederate
Faction of both Kingdoms, as the most proper and least hazardous way of tasting
the Kings patience, and the Peoples humors. That their design was laid and
carried on by Counsels, and Intelligence as aforesaid, may be collected from
the Consequent, and brotherly Agreements: and truly the Retrospect of the Act
of Indemnity seems to hint no less, for it commences from the first Scottish
Broyls, though four or five years before the War brake out in England; what was
begun by Covenant, was so prosecuted.

By virtue of the Covenant the Kirk-party supplied themselves with Men and
Moneys: Armies were brought into the Field; and beyond doubt, many that truly
loved the King, not knowing what they did, engaged against him. To keep up this
delusion, the Press and Pulpit did their parts, and to deal freely after this
advance, I should as much have wondered if they had stopped short of his death,
as I find others wondering how they durst accomplish it. Death with a Bullet or
an Axe, is the same Mischief to him that suffers it: and the same Crime,
wilfully done, in those that Act it. No man can rationally allow one, and
condemn the other: For if the Violence be Lawful; why not as well in the Field,
as upon a Scaffold?

In this particular, the Doctor is beside his Cushion. He makes me think of the
Marquess of Newcastle, upon a saucy Clergyman. Why should I remember that he is
a Priest (says my Lord) if he forgets it himself? His next argument against
Prelacy is a Modest, and (as I take it,) a queint One.

Can the self same State (says he) and Frame of Ecclesiastics be now revived
after so great and long continued alterations, page 124.
by which the Anti-prelatical party is exceedingly increased and strengthened?

Observation.
Surely this Gentleman has a mind to give his Brother Crofton a visit. Cannot
Prelacy be better restored after a Discontinuance, then Presbytery erected,
where it never had a Being? The very Laws are yet to make, for the One, and
still in force for the Other. But the great Obstacle is, the Anti-prelatical
party is exceedingly increased, and strengthened.] Truly I think, if his Majesty
should lessen the Number of them, by two or three of the Promoters of that
Doctrine, the Precedent might do some good upon the rest. Can any thing be more
feditious? These hints upon fair grounds and given in private, might very well
become the gravity of a Churchman, or the profession of a Loyal Subject. But to
the People, these Calculations are Dictates of Sedition; and only meant to
engage the credulous and heady multitude in false opinions both of the Tyranny
of Prelates, and their own Power.

Thus far in Observation upon the first Part of The Interest of England, in the
matter of Religion, etc. -- The whole Structure whereof (in his own words)
rests upon these Positions, as its adequate foundation.

1. That whilst the two forenamed Parties remain divided, both the Protestant
Religion, and the Kingdom of England is divided against it self.

2. That the Presbyterians cannot be rooted out, nor their Interest swallowed
up, whilst the State of England remains Protestant.

3. That their subversion if it be possible to be accomplished, will be very
pernicious to the Protestant Religion, and the Kingdom of England.

4. That the Coalition of both Parties into one may be effected by an equal
accommodation, without repugnancy to their conscientions Principles on either
side, in so much that nothing justifiable by Religion or sound Reason can put a
Bar to this desirable Union.

The whole matter (in Debate he tells us) rests upon three main Enquiries.

Page 17. part. 1.
I. Qu. Whether in Justice or Reason of State the Presbyterian Party should be
Rejected and Depressed, or Protected and Encouraged.

II. Qu. Whether the Presbyterian Party may be protected and encouraged, and
the Episcopal not Deserted nor Dis-obliged.

III. Qu. Whether the Upholding of both parties by a just and equal
accommodation be not in it self more desirable and more agreeable to the State
of England, than the absolute exalting of the one party and the total
subversion of the other.

Brevity and Clearness; that both the Lazy, and the Busy may find time to
read it, and the Weakest not want Capacity to understand it.

His first Position holds no further good, then as the Presbyterians are first
Protestants in the matter of the difference, and then Considerable in the
balance of the Nation. Religion led the Quarrel, so let it the Dispute. In
using the word Protestant, I follow Custom, for I had rather call it
Catholic: but Protestant let it be.

I suppose by the Protestant Religion, we understand That of the Reformed
Churches: to whose Decision we shall willingly submit the sum of our
Disagreements: which may be stated under a Reduction to these Two Questions.

I. Qu. Whether or no the Government of the Church by Archbishops and Bishops
-- be Antichristian, or Unlawful?

II. Whether such Laws of Humane and Significant Institution, as are orderly
made, and neither contradict the General Laws of Nature, nor any positive Law
in Scripture, -- be Binding or not?

First, concerning the Prelacy: Apol. Confess: per Pap. Page 137.
Luther himself distinguishes betwixt Popish Tyrants, and True Bishops:
professing his Quarrel to them as Popish not as Bishops.

The Authors of the Augustane Confession, leave it upon Record, De reform.
adver. Eccles. page 95.
That they would willingly preserve the Ecclesiastical and Canonical Polity, if
the Bishops would cease to Tyrannize over their Churches.]

Bucer advises by all means the restoring of such Ecclesiastical Governments as
the Canons prescribe, (Episcopis and Metropolitanis) to Bishops and
Metropolitans. Melancthon to Luther, -- You would not imagine (says he) how
some people are netled to see Church-policy restored: as if it were the Romish
Sovereignty again.] Ita de Regno suo, non de Evangelio, dimicant socii nostri.

Calvin himself recommends the Hierarchy to the King of Poland: and treating
concerning the Primitive Church, says, That the Ancient Government by
Archbishops and Bishops, and the Nicene constitution of Patriarchs, was for
Orders sake, and good Government. [Ad Disciplinae conservationem pertinebat.]

The same person being called to account by Cardinal Sadolet, concerning the
Geneva defection, and for subscribing the Augustane Confession, renders this
Answer. Cursed be such as oppose that Hierarchy, which submits it self to
Christ Jesus. [Nullo non Anathemate dignos censeo, quotquot illi Hierarchiae,
qui se Domino Jesu submittit, subjici nolunt.

Zanchi (the Compiler of the Gallican Confession) observes a Change of Name,
rather than of Office, throughout most of the German Churches. Bishops and
Archbishops being only disguised under the notion of Super-intendents, and
General-Superintendents: acknowledging, That by the consent of Histories,
Counsels, and the ancient Fathers, those Orders have been generally Allowed by
all Christian Societies.

Beza, (the rigid Successor of Calvin) being checked by the Archbishop of
Canterbury, for intermedling beyond his Sphere, -- We do not charge (says he)
all Archbishops and Bishops with Tyranny. -- The Church of England has
afforded many learned Men, and many glorious Martyrs of that Function. If that
Authority be there still in Being, may a perpetual Blessing go along with it.
[Fruatur sane ista singulari Dei beneficentia, quae utinam illi sit perpetua.]
This with all Ceremony was addressed, -- Totius Angliae Primati: To the Primate
of all England, and in the name of the whole Church of Geneva.

Saravia makes him him speak yet plainer; who arguing for the Hierarchy out of
the Apostles Canons, receives from Beza this Reply. Bez. cont. Sarav. p. 116.
This is no more then what we wish might be restored to all Churches. [Quid
aliud hic statuitur, quam quod in omnibus locis, Ecclesiis restitutum cupimus?]

Zanchi comes up to the very Case of England; (nay, and a little further too)
not only affirming Episcopacy to be agreeable to the Word of God: But where it
is in exercise, that it ought to continue, and where by violence it has been
abolished, that it ought to be restored. [ Note.
Vbi vigent (Isti ordines scil.) non esse Abolendos, and ubicunque Iniquitas
temporum eos abolevit Restituendos.]

With what Face now shall the Enemies of Bishops call themselves Protestants,
in this particular at least, wherein they evidently cross the whole stream of
Protestant Divines? Now to the second Quae^e.

Whether such Laws of Humane, and significant Institution, as are orderly made,
and neither contradict the general Laws of Nature, nor any positive Law in
Scripture, be binding or not?

Calvin Epist. Page 341.
Hear Calvin first, [ Quamvis quod oberuditur scandalum afferat, quia tamen
verbo Dei per se non repugnat concedi potest.] Scandals Taken, without
repugnancy to the Word of God, are not sufficient to invalidate the obligation
of a Ceremony imposed by the Church. Beza himself, nay, Mr. Cartwright, the
Captain of our blessed Legions, will allow, rather than quit a Benefice, to
wear a Surplice.

Scripta Anglicana, p. 455.
Bucer thanks God with all his soul to see the English Ceremonies so pure, and
conform to the Word of God, or at least, (rightly understood) not contrary to
it.

Not to hunt further for particular Authorities, I shall be bold with my own
Brother, and make use of some general Collections which he has gathered ready
to my hand. H. L. S. His affinity of sacred Liturgies. page 27.


Nothing assuredly can be more demonstrative of the Protestant Tenets, than the
Confession of their several Churches.

That of Helvetia first, [Churches have always used their Liberty in Rites,
Cap. 27.
as being things indifferent, which we also do at this day.] That of Bohemia; [
Humane Traditions and Ceremonies brought in by a good custom, Cap. 15.
are with an uniform consent to be retained in the Ecclesiastical Assemblies of
Christian People, at the common Service of God.] The Gallican; Act. 32.
[ Every place may have their peculiar constitutions, as it shall seem
convenient for them.] The Belgic; Act. 32.
[ We receive those Laws as are fit, either to cherish or maintain concord, or
to keep us in the obedience of God. Act. 15.
] That of Ausburg; [ Ecclesiastical Rites which are ordained by man's Authority,
and tend to quietness and good order in the Church, are to be observed.] That
of Saxony; [ For order sake, there must be some decent and seemly Ceremonies.
Act. 20.
] That of Swethland; [ Such Traditions of men as agree with the Scriptures,
Cap. 14.
and were ordained for good manners, and the profit of men, are worthily to be
accounted rather of God than of Man.] These were the Tenants they publicly
owned, nor did they act different from what they taught, ordaining Churches,
Pulpits, Prayers before and after Sermon, administering the Sacraments in
Churches, delivering the Communion in the forenoon to Women, Baptizing Infants,
and several other things, not one whereof were directly commanded by either
Christ, or his Apostles.

From hence it is manifest, we may divide from Presbyterians, and yet the
Protestant Religion not be divided against it self.

A Schism there is, but whether in the Church, or in the Faction, is only a
dispute for those that plead the Authority of Tumults.

As their opinions are not one jot Protestant, where they divide from Bishops;
so neither are their Morals any more warrantable, wherein they act as Men.
Which shall we credit, Words, or Deeds? Will they not Bite; where they pretend
to Kiss? A famous Martyr of that Party, (Hacket) served a fellow so. Some
difference there had been, and they were to be made friends. Hacket pretends a
Reconcilement; takes the man in his Arms, bites off his Nose, and swallows it.
This is that Hacket that was joined with Coppinger, and Archington, in a plot
to murder the Lords in the Star Chamber, because they had committed Cartwright,
(the great Rabbi of the Party) whose Crime was only the erecting of the
Presbytery without, and against the Queens Authority. Thus we see, That in
Queen Elizabeth 's days too, the Protestant Religion was divided against it
self. Briefly, that it is not Religion which moves these people, is most
apparent, from their unquiet and distempered Actings. Proceed we now to enquire
what it is, or in plain terms, to unmasque the Holy Cheat, and show it
barefaced to the people.

Of all Impressions, those of Religion are the deepests; and of all Errors, the
most to be lamented and indulged, are those of tender and mis-guided
Consciences. The clearness of this Principle considered, it is no wonder that
the foulest designs, put on the greatest shows of Holiness, as the only way to
gain and rule affections, without which, no great matters can be accomplished.
This is a truth well known to the Presbyterians, and of experiment as ancient
as their Discipline.

We do not undertake to read their Hearts, but their VVritings we may venture
upon; enquire a little into their practices, and by comparing both, give some
tolerable guess at their Intentions. The readiest way is to look back, and
match them; for the best prospect of the future is behind us.

Some grumblings toward the Consistorian discipline, The rise of Presbytery.
there were in the days of Edw. 6. but the first notorious Separation was that
of Frankford, (in the Reign of Queen Mary) when Gilby, Goodman, and Whitingham,
with their Companions, flew off, and went to Geneva, from whence they returned
into England, soon after Queen Elizabeth came to the Crown. These led the Dance
in England; Knox in Scotland: and at this day our Presbyterians do but write
after their Copy: professing the same Principles, pretending the same Scruples,
and beyond doubt proposing the same End; which was to get the same Dominion
here, which Calvin and Beza exercised at Geneva: to whom they still repaired
for Counsel as they needed.

Cartwright and Travers came in the breech of these, but not without consulting
Beza first, to learn the Knack of the Geneva Model. These were the men that
first brought into England that horrible Position, that the Geneva Discipline
was as essential a Note of the Church, as either the true preaching of the
Word, or the due Administration of the Sacraments. This is the Principle which
supports the Presbyterian Interest.

The Process of Presbytery.
For the first thirteen years of the Queen's Reign, they contented themselves to
throw about their Libels against Ceremonies, and divide into Conventicles.

In the fourteenth of her Majesty, they addressed two Admonitions to the
Parliament; the former in the quality of a Remonstrance, with a Platform; the
other, bolder, and more peremptory. This Parliament was no sooner Dissolved,
but they fell presently to work upon their Discipline; the Progress whereof is
with great exactness set down in the Third Book of Bancroft's dangerous
Positions.

Dangerous Positions, page 43.
In 1572. a Presbytery was erected at Wandesworth in Surrey, at which time they
had also their Conventicles in London, where little was debated, but against
Subscription, the Attire, and Book of Common Prayer.

Dangerous Pos. page 44.
In 82. A meeting was appointed of 60 Ministers, out of Essex, Cambridge-shire,
and Norfolk, at Cockfield; to confer about the Common Prayer, -- what might be
tolerated.]

Dangerous Pos. page 45.
In 83. The form of Discipline was compiled, and Decrees made touching the
practice of it, which soon after were put in execution.]

Dangerous Pos. page 75. page 86. page 89.
In 87. The Discipline was received, and put in practice in Northamptonshire.]

In 88. A Classical Assembly at Coventry.]

In 89. A general Meeting in Cambridge, and another at Ipswitch.]

In 1590. Upon the detection of the Premises, they refused to answer upon Oath.
page 91.


Being thus Associated, Dangerous Pos. page 120.
they appropriate to their Meetings the name of the Church, and use the style.

The Offices of the Lord Archbishops, and Bishops, etc. (says Martin Junior)
are condemned by the Doctrine of the Church of England. page 125.
]

By these degrees, the Schismatics advanced to a dangerous height, and
Boldness; and of this temper and extraction are our Presbyterians.

After the aforementioned discovery, a stricter eye and hand was kept upon
them; diverse of the Ringleaders were imprisoned, and the Covy broken.

Upon the coming in of King James, they began to stir again; but he knew them
too well, either to Trust, or Suffer them.

How they behaved themselves toward the late King, is to the eternal Infamy,
not only of the Faction, but of the Nation, too notorious: What they design
toward the present Government, That Is the Question: And now I come to enquire.
--

Whether in Justice or Reason of State the Presbyterian Party should be
Rejected and Depressed, or Protected and Encouraged.

Before I fall upon the Question, once again I explain my self. By
PRESBYTERIAN, I intend a Faction, that under color of settling a Reformed
DISCIPLINE, seeks to dissolve the frame of an established Government. And
first, I am to prove that Party so distinguished, such a Faction, which both
from their own Practices, Positions, and from Common Observation, and
Authority, I think I shall make good; and that their last aim is to exercise
that Tyranny themselves, which they pretend to punish.

We Will first examine how they treat the Civil Power.

If Princes be Tyrants against God and his Truth, Presbyters Doctr. concerning
Kings.
their Subjects are freed from their Oaths of Obedience.

Kings, Princes, and Governors, have their Authority of the People, Knox to
Engl. and Scotl. fol. 78. Gilby Obedience, p. 25.
and upon Occasion, the People may take it away again.

Ministers ought not to obey the Prince, when he prescribes Ceremonies, and a
Fashion of Apparel.

Evil Princes ought by the Law of God to be deposed. Register, p. 48.


Goodman, p. 144.
Andrew Melvil being cited to answer for Treason delivered in a Sermon, declined
the judgment of the King, affirming, That what was spoken in Pulpit, Spotswoods
History of the Chur. of Scotl. p. 330.
ought first to be tried and judged by the Presbytery; and that neither the
King nor Counsel might in prima instantia, meddle therewith, although the
speeches were Treasonable.]

Scots Plea p. 262.
Strike the Basilique vein; nothing but this will cure the Plurisie of our
State. Kings Declaration concerning Scotland, p. 404. Ibid. p. 409.


Let us never give over, till we have the King in our power, and then he shall
see how good Subjects we are. (Delivered in a Sermon.)

It is lawful for Subjects to make a Covenant, and Combination without the
King.

But to come nearer Home, to show that the whole Gang is of the same Leaven.
Worse than all this was daily printed against the late King, even by those
Persons that were in pay to the Presbyterian Faction: and yet at last, those
outrages are justified against the Father, by such as would be thought Loyal to
the Son.

If Parliaments think to escape better, they are deceived.

If the Brethren cannot obtain their will by suit, nor dispute, Bancroft, p.
169.
the Multitude and People must do the Feat.

One preached, King's declaration, 404.
That though there were never so many Acts of Parliament against the Covenant,
yet it ought to be maintained against them all.

The Parliament can make no Law at all concerning the Church, Ibid. 408.
but only ratify what the Church decrees: and after it has ratified it, yet
if the Assembly of the Church shall prohibit it, and repeal that Decree of the
Church, all the Subjects are discharged from yielding obedience to that Act of
Parliament.

An Assembly may abrogate Acts of Parliament, Ibid. 411
if they any way reflect upon business of the Church.

Knox.
Reformation of Religion belongs to the Commonalty.

Of the Parliament in the 24 year of the Queen, (says the Supplication) if the
desired Reformation be not granted.] There shall not be a man of their seed
that shall prosper, be a Parliament man, or bear Rule in England any more.

Concerning Laws established; They Fall in Consequence with the Power that
makes them.

Presbyterians opinion of Bishops
Let us see now with what modesty they treat the Church, and first the Bishops.

Bancroft page 56.
They are Ordinances of the Devil, -- Proud, Popish, presumptuous, profane,
paltry, pestilent, pernicious Prelates, and Usurpers, -- Robbers, Wolves,
Simoniacks, Persecutors, Sowers of Sedition, Dragons, (and so to the end of the
Chapter.)

Their Clergy, an Antichristian, Swinish Rabble, Ibid. p. 58.
-- The Ministers are neither Proved, Elected, Called, nor Ordained according
to Gods Word.

The Ceremonies, -- Carnal, Beggarly, Antichristian Pomps.

Presbyterian Reformation.
Hitherto, the Faults of Governors, and Government, now their Proposals of
Amendment, and Reformation; by what Rules, and by what Means we may be Governed
Better. Thus then.

Let the whole Government of the Church be committed to Ministers, Admon. 1.
Elders, and Deacons.

Very good, and to whom the Government of the State?

Why to Them too. For the Church wherein any Magistrate, King, or Emperor is a
Member, is divided into some that are to Govern: Cartwright.
viz. Pastors, Doctors, and Elders: and into such as are to obey, viz.
Magistrates of all sorts, and the People.

The Question is next, about the Extent of the Ecclesiastical Power, and in
what manner that Assumption hooks in all Civil Actions within their Cognizance?

In Ordine ad Spiritualia, Forsooth: Holy Discipline, page 260.
by which rule nothing scapes them.

It Is the desire of the Admonitor; That he and his Companions may be delivered
by Act of Parliament, from the Authority of the Civil Magistrates: as Justices,
and others, and from their Inditings, and Finings.]

The Eldership shall suffer no lewd customs to remain in their Parishes, either
Games, or otherwise.] And further; The Office of the Church-Governors, Ibid.
284. Ibid.
is to decide Controversies in Doctrine and Manners, so far as pertains to
Conscience and the Church Censures.]

Every Fault (says Cartwright) that tends Ib. 285.
either to the Hurt of a man's neighbor, or to the hindrance of the glory of
God, is to be examined and dealt in by the Orders of the holy Church.] Nay,
Knox goes further yet.

The bare Suspicion of Avarice, or of Pride, Superfluity, or Riotousness in
Cheer or Raiment.] -- Even this Nicety falls within their Censure.

Now would I know what need of a Civil Magistrate, when even our private
thoughts are subjected to the Scrutiny of a Presbytery?

But will some say, What signifies the intemperance of Particular tongues, as
to the General of the Party? I am challenged by the Author of the Interest of
England, to produce their Actions: and That Is my next immediate Business.

The Presbyter has now the Chair, see how he manages his Greatness. None of
that Tyranny ye found in Bishops, I warrant ye: no groaning now under the Yoke
of Antichrist; the intolerable burden of canonical Subscription; the
Imposition of Ceremonies, properly sacred; the Injunction of the Cross in
Baptism; and that abominable Idol, the Common Prayer.

Inter. of Engl. Part. 2. p. 81.
Some words perhaps may slip unwarily, that might have been as well let alone;
but alas good people, they mean no harm. Suppose that some of this way were
guilty of some provoking forwardness, should grave Patriots, and wise
counselors thereupon destroy the weak Party, or rather heal it? It Is indeed
possible, that in the heat of a Reforming and Spiritual Zeal, they may have let
fall Speeches of holy Indignation against the opposers of the By which term
they difference their Classical Approbation, from Episcopal Ordination.
LORD'S ORDINANCE. But have they showed their disaffection either to Inter. of
Engl. Par. 2. p. 5^.
King or Parliament, by any thing discernable in their outward behavior: have
they controlled the Law of the Land, or the just Liberty of the People?

If they have not done all this, there is a great failing both in our Stories,
and our Memories. I know 'twill be objected, they Petitioned, and in a
supplicant and humble way, suitable to the duty of good Subjects. They did
Retition; and in this manner -- (about the. 27. of the Queen.)

May it please your Majesty, etc. The Reformers way of Petitioning.
-- That it may be Enacted, etc. -- That the Book hereunto annexed, etc.
Entitled, A Book of the Form of Common Prayers, Administration of Sacraments,
etc -- And every thing therein contained, may be from henceforth authorized,
put in ure, and practiced throughout all Your Majesty's Dominions.

Herein they press upon the Nation their own Form, which would not yet allow of
any Other.

What they could not get established by Law, Holy Discipline, p. 100.
they settle yet by Practice, and privately agree upon a general endeavor to
increase the Party.] But say they should be opposed?

Why then, have a fling at Evil Counselors. [If her Majesty give ear to such
Counselors, Bancroft's dangerous Posit. p. 53.
she may have cause one day to lament.] Then they Remonstrate, how miserably
poor men have been handled; Ibid. p. 56.
] That godly Ministers have been brought before the Bars of Justice;] and that
if this Persecution be not provided for, Ibid. p. 57.
it is the case of many a thousand in England: great troubles will come of it.]

Inter. of Engl. p. 29. Ibid.
This numerous party will not vary from it self, etc. -- The minds of men are
fixed in this Opinion, and are not like to be reduced to the practice of former
times. Bancroft Page 138. Ibid. 11. P^. 14^.
] Well said I. C. yet, Thousands (says another) do sigh for this Discipline;
and ten thousands have sought it.] We do protest unto Your Majesty (say the
Supplicators) that we will be no longer subject unto the Bishops unlawful, and
usurped Authority, etc.] -- And another. [ The truth will prevail (speaking of
the Discipline) in spite of your teeth, (meaning the Bishops) and all other
Adversaries of it.]

Inter. of Engl. p. 53.
In the late King's Declaration concerning the tumults in Scotland: this way of
Petitioning is very frequent: and this is that my friend hints, in saying, That
the Presbyterians have never ceased to solicit, and supplicate, etc.] But
Words draw no Blood.

It Is true, but such as these come very near it.

We fancy first, defects in Government; then we discourse them; after that, we
propose a Reformation, which, if rejected, we proceed to press it: the next
step is a Threat, and then a Blow.

Where there are failings in Authority, it is not for private Persons to take
Public notice of them. Who ever does that, would strike, if he durst. This is
not meant of every slip, in common discourse, either of Heat, or Inadvertency;
yet that is very ill too) but of deliberate Affronts; such as proceed from a
formed Habit of Irreverence: and in that Case, I think 'twere no hard measure,
if he that sets his hand to the King's dishonor, should lose his Head for it.

Take it at worst. Put case a Prince Misgoverns; yet we are sure, that his
Superior does not; and that respect we cannot pay to his failings, we must
allow to his Commission. From Words proceed we now to Actions.

Presbyterian Practices toward their SOVEREIGN.
THE Presbyterian is no sooner in the Saddle, but (in the name of Reformation)
how the man Gallops: Kings, Parliaments, Laws and Liberties, Oaths and
Covenants, are but as feathers in his way.

I shall not clog this Section with many Instances. The Traitorous actings of
the Conventicle at Glasgow, in 1638. the horrid outrages that ushered it, and
the most deplorable consequences that ensued upon it, contain enough to brand
that Faction to eternity.

I shall the rather fix there, because it brings the Case home; and first, in
regard that the Schismatics of both Nations acted by the same tie of Oath and
Interest. Next, as it is the Model, they have made the people swear they would
be damned by. Some of their many Insolences are these.

Positions of the Conventicle at Glasgow, An. 1638.
I. The Assembly is Independent, either from King or Parliament, in matters
Ecclesiastical. II. It is lawful for Subjects to Covenant and Combine without
the King, and to enter into a Bond of mutual defense against him. III. An
Assembly may abrogate Acts of Parliament, and discharge their Fellow Subjects
from obedience to them, if they any way reflect upon the business of the
Church. IV. They deny the King's right of Calling or Dissolving Assemblies, and
they continue to Sit and Act, notwithstanding his Majesty's express Order for
their Dissolution. (See the King's Declaration.)
These Rebellious proceedings are yet darkened by the transcending Usurpations
that followed them. But here I am bounded; This only I may say;

Who ever has a mind to run the extremities of another War, and to see another
King murdered, let him give his Vote for Presbytery.

And here let every man look behind him, and lay his finger on his mouth.

As the Geneva Discipline is injurious to Kings, and stated Laws, Presbytery
tyrannous to the People.
so it is most ridiculously tyrannous to the People. A great uproar arising in
Edinburgh, about the making of a Robin-hood, they of the Consistory did
excommunicate the whole Multitude. Bancroft p. 20. Ibid. p. 105.
] It Is a strange tenderness possesses these Saints. One of them being to
Christen a child, brake off in the middle of the Action, because he would not
call it Richard.]

I suppose no man knew this kind of Cattle better than King James. Presbyters
persecutors of K. James.
I was persecuted (says that learned Prince) by Puritans, not from my Birth
only, but even since four Months before my Birth.] And to Prince Henry Thus.

Take heed to such Puritans, K. James his works: page 305. Ibib. p. 160.
very Pests in the Church and Commonweal, whom no deserts can oblige, neither
Oaths or Promises bind; breathing nothing but Sedition, and Calumnies,
aspiring without measure, railing without reason, and making their own
imaginations (without any warrant of the Word) the square of their conscience.
I protest before the great God, and since I am here as upon my Testament, it is
no place for me to lie in, that ye shall never find with any Highlands or
Border-thieves, greater ingratitude, and more lies and vile perjuries, The
Antiquity of Phanaticks.
than with these Phanatique spirits. And I think every man may say as much that
has but known them.

We are at length by Gods grert mercy, delivered from those Evangelical
Impostors, and after all our wanderings brought once again, into the Channel. We
have our Prince, our Laws, our Freedoms, our Interest lies before us, and
certainly we cannot be so mad, as now to dash a second time upon the same Rock:
Yet they shall lose nothing for want of offering at it.

The Arguments of 1641. are set on foot again: The very same with Cartwright's,
(that Consistorian Patriarch, as Bancroft terms him) nay, they are advanced
already beyond pleading of their Cause, to pressing of it, by saucy
Importunities, and peremptory threatenings.

From what I have delivered, it cannot be denied, but their Positions are
destructive to all Civil Government: And for their Practices, the story is
written in Blood.

This might suffice to end the Controversy concerning Reason of State, for
certainly a Faction so Principled, cannot with safety to the Public be
incorporated into any Politic Constitution. But I shall add some further
Reasons, why by no means they are to be admitted.

1. They Are a Party never to be gained by Obligations; Reasons against Coalition.
and this is manifest from their proceedings toward the late King, whose most
unhappy Tenderness of Nature roast him his Life. And at this instant, that
irreclaimable ingratitude is yet more clear toward his Majesty in being: whose
unexampled Mercy, so much as lies in them, is converted to his Dishonor, and
Destruction.

2. They ground their claim upon the Equity of their Cause, which if allowed,
by the same reason they may serve this King as they did his Father.

3. Their Demands are Endless, as well as Groundless, and it is not prudential
to grant any thing to a Faction, that will be satisfied with nothing. It is but
Giving them a power to Take the rest.

4. They Expostulate, and what they get upon those Terms, they look upon rather
as a Submission, than a Concession. The very manner of their Address has a
spice of Mutiny in it, and they will hardly make an honest use, of what they
compass by dishonest means.

5. It is not advisable to encourage Tumultuary combinations, by Rewarding them.

6. The Dispute is not so much what their Consciences will Bear, as what their
Importunities can Obtain: and to feel the Pulse of the Supreme Authority.

In fine, It is a contest betwixt the Law and a Faction, and a fair step toward
a New Rebellion.

So much for Reason of State.

Now to the Justice of their pretenses. The Quaere is.

Whether in Justice or Reason of State the Presbyterian Party should be
Rejected and Depressed, or Protected and Incouaged.

It Is one thing what the King may do in point of Justice, and another thing
what the Presbyterians may demand upon that score.

There is a Justice of Conscience, Honor, and of Prudence.

Justice of Conscience.
By the First: His Majesty is tied up in common with the meanest of his
Subjects. That is, if the King find himself in Conscience bound to maintain
Episcopacy in the state he found it, (Legally settled) he is not free to alter
it.

Justice of Honor.
In point of Honor: There Is more Liberty, and whatever the King does in that
particular, is well done. But his Majesty not having as yet declared himself;
what do we know, how far even upon That Point he may concern himself to reject
the Presbyterian's Demands? Partly out of Reverence to his Royal Father; In
part, out of a Princely Strictness to His own Dignity: and partly out of a
Generous tenderness toward his Ruined Party.

First, as to what may seem relating to His Majesty's Father.

That which these people urge, is what the late King chose, rather to Die, than
Grant: which in His (...) is intimated in these words.

In these two points, (...). page 239.
the preservation of established Religion and Laws, I may (without vanity) turn
the reproach of my sufferings, as to the worlds censure, into the honor of a
kind of Martyrdom, as to the testimony of My own conscience, the troublers of
My Kingdoms, having nothing to object against me but this, that I prefer
Religion and Laws established, before these alterations they propounded.

Every word has its weight, which fell from the Pen of that pious and
judicious Prince. Nor can I over-pass a Caution of his learned Father's; when I
consider the sum of their Proposals, which in effect is but a condemnation of
the late King, in the bold, needless justification of Themselves. These are the
words.

As for offenses against your own Person and Authority, since the fault
concerns your self, K. James his works, p. 157.
I remit to your own choice to punish or pardon therein as your heart serves
you, and according to the circumstances of the turn, and the quality of the
Committer.

Here would I also eike another Crime to be unpardonable, if I should not be
thought partial: But the Fatherly love I bear you, will make me break the
bounds of shame, in opening it unto you. It is then, the false and unreverent
writing, or speaking of malicious men against your Parents and Predecessors.
And a little further.

It is a thing monstrous to see a Man love the Child, and hate the Parents: as
on the other part, the infaming and making ^dious of the Parents, is the ready
way to bring the Son into contempt. And for conclusion of this point, I may
also allege my own experience: for besides the judgments of God, that with
mine eyes I have seen fall upon all them that were chief Traitors to my
Parents, I may justly affirm, I never found yet a constant biding by me in all
my straits, by any that were of perfect age in my Parents days, but only, by
such as constantly bode by them; I mean, specially by them, that served the
Queen my Mother; for so that I discharge my Conscience to you, my Son, in
revealing to you the truth, I care not what any Traitor, or Treason-allower,
think of it.

Thus far his Majesty may find himself concerned in Honor to his Fathers
Ashes, The late Kings Counsels.
now to his dying Counsels.

Take heed of abetting any factions, (...). Page 236.
or applying to any public Discriminations in matters of Religion, contrary to
what is in your judgment, and the Church well settled.

I cannot yet learn that lesson, Ib. p. 239.
nor I hope ever will you, that it is safe for a King to gratify any Faction
with the perturbation of the Laws, in which is wrapped up the public Interest,
and the good of the Community.

What in effect do these people now desire, but that his Majesty would rather
take their Counsel, than his Fathers? In the next Page, the King expresses a
more than ordinary earnestness, in these words.

My Counsel and Charge to you is, that you seriously consider, Ib. p. 240.
the former real or objected miscarriages, which might occasion my troubles,
that you may avoid them.

Herein, his Majesty is tacitly conjured against them; it being a most
notorious Certainty, That The late King lost both his Crown and Life by
Over-granting. The now-pretended cause of the quarrel, was not mentioned till
after the War was begun. The color of raising an Army, being to fetch in
Delinquents. After which (says his Majesty) among other lesser Innovations,
(...). page 62.
this chiefly was urged: the Abolition of Episcopal, and the Establishment of
Presbyterian Government.

As to the point of Imperial Honor, wherein his Majesty may possibly concern
himself more immediately: It is a high excess of goodness to make his Favors
Common, where they are looked upon so cheap, (as here; Witness these daily new
Transgressions, since his most Gracious Pardon.) [ Some men (says the late
King) have that height, Ibid. page 169.
as to interpret all fair Condescendings, as Arguments of Feebleness, and glory
most in an unflexible stiffness, when they see Others most supple and
inclinable to them.]

There remains yet a third Question under this Head of Honor; that is, How far
his Majesty's Generosity may extend it self, in Favor, and Protection of those
persons that have served him, through all extremities till they have nothing
left them beyond the hopes of honorable Epitaphs.

These people have Consciences too; a sense of Duty and Religion. They
reverence the Episcopal Order, and That, which through the sites of Bishops,
was equally wounded: The Order of Kings. At last, those that subverted the
Former, and usurped the Latter, demand (I think in reparation of their hazards)
a Presbyterian Government. In which particular, our Duty teaches us not to
direct our Master: only we take a sober Freedom to answer our Accusers; and to
profess to all the World, that those who fought For King and Bishops, were in
our Opinion as honest men at least as they that fought against them.

To his Majesty's honorable Consideration, I think in this point we may claim
a Right. We have suffered for, and with his Royal Father, and Himself, and the
main Justice of the Cause, betwixt the King and those that served him, is the
same thing: so that whoever strikes at Us, wounds our Soverein.

Lastly, There is a Justice of Prudence, wherein a man may frame a thousand
reasons against the Encouraging of the Presbyterians* not speculative, and airy
Notions, but close, and pinching Reasons, grounded upon weighty Authority, and
a never-failing course of long experience. (Yet not to dictate to his Majesty,
to whose Will we submit our Reasonings)

First, if their Desires were Modest, the manner yet of promoting them, is too
rude and positive; they Preach and Print their Grievances, which is the way
rather to stir a Faction, than allay a Scruple. Lord, (says Mr. Manton) give
us the Liberty of the Gospel, before we go hence and be no more seen.] As if
Episcopacy, were Paganism. It Is dangerous to grant more, to those that take
too much. How do I reverence the Divine Spirit of his late Majesty.

(...). Page 182.
The great Miscarriage I think is, that popular Clamours and Fury had been
allowed the reputation of zeal, and the public sense; so that the Study to
please some parties, has indeed injured all.

Ib. p. 236.
And again; Take such a course as may either with calmness and charity quite
remove the seeming differences and offenses by impartiality, or so order
affairs in point of power, that you shall not need to fear or flatter any
Faction; for if ever you stand in need of them, or must stand to their
courtesy, you are undone: the Serpent will devour the Dove: you may never
expect less of Loyalty, Justice, or Humanity, than from those who engage into
religious Rebellion: their Interest is always made Gods, under the colors of
Piety, ambitious Policies march, not only with greatest security, but applause,
as to the populacy; you may hear from them Jacobs voice, but you shall feel
they have Esaus hands.

To what I have said, I shall be bold to add a Justice of Proportion; and
thereupon Two Questions.

1. Why should the Presbyterians; a Small, Irregular party, pretend to give the
Law to the Supreme Authority, the established Constitution; and incomparably
the greater Part of the Nation?

2. Why should those people, that with a more then Barbarous rigor pressed the
Covenant: ejecting, sequestring, imprisoning such as refused to take it, and
without Mercy or Distinction: -- Those that in public barred Non-Covenanters,
The late Kings Declaration concerning Scotland. page 404.
the Holy Communion in express Terms with Adulterers, Slanderers, and
Blasphemers, affirming in the Pulpit, that all the Non-Subscribers to the
Covenant were Atheists. -- Why should (I say) those people that with so
unlimited a Tyranny imposed upon the Nation a Rebellious League; to the
Engagement of their Souls in taking it; their Liberties and Fortunes in
refusing: -- I say yet once again; why should those People now at last demand
an interest in that Government, which Root and Branch they have labored to
extirpate? or with what Face can they pretend a Right to an Authority, where
but by Mercy they have none to Life? (I speak of these late Libellers and their
Abettors.)

Let me be understood likewise by Presbyterians, to intend those of the
Scottish race, to whom we are beholden for our discipline. That Faction first
advanced it self by Popular Tumult and Rebellion. Knox learned the trick on it
at Geneva, and brought it into Scotland; We had our Agents too, that did as
much for us, these Fellows conferred Notes, set the Wheel going, and we were
never perfectly quiet since.

Upon the whole matter aforegoing (in the Gentleman's own words) we firmly build
this Position,

That the Presbyterian party, ought not, either in Justice or Reason of State,
in any wise to be Encouraged, but rather Rejected; Neither ought they to be
protected in any Inconformity to the Law, but rather totally Depressed.

His second Quaere is soon dispatched, viz.

II. Qu. Whether the Presbyterian party may be Protected and Encouraged, and
the Episcopal not Deserted nor Dis-obliged.

First, many things are possible, which are neither Just nor Rational; and
therefore it matters not much to allow it the One, if I prove it not to be the
Other* Imagine such a Contemperation of Episcopal, and Presbyterian pretenses,
as might atone their present Disagreements, yet where is the King? The Interest
that is principal in the Concern, is not so much as named in the Question. The
Quarrel was about the Militia, not Lawn-sleeves, and the Royal Party is to be
taken in, as well as the Episcopal.

The truth of it is; This Gentleman does not find it convenient at present to
move an utter Extirpation of Bishops: but he proposes That, which granted,
would most infallibly produce it. A Consociation forsooth, that for the better
credit of the Project, shall be called a Regulated Episcopacy, which in good
honest English is next Door to a Tyrannical Presbytery. In fine,

The Episcopal Authority is Deserted and Disobliged by the admittance of a
Presbyterian Competition.

Yet pardon me, I have found a way to reconcile them, Make but these squabling
Presbyterians, Bishops, and the work's done: as Presbyters they are Encouraged;
and (I dare say) not disobliged, as Bishops. The plague of it is, there is
neither Justice nor Reason of State for it, and so we are where we were again.

We shall make short work too with his Third Question: for in effect it spells
just nothing.

III. Qu. Whether the upholding of both parties by a just and equal
accommodation be not in it self more desirable, and more agreeable to the
state of England, than the absolute exalting of the one party, and the total
subversion of the other.

I must needs take notice here of two Mistakes, the one in propriety of
language, viz. the Upholding of both parties. One of those Parties is not up,
and cannot be upheld. The other, shifts the Question, and states the difference
betwixt the EXALTATION of the one, and the SUBVERSION of the other, when all
that we desire is but to keep both where they were, without advancing or
depressing either.

If they have any Title to the Interest they challenge, the same had Cromwell to
the Crown. This Question must be better stated, before we think it worth an
Answer.

One Reflection now upon the Whole. Here Is Exaltation, -- and Subversion; -- but
not a syllable of Toleration: and what is the reason of all this? They are
afraid that would be granted; and how should they do then to pick a quarrel?
Their way is never to be satisfied in Conscience, with what the King can give
in Honor, and Reason. (His Sacred Majesty's Observation) A grand Maxim with
them was always to ask something, (...). page 170.
which in Reason and Honor must be denied, that they might have some color to
refuse all that was in other things granted; setting Peace at as high a rate as
the worst effects of War.] I have cited this already, but every Line drawn by
that Hand deserves to be repeated.

To this, there is another end that is common to the Gang, which is, to draw an
odium upon one Party, and a compassion toward the other. And other end than
this do I see none at all, in his absoute exalting, -- and total subversion. We
covet no Change, but desire the contrary. How little soever it may appear to
our purpose, it is very much to theirs, to have the people understand by
Absolute Exalting, -- the dangerous and intolerable pride of Bishops; and by
their total subversion, on the other side, how sadly the word goes with The
Professors of the Gospel.

These trivial appearances have more weight, than commonly the world imagines:
It Is not so much (as Hooker says) how small the spark is that flies up, as how
apt things about it are to take fire. Their business is to stir the affections
of the common people, which must be done by means and ways, to wise men, in
themselves ridiculous, but in their applications of most desperate effect.

I speak in earnest, that very Tone they use in Preaching; that
Fellow-feeling-Tone (as they would have it understood) is I believe of great
use to their business. I have observed the Groans that follow the Ahi-mee's,
and beyond doubt those snivelling affectations are not without their benefit.
That it is a forced and acted passion, is evident in this; they almost all of
them use the same emphasis.

I would not for my Hand let fall a syllable should cast a scandal upon that
Holy Ordinance: and with my soul I reverence the grave and pious Clergy. We
cannot attribute enough to God; assume too little to our selves. We cannot be
too much afflicted for our sins, nor too sensible of our own unworthiness. Yet
I suppose a fit Christian sorrow may be contained within such terms as to reach
Heaven, without disturbing the Congregation. To come to a Church-dore, and hear
an outcry, as if a man were cutting for the Stone; and what is all this, but an
afflicted Pastor, mourning for those heavy judgments, that hang over the Land
because of Common Prayer: And then the Sisters groan so ruthfully, you would swear
five hundred women were in Labor. Away with these ostentations of Holiness, --
but first away with the Discourse of them.

I must confess, the Gentleman has offered fair, and more I doubt then he can
undertake for, were it accepted. What if Six Presbyterians of Seven renounce
his Moderation, and say he treated without Commission: where is his Pacifick
Coalition then? It Is for a Parity they struggle; which when they have got, they
shall as much contest among themselves to crush again, as ever they did to
introduce it. Just thus was the King treated; He was to rule in Consociation
too, by the advice of his Presbyters. And what came on it? The Factions
interfer'd; the Change went round the Circle; and at long-length; in the place
of a most Gracious Prince, up starts a most Tyrannical Protector.

And yet I verily think, a way might be found out to work upon these people:
Let the King settle their strict Form of Discipline; fill the Presbyteries with
Episcopal Divines, and Elders of his own Party; I verily believe these very men
would be as hot for Bishops. I cannot comprehend the temper of that
Sacrilegious Tenderness, that makes men Digest Bishops Lands, and yet forsooth
they cannot swallow the Sleeves.

Only this word. Some of the Authors I have quoted for Episcopacy, (to deal
sincerely) may be as well produced against it. For That, let them look to it, I
am Innocent: and my Cause Clearer for it. They found it for their Interest to
Engage their Disciples in many Opinions, which for their Honor they would not
undertake to defend against their Equals.

I Should end here, were I not drawn out beyond my purpose, by a Second Part
from the same Hand; which should not yet divert me from my first Intention,
could I but save my self, in letting it absolutely alone. By the Formalities of
Title and Connection, it seems related to the Former part, further then by some
passages in the Treatise it appears to be; whereof some few I am concerned to
Examine, and I shall shorten even that little I intend, as much as Possible. He
calls it --

A Deliberative Discourse, PROVING, That it is not agreeable to sound Reason to
prefer the Contracted and Dividing Interest of one Party, before the General
Interest of Protestantism, and of the whole Kingdom of England, in which the
Episcopal and Presbyterian Parties may be happily United.
We are agreed in all but in the Main, and as to That, I have already showed,
Observation.
that in the Subject of our Difference, the Presbyterian Party (that is, the
Kirk-party) is divided from the Protestant: So that unless it can be made out,
by the Judgment of the Reformed Churches, that Prelacy is Antichristian, and
that Instituted Ceremonies are Unlawful; the Author of this Deliberation
overthrows himself by his own Argument, of preferring the General Interest of
Protestantism, before the Contracted and Dividing Interest of one Party. We
should not take in Discipline within the pale of Religion, but against That
Party, which reckons it an essential Mark of the Church. And let them take
their Choice, whether it shall be accounted among things Indifferent, or
Necessary. If the Former, Obey the Imposition; if the Latter, let them produce
their Authority.

The Foundation being mis-lai'd, the Building will hardly stand: Or, which is
worse, it falls upon the Builder.

He says, His Aim is Unity, and truly so is mine; But Unity in such a
Composition will never set us right. Two may agree in the same point of Verity;
but then that Truth must for it self be entertained, without considering one
another. If about any thing Material we differ, fly to the Judge of Truth: The
Scriptures, and the Church: If about Less, and Common Matters, go to the Rule
of Duty, (in such Cases) the settled Law. But I forget my self.

It must needs be (says the Deliberator) the Wisdom of this State to smother
all dividing Factions, page 14.
and to abolish all partial Interests, that the common Interest of England may
be alone exalted.

State, the Keepers of the Liberties; if the Supreme Authority of this Nation
as it is legally vested in the King, the Man has killed himself. The best Rule
of Interest is the Law.
What are Dividing Factions, but such Parties as start from that common Rule
the Law, which every State is bound upon a Principle of Policy, and Honor, to
preserve Sacred and Inviolable?

The Law is but the Wisdom treasured up of many Ages; -- only an amass of all
those lights, which long Experience, strict Search and Industry; and many
Consultations of great Statesmen, have given to the Discovery of our true
Interest. Great Reason is there to approve so great Authority: and as great
shame it were not to avow what we our selves have done; (The Law being but an
Universal Vote) beside the penalty of Disobedience. How Mad then, how Ignoble,
and how Desperate shall we esteem that Faction, that breaks through all these
bonds of Reverence, Honor, and Prudential Security, to force that Sanctuary,
wherein, as Christians, and as Men, we have reposed, First, the Protection of
our Religion; -- and then the Arbitration of our Lives and Fortunes.

From such Dividers, Heaven deliver us, first, and then preserve us.

Page 36.
All Enterprises (says our Author very rationally) that have their beginning in
judgment, and not in passion, are directed to a certain end set up as a mark,
and that end is not a business at Rovers; but some particular steady issue of
things, certainly or probably apprehended and expected: Wherefore let wise men
consider the mark where at they level, and to what issue and state of things
their actions tend.

Observation.
Most certain it is; without that mark men go they know not whether. First the
End; then, the Way; is (I suppose) the Common Method of all Wise men: and his
advice to such, to look before them, might have been spared, they would have
don't without it. Now to his Business; but first, I Will clear the way to it. The
Question is,

Page 33.
Whether the fomenting of these Discords, (viz. in matters of Discipline) do
not proceed from a carual design? And he debates the matter with the
Episcopalians.

Page 36.
Here is a numerous Party not of the dregs and refuse of the Nation, but of the
judicious and serious part thereof: What will they do with them? and how will
they order the matter concerning them? Would they destroy them? I solemnly
profess, that I abhor to think so by the generality of the Episcopal
persuasion: I would disdain to mention such an unreasonable impiety, were it
not to show the inconsiderate and absurd proceedings of an unalterable
opposition, as that it cannot drive to any formed end and issue. That
Protestants should destroy Protestants, for dissenting in the point of
Ceremonies, and sole Jurisdiction of Bishops, is so dreadful a violation of
Charity and common Honesty, that it is a most uncharitable and dishonest thing
to suppose it of them. What then? would they bear them down, or keep them under
hard conditions? Shall all persons that cannot yield exact obedience to
Ecclesiastical injunctions concerning all the parts of the Liturgy, and
Ceremonies, be suspended and deprived as formerly? Shall Ministers of this
judgment be cast and kept out of Ecclesiastical Preferment and Employment?
Shall all private Conferences of Godly Peaceable Christians, for mutual
edification, be held unlawful Conventicles? It has been thought by wise men to
be against the Rules of Government, to hold under a rigid yoke a free people,
of such a number and quality, and intermingled in all estates and ranks, and
intimately conjoined with all parts of the Body Politic, that it is almost
impossible to exclude their Interest from a considerable share in public
actions.

judicious serious Party, pray let us allow them to be a Company of very fine
Gentlemen, and mind our business. I think he says they are numerous too. So
were the Frogs that came into the King's Chamber: and what of that?

In good truth, altogether, it is a very pretty Anagram of Sedition. If it
wants any single Circumstance that is needful to procure a Tumult, I am
exceedingly mistaken.

Mark it, here is Number; Conduct, and Pretense of Right, to Embolden, and to
Fix the Multitude. Then, to Provoke, and Heighten them: old Sores are rubbed;
they are minded how they were used so long ago; and hinted yet of worse behind,
if they have not a care betimes. What is all this to say? but

Gentlemen, you remember how it was with you formerly; if you have a mind to
any more of That, so. But things are well enough yet; there are those will
stand by you that know what they have to do, and enough to make their hearts ache.
-- Why it is against all Rule of Government, to put this yoke upon a Free
People. --

If the Author be within hearing; he should do well to be his own Expositor. In
the mean while, compare we the Gloss with the Text.

He speaks now in his own words, which the Reader may find by conferring them
with the entire matter of the last Quotation, to be extracted with the
strictest justice to his meaning.

Here is (says he) a numerous Party, of the judicious and serious part of the
Nation: what will they (the Episcopalians) do with them? etc. would they
destroy them? etc. I solemnly profess, that I abhor to think so of the
generality of the Episcopal persuasion, etc. shall they be suspended, and
deprived as formerly? shall all private conferences of godly, peaceable
Christians, for mutual edification, be held unlawful Conventicles? It has been
thought by wise men to be against the Rules of Government to hold under a rigid
yoke a Free People of such a Number, and Quality. --

This is cutting of a Man's Throat with a Whetstone. Truly Horace his saying
would sound very well from this Gentleman.

-- Fungor vice Cotis, acutum
Reddere quae ferrum valet, exors ipse secundi.
My Office is to Whet, not Cut. To tie him up now to his own Philosophy, which
is, (according to his fore-alledg'd Position) that all Rational Enterprises
propose some certain End, unto which end, all wise men conform their mediate
Actions. If it be so, (as we are agreed upon it) then by that very reason which
directs him to choose the means, are we enabled likewise to guess the end.

His End, he says, is Peace; and in this Treatise he has chalked his way to it.
He Is a wise man, and certainly proceeds in order to the Mark he levels at. Let
him be judge by his own Rule.

To mind the peevish of old Grievances, and in so doing to transport the honest
with a just sense of new indignities; The Presbyterian Method of making Peace.
Is this the way of Peace?

To break a solemn Law; that Law that saved the Breakers of it; to abuse the
Mercy of the Prince that made it; and to traduce the Government of his Father,
whom they themselves destroyed; and which is worse, to justify all this: Is
this the way of Peace?

To startle the mad brutish Rabble with dangerous apprehensions; to lay the
justice of their Cause before them, and when they are ripe for mischief, to
show them Men and Arms, -- Is this the way of Peace?

-- Then let me learn which is the way of Tumult.

Shall Protestants destroy Protestants, (says he) for dissenting in the point
of Ceremonies? No, but the Law shall destroy Subjects, for attempting to Rule
their Governors.

Touching their Conventicles, since they fal^ in my way, I think of them, as of
the Painter'^ Bad God that made a Good Devil: I take them to be none of the
best Churches, but for ought I know, they may make excellent --

I beg ye only to observe now, the equity o^ these good Folks.

Page 38.
Is it for the service of Christ, and the encreas^ of his Kingdom the Church,
that so many abl^ Divines should be debarred the use of the Lord Talents, that
so many laborious Minister should sit still in silence; that when Christ
teaches us to pray that the Lord would thrust forth Laborers into his
Harvest, those Laborers should be thrust out of his Harvest? Surely this would
make a cry in the ears of the Lord of the Harvest.

Woes in the Gospel belong to this talker of it? The Service of God went
merrily on, in the Thorough Reformation; did it not? When not a Minister kept
his Living, but to the hazard of his Soul; and in several places (where the
allowance was small) neither Sacrament nor Sermon, for diverse years together.
But in those days, the Covenant kept all in good order.

With what a monstrous confidence does this man press a Text, which the whole
Nation knows is clear against him! And all in Scripture Phrase forsooth: Ne
sine forma tantum scelus fiat, for the honor of the exploit. These people use
Religion, as your London-Cooks do their pickled Barbaries: they garnish with
it. It serves for every thing: I know not how it is, but they do it, because
they find the women like it.

When the Episcopal, and loyal Clergy, their Wives, Children, and Families,
were swept entirely away by that SCOTCH PLAGVE the COVENANT; That made no cry
sure in the ears of the Lord of the Harvest. Let the great Great Judge of all
the World determine it.

Page 39.
If the neglect of brotherly Pacification hold on, and the Hierarchy resolve
upon their own advancement to the highest pitch, one may well conclude, that
they make a full reckoning to wear out the Presbyterians, and to swallow up
their Interest, conceiving they are able to effect it by degrees; and that
greater changes than these have been wrought without much ado.

Observation.
Let but the meanest Soul alive now judge of these men's Consciences. (I speak of
those that tumult since the Act of Pardon) As deep a forfeiture as ever was
made by mortals, the King has remitted to them. They have cost the Nation more
then they have left it worth, beside the blood, the Grief, and Desolation they
have brought upon it. This notwithstanding, they have at this Instant the self
same Interest they ever had, as to Freedom and Safety, and otherwise more:
They keep what they got; beg, and get more; and are not yet content unless
they Govern too. But this is but another Alarm, as who should say; Look to your
selves my Masters; lose not an Inch, for if you do, they will do your Business by
degrees,

By and by, among other concurring advantages, to the great Changes Queen
Elizabeth wrought in Religion; he reckons this for one.

Page 42.
Popery (says he) being in substance a Religion contrary to what was publicly
professed, had no advantage for increase by public Preaching, or Books
publicly allowed.

Press and Pulpit, is sufficient to embroyl the best ordered Government in the
World.

All Governments have their Disorders and their Malcontents: The one makes use
of the Other, and here is the ground of all Rebellions. Some Real faults are
first found and laid open to the People, which, if in matter of popular
Freedom, or Religion; so much the stronger is the Impression; the vulgar being
natural^y stubborn; and Superstitious. Bring it to this, a very little Industry
carries it on at pleasure. They shall believe Impossibilities, Act eagerly,
they know not what, nor why; and while they reach at Liberty, grasp their own
Fetters. Their unhappiness is, they can ^etter Phansy a Government without any
^aults, then brook one that has some. Add ^ut to this distemper, Licentious
Pamphlets, and seditious Sermons, the World shall never ^eep that people quiet.

Wherefore since on all hands it is agreed, that Printing, and Preaching in
opposition to a ^ublick establishment, are of so dangerous con^equence, by the
force of the Gentleman's ^wn Rule we ought to hear no more of their Discipline
from the Press or Pulpit. Observe ^is next coherence.

Page 42.
There are now in England thousands of Ministers dissatisfied in the Hierarchy
and Ceremonies, who are all competently and many of them eminently learned.
They are not generally of light spirits, but steady and well resolved, and
tenderly affected touching their spiritual Liberties.

resolute they are. That is, take notice again for we have had it exceeding
often. His Resolute thousands make me think of the Tribe^ repairing to David. 1
Chr. 12.
But they are dissatisfied he says: it may be it is because they are no^
Bishops: Yet truly if they be so well resolved methinks they should not be
dissatisfied with tha^ they cannot help. I Will ask but two Questions and I have
done.

1. Are any of those Tender-conscienc'^ thousandsthat are so tenderly affected
toward spiritual Liberties, those Presbyterians that denye^ the King the
freedom of his own Chaplains?

2. Had any of these eminently learned thousands a hand in the Assemblies
Letter to the Reformed Churches of France, the Low Countries, etc. -- (as great
a Schism in Learnin^ as the other was in Religion) He comes now t^ the point
indeed.

Page 43.
Commonly (says he) those people who try all Doctrines by Scripture, and are
swaye more by its Authority than by the Ordinanc^ and Customs of men, do much
hesitate and stagger concerning the sole Jurisdiction of Bishops, the pomp of
the Hierarchy, and sacred mystical Ceremonies of humane Institution. And
therefore let the Episcopal Party never look to be rid of these difficulties,
till they remove the matters in Question, whereat a knowing people are always
ready to stumble.

Go to then, since the Gentleman will have it so, grant for dispatch the thing
he presses, Observation.
to wit, -- that they do Hesitate, and Stagger. It Is hard, that when upon a
private search, the Question hangs in Balance, the casting in the Authority of
the Church, and the great weight of Christian Charity, should not be yet enough
to turn the Scale. He that doubts, Sins, will not excuse that man, who because
he thinks he stands, refuses to take heed of falling.

But let him doubt, nay more, let him resolve; all is but for himself still,
not for me. When he comes once to muster up his Thousands, and talk of parties,
his plea of Conscience is gone: and doublesse these Violent and public
sticklers for the Scrupulous, (that is in such and such particulars) are the
greatest enemies they have. It casts a Scandal upon the very cause of
Conscience, when those who evidently want it in themselves, plead for it in
others. Upon this Subject, exceedingly well says Mr. Lloyd in a late Treatise
of Primitive Episcopacy, Page 80. It becomes not good men to c^nsure us for
using th^s^ Rights and Ceremonies, which we are persuaded not to be prohibited
by Gods Law, and both they and we do surely know to be commanded to be used by
man's Law duly made, which is Gods Ordinance, to which we must be subject for
Conscience sake. And a little after -- If any will attempt to be Authors of
Combinations, to extort by show of multitudes and by tumults, the alteration or
abrogation of any part of the established Laws, Civil or Ecclesiastical, they
will thereby evidently manifest themselves to be but mere pretenders to a
tender Conscience, and power of Godliness; for they that labor to extort a
part, if they prevail, must have the whole in their power. And can they that
attempt so great Robbery, love God, and the Power of Godliness? By this cursed
fruit, we know these to be most vile-Hypocrites. Now to our Adversary.

The Gentleman desires to clear the Presbyterians of being no Phanaticks: and
we'll give him the hearing.

It is said that the Presbyterians promoted the Kings Return, page 54.
not out of good will to His Majesty, or a love of Order, and Unity, but out of
fear of being destroyed by the Phanaticks.] To this I shall say little but that
I believe there was more in it than so. Let him argue upon it.

The pretended reason of their insincerity seems to me to add much to their
reputation in that behalf. Ibid.
For if the Phanaticks would destroy them, it is manifest that they are none of
them. Phanaticks would not destroy themselves willingly. The several various
Sects will wrangle with each other in verbal contests; but they never knowingly
plotted or banded against each other upon the account of their different
Opinions, but did all unite in one common Principle of pretended Liberty of
Conscience, and in one common cause of Universal Toleration.

A pleasant Reasoning. Observation.
A man would think Christianity as strong a tie as Phanaticisme, and yet we see
Christians destroy one another. But come to the point. What Is more familiar
then for a couple of Curs to hunt the same Hare, and when they have caught
her, worry one another for the Quarry? I Will tell this Gentleman a thing now,
shall make him take me for a Conjurer. I Will tell him the true reason why those
Presbyterians helped His Majesty in, that are not quiet now they have him. Not
for fear of the Phanatiques: he made that Objection himself for ought I know;
but Here it is. (Still saving to my self the freedom of Interpreting my own
words.)

I speak only of those Presbyterians that since His Majesty's happy Return, are
yet fomenting of new Troubles.

The Presbyterian Faction have been ever constant to the rule and method of
doing their own Business in the Kings name; The Presbyterians do their own
business in the Kings name.
and this went far with the simple, and well meaning people; but let not any
man believe this Interest did their work. The ruin of His blessed Majesty, was
that unhappy Agreement with the Covenanters in 1639. after so horrid an expense
of Time and Money, as gave the greatest benefit imaginable to their Interest,
and an equal disadvantage to his own. The King by his expense being grown poor
and they strong by the Delay, was more and more oppressed, till at the last the
Field was cleared: He and His Party in appearance lost.

What did these great Pretenders then for the good of King and Church, but
share the booty, and exercise a Power themselves ten thousand times more
Turkish then ever they called that they had abolished? what hindered then the
Settlement of this Nation upon its legal Basis, (as they phrase it) if the good
people had but had a mind to it? Who kept the King from his Parliament? -- or
was he ever named but with relation to the Loss of Right as well of Power.

Well, but at last, these people take their turns too, and then the King's a
Gracious Prince again. These Factions are of Kin to Montaignes Family, where
the Son beats the Father from generation to generation. Now we come near our
purpose.

Look back into the Scotch defeat in 1648. Not any thing more clear sure, then
that the Presbyterian party, would they but frankly have closed with the Kings
Tried Friends in that Engagement; without a Miracle, they must have carried it.
Those Few they had, did well nigh all that was considerable in the Action.

See afterward, in 50, and 51. how dirtily upon this very account, the
Presbyterian crew treated his Majesty: and look quite through their
Interregnum; they have observed the same indisposition of uniting with the
Kings Party, but still shaking the Head, with an Alas poor Gentleman, at the
mention of our persecuted Sovereign. Not to insist upon English Particulars;
They never would join with Us to help his Majesty, we never refused with them.
Now comes the Mystery of the Reserve. Say they,

If we can order Matters so as to get the King's Person in the head of us, and
keep out his Party, Their hands are tied by a Principle of Duty; Our Power is
enlarged upon an Interest of favor, and we can play our Game at pleasure. That
is; We Will not forget to mind him of his RESTORERS, and now and then a Whisper,
how DEBAUCHD the Gentry's grown; how unfit this man is for Trust, that for
Temper, and a Third for Conduct.

We may then propose the naming of Officers, and wee'r to blame if we forget
our selves. By these Degrees, and ways, Time, and a little Patience will wear
them out; or if it were nothing else, the very Poverty we have reduced them to,
would make them ^oon Contemptible.

Whereas should we but offer once a General agreement with that Party, our
Design's spoiled, for they will be more than we shall well know how to master.
That must not be. Our Interest lies to take in just so many, as when they have
done our Work, we may be able to turn out again. So much for That.

This is the very Soul of the rigid Presbyterians. Page 60.
Poor Worms, Where is our Charity and Regard (they cry) to public
tranquillity, if we reject the sure and only means of Concord?]

Providence, if we admit so sure an Introduction to Confusion? To comply with
one Importunity of this nature, is to Authorize, and encourage more; and to
please all, is totally Impossible.

The Canons stick in his Stomach notably, they force too much, and bring in
Popery [Shall not the Laity be allowed to search the Scriptures, Page 61.
nor try the Doctrines delivered, but acquiesce in what their Teachers say
without the Exercise of their own reasoning, or judgment of Discretion?]

search the Scriptures, as their Teachers may the Laws, yet by their Leave,
the Church and Bench must interpret them. What difference is there betwixt King
James his Phanatiques, and King Charles his; save that they ascribe one and the
same Effect to several Causes. Both claiming equal Certainty, the One, from his
Judgment of Discretion: the Other, from Divine Impulse? What work shall we
have when every Taylour shall with his Judgment of Discretion cut out his own
Discipline, and set it up for a Fashion: When these men and their Bibles are
alone together (as Hooker says) what Phrensies do they not call directions of
the Spirit?

He comes now to the Politics.

It is a chief point of knowledge in those whose work it is to mould and manage
a Nation according to any order of things, Page 62.
to understand what is the temper of the people, what Principles possess and
govern them, or considerable Parties of them, and to what pass things are
already brought among them.

Scotized English Presbyterian. By Temper he is Ambitious; and Unthankful; ever
Craving; and never Full: Governed by Principles Insociable, and Cruel. He rates
his Party, his Piety, and his Kindness, twenty times greater then they are,
and rather than confess that he is out in his Reckoning, he shall face any
other man down that one on the wrong side of a Cipher is 1000

Lastly, in Considering to what pass things are brought among them, he will
bethink himself likewise how they came to be so.

A State may probably root out such Opinions as it conceives to be heterodox
and inconvenient, Page 63.
by using great severity in the beginning, when the Opinions are but newly
sowed in men's minds, and the People are of such a nature, as to abhor dangers,
and aim to live securely, and when the Nation in general is devoted to the
ancient custom of their Forefathers. But the same course may not be taken when
the Opinions have been deeply rooted and far spread by long continuance, in a
Nation of a free spirit, and zealous, and the generality of those, that in a
Law-sense are called Cives, do not detest them.

Truly in this Case, if Heterodox Opinions cannot be rooted out, Observe.
the Men that publicly maintain them, must: and the rather, if they be free,
and zealous: for there is the more danger in their further Progress. Especially
if such Opinions prescribe from the success of Treason. For There, even in
matters of themselves very Allowable, I would not leave the least marque of an
approbation. It gives too great an honor to Rebellion. Provided always that I
act at Liberty, and free from Pre-ingagements.

Where there is such a Real Cause of Fear, as is here shadowed to us; That
Prince that loves his Empires or his Honor, must struggle with it betimes:
Safety, or Pleasure, such a people perhaps will be content to allow in exchange
for Sovereignty: But for the rest, that Prince is lost that puts himself on the
Asking side.

It never fayles, this Rule: when Subjects earnestly press for more than they
ought, they aim at more yet than they ask. They are already past their Duty,
and short of their Ambition.

In such a Case as This, Rigor is the only Remedy: great Aptness to forgive
is entertained with greater Pronesse to offend.

Let it be thought upon; if any Danger, where it lies: Not in the bare Conceit
of Fancy, or Dislike, for, or against the Matter in Dispute, but in the means
that give Form, growth, and strength to those unquiet Motions; and that
assemble those Loose scattered Sparks into one Flame.

These Instruments are mercenary Pulpitmen, and Scriblers; it is but removing
them, and the Danger's over.

Least he should seem to want a Color for these Freedoms, he tells us, Page 65
that [ the present Age being more discerning, all sorts affect a greater
Liberty of Judgment and Discourse, than has been used in Former times.]

This we observed, but did not till now impute it to Discretion. Observation.
Suppose they should grow more and more Discerning, and their Desires of
Liberty grow too; would not these People soon grow Wise enough to Govern, that
are already grown too good to Obey? It Is dangerous trusting of them; yet he
assures us otherwise.

This Kingdom, after the removing of foundations, Page 66.
is by a mavelous turn reestablished upon its ancient basis. And verily that
which has wrought the change will settle it; that which has brought such
things to pass, will keep them where they are, if we do not overlook and
slight it: And what was it, but the consent of the universality, the Vote of
all England?

Prayers, rather than these Expostulations. It Is an ill Age when Thieves
arraign the Law. That sort of men which ruined us, proposes now that very
Method, by which we were destroyed, to settle us, inviting the distempered
people by this Overture, to take their Poysoners for their Physicians.

It Is very true, that (under Providence) It was the Common Vote, and stirring
of the Nation, restored the King, and the Law: and shall we now restrain that
Universal Comfort to the particular Advantage of that single Party, that first
invaded them? How great a blemish were it to the Honor, and wisdom of the
Nation, after so long, and hard a Tugg, to throw away the sum of the Contest:
as if we had wrangled all this while for Shadows! But to explain my self.

They that think matter of Ceremony to be the True reason of the Difference on
either side, mistake themselves. It is the Law it self, which is assaulted by
the One Party, and defended by the Other, in the Particular of Ceremony: and it
is the King himself that is affronted in the Indignities they cast upon
Bishops. To leave the matter clear: There is a Faction which would overthrow
the Law, and set up themselves above it; and These Contrivers put the People
upon Cavilling for Ceremonies. They innocently, under a mistake of Conscience,
advance an Interest of Usurpation, taking that to be only a Dispute about the
Lawfulness of the Practice, which rationally pinches upon the validity of the
Power. It ends in this.

Grant once, that a Popular Vote may overrule a Stated Law, (though but to the
value of a Hair) the virtue of that reason extends to our Freedoms, Lives, and
Fortunes, which by the same Rule they may take away as well as Ceremonies.

And (as the case stands) Kings as well as Bishops.

But [ seeing this great Revolution has not happened by the prevailing force
of one Party, Page 67.
but by the unstrained motion of all England: what reason is there, that one
Party should thrust the other out of its due place of rest; upon the common
Foundation?

No reason in the world. The Law is our common resting place: Observation.
the main Foundation upon which we are all to Bottom. The Law is an impartial
Judge, let That determine which place belongs to Bishops, which to Presbyters;
what Ceremonies are Lawful, and which not.

This is a short and a sure way, worth forty of his Coalition.

Page 73.
Having pressed union hitherto, he proceeds now to remove certain impediments;
One whereof is an erroneous judgment touching the times foregoing the late Wars.

Knox about 1558. from Geneva into Scotland, from thence they were transmitted
into England, since which time, the Abettors of them in both Nations, have
never ceased by Leagues, Tumults, Rebellions, and Usurpations, to embroile the
public Peace, and affront the Supreme Authority.

They have formally proceeded to the Deposing of Princes, the exercise of an
absolute Authority over the Subject: the abrogation of Laws, the Imposition of
Taxes; and, in fine, to all extremities of Rigor, as well in matters of Civil
Liberty, as of Conscience. He that desires a Presbytery, let him but read
Presbyter, for King, in the first Book of Samuel, and the eighth Chapter, and
he shall there find what he is reasonably to expect. These were the pranks
foregoing the late Wars: and such as these will be again, if people be not the
wiser.

But our Camerade will be none of the Party sure: For, Page 74.
I abhor (says he) to take upon me the defense of our late distracted times:
the distempers thereof I would not in any wise palliate.]

Is the wind in that door? Now do I feel by his Pulse, that Crofton's laid by
the heels. He has forgot, Interest of England. Part 1. Page 13.
that the War was between the King, and both Houses of Parliament. And that the
Presbyterian Party in England never engaged under a less Authority than that of
both Houses of Parliament.] And that Presbyterians have never disclaimed, Part
1. Page 49. Ibid. 53.
or abandoned their lawful Prince.] It may be he means, that he will not
justify the Distempers of the other side. But why do we contest? since he
tells us, that --

It is the part of weak and selfish minds to contract Religion to certain modes
and forms which stand not by divine Right, page 75.
but by the wills of men, and which are of little efficacy, and very
disputable, and if supposed lawful, ought to be governed by the Rule of
Charity.

Church to impose upon the People, or the People upon the Church? For the
People on the one side to exempt all, or for the Church on the other side to
bind all.

Order it self is of Divine appointment; but the manner of Ordering (save where
God himself has preimposed) is left to Humane liking and Discretion. To think
(says he) that none is a good Christian, page 75.
a sound Protestant, a fit Minister, that cannot subscribe to such Modes, and
Forms, proceeds from a narrow, and ignoble judgment.

Observation.
He may be a fit Teacher for Geneva, that cannot subscribe to the Form of
England, and a fit Minister for England, that cannot conform to the practice of
Geneva; they may be both good Christians too, and sound Protestants; yet
neither of them fit in transposition. It Is one thing to be qualified for the
Ministerial Function, and another thing to be fit for such or such a
Constitution. It Is true, he Officiates as a Minister: but thus, -- or so -- as
a Subject, and that is the real ground of their exception. They do not willingly
admit the King's Authority in matters of the Church: and that, which
effectually is but their own Ambition, they obtrude upon the world, as a high
point of Tenderness to the people. There are beyond all doubt, weak
Consciences, fit objects for indulgence: but the less pardonable are their
Mis-leaders, whose business it is for their own ends to engage the simple
multitude in painful, and inextricable scruples.

Let them Preach downright Treason, stir up the Rabble to Tumult, and
Sedition: if they chance to be caught and questioned for it: see with what
softness they treat their Fellows, and with what supercilious gravity their
Superiors.

When some degree of forwardness breaks forth, Page 78.
it is encountered with that severity which hazards the undoing of the weak
part, that should and might be healed.] And again, to the same effect,
(concerning Crofton's Commitment, I imagine) [ But suppose that some of this
way were guilty of some provoking forwardness, Page 81.
should grave Patriots and wise Counselors thereupon destroy the weak part, or
rather heal it? A prudent Father is not so provoked by the stubbornness of a
Child, as to cast him out, and make him desperate while there is yet hope
concerning him. It is meet indeed for Princes to express their just
indignation, when Subjects presuming on their Clemency do not contain
themselves within their duty; and the seasonable expression of such disdain,
wisely managed, is of great force in Government: nevertheless if it get the
mastery, it is exceeding perilous. It was the Counsel of Indignation that
proceeded from Rehoboam 's young Counselors.] What this Language deserves both
from the King and his Counsel, let those that have authority to punish, Judge.

Page 83.
When Governors resent the non-compliances of a Party, their best remedy is to
remove the occasions, when it may be done without crossing the Interests of
State, or Maxims of Government.

People will not yield to the Prince, the Prince should do well to yield to the
People. A most excellent way for a King that has to do with Presbyterians:
where he shall be sure never to want subject for his Humility, nor ever to get
thanks for his Labor.

Page 84.
Where there are many sufferers upon a Religious account, whether in truth or
pretense, there will be a kind of glory in suffering, and sooner or later it
may turn to the Rulers detriment.

Sufferers, where there are not many Offenders; and there will not be many
Offenders, where an early severity is used. But however, if any hazard be, he
that prints it, dictates, encourages, and promotes it, and deserves to suffer
with the foremost. But the Gentleman begins now to talk like a Christian. I
detest (says he) and abhor the Tumults, page 98.
and Insurrections of the People, and the resisting of the Sovereign Power.]

Sovereign Power, which he abhorrs should be resisted by the Tumults of the
People? Interest of England. Page 49, Ibid. 98.
Even the Two Houses in co-ordination with the King. A little further, [ I am
persuaded (says he) that the Generality of the Presbyterian denomination would
endure extremities, before they would revenge or defend themselves by unlawful
means, as rebelling against their Lawful Sovereign.



This part (says he) of the Supreme Power (meaning the two Houses) is indeed
capable of doing wrong, Page 49. Interest of England.
yet how it might be guilty of Rebellion, is more difficult to conceive.]

Now if the Two Houses cannot Rebel, as being part of the Supreme Power; (by
his Argument) neither can the Presbyterians, in compliance with that Party: So
that by this mis-placing of the Supreme Authority, whatever has been acted by
virtue of any Commission from the Two Houses, may be done over again, and no
Rebellion.

By this device, he only disavows Rebellion so far as This, or That, is not
Rebellion according to his Proposition, although the Law determine otherwise.
This is no more then what was ever maintained, even by those that stood
themselves upon the highest terms of Disobedience. Did ever any man say, This
is Rebellion, and I Will justify it? Nay, I should be glad to hear any of them
say, This was Rebellion, Page 101.
and I Am sorry for it. [But it is evident, that the Presbyterians love the
King, and Kingly Government, and account themselves happy in his Majesty's
Clemency, allowing them a just and inoffensive Liberty in certain matters of
Conscience.]

more, when they should be doing him service for what they have received
already. They love the King, they say, but then their Love is Conditional, they
must have something for it.

Would they expose themselves for twenty years together, to Gaols and Gibbets,
all sorts of Hazzards and Misfortunes for their Prince, and at the last sit
down and sterve contentedly, out of a sense of honorable Loyalty?

That Subject is not right, who has not brought his mind up to this Frame;
however unhappy he may think himself in such encounters as put him to the Trial
of his utmost Virtue.

page 104.
Wise men inform us, that a Prince by adhereing to one Faction, may in time
lift it up above his own Imperial Interest, which will be forced to give way to
it as the lesser to the greater. And the prime Leaders of the potent Faction
will sway more than the Prince himself. They will become arrogant, unthankful,
and boundless in their ambitious designs.

This is a good Rule, but ill applied; unless returned upon himself.
Observation.
I hope he will not call That Party a Faction, which submits all its Actions to
the clear Letter of the Law; and he will hardly prove That to be none, which
crosses This. If so, let Common Reason judge betwixt us.

There is a saying, which by many has been taken up for a Proverb, No Bishop,
no King. page 106.
I do not well understand the rise of this saying, and therefore dare not speak
in derogation of their Judgments who were the Authors of it. But upon the
matter it self, I crave to make this modest Animadversion. And first it is some
degrading to the transcendent Interest of Sovereignty, to affix unto it a
necessity of any one partial interest for its support: for Independency and
Self-subsistence, without leaning upon any Party, is a Prince his strength and
glory. Also it makes that Party over-confident, and its opposite too
despondent. Such sayings as import a Princes necessary dependence on any
particular Party, may in the mouths of Subjects be too presumptuous, and in
the mouth of a Prince too unwary.

Observation.
If we are not yet instructed in the Weight and Reason of that saying, -- NO
BISHOP, NO KING; sure we are past Learning any thing. We found the sad truth of
this Judgment, in the event of the late War; but that is no Rule. By No Bishop
no King, is not intended that Bishops are the props of Royalty, nor do the
Episcopalians understand it so: but that both one and the other are Objects of
the same Fury, only the Church goes First: so that without presumption, a
Subject may affirm it; and without loss of Honor, a Prince may grant it.

I might draw Arguments from the Agreement of their Original, the likeness of
their Constitution, the Principles by which they are supported, and that they
lie exposed to the same Enemies, and the same method of Destruction. But this
would seem to imply a more Inseverable Interest then I aim at; and raise the
Clergy above the proper State and Orb of Subjects. My meaning is more clear and
open.

All Popular Factions take the Church in their way to the State; and I am to
seek where ever any Prince quitted Episcopacy, and saved Himself. That is, his
Royal Dignity; for the empty name of King, is but the Carcass of Majesty. It is
with the unruly Populacy, as it is with raging Tides, they press where the Bank
is weakest, and in an instant overrun all. If they had either Modesty, or
Conscience, they would not force so far: if they have neither, will they stop
There? what did the late King Grant; or rather, what Deny? till by their mean
Abuse of his unlimited Concessions, he lost his Crown, and Life? Yet what
assurance Words could give him, he wanted not: Words wrapped up in the most
tender and Religious Forms imaginable. But what are Words where a Crown lies at
stake?

In fine, Treason's a Canker; and where it seizes, that Prince must early cut
off the Infected part, if he would save the Sound.

The true Church lies in the middle between two extremes, Formalists, and
Fanatics. Page 116.
They are of circumspect and regular walking, no way forward in attempting or
desiring alterations in a Civil State. A Prince does hold them in obedience
under a double bond. For they know they must needs be subject not only for
wrath, but for Conscience sake. Indeed we will not conceal, that in lawful
ways they assert that Liberty which is settled by the known Laws and
Fundamental Constitutions, the maintaining whereof is the Prince's as much as
the Peoples safety.

If to be no way Forward in promoting Changes in the Civil State, Observation.
be a marque of the Church: The Presbyterians are out of the Pale. It Is truth,
they are, it seems, Assertors of Lawful Liberty, in Lawful ways; but how is
that I pray'e? Did they not tell us this when their Swords were at our Throats,
when it was Death to assist the King, when they were forced to fly to the
Equitable sense of the Law, and quit the Literal, and fetch their Arguments,
from Inspiration, because they had none in Reason.

I shall here put an End to this Discourse, which is become much longer already
than I meant it, by reason of his Addition. Crofton's ill Fortune I find has
made him wary, but not humble; for he presses the same Things in substance
still, though in somewhat a differing manner of Respect, and seeming Candor.
The good Words he gives, belong to those Persons which he shall vouchsafe to
Call serious, and to think worthy of them; and the Government is to be molded,
and disposed of as he pleases.

Finally, he pretends to aim at a Fair, and Christian Accord, and yet proceeds
in a direct method of Dividing: by sharp, and scandalous Reflections upon the
Kings Party.

To say no more, his Reasonings are Dishonorable to the memory of the Late
King; Seditious, and Provoking to the People; Bold, and Imposing in themselves;
Repugnant to the established Law, and to the main scope of the General Pardon.

How out of all these ill Ingredients should be composed a National, and
healing balsome, I shall now give the Reader leisure to consider.

Male imperatur, ubi regit Vulgus Duces. FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books Printed for Henry Brom, at the Gun in Ivy-lane.
THe Alliance of Divine Offices, exhibiting all the Lyturgies of the Church of
England since the Reformation, by Hamon L'Estrange Esquire in fol.

The Souls Conflict, being eight Sermons preached at Oxford, and so much
recommended by Dr. Hewit, in 8.

Dr. Browns Sepulchrall Urns and Garden of Cyrus. in 8.

Two Essays of Love and Marriage in 12.

The Royal Exchange, A Comedy in 4. by R. Brom.

Five new Plays* by R. Brom, never before printed, in 8.

Poems by the Wits of both Universities, in 8.

A Treatise of Moderation, by Mr. Gaul, in 8.

St. Bonaventures Soliloquies, in 24.

Mr Baxter's Treatise of Conversion, in 4.

The Common Law Epitomized, with Directions how to prosecute and defend
personal actions, very useful for all Gentlemen, to which is annexed the
nature of a Writ of Error, and the General proceedings thereupon, in 8.

Golden Remains by that most Learned R. Stuart D. D. Dean of Westminster and
Clerk of the Closet to King Charles the first, being the last and best
Monuments that are likely to be made public, in 12.

Mr. Sprat's Plague of Athens, in 4.

Jews in America by Mr. Thorowgood, in 4.

The Royal Buckler, or a Lecture for Traitors, in 8.

A view of some late remarkable Transactions, leading to the happy Government
under our gracious Sovereign King Charles the Second, by R. L'Estrange Esquire in 4.

All the Songs on the Rump in 8.

The Pourtraicture of his sacred Majesty King Charles the Second, from his
Birth 1630. till this present year 1661. being the whole story of his escape at
Worcester, his travailes and troubles.

The Covenant discarged by John Russel, in 4.

The complete Art of VVater-drawing in 4.

Mr. Boys his Translation of the 6th. Book of Virgil in 4.

Mr. Walwin's Sermon on the happy return of King Charles the Second.

A perfect discovery of VVitchcraft, very profitable to be read by all sorts of
people, especially Judges of Assize before they pass sentence on condemned
persons for witches, in 4.

A short view of the Lives of the Illustrious Princes, Henry Duke of
Gloucester, and Mary Princess of Orange deceased, by T. M. Esquire in 8.

Aeneas his Voyage from Troy to Italy; an Essay upon the third Book of Virgil,
by I. Boys, Esquire in 8.

Trapp on the Major Prophets, in fol.

Songs and other Poems, by A. Brom, Gent.

Mr. Grenfeilds Loyal Sermon before the Parliament.

A Caveat for the Cavaliers.

A Modest Plea both for the Caveat and Author, by R. L'Estrange Esquire

The History of Portugal in 8.

Cases of Conscience, in the late Rebellion resolved by W. Lyford B. D.
Minister of Sherburn in Dorsetshire.


