TITUS OATS. D. D.


Capt. WILLIAM. BEDLOE.


Mr: Stephen. Dugdale.


Mr: Miles Prance.


A COMPENDIOUS HISTORY OF THE MOST Remarkable Passages OF THE LAST FOURTEEN
YEARS: With an Account of the PLOT, As it was carried on both before and after
the FIRE OF LONDON, to this present Time.

Tantum Religio potuit suadere malorum.

LONDON: Printed by A. Godbid, and J. Playford, and are sold by S. Neale, at
the Three Pigeons in Bedford-Street over against the New-Exchange, 1680.

TO THE READER.
THese ensuing Sheets are chiefly the Relation of the wonderful passages of the
14 last Years. Then the 2 last of which there are few that deserve to be more
Celebrated in History, next to those that were so renowned for the Active part
of the KINGS Restoration: though it may be questioned to which History will
give the precedence: whether to those of His Restoration, or those of His
preservation. In reference to which, several of the occurrences have almost
equaled Miracles, and therefore merit to be recorded, and to be read with
consideration, as the evincing Proofs of an overruling Providence.

The Relation begins at the great Conflagration of the CITY, as being the first
remarkable Effect of the Treason then hatching. For to repeat the stories of
Queen Elizabeth, King James, and King Charles the first; would have bin only to
have tired the Reader, with what is already sufficiently made known, both in
English and Latin, to all the Protestants in the World; and only serves to
swell a Volume to the unprofitable and needless expense of the Buyer. If any
thing has bin left out, it has bin for fear of invading the properties of other
Men, whose Narratives though at that time seasonable, yet can never hope to be
inserted in a story, where their Epitomes are only necessary. Omissions may be,
but it is thought, by those that have viewed these sheets, there are very few or
none of Moment. Whatever they be, the Reader, it is hoped, will pardon them,
considering the multiplicitie of affairs, and the present juncture of time.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Cabal of Several Notorious Priests and Jesuits, Discovered, as, William
Ireland, Thomas White alias Whitebread, Provincial of the Jesuits in England.
William Harcourt, pretended Rector of London. John Fenwick, Procurator for the
Jesuits in England. John Gaven alias Gawen, and Anthony Turner, etc. showing
their Endeavors to Subvert the Government, and Protestant Religion. viz. Their
Treasonable Practices in England and France: Articles of their Creed: Their
stirring people to Rebellion: frequenting Quakers Meetings in all sorts of
Apparel: Their Usurpations: Murdering of Infants and Incontinency in their own
Classis: Their unclean acts in their Visits, Churches, Houses, Travels and
Nunneries: Coining false money: Bloody Revenges and strange Ingratitudes: The
number of their Orders with the divisions and strifes now in that Society.

By a Lover of his King and Country, who formerly was an Eyewitness of these
things.

THE high zeal of those that are of the Roman Catholic profession proceeds
either from Policy or Devotion. The Politic zeal is counterfeited by the
Priests and Rulers of the Church: but the zeal of Devotion is imposed by them
upon the People. The one is Active, the other Passive; and though the Passive
are sometimes seduced by the Active to Action, yet does that Action seem to be
a passion, in regard they suffer themselves to be overpersuaded to do it. Of
these two sorts of zeal does the Roman Catholic Religion consist; Which because
they are both made use of for the propagation of their pretended Faith, or
rather for the enlargement of their Tyrannical Dominion, and the satisfaction
of their insatiate Avarice, they are therefore founded upon all the Maxims of
Cruelty and Barbarism imaginable. Nay their very mercies are inhumanities,
while their Absolutions and Dispensations do but encourage the perpetration of
all manner of Impiety, and by that means maintain a perpetual War against all
mankind, and destroy the necessary Converse of humane Society. Thus while they
seek to subjugate the World to themselves, where they find themselves too weak,
they fall to contrivance. Hence those Effusions of Blood, and dismal Massacres
licensed by the Pope, and encouraged and applauded in their public harangues by
the Jesuits and Priests, his Godly Emissaries and holy Instruments: Hence
those Treasons against Queen Elizabeth, those Horrid Machinations against King
James; hence this Villainous Plot, that has been so long hatching against the
Person of the best of Kings, of which we are now to make a short but a
Methodical History, to remain as a public Record, filled to Perpetuity, of their
inhuman Butcheries and foul Contrivances so bloodily and so profanely.
intended.

The Design was laid home and smartly; the Conspirators aimed at no small
things, no less than the Murder of a Great Monarch, the subversion of his Laws
and Government, and the total Perdition of three Kingdoms under his Sovereign
care.

The Chief Actors upon this bloody Stage were the whole Body of the Roman
Catholic Clergy, even from the Triple Crown to the poor selfdenying Dominican
and Innocence - pretending Benedictine. For his Holiness in a General Council
for the propagation of the Faith, held in December 1677. had adjudg'd the King
of Great Britain to be certainly a Heretic, and for that very reason had vainly
deposed him, and as impudently confiscated his Dominions, as being St. Peter's
Patrimony forfeited to him for the Heresy of the King and People; To which
purpose he also appointed Cardinal Howard to take possession of England, as his
Legate, in his Name. He had moreover in his fond imagination displaced all the
Archbishops, Bishops, etc. from their Ecclesiastical Employments; and all
others from their Secular Dignities, and constituted his own Minions in their
places. What Jesuit or Priest, upon so free and authentic Donation as the Pope
thus made them of his new Forfeitures, but would have ventured a Caper at
Tyburn, for an Archbishopric of York, or a Bishopric of Winchester, or the fat
Glebes belonging to many a reassumed Abbey and Monastery? Nor can we doubt but
that they had been many Years brooding over such a Magnificent design, which
they had so nearly hatched and matur'd to perfection. Especially considering
how long ago it was that we felt the dreadful Effects of their Treason, before
the happy discovery of their impious Conjurations.

It was in the Year 1666. upon the 2d of September, that the greatest fire
brake forth, hardly to be paralleled in Story, which sacrificed to the fury
and Ambition of the Jesuits and Popish Priests the fairest and largest part of
one of the Richest and most populous Cities in the World.

As to this fatal and destructive Fire, which destroyed 373 Acres within, and
63 Acres and three Roods without the Walls of the City, it appears to have been
under Consultation long before the fact was put in Execution. For when they had
once, after several Debates and Communications of Letters, unanimously
resolved, That it was absolutely necessary to ruin the City, and impoverish her
Inhabitants, before they could possibly be able to bring any of their
Contrivances to maturity, Richard Strange, once Provincial of the Jesuits,
took the care of a Fact, so worthy the Order of Jesus upon himself. To which
purpose having made Gray, Pennington, Barton, all three Jesuits, and others,
privy to his Criminal Intentions, they all met together at a public House,
called the Green Dragon, near Puddle Dock, kept by one West, a Tailor. There
after several Consultations, they agreed to have done their work in February
1664. but not having assistance sufficient, nor materials enough ready for
Execution, they desisted for that time. In January 1666. they again renewed
their meetings at the same West's House, and under the pretense of being Fifth
Monarchy Men, they first inveagled one Green into their Society, and with a
bait of 30 l. wherewith they furnished him for his present Necessities, soon
caught the hungry Fish. Green, thus deluded by their Charity and their Canting,
joined with them in their design, both for Firing the City, and Murdering the
King; and in farther gratitude for their kindness, brought into their
acquaintance eight more of the same Gang; who as they were a hotheaded and
inconsiderate sort of Cattle, soon closed with a Combination so suitable to
their own Natures, and were no less zealous in the business then the Jesuits
themselves. Upon this they were all eager to have gone to work in February
following, before the Return of the Inhabitants to London. But Green opposed
that Resolution, representing to the Jesuits, that then they should be the
sooner discovered, in regard that the greater the Uproar was the safer they
should be. More then this, he put them in mind, That the King would not then be
much in Town, if at all, who as Green at that time adviz'd, was to be cut off,
when the people were all in Consternation and hurrey by reason of the Fire.
This advice pleased the subitle Jesuits well, and for those reasons the
business was delayed. Soon after Green, and the rest of the Cabal were
suspected by their Host, the forenamed West, and forwarn'd his House. Upon this
the wary Jesuits like Foxes fled immediately to their Holes and Eathed
themselves at St. Omers, leaving their poor deluded Fifth Monarchy Brethren to
suffer the deserved Punishment of their rash Zeal. For those Fifth Monarchy
Bigots being all taken, the next Sessions were indicted at the Old Baily, by
the Names of John Rathbones, William Saunders, Henry Tucker, Thomas Flint,
Thomas Evans, John Miles, William Westcott, and John Cole, for Conspiring the
Death of his Majesty, and the overthrow of the Government; having laid their
Plot for surprizal of the Tower, killing the Lord General Monk, Sir John
Robinson, and Sir Richard Brown, and then to have declared for an equal
division of Lands. The better to effect which the City was to have been fired,
the Portcullices to have been let down to keep out assistance, and the Horse
guards to have been surpised, several Officers having been gained for that
purpose. Of all this they were found guilty, and soon after Executed, all but
Green, who died in prison, before he came to his Trial. All which nothing
grieved the Jesuits, believing that now, whatever mischief happn'd afterward,
the burden of the Crime would be laid upon the Fanatics. As to the Fathers
that brought them into those noozes, the poor condemned Hotspurs never
mentioned a word concerning them; neither knowing their Names, nor suspecting
them to have been Jesuits, but of their own Faction, and therefore the more
chary of detecting them. Upon notice therefore given to Strange, by Fitzgerald,
an Irish Jesuit, and one Neal of White- happel, that the Fifth Monarchy
Cullies were all safe out of this World, without the least Information given or
notice taken of their Names or Persons, Strange and his Companions returned in
June following, and fell again to their employment, which had been in some
measure managed by their Associates in their absence. To be short, they got
fifty or sixty Irish to ply the Work, and were also in fee with several French
Men, who were faithful in the business, to speak the Phrase of Strange himself.
All things being ready, and the places pitched upon, Strange in August 1666.
removed his Quarters, and lay at a House in Fenchurch Street by the Name of
W^lker; Pennington and Barton lodged at an Apothecaries in Shoo Lane, Gray and
Fitzgerard took up their Querters in White Chapel at the House of Neal
beforenamed, who was to manage the Fire from Thames Street to the Tower. Just
at the Time prefixed one Pie-de-loup and Hubert, both French Men and
Companions, came to an Alehouse in Pudding Lane, adjoining to Farriner the
Baker's, and observing their opportunity, conveyed, at the end of two long
poles, three Fireballs, first lighted with Matches, through a hole in the
Wall, into Farriner's House, not stirring till the Room was in a Flame. This
was the Confession of Hubert himself, and what moreover he acknowledged at his
Execution: For he was sometime after Tried, Condemned, and Executed for this
very fact.

And now the Fire being thus begun, while Night and Consternation bred a
general confusion, the Devils Agents were no less busy in employing their
Masters own Element, at their several stations, till it grew to such a height,
that I need not repeat the dismal havoc which it made, as being yet too fresh
in Memory.

But as if this had not been Impiety enough for the Order of Jesus to boast
of, they had a sort of unsanctified Villains and Jades, to the number of
fourscore or fourscore and six, who made it their business to Plunder, Steal,
and carry away the Goods of the Miserable, in the height of their distraction;
for which purpose the Holy Order had their Warehouses, and receptacles of
Stolen Goods in Wild Street, besides what they concealed in Somerset House; so
that they got by the Fire of London above 14000 l. Among the rest they carried
off a Casquet of Diamond Stones, which was sold by the same Jesuits in
Flanders for 3500 l. Sterling. It is also ascertained from the Mouth of Strange
himself, that there were spent in this Destruction of theirs, above Seven
hundred of those little Hand Granado's, which they flung into Houses, and
called by way of Joke, and Secrecy, Tewksbury Mustard-Balls, now better known
by the name of Jesuits Fireballs.

The next considerable Fire was that in Southwark, which happened in the Year
1676. This Fire was begun by one John Groves, who had several Fire Works made
for that purpose, and three Irish Men, that were his Assistants; so prosperous
in their Villainy, that they set an Oil shop near Saint Margarets Hill on Fire.
For which noble Act the said Groves had 400 l. and the three Irish Men 200 l. a
piece paid them by the Jesuits here in London that set them on Work. However
the Jesuits were no losers by the Bargain: for by the Dexterity of their
plundering Emissaries they got no less then 2000 l. Sterling by that Desolation.

In the Year 1676. a great Cabal was held in the English Covent of Benedictine
Monks at Paris, for the carrying on the great Work of subverting the Protestant
Religion and introducing Popery into England.

For the accomplishing of which Design, they could not imagine any means more
probable, then by continual Fires, to weak'n, if not utterly demolish the
remaining Splendour of the City and Suburbs of London; Affirming withal, that
they would never leave that heritic Heap, till they had brought down her Pride
by Fire and Py racy.

These Results being transmitted to their Correspondents in England, were here
with no less fervency debated, and no less sedulous endeavors used to satisfy
as well their own Cruelty, as the longing Expectations of their Brethren in
iniquity beyond Sea. Of these Consultations the real Effects were those Fires
near Limehouse, Sept. 18. 1678. at Wapping, where Blundell the Jesuit was the
Master Engineer, and St. Katherines, designed likewise for the burning of the
Ships in the River, as also in several other places; which though they had not
that success which they desired, however showed the heat of their Zeal, and
their Kindness to the Kingdom. The same Fate was destined for Westminster, and
that ancient Monunument of our Ancestors Magnificence, who never intended that
Noble Sructure for the spoil of Loyola's caitif brood. This Fire was to have
begun its progress near the Palsgrave's-head, without Temple Bar, and having
baited at the Savoy, was to have been driven on again by the Benedictins on
both sides of the way to White Hall, from whence, near the end of the Stone
Gallery, it was to have been conveyed by fresh Company to Westminster. All
which grand Contrivance was to have been put in execution in the time of the
great Frost, in the year 1676. But then it seems they were not well assured of
the Assistance of the French King; of which they were afterward fully
ascertained by Le Cheise, Confessor to the said King, and his Correspondent,
Mr. Coleman.

No wonder such hellish Designs were laid by men whose confidence almost
exceeded Admiration. For though the Plot were in some part at that time
discovered, yet did they venture to carry on their Design, and kindled a Fire
near Limehouse, the 18th of Sept. 1678, as is already mentioned, which in three
or four hours time consumed and laid level with the ground between forty and
fifty Houses, and had questionless made a greater devastation, had not the
active Courage, and unwearied Toil of the Seamen put a stop to the fury of the
Flames. Whence we may be well assured that they had resolutely intended the
utter desolation of this Ancient and Potent City (in nothing more unhappy then
in the largeness of her Extent) had not the discovery of their Treasons and
villainous Impieties warmed them with such another kind of miraculous heat, as
melted their Cabals, yet cooled the violence of their fiery proceedings.

The Jesuits had soon the scent, which only the smother made, in their Noses;
having a smart Intelligence that Dr. Oats had been in company with a
Protestant Minister. This startled the Provincial, Monsieur Whitebread; and yet
he had the confidence to write to Mr. Bedingfield, not to take notice of what
Keins, (it seems the whisperer of the unwelcom News) had told him; but to
proceed in the business of the King, and in the whole Affair, as before. Nay,
he was so Cocksure, as to come to London the third of September. The next day
the Doctor went to visit him, or rather to wait on him by order of his
Superiors. But then the Scene was altered: the incensed and sow'r Provincial
changed both his Countenance and Behavior. For he not only reviled the Doctor
in words, asking him, With what face he could look on him, that had played him
such a treacherous trick? but entertained him with blows and a courteous box of
the Ear, (for St. Peter may strike, as well as teach) as being charged for
having been with the King, and a Minister with him.

However, that the Jesuits Trade might still go forward, I mean Murder, the
good natured Provincial was willing to be reconciled to the Doctor, on
condition he would discover the Minister's Name, and his place of abode, to the
end they might make him sure, for they resolved to have killed him.

In the mean time the Doctor was ordered to march, and within fourteen days to
return to St. Omers; and that he might not delude them with a slippery cheat,
they took upon them to pay for his Coach-hire and Provision upon the Road to
Dover, and at Calice ordered the Master of the Feathers to pay for his passage
to St. Omers; unwilling to trust him with so much Money at his own disposal.
There he was also to stay till farther Order from the Provincial; and an
excellent Office, which was to be Surveyor of the firing of Wapping, taken out
of his hands and committed to the charge and industry of the more trusty Father
Blundel.

But upon the sixth of September at night, the Doctor attending at the
Provincial's Chamber door, and just ready to go in, overheard Monsieur White,
and some others, whom by their voices he conjectured to be Mico, and one Poole,
consulting how to dispose of a certain person, whom he vehemently suspected to
be himself. The words, not to be omitted, were these:

This man has betrayed us, and therefore we will give a Coachman Twenty Pound to
take him up, and carry him directly to Rochester, to Esquire Lee' s house, who
lives near the Town; and from thence to Dover, by some by-way, because he is
acquainted at Sittinborn. Adding withal, That if they could but get him on the
other side the Water, they would torment him, till he had confessed to them,
who it was that had been with the King, and had informed him of the Business.

These Words begat in the Doctor a rational fear; so that he made all the have
he could down Stairs, to avoid the danger, and for his better security, shifted
his Lodging that night.

The next night, as he was returning to his own Lodging, for some Necessaries
which he wanted the day following, he met with one Grigson, a Papist; who
informed him, That the Jesuits were highly incensed against him, because he had
not answered their Expectations, in being true to them: that they were
dangerous persons, and would ruin him, if they could. To which he added, That
he had known their Roguery these twelve or fourteen years.

The Doctor surpised with this Caution went no further, but staid with the
said Grigson, and lay that night at his Lodging: where he had no sooner
composed himself to rest, but one Stafford, a Son of Papistical Zeal, whom he
never knew, nor ever in his life provoked, attempted to force open his Lodging,
but was constrained to retreat, when he found himself discovered by the
Servants of the House: so that from that time forward he grew more jealous of
them, and careful of himself.

Thus much for the Preliminaries, which give a fair insight into the Age and
Series of this detestable Contrivance. It will now be requisite to embody the
Design, and to display the whole Mystery, that thereby the Crimes of every
Malefactor (for I cannot in Conscience call them Martyrs) that has hitherto
been justly Executed, may more clearly appear.

The grand and general Design then of the Pope, the Pious and Zealous Society
of Jesuits, and their Accomplices and Associates in this as disingenious, and
raskally, as unchristian Conspiracy was to have reduced the flourishing
Kingdoms of Great Britain and Ireland to the Romish Religion, and under the
Papal Jurisdiction.

To accomplish this, the Pope had Entitled himself by way of Confiscation and
Forfeiture to the Kingdoms of England and Ireland. He had sent the Bishop of
Casal, in Italy, into Ireland, to make out his Title to that Kingdom, and to
take Possession in his behalf; and had constituted Cardinal Howard his True and
Lawful Attorney, for the same intent and purpose in England. But these fair
Vineyards could not be enjoyed, so long as the right owner lived, and had power
to defend his own Inheritance. Therefore was the King himself by his Holiness
impiously condemned, and by the Consults of the Jesuits and Priests at London,
applauded and encouraged by the Birds of the same Feather abroad, disposed and
destined to a lewd Assassination. And to make good the Attempt, the Papal Force
in both Nations was to be Armed, and that under Officers and Commanders
commissionated by St. Peter's Authority, given to the General of the Jesuits at
Rome, and by him conveyed to the Provincial of the same Order in England. In
this, somewhat mannerly, that the King was not to fall alone, but to be
attended by some of his nearest Relations, and choicest Peers, of which number
was his own Brother, if he did not fully answer their Expectations, the Prince
of Orange, the Duke of Ormond, and the Earl of Shaftsbury.

Into Scotland twelve Scotch Jesuits were sent by Order from the General of the
Society, and had a Thousand Pound given them by Le Cheese, the French King's
Confessor, to keep up the Commotions in Scotland, and had Instructions given
them to carry themselves like Nonconformists among the Presbyterians, the
better to drive on their Design.

The Conquest and Subduing of Ireland was contrived and designed by a general
Rebellion and Massacre of the Protestants in that Kingdom, for which the Actors
had a late Precedent to go by. For the carrying on whereof the Pope had been so
liberal, as to disburse Eight Hundred Thousand Crowns out of his own Treasury.
And for fear their own Power might not be sufficient, there was a French Plot
cunningly and a-la-modely interwoven with their English Conspiracies to bring
in Foreign Assistance, and Correspondencies, held for that purpose between them
and the King of France's Confessor at Paris.

But Heaven, that saw and with indignation beheld the dark and infernal
Practices of them, that by acting contrary to all Piety and Virtue, were
bringing a Reproach and Scandal upon Heaven and Christianity it self, would no
longer suffer them to proceed in such an Execrable Tragedy. A Crime that had it
come to Execution, Hell would have blushed, and the Devils in union among
themselves, might have had a prospect of some probability of Mercy, beholding
men more wicked then they.

The Discovery then being fully resolved upon in the Breast of Dr. Oats, he
makes his first Applications to Dr. Tongue, both for his Advice and Assistance.
Who upon Monday the 13th of August, 1678, acquainted Mr. Christopher Kirkby
with the detection of a Popish Conspiracy against the King's Sacred Person and
the Protestant Religion, showing him withal the Three and Forty Articles, as
he had received them in Writing from Dr. Oats, and requesting him not to make
the business known at first to any other person then the King himself. Many
difficulties showed themselves in the Management of this Affair, which required
the more wariness in proceeding. So that Mr. Kirkby, not finding an Opportunity
to speak in private with the King that Afternoon, prepared a certain Paper to
put into his hands the next Morning, as he went to walk in the Park. His
Majesty having received and read it, called Mr. Kirkby to Him, who then only
gave him this short Account, That his Enemies had a design against his Life,
and therefore besought him to have a care of his Person, for that he knew not
but that he might be in danger in that very Walk which he was about to take;
desiring withal, a more private place for a more particular Account. Thereupon
his Majesty commanded him to wait his return out of the Park: At what time
calling Mr. Kirkby into his Bedchamber, he commanded him to declare what he
knew.

Mr. Kirkby thereupon informed the King, that there were two persons that were
set to watch an opportunity to Pistol him. That his Friend was at hand, and
ready with his Papers to be brought before him, when his Majesty should command.

In answer to this, his Majesty appointed between the hours of Eight and Nine
in the Evening: at which time Mr. Kirkby and Dr. Tongue attended, and being
commanded into the Red Room, delivered the Forty Three Articles, or rather
Heads of the Discovery to his Majesty, who being to go to Windsor the next
Morning, was pleased to promise that he would transmit the Papers into the
hands of the Earl of Danby, then Lord Treasurer, upon whom they were likewise
ordered to attend the next day after. That day, about four of the Clock in the
Afternoon, they were admitted into the Treasurer's Closet, who read the Papers,
and found them to be of the greatest Concern imaginable.

The third of September, Mr. Kirkby went to Dr. Oats, and having received from
him what he had to communicate, appointed to meet him the next morning.

Accordingly, the next morning, being the fourth of September, Mr. Kirkby and
Dr. Oats met, at what time the latter told the former, that Whitebread,
Provintial of the Jesuits, was come to Town, and had stricken him, and charged
him with having been with the King, and with the discovery of the Plot, which
he denied, it being true that he had not seen the King. Upon this, it was
concluded, that seeing the discovery was smoked, Dr. Oates's Information
should be sworn before some Justice of the Peace, which was accordingly the
first time done before Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey the sixth of September; who
nevertheless was not permitted to read the particulars of the Information; it
being alleged that his Majesty had already had a true Copy thereof; and that
it was not convenient that the business should be communicated to any body else
as yet: So that Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey was satisfied without reading them, and
only underwrit Dr. Oates's Affidavit, That the Matters therein contained were
true; Dr. Tongue at the same time making Oath, that they had been made known to
the King.

In the mean time Mr. Kirkby goes to Windsor, and shows himself to the King,
but his Majesty was not pleased to speak to him either that day, or the next;
whereby it was conjectured that some persons had made it their buness to
dispossess the King of the belief of any such thing as a Plot.

Wherefore upon the seventh of September he went to the Treasurer's Lodgings,
and meeting with Mr. Lloyd, he told him that the person who had given the
Information was discovered and had been abused and beaten by the Conspirators,
and therefore desired my Lord Treasurer's farther directions; but though he
waited all that day and the next, my Lord was not to be spoken with. Thereupon
he returned, and meeting with Doctor Tongue and Oats, at the place which before
they had appointed, he carried them to his Lodgings at Fox-hall, for their
better security.

Nevertheless the business was not so far neglected, but that upon the twenty
seventh, Mr. Lloyd before mentioned, was sent to Fox-hall to signify to Mr.
Kirkby, that he had Orders to bring Doctor Tongue before the Council; but the
Lords being risen, ere the Doctor could be brought, he was Ordered to attend
the next Morning.

In the mean while they went all three again to Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey,
carrying the first Depositions sworn the sixth of September, and two Copies
more written by Doctor Oats, to have them also sworn, which being done, Doctor
Oats was sent back to Fox-hall, and Mr. Kirkby and Doctor Tongue attended the
Council according to Order; who being called in were Ordered to bring Doctor
Oats thither, which was soon after done. And then it was, that Doctor Oats,
being the first time examined, and also sworn again at the Council board to the
Heads of his Discovery, both he and Doctor Tongue were Ordered Lodgings at
Whitehall.

Being thus secure of the Discovery, and the Discoverer as well secured, the
main business now lay all in good proof and fair Testimony. Which as on our
side there was all care taken to find out, so on the Conspirators behalf, there
was no stone left unturned, no Labor of imagination omitted to vilify, and
enervate, and to reproach and scandalize what ever witnesses appeared.

And therefore before we go any farther, it will be requisite to say something
in Justification of his person, who was the First and main Discoverer, and to
whom the Nation is most chiefly beholding.

All the World cannot but be very apprehensive, that it is the Interest of the
Roman Catholics to vindicate their reputation if they can; which there is no
way under Heaven to do, but by fixing those Imputations upon Doctor Oats,
which may render him ridiculous, perjured, and consequently unfit to be
believed.

In the first place the Papists accuse him of debauchery, and for being turned
out of the College at Saint Omers, and that he does all this out of Revenge.

Then they suggest that his Information must needs be fictitious, because it is
a thing unlikely that he should come to such a distinct knowledge of so many
particulars in so short a time. Or if he had heard or seen them, that he should
so perfectly remember them: and then again if he were so conversant among the
Conspirators, why he should not do it sooner.

In the last place, they allege, that it is not probable, that they who so
cheerfully blended their Blood with that of his Majesty's most faithful
Protestant Subjects in the late Wars, should so strangely alter their minds, as
with such an unheard of Unanimity to combine to murder the King, for whose
Father they had so Religiously fought, and destroy the Liberty of a Nation
which they had endeavored to maintain with their Lives. Plausible insinuations
indeed, but of no moment, when judiciously weighed and considered.

For as to the Education of Doctor Titus Oats, he was bred a Student in Saint
John's College in Cambridge; neither is it probable that he forgot his
Learning, but rather highly improved it, by his going out Doctor in Divinity at
Salamanca in Spain; where he did all his Exercises, more difficult than what
are performed among us here. He was also for some time a Minister at
Chichester, and at length Chaplain to the Duke of Norfolk.

In all these Stations the sobriety of his Life and Conversation was such, as
freed him altogether from the stain of Debauchery. In which respect he may well
appeal to the Jesuits themselves, who would never have esteemed him as they
did, by conferring their Order upon him, and trusting him so far, had they not
found him a sober person and fit for their purpose.

When he was Chaplain to the Duke of Norfolk, he overheard some whisperings
among the Priests, by which he collected, that there were some great designs on
Foot, though he could not find out what they were. This and some other dark
Intimations which he received from his Protestant friends, bred in him an
earnest desire to sound the depth of the Intrigue, and if it were possible to
Countermine it. To which end he pretended himself to certain Priests
dissatisfied in some points relating to the Discipline of the Church of
England, desiring withal, for the Solution of his doubts, to confer with some
of their Jesuits, which the Priests procured, on condition he would not betray
them. After several disputes, wherein he suffered himself to be overcome, he
was seemingly reconciled to the Church of Rome, and then desired of the Fathers
that they would admit him into their Order, which they did after a debate of
three days. To this Grant of theirs they also added this farther kindness, that
because he was past the Years of Pupillage, as being in the 28th Year of his
Age, they would not employ him, as they usually did their Novices, in drudgery
for the first two Years, but advance him to be a Messenger for the Society.
Nothing could more exactly have fitted his purpose. So that being forthwith
sent with Letters into Spain, he opened them, and thereby began to have some
insight into the contrivance: from which time he carried himself with that
discretion and reservedness, that after a little time he was admitted to their
Consultations; by which means he had not only the opportunity to observe the
present carriage of Affairs, but also liberty to enquire into their former
Proceedings. By this means he came to understand how the City was Fired by the
Contrivance of the Jesuits, was informed how the Design was carried on, and
who were the Actors in the several Scenes of the Tragedy. Which he might well
believe when he himself was a Witness how they had Fired Southwark, and were
designing to have utterly laid wast both the Temple, Westminster, and the rest
of the Suburbs.

He also kept short Memorandums of all passages of consequence that happened
from the time of his first admission. Of all which he has given such an exact
Account, confirmed by other Circumstances and collateral Evidence, that among
such a number of particular occurrences, no one thing has contradicted another,
nor interfer'd with those papers that have been found elsewhere, or with those
Informations that have been separately given in by other Persons. Nor was it
possible that the Grand Assembly of the Nation consisting of so many
perspicacious Judgments, and by whom he was fully examined should be so imposed
upon by one Man, as to Vote upon his Information that there was a Plot to
Murder the King, alter the Government, and subvert the Religion established by
Law, had they not been highly satisfied in the Credit and soundness of the
Evidence.

As to the time of his Discovery, had he made it upon his first knowledge, he
had acted with less prudence, and the Opposition he has met with plainly shows,
that the Kingdom might probably have lost the advantage of his delay, had he
come unprovided to attest those things which he could not so well have proved.
Nor was he at his own disposal, when first he entered into their Society. So
that had he moved or acted either without or contrary to their Order, he had
presently been suspected, watched and found out; but as soon as he had enough
to convince the World, or at least the Rational part, and that he was sent from
Saint Omers into England, he showed his real intentions to preserve his
Majesty's Person and his Native Country from the bloody Contrivances of a bosom
Enemy.

But what needs all this Justification? Heaven it self assisted the Discovery,
and so directed their infatuated Councils, that contrary to all the dictates of
common Sense and Reason, the Politic Jesuits rang that bloody peal themselves
which wakened the drowsy unbelief of those that scarce gave credit to the
Story; and by closing the Eyes of one unfortunate Gentleman, opened the Eyes of
the whole Nation.

For understanding that Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey, one of his Majesty's Justices
of the Peace for the County of Middlesex, had taken the Discoverers Oath and
Affidavit, and presuming that much of the Plot might be confessed and made
known to him, thinking to stifle his report in the Birth, they concluded to
commit a Murder that Villainy laughed at, and was Ridiculous to Folly it self.

The chief Instruments, for there were several others unknown to the
Discoverer, set on and encouraged to act this fatal Tragedy were Father Girald,
and Father Kelly two Priests, Robert Green, Cushion-Man to the Chapel of
Somerset House, Lawrence Hill servant to Dr. Goddin, Treasurer of the Chapel,
Henry Berry, Porter, Lewson a Priest, Philip Vernatti, once belonging to my
Lord Bellasis, and Mr. Miles Prance, by them deluded in to be an Assistant;
though soon after, the Detector of the Fact and Persons.

These Men did not assign any particular reason for their malice, but only in
general that Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey was a busy Person, and going about to
ruin all the Catholics in England, and that it was necessary to destroy him or
else they should be all undone.

This being their undoubted Maxim, they laid several distinct Plots, and
employed diverse separate Agents unknown to each other, to accomplish their
design.

Several Consultations they had at the Plow* near Somerset House, and in other
places, but the ultimate Result of all their Debates was this, That Sir
Edmund-Bury Godfrey should be dogged as he walked the Streets, and that whoever
of the Confederates should first lodge him in a convenient place should give
the rest notice.

In pursuance of this Resolution, having watched him several days, and finding
no opportunity, at length upon Saturday the 12 of October 1678. in the Morning,
Hill, Girald, and Green, went forth to observe his Motion, and Kelley, knowing
what they were gone about, went to Mr. Prance's House to acquaint him
therewith, and to charge him to be in a Readiness. The first three went near to
Sir Edmund-Bury's, and while two stayed at a distance, Hill went up to the
House and understanding he was within, spoke with him upon some pretended Story
and so returned.

About ten or eleven a Clock Sir Edmund-Bury came forth all alone; and his
unknown Attendants dogged him with great diligence all the rest of the day to
several places, as his occasions led him, till about six a Clock at night, at
what time he went into a great House in St. Clements, where it is thought he
supped. Then did Green leave the other two, came to Mr. Prance, and informed
him, that they had now set Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey in a House in St. Clements,
and bid him make all the have down to the Water Gate belonging to
Somerset House, where he should find Kelley the Priest and Berry the Porter.
Thereupon Prance went thither, and found them walking in the Yard, where they
continued sometimes walking, sometimes sitting till toward nine of the Clock.
About which time Sir Edmund-Bury, coming out of the House aforesaid, Hill ran
before to give Notice that he was coming along; and to wheedle him in, he
ordered that two should pretend to be a quarrelling. Which done, Hill returns
to the Water Gate to expect his coming and entice him in. In the mean time
Kelly and Berry began a seeming quarrel, but made no great Noise, and Sir
Edmund-Bury coming along, just as he was passing by the said Water Gate, Hill
steps to him in a great deal of have, crying, For God's sake Sir Edmund-Bury
Godfrey be pleased to come in, for here are two Men quarrelling, and I fear
there will be Bloodshed between them. Pugh-pugh, said Sir Edmund-Bury, refusing
at first to trouble himself; but Hill still urging and insisting that he was
afraid there might be a great deal of mischief done, and how glad he was to
meet so opportunely with his Worship; Sir Edmund Bury, not suspecting any harm,
but desirous to prevent any mischance that might be occasioned by a quarrel,
was persuaded to follow him.

Hill entered the Gate first, Sir Edmund-Bury followed, and behind him
immediately clapped Girald and Green. These all making down in this order
toward the Rails near the Queens Stables, where Kelley and Berry were
pretending a quarrel, Prance, who stood close by the wall concealed, goes up to
secure the Water Gate, while Berry slipped to secure the Stairs and Passage by
the Chapel.

And now having got him safe, Green, who kept close behind, and had a large
twisted Handkerchief in readiness, on a sudden threw it about his Neck, and
immediately Girald, Kelly, Green and Hill fell upon him, secured his Sword,
threw him down, and throtl'd him, so that he could neither call out, nor speak;
then drew him behind the Rail, and gave him many violent punches on the Breast
with their Knees.

After they had thus manifestly bereaved him of his breath, Girald the Priest,
fearing he was not quite dead, would have run him through with his Sword. But
the rest would not yield to that, for fear of being discovered by the Blood.
However to make sure work, Green got upon him, and punching him with his Knee
upon the Breast with all his force, wrung his Neck quite round. Thus fell this
unfortunate Gentleman, a needless Victime to their stupid Fury, to prevent the
Sacrifice of three whole Nations, and save the Offering of Royal Blood to their
cruel Idolatry.

After the business was fully done, Prance and Berry came from their Posts, and
then they all set to work to remove the Body, which they carried in at a door
right against the place where he was murdered, and so into a little Room in
Doctor Goddin's Lodgings, where Hill lived; and where they placed the Corpse
with the back leaning against a bed.

There the Body lay all Saturday Night, Sunday all Day and Night, till Monday
at Night; but then they carried it into another Room cross the upper Court of
Somerset House. There it continued all Monday and Tuesday till nine a Clock;
and then Girald, Kelly, Green, Hill and Berry took him out of that Room, and
removed him into another opposite to Doctor Goddin's door, supposed to belong
to Sir John Arundel's Lodgings.

There the Body lay from Tuesday Night till Wednesday about nine a Clock at
Night, and then the five forementioned persons removed it again to the Room in
Doctor Goddin's Lodgings, where it first lay. In this removal they were
frighted by Mr. Prance's coming, so that they ran away and left the Body for a
while, but being called to by Mr. Prance, and knowing his Voice, they returned
to their Labor.

Having thus several times removed the Body they entered into a deep debate,
how and where to dispose of it for their best security. The result of which
was, that he should be carried into the fields and laid in some obscure place,
in such a manner, that when ever he should be found, it might be supposed that
he had Murdered himself. And this they thought would be much for the Interest
of the Church, when it should come to be known, that he who was so busy in
charging the Catholics with a Plot, had been afterward so troubled in mind, as
to kill himself; and therefore it was agreed that none of his Money or other
things should be meddled with.

This result being well approved of, they resolved to carry away the Body that
Night, being the sixteenth of October. To which purpose Hill procured a Sedan
late in the Night, into which they forced in the Body, by bending it into a fit
posture. When they had got the Body in, they carried it over the Courtyard
toward the Lodge, and then giving a Hem, which was the sign, Berry came forth
and opened the Gate, and so with Heart and good. Will away went Prance and
Girald first with their burden, as far as Covent Garden, where they were
relieved by two more, who Footed it on as far as Long-Acre; then Girald and
Prance took up their load again, and carried it to the Grecian Church near
Soho. When they had the Murdered Cavalier there, having a Horse ready, they
forced open his Legs, and mounted him astride, and then set up Hill behind to
hold him up steady, at which time Girald spoke these words, I wish we had a
hundred such Rogues as secure as this. Then Hill, Girald, Kelly, and Green
attended upon him in such manner, that he seemed to ride in great State, one
leading the Horse, and the other two walking on each side; and so they conveyed
the Body to a field near Primrose Hill, where they laid it in a Ditch, first
run through with his own Sword, and left his Scabbard and Gloves at a distance
not far off.

The next Morning the Murderers met and gave an account of it to Mr. Prance who
went no farther than Soho: and in a paper set down a Narrative of their Heroic
Act. Nor is it unlikely but that it was sent to Rome, where it found as great
Approbation, and caused as great joy, as some other Acts of theirs of the same
nature have formerly done.

Sometime also after the fact committed they had a meeting at the Queens Head
at Bow, where the forementioned Narrative was produced and read, which made
them very merry, and so jocundly loud they were in reading it, that they were
over heard by some, who gave evidence at their Trial, that there was a paper
their read which concerned Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey.

On Thursday in the afternoon the Body was found in a Ditch with his Sword run
through him, two handfuls out of his Back, with his Neck dislocated and his
Breast very much beaten and bruised. In that condition after the Coroners Jury
had given in their Verdict that he was Murdered by a Confederacy of
Assassinates the Corpse was carried home, and afterward solemnly buried in the
Church of St. Martins Parish in the fields, his Funeral Sermon being Preached
by the Learned and Reverend Dr. Lloyd Dean of Bangor the Minister of the Place.

The confused Rumor of the Plot, and the loud noise of this Murder, strangely
Alarmed the whole Nation; but who did it, or upon what motives or provocations,
was a Mystery long concealed, and all people groped only in the dark of
Conjecture. Some there were that suspected the Papists, but they would by no
means hear of any such accusation, and therefore threw out various reports that
his own Relations had murdered him to get his Estate; that he was mad, and that
he had married beneath himself and therefore lay concealed.

However the King both for his own and the satisfaction of his people, was
pleased to issue forth his Royal Proclamation, wherein he promised a very
considerable reward to them that should first discover the Authors and
Contrivers of so horrid a Murder. Yet all the Confederates being at that time
either Priests or zealous Bigots, whose Consciences were overpowred by the
persuasive exasperations of their diabolical Confessors, they firmly kept the
Grand Secret, till Mr. William Bedloe awed at first by the strong obligation of
the Sacrament of the Altar twice aweek Administered to him to keep him steady,
at length by a secret impulse of Heaven, and convinced by the wicked designs
wherein he had been so often engaged by Men pretending Sanctity, returned from
Bristol, where his restless mind had carried him, and of his own accord came
in, and began the Discovery. After which, by the accidental knowledge of Mr.
Prance in the Lobby of the House of Commons, he opened a way to the full
displaying of the Mystery.

But leaving this subject for a while we must take notice that three or four
days before this, on the twenty first of October 1678. the Parliament in
pursuance of his Majesty's last Prorogation met at Westminster, and the next
day Doctor Oats was examined before the Commons, as he was also before the
House of Lords the day following. Upon which his Majesty was pleased to issue
forth several Proclamations one after another, as well in reference to the Plot
discovered, as also for the future security of his Royal Person and Government.

The first was a Proclamation for a General Fast, appointed to be kept the 13th
of November following.

The next was a Proclamation commanding all Popish Recusants to depart ten
miles from the City of London.

And the third was a Proclamation that no Officers or Soldiers of his
Majesty's Guards should be a Papist.

His Majesty also observing the affection of both His Houses toward His Royal
Person, and their zeal for the security of the Nation, was pleased to make them
a most Gracious Speech, wherein he gave them thanks for the care which they
took of his Government and Person, promising to pass all Acts which they should
make for preservation of the Protestant Religion.

During these Proceedings of Parliament and Council, one Staley having out of
the abundance of his Heart, on the fourteenth of November 1678. spoken most
desperate treasonable words against the King, and being the next day
apprehended for the same, was brought publicly to his Trial at the King's Bench
Bar in Westminster Hall, upon the twenty first of the same Month.

This Staley was a Goldsmith in Covent Garden, and the reason of his inveteracy
against the King, is said to be, for that being a Papist and a Goldsmith that
dealt in money, he found his Trade decay; because the Catholics, with whom his
chiefest dealings were, called in their money faster than he desired, upon the
discovery of the Plot.

The Treason urged against him was this, that being at the Black Lion in
King Street in the new Buildings between High Holborn and Long-acre with one
Fromante his Friend: the said Fromante, among other discourse, was saying, That
the King of England was a great Tormentor of the people of God. Upon which, the
said Staley flew out into a violent Passion, and made answer, with the addition
of other irreverent words, That the King was a great Heretic, there is the
heart, and here is the hand, I would kill him my self.

These words being spoken in French, were distinctly understood by two English
Gentlemen, that overheard and saw the said Staley when he spoke them, the door
of the Room being open. And this also in the presence of another that did not
understand French, to whom the others immediately interpreted the words.

He was endited for Imagining and Contriving the Death of the King.

The Jury were,
Sr. Philip Matthews, Sr. Reginald Foster, Sr. John Kirk, Sr. John Cutler, Sr.
Richard Blake, John Bifield, Esquire Simon Middleton, Esquire Thomas Cross, Esquire Henry
Johnson, Esquire Charles Umphrevil, Esquire Thomas Egglesfield, Esquire William Bohee, Esquire
The Witnesses swore the words positively upon him; and the Statute of this
Kings Reign making desperate words to be Treason, was read and urged against
him. But his defense was weak, while he only endeavored to evade the Crime, by
alleging a mistake of the Expression; as if he had said, I will kill my self,
instead of, I will kill him my self. But that shift would not serve; for the
Jury soon brought him in Guilty: whereupon he was condemned to be hanged, drawn
and quartered: which Sentence was upon the 26th of the same month executed
accordingly. So that he had this honor, to be the Popes first Martyr for the
Plot. It was his Majesty's pleasure, that his Relations should have the
disposal of his Quarters, to give them a decent and private burial; but they
abusing his gracious favor, with a public, and more than ordinary funeral
Pomp, his buried Quarters were ordered to be taken up, and to be disposed by
the Common Executioner upon the Gates of the City.

1678. Next to him, Coleman became the public spectacle of his own conceit and
Ambition. He had been committed to Newgate by the Council upon the 30th of
September, which was the next day after Dr. Oates's first Examination.

He was brought to his Trial upon the 27th of November, before the Judges of
the Kings Bench.

The Jury were,
Sr. Reginald Foster, Sr. Charles Lee, Edward Wilford, Esquire John Bathurst, Esquire
Joshua Galliard, Esquire John Bifield, Esquire Simon Middleton, Esquire Henry Johnson,
Charles Umphrevile, Thomas Johnson, Thomas Egglesfield, William Bohee.
The general Charge of the Enditement, was for an intention and endeavor to
murder the King; for an endeavor and attempt to change the Government of the
Nation; for an endeavor to alter the Protestant Religion, and instead thereof
to introduce the Romish Superstition and Popery.

The particular Charges were, one or two Letters written to Monsieur Le Chaise,
Confessor to the King of France, to excite and stir him up to procure aid and
assistance from a Foreign Prince, Arms and Levies of Men. That this Letter was
delivered, and an Answer by him received, with a promise that he should have
Assistance. That he wrote other Letters to Sr. William Throckmorton, who
traitorously conspired with him, and had intelligence from time to time from
him.

The main things insisted upon for the Evidence to prove, were first, That
there had been a more than ordinary design to bring in the Popish, and
extirpate the Protestant Religion.

That the first Onset was to be made by a whole Troop of Jesuits and Priests,
who were sent into England from the Seminaries, where they had been trained up
in all the Arts of deluding the people.

That there was a Summons of the principal Jesuits, the most able for their
head-pieces, who were to meet in the April or May before, to consult of things
of no less weight, than how to take away the Life of the King.

That there was an Oath of Secrecy taken, and that upon the Sacrament. That
there were two Villains among them, who undertook that execrable work, for the
rewards that were promised them: Money, in case they succeeded; and Masses for
their souls, if they perished.

That if the first failed, there were also four Irish men recommended to the
Caball, men of mean and desperate Fortunes, to make the same attempt, when the
King was the last Summer at Windsor.

That Forces, Aids and Assistances were prepared to be ready both at home and
abroad, to second the Design.

That Mr. Coleman knew of all this, and encouraged a Messenger to carry money
down as a reward of those Murderers that were at Windsor.

That there were Negotiations to be maintained with public persons abroad,
money to be procured, partly from friends at home, and partly beyond Seas, from
those that wished them well; in all which Negotiations, Mr. Coleman had a busy
hand.

That this Conspiracy went so far, that General Officers were named and
appointed; and many engaged, if not listed: and this not only in England, but
in Ireland likewise.

That the great Civil Offices and Dignities of the Kingdom were also to be
disposed of, and that Coleman was to have been Secretary of State, and had a
Commission from the Superiors of the Jesuits, to act in that Quality. That he
had treated, by virtue thereof, with Father Ferrier, and La Chaise, Confessors
of the King of France, for the Dissolution of the Parliament, and Extirpation
of the Protestant Religion: to which purpose, he had penned a Declaration with
his own hand, to justify the Action, when the Parliament was dissolved.

That he kept intelligence with Cardinal Norfolk, with Father Sheldon, and the
Popes Internuntio at Brussels. Lastly, that he kept a Correspondence with Sr.
William Throckmorton, to the destruction of the King and Kingdom.

Being arraigned for these crimes, he insisted to have had Council allowed him;
which was denied for this reason, for that the proof lay all on the other side;
which if it were plain, there would be no need of Council.

As to the proofs of these Crimes by the two Witnesses, Dr. Oats, and Mr.
Bedlow, it was first proved by Dr. Oats alone, That there was a general
Consult or meeting of the Jesuits in April Old Style, and May New Style, at the
White Horse Tavern in the Strand, and afterward they divided into Companies;
and in those Consults they conspired the death of the King, and contrived how
to effect it. That to that purpose Grove and Pickering were actually employed
to murder the King, and to pistol him in St. James's Park. For which Grove was
to have 1500 l. in money, and Pickering, being a Priest, thirty thousand
Masses, which was computed to be equal to 1500 l. That to this Contrivance and
Conspiracy, Coleman was privy, and did well approve of the same.

It was also farther proved by the same Witnesses, that four Irish men were
provided by Dr. Fogarthy, and sent to Windsor, there to make a farther attempt
upon the Royal Person of the King: and fourscore Guinneys were provided by
Harcourt to maintain the Assassinates at Windsor; and that while this
Conspiracy was in Agitation, Coleman went to visit Harcourt at his Lodging; but
not finding him there, and being informed he was at Wild House, that he went
and found him out there: at which time, Coleman asking what provision Harcourt
had made for the Gentlemen at Windsor? Harcourt replied, that the fourscore
Guinneys which lay upon the Table, were for them; and added, that the person in
the Room was to carry the money. Upon which, it was farther proved, that
Coleman should reply, That he liked it very well; and that he gave a Guinney
out of his pocket to the Messenger, who was to carry the money to Windsor, to
encourage him to expedite the business. It was further sworn by Dr. Oats, That
in July last one Ashby a Jesuit, brought instructions from Flanders to London,
that in case Pickering and Grove could not kill the King at London, nor the
four Irish men assassinate him at Windsor, that then the sum of ten thousand
pounds should be proposed to Sir George Wakeman, to poison the King. In this
conspiracy Mr. Coleman was proved to be so far concerned, that by the Letters
which passed between Whitebread and Ashby, it appeared that he should say, he
thought ten thousand pound was too little, and that he thought it necessary to
offer five thousand pound more: which upon his admonition and advice was
assented to by the Jesuits. It was also further sworn by Dr. Oats, that he
saw Letters from the Provincial at London, to the Jesuits at St. Omers, that
Sir George had accepted the Proposition.

The second witness was Mr. Bedlow, who swore, that he was employed by
Harcourt, the Jesuit, to carry Pacquets of Letters to Monsieur Le Chaise, the
French Kings Confessor, and that he was at a Consult in France, where the Plot
was discoursed on for killing the King; and that he brought back an answer from
Le Chaise to Harcourt in London; and that particularly on the 24th. or 25th. of
May, 1677. he was at Colemans house with father Harcourt, and some other
persons, where Mr. Coleman, falling into discourse concerning the design in
hand, said these words, That if he had a Sea of blood, and a hundred lives, he
would lose them all to carry on the design; and if to this end it were
requisite to destroy a hundred Heretic Kings, he would do it. The other part
of the evidence consisted of Papers and Letters, generally relating to prove
the latter part of the Enditement, viz. the extirpation of the Protestant
Religion, introducing Popery, and subverting the Government.

This was plainly proved by a long Letter written by Mr. Coleman, dated Sept.
29. 1675. and sent to Monsieur Le Chaise before named: wherein he gave him an
account of the transactions of several years before, and of his correspondence
with Monsieur Ferrier, predecessor to the said Le Chaise; wherein he asserted
that the true way to carry on the interest of France, and to promote the
Catholic Religion in England, was to get the Parliament dissolved: which he
said, had been long since effected, if three hundred thousand pounds could have
been obtained from the French King: and that things were yet in such a posture,
that if he had but twenty thousand pound sent him from France, he would be
content to be a sacrifice to the utmost malice of his enemies, if the
Protestant Religion did not receive such a blow that it could not possibly
subsist. The receipt of which Letter was acknowledged by Monsieur Le Chaise, in
an answer which he wrote to Mr. Coleman, dated from Paris, October. 23. 75.
wherein he gave him thanks for his good service in order to the promotion of
the Catholic Religion.

Another Letter was produced, dated August 21. 74. written by the prisoner
Coleman to the Popes Internuncio at Brussels, wherein he said that the design
prospered well, and that he doubted not but that in a little while the business
would be managed to the utter ruin of the Protestant party.

Other Letters were brought in Evidence, wherein he wrote to the King of
France's Confessor, that the assistance of his most Christian Majesty was
necessary, and desired money from the French King to carry on the design.

But there was another without a date, more material than all the rest, written
to Monsieur Le Chaise in a short time after his long Letter, dated Sept. 29.
1675. wherein among other things, the Prisoner thus expressed himself. We have
a mighty work upon our hands, no less than the Conversion of three Kingdoms,
and the utter subduing of a pestilent Heresy, which has for some time
domineered over this Northern part of the World; and we never had so great
hopes of it since Queen Mary's days. In the close of which Letter he implored
Monsieur Le Chaise to get all the aid and assistance he could from France, and
that next to God Almighty, they did rely upon the mighty mind of his most
Christian Majesty, and therefore hoped that he would procure both money and
assistance from him. And thus was the latter part of the Enditement fully
proved upon him.

There was another Letter produced against him, which he wrote to Monsieur Le
Chaise in French, in the Dukes name, but without his privity or knowledge, so
that when he had the boldness to show it to the Duke, he was both angry and
rejected it. It contained several invectives against my Lord Arlington, as
being a great opposer of the Duke's designs, and the chief promoter of the
match between the Prince of Orange and the Dukes eldest daughter the Lady Mary.

As for the long Declaration which he wrote as if he had been an actual
Secretary of State, and employed by some certain King his Master, to justify
the Dissolution of his Parliament, it was produced rather to show his good
intentions to his true Sovereign, and as a circumstance to confirm the rest,
than otherwise. To all this Mr. Coleman made the slenderest defense imaginable.
Only being charged that he was at a Consult with the Jesuits and Benedictine
Monks in August, at the Savoy, he endeavored to prove that he was all that
Month in Warwickshire; but his witness, which was but single, not being able to
make any positive answer to the questions demanded by the Court, his testimony
nothing availed him, no more than his cavil with Doctor Oats, that he did not
charge him at the Council, with all the matters in the Indictment. For it was
fairly proved by one of the Clerks of the Council that he charged him severely
enough to have him committed to Newgate. And that was sufficient for the
Prosecutor to do, till he came to give his full evidence at the Trial.

As to the Letters, he said they were only intended for the making the King and
the Duke as great as could be, as far as he thought it in his power: to which
end he desired the Court to consider the contexture and connection of the things
therein contained.

After this the Court took notice to the Jury of the Accusation it self, and of
the Evidence, which was of two sorts, Letters under his own hand, and witnesses
viva voce.

That as to the Letters, he rather made his defense by expounding what the
meaning was, than by denying that he wrote them. So that they were to examine
what those Letters did import of themselves, and what consequences were
naturally to be deduced from them. However it was the opinion and direction of
the Court, that the substance of the long Letter amounted to this; that is so
say, to bring in the Romish Catholic Religion, and to establish it here, and
to advance an interest for the French King, be that what it would. That his
last Letters did more plainly expound his meaning and intention, that when our
Religion was to be subverted, the nation was also to be subverted and
destroyed: In regard there could be no hope of subverting or destroying the
protestant Religion, but by the subversion, not the conversion of the three
Kingdoms.

As to the Witnesses viva voce, because the Jury had heard their evidence, the
Court did not insist upon it: only directed the Jury to consider what the
Letters did prove the prisoner guilty of directly, and of what by Consequence;
what the prisoner plainly would have done, and how he would have done it.

Upon this the Jury withdrew, and after a short stay returning gave up their
Verdict, which was Guilty; and so Mr. Coleman was for that day remanded back to
the prison, with order to the Keeper to bring him the next morning again to the
Bar to receive Sentence.

The next day, being the 28th. of November, the Prisoner was again brought to
the Bar according to Order, where being asked what he had to say for himself,
he insisted as to his Papers upon the Act of Grace. As to the evidence viva
voce, he made the same exceptions he had done before, only added that he wanted
a book of accounts which had been seized on among his Papers, by which he could
invalidate Dr. Oates's testimony, by making it appear he was out of Town all
August.

To the first it was answered that he could have no benefit of the Act of
Grace, in regard his Papers bore date in 74. and 75. since which time there had
been no Act made. And as for what he said concerning Mr. Oats, it was urged in
vain, in regard the Jury had given their Verdict.

The Exhortations which the Court gave him were in short, That whereas he was
found guilty of conspiring the death of the King, of endeavoring to subvert
the Protestant Religion, and to bring in Popery, and this by the aid and
assistance of foraign powers, though he seemed to disavow the matter of the
death of the King, he should not therefore think himself an innocent man. For
that it was apparent by his own hand, that he was guilty of contriving and
conspiring the destruction of the protestant Religion, and the introduction of
Popery, by the aid and assistance of foreign powers, from which no man could
free him in the least. And though it should be true, that he would disavow that
he had not an actual hand in the contrivance of the Kings death, which however
two witnesses positively swore against him; yet he was to know, that he that
would subvert the Protestant religion here, and consequentially bring in a
foreign authority, did an act in derogation of the Crown, and in diminution of
the Kings Title and sovereign Power: and made it his endeavors to bring a
foreign Dominion both over our Consciences and Estates. So that if any man
should endeavor to subvert our Religion, to bring in that, though he did not
actually contrive to do it by the death of the King; yet that he was guilty of
whatsoever followed upon that contrivance. He was further exhorted to
repentance, which was the only thing that remained. And that if he could not
with our Church have Contrition, which is a sorrow proceeding from Love, he
would at least make use of Attrition, which is a sorrow proceeding from fear.
For that he might assure himself, there were but a few minutes betwixt him, and
a vast Eternity, where would be no dallying, no arts used. And therefore that
he should think upon all the good he could do in that little space of time that
was left him; which was all little enough to wipe off, besides his private and
secret, even his public offenses. He was admonished that Confession was very
much practiced in the Religion which he professed, and that he would do well to
exercise it; but yet, that as his offense was public, so should his Confession
be. Perchance, said the Court, he might be deluded with the fond hopes of
having his sentence respited. But he was exhorted not to trust to it, for that
he might be flattered to stop his mouth till his breath were stopped, which it
was feared he would find by the event.

These friendly and Christian-like Exhortations being concluded by the Judge,
he then proceeded to the final sentence of the Law, which was, that he should
be Hanged, Drawn, and Quartered.

The fatal sentence being past, Mr. Coleman offered some few things to the
Court, the sum of which was this, That he did admire the Charity of the Court,
and whereas the Court advised him to Confession, he besought their Lordships to
hear him some few words. The Court indeed had the patience to hear him: but
what did all his fine words signify? They contained nothing but a florid
justification of his own innocence, in opposition to the verdict of his
Country. A vanity excusable in him whose vanity had been his ruin, and
commonly practicable among offenders conceited of their Eloquence, that pride
themselves to be accounted Swans, and the sweet singers of their own Epitaphs.

By the Conviction of Staly the malice of the Papists hearts appeared, though
they concealed it with better discretion. By the Conviction of Coleman, the
whole nation, and they that doubted most were convinced of the truth of the
design. So that upon the 28th. of November. his Majesty was pleased toissue forth
his Royal Proclamation, wherein he promised pardon and 200 l. to any person
concerned in the Plot, that would come in and discover before the 25. of
December. And within two days after his Majesty was also pleased to give his
Royal assent to an Act, to disable Papists to sit in either Houses of
Parliament.

December. All this while Colemans Execution was respited. For as it was verily
thought that he could discover much, all endeavors were used to have brought
him to a further Confession. But he believing himself sure of a pardon from
other hands, would by no means give ear to those, who he had more reason to
think had his life at their disposal. And therefore finding that he was
obstinate to all propositions of grace and favor, at length order was given
for his Execution. It was his misfortune to believe he should have his pardon
to the last moment of his life, even after he was tied up. But, whoever they
were, those whom he thought his best friends deceived him, although to please
them, he gave thanks to heaven that he dyed a Roman Catholic, and absolutely
renounced the knowledge of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey's death: with which
asseverations the Executioner did his office, the third of this month. An
unhappy Martyr for his cause, if he so thought himself, in this, that he died
for those that less pitied him than those he had so deeply wronged; and were,
as it is verily presumed, the chief rejoycers, that they were so fairly rid of
him.

Had Justice been ready with her prosecution he had not gone alone perhaps, but
might have had company to have attended him to his imaginary Paradise. For upon
the 15th. of this month, John Grove, William Ireland, and Tho. Pickering,
apprehended sometime before by the diligent pursuit of the discoverer, were
also brought to their Trials at the Sessions in the Old Bailey.

The Names of the Jury were,
Sr. William Roberts, Bar. Sr. Philip Matthews, Bar. Sr. Charles Lee, Knight.
Edward Wilford, Esquire John Foster, Esquire Joshua Galliard, Esquire John Byfield, Esquire
Thomas Egglesfield, Esquire Thomas Johnson, Esquire John Pulford, Esquire Tho. Ernsby, Esquire
Richard Wheeler, Gent.
The substance of the Indictment, was for conspiring and attempting the death
of his Sacred Majesty; as also for endeavoring and contriving to alter the
Religion established in the Nation, and to introduce Popery in its room.

The particular Charges consisted in the particular proofs, how every one of
these Offenders was particularly concerned for the carrying on, and effecting
these designs.

To this purpose it was sworn by Dr. Oats, That Whitebread received a Patent
from the General of the Jesuits at Rome, to be Provincial of the Order in
these parts, and by virtue of that Commission, sent to St. Omers for several of
the Society to make their appearance at London, to the end they might be
personally there at a Consult, which was to be held the 24th of April Stilo
Veteri. That upon the receipt of the said Summons, the 5th of April Nine of
them, of which the Discoverer was one, did come to London. That upon the said
24th of April the Consult was held at the White Horse Tavern accordingly; and
that the Prisoners at the Bar were there.

That it was there resolved, that Pickering and Grove should go on in their
attempt upon the King; for which Grove was to have 1500 l. and Pickering the
reward of 30000. Masses. Which Result was also signed by the Prisoner Ireland.

That there was an Oath of Secrecy administered at the said Consult by
Whitebread, which Ireland took among the rest.

Mr. Bedlow swore, That either in August, or the beginning of September he was
at Harcourt's Chamber, where it was resolved, that since the Ruffians had
missed Killing of the King at Windsor, Grove and Pickering should go on; and
that one Conyers should be joined with them to assassinate the King in his
morning walks at New Market, and that Ireland was there also, heard all, and
gave his consent.

Against Grove and Pickering it was sworn by Dr. Oats that he saw them several
times walking together in the Park, with their screwed Pistols, which were
longer than ordinary Pistols, but shorter than a Carbine.

That they had Silver Bullets, and that Grove would have had the Bullets
chewed, lest the wound should not have proved mortal.

That Pickering had once a fair opportunity, but that the flint of his Pistol
being loose, he durst not venture to give fire; and that for that negligence of
his, he was forced to undergo penance, and to receive twenty or thirty strokes
of Discipline.

That Grove did go about with one Smith to gather Peter Pence.

That Grove confessed to him, that he with three Irish-men did fire Southwark,
for which Grove had 400 l. and the three Irish-men 200 l. apiece.

Mr. Bedlow swore against Grove in particular, that in the business of killing
the King, he was more forward than the rest, and that he should say, Since it
could not be done clandestinely, it should be openly attempted.

As to the reward, he swore it to be the same with Dr. Oats before.

The defense which the Prisoners made, was nothing but a bare denial of the
matter of Fact. Only Ireland, being charged in Aug. labored very much to prove
that he was out of Town all that time, though it were re-prov'd by very good
circumstances, and upon oath for the King, that he was seen in London upon the
12. or 13th. of the same month.

His next defense was a weak reflection upon Dr. Oates's credit, to which
purpose an Indictment for perjury never prosecuted, was urged against him; but
the Attorney General made slight of it, as of a thing that had nothing in it.
Neither was that which Sir Dennis Ashbornham said, of greater force, seeing
that the irregularities of Children, are no impediment, but that they may prove
good men. So that the Endictment being fully proved against them by good
witnesses, and the concurrence of the Evidence in every particular, the Jury
made no long stay before they returned, and brought them in all Guilty.

After this the Court adjourned till the afternoon, and then the Prisoners
being again brought to the Bar, were all three condemned to be Hanged, Drawn,
and Quartered.

While Humane Justice was thus employed upon Earth, Divine Vengeance was no
less active above. No longer could it suffer innocent blood to clamor
unrevenged. And therefore where Bedlow failed, much about this time, by a
strange accident was Praunce disclosed, to make out all the rest.

For at what time Fenwick, Ireland, and some others were first apprehended, Mr.
Praunce, happening to be at a Coffee-house, where some Gentlemen were talking
somewhat severely against the said Prisoners, zealously and officiously began
to speak so favorably in their defense that notice was taken of his words, and
as he was told, some information given against him. To avoid therefore both
charge and trouble, he absented himself from his house the next three nights
together. After which time, understanding the business was over, he returned
home again and continued there as he was wont to do. This happened about a
fortnight before Sir Edmundbury was murdered. Yet upon this occasion, so
providence ordered it, was he twelve weeks after apprehended and called in
question. For it chanced that one of his neighbors and he fell out, who having
got some intimation that Mr. Praunce lay out of his house three nights one
after another, began to question whether those three nights might not be the
night that Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was killed, and those that followed: And upon
this bare surmise or presumption, that had no ground or bottom in the world,
that either he or any that he knew, were guilty or any way concerned in the
fact, a warrant was obtained from the Lords of the Council, to apprehend Mr.
Praunce, and to take him into a strict examination. Being thus taken by virtue
of the warrant, he was first carried into the Lobby of the House of Commons,
where Mr. Bedlow, whom he knew not, as being a person that had seen him but
once before, that is to say, between the Murder and the carrying forth of the
Corpse, but then taking some little notice of him, knew his face again, and
positively charged him to have been concerned in the murder, whereupon he was
examined and committed to Newgate the 21st. of this month. Within two days
after, he made a full discovery upon Oath, impeaching Fits-Girald, Kelly, Hill,
Berry and Green. Green was before in the Gate House for refusing the oaths.
Hill and Berry were presently apprehended. But the cunning Priests got away.

Upon the 24th. he was carried before the King and Council, to whom he gave a
faithful and particular account of all the circumstances of the Murder. Which
because it contained so many descriptions of benches, doors, entries and rooms,
his Majesty was pleased to order the Duke of Monmouth, the Earl of Ossory, the
Earl of Clarendon, and Sir Robert Southwell to go with the prisoner, and take
his Examination upon the place. At which time he gave such an exact account of
the places which he had mentioned before, viz. the very spot upon which the
murder was committed: where he himself, where Berry stood, as also the door,
stairs, dark entry, etc. mentioned in the Narrative, that his Majesty's
Commissioners returned very well satisfied with the truth of his Relation and
Confession.

True it is that Mr. Praunce did afterward seem to retract by a bare
affirmative, what he had formerly confessed upon Oath, saying before the King
and Council, That he was innocent, and the rest whom he had accused were also
innocent. But these words were extorted from his own fears and consternation,
that set before his eyes the danger of his life, and the undoing of his wife
and family. For he had no sooner done it, but his Conscience troubling him
above all those considerations, he recoyl'd from those false assertions, and so
strenuously and regularly maintained the Truth to which he had sworn, by an
addition of farther discoveries, that the King was pleased with his own Lips to
assure him of his Pardon, which was afterward delivered to him in due form
under the Great Seal.

Kelly was afterward taken up by the name of Daniel Edmunds, in some place in
Surrey, and sent to the Marshalsea for refusing the Oaths; but being deeply
sensible of the danger he was in, he so wrought upon the Poverty of that place,
that he procured bail for ten shillings apiece, and got away this very Month,
before his true name of Kelly was known.

Much about this time the Parliament took into their serious consideration
certain transactions of the Earl of Danby, then Lord High Treasurer, and after
a strict Scrutiny into the business, upon the 19th. of this Month, resolved,
that there was sufficient matter of Impeachment against him, and ordered a
Committee to draw up the Articles, and to receive any further Informations or
Evidence that should come in.

Within two days after several Articles of Impeachment were brought into the
House, severally put to the Question and agreed upon; the same day they were
ordered to be engrossed; and votes further passed that the said Earl should be
sequestered from Parliament, and committed to safe Custody. Which that it might
be the sooner effected, they sent up Sir Henry Capell with the Articles to the
Lords, who accordingly went and delivered them to the Chancellor in a full
assembly of that house, but the house being prorogued at the latter end of the
Month till the 4th. of February, nothing more was done for that Sessions.

However before they were prorogued they passed several resolves for impeaching
the five Lords in the Tower, of Treason and other high Crimes and Misdemeanors;
and the same day, which was the 5th. of this month, the five several
Impeachments were carried up to the Lords, and a Committee appointed to draw up
Articles against the parties impeached; to which purpose the said Committee was
empowered to inspect the Journals, and consider of Presidents for Impeachments.

In the Lords House, so soon as the Articles against the Earl of Danby were
exhibited, he himself desired copies of all papers and proceedings;
nevertheless it was then resolved, that at that time he should not withdraw.
Thereupon the said Earl, toward the latter end of the month, having still his
liberty, moved again in the Lords House, that he might have a copy of his
charge, and that he might not long lie under it. Upon which a Motion followed,
that the House would consider of the desire of the House of Commons, touching
his confinement. Thereupon it was the next day resolved, that he should not be
confined as then: and that he should have a copy of the Articles, to which he
was appointed to bring in his answer before the third of January.

And as to the Lords concerned in the Conspiracy, it was referred to the Lords
of the Committee for privileges, to consider the state of the Impeachments,
and of all the incidents thereunto relating, and to make their report; which is
the sum of what was done in reference to these matters, till the sitting of the
new Parliament, of which more in due place.

As yet the stress of the discovery lay upon Dr. Oats, and Mr. Bedlow, but
this month came in the substantial assistance of Mr. Dugdale, who upon the
twenty fourth of this month submitted himself to the examination of Mr. Lane,
and Mr. Vernon, two of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County of
Stafford.

Nor is it to be omitted that among the rest of the Discoveries about this time
made, Lower Comes in Herefordshire was detected to be a College of Jesuits;
and was let them at a low rent by one Hutton of St. Giles's, Merchant, for one
and twenty years, which lease was witnessed by William Ireland, Fenwick and
Groves.

The House was contrived for the purpose, with lodging Chambers and Studies,
and seated with all the privacy imaginable, at the bottom of a rocky and woody
Hill. There were found in the house several Popish Books, a Box of white Wafers
stamped, several Popish Pictures and Crucifixes, some Relics, a little
Saints-bell, and an Incense pot. Soon after one Father Lewis was taken near the
same place and sent to Monmouth Jail. He had cozened a poor maid of all the
Money she had in the world, to the value of 30 l. and made her give him a bond
and confess a judgment to him for payment of the said money upon a pretense of
praying her Fathers Soul out of Purgatory.

January 1678. Toward the beginning of this month the Earls of Salisbury and
Clarendon were sworn of his Majesty's Privy Council. Neither do we find the
beginning of it signalized with any transaction of remark, till the Execution
of Ireland and Grove, for Pickering had a further reprieve till May, 1679. The
other two were both hanged, drawn, and quartered, according to the Sentence
pronounced against them, upon the 24th. of this Month.

The last words of Ireland were mainly taken notice of, and there were some
whose Charity was almost deluded to believe him, hearing those imprecations of
Damnation which he made to impose upon the world that he was not in Town all
August, and consequently that the witnesses had sworn falsely against him. Yet
after all these solemn Imprecations to advance his own and depress the credit
of the Kings witnesses; as if his Salvation depended upon his giving a
meritorious sparring blow to the Kings Evidence at his departure, after all
these Imprecations I say, that he was absent in Staffordshire from the fifth of
August till the fourteenth of September, in comes one Mr. Jenison, a person of
worth, and credit, and positively deposes upon oath that he saw Mr. Ireland at
his Chamber at the Heart in Russel street upon the nineteenth day of August,
being then newly returned from Windsor. He further deposed, that after a short
salute, Mr. Ireland asked him what news at Windsor, and how the King spent his
time? To which when Mr. Jenison answered, that the King spent his time in
Hawking and Fishing, and went very thinly and meanly guarded, the Old Priest
replied, that then it would be an easy thing to take him off. A circumstance
so remarkable, and consequently so convincingly apparent, that many doubters
were very well satisfied to see it, finding the credit of the traduced
witnesses so well supported, and such a slur put upon all the vows and
protestations of a sufferer so desperately engaging heaven in the defense of
his untruths.

Much about this time his Majesty's Forces that had been recalled out of
Flanders, began to return again into England. But that which was the nine days
wonder of the whole Nation was the dissolution of the second long Parliament,
which had been continued by Prorogations and Adjournments from the eighth day
of May, in the 13th. year of his Majesty's reign, and was lastly prorogued till
the fourth of February, in the twenty fourth year of his Majesty's Government,
with an intention to have met again.

By this Proclamation his Majesty did publish and declare his Royal will and
pleasure to dissolve the present Parliament, and that he did dissolve the same
accordingly. However to the intent his Majesty's Loyal Subjects might perceive
his confidence in their good affections, and how desirous his Majesty was to
meet his people, and have their advice by their representatives in Parliament,
His Majesty was also pleased to declare, that he would forthwith issue out his
Writs for calling a new Parliament, to be holden at Westminster on Thursday the
sixth of March, 1678/9. And thus if it might be thought to be a wound, he that
gave it, at the same time healed it; and stopped as well the Insinuations as
the Clamours of disaffected malcontents.

Toward the latter end of this month the middle Temple happened to be fired,
though whether on purpose or by accident is yet undetermined: this is certain,
that had it gone on, it had destroyed one of the most stately Piles of Law in
the whole world.

February, 1678. January having thus made its Exit, February succeeds,
remarkable in the first place, for the change of the Secretaries of State. For
Sir Joseph Williamson having resigned the Seals of the Secretaryship into his
Majesty's hands, the right honorable Robert Earl of Sunderland, was sworn into
his room.

Not long after several Queries were presented to his Majesty in Council by the
Justices of the Peace for the County of Middlesex, in order to their proceeding
as to Papists, and Popish Recusants.

1. Whether Foreigners, Popish Recusants, that are and have long been settled
Housekeepers, following employments for their own advantage, as Chirurgions,
Tailors, Perriwig-makers, etc. but not otherwise Merchants, though certifi'd to
be Merchant strangers, shall be excused from taking the Oaths, or giving
sureties?

2. Whether such Foreigners being certifi'd by Ambassadors, or other foreign
Ministers to be their Servants, should be excused?

3. Whether Foreigners, Popish Recusants, settled as Housekeepers, but neither
Tradesmen, Travelers, or Foreign Ministers Servants, shall be excused?

4. Whether Native subjects of our Sovereign Lord the King, that are Menial
servants of Foraign Ministers, shall be excused?

5. Whether married women, being Popish Recusants, but their Husbands
Protestants, shall be excused?

6. Whether Popish Recusants that have taken the Oaths, found Sureties, have
appeared, and are convict, shall find Sureties, or be continued over?

These Queries were by his Majesty referred to the Judges, who returned an
answer in writing that they had met and considered of the Questions proposed,
and gave it for their Opinions:

1. That Foreigners, being Popish Recusants, and exercising ordinary Trades,
but not Merchants, were not excused from taking the Oaths, or finding Security.

2. That Foreigners, though certifi'd by Ambassadors to be their servants,
except they were their menial servants, were not excusable.

3. That Foreigners, though settled Housekeepers, being no Travelers, or
Foreign Ministers servants, were not to be excused.

4. That the Kings native Subjects were not excused from taking the Oath, by
being menial servants to Foreign Ministers.

5. That they found no Law to excuse a Feme covert, being a Papist, from taking
the Oaths, though her Husband were a Protestant.

6. That a Popish Recusant, having taken the Oaths, was not bound to find new
Sureties, unless, upon a new tender of the Oaths, he should refuse to take them.

This report and opinion of the Judges his Majesty was graciously pleased to
approve, and thereupon an Order was made, That the Justices of the Peace in
their several precincts, should in the execution of their duties, touching
these particulars, take notice of the Judges opinions, and conform themselves
thereto.

And whereas his Majesty had received a complaint in Council, that several
Justices of the Peace in several Counties, Cities and Liberties,
notwithstanding the many Proclamations issued forth for the security of his
Majesty's person against the Plots of the Papists, did refuse and neglect to
put the same in execution; It was therefore about this time ordered in Council,
That all his Majesty's said Justices of the peace should with all care and
diligence pursue his Majesty's commands in the execution of the premises; with
further directions also to the Lord Chancellor, forthwith to put out of
Commission all such as should refuse or neglect their duty, as persons
disaffected to his Majesty's Government, and the Protestant Religion.

Yet notwithstanding all this public diligence, the Papists were still in the
very face of countermanding Authority, no less active to undermine the very
Plot it self, and utterly to extirpate the very proofs and evidence of the
discovery.

For one James Nettervile, formerly a Clerk in the Court of Claims in Dublin,
being at this time a prisoner in the Marshalsea, sent for an acquaintance of
his, one Captain John Bury, an Irish Gentleman, and there communicated to him a
great design of the Papists, to turn the Plot another way, that is to say, to
turn the Plot upon the Protestants for the destruction of the Papists. To
effect this, the said Nettervile proposed to the Captain, that he would swear
to such and such heads as should be drawn up for him, to discredit and
invalidate the testimony of Dr. Oats, in reference to the Plot, and that for
his reward he should have 500 l. to be deposited in a third hand by one Russel,
for better security, to be paid him immediately upon his doing the business.
This design was managed by the same Russel, a rank Papist, and an Irish man.
But it seems they made their addresses wrong; For such was the fidelity and
loyalty of the Captain to his Prince, that he made a timely discovery of the
contrivance, and so spoiled the Market of those Traders in Subornation.

What this piece of subtilty meant, may be easily conjectured; but this was
more observable, that a little before this discovery, several persons by these
very people appointed, were at the houses of certain eminent Presbyterians in
London, to pray their charitable Contributions toward the maintenance of Mr.
Oats and Mr. Bedlow, falsely pretending that the Kings allowance was not
sufficient for their support. But the parties to whom they made their
application, smelling the cheat, slighted their charitable diligence, and sent
them away empty. And indeed who knows what use they might have made of it, had
those persons encouraged their design?

In the mean time, that is to say, upon the fifth of this month, Robert Green,
Henry Berry, and Lawrence Hill, were brought to their Trials at the Kings Bench
Bar, for the Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey.

The names of the Jury were,
Sir William Roberts, Sir Richard Fisher, Sir Michael Heneage, Sir Thomas
Bridges, William Avery, Charles Umphrevile, John Bathurst, Richard Gowre,
Thomas Hensloe, John Sharp, John Haynes, Walter Moyle, Esquires.
The general Indictment was for the murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, one of
his Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County of Middlesex, the manner of
which Murder has been already related, as also the reasons for which they did
it.

The stress of the Evidence lay upon Mr. Praunce, who swore in general, that he
met the Murderers, in reference to the carrying on their work, several times
at the Plough Alehouse near Somerset House; that Girald and Kelley seduced him
and inveigled him into the Conspiracy. That Hill, Girald and Green dogged him
all Saturday from his first going out. That at night they lodged him in a house
in St. Clements. That at his coming out from thence, Hill ran before and gave
the rest notice; and then went and stayed for his coming by. That it was Hill
that persuaded him to follow him into the yard, under pretense of a quarrel.
That it was Green who threw the twisted Handkerchief about his neck; and that
then Hill, Girald and Kelley came in to Green's assistance, pulled the
Gentleman down, and helped to throttle him, while Berry and Praunce watched the
avenues into the yard. And that Green afterward for the more sure dispatch,
wrung his neck round.

That after the Murder was done, all the six actors carried the body into
Hills Lodgings. That when the body was to be removed from Somerset House, which
was on the Wedsnesday night following, Praunce and Girald were the first that
carried the Sedan, and were relieved by Green and Kelley. That at Soho, Hill
met them with the horse; that there they all mounted the dead body, by forcing
the legs open, upon the said horse; that Hill rode behind, and that Green,
Kelley and Girald walked by, till they came to the place where the body was
thrown.

It was farther sworn by Mr. Praunce, that after all this, Girald met several
persons at Bow, namely, Luson, Vernatti, Dethick, and one more, and there
rejoiced together for the cleverness of the Murder committed, and the good
fortune they had had for the disposal of the Body.

Mr. Bedlow swore, That after the said Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was murdered, he
met one Le Fair a Priest, in the Cloisters of Somersethouse by appointment,
and that the said Le Fair carried him into a Room, where were several persons
looking upon the body, by the help of a Candle and Lanthorn, and that at that
time, he also among the rest saw Sir Edmundbury Godfrey lie dead, and that he
knew him as he lay.

This Evidence was also fortified by several other circumstances. By the
Constable who found the body in the same posture they themselves reported they
had left it. By the master of the Plough and his servant, who confirmed the
several meetings of the Murderers at the same house. And by Sir Edmundbury's
maid, who swear to the enquiries made for her Master at his house by Green and
Hill.

In answer to these facts, thus made out, Hill defended himself, by affirming
that Mr. Praunce had perjured himself, by denying or recanting what he had
sworn before the King; but that was overruled by the Court, for that Mr.
Praunce's first Impeachment of the Conspirators was done upon oath, and his
recantation but only a bare denial.

Green brought his witnesses to prove that he was constantly at home by nine of
the clock at night, and never stirred after that out of the house, and that
such a thing could not be done in the house but they must know of it: but
because they did not exactly make out what they averred, there was no credit
given them.

The most considerable testimony was that which Berry produced, which was that
of the Sentinels who kept the Guard; one of which standing at the Gate from ten
to one at night, averred that he saw no Sedan let forth. But in regard the
Sentinels could not be so positive but that they might be mistaken by reason of
the darkness of the night, and privacy of the conveighance, their Evidence was
not thought substantial.

It was further urged by Hill, that Mr. Praunce had been tortured to make him
confess what he did. But Mr. Praunce, upon his oath, utterly denied any such
thing, affirming that the Keeper had used him with all civility, from his first
commitment. So that the evidence for the Prisoners, being so far from
overpowring the testimony for the King, that it was in no measure able to
balance it, the Jury soon found them all guilty; upon which they severally
received sentence to be hanged. The execution of which sentence followed upon
the twenty first ensuing.

March. 1678/9. But now the time of the new Parliaments sitting drawing near;
toward the beginning of this month, his Majesty, that he might remove all fears
and jealousies out of the minds of his subjects, thought meet to command his
Royal Highness to absent himself for a time.

Who thereupon in obedience to his Majesty's pleasure, together with his
Duchess, took leave of his Majesty upon the third of March, and after a short
visit to his Daughter, the Princess of Orange in Holland, retired to Bruxells
in Flanders.

He was no sooner departed, but the Parliament, which had been so lately
summoned before, met according to the time appointed at Westminster. So soon as
they were ready, the King went in his Barge to Westminster, and there in a
Gracious Speech, upon which the Chancellor afterward enlarged, His Majesty
acquainted both Houses what he himself expected, and what the Country stood in
need of, from their Unanimous and Prudent Consultations.

The Speeches being ended, the Commons return to their House, and choose again
the Speaker of the last Parliament, Mr. Edward Seymour.

This choice occasioned their Prorogation from the twelfth to the fifteenth of
the same month, at what time, being met, again they chose Sergeant Gregory, and
caused him to take the Chair.

Before they fell upon business, the members were all severally sworn and took
the Test, and being so cemented together, they fell first upon the further
prosecution of the Plot, already discovered to the Parliament, not long before
dissolved.

In reference to which affair, Dr. Tongue, Dr. Oats, and Mr. Bedlow were
summoned to attend them, and to give their Informations. Upon their appearing
Dr. Tongue gave a long Narraton, which because it was tedious, they further
desired in writing. Dr. Oats read his own depositions, and when he had done,
made a complaint of some discouragements which he had received from some of the
Members. The complaint fell more severely upon one of them, who having spoken
some words in contempt of the Truth of the Plot, was sent to the Tower and
expelled the House, but soon after upon his modest Petition discharged from his
imprisonment.

But whatever particular persons thought of the Plot, the House of Commons were
so well satisfied, that they appointed a Committee of Secrecy to take
Informations, prepare Evidences; and draw up Articles against the Lords,
suspected to be therein concerned.

By way of further prosecution also, it was resolved, that an humble address
should be made to his Majesty, that all the papers and writings relating to the
discovery of the Plot, and particularly such papers and writings which had been
taken since the prorogation of the last Parliament, might be delivered to the
Committee of Secrecy appointed to draw up Articles against the said Lords. To
which his Majesty was pleased to return for Answer, that those papers and
examinations were delivered to the Committee of the Lords, from whence they
should be sent to their Committee so soon as the Lords had done perusing them.

In the midst of these transactions, they forgot not the Earl of Danby. For
upon the twentieth of this month, they sent to the Lords to put them in mind of
the Impeachment of High Treason exhibited against him, in the name of the
Commons, and to desire that he might be forthwith committed to safe custody.

In answer to which, at a Conference of both Houses, the Duke of Monmouth,
acquainted them in the behalf of the Lords, That their Lordships having taken
into consideration matters relating to the Earl of Danby, together with what
his Majesty was pleased to say upon that Subject, had ordered that a Bill
should be brought in, by which the said Earl should be made for ever incapable
of coming into his Majesty's presence; and of all Offices and Employments; and
of receiving any gifts or grants from the Crown, and of sitting in the House of
Peers.

In the mean time the Commons having appointed a Committee, to enquire into the
manner of the suing forth the said Pardon, made their report, that they could
not find the entry of any such Pardon in either of the Secretaries Offices, nor
in the Offices of the Signet or Privy Seal, but that they found it to be a
Pardon by Creation.

Thereupon the Commons send another Message to the Lords to demand Justice, in
the name of the Commons of England, against the said Earl, and that he might be
immediately sequestered from Parliament, and committed to safe custody.

To which the Lords returned, that they had ordered, before the coming of their
last message, the Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod forthwith to take the said
Earl into custody.

Soon after the Lords sent another Message to acquaint the Commons, that they
had sent both to Wimbleton, and to his house in Town, to apprehend the said
Earl, but that the Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod could not find him.

April. 1679. Thereupon the Commons ordered a Bill to be brought in, to summon
the said Earl to render himself to Justice by a day to be therein limited, or
in default thereof to attaint him. Which Bill, having passed the House, was
sent up to the Lords for their concurrence.

In the mean time the Lords had prepared a milder act of their own for the
banishing and disabling the Earl of Danby; which being rejected by the Commons,
the Lords desired a conference, at which they delivered back the Bill of
attainder, choosing so to do by conference, rather than by message, to preserve
a good understanding, and to prevent Controversy between the two Houses. And
to show the reason why they insisted upon their own amendments of the Bill for
attainder, it was urged, that in regard the King had always in his reign been
inclined to mercy and clemency to all his subjects, the first interruption of
his clemency ought not to proceed from his two houses.

This being reported, an humble address to his Majesty was presently resolved
upon, to issue out his Royal Proclamation for the apprehending the Earl of
Danby, with the usual penalties upon those that should conceal him, and that
his Majesty would be also pleased further to give order to the Officers of his
Household, that they should take care that the said Earl should not be permitted
to reside within any of his Majesty's Palaces of White Hall, Somerset House or
St. James's.

While this address was preparing, the Commons considered of the amendments
made by the Lords to the Bill of attainder; to some of which they agreed, but
to others they refused to give their consent, finding a bill of attainder
converted into a Bill of banishment. For it was alleged in point of reason,
that Banishment was not the Legal Judgment in case of High Treason. And that
not being so, the Earl might make use of the Remission of his Sentence as an
Argument, that either the Commons were distrustful of their Proofs, or else
that the crimes were not in themselves of so high a nature as Treason. Besides,
that the example of this would be an encouragement to all persons that should
be hereafter impeached by the Commons, to withdraw themselves from Justice,
hoping thereby to obtain a more favorable sentence in a Legislative way, than
the Lords would be obliged to pass upon them in their judicial capacity.

The same day in the afternoon, which was the 8th. of the present month, both
Houses had another conference upon the same Bill, which the Lords assured the
Commons they had desired not so much to argue and dispute, as to mitigate and
reconcile, having observed that the debates of this Bill, had already given too
great obstructions to public business. To this end the Lords propounded, That
if there might be a way found to satisfy and secure the public fears, by
doing less than what was proposed in the Bill, they did not think it advisable
to insist upon the most rigorous satisfaction that public Justice could demand.

To induce them to this compliance, the Lords acknowledged, that Banishment was
so far from being the Legal Judgment, in case of High Treason, that it was not
the Legal Judgment in any case whatsoever; as not being ever to be inflicted,
but by the Legislative Authority. However they saw no reason, why the
Legislative Authority should always be bound to act to the utmost extent of its
power, in regard there might be a prudential necessity sometimes of making
abatements, and might prove of fatal consequence, should it not be so.

Therefore the Lords, to remove all jealousies of Presidents of this kind, did
declare that nothing done in the Earl of Danby's case should be drawn into
consequence for the time to come, and that they would so enter it upon their
journal Book.

Nevertheless the Commons would not agree, but sent to the Lords for a free
Conference, upon the subject matter of the last. Which being had, and the
members that managed the same, being ordered to draw up the substance of the
matters which were fit to be entered, that passed at the said free Conference;
the Lords desired, the same day, a present free Conference upon the subject
matter of the last free Conference.

In this Conference the Lord Privy Seal that managed it, declared that the
Reasons of the Commons for passing the Bill as they proposed, were
unanswerable, and that therefore the Lords were content to make the Bill
absolute, without giving the Earl of Danby any day to appear, and the penalties
to continue.

Further it was by him observed, that the Lord impeached, would not only be
ruined by the passing of this Bill, together with his family, but those
acquisitions also, which he got by marriage into a Noble Family, would be all
lost.

Neither did he forget to intimate, That if the House of Commons would have any
other Penalties added to the Bill, the Lords would leave it to them, so that
they did not run to the absolute obstruction of the Lord Impeached.

Taking notice withal, that though all the reason and justice were of the
Commons side, yet in a Legislative Capacity, they were to consider of
Circumstances in relation to the public good. And then proceeding, he told the
House of Commons, that in the transactions of this affair, they had gained two
great points.

That Impeachments made by the Commons in one Parliament, continued from
Session to Session, and from Parliament to Parliament, notwithstanding
Prorogations or Dissolutions.

And Secondly, In cases of Impeachment, upon special matter shown, if the
modesty of the party impeached did not direct him to withdraw, the Lords did
admit that of right they ought to order him to withdraw, and that afterward he
must be committed.

Another Observation was made by his Lordship, that a Member of the House of
Commons made mention of the Earl of Clarendons case, but in regard that case
was general, and no special matter shown, it was not like this. So that he did
not understand that the Lords intended to extend the point of Withdrawing and
Commitment to General Impeachments without special matter alleged. For that if
it should be otherwise, many of the Lords might be picked out of their House of
a sudden.

To this the Earl of Shaftsbury replied, that they were as willing to be rid of
the Earl of Danby as the Commons; and first, as to the right of the Commons,
the Lords did agree that it was their right, and well warranted by Presidents
of former ages. And as to the distinction made, where the Impeachments were
General, and special matter alleged, there was no order given to make any such
distinction, for that General Impeachments were not in the case. The same was
affirmed by the Duke of Monmouth, and the Lord Falconbridge, and that the Earl
of Shaftsbury was in the right, and delivered the true sense of the Lords. And
as to that expression, That the Lords would not draw into example the
proceedings of the Earl of Danby, but would vacate them, the Lords intended
that only to the points of notwithdrawing and not-committing.

The said Earl likewise insisted that the way then proposed, would be a means
to have the Bill pass, for that the Commons might have other penalties, if they
pleased, as Confiscation of Estate. And notwithstanding they had no particular
order to mention Honors, yet by the general words he thought them included: So
that if they were insisted on by the Commons, he knew not but that they might
be agreed to be inserted in the Bill.

Therefore the Commons were desired to consider, that there were more weighty
reasons, better understood than expressed, that proved it necessary for the
good of the public, that the Bill should pass.

The Commons made this reply, that they hoped the Lords did not think they took
it as if they had then gained any point; for that the points mentioned by the
Lords as gained, were nothing but what was agreeable to the ancient methods of
Parliaments.

After this a free Conference being desired upon the subject matter of the last
free Conference, the Bill was left with the amendments in the Lords hands.

Whereupon the Lords desiring another free Conference upon the subject matter
of the last, the Lords declared, that they hoped that would be the concluding
Conference, having agreed to the Bill without further amendments, and therefore
desired the concurrence of the Commons.

Thus at length the Commons agreed to the amendments made by the Lords, and
sent a message to acquaint the Lords therewith. This was done upon the
fourteenth day of this month. But upon the sixteenth a Message was sent by the
Lords to acquaint the Commons, that the night before, the Earl of Danby had
rendered himself to the Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod, and that being called
to the Bar, they had sent him to the Tower.

Thereupon a Committee was appointed to prepare and draw up further Evidence
against him, and such further Articles as they should see cause.

Soon after his Majesty was pleased to dissolve his Privy Council, and to make
another, consisting of no more than thirty persons. And for the management of
the Treasury, and Navy, five Commissiones were appointed for the Treasury, and
seven for the Admiralty.

Then the Commons took into consideration the disbanding of the Army; and
having voted a supply of 264602 l. 17 s. 3 d. to that intent, they then voted,
that Sr. Gilbert Gerrard, Sr. Thomas Player, Coll. Birch, and Coll. Whitley,
should be Commissioners to pay the disbanded forces off.

But now to return to the Earl of Danby: upon the 25th. of this month, a
message was sent by the Lords to acquaint the Commons, that the said Earl had
that same day personally appeared at the Bar of their House, and had put in his
plea to the Articles of Impeachment against him. The Articles were these, as
they were delivered into the House of Lords in the name of the Commons of
England, by Sir Henry Capel, December 23. 1678.

I.
That he had traitorously encroacht to himself Regal Power, by treating in
matters of Peace and War with Foreign Ministers and Ambassadors, and giving
instructions to his Majesty's Ambassadors abroad, without communicating the
same to the Secretaries of State, and the rest of his Majesty's Council;
against the express Declaration of his Majesty in Parliament, thereby intending
to defeat and overthrow the provision that has been deliberately made by his
Majesty and his Parliament, for the safety and preservation of his Majesty's
Kingdoms and Dominions.

II.
That he had traitorously endeavored to subvert the ancient and
well-establish'd form of Government of this Kingdom, and instead thereof to
introduce an Arbitrary and Tyrannical form of Government; and the better to
effect this his purpose, he did design the raising of an Army, upon pretense of
a war against the French King, and to continue the same as a standing Army
within this Kingdom: and an Army so raised, and no war ensuing, an Act of
Parliament having past to disband the same, and a great sum of money being
granted for that end, he did continue the same, contrary to the said Act, and
mis-imploy'd the said money given for the disbanding to the continuance
thereof, and issued out of his Majesty's Revenues great sums of money for the
said purpose, and wilfully neglected to take security of the Play Master of the
Army, as the said Act required, whereby the said Law is eluded, and the Army
yet continued, to the great danger and unnecessary charge of his Majesty and
the whole Kingdom.

III.
That he, traitorously intending and designing to alienate the hearts and
affections of his Majesty's good Subjects from his Royal Person and Government,
and to hinder the meeting of Parliaments, and to deprive his Sacred Majesty of
their safe and wholesome counsel, and thereby to alter the constitution of the
Government of this Kingdom, did propose and negotiate a peace for the French
King, upon terms disadvantagious to the Interest of his Majesty and Kingdom.
For the doing whereof he did procure a great sum of money from the French King,
for enabling him to maintain and carry on his said traitorous designs and
purposes, to the hazard of his Majesty's Person and Government.

IV.
That he is Popishly affected, and has traitorously concealed, after he had
notice, the late horrid and bloody Plot and Conspiracy contrived by the Papists
against his Majesty's Person and Government, and has suppressed the Evidence,
and reproachfully discountenanced the Kings Witnesses in the Discovery of it,
in favor of Popery, immediately tending to the destruction of the Kings Sacred
Person, and the subversion of the Protestant Religion.

V.
That he has wasted the Kings Treasure, by issuing out of his Majesty's
Exchequer, several branches of his Revenue, for unnecessary Pensions and secret
services, to the value of (...) within two years, and that he has wholly
diverted out of the known method and Government of the Exchequer one whole
branch of his Majesty's Revenue to private Uses, without any account to be made
of it to his Majesty in his Exchequer, contrary to an express Act of Parliament
which granted the same. And he has removed two of his Majesty's Commissioners
of that part of the Revenue for refusing to consent to such his unwarrantable
actings therein, and to advance money upon that branch of the Revenue for
private uses.

VI.
That he has by indirect means procured from his Majesty to himself diverse
considerable gifts and Grants of Inheritances of the ancient Revenues of the
Crown, contrary to Acts of Parliament.

For which matters and things the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the
Commons in Parliament, do in the name of themselves, and of all the Commons of
England, impeach the said Thomas Earl of Danby, Lord High Treasurer of England,
of High Treason, and other high Crimes, Misdemeanors and Offenses, in the said
Articles contained. And the said Commons, by Protestation saving to themselves
the liberty of exhibiting at any time hereafter any other accusation or
Impeachment against the said Earl, and also of replying to the answers of which
the said Thomas Earl of Danby shall make to the Premises, or any of them, or
any Impeachment or Accusation which shall be by them exhibited, as the cause
according to proceedings of Parliament shall require, Do pray that the said
Thomas Earl of Danby may be put to answer all and every the Premises, that such
proceedings, Trials, Examinations and Judgments, may be upon them, and every
one of them had and used, as shall be agreeable to Law and Justice, and that he
may be sequestered from Parliament, and forthwith committed to custody.

To these Articles the Earl of Danby soon after put in his Plea, as follows.

The Plea of the Earl of Danby, late Lord high Treasurer of England, to the
Articles of Impeachment, and other High Crimes, Misdemeanors and Offenses,
Exhibited against him by the name of Thomas Earl of Danby, Lord High Treasurer
of England.
THE said Earl for Plea says, and humbly offers to your Lordships, as to all
and every the Treasons, Crimes, Misdemeanors and Offenses contained or
mentioned in the said Articles, That after the said Articles exhibited, namely
the first of March now last past, the Kings most excellent Majesty, by his most
gracious Letters of Pardon under his great Seal of England, bearing date at
Westminster the said first day of March, in the one and thirtieth year of his
Majesty's reign, and here into this most High and Honorable Court produced
under the said great Seal, of his special Grace, certain Knowledge, and mere
Motion, has pardoned, remised, and released to him the said Earl of Danby all
and all manner of Treasons, Misprisions of Treasons, Confederacies,
Insurrections, Rebellions, Felonies, Exactions, Oppressions, publications of
words, Misprisions, Confederacies, Concealments, Negligences, Omissions,
Offenses, Crimes, Contempts, Misdemeanors and Trespasses whatsoever, by himself
done, or with any other person or persons: or by any other, by the command,
advice, assent, consent or procurement of him the said Thomas E. of Danby,
advised, committed, attempted, made, perpetrated, concealed, committed, or
omitted before the 27th. day of Feb. then and now last past, being also after
the time of the said Articles exhibited, although the said Premises, or any of
them, did or should touch or concern the person of his said Majesty, or any of
his public Negotiations whatsoever, and also his Majesty's affairs with
foreign Ambassadors sent to his said Majesty; or by not rightly prosecuting his
Majesty's Instructions and Commands to his Ambassadors residing on his
Majesty's behalf in foreign parts. And as to all and singular accessories to
the said premises or any of the indicted, impeached, appealed, accused,
convicted, adjudged, out lawed, condemned or attainted, and all and singular
Indictments, Impeachments, Inquisitions, Informations, Exigents, Judgments,
Attainders, Outlaries, Convictions, pains of Death, Corporal punishments,
Imprisonments, Forfeitures, Punishments, and all other pains and penalties
whatsoever, for the same or any of them; and all and all manner of suits,
Complaints, Impeachments and demands whatsoever. Which his said Majesty by
reason of the Premises or any of them then had, or for the future should have,
or his heirs or successors any way could have afterward against him the said
Thomas Earl of Danby. And also suit of his Majesty's peace; and whatever to his
Majesty, his heirs or successors, against him the said Earl did or could belong
by reason or occasion of the Premises, or any of them.

And his Majesty has thereby granted his firm Peace to the said Tho. E. of
Danby. And further his Majesty willed and granted, that the said
Letters Patent, and the said Pardon and Release therein contained, as to all
the things Pardoned and Released should be good and effectual in the law,
though the Treasons, Misprisions of Treasons, Insurrections, Rebellions,
Felonies, Exactions, Oppressions, Publications of words, Misprisions of
Confederacies, Concealments, Negligencies, Omissions, Offenses, Crimes,
Contempts, Misdemeanors and Trespasses, were not certainly specified. And
notwithstanding the Statute by the Parliament of King Ed. 3. in the 14th. year
of his reign, made and provided, or any other Statute, Act or Ordinance to the
contrary thereof made and provided. And moreover his said now Majesty, by his
said Letters Patents, of his farther Grace did firmly command all and singular
Judges, Justices, Officers, and others whatsoever, That the said Free and
General Pardon of his said Maj. and the general words, clauses and sentences
abovesaid should be construed, and expounded, and adjudged in all his Majesty's
Courts, and elsewhere in the most beneficial, ample, and benign sense.

And for the better, and more firm discharge of the said Earl, of and from the
crimes and offenses aforesaid, according to the true intents of his Majesty,
and in such beneficial manner and form, to all intents and purposes whatsoever,
as if the said Treasons, Crimes, Offenses, Concealments, Negligencies,
Omissions, Contempts, and Trespasses aforesaid, and other the said Premises, by
apt, express, and special words had been remitted, released and pardoned; and
that the said Letters Patents of Pardon, and the Release and Pardon therein
contained, shall be pleaded and allowed in all and every his Majesty's Courts,
and before all his Justices whatsoever, without any Writ of allowance, any
matter, cause or thing whatsoever in any wise notwithstanding, as by the said
Letters Patents themselves more at large appears; which said Letters Patents
follow in these words.

Carolus Dei Gratia Angliae, Scotia, Franciae and Hibernae Rex, Fidei defensor,
etc. Omnibus ad quos prasentes Literae nostrae pervenerint, Salutem. Sciatis,
quod nos pro diversis bonis causis and considerationibus, Nos ad hoc
specialiter moventibus, de Gratia Nostra speciali and mero motu Nostris
Pardonavimus and Relaxavimus, etc. And the said Earl does averr, that he the
said Thomas Earl of Danby, in the said Articles named, is the said Thomas Earl
of Danby in the said Letters of Pardon, here produced, likewise named.

Which Pardon the said Earl does rely upon, and pleaded the same in Bar of the
said Impeachment, and in discharge of all the Treasons, Crimes, Misdemeanors
and Offenses contained or mentioned in the said Articles of Impeachment, and
every of them: And this the said Earl is ready to averr.

Whereupon he humbly prays the judgment of your Lordships, and that his
Majesty's most Gracious Pardon aforesaid may be allowed: And that he the said
Earl, by virtue hereof may be from all the said Articles of Impeachment, and
all and every of the Treasons and Crimes therein alleged against him acquitted
and discharged.



The Earl of Danby having thus put in his Plea to the Articles of Impeachment,
the Commons referred it to the Committee of Secrecy to examine the matter of
the Plea of the Earl of Danby, and to enquire how Presidents stood in relation
to the Pardon and in what manner and by what means the same was obtained. Who
thereupon made their Report, That they could find no President that ever any
Pardon was granted to any Person impeached by the Commons of High Treason, and
depending the Impeachment. So that they presently ordered that a Message should
be sent to the Lords to desire their Lordships to demand of the Earl of Danby
whether he would rely upon, and abide by his Plea or not.

In the midst of these disputes a business of another Nature intervenes. For
one Mr. Reading having been accused to the Commons for going about to corrupt
the Kings Evidence in the behalf of the five Lords in the Tower, they presently
ordered him to be secured, and made an Address to his Majesty that he would be
pleased to issue forth a Commission of Oyer and Terminer for the Trial of the
said Mr. Reading, wherein they made the more have, to the end his Trial might
be over, before that of the Lords, which it was then thought, was near at hand.
Hereupon the Commission was expedited; and upon the 24th. of this Month, the
Commissioners met at Westminster Hall in the Court of Kings Bench.

The Commissioners were the twelve Judges of England, Sir James Butler, Sir
Philip Matthews, Sir Thomas Orby, Sir Thomas Bide, Sir William Bowls, Sir
Thomas Stringer, Sir Charles Pitfeld, Thomas Robinson, Humfrey Wirley, Thomas
Haryot and Richard Gower, Esquires.

The Prisoner was endicted by the name of Nathaniel Reading, for soliciting,
suborning, and endeavoring to persuade Mr. William Bedlow, to lessen, stifle,
and omit to give in evidence the full truth according to his knowledge, against
the Lord Powis, Lord Stafford, Lord Peter and Sir Henry Tichborn, but to give
such evidence as he the said Reading should direct; as also for giving the said
Mr. Bedlow fifty Guineys in hand, and promising him greater rewards, for the
ends and purposes aforesaid.

The Jury were,
Sir John Cutler, Joshuah Galliard, Edward Wilford, Thomas Henslow, Thomas
Earsby, John Searle, Esquires. Thomas Casse, Rainsford Waterhouse, Matthew
Bateman, Walter Moyle, Richard Paget and John Haynes, Esquires.
Mr. Reading at first challenged Sir John Cutler, as being in the Commission of
Peace, and labored very much to have his challenge made good.

But his Challenge was overruled by the Court, first in regard that Sir John
was not in the particular Commission then sitting; and secondly, for that he
could not challenge him peremptorily, the Indictment not endangering his life,
as it might have been laid, but only for a Misdemeanour. Thereupon the Court
proceeded; and

First, in point of Evidence Mr. Bedlow swore, that he began with him as a
friendly adviser, admonishing him to be cautious, and not to run at the whole
Herd of Men. That he would make the Parliament his friends by proving the Plot;
the King his friend, in not charging all the Lords, and the Lords his friends,
by being kind to them. That the persons he most solicited for were the Lords
Powis, Petre and Stafford, Sir Henry Tichborn, Mr. Roper, Mr. Caryl, and
Corker, a Jesuit. That he should have Money and an Estate, by the negotiation
of the Prisoner at the Bar, to shorten the Evidence, and bring them off from
the charge of High Treason. That he and Mr. Reading had several Consultations
about this matter. That the Prisoner in assurance of his reward, told him he
had order to draw blank deeds to be signed in ten days after the discharge of
those for whom the solicitation was made. That Reading and Mr. Bedlow had a
private Consultation, at what time Mr. Bedlow was to pen his Testimony as Mr.
Reading should direct him for the mitigation of the Evidence. That when that
Paper was finished, the Prisoner carried it to the Lords to consider of it: and
that after they had considered of it, and mended it, as they pleased, Reading
returned with the emendations written with his own hand; and delivered them to
Mr. Bedlow in the Painted Chamber, who held them so behind him, that Mr.
Speak, as it was agreed, walking after him, came and took them out of his
hand. And that two Witnesses more being privately concealed by Mr. Bedlow in
his own chamber, overheard the main of the Consultation and overture of Mr.
Reading.

After this the Paper was produced which contained the short and tender
Evidence that Mr. Bedlow was to give, according to the Correction of the Lords,
and read in open Court, all under Readings own hand.

Which done, Mr. Speak was sworn, and deposed that being privately concealed
in Mr. Bedlow's Chamber, he overheard Mr. Bedlow's and Mr. Reading's
Negotiation together. That Mr. Bedlow asked Mr. Reading what the Lords said to
the business, and what my Lord Stafford said to the Estate in Glocestershire.
To which Mr. Reading made answer, that the Lord Stafford had faithfully
promised him to settle that Estate upon Mr. Bedlow, and that he had Orders from
that Lord to draw up a blank Deed in order to the settlement, which the said
Lord had engaged to sign and seal within ten days after he should be discharged
by Mr. Bedlow's contracting of his Evidence. That Mr. Reading added, That the
Lords Powis and Peter, and Sir Henry Tichborn, had faithfully engaged and
promised to give Mr. Bedlow a very fair and noble reward which should be
suitable to the service he should do them, in bringing them off from the Charge
of High Treason. To which when Mr. Bedlow replied, that he would not rely upon
their promises only, but expected to have something under their hands:

Mr. Reading replied, That they did not think it convenient so to do as yet,
but that Mr. Bedlow might take his word, as he had done theirs, adding withal
for a further confirmation, That he would engage his life for the performance.
With much other discourse, all tending to the same effect.

The third Evidence which was Mr. Bedlows man, and was concealed in the Chamber
to the same intent as the former witness was, gave the same Evidence upon oath,
as to what had been discoursed of in the Chamber between his Master and the
Prisoner, without any thing of material alteration of the words themselves,
which therefore need no repetition.

The defense of the Prisoner was very weak, more especially considering that he
was a man of the Gown. No more indeed than what after a tedious multiplying of
words, amounted to the Confession of the whole Charge. For he could not deny
but that he did carry the Kings Evidence to the Lords in the Tower; but that it
was purely out of Conscience to prevent the shedding of innocent blood. The
other part of his Evidence consisted in bespattering the witnesses, for which
he was so often corrected by the Court, that it betrayed in him more of
presumption than Law.

Therefore the Jury so little believed him, that after a very short absence
from the Bar, they brought him in Guilty; upon which the Court proceeded to
Sentence, which was, That he should be fined a thousand pound, That he should
be imprisoned for the space of one whole year; and be set in the Pillory for
the space of one hour in the Palace-yard at Westminster.

Thereupon in order to the Judgment of the Court he was set in the Pillory on
the Monday after his Trial. And as the Court were so kind as not to endite him
for his life, so they were careful to give the Sheriff a particular Charge of
his Person, lest the rage of the People understanding his Crime, should have
deprived him of what the mercy of the Law had granted him with so much favor.

May 1679. If Doctor Oats may be believed, whom we have not found yet to fail,
he tells us that the Jesuits had sent several Emissaries of their own to
foment the discontents and rebellious fermentations of the people of Scotland.
The mischief was laid upon the Presbyterians; whether it were so or no God
knows; but the effect and consequence was dire, nothing but Papistical murder,
which it is to be feared will come to be the Character of that Religion. In
England no less a sacrifice would serve them than a King, though Heaven
detested their oblation. In Scotland there was no King, and therefore they
resolved to cut off the Primate of the Church.

A strange doctrine to preach, that there could be no greater gift made to
Jesus Christ, than to send the Archbishop of St. Andrews head in a Silver Box
to the King. And yet this doctrine prevailed with one James Mitchel to attempt
the killing of the same Prelate in the chief street of Edinburgh, in the face
of the Sun and of all the multitude. Who dying for the fact, and with an
obdurate and seared zeal, owning and justifying the fact, led others so far
astray into the violation of the Law of Nature, that upon the third of this
month, deluded Devotion adventured to murder the Archbishop in the ensuing
manner.

The Archbishop it seems was returning in his Coach from a Village in Fife,
called Kennoway, toward the City of St. Andrews it self, and was got within two
miles of the place, near to another small village called Magus. There it was
that the Coachman, having spied several Horsemen, gave his Lord notice of them,
and asked him, whether he should not drive faster? But the Archbishop, not
dreading any harm, thought it not convenient to mend his pace. When they drew
near, the Archbishops daughter looked out, and seeing them with Pistols in
their hands, cried out to the Coachman to drive on. And he had certainly
out-driven them, had not one Balfour of Kinlock* being mounted upon a very
fleet horse, cunningly got before the Coach, into which they had already
discharged several shot in vain. This Balfour, finding he could not wound the
Coachman, because the Coach-mans whip frighted his Horse, wounded the
Postillian, and disabled the fore horses. Upon which the rest coming up, one of
them shot the Archbishop with a Blunderbuss as he sat in the Coach, while
others reproachfully called to him in these words, Come forth, vile Dog, who
have betrayed Christ and his Church, and receive what thou have deserved for
thy wickedness against the Kirk of Scotland. While he was in the Coach one ran
him through with a Sword under the shoulder, the rest pulling him violently out
of the Coach. His daughter went out, fell upon her knees and begged for mercy to
her father, but they beat her and trampled upon her. The Primate with an
extraordinary calmness of spirit, said to 'em, Gentlemen, I know not that I
ever injured any of you, and if I did I promise ye I will make you what
reparation you can propose.

To which they returned no better Language than this, Villain and Judas, Enemy
to God and his people, thou shall now have the reward of thy enmity to Gods
people: which words were followed with many mortal wounds, of which one was a
deep one above his eye. He labored to make them apprehensive that he was a
Minister, and pulling off his Cap showed them his gray hairs; entreating them
withal, that if they would not spare his life, yet that they would at least
allow him some little time for prayer.

But their barbarous and inhumane answer was, That God would not hear so base a
Dog as he was; and as to the desire of Quarter, they told him, That the strokes
they were then about to give, were those which he was to expect.
Notwithstanding all which inhumane usage, and a shot that pierced his body
above his right Pap, and several blows that cut his hands, while he was holding
them up to Heaven in prayer, he raised himself upon his knees, and uttered
these few words, God forgive you all. After which, by reason of many gashes
that cut his scull in pieces, he fell down dead. At which time some of the
Murderers, believing that they heard him groan, returned, saying, he was of
the nature of a Cat, and therefore they would go back, and hack him a little
better for the Glory of God.

And so having stirred about his brains with the points of their Swords, they
took an oath of the servants not to reveal their names; and then bidding them
take up their Priest, they rode back to Magus, crying out aloud, That Judas was
killed; and from thence made their escape.

All this while at London the Parliament continue their prosecution of the Earl
of Danby; and in order thereunto the lower House resolve that the Pardon of the
Earl of Danby was illegal and void, and not to be allowed in Bar of the
Impeachment of the Commons of England. Thereupon the whole House with the
Speaker went up to the Lords, to whom the Speaker made this following Address;
My Lords,


The Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, in Parliament assembled, are come up to
demand Judgment in their own names, and in the names of all the Commons of
England, against Thomas Earl of Danby, who stands by them impeached before your
Lordships of High Treason, and diverse high Crimes and Misdemeanors. To which
he has pleaded a Pardon, which Pardon the Commons conceive to be illegal and
void, and therefore they do demand Judgment accordingly.

Thereupon the Lords appointed a short day for hearing the Earl what he could
say to make good the plea of his Pardon.

Nor was his Majesty himself less careful of the safety of the Nation, who
finding or at least foreseeing the ill consequences of these continued
debates, thereupon sent a Message to the Commons, wherein he desired them to
secure the Fleet, to proceed in the discovery of the Plot, the Trial of the
Lords in the Tower, and the Bill for securing the Protestant Religion.

For all which they appointed a certain day of consideration, but before they
proceeded, they made an Address to his Majesty against the Duke of Lauderdale,
as a person who being in high trusts and employments about his Majesty, had by
his arbitrary and destructive Counsels, tending to the subversion the rights,
and liberty of of the subject, endeavored to alienate the hearts of his
Majesty's good subjects from his Majesty and Government; and more particularly
had contrived and endeavored to raise jealousies and misunderstandings between
England and Scotland. And therefore they most humbly besought his Majesty to
remove him from his Counsels both in Scotland and England, from all Offices,
Employments, and places of Trust, and from his Majesty's presence for ever.

And to show that they did not this out of disobedience, but affection,
presently after they declared in a full house, That in defense of his Majesty's
person, and the Protestant Religion, they would stand by his Majesty with their
lives and fortunes; and that if his Majesty should come to any untimely end,
which God forbid, they would revenge it to the utmost upon the Papists.

And now the Bill for the disbanding of the Army being completed, and having
passed both Houses, was confirmed, and received its last consummation by the
Kings Royal Assent: So that the Commissioners appointed by the house for that
purpose had liberty to attend that particular service.

In the mean time the Commons perceiving that there was a day appointed for the
Earl of Danby to make good the plea of his Pardon by Council, ordered that no
Commoner should presume to maintain the validity of the Pardon pleaded by the
said Earl, without the consent of the House; and that the person so doing
should be accounted a betrayer of the liberty of the Commons of England.

Next day the Earl appeared; and put in his Petition into the House of Lords,
wherein he set forth, that he was then attending their Lordships according to
Order; and expected to have met the Council assigned him by their Lordships;
but that he had received a Message from every one of them, that they durst not
appear to argue for him, by reason of a Vote which the house passed yesterday.

Who thereupon ordered that the Petition should be communicated to the House at
the next Conference, to know of them whether any such Vote were by them made or
no.

But here arose a new debate concerning the Bishops, which much entangled the
interest of the Earl of Danby, and the other five Lords in the Tower, in
reference to their Trials; for the Commons would not prosecute the latter
before the first, nor the first before such and such things were concluded. So
that it will be necessary to relate the proceedings of both Houses against the
Lords, which at length happened to be the occasion that neither the one nor the
other came to their Trials, as was expected.

The House having passed five resolves for the Impeaching Henry Lord Arundell
of Warder, William Earl of Pomis, John Lord Bellasis, William Viscount
Stafford, and William Lord Peter, of Treason, and several other Misdemeanors,
the same day five several Impeachments were accordingly carried up to the
Lords, but they did not desire they should be sequestered from Parliament, and
committed to custody, because they were at the same time under restraint in the
Tower.

The Impeachments were first in general, That for many years last past there
had been contrived and carried on a traiterous and execrable Conspiracy and
Plot within this Kingdom of England, and other places, to alter, change and
subvert the ancient Government and Laws of this Kingdom and Nation, and to
suppress the true religion therein established, and to extirpate and destroy
the professors thereof; which said Plot and Conspiracy was Contrived and
carried on in diverse places and by several ways and means, and by a great
number of Persons of several Qualities and Degrees who acted therein, and
intended to execute and accomplish the aforesaid wicked and traitorous designs
and purposes.

That the said five Lords together with Philip Howard, commonly called Cardinal
of Norfolk, and diverse others, Jesuits, Priests and Friars, and other Persons
as false Traitors to his Majesty and this Kingdom, within the time aforesaid,
had traitorously consulted, contrived and acted to and for the accomplishing of
the said wicked, pernicious and traitorous Designs; and for that end did most
wickedly and traitorously agree, conspire and resolve to imprison, depose and
murder his sacred Majesty, to deprive him of his Royal State, Crown and
Dignity, and by malicious and unadvised Speaking, Writing, and otherwise
declared such their purposes and intentions,

To subject this Kingdom and Nation to the Pope and his Tyrannical Government.

To seize and share among themselves the Estates of his Majesty's Protestant
Subjects.

To erect and restore Abbeys, Monasteries, and other Convents and Societies,
which have been long since by the Laws of this Kingdom suppressed, for their
Superstition and Idolatry, to deliver up and restore to them, the Lands and
possessions now invested in his Majesty, and his Subjects by the Laws and
Statutes of this Realm.

That the said Conspirators, their Accomplices and Confederates, had and held
several Meetings, Assemblies and Consultations, wherein it was contrived and
designed among them, what means should be used, and what Persons and
Instruments employed to murder his Majesty, and did then and there resolve to
effect it by Poisoning, Shooting, Stobbing, or some such like ways and means;
offered rewards and promises of advantage to several Persons to execute the
same, and hired and employed several wicked Persons to Windsor and other
places, where his Majesty did reside, to destroy and murder his Majesty; which
said Persons accepted such rewards, and undertook the perpetrating thereof, and
did actually go to the said places for that end and purpose. That the said
Conspirators had procured, accepted and delivered out several Instruments,
Commissions and Powers, made and granted by or under the Pope, or other
unlawful and usurping Authority, to raise Money, Men and Arms, and other things
necessary for their wicked and traitorous Designs, namely to the said Henry
Lord Arundel of Warder to be Lord High Chancellor of England, to the said
William Lord Powis to be Lord Treasurer of England, to the Lord Bellasis to be
General, to the Lord Petre to be Lieutenant General, to the Lord Stafford to be
Paymaster of the Army.

That in order to encourage themselves in prosecuting their said wicked Plots,
Conspiracies and Treasons, and to hide and hinder the discovery of the same,
and to secure themselves from Justice and Punishment, the Conspirators and
Confederates aforesaid did cause their Priests to administer an Oath of Secrecy
together with the Sacrament, and upon Confessions to give them Absolutions upon
condition that they did conceal the Conspiracy.

That the better to compass their traitorous Designs, they had consulted to
raise and had procured and raised Men, Money, Horse, Arms and Ammunitions; and
had made applications to, and treated and corresponded with the Pope, his
Cardinals, Nuncio's and Agents, and with other foreign Ministers and Persons,
to raise tumults within the Kingdom, and invade the same with foreign Forces;
to surprise, seize and destroy his Majesty's Navy, Forts, Magazines and Places
of Strength to the ruin and destruction of the Nation.

That when Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey, a Justice of Peace, had according to the
duty of his Oath and Office, taken several Examinations, and Informations
concerning the said Conspiracy and Plot, the said Conspirators or some of them,
by the advice, council and instigation of the rest, did incite and procure
diverse persons to lie in wait and pursue the said Sir Edmund-Bury several days
with intent to Murder him, which at last was prepetrated and effected by them.

That after the said Murder and before the body was found, or the Murder
known to any but the Accomplices, the said Persons falsely gave out that he was
a-live and privately Married; and after the Body was found, dispersed a false
and malicious report, that he had Murdered himself. Which said Murder was
committed with a design to stifle and suppress the Evidence he had taken, and
had knowledge of, and to discourage and deter Magistrates and others, from
acting in the farther discovery of the said Plot and Conspiracy.

That of their farther malice they had wickedly continued by many false
suggestions to lay the guilt and imputation of the aforesaid Horrid and
Detestable Crimes upon the Protestants, that so they might escape the
punishments they had justly merited, and expose the Protestants to great
scandal, and subject them to Persecution and Oppression in all Kingdoms and
Countries where the Roman Religion is received and professed.

All which Treasons, Crimes and Offenses were contrived, committed,
perpetrated, acted and done by the said Lords, and every of them, and others
the Conspirators against our Sovereign Lord the King, his Crown and Dignity,
and against the Laws and Statutes of the Kingdom.

Of all which Treasons, Crimes and Offenses, the Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses in Parliament Assembled, did in the Name of themselves and of the
Commons of England impeach the said William Earl of Powis, William Viscount
Stafford, Henry Lord Arundel of Warder, William Lord Petre, and John Lord
Bellasis, and every of them.

And the said Commons, saving to themselves the Liberty of Exhibiting at any
time hereafter against other Accusations or Impeachments against the said
Lords, and every of them, and also of Replying to the Answers, which they and
every of them should make to the premises, or any of them, or to any other
Accusation or Impeachment which should be by them exhibited (as the cause
according to course and proceedings of Parliament should require) did pray that
the said Lords and every of them should be put to Answer all and every the
Premises, and that such Proceedings, Examinations, Trials and Judgments might
be upon them and every of them, had and used, as should be agreeable to Law and
Justice, and course of Parliament.

The Articles of Impeachment being drawn up and finished and carried up to the
Lords House, the Lieutenant of the Tower was ordered to bring up the Prisoners
to the Bar, where after they had kneeled awhile, they were ordered to stand up
and hear their Charge; which when they had heard, the Lord Chancellor asked
them what they had to say for themselves, letting them know withal that his
Majesty would appoint a Lord High Steward for their Trials. Thereupon the Lords
impeached made several requests in order to their several Defenses upon their
Trials and then withdrew for a time. After the House had taken their requests
into consideration, they were called in again, and the Lord Chancellor gave
them to understand, that the several Endictments found against them by the
Grand Jury, should be brought into that Court by Writ of Certiorari; and that
they might have Copies of the Articles of Impeachment, and should have
convenient time given them to send in their respective Answers thereunto.

All this while the Lord Bellasis had not appeared at the Bar; it being sworn
that he was so ill that he could not stir out of his bed: which reasonable
excuse was allowed for the time. Not long after a Message was sent from the
Lords to acquaint the Commons, that the Lords impeached had all, except the
Lord Bellasis, brought up their Answers to the Charge exhibited against them,
and that their Lordships had sent them the Originals, desiring to have them
returned.

Soon after it was found, that the Lord Bellasis had sent in his Answer without
Appearance, which occasioned a great Debate, Whether by his not appearance he
had been Arraigned, or no, and whether his Answer were legal? The consideration
of which business was referred to the Committee of Secrecy; as also to look
into the Answers of the five Lords; to consider of the Methods of Proceedings
upon Impeachments, and to Report their Opinions. Which were, That the Lord
Bellasis being Impeached of High Treason by the Commons could not make any
Answer, but in person. And that the several Writings put in by the other Lords,
which they called their Pleas and Answers, were not Pleas or Answers, but
Argumentative and Evasive, to which the Commons neither could nor ought to
reply.

That though the Answers of the other four Lords were sufficient, yet that
there ought not to be any Proceedings against them, until the Lord Bellasis had
put in a sufficient Answer in person.

That the Commons should demand of the Lords, that their Lordships would
forthwith order and require the said Lords to put in their perfect Answers, or
in default thereof, that the Commons might have Justice against them.

Thereupon it was ordered by the Commons, That a Conference should be desired
with the Lords touching the Answers of the five Lords in the Tower; and that
the Managers thereof should acquaint their Lordships, that they intended to
make use of no other Evidence against the five Lords, then for matter done
within seven years last past; desiring their Lordships withal, to appoint a
short day for the said five Lords to put in their effectual Pleas and Answers
to the Articles of Impeachment.

But e're this Conference could be had, a Message came from the Lords to
acquaint the House, That John Lord Bellasis had that day appeared in person at
the Bar of the House, and had put in his Answer to the Articles of Impeachment,
which they had accordingly sent them.

The next day came another Message from the Lords, to acquaint them, That the
Lords Powis, Stafford, and Arundel, had appeared likewise at the Bar, and had
retracted their former Pleas, and had put in their Answers, which they had also
sent for them to view and consider. All which Answers were by the Commons
referred to the Secret Committee.

What these Answers were may be easily seen by that of the Lord Petre's here
inserted. For as their Crimes were the same, so their Defenses could not vary
much either in sense or matter.

The Lord Petre's Answer to the Articles of Impeachment.
THE said Lord in the first place, and before all other protesting his
Innocence, etc.

The said Lord does with all humility submit himself, desiring above all things
the Trial of his Cause by this most Honorable House, so that he may be
provided to make his just Defense, for the clearing of his Innocence from the
Great and Heinous Crimes charged against him by the said Impeachment. This
being prayed, as also liberty to Correct, Amend, and Explain any thing in the
said Plea contained, which may any ways give this Honorable House any occasion
of Offense, which he hopes will be granted.

The said Lord as to that part of the Impeachment that concerns the matter
following: Namely, That for diverse years last past, there had been contrived
and carried on by the Papists a most traitorous and execrable Conspiracy and
Plot within this Kingdom of England and other places, to alter and subvert the
Ancient Government and Laws of this Kingdom and Nation, and to suppress the
true Religion therein Established, and to extirpate and destroy the Professors
thereof; and that the said Plot and Conspiracy was contrived and carried on in
diverse places, and by several ways and means, and by a great number of several
Persons of Qualities and Degrees who acted therein, and intended thereby to
execute and accomplish their aforesaid wicked and traitorous Designs and
Purposes.

That the said William Lord Petre, and other Lords therein named, together with
several other persons therein likewise named and mentioned as false Traitors to
his Majesty and Kingdom within the time aforesaid, have traitorously acted and
consulted to and for the accomplishing of the said wicked, pernicious and
traitorous Designs, and to that end did most wickedly and traitorously Agree,
Consult, Conspire, and Resolve to Imprison, Depose, and Murder His Sacred
Majesty, and deprive him of his Royal Estate, Crown and Dignity, and by
malicious and advised Speaking and otherways declaring their said Purposes and
Intentions; As also to subject this Kingdom and Nation to the Pope and his
Tyrannical Government, and to Seize and Share among themselves the Estates and
Inheritance of His Majesty's Protestant Subjects, and to Erect and Restore
Abbeys, Monasteries, and other Convents and Societies, which have been long
since by the Laws of this Kingdom suppressed for their Superstition and Idolatry,
and to Deliver up and Restore to them the Lands and Possessions now Vested in
his Majesty and his Subjects, by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm. And also
to Found and Erect new Monasteries and Convents, and to remove and deprive all
Protestant Bishops and other Ecclesiastical Persons from their Livings,
Benefices and Preferments, and by this means to destroy his Majesty's Person,
and extirpate the Protestant Religion, overthrow the Rights, Liberties and
Propertys of all his Majesty's good Subjects, subvert the Laws and Government
of this Kingdom, and subject the same to the Tyranny of the Sea of Rome; And
the said Conspirators, Accomplices and Confederates traitorously had and held
several Meetings, Assemblies and Consultations, wherein it was contrived and
designed amongst them what ways should be used, and the Persons and Instruments
should be employed to Murder his Majesty, and did then and there resolve to
effect it, by Poisoning, Shooting, Stabbing, or by some such like ways and
means.

And to that part of the Impeachment named, The better to compass their
traitorous Designs, Have Consulted to raise Money, Men, Horses, Arms and
Ammunition, etc.

The said Lord, saving to himself (and which he humbly prays may be reserved to
him) the liberty of answering over, and denying all and singular the said
Crimes and Offenses charged on him, says, and humbly offers to this
Honorable House, That the Charge of those Crimes and Offenses so imposed on
him by the said Impeachment, are so general and uncertain, that he cannot
possibly Answer thereto, or make any just or lawful Defense upon his Trial: For
that the said Charge has no manner of certainty, in point of time, it being
laid only for many years last past, which may be for 5, 10, 20, 30, or more
years, whereby, though the said Lord knows himself to be altogether innocent of
any such horrid or detestable Crimes, as by the said Impeachment are objected
against him. Yet it is impossible for him upon any Trial thereof to be prepared
with his just and lawful Defense by Witness, to prove himself absent or in any
other place at the same time of such Meetings or Consultations, to or for any
of the wicked Designs and Purposes in the said Impeachment mentioned, as on his
Trial may be suddenly objected against him, when he cannot by any care or
foresight whatever, have such Witness ready as would disprove them if they were
certainly charged for any traitorous Design, Act, or Crime, at any time
certainly alleged by the said Impeachment. Nor is the said Charge in the said
Impeachment more certain, as to the place of any such Meeting or Consultation
laid down in the said Impeachment, being only alleged, to be in diverse places
within this Realm of England, and elsewhere: Which, for the Cause aforesaid, is
so utterly uncertain, that it deprives the said Lord of his Defense upon his
Trial. The incertainties likewise of the number of Meetings and Consultations
to the wicked Purposes in the Impeachment mentioned, and the not showing how
many times the Lords met and consulted, and with whom in particular, does
likewise deprive him of all possibility of making his Defense in producing
Witnesses. For the said Lord being wholly innocent cannot suppose or imagine
what Meetings or Consultations, either to raise Money or Men for carrying on a
Traitorous Design, or to any other wicked Intent or Purpose in the said
Impeachment mentioned, shall or may be objected against him upon the Trial. And
it is as impossible for him to bring Witnesses to prove all the Meetings and
Consultations may upon his Trial be objected against him, as a traitorous
Meeting or Consultation.

And where it is in the said Impeachment charged upon the said Lord, That he
has uttered Treason by malicious and advised Speaking, and other ways
declaring the same. The said Lord says, That never any traitorous thought
entered into his heart, and therefore he cannot know any Words or Writing he
ever spoke or declared, which are now charged upon him as Treason, there being
no Word or Writing at all specified in the Impeachment, whereby the Lord may
know how to prepare his Defense against them, or this most Honorable Court may
judge whether the said Words or Writing are in truth Treasonable, or not?

All which Incertainties, eminent and apparent Dangers of the said Lord being
thereupon surprised in a Cause of this Consequence, wherein his Life (and
Honor, more dear to him than his Life, and all else that is dear to him in
this World, are immediately concerned) being seriously weighed and considered
by your Lordships, He humbly prays, (as by his Counsel he is advised) That
your Lordships would not put him to Answer the said Impeachment herein above
recited, till the same be reduced to such a complete certainty, that the said
Lord may know how to Answer unto, and thereby be enabled to make his just
Defense accordingly.

All which, notwithstanding he humbly submits to whatsoever your Lordships
in Justice shall order and think fit; And to all other Treasons, Crimes and
Offenses contained, mentioned or specified in the said Impeachment, the said
Lord protesting his Innocence in the great Wisdom and Sentence of this
Honorable Court shall always acquiesce.

Soon after the Lords desired to know of the Commons, Whether they were ready
to join Issue? who returned in a short time for answer, That they were ready to
make good their Charge against the five Lords.

Thereupon a Message was sent from the Lords to acquaint the Commons, That they
had made an Order, That the five Lords in the Tower should be brought to their
Trials upon the Impeachments against them by that day seven night, the Message
being delivered on the sixth of May: and that they had also appointed an
Address to be presented to his Majesty, for the naming a Lord High Steward, as
well in the Case of the Earl of Danby, as of the other five Lords, and that the
same should be in Westminster Hall.

Upon this, the Commons appointed a Committee to search Precedents relating to
the Message sent them from the Lords; upon whose Report it was found, That on
the like occasion, the Commons had appointed a select Committee to join with a
Committee of the Lords, to consider of the Methods and Circumstances to be
observed in the Trial. This occasioned a Message to the Lords, to desire a
Conference upon the Subject Matter of the last Message relating to the Trial of
the Lords in the Tower.

There it was urged by the Commons, that they supposed that their Lordships did
intend in all their proceedings upon Impeachments depending at that time before
their Lordships, to follow the usual course and methods of Parliament; and
therefore the Commons could not apprehend what should induce their Lordships to
address to his Majesty for a Lord High Steward, in order to the determining the
validity of the Pardon, which had been pleaded by the Earl of Danby to the
Impeachment of the Commons; as also for the Trial of the other five Lords; for
that they conceived the Constituting of a High Steward was not necessary; in
regard that judgment might be given in Parliament without a High Steward. For
which reasons, and for that there were several other matters contained in their
Lordships Message, touching the Trials of the Lords impeached, which if not
settled, might occasion several Interruptions and Delays in the Proceedings.

Therefore the House of Commons did propose to their Lordships, that a
Committee of both Houses might be appointed to consider of the most proper ways
and methods of proceedings upon Impeachments by the House of Commons, according
to the usage of Parliament, that those Inconveniences might be avoided.

The Reasons of the Commons being thus delivered, the Lords desired another
upon the Conference before going, wherein they declared, that they could not
agree to a Committee of both Houses, because they did not think it conformable
to the Rules and Orders of Proceedings of that Court, which always was, ever
ought to be tender in matters relating to their Judicature.

Upon the report of this Answer, the Commons voted, that it tended to the
Interruption of the good Correspondency between the two Houses, and therefore
desired another Conference with the Lords.

There the Commons declared their care to prevent all interruptions of a good
Correspondence between the two Houses; which as they were desirous at all times
to preserve, so was it more especially necessary at such a conjuncture, when
the most heinous Delinquents were to be brought to Justice, that the Enemies of
the King and Kingdom might have no hopes left them, to see it obstructed by any
difficulties arising in the way of proceeding. And therefore in Answer to the
last Conference it was urged, That their Lordships did not offer any Answer or
satisfaction to the Commons in their necessary Proposals amicably propounded by
way of supposition, that they might have been confirmed therein by their
Lordships. That their Lordships did intend in all their Proceedings upon the
Impeachments now depending before their Lordships to follow the usual course
and methods of Parliament.

And further, their Lordships had not given the least Answer or satisfaction to
the Commons concerning their Lordships addressing to the King for a Lord High
Steward, though the Commons proposed their design of satisfaction, in as
cautious terms as could be, on purpose to avoid all disputes about Judicature.

Thereupon the sense of the Commons was thus summed up, that They, to avoid all
Interruptions and Delays in the proceedings against the Lords impeached, and
the inconveniences that should arise thereby, having proposed to their
Lordships, that a Committee of both Houses might be nominated, to consider of
the most proper means and methods of proceedings upon Impeachments, and
receiving no other Answer from the Lords, save only That they did not think it
conformable to the Rules and Orders of the Proceeding of their Court, without
any Reason assigned, judged the said Answer to be a refusal of them to agree
with the Commons in appointing such a Committee, though heretofore not denied
when asked upon the like occasion; and at that time desired purposly to avoid
disputes and delays.

So that in fine the sense of the House being thus delivered by Mr. Hambden, at
length he told the Lords that he had commands to acquaint them that things
standing so upon their Answer, the Commons could not proceed in the Trial of
the Lords before the Method of proceedings were adjusted between the two Houses.

However this difference was soon passed over had not a large debate
intervened. For soon after the Lords sent down a Message to acquaint the
Commons, That they had appointed a Committee of twelve Lords to meet a
Committee of the House of Commons in the inner Court of Wards to consider of
propositions and circumstances relating to the Trial of the Lords in the Tower.

In the amidst of these Debates his Majesty was pleased to send a Message to
the House by Mr. Powle, to the following purport. That His Majesty had already
at the first meeting of Parliament, and since, by a word or two, mentioned the
Necessity of having a Fleet out at Sea that Summer, yet the season for
preparing being advanced, and our neighbors before us in preparation, He could
not hold himself discharged toward His people, if He did not then with more
earnestness, Commend the same to their present Care and Consideration, and the
rather from the daily expectation of the return of the Fleet from the
Streights, to which a great Arrear was due, and did hereby acquit Himself of
all the evil Consequences which the want of a Fleet in such a juncture might
produce. Neither had He done this without considering that their Entering upon
the work presently could be no hindrance to the great Affairs upon the House,
but rather a security in the dispatch thereof.

However it were, the Consideration of this Message was Adjourned for a Week,
and their former Debates resumed, if they were at all interrupted.

For now the Committees of Lords and Commons having met, two Propositions were
made by the Commoners; to see the Commission of Lord High Steward, and other
Commissions.

In the second place, they desired to know what Resolutions had been taken
touching the Lords Spiritual, whither they should be absent or present.

As to the first, the Lords acquainted them with an Order which they had made,
that the Office of a High Chamberlain upon the Trial of Peers upon Impeachment,
was not necessary to the House of Peers, but that the Lords might proceed upon
such Trials, though a High Steward were not appointed.

The Lords also farther declared that a Lord High Steward was made hac vice
only, that notwithstanding the making of a Lord High Steward, the Court
remained the same, and was not thereby altered, but still remained the Court of
Peers in Parliament.

As to the second Proposition, the Lords communicated the Resolution of the
Peers, which was this, that the Lords Spiritual had a right to stay in Court in
Capital Causes, till such time as judgment of Death comes to be pronounced; or
rather, as by a farther explanation of the said Resolution the Lords made it
out, till the Court proceeded to the Vote of Guilty or not Guilty

In the first place, the Commons took exception at the words in the Commission
of the Lord High Steward for Trial of the Earl of Danby, which were these, Ac
pro eo quod Officium Seneschalli Angliae, (cujus praesentia in hac part
requiritur) ut acceptimus jam vacat. These the Commons desired might be left
out, as implying that the continuing a Lord High Steward was necessary; and
thereupon proposed these words to be inserted,

Ac pro eo quod Proceres and Magnates in Parliamento Nostro Assemblato nobis
humiliter supplicaverunt, ut Seneschallum Angliae hac vice constituere
dignaremur. These Amendments were soon consented to by the Lords, and it was
farther agreed that the Commission under Seal for Constituting a Lord High
Steward for the Trial of the Earl of Danby should be recalled, and another new
Commission according to the Amendments issued forth, bearing date after the
said Resolve; and that the like Commission should be issued forth for Trial of
the other Lords.

As to the Lords Answer to the second Proposition, the Commons gave their
Committee order to insist, That the Lords Spiritual ought not to have any Vote
in any proceedings against the Lords in the Tower; and that when that matter
should be settled, and the methods of Proceedings adjusted, that then the House
would be ready to proceed upon the Trial of the Earl of Danby, against whom the
House had already demanded Judgment, and afterward to the Trial of the other
five Lords.

Upon the 16th of May, after several Debates and Reports of both Committees,
the Lords came to this Resolution, that the Thursday following should be
appointed to begin the Trial of the five Lords.

Upon which the Lords Spiritual desired leave of the House, that they might
withdraw themselves from the Trial of the said Lords, with Liberty of Entering
their usual protestations. This Resolution and the desire of the Bishops being
communicated to the Commons. It was by them resolved, That the Vote of their
House extended as well to the Earl of Danby, as the rest, and that if the
Bishops might have leave to withdraw, it implied a right, which if they had, it
was a new Court; a thing the Commons could not admit of. The Lords made Answer
that there was no day appointed for the Trial of the Earl of Danby, and that
the Lords Spiritual would be absent at all the parts of the Trials of the five
Lords; and that the Protestation they desired to enter would be the same as in
the Earl of Stafford's case.

To which the Commons replied that they could not proceed to treat of any other
proposal till such time as the business about the Court should be settled.

But the Lords insisting still upon their first Resolutions, the Commons
thought fit to draw up their Reasons in writing, which they did, and delivered
them to the Committee of Lords upon the 26th of May. Which was the day before
their Prorogation. Which because they are matter of History as well as debate,
may not be unfitly inserted.

They alleged that the Commons had always desired, that a good Correspondence
might be preserved between the two Houses.

That there was then depending between their Lordships and the Commons a matter
of the greatest weight; In the transactions of which their Lordships did seem
to apprehend some difficulty in the Matters proposed by the Commons. To clear
the same the Commons had desired that Conference; by which, they hoped to
manifest to their Lordships that the Propositions of the House of Commons, made
by their Commit, in relation to the Trial of the Lords in the Tower, were
only such as were well warranted by the Laws of the Parliament, and
Constitution of Government, and in no sort entrenched upon the Judicature of
the Peers, but were most necessary to be insisted upon, that the Ancient Rights
of Judicature in Parliament might be maintained.

The Commons readily acknowledged that the Crimes charged upon the Earl of
Powis, Viscount Stafford, Lord Arundel of Wardour, and Lord Bellasis were of
deep Guilt, and called for speedy Justice: But withal, they held, that any
change in Judicature in Parliament, made without consent in full Parliament,
was of pernicious Consequence both to his Majesty and his Subjects; and
conceived themselves obliged to transmit to their Posterity all the Rights
which of that kind they had received from their Ancestors, by putting their
Lordships in mind of the progress that had already been between the two Houses
in relation to the Propositions made by the Commons, and the reasonableness of
the Propositions themselves. So that they doubted not but to make it appear,
that their Aims had been no other, then to avoid such Consequences, and to
preserve that Right; and that there was no delay of Justice on their part. And
to that purpose they offered to their Lordships the ensuing Reasons and
Narrative. That the Commons in bringing the Earl of Danby to Justice, and in
discovery of that execrable and traitorous Conspiracy, (of which the five
Popish Lords stood impeached, and for which some of their wicked Accomplices
had already undergone the sentence of the Law, as Traitors and Murderers) had
labored under many great difficulties was not unknown to their Lordships.

Nor was it less known to their Lordships, That upon the Impeachment of the
House of Commons against the Earl of Danby for High Treason, and other high
Crimes, Misdemeanors and Offenses, even the common Justice of sequestring him
from Parliament, and forthwith committing him to safe Custody was then required
by the Commons, and denied by the Peers, though he then sat in their House. Of
which their Lordships had been so sensible, that at a free Conference, the 10th
of April last, their Lordships declared, That it was the Right of the Commons,
and well warranted in former Ages, That upon an Impeachment of the Commons, a
Peer so impeached, ought of right to be ordered to withdraw, and then to be
Committed. And had not that Justice been denied to the Commons, a great part of
the Sessions of Parliament, which had been spent in framing and adjusting a
Bill, for causing the Earl of Danby to appear and answer that Justice, from
which he was fled, had been saved, and employed for the preservation of his
Majesty's Person, the security of the Nation, and in prosecution of the other
five Lords, Neither had he had the Opportunity for procuring for himself that
illegal Pardon, which bore date the first of March, and which he pleaded in Bar
of his Impeachment; nor of wasting so great a proportion of the Treasure of the
Kingdom, as he had done, after the Commons had exhibited their Articles of
Impeachment against him.

After which time so lost, by reason of the denial of that Justice which of
right belonged to the Commons upon their Impeachment, the said Bill being ready
for the Royal Assent, the said Earl then rendered himself, and by their
Lordships Order of the 16th of April last, was committed to the Tower. After
which he pleaded the said Pardon, and being pressed, did at length declare, that
he would rely upon and abide by that Plea. Which Pardon so Pleaded, being
illegal and void ought not to Bar or preclude the Commons from having Justice
upon the Impeachment. They did thereupon with their Speaker, on the Fifth of
May, in the name of themselves and all the Commons of England demand Judgment
against the said Earl upon their Impeachment; not doubting but that their
Lordships did intend in all their proceedings upon the Impeachment, to have
followed the usual Course and Method of Parliament.

But the Commons were not a little surpised by the Message sent from their
Lordships, delivered them on the seventh of May, thereby acquainting them, that
as well the Lords Spiritual as Temperal had ordered that the 10th of May,
should be the day for hearing the Earl of Danby, to make good his plea of
Pardon. And that on the thirteenth of May, the other Five Lords should be
brought to their Trial; and that their Lordships had addressed to His Majesty
for naming of a Lord High Steward, as well in the Case of the Earl of Danby, as
of the other Five Lords.

Upon Consideration of this Message, the Commons found, that the admitting of
the Lords Spiritual to exercise Jurisdiction in these Cases, was an alteration
of the Judicature in Parliament, and which extended as well to the proceeding
against the Five Lords, as the Earl of Danby. And that if a Lord High Steward
should be necessary upon Trial on Impeachments of the Commons, the power of
Judicature in Parliament, upon Impeachments might be defeated by suspending or
denying a Commission to Constitute a Lord High Steward. And that the said days
of Trial appointed by their Lordships were so near to the time of their said
Message, that those Matters, and the Method of Proceeding upon the Trial could
not be adjusted by conference between the two Houses, before the day so
nominated. And consequently the Commons could not then proceed to Trial, unless
the zeal which they had for speedy Judgment against the Earl of Danby, (that so
they might proceed to Trial of the other Five Lords) should induce them at that
juncture, both admit the Enlargment of their Lordships Jurisdiction, and to sit
down under those or any hardships (though with the hazard of all the Commons
Power of impeaching for time to come) rather then that the Trial of the said
Five Lords should be deferred for some short time, while those Matters might be
agreed on and Settled.

For reconciling differences in these great and weighty Matters, and for saving
that time which would necessarily have been spent in Debates and Conferences
betwixt the two Houses, and for expediting the Trials, without giving up the
power of Impeachments, or rendering them effectual.

The Commons thought fit to propose to their Lordships, that a Committee of
both Houses might be appointed for that purpose. At which Committee, when
agreed to by their Lordships it was first proposed; That the time of Trial of
the Lords in the Tower should be put off till the other Matters were adjusted;
and it was then agreed, That the Proposition as to the time of Trial should be
the last thing Considered: The effect of which agreement stands reported in
their Lordships Books.

After which, the Commons Communicated to their Lordships, by their Committee,
a Vote of theirs, that the Committee of the Commons should insist upon the
former Vote of the House, that the Lords Spiritual ought not to have any Vote
in any proceeding against the Lords in the Tower and that when that Matter
should be settled, and the method of proceedings adjusted, the Commons would
then be ready to proceed upon the Trial of the Pardon of the Earl of Danby,
against whom they had before demanded Judgment, and afterward to the Trial of
the other Five Lords in the Tower. Which Vote extended as well to the Earl of
Danby, as to the other Five Lords. But the Commons had as yet received nothing
from their Lordships toward an Answer of that Vote, save that their Lordships
had acquainted them, that the Bishops had asked leave of the House of Peers,
that they might withdraw themselves from the Trial of the Five Lords, with
Liberty of entering their usual Protestations.

And though the Commons Committee had almost daily declared to their Lordships
Committee, That that was a necessary point to be settled before the Trial, and
offered to debate the same, their Committee still answered that they had not
power from their Lordships, either to confer upon or give any Answer concerning
that Matter.

And yet their Lordships, without having given the Commons any Satisfactory
Answer to the said Vote, or permitting any Conference or debate thereupon, did
on Thursday the second of May, send a Message to the Commons, declaring that
the Lords Spiritual as well as Temporal had ordered the 27th of May for the
Trial of the Five Lords.

So that the Commons could not but apprehend, that their Lordships had not only
departed from what was agreed on, and in effect laid aside by that Committee
which was constituted for preserving a good understanding betwixt the two
Houses, and better dispatch of the weighty affairs depending in Parliament, but
also must needs conclude from the Message and Votes of their Lordships of the
7th of May, That the Lords Spiritual had a right to stay and sit in Court, till
the Court proceeded to the Vote of Guilty or not Guilty. And from the Bishops
asking leave that they might withdraw themselves from the Trial of the said
Lords, with Liberty of entering their usual Protestations, and by their
persisting to go on, and giving their Votes in proceedings upon Impeachments,
that their desire of leave to withdraw at the Trials was only an evasive answer
to the before mentioned Vote of the Commons, and chiefly intended as an
argument for a right of Judicature in Proceedings upon Impeachment, and as a
reserve to judge upon the Earl of Danby's plea of Pardon: and upon those and
other like Impeachments, though no such power was ever claimed by their
Predecessors, and was utterly denied by the Commons. And the Commons were the
rather induced to believe it so intended, because the very asking leave to
withdraw, seemed to imply a right to be there, and that they could not absent
without it.

The Commons therefore did not think themselves obliged to proceed to the Trial
of the Lords on the seventh of May, but to adhere to their Vote. And for their
so doing, besides what had been already and formerly said to their Lordships
they offered these Reasons following.

I.
Because your Lordships have received the Earl of Danby's Plea of Pardon, with
a very long and unusual Protestation, wherein he has aspersed His Majesty by
false suggestions, as if His Majesty had commanded or countenanced the Crimes
he stands charged with, and particularly the suppressing and discouraging the
Discovery of the Plot, and endeavoring to Introduce an Arbitrary and
Tirannical way of Government; Which remains as a scandal to His Majesty,
tending to render His Person and His Government odious to His People, against
which it ought to be the principal care of both Houses to Vindicate His Majesty
by doing justice upon the said Earl.

II.
The setting up a Pardon to be a Bar against an Impeachment defeats the whole
use and effect of Impeachments; and should this point be admitted, or stand
doubted, it would totally discourage the exhibiting any for the future. Whereby
the chief Institution for the preservation of the Government, and consequently
the Government it self would be destroyed. And therefore the case of the said
Earl, which in consequence concerns all Impeachments whatsoever, ought to be
determined before that of the five Lords, which is but their particular case.

And without resorting to many Authorities of greater Antiquity, The Commons
desire your Lordships to take Notice, with the same regard they do, of the
Declaration which that Excellent Prince, King Charles the I. of blessed Memory,
made in this behalf, in his Answer to the nineteen Propositions of both Houses
of Parliament. Wherein stating the several parts of this Regulated Monarchy, He
says, The King, the House of Lords, and the House of Commons have each their
particular Privileges. And among those which belong to the King he reckons
Power of pardoning. After the Ennumerating of which, and other his
Preaogatives, His said Majesty adds thus; Again that the Prince may not make
use of this High and perpetual Power to the hurt of those for whose good he
has it, and make use of the Name of public Necessity, for the Gain of his
private Favorites and Followers, to the Detriment of the People, the House of
Commons (an excellent preservative of Liberty, etc.) is solely entrusted with
the first Propositions concerning the Levying of Money, and the Impeaching of
those, who for their own ends, though countenanced by any Surreptitiously
gotten Command of the King, have violated the Law, when he knows it, which he
is bound to protect, and to the protection of which they are bound to advise
him, at least not to serve him to the contrary. And the Lords being entrusted
with a Judiciary power, are an excellent Skreen and Bank between the Prince and
People, to assist each against any encroachments of the other, and by just
Judgment to preserve the Law, which ought to be the Rule of every one of the
three, etc. Therefore the Power placed in both Houses is more then sufficient
to prevent and restrain the Power of Tyranny, etc.

III.
Until the House of Commons have right done them against this Plea of Pardon,
they may justly apprehend, that the whole Justice of the Kingdom in the Case of
the five Lords may be obstructed and defeated by Pardons of the like nature.

IV.
And Impeachments are virtually the voice of every particular Subject of this
Kingdom, crying out against Oppression, by which every member of that Body is
equally wounded. And it will prove a matter of ill consequence, that the
Universality of the People should have occasion minister'd and continued to
them to be apprehensive of utmost danger from the Crown, from whence they of
right expect Protection.

V.
The Commons exhibited Articles of Impeachment against the said Earl, before
any against the five other Lords; and demanded Judgment upon those Articles.
Whereupon your Lordships having appointed the Trial of the said Earl to be
before that of the other five Lords, and now having inverted the said Order,
gives a great cause of doubt to the House of Commons, and raises a jealousy in
the Hearts of all the Commons of England, That if they should proceed to the
Trial of the said five Lords in the first place, not only Justice will be
obstructed in the case of those Lords, but that they shall never have right
done them in the matter of this Plea of Pardon, which is of so fatal
Consequence to the whole Kingdom, and a new device to frustrate the public
Justice in Parliament.

Which Reasons and Matters being duly weighed by your Lordships, the Commons
doubt not but your Lordships will receive satisfaction, concerning their
Propositions and Proceedings. And will agree, That the Commons neither ought
nor can, without deserting their Trust, depart from their former Vote
communicated to your Lordships; That the Lords Spiritual ought not to have any
Vote in any proceedings against the Lords in the Tower, etc.

This Narrative and the Reasons being delivered, as is already mentioned, were
the next day read and debated; and then the Lords read their own Vote of the
13th of May, and their Explanation thereupon, and the Question being put,
whether to insist upon those Votes concerning the Lords Spiritual, it was
Resolved in the Affirmative; Eight and twenty of the Lords dissenting.

What the issue of the dispute would have been, is not here to be disputed: but
this is certain, that while both Houses were thus contesting, His Majesty
himself put an end to their Debates. For that very day being come in His Royal
Robes into the House of Lords, and seated in His Throne, the Commons also
attending, His Majesty was pleased to give His Royal Assent to A Bill for the
better securing the Liberty of the Subject.

A Bill for reingrossing of Fines burned in the late Fire in the Temple. And

A Private Bill concerning Charles Dale of Rutlandshire Esquire



And then having intimated His Resolution to the two Houses to Prorogue them
till the 14th of August, The Lord Chancellor Prorogued them accordingly by His
Majesty's Command.

Little else of moment was done this Sessions; only the House of Commons
having ordered a Committee to inspect the Miscarriages of the Navy, upon their
report of the Heads of an Information against Sir Anthony Deane and Mr. Pepys
Members of the House, they were both by Order of the House committed to the
Tower: by virtue of which commitment they still remain under Bail.

Presently after the Prorogation of the Parliament came the News of the
Rebellion that was broken out in the West of Scotland, where they Proclaimed
the Covenant, and set up a Declaration of which the substance was, That

AS it was not unknown to a great part of the World how happy the Church of
Scotland had been, while they enjoyed the Ordinances of Jesus Christ in their
Purity and Power, of which we had been deplorably deprived by the
reestablishment of Prelacy; So it was evident, not only to impartial Persons,
but to professed Enemies, with what unparalleled Patience and Constancy, the
People of God had endured all the Cruelty and Oppression that Prelates and
Malignants could invent or exercise. And that being most unwilling to act any
thing that might import Opposition to lawful Authority, though they had all
along been groaning under Corruptions of Doctrine, slighting of Worship,
despising Ordinances, Confining, Imprisoning, Exiling their faithful Ministers;
Fining, Confining, Imprisoning, Torturing, Tormenting the poor People,
Plundering their Houses and Selling their Persons to Foreign Plantations;
whereby great Numbers in every Corner of the Land were forced to leave their
Dwellings, Wives and Children, and to wander as Pilgrims, none daring to Supply
or Relieve them, nor so much as to speak with them upon their Deathbeds, for
fear of making themselves obnoxious to the same Punishments. And not only so,
but that they had been forced also to stoop under the Yoke of Oppression in
their Civil Interests, their Bodies, Liberties and Estates: So that all manner
of Outrages had been exercised upon them through a tract of several Years past;
particularly in the Year 1678. by sending among them an Armed host of Barbarous
Savages contrary to all Law and Humanity; and by laying upon them several
Impositions and Taxes by a prelimited and overawed Convention of Estates in
July 1678. for keeping up an armed Force entrusted for the most part into the
Hands of avowed Papist, or their Favorers: by whom sundry invasions had been
made upon them, and incredible Insolences committed against them: their
Ministers and People being by them frequently hunted after and apprehended,
while meeting in Houses for Divine Worship. So that being necessitated to
attend the Lord's Ordinances in fields and desert places, there they had also
been hunted out and Assaulted to the Effusion of their Blood, whereby they were
inevitably constrained either to defend themselves by Arms at these Meetings,
or to be altogether deprived of the Gospel preached by their faithful
Ministers. That upon the first day of June last, being the Lord's Day, Captain
Graham of Clover-House, being Warranted by Proclamation to kill whom soever he
found in Arms at field-Conventicles, and making Resistance, furiously assaulted
the People there assembled, and further to provoke them, bound a Minister, with
some others whom he had found in Houses that Morning; so that they were forced
to stand to their own-Defence, whereby it happened that several were slain on
both sides. Being therefore thus inevitably forced to betake themselves to the
last Remedy, in regard the Magistrates had shut the door of the Law against
their Applications, They thought themselves bound to declare, That these with
many other horrid Grievances both in Church and State, were the true Cause of
this their Lawful and Innocent Self-defence. And they did most solemnly in the
presence of God, declare, that the true Reasons of their continuing in Arms
were heartily and simply,

I. The defense and security of the true Protestant Religion, and Presbyterian
Government, founded upon the Word, and summarily comprehended in the
Confessions of Faith, and established by the Laws of the Land; to which King,
Nobles and People were solemnly engaged by the National Solemn League and
Covenant. More particularly the defending and maintaining the Kingly Authority
of Christ over his Church, against all sinful Supremacy, derogatory thereto.

II. The defense and preservation of his Majesty, his Person and Authority, in
the preservation and defense of that true Religion, and Liberties of the
Kingdom. That the World might bear witness of their Loyalty, and that they had
no thought, or intention, to diminish his just Power and Greatness.

III. To obtain a free and unlimited Parliament, and a free general Assembly,
in order to the redressing of their Grievances, to prevent Popery, and to
extirpate Prelacy from among them.

This therefore being the Cause they appeared for and resolved to own, They
humbly requested the King's Majesty to restore all things as he found them,
when God brought him home to his Kingdom. Or if that could not be obtained,
then they heartily invited, entreated, besought and obtested in the bowels of
Jesus Christ, all who were under the same Bonds with them, to meet in the
Defense of the Common Cause and Interest. And they requested their Countrymen,
the standing Forces of the Kingdom, of whom many were their Friends and
Relations, not to Fight against them, lest in so doing they should be found
Fighting against the Lord, whose Cause and Quarrel they were sure he would own,
seeing they fought under his Banner, who was the Lord of Hosts.

Upon the publishing of this Declaration, the Numbers of the Rebels increased,
and they began to embody themselves to maintain their zealous Madness. Insomuch
that at the latter end of this Month, about four-score of their Number, well
mounted and armed, went to a place called Rugland, and there Proclaimed the
Covenant, and burned several Acts of the Scottish Parliament, as the Act
concerning the King's Supremacy: the Recissory Act; and the Act appointing the
Anniversary of the twenty ninth of May. And that being done, they affixed a
certain Scandalous and Traitorous Paper or Declaration, on the Market-Cross of
the same Town, different from what has been already repeated, and in the
following scurrilous Terms.

The Declaration of the Rebels in the very words as it was designed to have
been put up by them at Glasgow, and actually set up at Rugland.
AS the Lord had been pleased still to preserve and keep his Interest in the
Land, by the Testimony of some faithful Witnesses from the beginning, so in our
days some have not been wanting, who through the greatest of hazards, had added
their Testimonies to those who have gone before them, by suffering Death,
Banishment, Torturings, Finings, Forfeitures, Imprisonments, etc. flowing from
cruel and perfidious Adversaries to the Church and Kingdom of our Lord Jesus
Christ in the Land. Therefore We, owning the Interest of Christ, according to
the Word of the Lord; and the National, and Solemn League and Covenant, desire
to add our Testimony to the Testimony of the Worthies that have gone before
(though unworthy, yet hoping as true Members of the Church of Scotland) and
that, against all things that have been done prejudicial to his Interest, from
the beginning of the Work of Reformation in Scotland, especially from the Year
1648. to the Year 1660. against these following Acts. As

1. The Act of Supremacy.

2. The Declaration whereby the Covenants are condemned.

3. The Act for the Eversion of the Established Government of the Church, and
for Establishing of Prelacy, and for outing of Christ's Ministers, who could
not conform thereto by an Act Recissory of all Acts of Parliament, and
Assemblies, for the Establishment of the Government of the Church of Scotland
according to the Word.

As likewise that Act of Council at Glasgow, putting that Act Recissory in
Execution, whereby at one time, were violently cast out above three hundred
Ministers, without Legal Procedures.

Likewise the Act, appointing a holy Anniversary, to be kept upon the twenty
ninth day of May, for the giving thanks for the upsetting of a Usurping Power,
destroying the Interest of the Church in the Land, which is to set up the
Creature to be worshipped, in the Room of our great Redeemer, and to consent to
the assuming the Power, that is proper to the Lord alone, for the appointing of
Ordinances in his Church. As particularly the Government thereof, and the
keeping of a Holiday, and all other sinful and unlawful Acts committed by them.

And for confirmation of this our Testimony, we do hereby this day, being the
twenty ninth of May 1679. publicly burn them at the Cross of Glasgow most
justly, as they Perfidiously and Blasphemously had burnt our holy Covenant
through several Cities of the Covenanted Kingdoms. We judge none will take
exceptions at our not subscribing this our Testimony being so solemnly gone
about: for we are ready always to do it, if judged necessary, with all the
faithful suffering Brethren of the Land.

June 1679.

This Declaration they intended to have put up at Glasgow; but the Neighboring
Parts being hotly alarmed by these' proceedings, Captain Graham of
Clover-House upon intelligence of a great number of Men, being gathered
together upon Loundoun Hill, marched thither with his Troop, and a Company of
Dragoons, and there found a Body of Fourteen or Fifteen hundred Men, well armed
and in good Order. The Foot were Commanded by one Weir; the Horse by Robert
Hamilton, and three more, whose names were, Patton, Balfour and Haxton; of
which the two last were deep in the Murder of the Archbishop of St. Andrews.

The Rebels, upon the approach of Captain Graham, sent out two Parties to
skirmish with him, which he beat into their main Body. Upon which they advanced
upon him with their whole Force. Yet notwithstanding all their Number, and
though his own Horse were killed under him, being soon mounted upon another, he
made good his ground, till at last being overpowered by Number, after a great
slaughter of the Rebels, with the loss of his Cornet, two Brigadeers, eight
Horse, and twenty Dragoons, he was forced to retreat toward Glasgow; being
after all this, constrained to Fight his way through the Townsmen of Strevin,
who were got together to oppose him, of whom he left ten or twelve dead upon
the place.

The Rebels, thus finding themselves superior in Force, had the confidence, the
next day, to attack the City of Glasgow at two several times. But all the
Streets were so well barricado'd by the Lord Ross, and the Soldiers there put
into so good and advantageous posture of Defense, that the Rebels were beat off
with a considerable loss, besides many Prisoners that were taken. Whereupon the
Horse and Foot in the Town sallied out upon them, and forced them to retire.

But now to leave Scotland for a while, let us return to London, to which place
Transactions no less signal call us back. For upon the seventh of this Month,
the Marquis d'Auronches, Ambassador extraordinary from the Crown of Portugal
made his public Entry, having been received at Greenwich by the Earl of Kent,
and Sir Charles Cotterell, Master of the Ceremonies, and from thence brought by
Water in the King's Barge, with several others of his retinue, to Tower Hill.
Where when he Landed he was saluted with a discharge of several pieces of
Cannon, put into his Majesty's Coach of State and conducted to Westminster. His
Equipage was very splendid, consisting of six Pages, who with the Gentleman of
his Horse, rod on Horsback, and twenty Footmen; And his three Coaches, one of
which was more remarkable for its richness, were followed by a numerous train
of others with six Horses a piece. Being come to his Lodging, he was
complimented from the King, by the Lord Berkley of Stratton, and from the
Queen, by Sir William Killegrew, her Majesty's Vice-Chamberlain.

The next day, but one, he was conducted to his Audience of their Majesty's, in
the Banqueting House, by the Earl of Shrewsbury and Sir Charles Cotterell,
being splendidly attended from Westminster in the King's Coach of State.

As for the Papists, they were still as great misbelievers as ever, cried up
the innocence of their own pretended Martyrs, exclaimed against the Injustice
of their Condemnation, and labored by all means imaginable to persuade the
World into a concurrence with their pretended suggestions. As that Religion
seldom wants weak and improbable Arguments among the Wise, to stumble mean and
Vulgar Capacities. Therefore it was now thought convenient to bring the rest of
the crew, that were in hold, before the face of Justice, that by their Trials
and Condemnations, they might silence the folly of vain Insinuation, and
confirm the Impiety of those that had preceded them in Punishment.

To which purpose, toward the middle of this month, Thomas White, alias
Whitebread, Provincial of the Jesuits in England, William Harcourt the
pretended Rector of London, John Fenwick Procurator for the Jesuits in England,
John Gaven, alias Gawen, Anthony Turner, and James Corker, were brought to the
Bar of the Session's-House in the Old Bailey.

As for Corker, he presented a Petition to the Court, setting forth that he was
absolutely surpised, and unprepared for his Trial, and therefore besought the
Court that he might not be tried till the next Sessions.

To this the Court seemed inclinable enough, nor did the Attorney General
gainsay it, upon condition that he could really make it out, that he wanted
Witnesses, without which he could not make his Defense. However it was thought
fitting that he should hear the Charge that was against him read; to the end he
might be able to give the Court an account what witnesses he had, that might
avail him in reference to his defense against it. Which being done, the former
question was put to him again; and then he named a witness to prove that he was
not in Town upon the 24th of April; So that being respited till the next day,
the Court said nothing farther to him that sitting.

The other five stood charged of High Treason; the particulars whereof were,
That upon the twenty fourth of April, in the thirtieth Year of the King's
reign, they with others did Conspire to raise up Sedition and Rebellion: to
cause a most bloody Massacre of the King's Subjects; to depose the King of his
Government, and bring him to an untimely Death, to alter the Government and
Religion established by Law, and to levy War against the King. It was further
laid to their Charge in the Indictment, That in pursuance of their evil
Intentions, and the better to accomplish their Designs, They met together, held
Consultations, and agreed to murder the King; and upon that bloody foundation
to build the progress of their Villainy; which was to introduce the Superstition
of the Church of Rome instead of the Religion established by Law. It was
concluded that Grove and Pickering should commit the Murder, for which
Whitebread and the other persons Indicted, Contracted, with the one for such a
number of Masses, and with the other for a certain sum of Money. That they did
also make diligent enquiry for four other Persons unknown, and when they came
to them, did both animate and embold'n, encourage and abet them to kill the
King at Windsor. And all this advisedly, and out of a Traitorous Malice and
Hatred against the King, and the National Government and Religion.

The Indictment being read, Whitebread represented to the Court, that in regard
he had been tried upon the 17th of December before, upon the same Indictment,
at what time the Jury being impannell'd, and the Evidence found insufficient
which came in against him, the Jury was discharged without a Verdict, he was
informed that no man could be tried, and consequently be put in jeopardy of his
life twice for the same cause. For which reason he made it his humble suit,
that he might have Counsel to direct him upon that point in the matter of the
Law. He urged that his life was in danger, as being delivered over in Charge to
the Jury: and to make it out, he alleged the Case of Sayer, in the 31 Eliz. who
having pleaded to a former Indictment for a Burglary, was Indicted a second
time; upon which it was the Opinion of the Judges, that he could not be
Indicted twice for the same fact. He likewise desired a sight of the Record,
and that he might be informed, Whether, or no, when a person comes upon his
Trial, he ought not either to be Condemned or Acquitted?

Upon the whole matter and his motion together, the Court declared to him, That
the Jury being discharged of him, his Life was in no danger. For that the Jury
being Sworn to make a true deliverance of the Prisoners in their Charge, their
Charge could not be full, till the last Charge of the Court, after Evidence.
Moreover, he was told, That such a Plea, as he produced, could not be supported
without a Record: but that it was certain, that there was no such Record of the
17th of December, for that there was no Verdict; and besides, it was not the
same Indictment, in regard it contained new Matter.

Fenwick offered the same Plea, enlarging himself upon it. That both of them
were then in the same danger with the other three that had suffered; in regard
that if Mr. Bedloe had given the same Evidence against Him and Whitebread, as
he gave against the rest, they two should have been likewise condemned. So that
the Evidence falling short, he supposed, that they ought to have been
discharged.

But the Court returning the same Answer to him, as to the former, they both
submitted, and so all of them Pleaded severally not Guilty to the Indictment.

When the Jury came to be Impannell'd, they excepted unanimously, without
naming them, against all those Persons that had served before as Jurymen in the
same Cause: which the Court allowed them, as but reason; and gave order to the
Clark of the Arraignments, not to Impannel any that were upon the former Jury.

When the King's Counsel had opened the Indictment, Dr. Oats was the first
Witness sworn, who Deposed against Whitebread, That he was made Provincial the
last December was Twelvemonth, and by Virtue of his Authority, ordered one
Conyers to Preach in the English Seminary, upon St. Thomas of Becket's day,
That the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy were Antichristian, Heretical, and
Devilish: which accordingly was done.

That he wrote Letters in January or February to St. Omers, relating what
Talbot had written to him about the State and Condition of Ireland: the purport
whereof was, That thousands would be ready to Rise so soon as the Blow was
given. By which word Blow they usually meant the Murder of the King, as those
of the Society had Instructions to understand. And this Blow, Whitebread wrote
in his Letter, That he hoped it would not be long before it should be given.

That he was at the Consult at the White Horse-Tavern, upon the 24th of April,
and there agreed upon the Resolve; That he signed the Resolve at Wild-House.
That the Resolve was, That Grove and Pickering should proceed in their Business
to dispatch the King, as a good Expedient.

That he saw Whitebread Administer the Oath of Secrecy to all that were then
present at the Consult, Mico holding the Book, which was a Mass Book.

That he was Authorized to Seal Military Commissions, of which he had Sealed
some Hundreds.

That in June he went over into Flanders, to look to his Charge, as being
Provincial; and there, in Discourse with some of the Fathers, used this
Expression, That he hoped to see the -- at Whitehall laid fast enough, and if
the Brother should appear to follow his steps, his Passport should be made too.

That upon Sir George Wakeman's refusing to Poison the King for 10000 l. He
advised the adding of 5000 l. more, and was highly pleased that he had accepted
it.

Mr. Dugdale being Sworn, Deposed against Whitebread, That in a Letter from Mr.
Groves to Mr. Ewers, he saw one of Mr. Whitebread's, to take none but stout
desperate Fellows, not mattering whether they were Gentlemen, or no; and that
they were to take away the King's Life.

That he had seen Whitebread at Harcourt's Chamber with Le Fair, Pritchard and
others; where they fell into discourse concerning Sir Geo. Wakeman's bogling at
10000 l. and so agreed to make it up 15000 l. to which Whitebread readily
consented.

Mr. Bedloe being Sworn, charged it upon Whitebread, That he gave Coleman an
Account of sending the four Irish-men to Windsor.

As to Fenwick, it was sworn against him, by Dr. Oats, That he came with him
from Dover to London in June was Twelvemonth, and that he, and one Ashby, or
rather Thimbleby, brought over Instructions from Whitebread, to offer Sir
George Wakeman a Sum for poisoning the King, and for the filling up a Blank
Commission to Sir John Gage, to be an Officer in the Army.

That Ashby being to go to the Bath; Fenwick advised him, upon his leaving that
place, to take a turn about Somersetshire, and to possess the people there
with the Matter, not doubting but that the Gentleman at Whitehall would be
dispatched before he came back.

That Fenwick was with others at Wild House, upon 21 of August, at what time
there was Fourscore Pound before them, upon a Table: which Money was for those
that were to kill the King at Windsor; and was present when the Money was paid
to the Messenger.

That the said Fenwick being at a Consult at the Benedictins, received advice
from Talbot, out of Ireland, of a Design to kill the Duke of Ormond, desiring
Commissions and Money for advancing the Design. Upon which the said Fenwick
sent Commissions to Chester by an Express, and other Letters by the Post: and
moreover, delivered the Witness Money for his necessary Expenses, charging him
to procure some Masses to be said, for a prosperous Success of the Enterprise.

Mr. Praunce being sworn, Deposed, That Fenwick being in discourse with others
at Ireland's Chamber, was there saying, That there would be 50000 Men in
readiness so set up the Catholic Religion: and that he asking Fenwick what
would become of Tradesmen, if the business should come to a War? the said
Fenwick bid him never to fear a Trade, for that there would be Church-work
enough for him, as Crucifixes, Images, and the like.

Mr. Bedloe being sworn, Deposed, That he had seen Fenwick both at Whitebread's
and Harcourt's Chambers, when the Murder of the King was discoursed of, and
that he agreed with the rest, and consented to it.

As to Harcourt, Dr. Oats Deposed, That he was one of those that were at the
great Consult, and Signed the Resolve.

That he was present at the filling up of a Blank Commission to Sir John Gage,
to be one of the Officers of the Army.

That he paid the Messenger the Fourscore Pound, which was for the four
Assassinates at Windsor, in his own Chamber.

Mr. Dugdale Deposed against him, That he being pitched upon to be one of the
King's Murderers, was by Harcourt chosen to be disposed of at London for that
purpose, under the Tuition of one Mr. Parsons.

That there was a Letter written from Paris, which passed through Harcourt's
hands, wherein Advice was given to the Conspirators in England, so to order the
Business, that the Death of the King might be accounted a Presbyterian Plot,
and in case of his Miscarriage, to engage the Protestants in a Revenge upon the
Presbyterian Party, as guilty of the Fact. And after that, to go on to a
Massacre; and those that escaped it, to be afterward totally cut off by the
Army.

That he had seen several Treasonable Letters, striking at the Life of the
King, and the Protestant Religion, which the Witness had intercepted and read,
at least a hundred of them, all sent from Harcourt to Ewers, under a Cover from
Groves.

That the first Intelligence of the Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, which
they had in the Country was sent from Harcourt, which Letter came to Harcourt
on Monday, and bore date on Saturday, upon the night of which day the said
Murder was committed, with these particular words, This Night Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey is dispatched.

Mr. Praunce being sworn, Deposed, That Harcourt had told him above a year
before, as he was paying him for an Image of the Virgin Mary, that there was a
Plot upon the Life of the King.

Mr. Bedloe being sworn, Deposed, That he saw Harcourt take the Fourscore Pound
out of a Cabinet, and pay the Money to the Messenger that was to carry it to
the Ruffians at Windsor, giving the said Messenger at the same time, for
Expedition, a Guiney, as from Coleman, to drink his Health.

That the Sum of 1500 l. which was to have been Groves Reward for killing the
King, was agreed upon and appointed in Harcourt's Chamber.

That he was one of those that agreed and consented to the addition of 5000 l.
to the first 10000 l. to be given to Sir George Wakeman.

That he was very well acquainted with the Witnesses bringing over diverse
Pacquets and Portmantles from beyond the Seas, of which he had brought over
several for himself.

That he had brought him several Letters from Wotton, St. Omers, Bruges, Paris,
Valladolid, and Salamanca, all of them for carrying on the Plot of changing the
Religion of England, and overturning the Government, what Men, what Money in
readiness, and what more expected. That the Contributions and Account lay
generally in Harcourt's hands, and that he had carried several Papers from
Harcourt to Langhorn concerning the same matter.

The said Witness farther Deposed, That he carried a Consult to St. Omers from
Mr. Coleman, to whom Harcourt went with him, and that in that Consult was the
main of the Design; and lastly, That he saw Harcourt give Sir George Wakeman a
Bill upon some certain Citizen for 2000 l. telling him at the same time, that
it was in part of a greater Sum.

As to Gavan, Doctor Oats Deposed, That he saw his Name to the Resolve, though
he could not Swear he was at the Consult of the 24th of April.

That he gave an account from time to time of the Affairs of Staffordshire and
Shrop-shire, relating to the Plot; and that coming to London, he gave the same
account to Ireland in his own Chamber, and talked of Two or Three Thousand
Pound that would be ready for the Design.

Mr. Dugdale Deposed against Gavan, That it was he who engaged the Witness in
the Plot upon the Life of the King, and often persuaded and encouraged him to
it.

That at Ewers's and the Witnesses Chamber, at Boscobell and other places,
several Consultations had been had about the Death of the King, and bringing in
of Popery. Wherein Mr. Gavan was always a great Man, having a good Tongue and
the Faculty of moving the People.

That at the same Consultations he had heard the Massacre often discoursed of.
And that Gavan should say, That though they were but in a low Condition
themselves, yet they would have Men and Money enough to spare for such a
Design.

That the said Gavan had many times endeavored to convince the Witness of the
Lawfulness, if not the Merit of killing any person whatsoever for the
advancement of their Religion.

As to Turner, it was sworn by Dr. Oats, That he was at the Consult at
Fenwick's Chamber, and Signed the Resolve.

Mr. Dugdale also Deposed, That Ewers had told him by word of mouth, That
Turner was to carry on the Design in Worcestershire.

That the said Turner had met with Ewers, Leveson and others in several places,
and had in every one of them given his consent to, and assisted with his
Counsel in the carrying on of the Grand Design of killing the King and
Introducing of Popery.

This was the main of the Evidence for the King.

The main Defense of the Prisoners lay in seeking to invalidate the Testimoney
of the Witnesses. And indeed they thought they had done their business, by
calling over to their assistance a cluster of Birds of their own Feather; a
crew of young Seminarians, nurtured up at St. Omers in all their own
Principles, and Lessons of Equivocation, and Jesuitical Tongue-Jugling, and
Religious Velitation. These were the Emets of Tunquin, that were in one hour to
eat down the Pillars of the King's Evidence, by proving, That Doctor Oats was
at St. Omers upon the 24th of April; and so not being ubiquitary he could not
be at the same time at the White Horse in the Strand: and then the Plot had
vanished, the Witnesses had been mere Accusers, that is to say, Diaboli indeed,
and they had been as Innocent as the Children unborn.

This flexible Flock were very punctual to their time, and laid their
Allegations home enough; nay some of them were so positive, that they affirmed,
That Dr. Oats never lay but two Nights out of the College, from December till
the middle of June. So that when the Cloud that rained upon the King's Evidence
came to be dissipated by the warm Testimony of Sir Richard Barker, Mr. Walker,
and Mr. Smith, all Scholars and Men of unbiased Repute, and several others,
though of meaner Quality, yet of honest Reputation; it was a thing that could
not be a little admired, to see the Effects of blind Popish Education: that so
many young Declaimers should make such an early venture of their Credit, as to
out-brazen Truth it self, in a matter, which upon the manifest Contradictions
of their Affirmatives, it appeared, could not be unknown to themselves. There
is but one Consideration that pleads for them, That as they were under
Discipline, they durst not but Swear in verba Magistri: well knowing what
Entertainment they were to expect at their return, if they did not stand fast
to their tackling. Their Masters knew no better means then to oppose blind Zeal
against blind Justice. Having armed deluded Youth with all the promised
Rewards, that could on their supporting attend the weak Cause of their Ghostly
Fathers in the Clutches of the Law, by any irregularity of mis-guided
Conscience whatsoever.

Thus then stood the Balance of the Evidence, as to the Defense of the
Prisoners on both sides. Some affirmed, That they were not in Town, but in such
and such places in the Country at the times they were sworn to be in London,
and consequently could not be guilty of Crimes said to be committed in the
place where they were not at that time, as the home-Friends of the Prisoners
alleged. Others, and those the St. Omer's Youths, affirmed, That Doctor Oats
was at the College of St. Omers all April and May, and in all that time they
saw him constantly there, saving only one Night that he lay forth. And that
Sir John Warner and Sir Thomas Preston did not come into England with the
Doctor, as he had sworn, for that they were daily seen in or near the places of
their Residence all April and May, whereby they surely thought they had
subverted the Doctor's Evidence.

On the other side, the Witnesses for the King positively swore, That they did
see the Doctor in Town either in the beginning of May, or the latter end of
April, and that they knew him and spoke with him in his Disguises.

Whitebread's Plea was, That having urged Doctor Oats at the last Trial, to
name any one that he had seen in Town, he could name no body. And so likewise
afterward, at the Committee he averred, That the Prisoner lay privately at
Groves's, when he never lay there at all: and then again, he had been positive,
that he staid here but six days, and saw little Company. Another Contradiction,
for that the Evidence had affirmed, That in the end of March, or the middle of
April, he saw him here, whereas Doctor Oats himself had declared, that he
crossed the Sea with Hilsley the 17th of April. So then if he landed in England
the 17th of April, and continued here good part of May, how could it be that he
staid in England but six days. But to this the Court gave answer, That the
precise day was not so punctually sworn to; so that Doctor Oats might be seen
here the latter end of April and the beginning of May, and yet his Testimony
stand good.

Fenwick desired the Court and the Jury to scan the Evidence on both sides: and
to consider that the one spoke to the whole time, upon a daily Conversation,
and the other only to this or that day; or of seeing Doctor Oats in a
Disguise. On the one side, so many young Gentlemen virtuously Educated; on the
other, a needy sort of people that sought to mend their Fortunes by their
Swearing. So that his Testimony was false as to Sir John Warner, Williams, and
Sir Thomas Preston. Or if the Evidence might be concluded equal, what was the
main support of his Evidence? several Letters, as he pretended from Mr.
Whitebread; which, if it were true, the Prisoners deserved to be hanged for
Fools, as well as for Knaves, for trusting a person they never had any esteem
for, and one whom the College had expelled.

As for the Commissions and Letters he spoke of, it was a wonder, that almost a
year after the making of the Discovery, and thousands of Letters seized, not
one Commission should yet appear; not one Penny of Money, nor any Order for it;
no Arms found, nor out of all those Letters, any thing discovered toward the
Design. And for all the Writings Signed, which he had sworn to be hundreds, not
one single Paper to be produced in confirmation of it. Upon which he concluded,
There was no rational Proof among them all, but Saying and Swearing; and that
was that he would stand by.

Harcourt declared, That he was then in the Seventieth Year of his Age, yet
never in his whole Life had been accused before a Magistrate before. But that
it was impossible to prove a Negative; and that there was no other Evidence
against him, but downright Swearing.

Gawen offered to the Court, That it was neither proved that he was at the
Consult, neither was he capable of it; appealing to Harcourt, and the rest,
Whether he were there, or no? and denying it upon the words of a dying man.

As to his Name being to the Resolve, which was laid in July, he had proved
himself to be in Staffordshire the last week of that Month.

He farther moved, Whether being accused by one Witness for a Fact committed in
London, and by another, for a Crime in Staffordshire, those two Witnesses
could go for two Witnesses in Law? But as to that he was overrul'd, as being a
Question already resolved in the Case of Sir Henry Vane, against whom distinct
Witnesses proved distinct Facts committed in several Countries, yet being all
overt Acts of one and the same Treason, the Evidence was adjudg'd to be good.

His second Plea was grounded upon the Circumstances of credible Witnesses, and
clear Evidence, but that in his Case there was neither the one nor the other;
and therefore he ought not to be Convicted by such Witnesses, nor such
Evidence. In Answer to which, the Court informed him, That they were lawful
Witnesses, because not convict of any Crime that might destroy their Testimony:
And for their Credit, that was in the breast of the Jury to judge of.

Turner's Plea was only a bare Question, Whether it were reasonable to admit
those people to an Oath in Evidence, who for Scandal had been debarred the
Sacrament, as he undertook to prove by one Hastings, but he being called, and
not appearing, the Court proceeded to give Directions to the Jury, wherein the
Evidence was so fully justified, and all their Objections so clearly answered,
that the Jury, after they had withdrawn, made no long stay to satisfy
themselves, but after a quarter of an hour's consideration, brought them in all
Guilty of the High Treason whereof they stood indicted. Upon which they were
remanded to Newgate.

The Names of the Jury, not to be omitted for their sober and judicious
Verdict, were,

Tho. Harriot, Will. Gulston, Allen Garroway, Rich. Cheney, John Roberts, Tho.
Cash, Rainsford Waterhouse, Matthew Bateman, John Kaine, Rich. White, Rich.
Bull, and Tho. Cox, Gent.
This White, alias Whitebread, had been formerly a strange Proteus in Religion,
and had rambled about the World in several Metamorphoses, in search of a good
Establishment for this World. For about twenty years since, he went to Oxford,
under the pretense of being a Jew, converted by some Eminent Divine of the
Presbyterian way in London. But there he pretended a farther Light, by joining
with, and at several Churches hearing the Sermons of Dr. Thomas Goodwin, Dr.
Owen, and some others, the Heads of the Independent or Congregational way.
After that, as being steadfast to nothing, or rather missing his chief aim,
Emolument, he fell to the Anabaptists, and from them to the Quakers, a proper
Sect for them that have the true Art of Dissimulation, among whom he challenged
Dr. Owen, and some others, in a Letter written in several Languages, and that
so learnedly, that it was deemed worthy the Consideration of the Convocation,
by whom he was censured as a Jesuit, or some other of the best sort of Popish
Education, and thereupon imprisoned in the Castle Prison in Oxford, where he
pretended distraction, and acted the Madman so rarely to the life, that in few
days some Friends of his procured his liberty. He was seen several times
running up and down the Streets, with his Hat under his Arm, full of Stones,
throwing at every small Bird he saw. But e're long he was met by a Minister of
the Church of England, at the House of a Roman Catholic, who there heard him
Discourse so gravely, learnedly, and discreetly, that he got not only into an
acquaintance but familiarity with him; insomuch that this Gentleman being of
Maudlin College, he there gave him several Visits in several Disguises. But at
length, being again suspected, and in danger of being apprehended, he stole
away privately for London. To which place business calling the same Gentleman,
about six Months after, he was no sooner come to Town, but he had notice of a
famous Preacher among the Quakers, near Charing Cross; and the same day he met
Whitebread, the great man of Fame, going to speak in an old fashion pink'd
Fustian Jerkin, clouted Shoes, his Breeches faced with Leather, and a Carter's
Whip in his hand, in that Garb altogether disguised from his knowledge: however
he knew the Gentleman, and spoke to him, and so they renewed their
acquaintance. For that time however they took leave, and he went forward upon
his intended work, but the next day he came to the Gentleman's Quarters in the
neat habit of a London Minister, and carried him to his own Lodging within the
Precincts of the Middle Temple, where he gave the Gentleman a handsome
Entertainment, and a sight of the several odd Habits in which he disguised
himself to the several sorts of people into whose good Opinion he had
insinuated himself. There the Gentleman saw his Orders from Rome, and an
Instrument wherein he was assured of, and had Orders to receive of certain
Merchants in Town, a Hundred Pound per Annum, besides a yearly Pension of
Eighty Pound from his Father. He pretended to this Gentleman, that he was born
at Wittenbergh, and that his Father's Name was John White, and in the Writing
he himself was styled Johannes de Albis by the Court of Rome. He was both
Jesuit and Priest in Orders, for that to the same Gentleman's knowledge he
celebrated Mass in one House in Southwark to more then Forty; after which, upon
the same day he visited several Presbyterians and others. The same Gentleman
continued in his Company for about a Month, till he was apprehended, and by
special Order from the Protector imprisoned in the Tower of London, where he
lay above six Months. No wonder then, that he stook closest to the Romish
Church, for she it seems was his best friend, and gave him the fairest
Allowance: what signified a little Imprisonment for her sake, who gave him a
hundred pound a year to support him in his tribulation?

The next day Mr. Langhorn was brought to his Trial at the same Bar. A
Councellor at Law, and one who got his bread by that very Law which he was
plotting to subvert. An imprudent piece of Ingratitude, to forego the Law of
his Country, which afforded him a substantial Employment, to catch at the
shadow of a Judge Advocate Generals place in treasonable Hopes.

The general sum of his Charge was High Treason, for conspiring the Death of
the King, and endeavoring an Alteration both in Church and State. The
particular Charge against him was, That in order to the accomplishing, as much
as in him lay, these designs of his, he had wrote two Letters to be sent to
Rome, and St. Omers, to procure aid from the Pope and the French King, on
purpose to introduce a change of the Religion by Law established in the
Kingdom, and to set up the Romish Religion in the stead thereof.

That he had wrote two other Letters to one Anderton, Rector of the English
College of Jesuits at Rome, and two others to be sent to St. Omers, wherein
he undertook to advise the means and ways by which the success of those
Treasons might be made to answer their expectations.

That he had received several Commissions in writing, transmitted to him by an
Authority that derived it self from the Sea of Rome; which Commissions were for
constituting Military Officers to command in an Army which was to effect their
Treasons by force.

That he was privy to all the Consultations of the rest of the Conspirators for
carrying on the grand design, and that he had solicited the Benedictine Monks
for 6000 l. for the same purpose, and had notice from time to time of the
Treasons and Conspiracy's of the Confederates.

To make Good this Charge Mr. Dugdall and Mr. Praunce were both sworn to give a
short evidence of the reality of the Design in general. Which being done Dr.
Oats was sworn to particulars, who thereupon deposed, That upon his return out
of Spain in November 1677. he brought Letters from Mr. Langhorn's sons, the one
in the Jesuits College at Madrid, the other at Valladolid, and that when the
Witness told him that he believed his Sons would both enter into the Society,
Mr. Langhorn showed himself not a little pleased, saying that by so doing they
might quickly come to preferment in England, for that matters would not hold
long in England as they were.

That upon his return to St. Omers he carried two Letters written by Mr.
Langhorn, one to the Fathers, another to Mr. Le Cheese the King of France's
Confessor, as Mr. Langhorn expressed himself, in order to our Affairs in
England, and to the same effect as Mr. Coleman had wrote to him before.

That not long after he wrote another Letter to the Fathers, expressing his
wonderful zeal for the Catholic Design, declaring moreover that the Parliament
began to cool in the business of the Protestant Religion, and that therefore,
speaking of the present Opportunity, Now was the time to give the Blow.

That though he were not at the Consults, yet that the Witness was ordered to
give him an account from time to time; and that upon a pleasing report made by
the Witness, Mr. Langhorn, with Hands and Eyes lifted up to Heaven, Prayed God
to prosper them.

That the Report of the Witness was, That the Death of the King was resolved
upon, and that Grove and Pickering were chosen out for the Execution of the
Result.

That at the same time several Parchments were lying upon Mr. Langhorn's
Study-Table, which he found to be Commissions for the Lords, Arundel of
Wardour, Powis, Bellasis, and Petre, to be Chancellor, Treasurer, General and
Lieutenant General. Another for Coleman to be Secretary of State, and another
for himself to be Judge Advocate of the Army; all which had the Jesuits Cross
upon them, and were signed Paulus D'Oliva.

That he saw the Answer of Le Cheese and Anderton to Mr. Langhorns Letters,
wherein they assured the Fathers of their firmness to the English Society, and
that the French King would certainly assist them for carrying on the work.

That Mr. Langhorn, being the Jesuits Solicitor, went with Harcourt, Fenwick,
Keines, and Langworth, to the Benedictine Monks, to desire their Aid toward the
Work.

That being told that Sir George Wakeman refused 10000 l. for poisoning the
King, he made Answer, That it was a public work, and a Body would have done it
for nothing, but that he was a Covetous and narrow Soul'd Man.

Mr. Bedlow being sworn, deposed, That he was entrusted with certain Letters
from Mr. Coleman to Le Cheese; but that first Mr. Coleman carried the Witness
to Mr. Langhorn's Chamber, who there entered the said Letters; the scope of
which, was to inform Le Cheese, that he wanted nothing but Money to accomplish
the Work, and to learn what supplies they might expect from France.

That at another time he carried to Mr. Langhorn another Packet containing
several Letters to be by him registered, being sent to him for that purpose by
Mr. Harcourt.

That he transcribed three Letters, one to Father Anderton, the other to the
Pope's Nuntio, and a third to Le Cheese, wherein were these expressions; That
the Arms and Hearts of the Catholics were all ready, and that considering the
Easiness of the King of England, and the Strength of the Power of France, the
Opportunity was by no means to be neglected.

Mr. Langhorn offered to the Court that the two Witnesses against him were
Parties to the Crime which was laid to his Charge, and therefore he desired to
know whither they had their pardons or no? Which though it were sufficiently
made out, yet the Court for the prisoners further satisfaction declared, that
whether they had or had not, they were nevertheless good Witnesses, or else
they should not have been admitted.

Upon which another Question was started by the Prisoner, Whether having had
their pardons they might not fall under the same prospect in Law with an
Approver, not as being approvers, but as under some Equivalence of reason with
them. From whence he would have drawn this Consequence, That if the Approver be
pardoned, the Appellee ought to be discharged.

To this the Court made Answer, That an Approver was ever allowed maintenance,
and that there ought to be a proof of Corrupt, Contract or Subornation, to
invalidate a Testimony.

This failing he desired to know, whether they had ever received, or whether
they did not expect Gratifications, and Rewards, for their discoveries.

In Answer to which Dr. Oats declared, That he was so far from having received
a Reward, that he was a very large sum of Money out of pocket, which he knew
not whether he should ever receive again or no.

The Prisoner urged that Mr. Reading had told him that Mr. Bedlow had received
Five hundred pound. But the Court informed him that that was not upon account
of the Plot, but for the discovery of the Murderers of Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey.

These little passes being all put by, and finding himself ready to sink, he
catches hold of the Saint Omers twigs, and flies to the allegations of a shoal
of young boys already baffled by the Verdict of a former Jury. The Court
however, since he depended upon it, and desired it, could not avoid the trouble
of a reexamination of the same testimonies which had been heard the day before.

For the Prisoners satifaction therefore they were all examined over again, and
the same Evidence opposed against them on the King's behalf as had been at
first. But this second attempt of those forward striplings, rather made a
farther display of the severe injunctions of their Superiors then otherwise,
and proved rather to the prejudice of him that called them then to his
advantage. For their Testimony still continued so starched, so straight laced,
so fixed to the Months of April and May, that when they were demanded any
Questions concerning any other Months, they seemed as if they had not received
Instructions to Answer them. Nay some of them were so confident as to say that
April and May were only the Months in dispute, and that they were not to
Answer any farther. Which so clearly evinced both the Court and the Jury that
they came from School with a conn'd Lesson in their Mouths, that some persons
of judgment did believe their Superiors might have spared them so much loss of
time.

This scene being over, and the Prisoner being called upon to speak for
himself, he did nothing else, but like a bad Logician, petere Principium; and
taking it for granted that the young Lads of St. Omers had spoken Truth, which
was never granted, but rather credibly evinced by several Oaths to the
contrary, would have thence inferred, that Dr. Oate's had given in a false
Evidence, and for that reason was not to be regarded.

As to Mr. Bedlows Evidence, he offered that it ought to be considered, That
there was no proving a Negative; Secondly, That he never had had any
acquaintance with him, nor could say that ever he saw him before that day in
his life. And therefore that it was not probable, had he been guilty, that he
would ever have trusted him with a privacy of such a nature.

Having made so weak a defense, he could expect no other then to be found
guilty, which was done after a very short consideration of the Jury.

Thereupon, the five Prisoners cast the day before, were all brought to the
Bar, and received Sentence all together, To be Drawn, Hanged and Quartered.

Upon the 21 of this Month Whitebread, Harcourt, Fenwick, Gawen and Turner,
were Drawn on three several Sledges from Newgate to Tyburn, and there Hanged,
Drawn and Quartered according to their Sentence. Langhorn being reprieved for
longer time.

How they lived appears by the Crimes for which they died: how they died may
appear by their blasphemous Justifications of those Crimes, for which they were
so fairly Condemned. Of which that the World may be convinced, let all
impartial judges but compare their Speeches with the Observations that have
been made upon them.

The Speeches.
I Suppose it is expected I should speak something to the matter I am condemned
for, and brought hither to suffer, it is no less than the contriving and
plotting His Majesty's Death, and the alteration of the Government of the
Church and State; you all either know, or ought to know, I am to make my
appearance before the Face of Almighty God, and with all imaginable certainty
and evidence to receive a final Judgment, for all the thoughts, words, and
actions of my whole life: So that I am not now upon terms to speak other than
truth, and therefore in his most Holy Presence, and as I hope for Mercy from
his Divine Majesty, I do declare to you here present, and to the whole World,
that I go out of the World as innocent, and as free from any guilt of these
things laid to my charge in this matter, as I came into the World from my
Mother's Womb; and that I do renounce from my heart all manner of Pardons,
Absolutions, Dispensations for Swearing, as occasions or Interest may seem to
require, which some have been pleased to lay to our charge as matter of our
Practice and Doctrine, but is a thing so unjustifiable and unlawful, that I
believe, and ever did, that no power on Earth can authorize me, or any body so
to do; and for those who have so falsely accused me (as time, either in this
World, or in the next, will make appear) I do heartily forgive them, and beg of
God to grant them his holy Grace, that they may repent their unjust proceedings
against me, otherwise they will in conclusion find they have done themselves
more wrong than I have suffered from them, though that has been a great deal. I
pray God bless His Majesty both Temporal and Eternal, which has been my daily
Prayers for him, and is all the harm that I ever intended or imagined against
him. And I do with this my last breath in the sight of God declare, that I
never did learn, teach, or believe, that it is lawful upon any occasion or
pretense whatsoever, to design or contrive the Death of His Majesty, or any
hurt to his Person; but on the contrary, all are bound to obey, defend, and
preserve his Sacred Person, to the utmost of their power. And I do moreover
declare, that this is the true and plain sense of my Soul in the sight of him
who knows the Secrets of my Heart, and as I hope to see his blessed Face,
without any Equivocation, or mental Reservation. This is all I have to say
concerning the matter of my Condemnation, that which remains for me now to do,
is to recommend my Soul into the hands of my blessed Redeemer, by whose only
Merits and Passion I hope for Salvation.

White.

THE words of dying persons have been always esteemed as of greatest Authority,
because uttered then, when shortly after they were to be cited before the high
Tribunal of Almighty God, this gives me hopes that mine may be looked upon as
such, therefore I do here declare in the presence of Almighty God, and the
whole Court of Heaven, and this numerous Assembly, that as I ever hope (by the
Merits and Passion of my sweet Savior Jesus Christ) for Eternal Bliss, I am as
innocent as the Child unborn of any thing laid to my charge, and for which I am
here to dye, and I do utterly abhor and detest that abominable false Doctrine
laid to our charge, that we can have Licenses to commit perjury, or any Sin to
advantage our cause, being expressly against the Doctrine of St. Paul, saying,
Non sunt facienda mala, ut eveniant bona; Evil is not to be done that good may
come thereof. And therefore we hold it in all cases unlawful to kill or murder
any person whatsoever, much more our lawful King now Reigning, whose personal
and temporal Dominions we are ready to defend against any Opponent whatsoever,
none excepted. I forgive all that have contrived my Death, and humbly beg
pardon of Almighty God. I also pardon all the World. I pray God bless His
Majesty, and grant him a prosperous Reign. The like I wish to his Royal Consort
the best of Queens. I humbly beg the Prayers of all those of the Roman Church,
if any such be present.

Harcourt.

DEarly beloved Countrymen, I am come now to the last Scene of Mortality, to
the hour of my Death, an hour which is the Horizon between Time and Eternity,
an hour which must either make me a Star to shine for ever in the Empyreum
above, or a Firebrand to burn everlastingly amongst the damned Souls in Hell
below; an hour in which if I deal sincerely, and with a hearty sorrow
acknowledge my crimes, I may hope for mercy; but if I falsely deny them, I must
expect nothing but Eternal Damnation; and therefore what I shall say in this
great hour, I hope you will believe. And now in this hour I do solemnly swear,
protest, and vow, by all that is Sacred in Heaven and on Earth, and as I hope
to see the Face of God in Glory, that I am as innocent as the Child unborn of
those treasonable Crimes, which Mr. Oats and Mr. Dugdale have Sworn against me
in my Trial, and for which, sentence of Death was pronounced against me the day
after my Trial; and that you may be assured that what I say is true, I do in
the like manner protest, vow and swear, as I hope to see the face of God in
Glory, that I do not in what I say unto you, make use of any Equivocation,
mental Reservation, and material Prolocution, or any such ways to palliate
Truth. Neither do I make use of any dispensations from the Pope, or any body
else; or of any Oath of secrecy, or any absolution in Confession or out of
Confession to deny the truth, but I speak in the plain sense which the words
bear; and if I do not speak in the plain sense which the words bear, or if I do
speak in any other terms to palliate, hide, or deny the Truth, I wish with all
my Soul that God may exclude me from his Heavenly Glory, and condemn me to the
lowest place of Hell Fire: and so much to that point.

And now, dear Countrymen, in the second place, I do confess and own to the
whole World that I am a Roman Catholic, and a Priest, and one of that sort of
Priests which you call Jesuits; and now because they are so falsely charged for
holding King-killing Doctrine, I think it my duty to protest to you with my
last dying words, that neither I in particular, nor the Jesuits in general,
hold any such opinion, but utterly abhor and detest it; and I assure you, that
among the multitude of Authors, which among the Jesuits have printed
Philosophy, Divinity, Cases or Sermons, there is not one to the best of my
knowledge that allows of King-killing Doctrine, or holds this position, That it
is lawful for a private person to kill a King, although an Heretic, although a
Pagan, although a Tyrant, there is, I say, not one Jesuit that holds this,
except Mariana, the Spanish Jesuit, and he defends it not absolutely, but only
problematically, for which his Book was called in again, and the Opinions
expugned and sentenced. And is it not a sad thing, that for the rashness of one
single Man, whilst the rest cry out against him, and hold the contrary, that a
whole Religious Order should be sentenced? But I have not time to discuss this
point at large, and therefore I refer you all to a Royal Author, I mean the
wise and victorious King Henry the Fourth of France, the Royal Grandfather of
our present gracious King, in a public Oration which he pronounced himself in
defense of the Jesuits, said, that he was very well satisfied with the Jesuit's
Doctrine concerning Kings, as believing it conformable to what the best Doctors
of the Church have taught. But why do I relate the testimony of one particular
Prince, when the whole Catholic World is the Jesuits Advocate? For to them
chiefly Germany, France, Italy, Spain and Flanders, trust the Education of
their Youth, and to them in a great proportion, they trust their own Souls to
be governed in the Sacraments. And can you imagine so many great Kings and
Princes, and so many wise States should do or permit this to be done in their
Kingdoms, if the Jesuits were men of such damnable principles as they are now
taken for in England?

In the third place, dear Countrymen, I do attest, that as I never in my life
did machine, or contrive either the Deposition or Death of the King, so now I
do heartily desire of God to grant him a quiet and happy Reign upon Earth, and
an Everlasting Crown in Heaven. For the Judges also, and the Jury, and all
those that were any ways concerned, either in my Trial, Accusation, or
Condemnation, I do humbly ask of God, both Temporal and Eternal happiness. And
as for Mr. Oats and Mr. Dugdale, whom I call God to witness, by false Oaths
have brought me to this untimely end, I heartily forgive them, because God
commands me so to do; and I beg of God for his infinite Mercy to grant them
true Sorrow and Repentance in this World, that they be capable of Eternal
happiness in the next. And so having discharged my Duty toward my self, and my
own Innocence toward my Order, and its Doctrine to my Neighbor and the World,
I have nothing else to do now, my great God, but to cast my self into the Arms
of your Mercy, as firmly as I judge that I my self am, as certainly as I
believe you are One Divine Essence and Three Divine Persons, and in the Second
Person of your Trinity you became Man to redeem me; I also believe you are an
Eternal Rewarder of Good, and Chastiser of Bad. In fine, I believe all you have
revealed for your own infinite Veracity; I hope in you above all things, for
your infinite Fidelity; and I love you above all things, for your infinite
Beauty and Goodness; and I am heartily sorry that ever I offended so great a
God with my whole heart: I am contented to undergo an ignominious Death for the
love of you, my dear Jesu, seeing you have been pleased to undergo an
ignominious Death for the love of me.

Gawen.

BEing now, good People, very near my End, and summoned by a violent Death to
appear before God's Tribunal, there to render an account of all my thoughts,
words, and actions, before a just Judge, I am bound in Conscience to declare
upon Oath my Innocence from the horrid Crime of Treason, with which I am
falsely accused: And I esteem it a Duty I owe to Christian Charity, to publish
to the World before my death all that I know in this point, concerning those
Catholics I have conversed with since the first noise of the Plot, desiring
from the very bottom of my heart, that the whole Truth may appear, that
Innocence may be cleared, to the great Glory of God, and the Peace and Welfare
of the King and Country. As for myself, I call God to witness, that I was never
in my whole life at any Consult or Meeting of the Jesuits, where any Oath of
Secrecy was taken, or the Sacrament, as a Bond of Secrecy, either by me or any
one of them, to conceal any Plot against His Sacred Majesty; nor was I ever
present at any Meeting or Consult of theirs, where any Proposal was made, or
Resolve taken or signed, either by me or any of them, for taking away the Life
of our Dread Sovereign; an Impiety of such a nature, that had I been present at
any such Meeting, I should have been bound by the Laws of God, and by the
Principles of my Religion, (and by God's Grace would have acted accordingly) to
have discovered such a devilish Treason to the Civil Magistrate, to the end
they might have been brought to condign punishment. I was so far, good People,
from being in September last at a Consult of the Jesuits at Tixall, in Mr.
Ewer's Chamber, that I vow to God, as I hope for Salvation, I never was so much
as once that year at Tixall, my Lord Aston's House. It Is true, I was at the
Congregation of the Jesuits held on the 24th of April was twelvemonth, but in
that Meeting, as I hope to be saved, we meddled not with State Affairs, but
only treated about the Governors of the Province, which is usually done by us,
without offense to temporal Princes, every third Year all the World over. I am,
good People, as free from the Treason I am accused of, as the Child that is
unborn, and being innocent I never accused my self in Confession of any thing
that I am charged with. Which certainly, if I had been conscious to my self of
any Guilt in this kind, I should not so frankly and freely, as I did, of my own
accord, presented my self before the King's Most Honorable Privy Council. As
for those Catholics, which I have conversed with since the noise of the Plot, I
protest before God, in the words of a dying Man, that I never heard any one of
them, neither Priest nor Layman, express to me the least knowledge of any Plot,
that was then on foot amongst the Catholics, against the King's Most Excellent
Majesty, for the advancing the Catholic Religion. I dye a Roman Catholic, and
humbly beg the Prayers of such for my happy passage into a better Life: I have
been of that Religion above Thirty Years, and now give God Almighty infinite
thanks for calling me by his holy Grace to the knowledge of this Truth,
notwithstanding the prejudice of my former Education. God of his infinite
Goodness bless the King, and all the Royal Family, and grant His Majesty a
prosperous Reign here, and a Crown of Glory hereafter. God in his mercy forgive
all those which have falsely accused me, or have had any hand in my Death; I
forgive them from the bottom of my heart, as I hope my self for forgiveness at
the Hands of God.

O GOD who has created me to a supernatural end, to serve thee in this life by
grace, and enjoy thee in the next by glory, be pleased to grant by the merits
of thy bitter death and passion, that after this wretched life shall be ended,
I may not fail of a full enjoyment of thee my last end and sovereign good. I
humbly beg pardon for all the sins which I have committed against thy Divine
Majesty, since the first Instance I came to the use of reason to this very
time; I am heartily sorry from the very bottom of my heart for having offended
thee so good, so powerful, so wise, and so just a God, Fairly promised when he
was going to be hanged.
and purpose by the help of thy grace, never more to offend thee my good God,
whom I love above all things.

O sweet Jesus, who has suffered a most painful and ignominious Death upon the
Cross for our Salvation, apply, I beseech thee, unto me the merits of thy
sacred Passion, and sanctify unto me these sufferings of mine, which I humbly
accept of for thy sake in union of the sufferings of thy sacred Majesty, and in
punishment and satisfaction of my sins.

O my dear Savior and Redeemer, I return thee immortal thanks for all thou
have pleased to do for me in the whole course of my life, and now in the hour
of my death, with a firm belief of all things thou have revealed, and a
steadfast hope of obtaining everlasting bliss. I cheerfully cast my self into
the Arms of thy Mercy, whose Arms were stretched on the Cross for my
Redemption. Sweet Jesus receive my Spirit.

Turner.

GOod People, I suppose you expect I should say something as to the Crime I am
Condemned for, and either acknowledge my Guilt, or assert my Innocence; I do
therefore declare before God and the whole World, and call God to witness that
what I say is true, that I am innocent of what is laid to my Charge of Plotting
the King's Death, and endeavoring to subvert the Government, and bring in a
foreign Power, as the Child unborn; and that I know nothing of it, but what I
have learned from Mr. Oats and his Companions, and what comes originally from
them. And to what is said and commonly believed of Roman Catholics, that they
are not to be believed or trusted, because they can have Dispensations for
Lying, Perjury, killing Kings, and other the most enormous Crimes; I do utterly
renounce all such Pardons, Dispensations, and withal declare, That it is a most
wicked and malicious Calumny cast on them, who do all with all their Hearts and
Souls hate and detest all such wicked and damnable Practices, and in the words
of a dying Man, and as I hope for Mercy at the Hands of God, before whom I must
shortly appear and give an account of all my actions, I do again declare, That
what I have said is most true, and I hope Christian Charity will not let you
think, that by the last act of my Life, I would cast away my Soul, by sealing
up my last Breath with a damnable Lie.

Fenwick.

THE OBSERVATIONS.
THe main Drift and Scope of these notorious Malefactors Speeches, was to wipe
away the Contamination of that Guilt, which brought them all to be the public
Spectacles of Condign Punishment; wherein they observe all the same Method of
Appealing to Heaven, of denying the Doctrine and Maxims of their Order, and
then praying for the King and themselves. All which Oaths and Protestations,
had they been true, they might have been thought Apostates from their Order,
and Desertors of the Religion they so zealously professed upon the Ladder. Had
they been such Weak and Pusillanimous Combatants with Death, as not strenuously
to have denied what they were so fairly convicted of; they would have been
deprived of those glorious Crowns of Martyrdom which were assured them by Him,
whom they call the only Lord of all the World, the only Vice-God, the only
Emperor, the only King, the Most Holy Pope. They thought it was much better to
make but one Skip from the Cart to Jacob's Ladder, and so to mount directly up
to Heaven, than to be condemned with an ignominious Load of Truth, and Penitent
Confessions of the Facts they Committed, to the Whips and Scourges of a tedious
Purgatory; else it would seem strange to the World, that in the amidst of
those solemn Protestations which they made to that God, to whom their Souls
were taking such a speedy flight, as they pretended, they should so boldly deny
what so many Grand-Signiours of Jesuitism have so stiffly maintained to all the
World. Nor did these their succeeding Disciples, show themselves such mild
Receders from their Principles, who durst so confidently adventure to Beard the
Laws and Statutes of a Sovereign Prince, within his own Dominions; ipso facto,
Malefactors and Rebels to His Majesty, when they first set Foot within His
Territories.

As for their renouncing all Equivocations and Mental Reservations, which is
the Ground upon which they all tread, that will signify nothing when we
consider the Nature and Quality of a true Jesuit, which is, tenaciously to hold
and adhere to the Dictates and Positions of their Superiors, as believing what
they Teach to be all Inspiration. Now their Heavenly Doctrine is no more than
this; That it is lawful for them; not only to deny and conceal the truth, but
also piously and religiously to affirm, to swear by, and invoke God and their
Salvation, to attest those things which they know to be assuredly untrue. Thus
Toletus, both a Jesuit and a Cardinal, Lib. 4. of his Instructions to the
Priests, Cap. 21. If it be a secret Crime concerning which, any one is
examined, he may make use of Equivocation. As for Example, If I be asked
whether I did such a thing, or No? I may answer No: with this reservation to my
self; I did not now do it.

Gregory de Valentia asserts the same: If the Question, says he, be not fit to
be answered, though you be upon your Oath, yet shall no Perjury be committed,
though the Party swear contrary to the Intent of the Judge; such a one does
neither lie, nor take the Name of God in vain, when it is for his own
Preservation.

Andreas Eudemon Johannes is another of the same Stamp.

Martin Azpilcueta of Navarr, proves Equivocation to be lawful, from the
Example of St. Francis, who being asked by certain Officers, Whether such a
Murderer did not run such away? Put his Hands into his Sleeves, and cried, he
did not pass this way: meaning, that he did not fly through his Sleeves.

The forementioned Cardinal Toletus also affirms, That if a Priest be asked by
the Magistrate, whether he saw such a one at any time? He may answer, No: For
he did not see him that he should tell the Magistrate; or he did not see him in
a Beatifical Vision, or he did not see him at Venice, etc.

Many more Examples might be brought out of the same, and several other Printed
Authors; neither are the Equivocations of Tresham, Garnet, and others unknown
to our selves, as those of Richeome are in France, who affirmed, That he never
heard the last deceased Henry, called Tyrant by any of his Subjects, though he
had heard Henry Valois, the last Murdered King often so reviled. So that it may
be well said to be the Jesuits Motto, Jura, perjura, secretum prodere noli.
Swear and Forswear --
But the main Secret to betray forbear.




Thus while they pretend to renounce and detest Equivocations, Mental
Reservations, and Dispensations, Reason it self must needs persuade us, that
Men principl'd and Educated by such Instructors, are guarded with a good Salvo,
for those very Equivocations which they seemed to abjure.

No less, if not more apparent is the fallacy of their disowning and disavowing
that Dismal Doctrine, of killing Kings and Princes.

To which purpose Gawen fell short in affirming, That only Mariana the
Spaniard was the upholder of that Dreadful Opinion; witness the Writings and
Approbations of Stapleton and Garnet; and the Apology of Jacob Clements, in
some part recited in the Oration to the King of France, against the Readmission
of the Jesuits into that Kingdom. Commolet, and Guignardus, by whom that bloody
Act of Jacob Clements, who Murdered Henry the Third of France, was called the
Gift of the Holy Ghost, as is averred in the forementioned Oration to Henry the
Fourth, were both Jesuits. And who so wicked among us, says the same Oration,
as not to see, that if Jacob Clements had not deeply drank of the Jesuits
Poison, he would never have thought of killing his Lord and Master? The Warlike
Prowess and renown of Henry the Fourth, could not defend him from the Treachery
of Barriere, countenanced and abetted by Verade the Jesuit, and Aubry Curate
of St. Andre des Arts, nor of that other Bejesuited Enthusiast, who confessed
that he had sucked all his King-killing malice from their Diabolical Oratory.
And Mezeray affirms that the same Prince found himself in danger of nothing
more, than of the Conspiracies of those in religious Orders. And so far was
Mariana from being the sole supporter of this Doctrine, that Francis de Verone
wrote in the defense of Chastell, who had stabbed Henry the Fourth, and John
Gueret and John Hay were both banished out of France, for publicly teaching
their Disciples the vicious Precepts of early Treason.

Nor is there any thing more horrid among all the Butcheries of the Heathen
Sacrificers, than the Ceremony, which the Jesuits use, at the Consecration of
the Person and the Dagger, which they design for a Royal Massacre. For the
intended Executioner is brought into a private Room, where the Dagger,
carefully wrapped up in a fair Linen Cloth, and sheathed in an Ivory sheath
enameled with several strange Characters, with an Agnus Dei appendant, is set
at liberty to dazzle the Murderers eyes. Then the Weapon being drawn, is
sprinkled with Holy Water, adorned with a Rosary of Coral Beads, and so
delivered with these words, Chosen Son of God, receive the Sword of Jephta, the
Sword of Sampson, the Sword of David with which he cut off Goliah' s head, etc.
go and be prudently courageous. Which done, falling upon their knees, they
mumble forth this dismal exorcism; Cherubims and Seraphims, ye Thrones and
Powers, ye Holy Angels all descend, and fill this blessed Vessel with perpetual
Glory; daily offer to him the Crown of the Blessed Virgin Mary, the Holy
Patriarchs and Martyrs; For he is now your own, and no longer belongs tous.
After that they bring him to the Altar, and showing him the Picture of Jacob
Clements. Strengthen, O Lord, they cry, this thy Arm, the Instrument of thy
revenge. Let all the Saints arise and give place to Him. An invention of Men
worse than Devils, enough to amaze Heaven it self; which shows that the words
of dying men are not always Oracles, when they go about to deny the palpable
text of History to palliate embodyed Villainy. Nor was Mariana's Book exploded,
as Gawen averrs; but it is true that care was taken by the Jesuits to suppress
both Mariana and others, (for he was not alone) merely out of necessity, and to
divert the storm that threatened them from the Court of France. And thus the
world may see the folly of that vain Complement; That a whole Order should
suffer for the rashness of one man.

As little cause there is for Us to believe, That the whole Catholic World
should be the Jesuits Advocate. At least the whole Catholic World has taken a
very ill Cause in hand, to defend an Order that has so ill behaved it self, as
to be expelled out of France for Murder; out of England for High Treason; from
Venice, almost in the sight of Rome it self, for their insufferable Ambition,
and designs of Bloody revenge; out of Bohemia, for being common Disturbers of
the Public Peace; out of Moravia and Hungaria for the same Cause; out of
Transylvania, for being almost the ruin of that Country; and out of the Low
Countries, for their continual Misdemeanors; and Lastly, this may be also
added, That Sigismund King of Sweden was expelled his Kingdom, for endeavoring
to obtain their readmission after they had been ejected by his Subjects.

As for Father Harcourt, let it not seem strange, for I find they were all
alike in have to reach Heaven before Sunset, that he should pretend so much
ignorance of the Plot. For the reason is plain; he was resolved to Visit S.
Peter in the Jesuits Livery, and to let them see he was True Blue: while his
own Letter under his own Hand, written into the Country to give notice of Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey's Death, three Hours after his Murder, and publicly to be
seen, puts a most cruel Slur upon his late protested Hatredof Mental
Reservation and Equivocation.

Now as for their Prayers for their Judges, and the Discoverers of their
Treason, in my judgment they might have spared 'em. For why should they be so
zealous to pray for them, when they would not so much as beg one tear from
those that were not of their own Profession? They were no Prayers of Charity,
but rather the Curses of their Malice, while they labored to scandal the
Justice of such most Eminent Judges, the Impartiality of so sound a Jury, and
the Fidelity of such Witnesses, who having so highly merited of the whole
Nation, have rendered the Sufferers more remarkable in their Ends, than in all
the Progress of their Lives before.

Finally, It is very observable how harmoniously they jump upon that tickling
Expression of being as Innocent as the Child unborn: as if they were certain to
ride to Heaven upon the wings of that Lamb-like sentence, or that the world
were infallibly bound to believe that undeniable Asseveration. But besides that
it is the common language of every Pickpocket Strumpet at Newgate, though the
Evidence be never so manifest against her; Scholars methinks should not have
made use of such a piece of St. Martins ware, that only dazles with a false
Glittering, but has nothing in it of the real brightness of truth. For where no
Guilt can be, no Innocence can be imputed. No Child unborn can be thought to be
Guilty of an actual crime, such as killing the King, or subverting the
Government of a Nation; and consequently no Child unborn can be said to be
Innocent of those actual crimes, as not being the proper subject of actual
Guilt or Innocence. And therefore (pardon only the seeming depth of the
Expression) they had as good have said nothing; For a man may be Guilty of all
the actual Crimes under Heaven; and after that safely swear himself as Innocent
as the child unborn, in regard it is but a seeming asseveration, and grounded
upon nothing.

However it shows a good bold spirit in dying Christians, to put their tricks
upon God and Man, just as they are putting foot into the stirrup for eternal
Bliss. Let it suffice then, that by this fallacy, which they have all laid at
the bottom, as the Basis of the rest, all their preliminary Imprecations and
solemn Attestations, are nothing but Fourberie and Imposture.

These were the Acts of Civil Justice in England, while the Military Power
finds work enough in Scotland to extinguish the Flames of a newly kindled
Rebellion blowed up by the common Beutifeus of Christian War, Religion and
Liberty. For by the 7th of this month their Numbers were very much increased,
which encouraged several small parties, like little streams, to bend their
course toward the main Inundation.

On the other side his Majesty's Forces were no less vigilant to prevent their
meeting. To which purpose the Privy Council of Scotland understanding that
there was a party got together in Tyvidale, with a resolution to march Westward
and join with the main Body, sent the Master of Ross, son to the Lord Ross,
with forty Horse, and a hundred Dragoons to Selkerk to attend their motion.
They were about three hundred Horse and Foot; however when they perceived with
what a resolution he advanced toward them, they began to make a hasty retreat.
Whereupon the Master of Ross observing their fear, briskly attacked them with
his whole number, who so well behaved themselves, that the Enemy was totally
defeated, leaving sixty six dead upon the place, and ten Prisoners, the rest
being totally scattered.

Soon after the Earl of Murray's Steward in Down, having intelligence that
above a hundred new raised Rebels were marching out of Fife to the Rendezvouze,
got together the Vassals and Tenants of his Lord, and having pursued the Rebels
sixteen miles through the Mountains at last overtook them, routed them, and
took ten Prisoners, among whom was one Hinderson, who was one of the Murderers
of the Archbishop of St. Andrews, whereby he forced them to scatter and fly
into the adjacent Mountains. Of which the Lord Elphingstoun having notice, he
with some Gentlemen under his command, pursued them farther, killed some, and
took above thirty Prisoners, and among them two of the name of Balfour, and one
Hamilton of Kinkell, three more of the Murderers of the Archbishop. So that of
that party of the Rebels hardly one escaped being killed or taken.

The Gentlemen also of Strathern having fallen upon another party of the Rebels
marching out of Fife, of them they killed some, and took about forty Prisoners.

At the same time the Militia and Trained Bands of Edinburgh, to the number of
four thousand, took an oath to be faithful to his Majesty, and to venture their
lives and fortunes in suppressing the Rebellion.

These little skirmishes and petty victories could not hinder but that the
great Snow-ball still increased. So that the standing Militia, and Heritors of
some shires, were commanded to their several Rendezvouzes; those of the
Southern parts, near Edinburgh, and those of the Northern parts, near Sterling.
To command which Forces, his Grace the Duke of Monmouth was commanded by his
Majesty to repair forthwith into Scotland; in obedience to which Order he
arrived at Edinburgh the 18th. of this Month, having rode post all the way for
Expedition.

The next day he went to the Army, that lay twelve miles from the City, at
Moorhead beyond Blackborn, and eight from the Enemy. And having sent for some
provisions, which he found wanting, from Edinburgh; as soon as they arrived, he
resolved to march against the Rebels, who lay encamped behind Bothwell-Bridge,
in Hamilton-Park, they being posted all along the River, and the Bridge well
barricado'd and lined with Musketeers. Accordingly on Saturday the 21st. of
June in the evening his Grace began his March. Major Oglethorp, being commanded
to lead the Van, with five Troops of the English Dragoons, and a hundred horse
commanded by the L. Hume. His Grace followed with the rest of the Horse and
Dragoons, and 300. commanded Foot. About break of day the Van came in sight of
the Rebels, who were all ready drawn up in two Bodies, though they had no more
notice of the Dukes March, than what they had from the light of the Soldiers
Matches. Major Oglethorp with his party was commanded to march directly toward
the Bridge, and draw up before it: approaching so much the nearer, because it
was found that the Rebels had barricado'd up the Bridge with Stones and Timber,
that rendered the pass very difficult.

The Rebels had posted themselves very advantageously, for there was no coming
to them but over that Bridge, the River Clyd running between the two Armies.
The Duke drew up the Army in Battle upon the height parallel to the River, in
full view of the Rebels, which being done, he went to visit the Dragoons Post,
about a mile distant. Upon the way he was met by an Officer, who acquainted him
that a Parley had been beaten, and delivered him a Petition sent from the
Rebels, and signed by Robert Hamilton in the name of Himself, and the
Covenanted Army in Scotland now in Arms, the Contents whereof were, That they
had lain under great oppression both in their Estates and Consciences, which
had obliged them to have recourse to Arms for their own preservation, which
they were willing to lay down, when the things set down in their Declaration
were granted them. His Grace admitting of the Parley, there came out to him,
Mr. David Hume, one of their Ministers, with another Gentleman; who being asked
what they came for? Mr. Hume answered, That they were informed that his Grace
was a merciful person, that took no delight to shed blood, and one that had
power to do them good.

His Grace made answer, That he should be very glad, they would prevent the
effusion of blood, and to that end he was willing to hear what they propounded.
To which Mr. Hume replied, that all their desires were contained in their
Declaration. And being demanded whether he meant the Declaration that passed
undertheir name, and was set up and proclaimed at Rugland? He answered, God
forbid they should own that. But the Declaration he spoke of was one they had
lately printed, a Copy whereof he had with him, and desired liberty to read it;
which being done, his Grace told them, That he supposed they would take it as a
great proof of his Clemency and forbearance toward them, that he had Patience
to hear such a Libell against the Kings Person and Government read quite
thorough; But that he found no one Article in it, that he could possibly agree
to, and therefore would make them a much shorter proposal, which was, That if
they would immediately lay down their Arms and submit themselves to his
Majesty's Mercy, the Kings Forces should not fall upon them. Mr. Hume replied,
that it was impossible to agree to that; for that it would be to lay their
heads upon the Block. Whereupon his Grace advised them to consider well what
they had to do; and to reflect a little whether that number of men, showing him
the Army, as it was drawn up, were not sufficient to oblige them to new
resolutions: to which the Minister made a brisk return, desiring his Grace to
take a view of the Covenanted Army, assuring him, that every man he saw there
would dye in the place where he stood, in defense of the Covenant. His Grace
gave no farther answer, but that a few minutes would show the Truth of that, if
they refused his offer.

The other Gentleman, who appeared to be the more moderate, desired a Cessation
of Arms for one day; but being told that it was not to be expected that the
Kings Forces should grant that to Rebels, he pressed it for a quarter of an
hour only. His Grace told them, if they would go and consider, what he had
said, and send him their proposals in writing, he would at any time when he
heard their Drum, make a stand, to receive their papers; though the fight
should be begun; and so dismissed them. Immediately after that, he ordered the
Cannon to advance, which was brought to the height opposite to the Bridge, and
while preparation was making to fire upon them, they beat a second Parley.

Whereupon Major Maine was sent to know what it was they desired; who brought
back a Letter to this effect. That they had considered what had been said, but
could agree to nothing less than what was in their Declaration. That they
understood his Grace had brought with him from England some Terms of
Accommodation; which if he would please to communicate to them he should have
their Answer, if they were such as they could accept.

Major Maine was sent back to acquaint them that a more satisfactory Answer was
expected, therefore they would do well to look to themselves; and that their
Officers might if they pleased retire from the Bridge, (who were come thither
upon the account of the Parley) for that they should hear from his Grace in
another manner. As soon as they were retired, orders were given for the Cannon
to fire; which they returned with so smart a Volley from the Bridge, that all
the Gunners quitted the Guns; but soon returned to them again. Major Oglethorp
also was ordered to make a Trench on the edge of the Hill to cover his men; but
before it was finished, upon firing the Cannon against the Bridge, the Rebels
began to run from it. Whereupon his Grace commanded Major Oglethorp to possess
himself of the Bridge, but to advance no farther; However his men perceiving
the Rebels to retire before them, could not be hindered from passing the
Bridge, and following them up some part of the rising ground. But then the
Rebels observing their small number, advanced upon them, and forced them to
retire to the Houses at the foot of the Bridge. Thereupon his Grace sent three
hundred foot to second them, commanded by the Lord Leviston, son to the Earl of
Linlithgow, who behaved themselves so well, and fired so briskly upon the
Rebels, that the Dragoons and they forced the Rebels up the Hill again. They
were immediately seconded by the Regiment of Guards, and by the Troop of Guards
led by his Grace. No sooner were those Troops passed the Bridge, but the Rebels
fell to running; though they rallied again upon Hamilton Heath, about a quarter
of a mile off; so that his Grace advanced with the Troops that were already
passed, to the top of the Hill, and there made a halt, to give time to so many
of the rest of the Forces to come over, as would suffice to make the first
Line. In the mean while the Rebels were drawing up in Battle, directly opposite
to the Duke, at what time his Grace observing that they were strengthening
their left wing, with a design to take the advantage of a hollow ground; he
ordered his own right to be strengthened, and commanded a hundred Highlanders
of the Marquis of Athol's Regiment to post themselves in that hollow, and the
five Troops of English Dragoons to second them: which was no sooner done, but
they advanced upon his Grace, as he was forming the second Line. The Dukes
Highlanders, and their foot began the fight in the hollow ground; but the
Highlanders advancing too far were forced to retreat to the Dragoons. At the
same time, the Cannon fired upon their left wing, where their strength lay; but
they had not fired above twice before their Horse began to run. Whereupon his
Grace ordered Major Oglethorp, with the Dragoons, Major Maine, and Captain
Claveres, with their Troops of Horse, and the Earl of Eglington with his Troop
of Volunteers to pursue, while he followed himself, with the rest of the Army,
to the end of the Heath which was about a mile, observing such a pace, as might
not put his men into any disorder. The others pursued the Rebels so close, that
there were between seven and eight hundred slain, and above twelve hundred
taken Prisoners. So that the heat of the business was over by one of the Clock.
Many of the Prisoners were sorely wounded, whom his Grace caused to be dressed
by his own Surgeon.

The Prisoners of note were John Kidd, a Minister, and one of the most factious
among them; John King, another Minister, and one Mr. Carthcart. A Captain of
Foot was also taken, and old Gorden, the Lord of Earlston slain. The Prisoners
were sent to Edinburgh, where they were secured by the Magistrates of that City.

July. 1679. This growing Rebellion being thus nipt in the bud, by the
fortunate conduct of his Grace the Duke of Bucclugh and Monmouth, His Majesty
was pleased to publish a Proclamation, commanding the Judges and all
Magistrates to apprehend and punish all such as should frequent any field
Conventicles (those Rendezvouses of Rebellion) according to the prescript of
the Law; as also to prosecute with all legal rigor, the execrable Murderers
of the late Archbishop of St. Andrews: declaring withal that his Majesty being
desirous to reclaim all such as had been misled through ignorance or blind
zeal, had according to the power reserved to his Majesty by the fifth Act in
the second Session of the second Parliament, suspended the execution of all
Laws and Acts against such as frequent House-Conventicles in the Low Countries
on the South side of the River Tay; excepting the Town of Edinburgh, and 2
miles round the same, with the Lordships of Musselborough and Dalkeith; the
Cities of St. Andrews, Glasgow and Sterling, and a mile about each of them. But
that none under the color of this favor might presume to preach Rebellion;
all such as should be suffered to preach, should give in their Names, and find
Sureties to the privy Council, for their good and peaceable behavior: that but
one Preacher should be allowed to a Parish, and none to be allowed that had
appeared against his Majesty in the late Rebellion, nor none that should be
admitted by the nonconforming Ministers in any time hereafter.

This forbearance to continue during his Majesty's pleasure, and as the
Dissenters shall deserve the same.

Things being thus composed in Scotland, His Grace the Duke of Monmouth
returned for England, where he had that reception from his Majesty which his
Valor and Conduct had well deserved.

With him the Series of the History returns also; and being arrived at London,
there the first thing remarkable which it meets with is the Dissolution of the
Parliament. To which purpose the King was pleased to issue forth His Royal
Proclamation, That whereas the present Parliament was lately prorogued till the
14th. of August, the Kings most excellent Majesty being resolved to meet his
people, and have their advice in frequent Parliaments, had thought fit to
dissolve the present Parliament: and that he had given directions to the Lord
Chancellor for the issuing out of Writs for the calling of a new Parliament, to
be holden on Tuesday the 7th. of October next ensuing.

It was now a whole month since Mr. Langhorne had received sentence of
Condemnation. All this while he had been reprieved, partly for the sake of his
Clyents, that he might discharge himself of such business of theirs as he had
in his hands; partly for his own sake, to the end he might have retrieved
himself from the ignominy of his execution by a candid and sincere Confession.

He had sent a Petition to his Majesty, wherein after he had given his Majesty
most humble thanks for prolonging his life; he further set forth that he was
ignorant of the subject of the Earl of Roscommons Letter, as also of the
Grounds upon which it was written. That in obedience to his Majesty's commands
he had made the utmost discovery he could of the Estates he was commanded to
disclose; and therefore besought his Majesty to grant him his Pardon, or at
least to give him leave to live, though it were abroad, and in perpetual
banishment, he having as he pretended fully obeyed his Majesty's Commands.

But whether he spoke truth or no, may be fairly appealed to the world. For it
is impossible to think otherwise, but that if he had so fully and sincerely
obeyed those Commands which it was thought requisite, and which no question the
insight of a wise and discerning Council well knew he could perform, his
Majesty, so punctual to his Mercy, as they who have peculiarly tasted it, well
can testify, would never have swerved in the least tittle from the Grace which
once he had offered him.

So that when he saw so much confidence in a dying man, as to approach the
throne of mercy with so much untruth, his favorable eye could not look upon
that Canting Declaration which followed, but as the Speech of a Prosopopoeia,
hammered for him in the Popish Forge. By which figure, he might have enforced
his Protestations ten times more solemnly, without any disadvantage to his
credit among his Confessors.

Having thus therefore spent a month in plausible prevarications, at length the
fatal warrant came, by virtue whereof he was drawn to Tyburn, and there
executed according to the Sentence pronounced against him.

As for the Speech, which he left as a Legacy to the world, believing he should
not have opportunity to utter it by word of mouth, it was nothing but an
absolute denial of what had been so clearly proved against him.

It Is true, 'twas farc'd with strange imprecations and solemn Asseverations of
his Innocence. But how true those Protestations were, he himself discovers by a
bold untruth, that unmantles the fallacy of all the rest. For what man of
reason can imagine it possible that his Majesty or the Council should think his
attainted life so considerable, as to turn his Priests, and for his dear sake,
to take upon them the office of the Ministry, to convert him from Popery? 'Twas
very likely indeed that they should offer him Great Advantages, Preferments and
Estates, after the judgment was against him, to make him forsake his Religion;
as if the King had wanted a Judge Advocate for his Guards. But when he could
not beg a Banishment, he was resolved to bespatter that favor of life which
was offered him, only to be ingenuous in the farther discovery of the foul
design wherein he was engaged, but neither for his parts or endowments.

Not long after Sir George Wakeman, William Rumley, William Marshall and James
Corker, Benedictine Monks were brought to their Trials at the same Bar.

The Jury were,
Ralph Hawtrey, Henry Hawley, Henry Hodges, Richard Downtin, Rob. Hampton,
Esquires. William Heydon, John Bathurst, John Baldwyn, Will. Avery, Esquires.
Richard White and Thomas Wait, Gent.
The Charge against Sir George Wakeman was, that whereas there was a design
among several of the Popish party to subvert the Government of the Nation, by
altering the Laws and Religion therein established, and taking away the life of
his Majesty, he the said Sir George had undertaken to do the latter by Poison:
That for that piece of service he was to have fifteen thousand pounds, of which
sum he had already received five thousand pound in part. And that for a further
gratuity he had accepted of a Commission to be Physician General of the Army.

That he received the Commission from the Provincial of the Jesuits in
England; and that he read it, kept it in his possession, and agreed to it, with
a design to have entered upon his employment, so soon as the Army should be
raised.

To make good the Charge, Dr. Oats was sworn, and deposed, That he saw a
Letter of Sir George Wakemans, written to one Ashby a Jesuit, then under his
directions at the Bath, wherein after he had given him the prescriptions he was
to observe, he sent him word that he was assured of a certain person that was
to poison the King.

That he was present when Ashby offered him the 10000 l. in the presence of
Harcourt and Ireland, to poison the King.

That he refused it, not in abhorrency of the crime, but because, as he said,
it was too little for so great a Work.

That afterward five thousand pound more was offered him, as he was credibly
informed, by the order of the Provincial Whitebread. But that he certainly saw
the Prisoners hand to a receipt in the entry book, at Wild-house, for five
thousand pound, part of the said fifteen thousand pound.

Mr. Bedlow deposed, That he was in Harcourts Chamber, where he saw Harcourt
deliver to Sir George Wakeman a Bill of two thousand pound, which was charged,
as he supposed, upon a Goldsmith near Temple bar. And that Sir George upon
receipt of the Bill, told Harcourt that if the Bill were accepted, he should
hear from him suddenly. That the Bill was accepted and the money paid, by the
Confession of Sir George to the Witness. That the said 2000l. was soon after
made up 5000 l. and as Harcourt told this Deponent, all upon the same account,
and in part of the 15000 l.

Sir George pleaded to all this, that he had been left at liberty twenty four
days after he had been before the Council; and that upon Dr. Oates's being sent
for to the House of Lords to repeat his Evidence against Sir George, he confessed
there that he did not know Sir George Wakemans hand, and only knew the Letter
in question to be his Letter by being subscribed, G. Wakeman. Concluding from
thence that the Witness would have told more at that examination had he known
more.

To which the Dr. replied, that he had been so over-toyl'd with watching, and
searching after persons detected, that he was not able to make good his charge.
Which was also confirmed by the testimony of Sr. Thomas Doleman.

But Sir Philip Floyd, one of the Clerks of the Council, was more express in
behalf of the Prisoner, who acknowledged indeed that Dr. Oats did make mention
of Sir Georges undertaking to poison the King, as he had understood by a Letter
from Whitebread to Harcourt, and that he was informed by the same Letter that
Coleman had paid him five thousand pound of the fifteen thousand pound agreed
upon: But that being demanded of his own personal knowledge what he could tax
Sir George withal, he solemnly denied that he had any thing more against him.

To which the Doctor gave the same answer of his extreme weakness and
indisposition as before.

After that Sir George recommended one obser vation more to the Court, That in
the Doctors Narrative, there was not one Letter which came from beyond Sea to
which he did not swear positively both as to the date and as to the receipt:
and yet that in the case of life he would not be confined to a Month.
Concluding with a solemn Imprecation, and disclaiming all the Crime in this
Matter that had been charged against him.

Corker, Rumley and Marshall were charged of being privy to the Consult, for
killing the King, and to the carrying on the rest of the grand design, toward
which they had undertaken the raising and payment of 6000 l. by the Benedictine
Monks.

As to Corker, Dr. Oats swore him to be a Benedictine Monk, and privy to the
promise of the 6000 l. which was to be raised for carrying on the design.

That he gave Le Chaise, and the English Monks at Paris an account of the
Jesuits proceedings in England, and that he had a Patent to be Bishop of
London, which the Witness had seen in his hand; and that he disposed of several
parcels of money for advancing the design.

That he was privy to the Grand Consult in April, and excepted against
Pickerings being made choice of for killing the King, in regard that he being
engaged to say High Mass, an opportunity might be lost in the mean time.

Mr. Bedlow deposed against Corker, that he had been with him in the Company of
others at Somerset House, where he heard him discourse in general concerning
the Plot, of Letters of intelligence, and raising an Army, what Agitators the
Conspirators had in the Country, and what Interests they had made.

As for Marshall, he was charged by Dr. Oats with being present when the six
thousand pound was agreed upon, and that he made the same exceptions against
Pickering that Corker had done.

Mr. Bedlow deposed against him, that he had carried several Letters to the
Catholic party that were in the design, and particularly one to Sir Francis
Ratcliff. And that he had sent Letters of his own twice to others concerning
the subverting of the Government, and introducing Popery.

Rumley was accused by Dr. Oats, of being privy to the Consult for the raising
the six thousand pound, and that he prayed for the success of the Design.

Corker offered in his defense, that not knowing his accusations, he could not
come with Evidences to support his Plea. That there was nothing more easy than
to accuse an innocent person, and that the Circumstances ought to be as
credible as the Witnesses: of which there was neither to be found in his case;
using many flourishes to move the Court and the Jury, raising his Arguments
from Improbability of Witnesses, to maintain his Allegations: and the more to
invalidate the Dr.'s testimony, he brought witnesses to testify that one
Stapleton was President of the Benedictines and not himself, and that the said
Stapleton had so been for many years.

Marshall threw himself upon the Court, whom he besought to manage his cause
for him, as having had so much Trial of their Candor and Ingenuity. After
which he made some flight reflections upon the Kings Evidence; and desired the
Court to consider how little concerned he was at his being apprehended, which
was no small sign of his Innocence. But the main of his defense lay upon this
Stress, that Dr. Oats was a stranger to him, and had mistaken him for some
other person; which was evidently made out to the contrary: and beside that,
the Prisoner brought no proof of what he affirmed in that particular. At length
the Conclusion of his defense was a smooth harangue, ad captandum populum, and
in justification of the Crimes of them that had already suffered: which because
it was looked upon as an affront done to the Justice of the Court, he was
desired to forbear his Flowers of Rhetoric, which were all to no purpose.

As for Rumley, there being but one Witness against him, he did not think it
needful to trouble the Court with a defense, and indeed it was the opinion of
the Court delivered to the Jury that they ought to discharge him.

Upon the whole, it was the opinion of the Court that the Defenses of the
Prisoners were very weak, of which the Jury could not choose but take notice.

The main thing wherein the Court were dissatisfied was, Dr. Oates's excuse of
his own weakness and infirmity, for not giving his full charge against Sir
George Wakeman at the Council Board: Since he might have charged him in the
same breath, that he denied that he had any thing more against him.

Whether this or any other more prevailing argument overruled them, certain it
is, that the Jury found them all Not Guilty, and so, contrary to expectation,
they were all acquitted.

All this while his Majesty kept his Court at Windsor, where in consideration
of the many and faithful services performed unto him by the Right Honorable
George Lord Viscount Hallifax, John Lord Roberts, and Charles Lord Gerrard of
Brandon, he was pleased to confer upon them the Titles of Earls of this
Kingdom, creating the Lord Viscount Hallifax Earl of Hallifax, the Lord Gerrard
Earl of Newberry, Viscount Brandon, which title was afterward changed into that
of Macclesfeld; and the Lord Roberts Earl of Falmouth, Viscount Bodmin.

And to show that he took the same care of his Dominions abroad as at home, His
Majesty ordered recruits to be forthwith raised under the commands of Captain
George Wingfeild, Captain Charles Wingfeild, Captain William Langley, and
Captain William Matthews, to reinforce the Garrison of Tangier.

At home the Fort of Sheerness, and the Garrison of Portsmouth had both the
Honor to be surveyed by the King himself; who to that intent departed upon the
30th. of July from Windsor to Hampton Court, attended by the Duke of Albemarle,
and several of the Nobility, and from thence in his Barge to Deptford; where
after he had taken a view of a new Third-rate Frigate called the Sterling
Castle, he proceeded on to Sheerness, and so forward to Portsmouth, where he
safely soon after arrived by Sea; and having made a short stay in the Town,
returned again by Land to Windsor.

August, 1679. Soon after his return, his Majesty was seized by a fit of
sickness, which though Heaven, kind to three Kingdoms, was pleased not to
suffer to grow upon him, yet the short continuance bred no small terror and
consternation in the hearts of all his Loyal Subjects.

The City soon took the sad Alarm, and immediately deputed two Aldermen to
attend his Majesty during his sickness, of whose attendance he was pleased to
accept till the danger was over. His Royal Highness the Duke of York also,
receiving the unwelcome news, hastened out of Flanders to Windsor. But in a
short time these affrights were happily over.

September, 1679. In the mean time Mr. Jenison had been several times examined,
and at length made public a Narrative containing a farther discovery of the
Plot, with a confirmation of the truth of the Kings Evidence, which Ireland had
so fairly ventured at his death to invalidate at the expense of his Salvation.

Thereupon his Majesty was pleased to publish a Proclamation against the four
Ruffians, who were designed to have murdered him at Windsor. Wherein he
summoned them by the names of Captain Levallyan,.... Karney, Thomas Brahall and
James Wilson, to render themselves before the twentieth day of October next, or
else to suffer the extremity of the Law; with promise of a hundred pound to any
person that should apprehend or discover any of them.

While the King continued at Windsor, upon the noise of the Duke of York's
being returned, several Citizens, of whom the Chamberlain of London was the
chief, alleging their jealousies and fears, arising as they said from the
Dukes encouragement of Popery, and the continued practices of the Enemies of
the Protestant Religion, made their applications to the Lord Mayor, desiring
that the guards of the City might be doubled. His Lordship gave them thanks for
their care and zeal; and told them that he could not answer their desires of
himself, but that he would summon the Lieutenancy together: which being done,
though neither Sir Thomas Player nor other person appeared, and the address of
the absent Gentlemen being debated, it was concluded that there was no
necessity to put any farther charge upon their fellow Citizens at present, as
was desired, till more urging causes of danger appeared, which was the
determination of that grand affair.

But the City it self had a nobler design. For the Lord Mayor and Aldermen,
having the week before ordered two of their members to attend the King at
Windsor, humbly to desire leave to wait on his Majesty to congratulate his
happy recovery from his late indisposition, they accordingly went in a full
body toward the middle of this month, with a fair Retinue to Windsor. Where
being introduced into the Royal presence, the Lord Mayor set forth the
exceeding joy of the City, and of all his Majesty's Protestant Subjects for so
great a blessing: declaring withal the happiness they enjoyed in his Majesty's
most excellent Government, and his preservation of the public Liberty,
Property, and above all the Protestant Religion.

To which his Majesty was pleased to return for answer, That he had ever a high
esteem of his City of London, and would never omit any opportunity of giving
them the marks of his kindness, assuring them that he would employ his care to
maintain them in peace and secure them in their properties, and in the
Protestant Religion; and then admitted them to the Honor of kissing his hand.
After that his Majesty retiring out of the Royal Presence, my Lord Mayor was
asked whether he with the Aldermen would not wait on the Queen and Duke of
York? To which his Lordship answered that he had done all that was in his
Commission; but that he was heartily glad he had done so much, as being with
the rest of his brethren transported with an extraordinary joy to behold his
Majesty in so good a condition of Health. After the Ceremony was over, the Lord
Maynard by his Majesty's Order entertained the Lord Mayor and Aldermen at a
splendid Dinner: which being done, they returned home the same night, highly
satisfied with the favor and treatment they had received.

On the 17th. of this month, His Majesty returned to London with the Queen and
Duke of York; whereupon the Lord Mayor immediately gave order for the ringing
of the bells and making bonfires, which was performed with all cheerfulness and
joy by the Inhabitants. Soon after, that is to say, upon the 27th. of this
month his Grace the Duke of Monmouth took shipping in one of his Majesty's
Yachts for Holland, and the next day his Royal Highness the Duke of York
departed for Flanders.

Whose said remarkable Departures out of this Land may well suffice to give a
memorable conclusion to the story of these few last years, wherein the
Transactions have been so various and worthy observation, that the like have
rarely happened in a Kingdom, notwithstanding all these violent underminings of
her Tranquillity, still blessed with Peace, and which the prayers of all good
Men implore from Heaven may still continue so, under the protection of a
merciful God and Gracious King.

FINIS.

