L'ESTRANGE HIS APOLOGY: WITH A Short View, of some Late and Remarkable
Transactions, Leading to the happy Settlement of these Nations under the
Government of our Lawful and Gracious SOVEREIGN CHARLES the II. whom GOD
Preserve.

By R. L. S.

Qui aliquid statuit, part inaudita altera,
AEquum licet statuerit, Iniquus est Iudex.
LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom, at the Gun in Ivy-Lane, 1660.

The PREFACE.
IF it were possible to please all Humors, I would by all fair means endeavor
it; for I perceive that Knaves, and Fools have Honester, and Wiser men much at
their Mercy. Opinion is the Common people's Idol; they Make it first, and then
they Worship it. Nor matters it ^ow Frivolous and Weak the Ground is, so the
Report be strong; for Rumor is not allwaies founded upon Truth, and Reason;
but like a Pestilence, it Rises from a Vapor; Spreads it self; and One soul
Breath, suffices to Defame the cleerest Soul in Nature. As it is Vain, to
strive against the stream of Popular Affections: so Providence has render^d it
Unnecessary too, by making the mere Conscience of a Noble Action, a large
Requital of it. Nor is it Virtue, but Design, or Vanity, that looks beyond its
proper self, either for Profit, or Applause. Briefly; the worst that Calumny
and Malice, can Throw upon a Private Person, is but a Taste of the same Cup,
whereof, our Lord and M^ster, has Drank a Deep, and Bitter Draught before us.
All this considered; our Religion, or Philosophy, serves us to Little purpose,
if we Murmur, Shrink, or Transport our selves, under a Fate so Hard to be
Avoided, so Easily Born, and so Glorious to Overcome.

Let me not be Mistaken; As I think nothing more Ridiculous, than to appear
Disturbed, for a Pretence-less, and Malicious Scandal, while it regards only
the Voluntary, and Trivial Contrivers of it: So do I think nothing more
Reasonable, when such an Error shall have wrought it self into a Credit among
Sob^r Persons, than by an Open, Calm, and Clear Defense, for him that is Injured
to Acquit himself. Nor am I Ignorant, what Censure waits upon Discourses of
this Quality; nor (to deal Freely) much Concerned: -- upon this Principle, that
I am Certain not to Disoblige any One Person that I care to Please.

I reckon that I have to deal with Three sorts of People.

The First, Consists of such as have no hand at all in my Dishonor: Perhaps, no
Knowledge, neither of my Cause, nor Person. These I desire by any means not to
bestow their Time, or Mon^y, upon This Pamphlet, as having no share in the
Intention of it. If they will needs be Medaling, it is their Own fault, not
Mine, the mis employment of that Hour they Cast away upon it. It is One
weakness, to Write Vain Discourses, and it is Another to Read them Beside; My
Business is a kind of Privacy, and it is scarce Good Manners, in a Stranger to
Hearken after it. In sober Earnest, did I but know to whose Ear properly I
might Direct the Sense of what I Suffer, I should not have Committed it to
Paper. But, as the Case stands, I cannot Avoid it; for nothing but a Public
Defense, can wipe off a Public Scandal; and That way too, it is but to save
One Blot, and set another; Hazzarding my Discretion, to secure my Honor. It is
with Books, just as it is with Meats, Some are disposed for Luxe, and Gust; --
Others for Health; and some again for pure Necessity. I have provided nothing
here for Peevish Palates; nor, in Effect, for any other Persons than such as I
would make my Friends, and Those I Love to Treat with Liberty, and Plainness.
In Fine; he is a Rude Guest, that Pressing to a Table Un-invited, disparages
his Entertainment: and he is a Partial Judge, that blames Another, for Writing
that upon Necessity, which he himself may Read, or let alone, at pleasure.

The Second sort, is a Mistaken Party: such as have either been Misled, out of
an Fasinesse to Credit loose Reports; or by the Current of a Common Vote,
Induced to an Assent, to what they could not Contradict, and to take
Probabilities for Truths, wanting the means to Discern One, from the Other.
These a^e the Only Persons I consider, as properly the Subjects of my Care,
and Trouble. -- I would not have my Supposed Faults, become Really Theirs. Nor
is it less Their Interest, to Know the Truth, than Mine to Tell it. My
Reputation lies at stake, Their Justice: and the same Act, that Frees me from a
Misfortune, Delivers Them too from an Error. It is to These then that I
Dedicate this Demonstration of my Innocence; not doubting but that such as have
made this Apology Necessa^y, will likewise think it Pardonable. To suit the
Method of it, to the Obligation: It is the Surest, and the Safest Cure of all
Disorders, both of Body, and Mind, to Apply to the Root, and Causes of them:
and not by a Direct, and Passionate Opposition, to dash one Weakness against
Another. Some people Err out of Facility, and Heedlesnesse; I shall bestow a
Little Counsel upon them: But then there is a Serious Party, that is not moved,
but by fair Likelihoods, and Strong Appearances of Reason, and Those I shall
endeavor to prevail upon, by Evidences of Fact.

First; In the matter of Coun^el; Every man should do well to conform all his
Actions to the rules of Conscience, Honor, Prudence, and Convenience, by these
means Reconciling (as much as possible) Duty, and Interest. Not to Range over
the whole Field of Christian Duties, etc. -- I shall confine my self to my
Subject, and only in Few Words Observe, how Contrary to all these Obligations,
That Humor is (to say no worse) of taking up Evil Reports upon Trust, and
Venting them for Truths.

I do account that Babbling Levity, to Malice but what Chance-Medly is to
Murder; perhaps no harm Intended, but a man's Killed with Fooling: beside the
Breach of Charity, and the Violation of Sociable Justice. This as to Conscience.

Consider next in point of Honor; how Ignoble it is to Wound a man behind his
Back; nay in his Sleep; that neither Knows his Enemy, nor Feels the Wound, till
he is Lost beyond all possibility of Defense, or Resistance. Can any thing be
Meaner, than, for no Provocation Given, and for no Benefit Expected, to ruin
an Unknown and (perhaps) Guiltless person, past all power of Reparation?

Nor is the Humor more Discreet, than Noble. It is a Weakness that Proclaims
it self; and Prints a Marque, and Character of Folly upon whoever uses it. Is
any man esteemed the Wiser for telling All he Knows; or the Honester for
speaking More? In Fine; His Virtues are soon Compted, that spends his time in
Reckoning up his Neighbors Faul^s.

To come now to the point of Interest: There Is nothing more Dest^uctive to all
Great, and Beneficial purposes, t^an this same Credulous, and over flowing Vein
of Tattling. It speaks a man too Weak for Coun^el, or Conduct: too Open, for
Friendship: too Impertinent for Society: and Briefly, Good for nothing, but to
make either Sport or Anger.

In the next place I must apply my self to Disabuse the more Composed, and
Sober of the Mistaken Party; and that I hope to do eff^ctually, and in
despite of Prejudice, and Malice, to prove my self so far from ever
complicating to the King's Diss^rvice, (as I am Sneakingly, and Falsely,
represented to have done) that on the Contrary, I undertake to make it clear,
and put it past Dispute, that it has been the Constant Business of my Life to
do my Duty to his Majesty. Nor will I Justify, and Expose my Actions only,
but my very Thoughts. That is; -- If quite along the whole tract of the
Quarrel, my Judgment ever waver'd; as to the Justice of the ^ause; - or my
Affection Cooled; -- Nay more; if ever any Interest in Nature diverted me from
Prosecuting that Duty, to the neglect of all things under Heaven beside; may
that Omission be Eternally Imputed to me. If any man can Contradict me, let him.

This way of Vindication I have not either Easily, or Suddenly, resolved upon,
but having hitherto Subjected all private Injuries, and Passions, to a
Superior Principle of Public Duty, I reckon that this Happy Change h^th set
m^ now at Liberty, to do my Self Right; and That, wit^out offense to any
Ente^fering, and Designing Parties. It is one ^omfort too, the General Hope we
have o^ se^ing all those Iudasses laid open, that have Betrayed and Sold their
Mast^r: but I should be ex^eeding sorry, to find my Self in the Black Catalogue.

I am prepared for twenty Cavils now; and to prevent Another Troub^e, I Will
Answer some of them beforehand.

If he be Innocent (says o^e) a l^ttle time would have worn it ou^, without
this Bustle. Truly, for That; a little More, wears out my Life; and then again
my Patience is worn out already. I cannot think it one Jot Reasonable, to
wayt an Age for what may be done in an Hour; and all the while, stand Begging
That, as a Civility, which is my Due upon a score of Justice. Further; the
Tedious Expectation blasts the Comfort of my Life, and Cankers all that is
Conversable in my Nature. I have an Inward Shame, and Indignation to find my
self suspected among worthy Persons, that takes me from the Common Offices, and
Benefits of Society. I cannot Visit where I Would, and Ought, without a Blush:
and these Forbearances, in many places, are taken to proceed from want of
Inclination, or Good Manners; when (God he knows) out of an Honest Tenderness,
to Others, I Cross my Self, in what I Passionately Desire. So that betwixt
Those whom I would not Trouble; and such as would prove Troublesome to Me, my
Conversation's drawn into a very Narrow Compass: and That Retirement suffers
Great mistakes.

He Is a Vain Fellow (cries another) and Loves to hear himself Prate: -- A wit
-- (with a wry mouth) etc. -- Why Soberly; I had rather be That, than a Fool:
and Either of them, than a Knave; Let me but quit my self of the Last, and I Will
never Dispute the other Two. The Question is not Wit, but Honesty: and the same
thing might be as well applied to him that ^leads to save his Life.

Indeed, my Scribbling gives a shrewd Offense; but alas, the People Bark at
Strangers, l^ke Whelps; for Company; although they nev^r Saw* or Read, either
the Person, or the Thing they Blame. To justify my self in this Particular;
(my Conscience bears me witness) I have not Published any one Paper, but with a
prime Relation to a Common good. As my Intent was Fair, so I demand, where the
Effect was other of what I did? Have I Lashed any Person, whom This Convention
has not Stigm^tiz'd; or Branded any Party that might be Useful to the King's
Design? What is it I have Proposed, or Counsel d, in Contradiction either to
Honesty, or Reason? (No matter for the Knack of wording it)

Nay more, had but my Zeal been menag'd by a Person of Answerable Abili^ies, as
to That very point of writing, I know not any thing could have brought more
Advantage t^ the Business. First; it was Necessary to Imprint Hon^st Notions in
the People: upon whose aid depended the Decision of the Controversy. Their
Inclinations being Reasoned, and Encouraged into Resolves: the next point is
how to direct the Seasonable Execution of them. Let any man now show me, by
what other means than by the Press, 'twas possible to Engage so many Persons,
with so much Probability of good, and with so Little Hazard of the Contrary;
Especially, at a time, when 6 Persons could not m^et, without as many Spies
upon their Actions.

I do expect a Thousand pretty Epithe^s; as Formal, Self-conceited, Rash, etc.
-- but those I look upon only as Loose Grains, to make the rest Weight. The
Grand Discovery is still behind.

This Person (cries a third) cannot believe himself so much in Danger of an Ill
Opinion, as of being quite forgotten; and drives an Interest, in the little
sto^y of his G^oles, and Pamphlets, under pretense of a Necessity in Order to
his Honor. To This; I shall not stick to own, I wish it were so; and that his
Majesty would Judge in Favor of an Unprofitable Servant, that has but done
his Duty. -- At Last; What if it were my Business^ to put In among the Crowd of
Pretenders? But truly, my Ambition seeks only that Allowance of my Actions,
which I Dese^ve, not a Reward, beyond the Merit of them.

When I first heard my self suspected for an Instrument of Cromwells: his
Pensioner; and a Betrayer of his Sacred Majesty's Party, and Designs; I c^uld
not choose but Smile, and almost Thank the Author of that Calumny, that (in a
man so Full of Faults) had fixed a Charge There, where 'twas Impossible I
should b^ Guilty; (nay, or Repute^ so) he might as well have called me Whore,
as Traitor* But when I came to find that divers^ of my nearest Friends were
Cautioned; and with what Monstrous Secrecy Designs we^e Carri^d, ^or Fear of
Me; (even those Designs, that were the Common Talk of He^b women, and Porters)
I began then to L^ok about me; and in Conclusion some ^. or 3. Women, a ^idler,
and a Haberdasher, I discovered. Upon further Enquiry I found that this
Intelligence was as Current about the King, as Here; and that many Eminent
Persons were possess d wi^h the same Opinion. It was not then a Season, to
bring my self upon the S^age, when by Struggling, I should only have done a
Publ^que wrong, and yet my Self no Right* Wherefore I respited that Purpose, in
Hope, and Expectation of that Freedom, which (by Gods Blessing) we at this day
enjoy. Nay, even at this Instant; were I not Absolutely satisfi d, both from
all Hands, and Arguments, that, in the Worl^, I have no other way to help my
self* but This; I would not go this way to w^rk. I detest any thing of my own
writing, upon the second View; or were my Vanity of that Complexion, I should
not Entertain it, by Publishing so many Slubber'd, Hasty Copies as I have here
Reprinted; and which (Heaven knows it) I intended only ^or the Plain, Honest
business of disposing the Common People to their Obedience. What Good they
Did, I cann^t tell; I Am sure, they Meant no Hurt; Nor did they tend to any
thing, but what the People Did, at Last. I do but show what I was doing Then,
when I was Charg^d for Doing Ill. I Will not Excuse the Phrase, or Conduct of
them; but they were done with Infinite Good Will, and That discharges me. (To
make the medly less Intolerab^e, I have Inserted some Cohae en^es of Story,
and so Reduced all into an Orderly Relation.)

When I have Begged Their Pardon, whom my Misfortunes may h^ve led into a
Mistake; and ^iven them, Mine, to whose Mistakes I owe the sum of my
Misfortunes; I shall bestow my Judgment too upon that Spiteful Race of
People, that are so Bounti^ull to me; whose Study, Pride, and Pleasure it is, by
Scandal, and Detraction, to Sink all Others down to the some Base, and Sordid
Level with Themselves. They think the Blotting of Another, makes them Fair: and
either to Discourse the Ills they Know, or to Calumniate the Goodness which
they Envy, is all the virtue they pretend to. Nor is this Impious Vanity
Contracted Now, as Formerly; by bearing a Loose, Careless Hand, upon a Hot,
and Dangerous Distemper; but, I assure you, it is a Sober Excellence, that must
be Formed, and Perfect^d, by Industry, and Education. It Is Labored with such
Care, and Pains, as we should study Virtue, and here s the Ri^e, and Process
of it.

So soon as my Young-Master writes One and Twenty, he Learns to Swear, and
Drink; -- The several Sorts of Wines; -- and Price of Whores; -- The Names of
all the Famous Bauds and Vinteners; -- Takes his Small Poet to him, and his
Humble Cousin; -- gets his Admission-Clap, and There Is his Entrance. For his
First Month; he is but a kind of Property, in Public; a Mute, at Best. His
business being only to Observe, -- Harken, -- Admire, and to do Reason. Then
Home he goes, and Co^ns the Tavern-mode, and Discipline; as his first Lesson,
He plants himself before the Glass, and tries how This Oath, or That Wh^ff,
becomes him* -- the Supernaculum; -- then makes the Face that skar'd the
Drawer; -- and a Million of the Sweetest Things beside, that can be thought on.
By this Time, the Gay Novice, is pretty well Un-shackled, from those Severe,
and Troublesome Restraints of Piety, and Reason, which his Grave Tutour, or his
goo^ Old Mother put upon him. His next Step is into a Club of Wits, (Falsely so
Called) or Hectors, and There the man offers at Characters, and Quarrels:
Mistaking, for the most part, Scommes, and Blasphemy, for Wit, as well as
Rudeness, and Pot-metal, for true Valor* Then; Woe be to the Church, the
Women, and the Hackny-Coachman; Nay, the poor Coachman, with his broken Head,
Scapes best of the three.

The Eternal Verity, it self, is made a Fable; Religion but a Scar-Crow; --
(the Dark Impression of a Superstitious Melancholy) Nor does the wretch content
himself to Abandon Heaven, unless he does Invade it too; and in the Throne of
Providence it self, set up the Empire, and Divinity of Fortune. How great an
Honor is it to be Lash d by that Lewd Tongue, that thus Affronts his Maker!
and it is Observable, that a Notorious Slanderer, is very rarely seen without a
spice of Atheism. The Ladies next must take their Tu^n; in a Lampon perhaps, or
some such thing: (that most Un-christian, and Un-manly mixture of Wicked, and
of Brutish Folly) It Is but a Catalogue of their Names, no mat^er for the
knowledge of their Humors, or their Persons, and the thing's done. These
Impious Liberties, that give a Ho^rour to all Serious ^ersons, are but their
Spo^t that practice them: but then they make us some part of an Amends, in
their more ^erious Humou^s; which are not less Diverting, and Ridiculous.

IS it not better than Ten thousand Plays, to see a Formal piece of Animated
Pageantry, take the Tables End, and the Great Chair, and there Declare, and
Constitute himself the Supreme Arbitrator of all Causes. (This thing you may
Imagine now is Chairman to a Committee for Scandals) An ^ld Ape, Dressed in a
Considering-Cap, is not so Grave, and Senseless, as this Fellow. There Is the
Severity of Cato in his Face; but in his Head not Brain enough to qualify a
Parish Clerk. When he has called for Pipes; -- The ^other Drawer; -- and then,
for the same Racy-wine that He, and my Lord (such a Thing) sent for Last Night;
Out comes the Spruce Tobacco-Box, with the King's Picture at it, which he
Wears, and Kis^es, not so much out of Kindness, and Devotion, as for a Hint,
and Introduction, to his Politiques, now at hand.

Well, well -- (says he; Points to it and Pauses) -- had but This man followed
my Advice at Wo^'ster, h'ad done his Business: but we must never look for any
Good, so long as such, and such, are of his Counsel* (and then it is Ten to One,
he Names you Six of his Majesty s Best Friends, and Subjects) This is his
Queue to the King's Health; He Drinks, Lights his Tobacco; and Then, betwixt
the Pipe, and Bottle drops his Oracles. This man is Wise; -- That, Valiant; --
a Third, Honest; according as the goodly Inspirations of Smoke, and Tipple
shall move the Courteous Pledger. He tells you Stories of 3. Troops of Horse;
5. Companies of Foot, that he had Tampered; -- how much that Design stood him
in; and by what Miracle he Escaped Discovery. (he might have added, of a Thing
Invisible) You cannot mention One Unlucky Circumstance, either in Order to the
War, or in the Menage, and Persuance of it, but he Pretends to tell you upon
what Principle of State it Fayl'd: -- what Towns were Sold, for how Much, and
by Whom; who Betrayed all, at Naseby, etc. -- Nor can the World persuade him,
that ever any man Fought, that was not Killed. Ask his Opinion of the Roman
Catholics, he is able to produce you Sixteen Jesuits, in Red-Coats, and
Blew-Aprons, that are Employed to blow the Coal; and he knows further, where
Lambert took his Orders. We Are all Betr^y'd he cry^s: why he^e's L'estrange: --
that to my Knowledge, has r^ceiv'd 7^0 (...) of the Protector's Money at a Clap
-- W^ll -- (...)

Next to the Pleasure of this cunning man (...) the Contemplation of his
Auditory; who (...) sit Gaping, as if they took him for a Tooth-Drawer;
secretly praying God to Assist their Memories, that they may Tell the same
Tale, the Same way, where they come next. ( and here is the O^iginal of Fame) A
man would think these Fopp^ries too G^oss to Gai^ a Credit; yet being Vented
with a T^avellers* Authority, and Falling among Persons that only have a
General Notice of such Men and Actions, without the Knowledge of Particulars;
they seldom Dye in the Telling. One may suppose, that it is now Sleeping-time;
when full of Drink, and Kindn^ss, the Company disperses to their Quarters. It Is
no Ill Scaene that follows next, betwixt this Serious Trifle, and the Good
Wench his Land-Lady, that never fails, at his First Knock, and Any Hour, to
let him In. The Greeting still begins; -- by what strange Providence he Escaped
some Dreadful Danger. -- (the Watch perhaps, or the Horse-Guard) -- How many
Spies the Protector, or the Counsel has upon him: -- what Paquets from him to
his Majesty, ^ave been Intercepted: and then, how High they will Hang him, if
they Catch him. This Mollifies; Especially, attended with a
Maud'len-Salutation. That over; he betakes himself to his Philosophy, and
Courage; Unbuttons; -- Strikes his hand upon his Breast; -- Sets Her down by
him; -- Fills his Pipe, and tells his Story; -- What he will do for her when ^is
Majesty comes In; -- What He told the King, and what the King told Him: and in
the end, Talks himself out of a Waking, into a Real Dream. These People are
rare Company, in Paper; I cannot Leave the Subject, or at the Least, before I
do, I Will take a view, what Ground this Vast Pretense, and Vanity is Built upon.

What Hazzards have these People under-gone, or what Services done, beyond the
Loss of Leather, with Riding Post, to carry the first News of other People's
Actions; and at the Last, Spoiling the Tale in the Telling? If they can but
attain that point of Honor, to get themselves suspected by some Prickear'd
Drawer; -- Provoke an Information that they are Dangerous Persons; -- and then
walk by Owl-light, as if they were so; -- Concern themselves in Proclamation
for Banishment of Cavaliers, etc. -- Talk Big, a Day after the Fair; -- Kill a
man when his Head's off; and after that the King's Proclaimed, Defy the Rump:
-- These are the Desperate Adventures, and Meritorious services, which Entitle
these Gentlemen to a Precedence in the Honor of the Cause, before all Others.
No matter for the Chase, if they can but strike in at the Quarry; and by a
shameless Impudence, Blast, and Supplant, the Honest Mod^sty of those, that
bave worn out their Lives and Fortunes in the Quarrel. These are the Frank
Disposers of Rewa^d and Punishment. Nay, there are Some, that deem an Act of
Obl^vion, as n^edfull in the Case of Services, as Injuries: But These and
Those, I shall leave to the certain Fate of their Vain ^olly^s, (Discredit, and
Contempt) Their Iudg^ment d^es not weigh a Feather in the Balance, against a
Noble Thought. My care is only, not to Lose the Wiser, and the Worthier sort;
and for ^hese Reasons, I persuade my self I shall not.

Those that Have Suff^red, will not be severe in their own Case, and pass a
C^nsure even upon t^ems^^ves, in Blami^g Me. T^ose tha^ h^ve Nev^^ Suffered, do
no^ kn^w how soon they May; and ^ommo^ P^udence will se^ure me The^e. Upon This
Considen^e, I shall Proc^e^, Only Pr^mising; that what I Publ sh ^ow ^or my Own
Sake and to ^he Worl^; was Written f^^ a Pu^l qu^ End, and Fash oned to the
Humor of the ^eo^le.

An ADVERTISEMENT.
I Am here to Adv^rtise, that as at first I entered upon This Pamphlet with
great Unwillingness; so I have now at Last, rather chosen to break the Account,
and Order of it, by Leaving out 34. Pages of what I Intended, than Overcharge
the Reader by Filling up of this Ensuing Vacancy. It is too much already, of
what is Necessary; and That which I had prepared for this Place, not being of
so Absolute Necessity to my present Purpose, I shall refer to a more proper
Opportunity, and Leisure.

L'ESTRANGE HIS APOLOGY, etc.
TO begin with the Beginning of the War, and of my Story. My Judgment led me
to the Kings ^a^ty, and That I Served, without any other Aim, or Ben^fit, than
the Discharge of my Duty. In 1644. I was Betrayed by a Brace of Villains* by
name, Lem in, and Haggar) upon a Treaty to surprise Linn Regis. The former of
these had been at Oxford, and there Solicited, and obtained the Promise of a
Command at Sea; and Both of them were bound up under an O^th of Secrecy, and
Fidelity, as Rank as words could m^ke it. Being seized; and his Majesty's
C^mmission found about me: I was Hurried away, first to Linn; Thence to London;
and There transmitted to the City-Court-Martial for my Trial. (where Two Prime
men were a Saleman, and an Ostler) In this Extremity, nothing was left unsaid,
that might Infame me: and with so strong a Confidence too, that the best
Friends I had, were staggered at it.

The Commission was Decry'd for Counterfeit; The Design, Rash, and Foolish: --
The Instrument, as much; -- The Menage, worse; There were two tha^ A^firmed,
that I Betrayed all, with the Formalities, How, and upon What Conditions. I was
at last brought to the Bar; and Charged, First as a Spy; then as a Traitor,
with all the Circumstances of Rudeness, and Severity Imaginable. Upon that
Hearing, the Court Inclining to acquit me, It was proposed, and Carried, under
pretense of Favor to me, that Judgment might be deferred, and two days
longer Respit given me for the advantage of my Defense. In this Interim, they
had packed a Committee, and then Condemned me as Traitor; Many persons
Contributing to this Vote, that never heard one Syllable of my Trial. My
Sentence being passed, I threw a Breviate of my Case among them, with these
very Words; That Since they would not Hear my Defense, they might Read it; That
was it. A young Red-Headed Fellow, burnt it. I was then cast into Newgate;
whence I di^patch'd forthwith a Petitionary Appeal to the Lords; and Narratives
of the Proceedings to the Principal of Both Houses* At This Time I received a
Friendly Visit, from Mr. Th^rowgood, and Mr. Arrowsmith, (then of the Synod)
with an Assurance, that they would do their utmost to Preserve me, if I would
but Petition to be Banished, and Take the Covenant, without which, there was no
Possibility to Save me. My Answer was, (with a Respect to their Civility) to
this effect: That if I could be so great a Knave, as soberly to Contradict my
Conscience, in order to the Saving of my Life; I was not yet so great a Fool,
as to be Hanged, with my Confession about my Neck. The time appointed for my
Execution, being the Thursday following, The Lords Ordered my Reprieve,
commanding MILLS, (the Iudge-Advocate) to bring in my Charge, upon Wednesday.
He appeared accordingly, but with an Excuse, that he wanted Time to Prepare it;
however upon Friday it should be Ready. It was then Providentially Demanded;
whether they meant to Hang me First, and then Charge me; and if they Intended
to execute me in the Interim? He told them, Yes; For the Commons had passed an
Order that no Reprieve should stand good, without the Consent of Both Houses.
Hereupon, they desired a Conference; but the Commons had Voted also, That no
Private Business should be Moved in Ten days. This notwithstanding; with
great Difficulty, it was Debated, and my Reprieve confirmed, for 14. days: and
after That, Prolonged, in Order to a further Hearing. In this Condition of
Expectancy, I lay almost 4. years, a Prisoner; and only an Order betwixt me,
and the Gallows. I am the more Particular in This, because I have so many
Honorable Witnesses, to prove the Truth of every Syllable I say: and yet in
this Extremity, I had as much to do to Preserve my Credit among my Pretending,
Friends, as to Defend my Life against the M^lice of my Professed Enemies.

MY first Step out of Prison, was into Kent, and There, (God knows it) had my
Soul depended upon a strict Account for every Thought, and Moment; I could not
have employed more Care, and Zeal, in the Performance of my Duty, than I did:
Yet in the very height of our Success, being grown to a Considerable Body,
even out of Nothing, It was Suggested that L'estrange was False: But That
Opinion was soon Quieted, by a Discriminating Oath to the Commissioners at
Rochester, which made those very Persons that had privately aspersed Me, to
withdraw; and diverse of them afterward appeared openly against us. Upon the
Dissolution of the Party, I Crossed the Sea; and There I found the main
Miscariage of the Business Cast upon Me; but still by Those that Ruined it
Themselves. After a Six Month's trial, by Word of mouth, and Letter, to
Rectify Mistakes, I found my self at length obliged to a more ^ublique way of
doing it, and then* I Printed a Formal Series* and Relation of the Story; under
the Title of my Vindication. Thi^ Discourse proved as Effectu^l as I wished it;
For, insisting only upon matter of Fact, with every Circumstance of Persons,
Time, and Place, Material to my Purpose, there remained no Pretense for
Contradiction; and yet I made it my great Care, as well to Disperse Copies, as
to provoke a Reply, if any Syllable of what I said would bea^ it. The Sum of
all amounts to This. I gave a due Account of all Employments which the Country
put upon me, nor co^ld I reasonably be charged as Causal to any Misca^iages,
when there hapened none, while I had any Inte^est in the Busin^sse. At last,
upon the Conjunction of the County-Forces, finding some Dangerous, and
Unseasonable disagreements, even among themselves; besides some Scruples
started against Strangers, I thought it the best Service I could do them, to
render that Command I had, to the Commissioners, and leave Them to Respond,
both for the Conduct, and the Issue of the Rest. Nor having done This, did I
quitt my Duty; but after the loss of Maidstone, I moved the Committee at
Canterbury, (although in vain) to give another P^sh for it. From Thence, I went
to Sandwich, where finding the Town in a Tumult, and Abandoned; The Sea Before
me, and the Enemy Behind me, I took a Boat, and with much Difficulty, Escaped.

So much for KENT.

I Continued beyond Sea, from 1648. till the Army dissolved the R^mp in 1653.
and then Returning, after 2 or 3. Months daily Attendance, I was Examined by a
Committee of the Counsel, and in the End discharged from that Attendance, upon
2000l. Bayl, to Appear at any time within 12. Months, upon Summons.

After that Bond given, I challenge the World to say, where ever I exchanged
Syllable either with the Protector, or his Secretary: or that ever I
Communicated, Directly, or Indirectly, with any man of the Party, upon Public
Business. Nay more: Let any man prove that I did ever disown my First
Judgment: -- That ever I took any Engagement: -- That I ever held any
Particular Converse with any person of Differing Principles: -- or, in Fine: --
Let it appear that ever I either declined any Rational means of serving my
Prince, my self, or Diverted others from it; Nay if I am not able to Evidence
the contrary; and that I have steadily, and Positively employed all the
Faculties, and Interests I had in the World, in his behalf, I am content to
suffer, as if I had been the Murderer of his Father.

During the Rule of Cromwell, there was small Encouragement, to Form any
Design, unless upon his Person. For Betwixt diverse Renegado- Royallists, and
Mercenary Malcontents of his own Party, it was scarce possible to Act without
Discovery: beside, that he was Quick and Cruel. (Two great Advantages over a
slavish People) His Death in 1658. opened the way most certainly to a Change,
but That which entered upon it, in 1659. was of all others (I think) the Least
expected.

Several of the Old Members finding the Council of Officers at a Stand,
(having Cast off their new Protector) Solicited the Army to Invite their
Return to a Discharge of their Trust as before Apr. 20. 1653. This was done,
May 6 1659. and the next Day, (as if these Worthies had but held their Breath,
from 53, to 59) they Blurted out a Declaration against Kingship, and House of
Peers. This Insolence gave a fair Plea, and Opportunity to the People; and they
disposed themselves to a general Rising in August following: but the Issue of
all depending upon the City of London, where the Militia was placed in Ill
Hands; much good was not to be expected. Sir Henry Vane had Listed privately as
many Separatists as he Pleased, and the City stood in more danger of that
^ecret Faction, than of any visible Power that appeared to overawe it. The
Citizens were generally Hearty in the Business; and with the Allowance of
several of them, (Lambert being upon his March toward Sir George Booth) I
caused to be ^rinted this ensuing Declaration under the Title of The
DECLARATION of the CITY, to the Men at Westminster.
GENTLEMEN,
WE have waited for the good you have promised us; with a ridiculous Patience:
but we find you Men of the Original, and to be read backward. We are for the
Religion of the Heart, not That of the Nose; and for the Law of the Land, not
that of the Sword; we are likewise for the Charter of the City, and for the
Liberties of Freeborn Englishmen; with which we are resolved to Stand and
Fall. It is high time for us to look to our selves, when we are coming under a
Guard of your Choosing, and when we have only this Choice left us, whether we
will Adventure to destroy You to Day, or be sure to be destroyed our Selves to
Morrow. That Is the short of the Case; for, a Massacre is not only the Design,
but the Profession of the Party you have Armed against us; it is their very
Exchange-talk at noon day* But the work will be either too hot, or too heavy:
for my Masters, we are determined to suffer these affronts no longer, we are
now come to understand one another, The Ruin of the Nation is Your Interest,
the Peace and Preservation of it, Ours, and the mischief of it is; your
destruction is as Easy, as it is Necessary: for every Creature which either
Loves God, or his Country, Hates You. You have not so few as 200000 Enemies in
This Town, to dispute the Quarrel with some half a dozen of you; not to
multiply words, your Practices are such as a Generous Nature cannot Brook, and
your Power so despicable, that a Coward needs not Fear it. You have made the
City but a Cage of Broken Merchants; Tradesmen are ready to Perish for want of
Business; and their Families for want of Bread; nor have the Poor any other
Employment than to Curse you. Those few amongst you that have any thing, are
but Covered with the Spoils of the Nation, and out of the Scum of the People
you have composed your inconsiderable Rest. Well Gentlemen play your own Cards
your selves, We Will play Ours: you will have no Singl^ Person in the State,
we will have none neither in the City; at least, we'll have no White-Hall-Major;
we will neither extend our Privileges an Inch, nor abate an Hair of them. And
in the matter of Bloodshed, so let Heaven prosper Us, as we shall proceed
tenderly: But if there be no other way left us than violence whereby to
preserve our selves in our Just Rights, what Power soever shall presume to
Invade the Privilege of a Citizen, shall find 20000 Brave Fellows in the Head
on it.

This we do Unanimously Remonstrate to You, and to the World to be our Firm,
and Final Resolution.



THis Dispute Lasted not Long; and Lambert's return put an End to any further
thoughts of stirring in the City, for that Bou^.

The next Opportunity of Moving, was upon the Dispatch of the Army into the
North to oppose General Monck: The Government being then Lodged in a Committee
of 23 Officers of the Army: which gross Usurpation, together with the New
Militia which they had Imposed upon the City, ( Nov. 11.) put the Citizens upon
an Absolute Necessity of Endeavor to Free themselves: To which end, they
resolved to Petition the Common Counsel, for their Assistance toward the
obteining of a Free-Parliament, according to the Ancient Constitution of the
N^tion. A Petition was accordingly Drawn, Subscribed, and Presented; but by
reason of some pretended Informality in the Address, it was laid aside. This
Repulse made the Petitioners more Eag^r than they would have been; especially
finding themselves Betrayed by diverse of those Persons to whom they had
committed the Care of their Protection.

Upon Monday, Dec. 5. Horse and Foot were dispatched into the ^ity, by Violence
to hinder the Re-enforcement of the Petition, where they behaved themselves
with an Insolence, and Barbarism, not to be expressed. In thi^ Action, had the
Magistracy been but half so careful to Vindicate the Honor of the City, as
they were to save the Enemies of it, not a soul of them had escaped.

After some 5 or 6 Days expectation what this Affront would produce; I thought
it not amiss, if I could use some means to Q^icken them; and thereupon I
Printed a Paper Entitled, The Engagement and Remonstrance of the City of
London. DECEMBER 12. 1659.
AL^hough, as Citizens, we are reduced to a Necessity of Violence; and as
Christians, obliged to the Exercise of it; Unless we will rather prostitute our
Lives and Liberties, Fortunes and Reputations; Nay, our very Souls and Altars,
to the Lusts of a Barbarous and sacrilegious Enemy: We have yet so great a
tenderness for Christian blood, as to leave unattempted no means of probability
to save it. This is it which has prevayl'd with us to Declare, First, to the
World, what we Propose, and Resolve, ^re we proceed to further Extremities:
and to satisfy the Public, as well in the Reasons of our Undertakings, as to
Iust^fie our selves, in the Menage and Event of them.

We find, in the Midst of us, the House of Prayer converted into a Den of
Thieves: Our Counsels Affronted by Armed Troops, our Fellow-Cit^zens knocked on
the head, l^ke Dogs, at their own doors, for not so much as Barking: Nay, it is
become Death, now, to desire to Live; and Adjudg'd Treason, but to Claim the
benefit of the Law against it. Witness those Infamous Murders committed, but
Monday last, upon our unarmed friends: and the glorious I^solen^ies of that
Rabble, toward such of the rest, as they seized, and carried away. But this is
nothing: to make us a Complete Sacrifice, we are to be Burnt too: a thing, not
only threatened, in the Passion of the Tumult, but Soberly intended; for they
have laid in their Materials for the work already: (a prodigious Quantity of
Fireballs in Paul's, and Gresham College) Briefly, We are designed for Fire,
and Sword, and Pillage: and it concerns us now, to look a little better to our
gracious Guards. (Not to insist upon the loss of Trade; how many thousand
Families have nothing now to do, but Beg, and Curse these wretches?) The
Honor and Safety of the City lies at stake: and God so bless us, as we will
fall together. We will not live to see our Wives, and Daughters ravished: our
Houses Rifled, and our Children Beggars, that shall only live to Reproach their
cowardly Fathers: and all this done too by a People, which we can as easily
destroy, as mention: by a Party, so barbarous, and so Inconsiderable together,
that, certainly, no creature can be mean enough, either to suffer the one, or
fear the other. In this Exigency of Affairs, we have found it both our Duty and
our Interests to Associate; and we desire a Blessing from Heaven up on us, no
otherwise, than as we do vigorously, and faithfully pursue what we here
Remonstrate.

First; We do engage our selves, in the presence of Almighty God, with our
lives and fortunes, to defend the Rights and Liberties of the City of LONDON;
and if any person that subscribes to this Engagement, shall be molested for so
doing; We will unanimously, and without delay, appear as one Man to his Rescue.

Next; we demand, that all such Troops and Companies, as do not properly
belong to the Guard of the City, nor receive Orders from the lawful
Magistrates thereof; -- tha^ such Forces withdraw themselves from the
Liberties, within 12. hours after the Publication of This: upon pain of being
deemed Conspiratours, and of being Proceeded against accordingly, (for to this
extent, both of Judgment, and Execution, is every Individual qualified in his
own defense)

We are next, to demand the Enlargement of our Fellow-Citizens, which were
taken away by Force, and in a tumultuous manner, contrary to the known Laws of
the Place, and Nation.

This being performed, we shall acquiesce, in the Enjoyment of those Liberties,
which we will not lose but with our Lives. In Fine, to remove all Impediments
of the peace we desire: We do undertake, both as Men of Credit, and Justice;
that such of the Soldiers as will betake themselves to honester Employments,
shall receive their Arrieres from the City, and such a further care of their
future well-being, as is suitable to the Necessities of the One part, and the
Charity of the Other.



THis Paper was so well received, that it encouraged me to follow it with
Another, Entitled, The Final Protest, and Sense of the City.
HAving diligent^y perused two Printed Papers, bearing date, ^he 14th. of this
ins^ant December: The One, in form of a Proclamation concerning the summoning
of a Parliament: The Other as an Order of the Common Counsel, commanding the
City to acquiesce in expectation of that Parl^ament: We find therein
contained, matters, so contrary to the Honor of the Nation, and to the Freedom
of the City, that we stand obliged, both as Englishmen, and as Citizens, to
Protest, against the Impositions of the former, as Illegal, and the Concessions
of the Latter, as a direct Combination against us. These Two Papers are
Seconded by a Third: (for the Two are One, both in effect, and design,) and
That is, a Proclamation of Banishment, directing to the late Kings party, under
the notion of the Common Enemy: so that there is no love lost betwixt the
Committee of Safety, and the Common Counsel, when the General provides for the
Peace of the City, and the Mayor for the Safety of the Army; not to argue Acts
of Oblivion, and the viol^tion of Public faith in the case: that they
Conditioned for their Lives and Liberties, and Compounded for their Fortunes.
This is not our Concern, what they do suffer; but what we may, if we trust
those, that Keep no Faith with them: And that we will take a care of: When They
are Gone, then We are the Common Enemy; So are the Laws of God, and of the
Nation, and such is every Man that loves them. What this Malignant party is,
these People talk of, we neither Know, nor Meddle; the Gentry it is we Live by,
and by the Laws of Gratitude, and Hospitality, we are bound to Protect them,
and resolved to do it, within our Walls, against any other Power, than that of
the Known Law. The short of the Design is This; a Danger is pretended to the
City, from the late Kings party, and to prevent the mischief, the Kind
Committee Banishes the Gentlemen; with Order to the Mayor to make strict
searches for Delinquents. Now in persuance of this pret^ous Order, our Houses
must be forced, and we Disarmed, and then, our throats cut, to preserve the
City. Let those that would be Chronicled for Slaves, and Fools, submit to
suffer this; and after that Infamous Hour, may a Yellow Coat, and a Wooden
Dagger, be the Badge and Distinction of a Citizen. To conclude, We our selves
are That City, so much the Care and Cry of the Proclamation; and This is our
Unanimous sense, and Resolve. The Army proposes to Pillage, and Murder us, the
Mayor, and his worthy Advisers, Ireton, etc. -- are to hold our Hands, while
They give the Blow; So, that we are now to provide both against Force and
Treason; having One Enemy within our Walls, and Another in our Counsels. But
withal, we have our Swords in our Hands, and our Brains in our Heads; and only
to Strike the One, and to Disbelieve the Other, is to Subdue, and Disappoint
them Both.

We do therefore declare to the World, that we will by Violence oppose all
Violence whatsoever, which is not warranted by the Letter of the Established
Law: and that in persuance of this Duty, both toward the Nation, and City, an
Insolent Soldier, and (...) Apostate Magistrate shall be to us as the same
thing. -- Not to word it much further, as we will not be Bafft^d, by Affronts,
so neither will we be Fooled, by Flatteries.

After the Loss of Trade and Liberty, a vast expense of Blood, and Treasure;
After many Injuries received, more threatened, and none returned, We made a
sober, and Regular Application, to the Authority of the City, for Redress. This
they Promised, and we Expected, till at last, instead of a Reparation for past
Wrongs, or a Security against worse to come; We are paid with an Expectation
of a Parliament in January. This is a Logique we understand not. It is in
English, Lie still, till we cut your throats. It would be well to commit the
disposition of our Fortunes, to those people, that are at this Instant
designing an Execution upon our Persons; and to requite those Worthies, that
have already Robbed us of all we have Lost, with the Offer of that little Rest
they have Left. But this will not do our Business; we will not have our
Murderers, for our Judges: nor will we wait. That ^^^liament they babble of so
much, will scarce Vote up the City again out of Ashes, nor all the Saints in
that holy Assembly, bring the poor Cobbler into the wo^ld again, that was Killed
by order of his Brother Hewson. No, the Cheat is too stale, and we are
Determined to Redeem our selves; but with this Caution, We do solemnly
profess, that we will exercise all the Tenderness which possibly the Case will
bear. The Common S^uldier is engaged rather out of a Heedless, than Malicious
Interest: We do therefore Protest, that such of those as shall not evidence
their Malice, by their Obstinacy, shall receive a Fair Consideration: But, for
such as Lead them, we do Resolve, not to allow Quarter to any one of them, that
draws ^is Sword in the Quarrel: And in Order to the Q^icker, and Gentler
Dispatch of the Business: We conclude with a T^x^* F^ght* nei^her^with Small
nor Great, but with the King of Israel. And so Go^d give a Bl^ssing to the
Endeavors of all Honest Men.



THis Sheet gave great offense to the Saints, and particularly to Titchborn,
who examined the Matter himself* and ordered the punishment of the Women that
sold it; after many Personal Abuses, beside the Loss of th ei^ Copies.

Dec. 18 Diverse persons of Quality were seized in the City, by the Soldiers,
and in a B^rbarous, U^seemly manner, Stripped, and Driven Naked to the Mewes.

Soon after, comes Intelligence, that the Forces employed to Reduce Portsmouth,
were joined with the Fugitive Members, and upon their March for London:
whereupon I caused to be Printed as follows.

The Resolve of the City. December. 23. 1659.
OUr Respects to Peace, and Order, are too notorious to be questioned, since by
the mere Impressions of Charity and Obedience, we have thus long suspended the
Justice we owe to our Selves, together with that Vengeance, which the Blood of
our Murdered Companions requires at our hands. Nor have these Principles of
Public tenderness been less Eminent, upon our Judgments, than upon our
Passions; For, we have as well Believ d, in Contradiction to Evidence of
Experiment, as we have Suffered, in Opposition to the very Elements, and
Dictates of Humanity. Witness that Execrable Monday (sacred to the Eternal
Infamy of this City) even Then, when we had that Enemy at our Mercy, toward
whom, by the Rights of Nature, and of Generosity, we were not bound to
exercise any, even Then, I say, in the very Heat, and Course of an Honest, and
Powerful Indignation, we returned Quietly, to our Houses, upon the first
Notice, that the Authority of the City would have it so. But it is likewise
true, that this Assur^nce was added to the Message, viz. That the Common
counsel was sensible of our Gri^vances, and would duly consider them. Since
this, we find nothing done in persuance of that Promise; but on the Contrary,
Injuries are Multiplied upon us; and those of tha^ D^y, serve but as Arguments
of E^couragement to G^eater. Some of us Killed, Others Wounded, and lead in
Triumph Naked through the Streets: Two or three Hundred Thousand Persons
Looking on, to celebrate the Conquest, and the Shame. A Citizens Sku^l is but a
thing to try the Temper of a Soldiers Sword upon; Give us ^very M^n a Red-coat
for a Cash-Keeper, and the work's done. They Are come within a Trifle on it
already; and all this while, an Order to be Quiet, is all our Patient Masters
will afford us. Give us an Order that may make us Safe, (although we need not
Ask, what we can Give our selves) Persuade these people to be Gone, or Bid us
Drive them out; What Law made Paul's, and Gresham College* Garrisons? If
nothing else will do, we'll do it our selves: We have Engaged, and sworn the
Vindication of the City, and nothing can Absolve us from the Oath we have
taken. This must be done betimes too, 'twill come too late else, to prevent,
either the Necessity of a Tumult, or the greater Mischief, of a Supine and
Credulous Security. A Parliament in January will do us no more good, than a
Cordial will do him that was Hanged last Sessions. Our Sense at Large, we
delivered to the world* in a Paper, Entitled, The Final Protest, and Sense of
the CITY: Which is Public enough, notwithstanding the great Design used to
suppress it, and the Insol^nces of diverse persons, disaffected to the good of
the Ci^y, toward those that sold them. To That we adhere. That Prot^st of Ours,
p^oduced Another from the Common counsel, of the aoth. Current, to which
something ought to be said. The sum of that Order is, but in effect, the
Justification of the Lord Mayor in the matter of Prudence and In^egrity: we do
not Deny, but finding our selves abandoned to all sorts of Outrages, by the
Cold Proceeding of the Court in our behalf, we were transported to some bitter
Reflections: Involving the present Mayor, with his more Criminal Predecessor
Ireton, in the Imputation. We shall not more Gladly find it a Mistake, than
Readily Confess it one, when we reap the Effects of that Care for the Good of
the City; but so long as We are tied up from all Lawful D^fence, and the
Public Enemy at liberty to practice all Unlawful Violences upon us, we
desire to be Pardoned, if we suspend in the Case.

The Cloze indeed is very Noble, and worthy of the Court, where they Declare,
For the Fundamental Laws, and the Protestant Religion, etc. -- and in fine, to
endeavor the convening of a Free Parliament, in order thereunto. But in
Contradiction to this Resolve, the Committee of Officers have yesterday
published a Paper, Entitled, The Agreement, etc. -- fairly telling us, That we
are to be Governed by People of their Choosing, and by a Model of their framing,
without any regard had to the Practice, and Reason of the Ancient Laws, or to
the Interest, and Liberty of every Freeborn Englishman. This Usurpation is to
be considered in its due place; at present it concerns us, to hinder them from
making the Slavery of the City, their first Step toward the Subjection of the
Nation. The seasonable Care of This, we do Humbly, and Earnestly recommend to
the Court of C^mmon-counsel; Our Hopes are, that we are now fallen into Better
hands, and if our Magistrates will but Command us, they have an Hundred
Thousand Lives in readiness to Engage for them. If we should be so unhappy, as
to be still delayed; we do however wash our hands of the Consequences: And so
God Direct and Deliver Us.

OBserving how much more Unanimous the Army was to Destroy Us; than We, to Save
our Selves: and Finding nothing extant of Direction to the Necessary purpose of
an Universal Union: I presumed to Publish a Paper, containing what I judged
might Rationally Promote such an Agreement, under the Notion of a thing already
done. It runs Thus.

A FREE PARLIAMENT Proposed by the CITY to the NATION.
GENTLEMEN,
HAving certain Intelligence of great Preparations against us from Abroad;
together with the daily and woeful experience, of a more Barbarous, and Ignoble
Enemy at Home: we have bethought our selves of an Expedient, which may at once,
both Secure, and Deliver the Nation from the Danger of the One, and from the
Tyranny of the Other.

In order to this effect: The City of London has constituted 4 Commissioners,
to Treat Respectively with the rest of the People of England, in the behalf of
their invaded Rights, and in such manner to Proceed, as to the said
Commissioners shall appear most convenient.

In persuance of this Appointment; We Four, (whose Names, and Authority you
shall find in a Schedule, to this annexed) do, in the Name, and by the
Commission of the City of London, earnestly and unanimously desire a General
Assistance, toward a work of a Public and Universal Benefit. The transaction
of this Affair, we have committed to Persons, eminent both for Honesty and
Fortune: and to gain D^spatch, as well as Priv^cy, we have at the same
Instant, and by safe hands, dispersed True and Exact Copies of These to you,
throughout England and Wales. Our Application should have been more Regular,
but for three or four false Brethren in our Counsels, whom we dare not confide
in. We find few the Honeste^ for the Quarrel, tha^ are the Richer for it; and
no other Enemies to the Peace of the Nation, but the Gainers by the Ruin of
it. U^o^ a due scanning of the whole m^tter, we h^ve concluded, that nothing
can restore us but a Free Parliament: Nor can any thing compose that, but a
Fr^e Vo^e, without either Force, or Faction. The most l kely means to procure
this, will be a general Engagement, to endeavor it. We ask no more, than that
you will follow our Example. That Paper, which we commend to you, is already
subscribed by many Thousands of this City. If you App^ove it, do as much; and
if you think Fit; choose out of every County Two Persons of a Known Integrity,
that may be still Among us, and at hand, to preserve a fair Intelligence
betwixt us. No longer since, tha^ Yesterday, the Conse^vators of our ^iberties;
Hew^on and his Mirmidons, put an affront upon us, and with some mischief too,
upon this very Point: The very mention of a Free-Parliament enrages them, and
there is Reason for it. Their Heads are forfeited, and if the Law Lives, They
must Perish. But all this while, we 're in a good condition, when the
Trangre^^ors of the Laws must be the Judges of it. The very Boys, and Women
had destroyed the Party to a man, but that with much ado, we hindered them. The
Truth is, in such a Confusion, more honest blood might have been spilt, than
that Rabble was worth. Upon this, the City is grown so impatient of the
Soldiers, that it is to be feared they will suddenly break out into an open
violence upon them. They have already entered into a solemn Engagement to that
purpose: But we shall do our best to quiet them, till we receive your Answer.
In Fine; the End is honorable, and we desire the means that lead to it may be
so too. Let nothing be omitted that may save blood; The Army is necessitous,
and without pay, they must or Steal, or Perish. Let us consider, they are our
Contrymen, and many of them, (the necessity apart) our Friends. Let such a
course be taken, that so many of them as shall contribute to the Advantage of a
Free Election, may without either Fraud, or Delay receive their Arriers. We
shall do our part in the Contribution* and in all Offices of Relation to a
Religious and Lawful Settlement, as freely engage our Live^ and Fortunes with
you, as we do our Pens in this Profession to you, that we are

True English men, and your Servants.
December. 6. 1659.
THE ENGAGEMENT.
WE the Freeborn people of England, having for many years last past, been
subjected in our Consciences, Persons, and Estates, to the Arbitrary, and
Lawless Impositions of Ambitious, and Cruell-minded men; and finding our
selves at present, in danger to be Irrecoverably lost; partly by Invasions,
threatened us from Abroad, and partly by Factions encroaching upon us at Home,
without the seasonable mediation of a Free-Parliament: We do Declare, that we
will by all Lawful means Endeavor the Convening of it, and that we will,
afterward, Protect the Members of it as the Blood of our own Hearts. We do
further Engage, in the Presence of Almighty God, that if any person or Persons
whatsoever shall presume to Oppose us; or to impose upon us any other
Government, Inconsistent with, or Destructive to the Constitution of
Parliaments, we will prosecute him, or them, as the Betrayers of the Peoples
Rights, and Subverters of the Fundamental Laws of the English Nation.

To the Honorable the Commissioners of the City of London, for the Liberties
and Rights of the ^nglish Nation.
GENTLEMEN,
HAving already satisfied you by what Authority we Act, it concerns us next, to
acquaint you, to what purpose we are Sent, and what it is, which we have in
Charge to deliver unto you.

Your Proposals for the S^ttlement of the Nation, (and That, by the means of a
Free-Parliament) have been as Faithfully, and Generally communicated, as you
intended they should; as Kindly received as you could wish; and the whole
matter brought to as speedy an issue as was possible for an Affair of that
Weight, and Quality to admit. In Testimony hereof, We are to give you the
Thanks of the People of England; and to assure you, that they are not less
pleased with your Method of promoting the Public Good, than they are Obliged
by those Affections which have disposed you to endeavor it. Particularly, they
are exceeding glad to find, that the City has entrusted such Persons in the
Business, as, beside all other due Qualifications for the Employment, have
This also; that they were never Parties in the Quarrel. It has been our Care
likewise, to proceed by the same rule; and for this Reason, If Both Parties
should be taken in, there might (possibly) be some Animosities started
sufficient to obstruct the Proceeding: And again, should Either of them be lest
out, the matter would (probably) be carried by Faction.

This we are commanded to represent, rather as a Fair Expedient, than an
Absolute Necessity.

In the next place, we are to inform you, that the Engagement you sent us,
found so prone a Reception, that we reckon it, with us, a greater difficulty to
Find an Enemy to the Intent of it, than to Subdue any whatever, that shall
presume to appear against the Promoters of it. We do however hold our Selves
bound to assure you, that we are perfectly resolved to Join in the Charge, and
Hazard of the Dispute, with you: and that we are as Unanimous in This Cause, as
if the Treasure of the Nation had but one Master, and the Strength of it, were
but directed by the Same Mind. The List of the Subscribers, we have here in
Town: If you desire to see it you may: but if Otherwise, we offer to your
Prudence to consider, if it may not be of more Advantage, and Security to the
Business in hand, rather totally to conceal the Subscribers, if not also the
Commissioners themselves. For the Thing it self, we are not only Willing, but
Desirous to make That Public. It is of so Honest, and Reasonable a Nature,
that no Man Dares oppose ^t, who dares not be Damned; no man Will, that
deserves to Live upon English ground: and to conclude, no Man Shall, and escape
Unpunished. Parliaments are the Constitution Fundamental of the Nation, the
Safeguard, and the Honor of it: nor are we more concerned to Support them, than
to be wary lest we Mista^e them. We are to Distinguish betwixt Names and
Things, that we be not governed by Delusions; Where have we a greater Cheat,
than that which styles it self the Public Faith? Greater Subverters of our
Liberties, than some that write themselves, the Conservators of them? It Is not
for 40 people to call themselves our Representative. Is It not enough that they
have Robbed us, unless they Govern us too? They Will say we Chose them, so did we
choose above 300 more; and we'll be Ruled by All, or None of them. Without more
ado, having Formally assured you of an absolute Concurrence from the Nation,
as to what they have received in Proposition from you: It remains now, only
that we recommend some Additionals to you, which we conceive may be of some
Benefit to the Common Interest of the whole.

In the First Place we Propose, That no Petition be presented to this Pretended
Parliament, from the City of London, and we Undertake as much for our Selves.

Secondly, That no Levies of Men, or Moneys, be suffered, in persuance of their
Pretended Acts; and in case of any Force attempted upon the Refusers, that we
immediately Arm our Selves, and by Violence Repel it.

Thirdly, we judge it very fit, in regard of Dangers Imminent, both Foreign, and
Domestique, That a Free Parliament, be speedily convened; the Time and M^nner
of Summons instantly agreed upon, with a Salvo Jure to all Interests. -- (By a
Free Parliament, we understand, an Assembly of such Persons as by the Law are
Qualified to choose, without any other Restreint than what the Law imposes.) Not
that we claim to our selves the Right of Calling Parliaments; but the
Impossibility of procuring one Regularly; and the Absolute Necessity of having
something like one Suddenly: -- This is enough to a^quit us before God and Men.
By these means, all Differences may be composed, all Parties reconciled; and to
^hese purposes we are ready to Sacrifice our Lives, and Fortunes.

GENTLEMEN, We are your faithful Servants.
January 3. 1659.
UPon the 17 of Ian. Mr. Bampfield, the Recorder of Exceter, delivered a
Leading Declaration, to the Pretended Speaker, from the Gentry of Devonshire:
Demanding the Readmission of the Secluded Members, and filling up of Void
Places: without any Previous Engagement. This Netled the Rump; and Drew from
Them* Another Declaration, ( Ian. 23.) wherein they expressed all Tenderness
possible for the Public; in a Fawning, Canting way: and especally Insisting
upon such Particulars, as might tender their Design of settling in a Free State,
the more Plausible to General Monck: who was now as far as Leicester toward
London.

This Declaration, moved me to Print this Ensuing Paper.

A PLAIN CASE. Ian. 24. 1659.
IT were no hard Matter to Trace the Course of Government, thorough all it is
sever^l Forms, and Mixt^res, from the very Fountain of it; and to Deduce the
Story, from it is Original in Parad^se, down to this wretched Place, and
Instant. The Sanction, and Assignment of it being proved, (That the Almighty
Wisdom placed ONE RULER over the World) Enquiry might be made into the Reasons,
and Equity of those ensuing Changes, which, either Force, Craft, or Agreement
afterward produced. To come a little nearer Home: much might be added,
concerning our Religion, Parliaments, Magna Charta, etc. -- but the Press
groans under the Subject, and the Nation under the Dispute. Conviction puts an
end to Argument. The Question is no longer, Right, but Power; and our
Reasonings are only Answered with Blows. It Is true, -- in the Infancy of the
Quarrel, when Rebellion, like a Painted Whore, under the Masque of Loyalty,
and Conscience, Cheated the People into an Engagement: when only some
Mis-governments, in Church and State were to be Reformed; and that Pretense
backed with a Thousand Oaths, to strengthen the Delusion: Dominion and
Obedience, Law and Conscience, were then a Proper, and a necessary Theme, to
undeceive the Nation, but now it is out of Season. The Sword's the only Judge
of Controversies. Our business is, to Talk more Sensibly, and less Learnedly.
Alas! to tell the Simple, that which they can never understand, and the Wise,
that which they know already; Who Is the Better for it? The Injuries we suffer,
are Notorious; and Understood, as universally, as Felt. The skill would be, to
find out a Fair Remedy, for a Foul Disease. In order to that, I shall be Plain,
and short: Prove what I say, and keep my self within the Compass of my Page.
This Nation is at this instant, upon the Brink of a Reproachful, and Ridiculous
Condi^ion of want, and slavery: Nor is the Truth of our Calamity more evident,
than the Reason of it. Half the Revenue of the Land is already shared among the
Saints, and in Reward, for robbing us of That, we are to Give the Rest, and
purchase our Bondage, dearer, than our Forefathers did their Liberties.
Indeed, a Hundred Thousand Pound a Month, when we have scarce Money left for
Bread, is a modest Proportion: and to endear the Proposition to us, it is to
maintain a war against the established Law, and consummat^ our Thraldom:
After this Tax is paid, they will Ask no more, but Take the rest without the
Ceremony: and we deserve to Lose All, If we Levy This. By Violence, they keep
themselves In, and their Fellows Out; By Violence, they Sit, and Vote, and
Ex^cute. They Are not the Twentieth part of those we Chose; and then the Quality
of the Faction, is as Inconsiderable, as the Number. The Nation looks upon
them, as a Herd of Wolves; they live by Blood and Rapine, and it is the Public
Interest to Hunt the^. They are too Few for us to Fear, too False to Trust, too
Wicked, and Imperious, to Obey. It Is not their Ianizaries that will do their
Business, when the whole Body of the People is united against them. The very
Soldier that has Raised them, Hates 'em; as being, at once, Instrumental to
their Guilt, and to their P^nis^ment. They are neither to be Obliged by Oaths,
nor by Benefits. How meanly have they treated the very Officers that preserved,
and Restored them; and Perfidiously, all that ever Trusted them! Those Sums
which were designed for the Satisfaction of Public Accounts, they divide among
themselves; and Turn those Troops to Free Quarter, whose Pay is already in
their own Pockets. After all this, the Laws must be as well subdued, as the
People: no other Title left us to our Lives, and Estates, but what depends upon
the Vote of a Legislative Committee. It is already construed Sedition, to
Demand, what the Law tells us, is Treason to Oppose: and the bare mention of a
Free-Parliament puts our blessed remnant into a Sweat. There Is Violence
designed upon us, and Violence must meet it. The Axe is laid to the root: the
Commune Freedom of the English Nation lies at stake; and it is our Commune
Interest to defend it. The Just, and peaceable assertion of our Undoubted
rights, is Voted Breach of privilege: and he that draws his Sword to save his
Country, forfeits his head for it. This will not do. These worthy Squires of
the Fagg end must take their Turns too. Suppose the City should refuse the Tax:
(the Countries are resolved upon it) How Certain, and Inevitable, is their
Ruin? The very first attempt of Force, sets the whole Nation in a Flame. They
Rise together, and the Work is done. It Is not the stifling of the Press, can
break their Correspondence: nor the Old Cheat of Creating New Plots, that will
divert them. These Iugglers have showed all their Tricks, and the whole World's
Convinced of their Intentions. The Design walks barefaced. It is now evident,
that they purpose to make us perpetual Slaves; and to enure us to no other Law,
than the Imperious Will of our hard Masters. Their very best, Friends and
Assistants, are now discarded by these Thanklesse Wretches: the Scrupulous, and
Congregationall Party being cast into the Balance with the Commune Enemy: and
both alike Excluded from the Government they promise us: (to show, that their
Ambition is as well Insociable as Boundless.)

To Finish All; what Security or Quiet, can that Faction expect, which never
Requited a Friend, or Spared an Enemy? What Comfort can that Nation look for,
that subjects it self to the Faith and Mercy, of such a Faction?

UPon the 25 of Ian. Sir Robert Pie, and Major Fincher, were Ordered to the
Tower, for Presenting and Subscribing a De^laration from Ber^sh^re, for a Free
and Full Parliament: It being Voted; A Breach of the PRIVIL^GE of PARLIAMENT:
SEDITIOUS, and tending to the Raising of a New War. The Squires of the Rump;
Scot, and Robinson were, by this Time, doing their Complements to his
Excellency; and the City-Commissioners, upon their way toward him: In which
Juncture, came forth a Paper Entitled

A Letter of General George Monck's; Dated at Leicester 23. Jan. and Directed
to Mr. Roll, to be communicated unto the rest of the Gentry of Devon: --
Occasioned by a Late Letter from the Gentry of Devon: dated at Exceter 14 Ian.
and sent by Mr. Bampfield to the Speaker, to be commun^cated unto the
Parliament.

Read in Parliament, Jan. 26.

To this Letter, I took the Liberty to Draw what follows in Answer. Addressed

To His Excellency, GENERAL MONCK. A L^tter from the Gentlemen of Devon: in
Answer to his Lordships of January 23. to them directed from Leicester.
My Lord,
THere is a Letter which has passed the Press under your Name, dated at
Leicester 23. Ian. and directed unto Mr. Roll, to be communicated to the rest
of the Gentry of D^von: etc. -- Whether this be your Excellencies Act or not,
is the question. I^ so it be, we receive it as a noble Respect from General
Monk to his Friends and Country men; if Otherwise, we look upon it as the
A^tisice of an Anti-Parliamentary Faction, under the pr^tence of your
Concurrence and Aid, to Delude and E^slave the Nation.

It is one thing for a Person of Honor freely to communicate his Thoughts and
Reasonings, (although in favor of a possible mistake) still referring the
Issue to the determinations of Divinity, and Reason: and it is another thing,
for a Confederate Party to charge such a Person with failings properly their
own.

To hasten the dispatch of that little we have to say, the Authors of this, are
of that number to whom your Letter directs. We shall proceed according to our
Duties, and Instructions, and briefly acquaint your Excellency with the sense
of those that have entrusted us.

We shall begin (my Lord) with the Concession of what we much Suspect; and
take for Granted, that the Letter so inscribed, is really Yours.

We are next to return you the Thanks of your Countrymen, for the expressions
of your Piety and Care, therein contained; and particularly, -- that in the
head of your Army, you have rather chosen Arguments of Reason, than of Force.
-- That you propose the word of God, for your Rule; and the Settlement of the
Nation, for your End. -- That you take notice of many Factions, and Interests
introduced, and yet profess a service to None of them. -- That you so
earnestly desire to Compose Old Differences at Home, and to Prevent New
Mischiefs from Abroad. -- And finally; That you submit the Result of all, to a
Fair, and Rational Examination.

To profess, and to pursue all this, is but like your self; and to these
purposes, we shall not stick to live and dye at your Feet. If upon Discussion
of the Reasons you allege, we assume the Liberty which your Candor allows us,
of declaring wherein we differ, we beg to be understood with all tenderness
toward your Excellency; to whom, as a stranger to our late Oppressions and
Calamities, the state of our Affairs, and Affections, may probably be
misrepresented.

To observe your own Method; our Letter to the Speaker, importing the recalling
of the Secluded Members was the occasion of Yours to Us, which says, that;
Before these Wars our Government was Monarchical, both in Church, and State;
but (as the case now stands) Monarchy cannot possibly be admitted for the
future, in these Nations; because it is incompatible with the several Interests
which have ensued upon the Quarrel: viz. the Presbyterian, Independent,
Anabaptists, etc. (as to Ecclesiastics) and the Purchasers of Crown, and
Bishops Lands, Forfeited Estates, etc. (as to Civils) by which means, the
support it self is taken away; so that the Constitution, qualified to fix all
Interests, must be that of a Republique: To which, the Secluded Members of
1648. will never agree, many of them being Assertours of Monarchy, and
Disclaimers to all Laws made since their Seclusion: Over and above, that the
Army also will never endure it. The Conclusion, This; that it were better for
us to desist from that Paper, and rely upon the Promises of this Parliament,
for a due Representative: -- a Provision for succeeding Parliaments, and a
Peaceable Settlement; than by an unseasonable Impatience to embroil the Nation
in a fresh Engagement.

From hence it appears, that we might be allowed a Free Parliament, but for
Four Reasons.

First, The Major Part Inclines to Monarchy, and they that have swallowed the
Revenues of the Crown, declare against it.

Secondly, The Entangled Interests of this Nation can never be United, but
under a Republique.

Thirdly, The Army will never endure it.

Lastly, It would beget a new War, whereas this Parliament promises to settle
us in a lasting Peace.

To all which, in Order, and First, concerning Monarchy; (not as the thing
which we contend for) we (only) wonder why it is Prejudged, and particularly,
by those Persons who have sworn to defend it. But, my Lord, you have hit the
Reason; they have Gained by Dissolving it, and they are afraid to Lose by
Restoring it. Having put the Father to Death, whom they Covenanted to Preserve;
they Abjure the Son, whom they Fear to Trust. By Force they would Maintain,
what by Force they have Gotten. In effect, the Question, is not so much, what
Government, as what Governors: A Single Person will down well enough, with the
f^ercest of them, when it lies fair for any of Themselves. Witness the late
Protector, and the Later Lambert. Briefly, since the Death of the late King,
we have been Governed by Tumult; Bandy'd from One Faction to the Other: This
Party up to day, That to Morrow; but st^ll the Nation Under, and a Prey to the
S^rongest. It is a feeble Argument against Monarchy, that we never have been
hap^y since we lost it: and yet nothing has appeared to obstruct our Quiet,
but the Division of the Boo^y* What Has been, Shall be, so long as this
Violence continues over us: nor can any other Government Settle the Nation,
than that which pleases the Universality of it. And in that, we pretend not to
direct our Representatives: but which way soever they incline, we shall with
our Lives and Fortunes Justify, and Obey their Appointments.

Whether we have Reason, or not, in this Particular, let your Excellency Judge.

The Second Objection against a Free Parliament, is drawn from the Necessity of
a Republique, to reconcile all Interests. To This, we offer, First, that it is
not Necessary; next, that it is not so much as Effectual, to that purpose; and
Lastly, that a Free Parliament ought to Introduce it, if it were both the One
and the Other.

The First we prove thus, It is not the Form of Government, but the Consent of
the People, that must Settle the Nation: The Public Debt, must be secured out
of the Public Stock: and That disposed of by an Engagement of the Public
Faith, to such Ends, and purposes, as the Representative of the Nation shall
deem expedient for the Good of it. In like manner may all other Interests be
secured; whether of Opinion, or Property, under what Form of Government soever
a Free Parliament shall think fit to unite us. That it is not Necessary, enough
is said. We are now to deduce from your Lordships Text, that a Free State would
be as little effectual also, as to our concerns. You are pleased to intimate
the Dangerous Inclination of the People to Monarchy: and to Balance the
Satisfaction, the Right, and the Universal Vote of the Nation, with the
Interests of some Few persons, that would Rule us Themselves, (for that is the
English of the Settlement they propose.) By this Argument, a Republique,
excludes the Negative, and more Considerable Interest, in favor of a Small,
and a Partial one: and if it be granted, that a Free Parliament will never
agree upon a Free State, it follows necessa^ily, that That Form will never do
our Business. Lastly, what Government soever is forced upon us, must certainly
expire with the Force that imposes it; and the Voice of the People (in this
case) is the Declaratory Voice of Providence.

The Third Difficulty is. The Army will never endure it. This is to say, You
are to be Governed by the Sword.

To Conclude; The Fear of a New War, and the Promise of a speedy Composure, are
the last Suggestions of Disswasion to us.

Alas, my Lord, do we not see that Parties are uniting against us, Abroad, and
we conspiring against our selves at Home? How certainly shall we be Attempted,
and how easily Overcome; without such a Medium to Reconcile us All, as may
Please us All! but we are promised fair. We beseech you Lordship to consider
the Promisers. Are not These the People that vowed to make our Last, a Glorious
King? Just such a Glorious Nation will they make of Us. Did they not next
Abjure a Single Person; and yet after that, set up ANOTHER, with Another Oath?
Not to pursue this Subject further: These Men we dare not Trust, nor any other
of that Leaven; we have have no thoughts but of Justice to all Interests; and
in order to that Settlement and Good we wish the Nation, we shall empower our
Representatives with the Command of all we are worth, and most remarkably
evidence our selves, My Lord,

Your Excellencies Servants.
Ian. 28. 1659.

THe General wa^ plied with Addesses for a Free-Parliament throughout his
whole Passage, and the Nation entirely Concurred to the same Effect. Upon
Tuesday (Feb. 2.) a Considerable Party of the Red-Coates, Tumulted for Pay;
Cast off their Officers, and Formally Engarrison'd themselves in
Somers^t-House: Publiqu^ly Reproaching the Rump, and Declaring for the City,
and a Free-Parliament. Finding the Citizens well enough disposed to improve the
Mutiny: I appointed Immediately the Printing of Two Papers, directing them to
Associate; and in These Terms.

The SENSE of the ARMY.
WHereas the Calamities of this Unhappy Nation, are charged upon those that
have ventured their Bloods for the preservation of it; We hold it necessary, to
acquit our selves, both to God and Men, by declaring to these following
Particulars:

First, That we will engage our Lives against all opposers of a Free-Parliament.

Secondly, That we will, according to the best of our Knowledge, observe, and
cause to be observed* the Known Laws of the Land.

Thirdly, That we will practice no violence, but what we are obliged to, by the
Laws of Honesty, and Nature.

Lastly, That we will not leave our Quarters unsatisfied, nor lay down our
Arms, without our Pay.

Somerset House, Feb. 2. 1659.

The Citizens DECLARATION for a FREE PARLIAMENT
We the Young Men in and about London, do unanimously Declare, That we will
Assist, and pro^ect, to our uttermost, what Party soever we shall find oppressed,
for desiring a FREE-PARLIAMENT; And that such of the Soldiery, as shall join
with us in so necessary and just an Undertaking, shall receive half their
A^rieres upon the first Rendezvous, an^ the Rest upon the Accomplishment of the
Work.

Feb. 2. 1659.
LA^e at night, The Apprentices drew into a Party in the City, and were
scattered by the Army Horse; whereas, had they rather drawn down into the
Strand, and joined themselves with Those in Somerset House, it was believed by
sober Persons, that they might have carried it. About One, in the Morning, the
Revolted Party was False-Alarmed and persuaded out of their security, upon
Pretense, that if they were not Instantly Posted, to hinder Monks Entrance into
the Town, they would have all their Throats cut in their Quarters. This Device
brought them out, and so That morning, they were Commanded away; Leaving the
Town Quiet, and in Condition to entertain Honester Guests. Upon Friday
Afternoon ( Feb. 3.) his Excellency marched in the Head of his Army to his
Quarters at White Hall: and the Day following, I took the Liberty to shoot
another Bolt; under the Title, and Form here-ensuing.

For his EXCELLENCY General MONCK.
MY LORD,
YOu are too Wise, and Noble, to need either a Direction, or a Spur, where your
Judgment, or Honor lies at Stake: And to tell you, that to make your self the
Happiest Person in Nature, you must Deliver us from being the most Miserable
People, is but to speak your own Thoughts, and Purposes. Yet such is the
Passion I have for your Personal, and for the Public Good, that a Burden
lies upon my Soul, till I have given some Testimony of my Respects, and
Tenderness^ both for the One, and the Other, how-supe^fluous-soever, toward a
Judgment, and Inclination, so well Qualified for the Knowledge and Practice,
of what is Honorable.

My Lord, We are a wretched People, and Providence has put it in your power,
to finish all our Troubles. The Eyes of Men and Angels are upon You, and the
whole Nation courts You as their Tutel^ry Spirit. Never was any Action so
easy, and so Glorious at once, as our Deliverance. It Is wrought without the
^azzard, or expense either of Blood, Time, or Treasure. The Hearts, the Hands,
and Fortunes of the People, are all at Your Devotion. Nay, lest You should
submit to be misled by Popular Appl^use, Ambition, or any other Frail^y; Heaven
has annexed Your Interest to Your Duty, (forgive the Language) You must be Mad
too, to be Wicked, and Quit all other Principles of Beneficial Prudence, with
those of commune Honesty and Conscience. Balance (my Lord) the main Account.
Heaven and Hell, are the Difference. One way, You are sure to be as Great and
Safe, as Love, and Gratitude can make You; whereas all other Acquisitions are
deceitful. A word now of the means to effect our Quiet; and that with all due
respect to better Reason.

First, In the Case of differing Persuasions, be pleased to form such an
Expedient, that all may quietly enjoy, and exercise their opinions, so far as
they Consist with the Word of God, and with the public Peace.

Secondly, Appoint an Act of Oblivion to be drawn (if you please) as
Comprehensive of all Interests, as care, and skill can make it; and after this,
let a Free-Parliament be called (with this previous Engagement imposed upon
them) That they shall first secure these two Particulars of Conscience and
Property, according to the true Intention of the Parties therein Concerned, ere
they proceed further; and that they may then apply themselves to other Debates
at Liberty* and settle what Government they shall think fit. This I presume not
to deliver as the Arrogant Imposition of a single Person; but I do offer it
humbly, as the sense of a Numerou^, and Sober party. Some Mutinous and Peevish
Spirits there are, whom nothing can please, but what displeases all the World
beside. It were pity, to alter the whole Frame of the Law, to gratify the
humor of so Inconsiderable a part of the People. Changes are Slow, and
Dangerous; God and Truth, are Invariable; We were Well, till We shifted, and
never since; having tried all other Postures in vain; were it not better to
attempt That once again, than thus expose our selves to be Restless for ever?

My Lord, the Author of this is very much Your EXCELLENCIE'S Servant.
Feb. 4. 1659.

THe City of London, having of late behaved themselves a little Cross,
disturbed the self-created Representative exceedingly. The Common-Counsel was
too Stout, and Honest, for their purpose. The Aldermen; but an Un^oward
Mixture: yet those among them that were Right, were Eminently so, and there
were not a few that were so. A very Worthy, and Particular Instrument in the
Frank carriage of the Business, was the Recorder. But Equal to them All was
the brave General.

The Rump was now come to a Forced Put. Moneys must be Raised, and the City
Subdued, or the Good Old Cause is Lost. In Order to Both; Out comes the Long
looked for 100000. Tax, upon Tuesday; (Feb. 7.) which was Followed with a
Negative Resolve of Common Counsel, upon Wednesday: but Thursday was the Bloody
Day Designed, both to his Excellence, and to the Town. (witness the Resolves
it p^oduced, as to the City, and the Orders Imposed upon the General.)

His Excellence having drawn his Forces into the City, so far Complied with his
respects even to the least Image of Authority, as to Secure diverse Persons, by
virtue of an Order, to that express purpose. But to Destroy Their Gates, and
Portcullices, he was very Loath; and signified as much to the Members, in a
Letter from Guild Hall, to which, he received in Answer, only a more peremptory
Command to Proceed, which accordingly he Executed, the day following, and so
returned to his Quarters.

The Resolves (of Feb. 9.) I must not Omit, for they deserve to be Transmitted
to Posterity.

Thursday 9 Feb.
THe House received a Report from the Council of State, of some Resolutions
taken by the Council, in relation to the City of London.

Resolved, That the Parliament does approve of what the Council of State has
done, in ordering, That the Commissioners for Government of the Army, do
appoint Forces to be and continue in the City of London, for preserving the
Peace thereof, and of the Commonwealth, and for Reducing of the City to the
obedience of the Parliament.

Resolved, That the Parliament does approve of what the Council of State have
done, in ordering that the Commissioners for the Army, do take order that the
Posts and Chains in the City of London, be taken away.

Resolved, That the Gates of the City of London, and the Portcullices there, be
forth with destroyed.

Resolved, That the Parliament does approve of what the Council of State, and
Commissioners of the Army have done, in Seizing and Apprehending of Mr.
Vincent, Merchant in Bishopsgate-Street, And Thomas Brown, Grocer in
Wood-Street, Daniel Spencer, in Friday Street, Laurence Brompfield, in
Tower-Street* Major Chamberlain, Mr. Bludworth, and Richard Ford, in
Seething-Lane, Major Cox, at the Swan in Dowgate, Mr. Penning, in Fa^church
Street, and Lieutenant Colonel Iackson.

Resolved, That the present Common Council of the City of London, Elected for
this Year, be discontinued, and be and are hereby declared to be Null and Void,
and that the Lord Mayor of London have notice hereof.

Ordered, That it be referred to a Committee to bring in a Bill for the Choice
of another Common-Counsel, with such Qualifications as the Parliament shall
think fit, with ordet to meet at 8. of the Clock in the Speakers Chamber to
morrow morning.

The House likewise read the Bill for settling the Militia of the City of
London, and the Liberties thereof, the first time, and referred it to the
Council of State, to present names of Commissioners for the Militia of the City
of London to the House to mo^row morning.

The Parliament taking Notice of the discreet carriage of the Lord Mayor of the
City of London, in the Late transactions of the Common Council,

Ord^red, That the Lord Mayor have the thanks of this House, and that Alderman
Atkins do give him the thanks of the Parliament accordingly.

THis day produced likewise a remarkable Petition, Presented by Praise-God
Barebones, Pressing, that no man might be Admitted into any pl^ce of Trust,
except such as should ABjURE A SINGLE PERSON; and further Praying; that it
might be Enacted HIGH TREASON, for any man to MOVE, OFFER, or PROPOUND, in
PARLIAMENT, COUNSEL, COURT, or PUBLIC MEETING, any thing in order to CHARLES
STEVVART, etc. -- and that after such a LAW ENACTED, it might be deemed HIGH
TREASON, for any man to move, or Propose the REVOCATION of it.

A man would have thought, these people should have had enough already of the
Oath of ABjURATION; for nothing did more expose them, than the eagerness they
had formerly used in the promoting of it: which served, only to Eurage the
Oppos^rs, and to set up for a Marque, the Infamous Abetters of it. But all this
was not s^fficient to divert the Gracious Members from a most Particular Order
of Thanks to the Petitioners.

Upon S^turd^y (^h^ memorable 11th. of F^b.) the G neral, ^inding himself a
little more at Liberty, Removed his Quarters in^o the Ci^y, and there Declared
himself, to the Universal Satisfaction of the Nation. (Desiring Particularly,
by Letter, the men ^f Westminster to bethink themselves of their Dissolution)

In the transaction of this Affair, there were ^o many untoward Circumstances,
that to Prevent Mistakes, I dispersed S^veral Copies of this ensuing Narrative.

IN October. last, when Lambert scattered the Committee of Westminster his
Unluckie Excellency thought it then a fit time to set up for himself; and in
the Head of a Phanatique Party, to bid Defiance to all the Sober Interests, and
Judgments of the Nation. His Principal assistant in the work was Sir Henry
Vane, the Prophet of that Inspired Rabble. The Faction was grown Bold, and
Formidable; when, to divert the Course, or meet the Fury of it, the General was
Invited to draw a Force from Scotland into the North: and In he came, but to a
Nobler purpose, than ever they Intended. They Called him in to save Themselves,
he Came to save the Nation. Upon the first notice of his Advance, Lambert was
sent with a considerable Army to meet him, and London left almost without a
Public Guard, (such was the Confidence they had in the Anabaptistique Party,
which was privately Armed, and Listed in and about the town.) In fine, after
diverse Affronts upon, and Tumults in the City, the Soldiery Revolted; the
Fugitive Members Returned; Lambert's Army Mouldered away; and his Excellency
vanished. Thus far without a Blow; but the more difficult part was still
behind, (for Treacherous friends, are much more dangerous than professed
Enemies) The General, resolves next, for London: and makes it his design, both
in his Passage, and after his Arrive, by all means possible, to avoid
bloodshed; His March speaks him a Soldier, and a Gentleman, for it was
Regular, and Inoffens^ve. The Country courted him upon the way as their
Deliverer, and he deserved it; For he has proved himself no less. The strict
reserve he used, was but what best became his Dignity and Prudence; he was too
Generous, to betray Another, and too Wise to be betrayed, Himself. Under this
Guard of Honor, and of Caution, he past his Journey; not to trouble you with
long stories, how the ways were thronged with Cries and Addresses of the
Nation, for a Free-Parliament; what Conference he had with the good Aldermen,
what Complements were made him, by the Other men of Westminster, etc. -- To
come to the Point, upon Friday afternoon, (the third of this Instant February)
General Monck took up his Lodgings in Whitehall. On the Monday following, his
Excellency was conducted by Scot and Robinson, (with the formality of a Mace
carried before them,) in o a place commonly called the Parliament House, where
he delivered himself according to good Discretion, and soon after returned to
his Lodgings Laden with the Thanks of the House. Tuesday and Wednesday were the
General's days of rest: but not so to the City: for, upon Tuesday the 10^^00
l. Tax came out, which Netled the Citizens shrewdly; and the day following,
they met in Common-Counsell, to advise upon it. Where they resolved, to adhere
to a former Vote of the Court in the Negative. At the same sitting was
communicated a Declaration from Warwi^k shire, for a Free-Parliament; it was of
a fair signification, and Authority; the Gentlemen that brought it, received
the Thanks of the Court; (not to mention the peevishness of 2 or 3 Dissenters)
it is hoped they may be wiser, and honester hereafter; This was a Day of
Business in London, and produced a Busier Night at Westminster: for the
Counsel of State, after a tedious Puzzle and Debate, Issued out Orders to
G^nerall Monck, for the Reducing of the City, directing him to proceed, in such
a Method, as they had prescrib^d him. In persuance thereof, his Excellency
marched early upon Thursday the Ninth current Horse and F^^t, into the City; by
th^^ means frustrating a Respect which the Court had designed him the Day
before; Having appointed four Aldermen, and eight Commoners to attend him the
next Morning. His entrance into the Town, brought all the Horror and
Satisfaction with it, Imaginable: nor did the People understand for a long
while, w^ether they should Curse or Adore him: at last in compliance with his
Orders, he seized diverse eminent Citizens, and sent them to the Tower, and took
up his Quarters that Night in the City; By this time, the People, beyond all
doubt, pronounced him the most execrable Creature that ever came within their
Walls, not understanding that the Mischief he did them, was but Jest, and the
Good he Intended them, was Earnest. That in consideration of a weeks
Imprisonment, he would reward them, and their Posterity, with Perpetual
Liberty. This however carried an appearance of severity, which was in effect,
but a point of Military Honor; For his Inclination, and Duty in this Action,
Led him several ways: as a Soldier he obeyed a Barbarous Order; as an
Englishman he made it his care, to take off the edge on it; and he was bound to
do That, this day by Commission, Which he resolved to undo two days after
upon a Nobler Principle; upon Friday, (the 10th. of the Month, and the la^t of
his Commission,) the General demanded the Cities last Resolve, from the
Aldermen; who s^ill adhered to their former Judgment. His Excellency, hereupon
gave command to demolish the City Gates, and so Returned to Whitehall.
(Observe, that his Displeasure, and Commission died together,) For the next
Morning, ( Saturday,) he made the Town a large Amends: Declaring Solemnly to
join with them, and their Associates for a Free Parliament; (but having fairly
first discharged himself to those at Westminster, by a Letter in commune with
his Officers; who have behaved themselves as men of Honor in the Business. The
Truth is, had not the General been nimble with them, they had undermined him;
for, contrary to Faith and Honesty, to their express Agreement, they had not
only entered into a secret combination with the Sectaries, but publicly
encouraged their Assemblings and Petitions; and more particularly, contrived
the direct Ruin of that Person, who had so lately preserved them. This is a
Theme transports me; The Bloody Votes were passed that Dismal Night: Let
Nedham tell you; but never was a Joy so Universal; wise men grew mad upon it,
and mad men sober. The Cries, the Bonfires, and the fume of Roasted Rumps, did
quite take down the Legislative Stomach; It Is thought the Thing at Westminster
is vanished. In fine, the Hand of God is in it, his Name be praised.

Feb. 12. 1659.

THis was not yet enough, to put the Rump out of Countenance. The blessed
Members met again as Formally as ever, and Acted with a Confidence tha t might
exuse the Common peoples Jealousy over the General. He was too Wise, to walk
too Open: and They not Wise enough to comprehend the Policy of his Reserve.
And yet they wanted not a Will to Understand him. They studied nothing else but
his Intentions. That which most puzzled them, was a Confe^ence at Alderman
Wale's, betwixt S^veral of the S^cluded M^mbers, and of the Rump: Joining to
That, His Excellencies Answer to a Proposal of Raising Forces to secure
themselves; which was, That He himself would Interpose betwixt the City, and
all Danger.

Observing how prejudicial these Mistakes were to the Public Interest of
Se^tlement; and with what Art, and Industry, they were Assisted, by the Adverse
Party: I took it for a Seasonable, and Good Off^ce to do something that might
Create a better Understanding: Or, at the worst, Excite the Citizens, to Act by
Tichborn's President, and of Themselves, in Case of any further Baffle or
Delay, in settling their Militia. For these Reasons, I Published this Ensuing
Paper.

A Word in Season, to General MONK, (with his Officers, etc.) To the CITY, and
To the NATION.
My Lord, and Gentlemen,
YOu are, at present, in the Heart of the Nation, and in the Arms of your
Friends: where you are Safe, and Beloved. You have the Strength and Affections
of the City, at your D^votion, and it is your Commune Interest, to unite in a
Concurence both of Power and Kindness. You stand and fall together. You are
all of the same Stock; Born to the same Freedom; Subjected to the same Laws;
Nursed up in the same Religion: And in fine, Obliged by the same Rules of Duty
and Wisdom, to promote the same Ends. I might add, that you are likewise
exposed to the same Danger, and from the same Enemy: by whose Hypocrisy, and
Skill, should you be D^luded into a Belief, of such who never kept Faith,
(forgive me) your Reputation is lost, with your Security; and you Fall, without
either Redress or Pity. In this very Instant, while you Treat, the Mine is
working. The Instruments and Means of your Destruction are already agreed upon.
Some ar^ employed to Infect your Councils, and Alienate your Soldiers: Others
sit among you, to Betray you. What by Open Force cannot be Effected, must be
assisted, by a Dagger or Poison. (You have the Substance of this, already, upon
Evidence, and Experiment.) Next to this Caution toward your Professed
Adversaries, allow me to propose a more Ingenuous, and Open Clearness toward
your Useful Friends. (if it were but to prevent Mis-understandings: Beside,
that the very Doubt is both Injurious, and Painful) Offices of Respect, and
Comfort, ought to be performed with Liberty, and Chearfullness, without any the
least mixture of Scruple, or Reserve. These Frank, and Mutual Enterchanges of
Succor, and Advice, beget a Trust, and Kindness; And That Is the true
Foundation of a happy, and Lasting Union. -- That Friendship which admits a
Jealousy, w^vers.

When You, (My Lord) your Officers, and Army, are become One with this City,
you have then but Contracted a nearer Alliance with the Nation: whose several
Counties, and Divisions, (how remote soever) are (with this Town) but Parts
still of the same Body. By a Consent of Interest, and Sense, they Prosper, or
they Wither, they Grieve, or Joy, they ^ive, or Dye. Nor are they more united
in their Interests, than in their Votes, and Resolutions; for they have
unanimously engaged with the City, to maintain their Rights, and Liberties, the
Reformed Religion, and the Freedom of Parliaments, against all Hazzards, and
Oppositions whatsoever. I need not tell your Lordship by what Audacious an^
Illegal Violences, this D^claration and Remonstrance was extorted from them.
The Nation stood condemned to Servitude, and Beggary, even by those, whom they
themselves had Raised from that Condition, to aggravate the Bondage, by the
more Intolerable Authors of it. It Is now become a Crime, to name a Full, Free
Parliament, and Tre^son to appeal to any other Law, than the Insipid Vote of a
Legislative Conventicle. The Gaols are full of Prisoners upon that very score.

Was it not time, (My Lord) to bid these People hold their Hands, after the
expense of so much Blood, and of so many Milions; and all this only to
perpetuate a dearer, and a more Infamous Thralldom? The Pulpits were enured to
Blasphemy, and Non sense, and the Government prostituted for money, to Persons
able to disgrace a Bawdy House. -- These, and the like Indignities, put the
Nation upon their Just, and necessary Defense; And in that Posture they now
stand Ready, and Resolved.

Your Excellency has been tender hitherto of Blood, but if a speedy Order be
not taken, to Regul^te those straggling Troops, that Act still in the Countries,
in Opposition to a Settlement, It will come yet to Blows: For questionless, in
case of a Necessity, the People will not stand still, and suffer themselves to
be picked out, man by man, till they be all D^stroyed.

The Gentry and Nobi^ity, are Slaves to every pedling Pursuivant. It Is but a
Warrant from our Masters, and all is Fish that comes to Net: No matter for a
Crime, if there be Booty. All that the People ask, all they design, is but the
Benefit of the Law. Will any English man deny it us? First, They have sworn to
defend it; Next We have sworn, ^ather to dye, than lose it. This Faction has
cost the Nation more than 60. Millions, besides the Blood they have Lapp'd: and
yet 100000. l. a Month, and not a farthing less, will do their Business, that
is, 5^00. l. a Man, or some such Trifle: For that, the Iunto shares; perhaps
the Soldier, once in a year, or 2. may get his Mornings draught, and then be
turned to Graze upon Free Quarter; and hanged for Mutiny, if he but talks of
Money. Its the trick they served all that have served them. Who ever strikes,
or pays on their behalf, fights but for Bondage, and contributes to his own
Chains. If they had any Fa^ih, they might be Trusted. But Oaths go down with
them like Pills of Butter, they are dissolved, as soon as taken. That Perjury
which would poison a good Christian, is but their Nutriment. Nay worse than
Wolves, they are False to their own Kind, and enter-worry one another. I should
be endless, to pursue this Subject till I want Matter. In brief, My Lord, look
to your self, and to your Friends; Life and Death are before you, Choose. May
Heaven direct and bless your Counsels and Endeavors, so far, as you proceed
with Piety and Honor. To prevent Mistakes, I do declare, that there are
diverse moderate and sober Persons, in the Mixture, for whom I have a fair
Respect, and that the tartness of my Language, only concerns the Furious and
Phanatique of them.

A word now to the CITY; and that a short one.] Gentlemen, upon your fair
compliance with the General, depends much of your safety: that is, so far as he
comports himself with terms of Prudence, Equity, and Honor; (and he is too
Noble, to go Less) next, to himself, you find his Officers, of an Ingenuous,
and clear Conversation; and worth your Friendships, their Commands apart; you
likewise find the body of the Army Civil, and well disciplined, you do
exceeding well to pay them all due respects: and to join Interests, and
Councils, with them; -- you have done Wisely, Honestly, and Bravely too, to
oppose Taxes: that is, Taxes imposed without a Law, -- to be employed against
your selves; -- and such, as had you granted them, your President would have
extended to enslave your Posterity. -- Your care next, to disarm the
Sectaries, was very seasonable, Your City had probably been in Ashes else by
this time. Consider, they bear the same mind still, and where they had those
weapons they can quickly have more. You cannot be secure without your Militia,
nor can any thing fairly obstruct your Procurement of it: In Tichburn's Case,
it was by the Commons ordered, that any six of the Common-Counsell (upon
emergent occasions) might send for the Lord Mayor to call a Common Counsel,
and in case of default, call it themselves, and any 40. of them, to have power
to act as a Common Council, without the Lord Mayor, any thing in their Charter
to the contrary Notwithstanding: See the Hist. of Independency, part 2. p 83.
Not to exceed my limits, Forget not your suffering Friends, and stand firm to
your Associates, and Allies. He that tamely suffers One Injury, Provokes
Another.

Now to the NATION, for a Farewell.] I need not press my Countrymen with many
Cautions, your Freedom of Elections, that is your Birthright; It Is that you all
declare, to Live and Dye for, you are too wise, to be cheated with Restrictions
and Qualifications: as if the Question were the Number, rather than the Choice,
at this rate, you may have a full House, indeed; but How? That is, full of the
Brats, the Kindred, and the Partisans of those that sit already; and then, they
that have gulled you all this while, shall govern you for ever, your very
Declarations against the Present Tyranny, have brought you to that Point, that
there is no safety left you, but in violence; for while you talk, you dye, your
scattered Friends are gathered up, one by one; whereas, your SEASONABLE UNION
MAKES ALL SURE.

As your Intentions are Honorable, so let your Actions be. How far the Law
extends, in case of Brutish, and Illegal cruelty, see St. John's Argument
against the Earl of Strafford; and with That I conclude: He that would not have
had others to have Law, why should he have any himself? Why should not that be
done to him, that himself would have done to others? It is true, we give Law to
Hares and Deers because they be Beasts of Chase; it was never accounted either
cruelty, or fowl play, to Knock Foxes and Wolves on the head, as they can be
found, because these be Beasts of Prey: The Warrener sets traps for Powlcats
and other Vermin, for Preservation of the Warren.

Feb. 18. 1659.

ABout This time, the Schismatiques had all their Instruments at work to
disappoint the General Design, and Hope of a Free Parliament. The Bolder, and
the more Ingenious sort of Honest men were Gathered up, by Flying Troops, that
they had every where Di^pers'd to hinder a Conjunction: nay, they were come to
That Degree of Impudence, to threaten Banishment, and Sequestration to the
whole Party of Declar^rs. Nor did they Act these Outrages upon the Gentry,
without a due regard of Popular, and specious Application to the Vulgar. The
House should be Immediately Filled: -- The Form of the Writ was already
Published: -- The Qualifications, Agreed upon; -- and in Fine; -- They would
Instantly proceed to a Settlement of Church and State: -- (what would they
more?) In the mean while; The Presses are at Work; by Libells against the King;
-- By Arguments of Interest; and by False Intelligence, to Corrupt, and Deceive
the People. No Stone is left unturned. The Common-wealtbmen. They Are a Birding
too; and Tell their Little Tales of Rome, and Venice. Nor does the General
himself escape their wild Attempts; either upon his Honesty, by Large and
Insignificant Donations; or else by Plots against his Person. The Party had
their Friends too in the City; either, by Tedious Speeches, From the Point, to
make their Meetings Fruitless: or upon Frivolous Pretenses to Delay the very
Calling of a Counsel; Retarding the Militia by that means, to the great
Hazard of the whole Affair.

This was the Face of Things, when the Brave General Cleared the way for the
Return of the Secluded Members, who being Entered (Feb. 21.) fell Instantly upon
the Nulling of those Sputious Orders, which Related to their First Seclusion in
Dec. 1648. Proceeding Thence, to the Enlarging, and Confirming of the
Generall's Commission: and the disabling of the Rump's Commissioners for the
Government of the Army. -- The Discharging of Prisoners, Illegally Committed:
-- and the Appointment of a new Convention, (Apr. 25. -- 1660.) -- In Fine;
they had enough to do for one while, to Vacate the mis doings of their
Predeeessors: which thing it self they did, with all convenient Modesty, and
Tenderness. As their Business was only to Settle the Nation, without
Perpetuating Themselves; so did they make all Haste was Possible, to Finish it.
The Militia's, they Placed in Good Hands: and Empowred a Counsel of State to
Govern in the next Intervall, which being done, and Provision made for a New
Election; (March 16.) they Dissolved Themselves.

The Independent Gang were struggling now for Life; and Labored by a Thousand
Shifts, and Cheats to make a Party in the new Militia. During That Transaction;
I caused this Following Paper to be Published.

A Seasonable Word.
I Do not write out of an itch of Scribbling, or to support a Faction; my Duty
bids me write. -- Nor do I love Hard words, or Many, Plain, and Few, suit all
Capacities and Leisures. I would be Read by all, and Understood by all: for my
Business extends to all. -- Not to spend time in Complement, or Apology; The
Readers Wisdom, or the Authors Weakness, is not the Question. The Nation is in
Distress, and every Englishman must lend his hand to save it. Nay, That must be
done Quickly too, and Vigorously; Delay is Mortal. Can any thing be more
Ridiculous, then to stand Formalizing, in a Case, where it is impossible to be
too early, or too zealous? The event of things takes up our thoughts, more then
the Reason of them; what News, more than what Remedy; As if it concerned us
rather to know, whose Fools and Slaves we shall be next, then to be such no
longer. That which completes the Wonder, and the Oversight, is, That the
Miseries we suffer, were before hand, as easily, to be Foreseen and Prevented,
as they are now to be Fel^: and we are only to look Backward, to take a perfect
measure of the Future; so obvious, and formal is the Method, that leads to our
destruction. If we are not in love with Beggary, and Bondage; let us at last
bethink our selves of Freedom, and from a due inquiry into the Rise, and
Growth, and present State of our Calamities, learn to be wise, and Happy, for
the time to come.

It may be observed, that since Churchmen dabled in Politiques, and Statesmen
in Divinity, Law and Religion have been still subjected to the Sword: and in
^ff^ct, those same Excursions, and Adulterate mixtures, are but the workings of
a Party already in motion toward that End. He that designs a Change of
Government, must begin by imposing a Delusion upon the People: and whatsoever
is Necessary to his Purpose, must be Accomodate to their Humor. -- The Pulpet,
by false glosses, and Puzzling distinctions, under the Doctrine of Conditionate
Obedience, sugges^ing Liberty, cousens the Multitude into a Rebellion. Oaths
and Covenants, are but like Iugglers knots, Fast or Loose, as the Priest
pleases -- The Weaker sort being thus prepared, and poisoned, by a Seditious
Clergy; it is then the Statesman's part to push those Mutinous Inclinations into
Action: and to divide the Cause betwixt Conscience, and Property, the better to
involve all Interests in the Quarrel. -- Under the Masque of Piety, and
Publiqueness of Spirit; of Holy men, and Patriots; the Crafty cheat the Simple;
engaging by those specious pretenses, the Rash, mis-judging People, (with good
Intentions; but wanting Care and Skill) in Sacrilege, and Treason.

This was the very Root, and this has been the Process of our Evils. Under
the notion of Gods glory, the Safety, and the Honor of the King: -- the
Fundamental Laws, and Freedoms of the People: -- the Privilege of
Parliaments, etc. the Kingdom was gulled into a Compliance with an Ambitiou^,
and Schismatic Faction. The main Pretense, was the Assertion of the Subjects
Legal Rights, against the grand Prerogative; and That, -- directed only to the
Limitation of an Intended, Arbitrary Power: -- the Regulation of such and such
Mis-Governments, etc. -- and all this -- Saving their Allegiance to His Sacred
Majesty; whose Person, Crown, and Dignity, they had so often, and so deeply
sworn to maintain -- This was a Bait so Popular, it could not fail of drawing
in a Party; and That produced a War, -- The Formal Story of the Quarrel, is
little to my purpose: the Logique of it, Less, -- How, by the same Authority of
Tent, and Law, both King and People, could be Justified, one aganst the other;
I meddle not. Let it suffice; that after 6. Years Conflict, -- a vast profusion
of Blood and Treasure, -- The King, a Prisoner, -- and his whole party
scattered, and disarmed: the Commons found themselves disposed to end our
Troubles; and passed a Vote to Treat with His Majesty in Order to a Settlement.
This met with little opposition, except from those, who having Gorged
themselves already, upon the public ruin, were not yet satisfied without
their Sovereigns Blood -- The death of Monarchy it self; -- and the subjecting
of a Tame, and Slavish People to a Conventicle of Regicides. There were not
many of so deep a Tincture; but what these few could not ^ff^ct by Number, they
did by Force. For, upon the 6 th. of December. 1648. Sir Hardresse Waller, Pride,
and Hewson, -- Seized and Emprisoned 41. of the Commons House; -- Clapped
Guards upon all passes leading to it; -- Some 160 more, were given in upon a
List to those that kept the Door, with an express direction from several
Leading Members to oppose their Entrance; -- a matter of 40 more withdrew, for
fear of violence. Their Crime was only the carrying of a Vote for Peace
(already mentioned) the day before. This action was so Enormous, that the very
Contrivers of it were ashamed to own it: transferring That upon the
Army Officers which was done by their own appointment. They passed however a
Formal disallowance of the violence, and ordered their discharge; which yet
the Officers refused (upon a Combination now most evident) -- Observe this,

That which in 48. they told us was an act of the Army Officers, in 59. they
call a Judgment of Parliament; and they justify and continue That very
Seclusion, by a Vote of Ian. 5.59. -- Which they Themselves Condemned and
Discharged by several Orders in Dec. 48. The Particulars of these
Transactions, are excellently delivered by Mr. Prynne, (the Honor of the age)
in his true and perfect Narrative, as also, in the Declaration of the true
state of the Secluded members, and in the History of Independency.

Return we now to the great Test of the Spirits, and Designs of the several
Parties, and Members of the House, and from that Judgment, and Discrimination
of Persons, and Humors, we may learn seasonably to provide against
After-claps. This Blow brake the House of Commons into Three Pieces: -- One
Party, adhered to the Vote, -- opposed the Violence; -- Declared against it, --
Claimed from time to time, their own and the Peoples Rights, -- Pleaded the
Covenant, and their Declarations, and stood it out. The Second sort, was not so
well prepared for Martyrdom; a kind of Barnacle, neither Fish nor, Flesh. This
was a Party, that Flew off at first, but soon retracted; -- Herded again, and
went along for Company; my Charity persuades me well, of diverse of them, and
that they mixed, rather in hopes to moderate the Rest, then in Design to
strengthen them: A Party rather Weak, and Passive, than Malicious. But nothing
can excuse those sons of Belial, the perjured Remnant; no, nor express them --
Beside their Oaths and Covenant, they have above a hundred times, in Printed
Declarations, renounced the very Thought of what they since have executed. Read
the Exact Collections, We are (say they) so far from altering the Fundamental
Constitution, and Government of this Kingdom by King, Lords and Commons. That
we have only de^ired, that with the consent of the King, such Powers may be
settled in the Two Houses, without which, we can have no Assurance, etc. These
are the very words of their Declaration, April 17. 1646 published by the House
of Commons, alone, toward the end of the war, and most remarquably entitled,
-- A Declaration of their true Intentions, concerning the Ancient Government of
the Nation and securing the People against all Arbitrary Government. -- Let
this Quotation serve for All, lest I exceed my Limits. Not to insist upon
things known, and public. -- How faithfully these People have managed their
Original Trust, - how strictly they have kept their Oaths and Promises, -- how
tenderly they have observed the Laws, and asserted our Freedoms; -- bow poor
they have made themselves, to make us Rich; -- how Graciously they have assumed
the Legislative power; and then, how modestly they have exercised it: -- In
fine; -- How Free, and happily we lived under their Government; till Oliver
played Rex among them and threw them out by a Trick of their own Teaching. This
was in April 1653. It were worth the while, to enquire into the good they did
us, during that 6 years Session, but that I leave to Needham. Nor shall I far
examine the Protectors Reign; by whose advice; -- by what assistance; -- or by
what Laws he ruled? -- how many of our late Republicans forgate themselves, and
swear Allegiance, to a single Person. How many things like Parliaments, he
dispe^sed.) -- It is enough; at last, he died. Died, -- in despite of Priests,
and Poets; Goodwin, etc. The former telling him from Heaven, that he should
escape that Fit, the Other telling us, -- (so needlessly.) --

His Highness, having other things to think on, left his successor doubtful,
till (as they say) His Secretary, (Then, one of Ours, now) with Goodwin, (His
Prophetique Confessor) Swore his son Richard into the Protectorship. But he
(Good Gentleman) did not much hurt, but peaceably resigned to Fleetwood, and
Disborough; and They, quite at a Loss for want of Brains and Courage, called in
the Fag-end of the old House, to their assistance: So that those Members, which
Dived, in April 53. came up again, upon the 7 th. of May, 59. and acted as
impetuously as ever: Till they were once again u^seated, by the Army; the 13.
of October. last, and then, the Commit of Wallingfordhouse was invested with
the Supreme Authority: ('It Is but a slippery Title that of the Sword) This
change, gave General Monk occasion to show his Charity to his Native Country;
by whose Generosity, and Conduct, the Honest and Suffering Party was relieved,
and the Phanatique Army dispersed, without Blood. Hereupon, the Souldjery
tacked about once again; -- Lamented their backslidings; and on the 26 th. of
December. following the Good-Old-Cause-men, re-enthron'd themselves: more eager
now, than formerly, against the Readmission of the secluded Members. This
barbarous, and Arbitrary proceeding, put the whole Nation upon a necessity of
procuring a Free and Full Representative: to which end, they proposed Modestly,
and Fairly, the Restoring of the Excluded Members, and Filling up the House; or
else, the Liberty of a New, and Legal choice. For bringing Letters to this
purpose, Sir Robert Pie, and Major Fincher were imprisoned. This was an
Insolence too gross, to do much Mischief, but to Themselves. Are these the
men, (the People cried) that put the King to death, only upon Pretense of a
Design, to Erect and Uphold in himself, an Unlimited, and Tyrannical Power, to
Rule according to his Will, and to overthrow the Rights, and Liberties of the
People, Yea, to Take away and make Uoid the Foundations thereof, and of all
Redress and Remedy of mis-Government, which by the Fundamental Constitutions of
this Kingdom, were reserved on the Peoples behalf, in the Right and Power of
FREQUENT AND SUCCESSIVE PARLIAMENTS? ( these are the words of the change) --
That which was Treason in our Lawful Prince, how comes it to be Law, now with
these Fellows? They took away the Kings Life, for but Intending, the very
thing they Act; and we are to be Hanged, for Asking only That, they swear they
Fought for. No; -- they are a Pack of cheats; They Murthe^ed Him, that they
might Rule, Themselves. The Plot was grown so Rank, the Commune People smelt
it; and without more ado, associated to free themselves, from an infamous and
perpetual bondage. Witness that Union, (in their Declarations) both of Demand
and Resolution; against the Equity whereof, no man has hitherto pretended the
least Objection. --

The Supreme Trifle; perceiving, an Universal Application to the General, in
his passage; and all, speaking the same Sense; Finding withal, that his
Excellence suspended, till he might hear Both Parties; and Conscious to
Themselves, of no imaginable Reason to Oppose: Beside: -- Seeing themselves
Declined, and Hated; -- Na^, and Endangered by a Peremptory Agreement of the
Nation; -- They did, at last, most graciously descend to promise us a full
Representative; but no Secluded Members, to be admitted, nor, in effect, any
other then Phanatiques.

His Excellency, well weighing, what was Reasoned pro and con: made way for the
Return of the Secluded Members. This Justice, brake (...) neck of a Design,
just then on Foot. This is the short on it. -- (...) were to be held at Ga^e, in
expectation of a further satisfaction; till those Troops which the Backside had
ordered to that purpose, should have seized all the considerable Persons of the
Kingdom. Nay, they were impudent enough, to tempt the General himself into a
Complication with them: But he was too discreet, not to distinguish where to
observe, and where to Leave them. In fine, That providence, which stills the
raging of the Sea, and the madness of the People, has put a check to their
Impetuous and, brutish fury.

Next to our Gratitude to Heaven, let us have a care, not to be wanting in point
of prudence to our Selves. Nothing undoes us but Security. We see, who are our
Friends, and who our Enemies; whom we may trust, and whom we must not. We have
paid dear for our Experience, and, sure, we have a Title to the Benefit of it.
Let us look Back, and learn, from Thence, the menage of the Future.

It is a tedious while, this Nation has been tossed betwixt Two Factions; One
in the Army, the Other in the Counsel; Both, well enough Agreed to destroy Us,
but Jealous still, One of the Other, as Don says of Ignatius, concerning his
Competitor in Hell, He was content he should be Damned, but loath he should
Govern. That Is all the Quarrel: the Vizor of Religion, is thrown aside long
since. The Conventicle cheats the Soldier this day; and he falls upon the
Rump, the next: in short; they do but watch one the other, at the public
charge; they may s^arle where they please, but they bite none but us, and at
the worst, forgive their fellow-Theeves for robbing Honest Men. This has been
their practice near these dozen years. Are we not yet convinced, that it is
impossible it should be otherwise, while the same people Govern us, with the
same aim, and bound up by no other Laws, than their Own Wills? I do not press
any resistance, Now; but, certainly, a readiness to protect Honester men, in
Case of an Attempt, were not amiss. We see, how dirtily they have used the
General, and how unworthily their Instruments have labored the Army into a
direct Tumult; and all this in order to a New Violence upon the House. We see,
what Iuggling is used in the MILITIA: as foysting in false Lists, to cast the
strength of the Nation into the hands of mean, and Factious pers^ns. What
ind^stry, to hold us still unsettled, by throwing in impertinent, and dangerous
Scruples, to delay (at the Fairest) if not disturb the long desired Peace we
pray for. -- He that has either Honor in his Blood, or Honesty in his Heart,
is Reproached with a King in his Belly. -- Then, for the Qualifications, these
goodly Squires would have thrust upon us, are they not pleasant? One man of
Forty shall be allowed to Vote, or Sit, and the other 39. must call That a
Free-Parliament, and swear, it Represents ^he People. -- We are not so Blind
yet, nor so Forgetful, as not to see, and know, some ^oxes and some Asses, in
the Medly; All are not Saints we call so. -- We do remember, who they were that
ruled in 48. and we are sensible, what they would do still, if they had Power.
-- We know, who brought in, who; but the Markets raised; our Heads will not off
now at Fifty shillings a Hundred, as formerly. In fine, let the General, the
Secluded Members, and the Honest Souldjers, live Long, Happily, and Beloved;
and let the Rest take their Fortune. I could only wish his Excellency had been
a little civiller to Mr. Milton; for, just as he had finished his Model of a
Commonwealth, directing in these very Terms, the Choice; -- men not addicted
to a Single Person, or House of Lords, and the Work is done. In come the
Secluded Members, and spoil his Project. To this admirable discovery, he
subjoynes a suitable Propo^ition in favor of the late sitting Members, and This
is it, having premised the Abilities and Honesty, desirable in Ministers of
State, he recommends the Rumpers to us as so Qualified; advises us to quit tha^
fond Opinion of s^ccessive Parliament; and suffer the Persons then in Power, to
perpetuate themselves under the name of a Grand or Gene^all Counsel, and to
rule us, and our Heirs for ever. -- It were great pity th^se Gentlemen should
lose their longings: One word, and I have done. We live in daily expectation of
Writs for another Session, if they Leave us as free, as they Found us, it is
W^ll: if Not; it is but to Turn the Tables, and try Their menage of a Losing
Game.

THe Great Design was now, to Disappoint the Hopes we had of Good from the
Next Convention, by Continuing Themselves; or at the least, to Fool the People
into an Expectation of the same Benefit from the Rump, which we promised our
Selves from a Free Parliament, and that way to Procure an Interest in the Next
Session. In order to this pitiful purpose, comes forth a wretched Pamphlet,
Entit'led No New Parliament.

OR Some Quaeres or Considerations humbly offered to The Present PARLIAMENT
MEMBERS.



The Occasion rather, then the thing it self, drew from me This Answer.

Quaere for Quaere, etc.
ALthough That Pamplet, which Occasions This, considered in it self, is not
Worth a Reply: Yet in regard of the Contrivers, and of the End it tends to, it
may Deserve one. I look upon it as nothing else, but the Phanatiques late
Petition sliced into Quaeres, by some unskilful hand; and with a Harmless kind
of Simple Malice, directed to elude the Justice and Necessity of their great
Patrons Dissolution.

I shall not much insist upon the business, beyond the Obligation of a Formal
Answer: but I shall take such heed to That, as to leave little place for a
Return; and in the rest, make the old saying good, that One Fool may ask more
Questions, than T^enty Wise men can Answer.

His Quaere's are as follows.
1. Whether this be not the Parliament, and these the Persons, who began the
War with the late King? And if so, whether it does not highly and nearly
concern them even for their own sakes, to be the Parliamen^ that shall take up,
and Cloze the Quarrel, and not leave it to others, especially, if as the
general voice goes, the Kings Son must be brought in?

ANSWER.
THis is not the Original Parliament; That was composed of Three Estates; King,
Lords, and Commons. Further; These very Persons now sitting, Declared the King,
a Party with them in the Quarrel; beginning the War in the Kings Name; -- For
Him, not With ( that is, as it lies here Against) Him. If Thus; the House must
be Divided as well now in the Question, as formerly it was so in the War. The
Parliament ( even in the Querists sense) were those that ( suitably to their
Duties and Engagements) Voted a Peace, in order to the Preservation of his
Majesty, but there was a Faction too, that contrary to Honor, Faith, and
Conscience, did forcibly seclude their Honester Fellows, ( by much the Major
Part) and Prosecute, and put to Death the King; Those that have been Honest,
are Safe: nay and so should those be too, that will at last be so, by my
Consent: but I Demand,

What Equity or Reason is there, that those Persons who Murdered the Father,
and are still professed Enemies to the Son, should have an Equal Benefit with
Others, that were Affronted for their Loyalty to the Former, and are at present
upbraided ( as if 'twere Criminal) for their Affection to the Latter? If the
Kings Son must be brought in, whether they will or no, what have we to do
further with those people, that Declare they will keep him Out, if they Can?

2. Whether this Parliaments first undertaking and prosecuting the War with the
Late King were Just, and upon good and Warrantable Grounds? If it were (as no
doubt it was) and God having by his Providence, after a long Interruption of
some of them, and a longer Seclusion of the rest, restored them to their trust,
whether they ought not now to stand to their first Good principles, maintain
their first Good Cause, and secure all the good people that have been engaged
with them, and by them?

ANSWER.
THe War was Just, in that part of the Parliament, which Declared for the King,
and Acted accordingly, but Unjust in th^se that Swore to Preserve him, and
Intended to Murder him. That the Parliament ought to stand to their first Good
Principles; we are Agreed. In so doing; they are to bring to condign
punishment, -- the Infringers of their Privileges, -- the Introducers of
Arbitrary power, the Obstructors of Successive Parliaments; The Murderers of
the late King -- the Subverters of the Established Government, etc.

I grant you further, that they are obliged to secure all the good people that
engaged With them and by them; but not consequently all those that acted
violently Against and Without them, -- now my Question.

How is it possible for those that Began upon Principles of Contradiction, (as
the Saving and Destroying of the King, etc.) to stand to their First principles?

3. Whether this be not that Parliament, and these the very persons, who by the
good esteem they had among the people of their Integrity, Faithfulness and
Constancy; whether I say, this be not the Parliament, who by these and other
means engaged the Honest, and well Affected of the Land in the aforesaid War?
And if so, whether this Parliament having now power in their hands, are not
obliged in Duty and Good Conscience to secure all the said Honest and well
affected people for this their Engaging and Acting under them, and not leave
them as a prey to their professed enemies, nor their terms of piece to be made
by they know not whom? Another Parliament, which there is too great cause to
fear, will be too much made up of such as neither have been nor are friends to
the Parliaments cause, nor to those that engaged in it.

ANSWER.
It Is not the Gaining of a good Esteem, but it is the practice of Integrity,
that recommends a Worthy person. I may believe well of a Cheat, and have my
pocket picked. But after that; I should deserve a Yellow Coat, ever to trust
that fellow Again, though he should plead, he had my good opinion formerly. --
Some I confess are yet in Being, of those whose Interest raised the War, but
these are not the men our Quaerist means: ( and beside; the most considerable
of that number, are in their Graves.) For the rest; (to wave this Argument from
Power to Conscience. --) Those people that dare not abide the test of a Free,
Legal Parliament, must not presume to a^t themselves, as an Authority without
Law, or Limit. In fine; -- If this be the Same Parliament, that first engaged
-- then --

Why should the Secluders, and their Adherents; -- Those which by Force of arms
Baffled this very Parliament, in 48. 'scape better then the Cavaliers that
fought against it, in 42?

4. Whether this be not the Parliament, who by many Declarations and
Remonstrances, by Protestation and Vow, by Solemn League and Covenant have
declared and engaged themselves before God, Angels, and Men, and have thereby
drawn in, and therewith engaged all Honest people to assert and defend their
just undertaking, and one another therein? Whether as things now stand, (when
this just Cause, which through Gods assistance could not be won from us in the
field, is in great danger to be stolen from us by the dark contrivances of its
and our adversaries) if this Parliament should dissolve at such a time as this,
and leave all, both Cause and all engaged by them in it to another Parliament,
the greatest part whereof may be no friends but enemies, or at least strangers,
or but little concerned in the first undertaking; whether this would not be
exceeding contrary to all those Former Declarations, Remonstrances,
Protestation, Vow, and Solemn League and Covenant?

ANSWER.
I Do allow -- the Members of this present Session, are those persons that
stand engaged by Oath and Covenant: and to that OATH and COVENANT, we appeal.
-- For Granted; they stand bound to protect all the HONEST people they have
engaged; but not the KNAVES, -- the Covenant-Breakers; I desire only this. --

Whether or Not, are they that took the Covenant, bound to protect the
Violaters of it? -- Nay, can they purge themselves of manifest Perjury and
Complication, should they not prosecute the obstinate Opposers of it?

5. Whether it be not more then sufficiently manifest what will ^e the carriage
of these Enemies to the Parliaments Cause, and its Adheren^s, when they get
power into their hands, since they are so forward already in their discourses
to charge the Parliament with Treason and Rebellion in their first Undertaking
the War, and lock on all their Friends as Rebels and Traitors for assisting
them in the prosecu^ion of it, and who are now in all places contriving and
promoting the electing of such into the New Parliament as are Enemies to the
present Parliament, their Friends and Cause, wherein if they prevail (as 'ti^
too likely) their work is done? How absolutely necessary is it then for the
present Parliament to continue their Session, for prevention of these
Mischiefs, which otherwise will ensue.

Upon these and many other very weighty considerations, it can by no means be
accounted either honorable, or just, or safe or prudent, for the present
Parliament to dissolve themselves, till first they have fully asserted and
vindicated their own just Undertaking, and the faithful adherents to it and
them, and not to leave both themselves and their Friends to the Malice and
Revenge of a vanquished Enemy.

If this should be, we may bid adieu to the Honor and Renown of English
Parliaments, and to all future hopes of assistance from the People, whatever
the Necessity may be: And let English men bid farewell both to their Civil and
Religious Liberties, if after so high a Conflict for them, with the expense of
so much Blood and Treasure, and having by Gods blessing subdued their Opposers,
yet after all to be exposed to a far worse Condition then before, which O God
forbid: We hope for better things from our present Parliament: All that we add,
is only this, If the King must come, none so fit to bring him as our present
Parliament.

ANSWER.
It Is not the Parliament is charged with Treason, but that Rebellious Faction;
-- that, by an Insolence, praevious to the Murtherof his Sacred Majesty. threw
out the Major Party of their Fellow Members, which interposed to save him --
and it is in their behalfs, this pitiful, half-witted Pamphleter engages.
Should these Gentlemen sit, till they found a Free Parliament their Friends,
they would hardly Rise betwixt This, and the Day of Judgment: and that's all they
desire. Alas! a Trifle. -- The care they take of our Religion, and Civil
Rights, in truth, is a great favor from them, that never understood their Own.
-- If the more sober, conscientious Persons at the Helm, think not fit to
dissolve so soon; the IONASSES, however must be thrown overboard, to save the
Vessel. -- He that dissents, let him produce his Reasons: and in Particulars,
but show what Good, they have either Done, or Meant us; to Balance the
Calamities they have engaged us in. I should be Glad to see these Men Repent;
Hardly, to see them Govern. -- These Folks are Ruined, if they do not Rule;
the Nation. if they do. -- The Question then is but --

Whether is more prudential; by saving of some half a score Secluders, that We
should Perish; or by their SPEEDY DISSOLUTION, that we should save our selves?

A Free Course of Success against the Rump, had put the People upon a Iollier
Pin; Their Humor was quite changed; They thought the Danger Over, and it was
now b^come a Thing Unseasonable to be Serio^s.

Accounting it expedient however, through all Forms to Follow them, and Fool
for Comp^ny, I was content to play the Mimique; as you may see in that which
follows, Entit'led

No Fool to the Old Fool.
Hark ye my Masters; -- for one half quarter of an hour now, let us be as Wise
as Woodcocks; and talk a little Treason. Why should not We thrive in the World
as well as our Neighbors? Had not other people Heads and Souls to lose as well
as We? If men will be Damned, they had better Damn Rich than Poor; as Bradshaw
and the Attorney General Damned. -- Believe me, -- three or fourscore thousand
pound is a convenient Plaster for a Broken Head; there is something to bear
Charges yet. Beside, There Is Power and Plenty. -- They Cosen whom they please:
-- Hang and Draw at Will; -- they keep their Lacquays and their Whores: and at
the last they go to Hell in Triumph. They have their Blacks and Elegies, and
leave the State to pay the Draper and the Poet. Twould make a man be-pisse
himself, to see the soft and tenderhearted Needham, weeping (like Niobe, till
he turns Stone) over the Tomb of Bradshaw, -- to see him Cry with one Eye, and
laugh with the other, and yet the Tragicomical Puppy keep his Countenance. The
Tears of such a Saint cannot but fall, like Drops of Lambeth Ale, upon the
Tongue of Dives, -- how great a Consolation was it (think ye) to the late
Protector to find himself placed at the right hand of God by Sterry? (that
Blasphemous, bold Phanatique) of whose Condition, Charity it self can scarce
admit a comfortable thought. For, after a long Course. of Treason, Murder,
Sacrilege, Perjury, Rapine, etc. he finished his accursed Life, in Agony, and
Fury; and without any mark of true Repentance. You Will say, he was the Br^ver
Villain for it. -- Crimes of this large Extent have indeed something that is
Masculine to allay them. But to be Damned for Sneaking; To purchase Hell at the
price of all that is pleasant Here: -- to contract Sin and Beggary, in the same
Act and Moment; This is the most Imprudent and Ridiculous wickedness that may
be. He that Indents with the Devil, has a merry Bargain, compared with Us;
There Is Time, and Pleasure. Here; the Vengeance treads upon the H^e's of the
Offense; and the Punishment of our Misdoings is the next immediate Effect of
them. In Paying Taxes, to an Usurped Power; There Is a Defection from the Right,
and a Compliance with the Wrong, which renders us doubly Criminal, -- and in
this case we do but Buy our Chains, and the next Consequent of our
Disobedience, is Slavery. It comes all to a Point, in what concerns Subjection
to Unlawful Powers. Under a Force, -- is a Brutish Argument. Vice is the
Obliquity of the Will: That Is Free. The same Plea lies in the Case of
Martyrdom: and by the same Rule we may renounce our Maker.

If Wicked, we are Resolved to be, -- Lets go a nobler way to work -- let us get
a matter of Half a Dozen Crafty Knaves together; take in some Thirty or Forty
silly Rascals into the Gang, and call our selves a Parliament. Why Gentlemen?
This is no impossible thing, Our Title is as good as Theirs, that have done the
same thing before us; but then be sure of the Proportion. Seven parts of Eight
must have neither Wit nor Honesty: yet Look as wise as Judges, and in the very
middle of their Pater-Nosters, pick their Neighbors pockets. These are to be
directed by the Rooks, and by them Both, the Nation, which would be
over-stocked with Cheats, were any more admitted into the Grand Conspiracy
against the People. To Personal abuses, the rest are likewise Qualified: They
may Imprison, When, Where, and Whom they please, without Cause showed, their
Will is a sufficient Warrant for the Well-affected. In fine, they are the
Peoples voice, and Tha^'s the voice of Heaven.

Why now should we despair of the same Events, from the same Means,
considering, what a Drowsy, Patient, and Phlegmatic people we have to deal
with? Shall's Fool a Little? Lets Vote down Magna Charta, and the Petition of
Right! Settle a Preaching Militia, and a Fighting Ministry? -- Out with our
Whinyards, and off with the Names, instead of the Heads of the Kings Tryers; as
Okey did upon the Change. Take away Monk's Commission; Petition the Soldiery
to Petition Us, to declare our selves Perpetual; -- Bind up the Nation under
Limitations for the next Session, and exclude all but our own party from the
Choice. No matter for the Law or Conscience of the business -- ARTICLES OF
SURRENDER; and Public ACTS of INDEMNI^Y, amount to nothing, -- OATHS and
COVENANTS, are but occasional Submissions to Con^eniency; not Binding any man,
that in the very act of Taking them, resolves to Break them. Let things come to
the Worst; when we have Overturned the Government; -- Polluted the very Atla^,
with our MASTERS BLOOD -- Cheated the Pu^lick, etc. It Is but to Whine and
Snivel to the People; tell them we w^r^ misled, by Cardinal Appetites; --
cloth all our Rogueries in Scripture Phrase -- Humble our selves before the
Lord (But not a Syllable concerning Restitution) and they will Forgive us: Nay,
perhaps, Trust us too: Think us their Friends, For doing them no more than all
the Harm we could. -- It Is a goo^ natured sort of Beast, -- the Common People,
if it be Pleased; and it is the Easiest thing in nature, for Fools and Knaves to
Please it. They have not been gulled half long enough yet, -- what will you say
now, to a New-Parliament made of an Did one? As There Is no Fool to the Old one,
so there is no Knave to the Old one.

What do ye think of your Episcopal Cole-marchant Sir Arthur, for Durham* and
let him bring in his Fellow Laborer Sir Harry Vane for Newcastle? In the City
of London, you cannot choose amiss, provided, that Ireton or Titchburn, be One;
and that he choose his Fellows. -- For Kent, no Man like Sir Michael Livesy,
For Norfolk there is Miles* Corbet, and if the House does not like him, they may
send him to the Red-Bull* for he personates a Fool or a Devil without the
Charge either of a Habit or a Viz^r. If the Nation be so Charitably disposed,
as to erect an Hospital, in favor of the Lame, the Rotten. and the Blind, let
'um take in Limping Lyk^* Robinso^* Rheumatique Mounson, Bobtail'd Scot; and
the Blinking ^obler. -- But why do I pretend to direct in Particular? -- Among
the Kings Tryers, Excise-men, Sequestrators, Cl^se-Committee-men,
^ajor-Generalls, Buyers and Sellers of the Crown and Church Lands, etc. -- they
may wi^k and choose. Alas, they are all Converted. I Am s^re he is Right, cries
one; he Told me so. Dull Sotts let Us be Right our Sel^es; and then, what n^ed
we care who is Wrong? I Will put a Case to you: suppose, upon the Dissolution of
this S^ssion, six or seven thousand of the Phanatique Souldjery, that knows a
Settlement destroys their Trade. should try a Blow for it yet; and by the help
of some of their Confederates, yet in appearance of Authority, should put a
Force upon the Honest Party: ('It Is but to suppose, what many of that Gang are
bold enough in Public to declare) I have a Phansy you will lo^k on still, and
betake your selves to your Old senseless Plea, -- They have the Power. --
Which, i^ you do -- No no; you cannot be so Tame, and witless.

Be careful whom you Trust, either in your Milit^a, or Counsels; Choose Persons
of Estates Honestly gotten; Such, whom the Law Preserves, ^ill Preserve the
Law. Whereas, If you choose such as have an interest of their Own, that th'warts
the Public; you're yery Charita^le to believe that those people, who all this
while, have Chea^e You to benefit them Selves, should, at the last, adventure
All to preserve You.

March 16. 1659.

UPon the Dissolution of the House, the Phanatick party betook themselves to
their wonted Insolence. Declaring publicly (diverse of them) that they were not
Dissolved: Offering to sit again; and protesting against the Choice of the next
Convention. They tampered the Army into a Combination; and proceeded to that
point of Boldness, that the Common-Counsel found it proper to entreat the
Counsel of State, and the General to retire into the City, during that Interval
of Parliament; for their greater Security.

March 19.

Observing the Lewd Practices of the Faction; and desirous to give the world
some notice of Particulars, in Order to the better Knowledge of them, I printed
this ensuing Paper.

THat this Nation has been long miserable, under the power of a violent and
Restless Faction, is clear to all such as are endued with Memory, and Reason:
nor is it more superfluous, to reflect upon their passed Miscariages than
Necessary to take some notice of their Later Cheats, and Insolences. Their
Design was, to fix themselves in a Perpetual C^unsel; contrary to Oa^h, and
Law; and to cut off successive Parliaments. To carry on which Project, they had
Armed all sorts of Li^ertines, throughout the Nation; particularly, threatening
London with Fire and Sword, if they should not comply. Their barbarous purposes
we^e Disappointed, by the General's Re-introduction of the Secluded Members:
Together, with the united rage of the People against them. In this hopeless and
Deserted condition. what they could not effect by open Force, they attempted by
Treachery, and Corruption. They used all Art, and Diligence, during the
Session, both to gain Opportunities, and to Improve them; but being over-voted
in the Main, They fell upon a more direct, and shameless method of Villainy. --
They falsified the Lists of the Militia: -- solicited Petitions from the City,
for their Continuance: -- Iuggled the Army Officers into a Tumult, -- Employed
their Instruments to Destroy the General; -- Mutinyed the Army, and the City;
and Finally, they engaged a great part of the Souldjery to Remonstrate against
the rest of the Nation. But all too little, to prevent their Dissolution; or to
Disturb our Hopes of Settlement.

The General has approved himself, in the calm, steady menage of this wild
Affair, a Person worthy of all the Honor we can give him. These Brutish
Libertines, -- finding all their Plots Bubbled, -- their Mines ven^ed, -- their
Party, Weak and Heartless, -- themselves Friendless Abroad, and Comfortless at
Home, -- as Guilty, and as Desperate as Cain; after the sad despair of any the
least Benefit to themselves, they are yet pleased in the Contrivance of our
Mischief; They Are not Dissolved, they tell us, -- and attempt to meet again;
That's in vain; and now they come to their last shifts, These Senseless
Cox-combs offer the Honest General the Instrument of Government; as if, that
Noble, Generous Soul, were to be wrought upon, to prostitute his Honor, and
his safety; and all this, to preserve a K^^nel of such Repro^a^ed, and
Ridiculous Puppies. I wonder seriously, how these Pimps, and Knigh^s o'th Post,
-- Scot and his Fellows, escape the fury of the People: That Rabbet-sucking
Rascal, with his Fellow Cheats, and Pandars; these are the Youths: Gentlemen,
that offer you like Dogs, to any Master, that will bestow the Haltering of
you. For shame, bethink your selves.

To be as short as possible, thus far you're safe: but yet these Tumblers have
not showed all their Tricks: their last Recourse, is to the Forgery of Letters;
(but so ridiculously framed, they are rather argument of Sport, than Anger: for
the Brewer is much better at a Chea^, than at a Stratagem) There are diverse
Scandalous Papers dispersed, in the Name of the King; and as the sense of the
Royal Party. You shall do well, to take notice, that nothing of that Quality,
proceeds ^ither from Himself, or his Friends. The Project is Phanatique, and
tends only to hinder our Expected, and Approaching Settlement. To mention One
for All; there is a Phamphlet of yesterday, En^ituled -- News from Brussels, in
a Letter from a near* a^tendant on his Majesty's Person, to a Person of Honor
Here -- Which Casually became thus Public.

Do but obs^rve this Formal Noddy, how he Boggles upon the very Title Page. --
How Casually, Good Man Sense-lesse? Did it D^op into a Printing House, and
Publish it self? -- his Title is followed, with a Suitable Text; of so Pityfull
an Air; and Fashion, I am ashamed to confess the reading of it. Indeed I
would advise the Secretary, rather to return to his Placket-Politiques, for he
is not half so good at State, as Bawdery. To deliver his aim in other terms,
for fear of giving the Reader a Vomit. The principal drift of his discourse is
to Personate a Royalist, Charging the Presbyterians with the murder of the
King, and professing an Implatable An^mosity against the whole party. -- Not to
employ more subtilty than needs upon so F^ivolous a Subject. Let this suffice.

Who Murdered the King, the Nation knows; and who interposed to Save him; --
who they are, that at this instant* Opp^s^ a Settlement, and who Desire it; Nay
More; we know, who cannot Live Under a Peaceable Government, and who cannot
Live Without it: And it is fit to show all honest people to distinguish.

Those, that have designed Us for Slavery, it is but reason to mark them o^t
for Justice* yet I should advise tenderness; whereby saving a Few, Infamous
Malefactors, we do not hazard a more Considerable Loss. He that Forgives
them, extends his Charity, but he that Trusts a man of them, Betrays his
Country.

March. 24. 1659.

THe Agitators were now grown so Busy in the Army, that the Counsel of State
put forth a Proclamation against them; and had not the singular prudence of the
General checked the Malice of that Confederacy, It would have proved of
danger^us Cons^quence. Finding themselves th^s disappointed of those ear^y
hopes they had as to the Army: Their next Trick was to procure Elections for
their purpose: and this they labored to ^ffect, by Tampering with the
Sheriffs, where they found any capable of a Practice: and by their Interest in
some pedling Fa^tious Boroughs, to get Themselves and their Friends chosen.

This being the present Danger, I Dispersed some Hundreds of Papers, the Title
and Copy whereof follows.

A Necessary and Seasonable Caution, Concerning Elections.
THe miserable dissettlement of this Nation, arising principally from Abuse of
Trust* practiced by those Persons, whom we chose to Represent the People; it
concerns us now at last, to provide warily against future Inconveniences, by a
more diligent Examination, and Knowledge of those we elect for the time to come.
We find the Na^ion Impoverished; the Government both of Church and State
dissolved; and all the Supports of a Puplick Magistracy devoured, by those
very people, who instead of Freeing us from Small and few miscariages,
(themselves) notori^usly exercised over us the greatest oppressions Imaginable.
For prevention of the like evils hereaft^r, we are to be very wary how we
choose; 1. Such persons as Preach without a Call, and deliver the Delusions of
Satan, for the I^spirations of the Holy Spirit; (We may know the Tree by its
Fruit.) 2. Such as either out of Fear, or Interest, Sacrifice the Public Good
to Passion, or Benefit, shifting from Party to Party; This Day for the King and
Parliamen; the next, Pensioners to the Protector, the Third for the Rump; the
Fourth for any thing that comes next. Under this notion, I comprise such as
make use of a Parliament-Priviledge, to Elude Creditors, to De^ain ill-gotten
Possessions, and to put themselves out of the Reach of the Law; th^r^by
hindering the due course of Proceedings against them. 3. And Lastly, take heed
of choosing any Persons that have already Falsified their Trust, -- by engaging
in Illegal Close-Committees* -- In any Relation whatsoever of Malice toward
the Late King, in Purchasers, of Sellers of the Public Revenues: -- In
Us^rped Imposi^ions upon the People. In Short; such, as have at the price of an
Universal Ruin, enriched Themselves; and laid the Foundations of their New
Babel, in Sacrilege, Perjury, Murder and Treason.


This may suffice for a Caution to all such, as are not resolved upon Beggary,
and Bondage.

THe Phana^icks had at this time many Irons in the Fire, and not without
Reason, for they had many Difficulties to Encounter. Their Instant and most
pr^ssing Concern was to Nip the Militia in the Bud; and either totally to
hinder the next appointed Choice, or so to Qualify and Overawe it, that we
should only be subject^d still to the same Faction, with somewhat more Pretense
of Equity and Form. They knew the Vote and Strength of the whole Nation would
be against them. And they set all their Heads and Hands at work to disappoint
it. Briefly; they had their Firebrands in the City; their bold and public
Agents in the Country: but their great Trust was in the Army; where they had
poisoned a Considerable party; And by whose Aid they made no doubt of Lambert,
(tho then a Prisoner) to head them, so soon as the Design were Ripe enough to
need him.

Upon this point of Exigence (that nothing might be wanting to procure another
War) they cast abroad in Swarms, Seditious Pamphlets; tending not only to
Disgrace the Person, and the Office of the King, his Fathers Memory, his
Friends, and Cause, but likewise to provoke the Weaker, and the l^sse
Considerate men of his own Party, by an Unseasonable and Mistaking Zeal to
blast the Business. The Rise and Course of the whole war is searched into, for
Matter to involve the Murderers of the King with those that would have Saved
him, in the same Hazard, Interest, Crime, and Quarrel.

One of the Modestest of these Discourses was put into my hand, with an Express
Desire that I would print an Answer to it, which accordingly I did: but rather
for my promise sake, then that I thought it worth the while; -- and This was it.

A Sober Answer to a Juggling Pamphlet, Entitled, a LETTER INTERCEPTED, etc.
I Have heard of one that has made himself a Cuckold, -- that has picked his
own pocket, -- and it is possible, a man may Design upon himself, and Intercept
his own Letters. The Miscariage, I confess, is a little odd,, where the
Courted party, -- the Contriver, -- and the Intercepter, are all One, and the
same Person. The Plot is Borrowed from the Story of Narciss^^* but by what
Enemy both to the Author, and Reader, this Disco^rse is made Public, we^^ an
Enquiry fitter for Authorit^, ^han a Private hand* Since so it is, le^s make
the b^st of a bad Marke^^* what the Composer has sold Cheap, -- We have Bought
Dear, and Both must L^s^ by the Bargain. Without ^urther Prolog^e -- H^r^'s SIR
POLITIC himself, and (...) take the measure of the man from his Title page.

A LETTER INTERCE^TED, -- Printed for the Use and Benefi^ o^ the Ingenuous
Reader -- in which the Two Different Forms of MONARCHY, and POPULAR
GOVERNMENT, are briefly C^nt^over^ed. --

( The Common (...) N. D. G^nt.)

EX UNGUE LEONEM. The VOICE is JACOB'S, b^^ the HANDS are ESAU'S. Popular
Arguments are of late become such a Drugg, the Author dares not own his
Inclination, for fear the Pamphlet should not off: but rather chooses, under the
color of a Phil^^^phical Debate, to advance a Seditiou^ Design; and instead of
delivering a sober Opinion, to excite a turbulent Faction. This will appear in
its due place; but in the Front, 'twas not so proper to disclose himself. The
Title is but a more formal kind of Bo-peep, -- a cousenage of the Reader into a
Two-penny expense, upon a thing not worth Three-ha'pence.

In the next page, you will find him more composed, and Magisterial. He
complements himself, Kisses his own fair Hand, -- Promises us an Honest, Plain,
Rational Discourse, not clogged with Maxims, or Examples; and then he falls to
the work upon the Question.

W^ether Monarchy, or the Popular Form of Government, be in Reason more safe
and profitable for the People? [pag. 2.]

He proceeds thence, to Distinguish Monarchy into Absolute, and Mixed or
Regulated, [ibid.] (though, by his Favor, Mixed, implies a contradiction.)

The Absolute (he says) is Absolutely Unlawful; and disconsonant both to the
Laws of God and Nature

If either One, or the Other: How comes it then, that God himself, styles
NEBUCHADNEZZAR (the King of Babylon) HIS SERVANT: upon the most express, and
severe penalties imaginable, commanding an Obedience to him? What means the
Prophet David when he says -- The Lord keep me from doing that thing unto my
Master, THE LORDS ANOINTED? That Tyrants Life, which purs^ed his, was then at
his Mercy; and a Phanatique Counsel, at his Elbow, advising him, to improve the
Providential Opportunity of taking it away; (but our Common-Wealth's-men are
Wiser, possibly, and Honester, than David.) This might suffice; but He goes on,
and so shall I, to bear him Company. --

It is against the Moral Law, (he tells us) for me to dispose of my own life;
since that Law, which Commands me, not to kill; does certainly require me, not
to kill my self, and the Law of Nature and Nations, does warrant any man to
kill, rather than to be killed. But He, that willingly and of Choice, lives
under a monarchy absolute, must, and does submit all that he has, Life not
excepted, to be at the will of the Monarch, etc. [pag.]

What pains this worthy Gentleman takes, to prove himself as good a Sta^esman,
as he is a Casuist; Is not my Li^e as well expo^ed to any Government? Since
wheresoever you place the Rule, the last appeal lies There; and There Is the
power of Life and Death, by the Agreement of all Nations. Again, An absolute
Monarch must be wicked, to destroy a Loyal Subject: and if a Limited, will be
so Impious too, there is no Relief, but Flight. The right of self preservation,
which our Author Intimates; con^erns but Individuals, at Liberty; -- Grotius
his Dissociatam Multitudinem. There, Every man is every Bodies Enemy: but when
we come to find, that safety, better secured by social Compact; and by
reducing all the several, and Dis-agreeing Particulars, under the Regiment of
some certain Laws directing to the Common benefit of all: In this Case, we
part with our Original Right, for the obtaining of a Nobler Good; -- Society,
and Order; without which, there is no Peace. I might here mind our Prevaricating
Author, of a Morality which he forgets, and that is Obedience. Rebellion is a
Blacker Crime, than Murder; for it is That, and More; but I would first
convince him, that Killing is not always Murder and that in many cases, a man
must rather choose to be Killed, than Kill. The Law strikes with the Sword of
Justice; and sure it is not Murder, by a Legal process, to destroy a
Malefactor. 'Twere That at least in me, to Kill the Judge, to save my self.
(But I suppose, our Author speaks his Interest, rather than his Opinion) In
fine, I cannot justify the Commission of a sin to save my Life. To draw my
Sword against my Prince although to save my self, in me, is Treason: but if I
l^se my Life, by not opposing Him, it is He alone that is Criminal, I am
Innocent. Nor does the choice alter the Case one jot; if I may Obey an Absolute
Monarch, I am as free to choose One, where I am at Liberty to choose the Form I
would be governed by. It is the Rulers part, not to command amiss, and it is the
Subjects Duty to Obey; (modo nihil Imperet, Naturali ^uri, aut Divinis
praeceptis Contrarium*) and (...) the worst; refuse, without Resisting.

Nay, but our Author tells us; -- A Free People, that have it i^ their choice,
and Power (as England now) to do otherwise, and shall submit their Lives to the
will, and dispose of an absolute Monarch, are most evidently thereby, in danger
of becoming guilty of self-Murther] [pag. 3]

Go thy ways N.D. for a profound Head piece! -- They are in more danger of
self-murder, in submitting to a Limited Monarch that is, of Hanging
themselves, if the King should come. Was there ever a more exorbitant Tyrant
than Cromwell? Our Freemen were content enough with him. Come: -- out wit, Our
modeller would speak, if he had a spoon, but the man is modest; I Will do it for
him. It Is this he would be at.

That we are now at Liberty to choose our Government; and that the King would
play the Tyrant, should be return. If his own Head does not sit sure. He may
thank himself. I would fain learn, from whence we date our Freedom. Who has
ABSOLVED us, of our OATHS, and DUTIES of ALLEGIANCE? Did we not swear to the
late King, and to his Heirs? And c^n a Government be altered, but by Consent of
all the Parties to it? This is too much said, upon a subject not properly my
Business. I Will proceed and wait upon him to his next Enq^iry; and that is
concerning Regulated Monarchy; but so Embroyled, it is infinitely harder to
Understand than to confute. Of Regulated Monarchies, Ours here in England is
beholden to him, he likes that best, and gives his Reason, Thus; The Excellency
of that Monarchy, WAS, that the Monarch without his Counsel could do no
considerable thing.] [pag. 3.]

By his fair leave, the Excellency of the GOVERNMENT, he would have said: for
it is the Imperfection of the Monarchy. But why WAS? IS it not, de Iure, still
the same?

He prosecutes this Train of Errors, yet with more;

All things were to be done in conjunction with his Counsel; either that Grand
one, his Parliament, consisting of Nobles, and Commons; or his Lesser Counsel,
consisting of Nobles chiefly, etc.]

Our Author, I perceive, is willing to confound Counsel, and Authority:
Whereas to represent, is one thing; it is another thing to Judge. It is the
Counsell's duty to propose, and advise, according to their Reason, but still it
is the Monarch's part to Act according to his own: without that Freedom, the
Prince is bound to Act in many Cases against his Conscience; and his Assistants
are become his Governors. Not to insist upon the Gentleman's mistake, in
asserting All things to be done in conjunctio^n with his Counsel. This is too
evident, to need a refutation. He spends his two next Pages, in dilating upon
the Desire of absolute Power in the Monarch; and the Reserves, or acquisitions
of the People; were he dashes the Kings Prerogative, and the Privileges of
Parliament, the One against the Other. Whereas the King has some Prerogatives
without a Parliament, but the Parliament has not so much as any Being, without
the King: (he being an essential of it.)

To pass over his False-fires, I shall come now to his main strength: And thus
it runs --

The Monarch cannot Rationally be thought to have other Business, or Study,
than to confirm, and establish the Monarchy to himself. [pag. 5.]

To this: First, He Is Entitled to the Government: (That, pro concesso) Next;
he is Entrusted, in Order to the Public Welfare, to Uphold it; and That, not
only in the Form, but to Himself: 'Twere to Betray his Trust, should he do less.

As to the appetite of Rule, which (as our Popular Champion will have it)
transports the Monarch, into a dangerous elevation above the People: -- That
Restless Impotency, is much more Hazzardous, in any other Government, than in
that of Monarchy. For, the Monarch's upper-most already: and rationally.
Ambition seeks rather to Raise it self above all others, than when it is at that
Height, still to exceed it self. It Is but a glorious envy, which aspires till
it be highest, and there determines.

As there is less temptation from without, so must the inclination, be much
calmer. Greatness is native and familiar to the Monarch: or, in case any
eagerness of Spirit should inflame him; It spends it self upon his Neighbors
liberties, rather than upon his Peoples: and it is extent of Empire abroad, not
enlargement of Prerogative at home, he covets.

This is not to exempt the Person of a Prince, from the frailties of a Man: he
may be vicious. But that too with less mischief to the public than to
Himself. He has no private aims, but what proceed from Principles nearer
allied to Kindness; then to Malice.

Now, to examine the likely Incidences to popular Government, and to proceed
upon his Postulatum, That in all men there is an inbred appetency of Power. That
granted, what can we expect from Persons of mean Fortunes, and extraction,
(invested with a title to Dominion) but Bondage, and Oppression? The short is,
there are many men, -- earnestly intent upon the same end; spurred on by keen
and craving Desires, to make themselves Rich, Great; and these design to raise
their Fortunes, and Reputations upon the public stock of blood and treasure.
At last when they have skrewed themselves up to that pitch of Power, by force,
and craft, where divine providence, by birth, had placed the single Person: --
when after a sharp, long, and chargeable contest, they have brought us within
view but of the counterfeit of what we quietly enjoyed before: Ready to seize
the sum of their own wishes; and the dear-p^rchas'd Fruit of all their Labors:
-- they find that point, which supports Sovereignty, too narrow for them all;
too large for any one of them; -- and, as they climbed together, so they fall;
-- crushed by those Hands, and Principles that raised them. We need not look
far Back for instances. What has obstructed our long look'd-for Settlement,
but Competitours for a personal rule; even among the Salus-populi-men
themselves? It Is nobler at the worst, to yield our selves to prey to a single
Lion, than to a Herd of Wolves: and that is the Difference, upon experiment,
betwixt the tyranny of One, and of a Hundred? ( -- old Oliver, and the Rump.)
Methinks it is a strange Confidence, to Argue for a Cause, confuted by the loss
so many Lives and Millions. For these twelve years last past, we have been
Slaves to Tyrants; Divided, in design to supplant one another, but still
United, to destroy the Nation, under the gay amusement of a Free State. But I
grow tedious.

The next thing I take notice of, is very remarkable (i. e.) Our Author's in
the right -- he says that From the Sovereignty, there lies no appeal. But then
he follows; that where a People will be ruled by a King they must give that
King absolute power to Govern.] [pag. 6.]

No need of that sure neither, -- the Sovereignty is in the King, though in a
Limited Monarchy: which so attemper'd; as that the People may not Rule in any
Case, nor the King, (singly by himself) in All; secures all Interests. I must
fix one note here, before I pass.

Although our Author tellsus, [ page 7.] that Absolute Monarchy is unlawful;
and Regulated, Dangerous: nevertheless, he rather advises the former than the
latter; -- That, which he terms Disconsonant to the Laws of God, than the
Other, which he pronounces only Dangerous, as related to the civil Good, and
Utillity of the People.

This is the Method of the whole party; they decry, first, the Form it self, as
being too Tyrannical; yet they condemn, the Limited of Insufficience, as to the
Exercise of Government; and the absolute, of Exorbitancy, as to the End of it.
One has too much Liberty the Other too Little. What is it they offer in
Exchange? a Free State; -- of a Model, ten times more Arbitrary and Pernicious.
When they have spent their Powder upon the Government; (for it is but Powder)
their Shot is still directed to the Person. Hinc illae Lachrymae. How have they
courted the General, (whose Honesty, is as Invincible as his Courage) to
Accept of what these Paper-Kites so much disclaim against? Our Grave,
Philosophising Mounsieur, he makes one too, and tells us, -- that Providence
has cast the Lot upon the Peoples side, and the Monarch has lost, if the
People will exclude him. --

Alas Good man! the Congregation's Holy every one of them -- Pretio^s Beagles!
to ascribe that to Providence, which they owe to Pe^^ury, and Sacrilege.
Where Is your Prescription? Where Is your Title? Enform ^he People, by what power
they are absolved from all their ties of Conscience: Honor, Thankfulness, and
Piety. Show them the Laws their Fathers purchased with their Bloods. Preach to
them o^t of Magna Charta. There Is the Foundation of the Peoples Freedoms. But
Sir I ask you pardon; The Kings a Woolf you say, and all the abjuring Saints
are Lambs, I warrant ye. But by your leave once more; you are absolutely of
Opinion then, not to admit the King by any manner of means? -- Indeed you
should do well, not to Anticipate the Parliament, it spoils the project, to
play the Tyrant, while you argue for the People. Pray let the King come in if
the next Parliament pleases. --

I must be now a little serious; for your next Paragraph has a spice of
C^nscience in it (the Word I mean) you will persuade the World, that if the King
comes in; it is neither Faith, nor Honor, nor Humanity, nor all together, can
tie up his Revenge. It would become you to tell the People, where ^re he brake
his Faith; Nay, Ill content my self, if youll but show me, where ever your
Phanatiques Kept an Oath, or Promise, if they might gain (the least) by
Breaking of it. The Conversation of the Person you inveigh against is b^yound
all Exception, Honorable: and it is in vain to mis-enform, against an evident
and contrary assurance. Many of those v^ry men that fought against him, will
witness for him: both for his Courage, and his Clemency. His Prudence, and his
Piety, are manifest, in This: that in despite of all Distresses, and
Temptations, he stands Firm, to his Temper, and to his Conscience. A Better
Friend, there lives not; nor a Better Nature. And this is Heat last, our Guil^y
Pamphletter bestows his Gall upon. I am no stickler for Prerogative: my
Patience, will hold out till the next Session: but to see Majesty invaded by a
private Hand, -- the People Poisoned, by the same instruments that destroyed
the Prince, -- all I can say is, we are ^^me Fools, to suffer it. But though
his passion may be Troublesome, our Author gives us some Diversion in his
Argument, and (Kinder still) he proves best Company at last. Kingly Government
if not absolute, (he says) i^ Lame; if Absolute, -- Destru^tive to the People.
Very good: Help the Defect, (if that be all) of the One; or at least, do not
impose upon us, in another shape, the possible Mischiefs of the Other -- pray
what is the Difference, as to our Security; the Supreme Authority under a Popular
Form, or the same power under a Monarchique? You Will have your Popular Assembly,
the Judge Unquestionable of all Expediences, and Dangers: why not a Single
Person as well? You say, He may abuse that power; and I say so may They. For
instance, suppose they judge it fit to change the very Form, what Hinders them?
or if they rather choose, to entayl the Government upon their own Families, and
to perpetuate themselves, what Remedy? If any, they are not Absolute: if none,
we are worse Here, than Before. The King cannot Betray the Peoples Trust; these
may.

What signifies your telling us, that the King absolute, is not bound to the
Laws he shall make? [pag. 9.] And by and by, -- that contrary to the Monarchy,
this, (meaning Democracy) makes not any one Law, to which every individual
person in the Assembly, is no^ subject? (the whole Assembly indeed, as it is
the Sovereign power, is unquestionable, you say.) It Is not the Persons, but the
Power, we are to consider; Conjunctim, they are as little subject as the single
Tyrant; and possibly they will never dis-joyn, they that can make what Laws they
please, will doubtless make this one of the number, -- that their own Members
shall be only tryable by their Peers: and by that device, they make themselves
both Parties and Judges.

To grant more then is needful; -- be it -- that in a State of Quiet, and
Universal liberty, such a Form might be admitted, as our Contrive^ t^rusts upon
us; but to attempt to force a Government, that excludes nineteen parts of
twenty of the people, from the exercise of it; and this upon a Nation
pre-engaged by Oath, and (by a sad experience) interessed against it. -- How
practicable, or how prudent, such a proposal may appear to others, I cannot
say: To me it wears the Face of a D^sign, promoted by a Factious, guilty Party,
to sacrifice the Nation, to their private interests, and despayres.

And yet such is the charity of our Author, he reckons all the miscarriages of
these late years in Government, but as foul way upon a Journey: and bids us not
conclude^ against our Inn at Night because the passage was dirty. (This is
according to his wonted tenderness.)

Now to my Phansy, it looks rather thus. We have been hitherto misled; our
very Guides have robbed us, and yet they bid us follow them still, they will
bring us to Paradise at last, -- Whither they will carry us, we know not; -- we
are in the Briars at present; -- we know the way home again; -- what have we
then to do, but to return?

Our Authors little Reasonings concerning Trade, are trivial; I shall refer
him to the Merchants for his Answer. They are the fittest Judges in the Case.
They have tried war, and peace, Monarchy, and Popular Government; let them say
which they like best. -- His Pen begins to run a little muddy: and what I do
not understand, I Am not obliged to answer. Something he talks of Peace abroad,
and of the motives to it; which he pronounces to be Advantage and no Body
denies it.

This does not hinder, -- because the Reasons of the Peace betwixt the Crowns
of France and Spain, might properly result from a Particular Convenience of
State betwixt them, that therefore the effects of that Agreement cannot referr
to Us. They Are more at Leisure now: nay there is a high necessity incumbent upon
them, to send abroad those Forces, which otherwise would be both Expensive, and
Dangerous at Home (Not to press other arguments, of themselves obvious, to
hasten our Composure, even for that very Cause; that they are Agreed.)

I presume not to direct, as our Imperious Commonwealths-man does; but as one
Private Person, I pretend to Reason the Opinions of another, submitting still
my Judgment to any Legal determination, or Rational Conviction.

Touching the King of Spains Design to Propagate the Romish Religion [Ibid.] --
we are the securer for that very design, if we unite upon the Basis of the
English Law: The mere Antiperistasis preserves us: whereas, If we compel that
Person, who by Divine Assignment, and Civil right, is our undoubted Sovereign;
to employ Foreign Succors to recover his Dominions; It may be feared, (and
it is but Reason) that Spain will Article for some concessions, in favor of the
Catholics, more then otherwise would, possibly, be granted to them: where the
Fault lies, in case of this extremity, let the People Judge. --

Bless us, -- what a Fit of Piety has taken our Friend, now of a sudden! He
calls in the Ministers, for his Compurgators, and desires them to declare --
what Government. (He Will feed their Flocks in the mean while.) Indeed, these
Pulpit-Politiques are not amiss. The Priests shall tell us what Government
fits their Reformation. Pray Sir, let me help you out; -- a Gloss upon the
Covenant, does your Business: it is but to tell the people, that in the Holy
Tongue, KING, signifies COMMONWEALTH, and the work is done.

The Gentleman, begins now to Fumble, and Talk Idle; and, in effect, he is
drawing home. But first he recommends the Nurcery and Education of his
Brat-project, even unto any Kind and Powerful hand that will promote it. From
hence he passes into a Quaint Resemblanc^ of the state of the Nation, to a man
in a feavour, and the People in Gross, to a Restive Horse with a Galled Back:
and so committing the issue to the Lord, the man Departs.

His thoughts, and mine do not agree; what ere the matter is. His Conceit is
this, The Nation's mad; and Promoted by false appetite, covets things
Mischievous; (that is, Monarchy) the wise and Charitatable Physician, (that is
the Commonwealths man,) he forces upon it what he knows to be more proper for
the Cure, (and this is a Free State) -- Now here is our difference.

I Am of opinion, that the Physicians are mad; the Nation sober, we have tried
their Physic, for some dozen years together; and every day we are worse then
other upon it; we find upon Experiment, that they prescribe us Poison, instead
of Remedies, and that they are but Mountebanks; they Live by Killing us. Our
Former Diet agreed much better with our Constitution, so that we have no way
left but to fall to That again.

But to conclude; -- his conceit of a Iadish People with a Galled Back, That Is
his Masterpiece. He tells us, it will neither suffer a Rider, nor a Dressing,
till it be overcome by Force, and then a Child may up, and Ride it.

These are somewhat broad signs. Now by your favor, Sir, the Faults not in the
Horse; but rather in the Rider, and the Saddle. The Nation has been Ridden
these dozen years together, at Switch, and Spur, in a Commonwealth Saddle; That
must needs pinch the Back of a Monarchique People. -- Nor is it yet so tame, as
you imagine; Change but the SADDLE, and the RIDER, and you shall see the Nation
will do well, without a Horsleech.

March* 27. 1660.

UPon the neck of this, came out Two sharper Pamphlets; written, (as I am of
late Informed) by a Renegado Parson; but as then, I took them to be either
Nedham's, or Miltons, (a Couple of Currs of the same Pack) They were Printed by
Livewell Chapman, and a Proclamation from the Counsel was issued out against
him for it, to which he never appeared. I was by many Reasons moved to Answer
these; as well to lay them Open, and Confute them, as to prevent the Possible
exception that might arise from a Reply by some less wary, though more skillful
pen.

The malice of these Pamphlets was Double-edged; and the Blow made at the Kings
Party over the Presbyterians Shoulder: Directed to persuade the World that
'twas the Presbyterian did the Mischief; and to engage the Presbyter himself
under an Apprehension of Revenge. The scope will better appear upon the
Reading, and whether I did Well, or Ill, to write these following Answers.

Plain English, TO HIS EXCELLENCY The LORD GENERAL MONK, AND The OFFICERS of
the ARMY under his COMMAND.
My Lord and Gentlemen,
IT is written, The prudent shall keep silence in an eviltime; and it is like,
we also might hold our peace, but that we fear a knife is at the very throat,
not only of our and your Liberties, but of our persons too. I^ this condition,
we hope it will be no offense, if we cry out to you for help, you that (through
Gods goodness) have helped us so often, and strenuously maintained the same
Cause with us, against the return of that Family which pretends to the
Government of these Nations. It is the pulick interest and yours, that we
hitherto fought for, and for which we now plead; therefore we insist upon it
with the greater confidence before you, because we are all equally concerned in
the good or ill of your transactions: We cannot yet be persuaded, though our
fears and jealousies are strong, and the grounds of them many, that you can so
lull asleep your Consciences, or forget the public Interest, and your own, as
to be returning back with the multitude to Egypt, or that you should with them
be hankering after the Le^ks and Onions of our old bondage. Though it were
possible you should forget, yet certainly God will not, all the injuries and
oppressions done by that family to his Church and people in these and other
Nations: Though the Inscription [Exit Tyrannus] which was fixed over the place
where the Statue of the late King formerly stood at the Exchange, has been
blotted out by the Rabble, yet it is written with the Pen of a Diamond in the
hearts of many thousands, and will be so hereafter in the adamantine. Rolls of
Fame and History. No matter then, though the profane Vulgar take a liberty to
proclaim him both Saint and Martyr in the midst of their Bon-fires, and their
Tipple. All the good fellows were ever at his Devotion, because he was for
theirs, and commanded it to be observed upon the Sundaies. But to the end it
may be better known how good a King, and how great a Saint he was, we have
taken the boldness at this instan^ to offer you an account of some part of the
transactions during his Reign: and because there are too many in the City who
wait the good time to re-erect his Statue, we desire in the first place to
present you his Picture, as it was drawn by a good hand, the Parliament, in the
year 1647. at which time it was resolved upon the Question jointly by the Lords
and Commons in Parliament Assembled. That they would make no further Addresses
or Applications to the King, or receive any Message from him.


ANSWER.
SOme two days since, came to my view, a Bold, Sharp Pamphlet, called PLAIN
ENGLISH -- directed to the GENERAL, and his OFFICERS, etc. --

It is a Piece drawn by no fool, and it deserves a serious Answer. -- By the
Design; -- the Subject; -- Malice, and the Style; I should suspect it for a
Blot of the same Pen that wrote ICONOCLASTES. It runs foul; -- tends to Tumult;
-- and, not content Barely to Applaud the Murder of the King, the execrable
Author of it vomits upon his Ash^s; with a Pedantique, and Envenomed scorn,
persuing still his sacred Memory. Betwixt Him, and his Brother Rabshakeh, I
think a man may venture to divide the glory of it; it relishes the mixture of
their united faculties, and wickedness. As yet, it is true; the Hand is somewhat
doubtful to us; but the Drift, -- Certain, and it is as Clear from whence it
first moved, as to what end it tends, it speaks the Rancour, and the interest
of the Rump; be the contrivance whose it will; and, beyond doubt, it was
written by some Mercenary to the Faction; and That, by their direction, and
appointment. It Is too Malicious, for a private Passion; and too Dangerous, for
one that writes not, either for Bread, or Life. Take it in gross; it is an Alarm
to all the Phanatiques in England; couched under the specious notion of an
Appeal to the General, and his Army, ass^rting to all purposes, the interests;
and Justifying the ^orrid Practices of the Regicide-Party. --

It Remonstrates; -- Expostulates; -- Tempts; -- Threatens; -- Flatters; --
Begs; -- Prevaricates: and by all Artifices, toward all Humors, it moulds it
self into an application suit^b^e: -- only upon the Blood, and Family of the
late King; it lashes out into an Impious, and Inhumane fury, sufficient to
Disgrace, the Sober (in comparison) promoters of his Death; and to Startle
their very Consciences, that spilt his Blood with Pleasure.

Nor does the Brutish Rebel only qui^ the Man, in point of Tenderness; his rage
against the Royal Line, disturbs his Reason too. (otherwise smooth enough to
delude such as are not very well aware of him) Whether it be the Agony* and
Horror of a Wounded Soul, which thus transports him; or that, in these
excesses, he only Personates the last Convulsions of a Heart-broken Faction; --
It matters not: Thus much we may collect from his distempers; That Rabble is,
at this instant, upon a Combination, to Tumul^uate the Army, and the People,
and such as will not share the Guilt of their Conspiracy, they labor to engage
within the Reach and Danger of it. That we may better understand what they
Design, we will see a little what they Say.

This Phamphlet speaks the sense of the whole Gang; and thoroughly Examined,
will discover the frame, and the extent of of their lewd Purposes.

I look upon it as an Affront to Christianity, and to Reasonable Nature; so
scandalous; I vow to God, in Favor merely of Humanity, I would suppress it,
were no more Copies extant of it: but it is too late for that. The Countries are
already furnished; and the Town yet full of them; (the singular, and early
care of the Public Magistrate to hinder it notwithstanding) so that it rests
now, only to lay open the vile interests of this bloody Faction, and Antidote
the People against the danger of their Pestilent Infusions. Let Time produce
the Author; (if it be lawful to Profane the Light with such a Monster) The
Matter only of this Licentious Paper must be my Subject.

IF we must never be quiet, til these People think themselves Safe, we must
stay till divine Justice is dissolved; -- till they believe the word, and Power
of God, a Fable; -- till they can Lay that Devil, Conscience; -- and Blot out
of the Table of their Memories, all their Presumptuous outrages, both against
Heaven and Earth; -- till they can Quench those raging Horrors that Exagitate
their Souls; -- Remove those hideous Fantomes, (that whereso'ere they fly)
pursue them, with the images of those that they have murdered, Bleeding
afresh* and when they think to Turn away their Looks from the Dire object, to
the other side, they meet with a Remembrancer, that minds them of their
Sacrilege, and Treason, and then they start again, another way; and there they
meet with a Sword drawn, to revenge their Perjuries. In fine, their Injuries
are of a large extent, and such, by consequence, must be their fears (while
they persist in their Impenitence.

In this distress, rather of Thought, than Danger; of Terror from within,
rather than Violence, without; They do well, to implore the Generals help, to
save their Lives, that would have taken His: especially, obliging him (in
Surplus) with this additional respect: That they have made him Free o^ the
Phanatiques; -- Embarked him in the same Bottom with themselves; -- and
Finally, involved the Honor, and the Saver of his Country, in common, with
the Blemish, and the Pest of all mankind.

Say, -- MILTON; NEDHAM; either, or both, of you (or whosoever else) -- Say
where this Worthy Person, ever mixed with you? (That is; You, -- or those that
Employ you, and allow you wages) more, then in order to those very purposes, to
which he still adheres, and from whence, you recede.

The return of that Family, which Pretends [as this Tumbler phrases it] to
Govern us, nor was nor is the Question. The public interest, that he fought
for, and you swore to: -- was the Preserving of our BIRTHRIGHTS: -- the good
old LAWS: -- his MAJESTY'S LEGAL AUTHORITY: -- the PRIVILEGES of PARLIAMENT,
etc. -- ( Read the Old Declarations) not to maintain a Canting Faction in the
Army; -- a Py-bald Ministry: -- or, which amounts to all: -- the Residence: --
the Errata's of an Honest Parliament.

Again, to comply fairly with an Universal Vote; -- That, does our Scribler
call forgetting of a public Interest; and keeping of the Covenant, or an
Oath, is, with him lulling of a Man's conscience asleep. A desire to be well
again, after a Cursed fit of the Spleen (and plied with steel too) of well-nigh
Twenty years con^i^uance, -- our Demi* Levite, -- terms it a Hank^ring after
our (...) Leeks and Onions. For that, -- Every man as he likes* you're for a
Rump, it may be. -- I Am for somewhat else. Believe me, I had rather Li^e poor,
and Honest; than Hang Rich; and Treacherous: -- th^n give my self a turn in one
of the King's old Houses. But -- De Gustibus, non est Dispu^andum.
I Am sorry my first Page is Printed. -- I shall be thought a Fool now, for
suspecting our Plain-English-man, of Wit. Something there is in his vein, like
bottle Ale. Stir it; -- It Tumults* ^putters and at last it spends it self in
Foam* -- but Nourishment, or Comfort there is none in it. -- The Fellows Jadish,
Dull, -- out of his Beaten and Known Rode; but when he comes to rail against
the King, he is in his Element. There, he is a Thorough* paced, Egregious
villain: and yet a Stumbler; but a false step or two may be allowed him.

This Formal Devil, -- how great an honor does he to the Royal Fami^ly, in
his reviling of it* -- The Injuries and Oppressions it ha^ done to Church, and
People, trouble him sore. The Blo^^ing out of -- EXIT TYRANNUS, sticks in his
stomach too, but, though the Statues gone, the story shall stand firm, there
lies his Consolation.

Audacio^s Brute* (the Blot* and the Deformity of Humane Race.) During the
War, the Nation lay oppres^ under the Common fate of an Intestine Broyl* The
Quarrel was disputed both with Pens and weapons, doubtfully, as to the Vulgar;
-- among the wiser sort, some steered their course by Interest, or Passion;
others resigned themselves, (abstracted from all other thoughts) to what they
reckoned Piety, and reason. (Thus for the Burden ^eems divided* After this the
King is made ^ Prisoner, and his Par^y sunk, now I Demand; Who has oppressed us
since, but those that Swore till then, they fought to save us* If we look back
beyond the War, our Mischief there was, that we were better fed than taught*
We were Rich, Wanton, and Rebellio^s.

But I begin to waver in my unde^taking. -- I find I have a W^l^ to deal with,
not a Man; That preys upon the Dead. A Devil! -- whose Business is to break the
Bonds of Unity and Order, and to Calumniate Virtue. Nor does it serve him* the
bare Murder of his Master, as it does other (...) of ^^pine, that leave the
^arkasse, when they have ^ucked the Blood] This w^^^ch must descant, and (...)
his (...) with an Audacious Pe^ulancy: -- Make P^oviden^^ it self a Compli^ate;
and with a Com^que sawcyness, Place or Displace; -- in Heaven, or Hell as his
Luxuriant Humor pleases.

BRADSHAW, these Villains rank among the Heroes; (and he deserves a Saints
place in their Calendar) -- a man, of whom we dare not barely hope well, so
enormous was his life, and so Conform, his Obstination in that lewdness to his
Death.

Whereas, that glorious Creature, that Dyed the object of this Monsters
insolence, and Rage, that innocently suffered, what that Pageant-President as
vilely acted: -- that with a Primitive Patience, Piety, Constancy, and
Resignation, endured the scorns, the injuries, and persecutions of his own
Subjects, and at the last, received his Death, from their very hands, in whose
behalf he Dyed.

This Saint and Martyr, [BOTH; beyond Controversy, so far as we can Judge] is
by our Charitable intelligencer Enrolled in the Black List, -- Charged with
Indevotion and Intemperance; so was our Savior a Wine-bibber, a haunter too of
Publicans and Sinners: -- to whose Inimitable example, [ I speak with
Reverence, to God and Truth] both in his life; and suffering, I do believe, the
story of our Late Sovereign, bears the nearest proportion of all others. -- But
it is amid their Bon-fires, and their Tipple [this Miscreant tells us] that he is
Canonized; -- and that his Majesty commanded Drinking as ^ Sunday exercise. The
World that kn^^ the King, knows this to be a Lie, [but it is our Mercuries Trade;
-- it is his Diana to amplyfie a little for the Public good] it is true, there
were some Liberties allowed upon the Sabbath, which being mis-employed, were
counter-manded. (How does this scand^ll both of Providence, and Society, escape
Thunder, or a Dagg^r*

We shall now have the story of our King and Saint: (he says) and to usher in
the erection of his Statue, his Picture first, -- dr^wn by the PARLIAMENT in
1647: (as our libelious Pamph^^t^er would persuade us) when the Vote passed
both by Lords and Commons, concer^ing Non-Addresses. I should be tedi^us to
reply upon every particular in the Declaration he talks of: But as to what
concerns the needful, and the proper Vindication of his Majesty; together with
those worthy Members, whom this seditious Rump-whelp labors to involve in the
same desperate and exorbitant proceedings with his ungracious Masters, -- In
what concerns, I say, their Vindication, I shall be clear and punctual;
leaving the Judgment of the Controversy, to the Impartial Reader.

WE revive this the rather, (says he) because the memory of Men being frail,
cannot retain all particulars; which is the reason (we fear) why so many
formerly engaged against him as high as any, upon conscientious accounts, both
Religious and Civil, are staggering and backsliding, and have need of some
quick and faithful Monitor to mind them of things past, and make them beware
of the present, lest they return with the Rout, and cry, Let us make our selves
a King again of that Family; that Family which so cruelly persecuted us and our
Brethren, and which still remains engaged by reason of State, and ancient
Principles of Enmity and Interest, to plow up the old Furrows upon our backs,
and re-deliver our persons and consciences into the hands of our old
Tormenters; and our Men of might, and our Counselors, to become sacrifices to
the revenge of an implacable party. March on then, (my Lord and Gentlemen,) for
believe it, there is in point of Safety no possibility of retreat, and much
less in point of Conscience or Honor; For, if you respect Conscience, (as we
hope you do) lay your hands upon your hearts, and tell us what hope you or we
can have, that the reformed Religion and Cause will be protected and maintained
by the Son, which was so irreligiously betrayed both at home and abroad by the
Father. It may be you do not readily remember these things, nor how much blood
was spilt by royal treachery, nor the manifold usurpations and designs by him
projected and acted upon our liberty, the like never done by any Prince before:
and for Blood, the Scottish Ministers employed hither Anno 1644. proclaimed and
published in Print, That the Late King had spilt more blood than was shed in
the ten Heathen Persecutions of the Christians: and the Ministers of London,
(as we can show you by several Prints of theirs) declared, That satisfaction
ought to be had for bloo^* that he was a Man of blood, and not capable of
accommodation with the Parliament. We mention not this to upbraid them; for, we
reverence their ancient Zeal in this particular, and humbly entrea^ them, as
well as your Excellency, and the Officers, and all the good people of these
Nations, to observe the forementioned Resolves of the Lords and Commons, which
were introductory to that most noble Act of Justice afterward executed upon
the King.

And that it may appear to be such; in despite of Ignorance and e^vy, we have
been bold here to present you in Print that most remarkable Declaration of the
Commons assembled in Parliament, in pursuance of the said Resolve of both
Houses, wherein they declare the Grounds and Reasons why they passed the
Resolves of no further Address, and therein you will see also, how well he
deserved to lose his head, and his Family the Kingdom; whose corrupt and
irreconcilable interest had been the head and fountain of th^^e Rivers of blood
and misery which had flowed so many years about these Nation^.

TO help the memories of some, that may very well forget the things they never
thought of; and to reproach to others, their inconstancy, who, out of good
intent at first engaged, and after That, convinced of their Original mistake,
upon a better Light, relinquished; there needs no better Monitor, than such a
Person, whose Guilt and Desperation, transport him beyond all hopes of mercy;
-- This Man sollicites for his Head, when under the pre^e^t of Conscience, he
labors for a Party: and yet me thinks he should not need. Alas! he is but the
Rump's Solicitor, he pleads their Cause, takes their Fee, and vanishes.
Impudent Creature, to presume to be afraid; as if a Hangman would disgrace
himself to meddle with him! O*h that Family That Family, puzzles our Men of
Might, [as the Droll words it*] our Counselors wonderfully.

Now do I fancy the Fellow, this Bou^, extremely to see the Little Agitatour
f^ll upon his Politiques, betwixt flattery, and saw^yness, Half-^uto^, and
Half-Parasite, with one eye up, and the other down, accost the General. --

My Lord, and Gent^emen, march on; [the word of Command; a Noble Rogue] for
believe it, etc. -- their's no retreat, he tells them, either in point of
safety, conscience, or honor, -- and then the Whelp takes another snap at the
King: as shamelesly, as senselesly, affirming, that the Reformed Religion,
[that is, [as I suppose he means] the Protestant] and Cause, [that is, the
Peoples Laws and Liberties] was irreligiously betrayed by our late Sovereign.
[Who lost his head in defense of one, and th'other] the Caution he puts in
against the Son is of the same alloy, a Person, so indulgent to his People,
that out of his particular Necessities, he yet relieved the English prisoners
that were taken in Flanders; although his Enemies; and, in point of Conscience,
further, so tender, that he preserves the Church of England in the Dominions of
the King of Spain: and still, his Honor, with his Religion. But let us a
little examine his Instances, for he pretends now to proceed to proofs.

The Scottish Ministers (as he tells us) proclaimed, and published in 1644. That
the late King had spilt more blood than was shed in the Ten Persecutions of the
Christians, -- and the Ministers of London declared him a Man of blood, etc. --
(That is, the High Priests, and Officers, cried out, saying, Crucify him,
Crucify him.) [That's the Original.] But to come closer to the Business, the
Scotis^, and the Scotch Ministers, are a clear different thing. Scotis^,
denotes the Ancient Faction^ of the Nation, [No Favorers of Kings,] and
Scotch, relates to their Nativity alone, abstracted from the Party.

First, they were Argyles Creatures, selected to promote Argyles designs: So,
not the Ministry of Scotland, but a Pack of Scottish Ministers.

Next, of no more Authority to the Rump, against the King, than to the Nation,
against the Rump, [in which they are as much unsatisfied.]

The Ministers of London, did as much, he says. That Is something truly; till
we consider what those Ministers were, and by whom, placed, and molded, for
that purpose.

Marshall was the prime person in the Agency betwixt the two Nations; -- He,
that cursed MEROZ; He, that was sent Commissioner into Scotland; taught them
their Lesson there, and then returning, taught some of our reputative Divines
to sing the same Tune, Here. -- This is the Man, that closed with Nigh, when
Presbytery went down; and carried the 4. Bills to ^he King, at
Carisbrook-Castle, for which, they had 500 l. apiece. I could tell you of some
more of the Gang, that, under question for confederacy with Love, after a due
formality of seeking God, delivered, as upon account of Inspiration, that
Oliver Protector was the person; and his the Government, of all that ever
were, or should be, the most agreeable to God.

This is not, to lessen the esteem of Holy Orders; neither to fix a rash,
irreverend Censure upon the Ministry: No Man reveres the Character of a
Churchman more than my self. But it is to show the World, how much our
Pamphlet-Merchand is steered, by Interest, and Passion, and how little, by
Reason, and Truth.

The grinning Whelp, now, betwixt snarling, and fawning, would fain persuade
the General, and his Officers, and all the world beside] that the Resolve of
Non-Addresses, by the Lords and Commons, was introductive to the MURDER of the
King. Murder, I say, that is the Plain English of what he styles -- A MOST
NOBLE ACT OF JUSTICE; His Method lies through direct Contradictions to the
Universal Rules, of Logique, Truth and Honesty.

By this Insinuation, he charges that Exorbitance upon the two Houses, and
draws an inference, from the Impardonable Quality of that Action, to the
Necessity and Reason of pursuing it. This, he pretends to make appear, in
spite of Ignorance, and Envy, from the Commons Declaration, in persuance of
the resolve of Both Houses, containing the Reas^ns, why no further Address* and
thence, proceeds to a Determination upon the Fathers Life, and the Son's
Inheritance; -- as po^itively fixing upon the Kings Account, those Plagues this
Nation has endured; as if the Graceless Villain were of Counsel with the
Eternal Wisdom.

I shall observe in order, and First, I Will prove that the vote of Non-Address,
was not properly an Act of the two Houses; or if it were so, that it did not
rationally direct to the Kings Life.

Secondly. That Declaration of the Commons, (SINGLY) declaring the Reasons of
the resolve of Both Houses (Jointly) does not amount eitheir to a
justification, or intention of taking the Kings life, -- No not though I should
grant the Members Free, -- which I cannot; and the Authority Full: which I do
not. -- To the First. --

They were under a Force. -- Upon a Debate in the Commons House, concerning the
Answer to the 4. Bills, presented to him Dec. 24. 1647. and debated, Ian. 3.
Commissary Ireton delivered himself after this manner.

The King has denied safety, and protection to his People by denying the 4.
Bills, that subjection to him, was but in lieu of his protection to his People;
this being denied, they might well deny any more subjection to him, and settle
the Kingdom without him: That it was now expected, after so long patience, they
should show their Resolution, and not desert those valiant men who had engaged
for them, beyond all possibility of retreat, and would never forsake the
Parliament, unless the Parliament forsook them first.

From hence naturally results the menace of the Army, in case the Parliament
should forsake them; and Ireton understood the Souldjery too well to mistake
them. --

As yet; here is nothing Capital pretended against the King.

After some more debate CROMWELL urged, -- that it was now expected, the
Parliament should govern and defend the Kingdom, by their Own Power and
Resolutions; and not teach the People any longer, to expect safety and
Government from an Obstinate man, whose heart God had hardened: That those men,
who had defended the Parliament, from so many dangers, with the expense of
their Blood; would defend them herein with Fidelity, and Courage, against all
Opposition. Teach them not by neglecting your Own, and the Kingdoms safety, in
which their own is involved, to think themselves betrayed, and le^t hereafter
to the Rage, and malice of an irreconcilable enemy, whom they have subdued for
your sake; and therefore are likely to find his future Government of them
insupportable; and fuller of Revenge then Justice: Not^ -- lest Despayr Teach
them to seek their safety by some other means than adhearing to you, -- who
will not stick to your selves; how destructive such a Resolution in them will
be to you all, I tremble to think and leave you to Judge.

This Speech, concluded the debate; and the better to Impress his meaning, he
laid his hand upon his sword, at the end of it. If this be not a Force, what
is? The Power and Inclination of the Army, being the only moving Arguments to
obtain the Vote. The Question was then put, and Carried for no more Addresses.
-- But no pretense still that extends to Life.

I shall appeal now to the Declaration it self; to which our Regicidall Babbler
refers the world for satisfaction.

First, the Sectarians had stolen a Vote, Ian. 4. to Engarrison Whitehall, and
the Mews: (the Lords not mentioned in the case) their manner of obtaining it,
was this. 'Twas Noon, and the Independent party called to Rise. The
Presbyterians went their ways to Dinner: the Independents staid and did their
business.

The Lords opposed the vote for Non-Addresse; (10. to 10.) but the Engagement
of the Army, cast it, who sent a Declararation to the Commons of thanks for
their 4. Votes against the King, ^ngaging to defend them with their Lives, etc.
-- Is this a Force yet?

Soon after this; comes forth a Declaration, and Reasons, etc. Drawn by a
Committee appointed, by the Independents, etc. So that even That too, was a
piece, Contrived by the Designers of our Mischief, and by a Force, Extorted
from the Sober rest, that would have saved us. This appears, from the interpose
of the Presbyterians, to moderate the Eagerness of it, upon the debate. The
last 4. lines of the said Declaration will be sufficient to stop the mouth of
any Reasonable person, as to the point of life; (even without the Violence;
which undenyably produced the rest.) After an Enumeration of diverse
particulars objected against the King* The Declaration concludes thus.

These are some few, of the many Reasons why we cannot repose any more Trust in
him, and have made those former Resolutions; (meaning the 4. Votes concerning
Non-Addresses) yet we shall use our utmost Endeavors, to settle the present
Government, as may best stand with the Peace, and Happiness of this Kingdom.

This very Declaration touches not his life; it is not said, settle A present
Gov^nment, but THE --; (relating properly to an Amendment, not an Abolition)

Considering the Grammar of it; I do not wonder much, at a Compliance; in some
Measure, to an indecency, in ord^r to pr^vent a greater Ill, that threatened
Them, and Us: and That, was their design; for when it came at Last to the
Result of Life, and Death, (as then 'twas evident, it amounted to no less)
those Gentl^men, whom the Author of Plain English would willingly engage, as
Complicates, -- those Gentlemen, I say, did then oppose themselves, against the
Murth^r^us Faction, and voted for a Treaty, Dec. 4. Upon the 6. they were
Imprisoned, and Affronted by the Army for their pains. -- When the more
moderate Party, was removed, the Rest were left at Liberty to consummate the
Kingdoms Ruin, and their own Da^^ation.

Come I Will go further with the angry man; -- put case, th^se Gentlemen had gone
yet forward; and dipped as deep as he could wish they had. Frailty is an
inseparable from our nature. It Is Humane to Transgress; -- It Is Christian to
forgive, and it is our Interest to Repent. He that Delivers me by D^sign, though
but from that misfortune which he himself engaged me in upon Mistake; -- he is
so far from any Reason to apprehend my Revenge, he has a Title to my Kindness:
but our incorrigible MONITOR, sets up his Rest upon a Final, Reprobated,
Impenitence.

I have been Tedious, out of a desire to be Clear: but I shall hasten and
contract as much as possible.

Having already proved the Declaration (of the Reasons why no more Addresses)
to have been an evident contrivance of the Independent Faction, in the very
frame of it; and published, while the Army stood to dare, and Overawe the
Sober Party, that was likely to oppose it; I do not hold my self con^erned, in
any further notice of the Particulars therein Contained; and which our
Challenger produces, as an unanswerable eviction, that the Late King and his
Family, deserved Death, and extirpation (as by and by, he tells you) -- Yet
something shall be said, even to his Queries, thence extracted, (in due place;)
but I must first unvail him to the people; and that, by laying open the Dilemna
he proceeds upon. -- He reasons Thus,

My business (says he to himself) must be to hinder an Agreement with the
King. The Presbyterian party (I Am afraid) enclines to it. If he return, we are
Lost: My own Soul tells me, we have sinned without Remission, and yet I see no
way to hinder it neither. The nation is United against us; the Presbyterian
abhorrs us, as much as the Royal party does; and the Army it self, begins to
declare it self our Enemy. What Is to be done, must be both Q^ick, and Home.
These Six ways lie before us.

First, the Army must be wrought into a Tumult.

Secondly, The Presbyterian must be Right or Wrong, involved with us in Guilt,
and consequently in danger. They must be made to share in the Blood of the
Father, and in the Detestation of the Son, and be possessed, that there can be
no safety to Them, but in a common interest with our selves. To this end, we
may forge Letters from Brussels, Suborn Witnesses to swear the King a Papist,
etc.

Thirdly, the Cavalier must be persuaded, that the Presbyter only designs, to
set up for himself; and Arguments drawn from bypast, and mistaken Failings
upon promise, to beget a Jealousy. The inconsistency of Episcopal, with
Presbyterian Principles must be objected, etc.

Fourthly, All Persons interessed in Estates, got by the War, must be engaged,
for fear of losing them.

Fifthly, The General himself, must be solicited to take the Go^ernment upon
him; Promises urged; no matter whether r^al or false: If this will not do, advise
him, as a Friend, to have a care of the City; and bid the City look to him.
Perplex them both; We'll confound all the World, rather then perish.

Lastly, We may publish the Declaration, of the Reasons, for no further
Addresses: and try, it that way, we can either make a Party among themselves,
or with the People. We may so bring it in, it shall be dangerous to reply upon,
for fear of disobliging, and as unsafe to let alone, for fear of seducing.
Here Is the Dilemma; It will be answered, or it will not; if it be 'twill
startle the Presbyterian; if otherwise, 'twill puzzle the People. [I wish our
Common Enemy would go this open way to work.]

Here Is the true State and Method of our Adversaries Thoughts, and Actions. Now
to his Quaeres, wherein I shall be tender, how I revive Disputes, either
unkind, or unseasonable; and yet not wanting to my undertaking, that is, my
undertaking to make Evident, that his Foundation is Sandy, and the Entire
Structure composed of Rotten Materials. I Will take his -- (what shall I call
them?) Suppositions, -- Objections, Questions, -- (or call them what you will)
one by one, and reply upon them in his own Order. Here he begins,

WOuld you see how and by whom the Irish Rebellion began, and upon whose score
those unparalled barbarous Massacres of hundreds of thousands of the
Protestants in Ireband, do lie?

NO, we would not see How. We question not, but you would be kind enough to show
us; and cut our Throats here just as those Rebels did their Fellow subjects
there. (For an Irish Rebel, is but the Anagram of an English Phanatique.)

By whom now, is another Question, and a Harder. Beshrew me, it is a Peevish
point. Why -- the Irish Rebellion, began, by the Irish Rebels: as the English
Rebellion, did by the English Rebels. I hope Commotions in Ireland are no
Miracles; nor is it needful to assign them any other reason, than the Humor
of the People? -- Yet I Will be civil to you. I speak my Soul, I do believe, the
Irish Catholics in that Rebellion which you point at, took flame at the
Severity they apprehended, from some extraordinary Declarations against them
here, previous to their Rebellion.

This I must add further, the King, (for'tis at Him, our Author's malice
strikes) at his return from Scotland, did earnestly, and particularly recommend
the care of Ireland to both Houses, in his speech, Dec, 2d. 1641. upon the
14th. he pressed them once again, to the same purpose; Adding, the great
Necessity of Dispatch; -- the daily Cries, and Importunites of the Irish
Protestants, and offering all his Power and Interest toward their Relief, in
these very Terms, See the exact Collections, the 1. and 2. Speeches in the
book.)

That nothing may be omitted on my part, I must here take notice of the Bill
for pressing of Soldiers, now depending among you my Lords, concerning which I
here declare, that in case it come so to me, as it may not infringe or diminish
my Prerogative, I will pass it.

And further, seeing there is a Dispute raised (I being little beholding to him
whosoever at this time began it) concerning the bounds of this ancient and
undoubted Prerogative, to avoid further debate at this time, I offer, that the
Bill may pass with a Salvo jure, both for King* and People, leaving such
Debates to a time that may better bear it, etc.

To conclude, I conjure you by all that is, or can be dear to you or me, that,
laying away all Disputes, you go on cheerfully and speedily for the reducing of
Ireland.

By whom, Ireland was tumulted, I do not know; but that it was not by his
Majesty, is most evident. Nor is there any Question, but the Massacres there
committed, must lie upon the score both of the Actors, and Promoters of those
cruelties: who they are, when I know, I Will tell you.

WOuld you know who it was that interposed betwixt the Parliament and the Duke
of Buckingham, and would not permit the proofs to be made against him
concerning the death of his own Father?

THis I shall satisfy you in.

A Letter was presented to the house from Thomas Haslerigg ( Brother to Sir
Arthur) which was read; to this purp^se. That there was one Mr. Smalling, a
Committeeman of Leicester- shire, who had been a Deputy-examiner in the
Star Chamber, and affirmed, that above twenty years since, there being a suit
in Star Chamber, between the Ea^l of Bristol, Complainant, and the Duke of
Buckingham, Defendant; Concerning Physic, presumptuously administered by the
said Duke, to King James; the said Smalling took many Depositions therein, and
was further proceeding in the Examinations, until a Warrant, signed by the
King, was brought him, Commanding him to surcease, and to send him the
Depositions already taken; which Smalling did; yet kept notes by him of the
principal passages, doubting what further proceedings might be hereafter in a
business of such importance.

Sir Henry Mildmay moved that Smalling be sent for, and examined upon Oath by
the COMMITTEE that penned the said Declaration; but upon motion of the
Presbyterians he was ordered to be examined at the COMMONS-BAR. Smalling came,
produced the Warrant, but no notes, so this Chimera vanished.

Tertio Caroli, this business had been ventilated, and examined against the
Duke, and no mention made of Poisoning, or Killing King James, It was then only
called, an Act of high Presumption, and Dangerous Consequence in the Duke, nor
was there the least Reflection upon KING CHARLES. (See the History of
Independency par. 1. p. 74.)

WOuld you hear who it was that made so light of Parliaments, killing them as
soon as born, and making them a scorn by dissolution at pleasure; and at length
designed, and in fine drew sword against the very Parliamentary Constitution,
after he had by imprisonments destroyed several eminent Patriots for their
freedom of speech in the Parliament on the behalf of the Public, and in
particular, touching the death of his Fa her?

NO; it needs not, I can tell you that. 'Twas Cromwell, and the secluding
Members. The RUMP, That drew Sword against the very Parliamentary Constitution.
They clapped up Sir Robert Pie, and Major Fincher for but desiring a
Free-Parliament; on the ^ehalf of the Public* sending their troops abroad to
seize, and Threatening (themselves) to seques^er all the Declar^rs. (That w^i^h
concerns his Majesty's Father, is spoken to already.)

WOuld the Scots know who it was that designed them to be the first Subjects of
Slavery in spirituals and Civils, who hated their very Na^ion, though the Land
of his Nativity; who made a Pacification with them, with a treacherous intent
to ^reak every Article; and manifested it as s^on as he returned from Edinburg
to London, giving special command to burn the said Articles by the hand of a
Common H^ngman, and it was publicly done?

I'^l ^ell you that too: 'Twas the old Arglye. -- But hold you Sir. Touching
the Treacherous intent, did he tell you his mind? But I conf^sse, you are
quick-sighted; you could not see things else that have no Being; -- as your own
Piety, and public Tenderness; -- You have approved your selves, Searchers of
Hearts indeed; witness your Sacrifices to your MOLOCH (the good old cause) your
Butcheries by Quartering, and Embowelling poor Wretches, only upon Frivolous,
and Incongruous Circumstances: senselesly patched together by your Ridiculous,
and Suborned sons of Belial.

Because that your own Party, did resolve, at first to break all Oaths; and has
been only True, in a fidelity to Hell, and Wickedness; you make no difficulty
to measure others by your Impious s^lves; -- you Talk, and Act at such a Rate;
-- as if the Word of God were a Delusion; Divinity an old wive's Tale; and
(seriously) not half so much Resp^ct, is paid to the Two Tables of the
Decalogue as to the Orders of your Coffe-house. I shall not ravel the
Transaction, sequent upon the Pacification you speak of. -- But to your next.

WOuld you hear the Cries of the blood of Rochel, and of his own people
sacrificed in that Expedition to a Foreign interest, and of all the
Protestants in France, for his Barbarous betraying of them.

THe Rochel Expedition I Am a stranger to; so I suppose are you, that make the
Challenge. But if you had told me of ^amaica; or the Sound; I should have
understood you.

WOuld you cast your eye on past miseries; and recollect the manisold
intolerable Oppressions of People both in matter of Estate and Conscience, and
compare them with the indulgencies at the same time toward Papists, yea and the
designs laid to make use of Papists, to destroy both Parliaments and godly
people together?

NOw you say something, surely The manifold intolerable oppression of People
in matter of Estate, and Conscience, etc. This I remember perfectly.

Your Major-General-Archy was an admirable Form of Government: So was your
Rump-archy. Clap a man up, and never let him know his crime, nor his Accuser,
-- declare a Man incapable of serving in Parliament, for having Bays in his
Windows, or a Minced Pie in Christmas, sequester half the Nation, because they
will not swear back and forward; sell Freeborn Men by Thousands into
Plantations; and in fine, beside Excise and other Impositions Arbitrary, lay on
the comfortable Load of 100000 l. a Month upon a Beggered Nation, and at the
latter end of the day. (Is this the Oppression your wise Worship intends?)

Now for the matter of Conscience, I can help you out there too. To shorten,
let the Oath of Abjuration serve for all. You follow this with a sharp charge
for making use of Papists. I could retort this, if I thought it valuable; but
frankly, in a War, the subject of the Question is not Religion, but Assistance.
Nor do I (though I might as well) condemn your Party, (that is, the Rump-men) for
the same practice.

WOuld you understand the correspondencies main^ained with, and the
encouragements given to, the bloody Irish Rebels, sor the Esse^ting his
design; together with the correspondencies and Solicitations settled in
Foreign Countries, to the same purpose, with all the circumstances evincing
the truth?

THis is the same thing again, shake Hands and to the next.

WOuld you be informed how often, and with how much solicitude the Parliament,
notwithstanding all these things, did for peace sake, in a manner prostitute
themselves, and hazard the whole cause, by appointing Treaty after Treaty,
which he never entertained but with intent of Treachery, and thereby frustrated
all their good intentions and endeavors, before ever they passed the Votes of
Non-Address.

Then, we beseech you, read the following Declaration, and be satisfied to the
full, whether or no the late King, and his Family deserved death and
ex^irpation.

I Pr^ethee do not choke us with the venerable sound of Parliament: I talk to
You, and of that Mungrel-mixture you plead for. A Parliament cannot do amiss,
(be not too quick now) they may have done Amiss, and the next Session may
repeal or mend it. What they did, I don't Q^estion: but what you say, will (as
I humbly conceive) admit a Castigation. Look back upon your self; These are
your words -- Which he never enterteyn'd (Treaty, that is,) but with intent of
Treachery and, thereby frustrated their good Intentions, and endeavors, before
ever they passed the Votes of Non Addresses.) At this rate, you ground the Non
Addresses, upon the Kings Intention of Treachery. A Positive disclaim of your
Ob^dience, upon a possible Dis-ingenuity in your Prince. Come, to cut short.
Dare you say, that he promised, and failed? That Is Treachery, to betray a
Trust: By this Rule of Proceeding, had you required his Life, and he refused,
you might have taken it: his crime was only the Non-Concession of what you
d^manded; and he gave his Reasons too for that re^usall. Well but let us come up
to the Vote it self. I have already proved, that it concerns not the secluded
Members; and now I shall entreat you to Back my opinion, with a slip of your
own Pen. Their honest strictness in the Negative, afterward, and their Adhesion
to it, through all extremities, speaks manif^stly the intention of the party,
and that acquits them. It Is your own Argument in your fourth expostulation. You
charge his Treaty with a treacherous Intent, which you infer from a subsequent
manifestation of himself by Action. But to dispatch, should I Grant all you
Claim, yet did not the late King and his family, deserve death and extripation;
The premises will not amount to it.

Now if you please go on.

AS for our parts, we very well recount the Series of past transactions, and do
remember that in February 1647. when the two Houses of Parliament passed their
Resolves of making no further Address, but determined to lay him wholly aside,
they never were in a greater state of security and freedom, never passed any
thing with greater deliberation; and never the least disturbance or alteration
arose in either of the Houses against those Resolves, until some Persons in
the Commons House otherwise affected, and who by procuring Elections of Persons
fit for their turn to serve in Parliament in vacant places, brought in new men
of the Cavalier s^amp (as is known) like themselves; and thereby out-balancing
the old Patriots, gained the Major Vote of the House; and so with heat, and by
design; obtained a revoking of those resolves which had been passed by both
Houses in a time of temper, upon most serious Consideration* so that though we
shall not take upon us ex absoluto to justify the interposure of the Soldiery
afterward, and their Exclusion of the Adverse Members, (it being a
transcendent Act, not to be measured by ordinary Rule, and which nothing can
justify but Supreme necessity) yet This we can truly say in their defense: In
Judgment and Conscience there was so indispensable a necessity, that had they
not interposed, those Principles and the Concernments of the Commonwealth,
upon which the aforesaid Resolves of both Houses were founded, had been utterly
shipwrackt, and the whole Cause and its Defenders most inevitably have sunk
together, seeing the same heady confidence in treaty was then given to the
Father, which too many now incline to allow unto the Son, who were first
engaged against them in the War, and held out to the time of the last treaty:
whom (of all other Men) his party do hate upon that account; and, if they had
an opportunity, would be sure to make them fall the severest Sacrifices to the
Revenge and Memory of his Father. THis is already Sifted, and a little Picking
will serve the Turn here. A Cavalier, I find, is only an Honest man that
crosses a Fantan; but the Old Patriots it seems, were the Minor part of the
House; and That Is enough to entitle the Nation to the Ben^fit of the Treaty
resolved upon. For Sir (if you will give us leave) we will be governed by the Major
part. It Is true, your Supreme necessity, is a pretty popular Sophism. But,

As necessity has no Law, so is it none; nor in any case pleadable against
Law, but by the Judges of the Law, which at all hands, is confessed to be the
Parliament, and the Major part of the Two Houses in conjunction with the King
have ever denominated That.

I must needs take a little pains to correct the Gentleman, in his next Fleere
upon the Presbyterians. He hangs like a Cock-sparrow upon the aforesaid
Resolves of both Houses (which is but an old Trick of laying a Knaves Bastard
at an Honest man's door) and then he preaches most Infallible Destruction to the
first engagers, whom the King will be sure to sacrifice to the Revenge and
memory of his Father.

This opinion or rather suggestion of his, opposes all Principles of Honesty,
Generosity, and prudence, which fall within the latitude of the case. Nay,
Taking for granted, the very entrance upon the War Justifiable.

There might be then a Question, Now there is none, They intended only a
Reformation, here is a Dissolution. A Liberty was there Designed, here is an
Intolerable Slavery Imposed, Those quitted, when they saw their error; These,
for that very Reason, proceed. There is, in fine, This difference; One side
would Destroy the King, the Other would Preserve him; These, would Govern
Without Law, and the Other would be governed by Law. After all this peremptory
rudeness at large; he bethinks himself at last of an Apology to the General;
and now the Pageant moves.

WE urge not these things, with an intent to make the least reflection upon
your Excellency, and our Brethern the Officers under your Command, as if we
suspected your sincerity and constancy, after so many plain and positive
Declarations against returning to our old Bondage under that Family which God
so wonderfully cast out before us, and wherein we are confident he, for his own
name and peoples sake, will never more take pleasure: but in regard the Old
Adversaries behave themselves insolently and proudly, and publicly give out,
the time is coming wherein they shall satisfy their lusts upon us, we thought
it convenient to whet your Spirits with a repetition of these things, as we
have done our own, that the world may see we yet own our Cause; and do believe,
that what we have done as Instruments in driving out that Family, we have done
in judgment and Conscience; and that you take a convenient time to let men
understand plainly that you also will continue of the same persuasion with u^,
for as much as there are none of the particulars charged upon the late King in
the following Declaration, which would not, with many more, have been proved to
his face by a Cloud of witnesses, if he would have put himself upon trial, when
he was called to answer for his actions. ALas, good Gentleman; you suspect the
General? No body can have such a Thought sure: you do but mind him of his Duty
now and then, Refresh his Memory, and whet his Spirits. He has declared himself
against returning to our old BONDAGE, under that Family which God so
wonderfully cast out before you; but not against the Liberty, and Title of that
Person whom God may, no l^sse wonderfully, bring in before you: and I suppose
my confidence is better grounded, that the people will never more take pleasure
in you; then yours is, tha^ God will take no pleasure in Him; the Nation will
as little endure the Rump, as you the King. But all this while, you Beg the
Question, How comes the King to be mentioned? The Young man (as your gravity
descends to call him) he is poor, and his Friends, Begg^rly; You have the
Balance of Propriety on your side too my Masters; you're safe enough then. I
would advise you now to wait, and not prejudge Authority. You're to Obey, not
to impose a Government. If you proceed to Murmr, and show your Teeth, when
you cannot Bite, 'twill be the worse for you. Indeed, your Good old Patriots
will be the Minor Vote again of the n^xt Parliament, if you behave not your
selves more modestly, the people will suspect you; for Mutinous Servants prove
but Untoward Masters. Monopolies, and some misgovernments were the True Cause,
that engaged the well meaning people, in the quarrel, not extirpation of both
Laws and Governors. But if your Adversaries, do (as you say) grow proud and
insolent; in such a case, you may be allowed to whet your Spirits (as you
express your selves, any thing but your knives; you were at that sport once)
your judgment and your conscience we are satisfied in; alas, the difference
betwixt yours and ours, is but a Trifle. What we take to be slavery, you call
Freedom. -- A Rebel in our Judgment, is a Patriot in yours. -- Murder, a
Sacrifice; Robb^ng of Churches, in your soft Opinion, is but unclothing of the
Whore; (a thing the Rump's a little given to) we term that Sacrilege. One
frailty I must needs take notice of among you, for all you talk of Providence,
I find, the Arm of Flesh strikes a great stroke in your spiritual coflicts;
and when you are worsted; you will take eggs for your money; and acquiesce, as well
as your neighbors. This I obse^ve to be one Article of your Faith, you argue
from Divine Omnipotency, that providence is ever on the stronger side. Suppose
the Gentlemen of the Backside, should look on for a fit now; the Royal Family
(you say) God cast out before us: Who casts out these? But to make all sure,
you pr^sse the General, and his Officers to Declare, that they will continue of
the same persuasion with you. (This perseverance, I confess, is a main point
you) should do well to leave a note, where they may find you; for you're a
little variable, and they are a little shy of meddling with those that are given
to change. You're possibly, this day, resolved for a Republic; the next, for a
Protector; by and by, a Counsel of Officers, and then, a Committee of Safety.
Come, come, Gentlemen, the General will be just, without your Counsels; and
steady, in despite of all your Arguments. Speak on.

GIve us leave (we beseech you) to add one thing more, which we had almost
forgotten, to show the madness of those men that cancelled the votes of
Non-Address, and would have brought back the late King by the Isle of
Wight-Treaty, and would now (if they might have their wills) bring in his Son
by the like, viz. that at the very time when that Treaty was on foot, though
this young man, who was then at Sea in the revolted Ships, declared all to be
null which should be agreed on by his Father; yet, hand over head, in they
would have had him, as others would now restore the Son upon the very same
terms which he so positively declared himself an enemy to in his Fathers
days. Good God! what a spirit of slumber has seized such men, who were once
deeply engaged with us in the Common Cause.

As for your Excellency, far be it from us to entertain any suspicion
concerning you, supposing you must needs have upon your heart the true interest
of Religion, and your Own too; and how much it is concerned in keeping Out of
that Family, whose restitution we believe God will not now permit unto any
designers, seeing he has from time to time so signally blasted all former
undertakings. As to what concerns Religion, you know what has been their
Education and Dependency abroad, and should they return, it is Obvious, all
Other parties would be put upon their Guard to defend themselves against him
and his Clergy at home; and so all sorts of Religious Parties, being
constrained to combine for mutual preservation and liberty, the War will soon
be renewed upon the point where it at first began.

WHat pity 'twould have been, this Gentleman should have forgot a thing that
never was, the King (indeed) sent an express to the City, the copy whereof was
carried to the House, by the Sheriffs, and some of the Common-Counsell: 3. Aug.
1647. But not a syllable of what he mentions in it; nor any thing that way
tending, yet was it eagerly debated, in Terminis, that the Prince should be
declared a Rebel and a Traitor. Among Other Reasons, why it was laid by, One
was, -- the Covenant; a Second, was This, It would not do well; to vote the
Prince a Traitor, the same day, that Messengers were sent to invite The King
his Father to a Treaty. The clamorous puppy might bethink himself of better
Language; especially Addressing to an Eminent Person. The madness of those men
(he calls it) that cancelled the votes of non-Addresses, and would have saved
the King, etc. -- If all were mad that would have saved That King, or that love
This, we should, not find many sober Persons, in the Kingdom.

This Fellow keeps so much stir to clear his Party of any jealousy, upon his
Excellency, that he most evidently creates, and discovers one. How comes
Religon now, To trouble our Atheistique Saints! These Reprobates have violently
taken the Father's Life, and thrown the Son out of his Right and Dominions;
exposing him to the charity of Foreign Princes for a subsistence: and after
this; his Education abroad, is made an Argument by this Brute, against his
Return, where will he be next now?

AS to your own interest in the station where God has placed you, it is well
known what the private sense and opinion of that Party is concerning your
Excellency, because you have been an Instrument, in keeping Scotland many years
with so great a vigilance and prudence free from the attempts of that
irreconcilable Enemy. Admit such a thing were possible, which some fancy, that
you should be the man that would put the Crownagain upon the head of that
Family; is it not plain what fate (setting aside all other Considerations) you
might expect from a seeming reconciled Enemy, and a King too? It being the
guise of Kings (as the Historians from enumerable Examples do Observe) ever to
recompense with hate their most meritorious Servants; making no difference to
return, betwixt the highest Obligation, and the grea^est Injury. The examples
are so frequent in our own Chronicles, as well as foreign, that he who runs
may read it; and it is not proper here to recite them. INd^ed he is hard put
to it, to make the danger out from the King, to the General, in case he should
restore him. If there were nothing else in it, 'twere enough, to make him Dear
to the King, and to his party, that he Hates you. Do not deceive your selves:
He Will be a scourge to the Phanatiques, and every soul that loves either Piety,
or Peace will assist him. Do not mistake me neither. God forbid that all such
as have either been misled by cunning practices; or else transported by
necessities, to seek a livelihood by unlawsull means. God forbid (I say) that
all without distinction, should be marked with that Infamous Brand: No I intend
it only of that Frantique crew, that preclude mercy, by despising it: and
persecute the Truth with a Determinate Malevolence and spite: But Note, the man
begins to soften.

ALas, (Sirs) it is not an Army that shall secure you, nor the power of the
Militia that can secure our Ancient Senators, (if any who have been engaged can
be so fond as to think of security) for, let the Young man come in with freedom
to encounter both Army and Militia with the bare title of King, and a^tuall
possession of the Throne, the eyes of Army and Militia will soon be dazeled
with the splendor of that Gay Thing, and fall down and worship at the sight
and hope of the Kingdoms of this world, and the glory of them; and then all
Bonds of agreement (if any be) will prove but Rushes.

Oh, for God and his peoples sake, yea, and for the City of Londons sake, whom
Charles the Father branded in his papers with the Chara^ter of Disloyal and
Rebellious City, (though at that time most renowned in her a^^ings, set an end
to the expectations of malicious enemies, and s^aggering Friends, by clearing
up your selves, that we may see you in the light, vigorously asserting the good
Cause of these Nations: yea, for the sake of Parliaments we ask it: and we
doubt it not at your hand, seeing the people are not like to be brought to
contend any more for Parliaments, i^ after so long a contest he should gain an
Opportunity of improving a possessi^n of the Crown to an usurpation over the
Privileges of Parliaments.

THis Thing, I Will lay my life, belongs to the Rump; it is so much concerned in
the behalf of our Ancient Senators. Truly I Am half o^ his mind, in what he
says last. That is, I do believe, his Majesty would be made welcome; But for
Faithless; nothing but an Abjuring Perjured Villain would suspect him.

See how the Supple slave, is come about now: how Arrantly the Rogue Beggs: Oh!
^or God and his Peoples sake, and for the City of (...) s^ke. (I am in ^arnest;
I must laugh before I can wr^te on.) Might not this fellow be laid hold of,
upon the statute against sturdy Beggars, and Lashed? He has absolutely turned a
piece of one of the Rump-Ballads into Prose.

Nay my Lord; (cries the Brewers Clerk) good my Lord for the love of God;
Consider your self, Us; this poor Nation, and that Tyrant Abroad;
Don't leave us: but George gives him a Shurg, instead of a Nod.
Come, hang your self, Beg right; here is your true meth^d of begging. -- Oh for
Tom Scot's sake; for Haslerig's; for Robinson, Holland, Mildmay, Mounson,
Corbet, A^kins, Vane, Livesey, Skippon, Milton, Tichbourn, Ireton, Gourden,
Lechmore, Blagrave, Barebones, Nedham's sake: and to conclude, for all the rest
of our Impenitent Brethrens sakes, Help a company of poor Rebellious Devils,
that only for murdering their Prince, destroying three glorious Nations,
breaking the bonds of Faith both with God and Men, trampling upon Religion and
Laws; exercising an absolute Tyranny over their Fellow Subjects -- Endeavoring
yet once more to engage their native Country in Blood; -- to alienate the
honest Soldiery from their Obedience; and in fine, for playing the Devil in
Gods Name; are now in danger to Lose the Reward of all their Virtues; -- The
Possessions which they have acquired by violence, by a Malignant and desperate
design of Peace and Settlement.

This is the State of your Condition, and this should be the form of your
Application.

Once more, and he bids you farewell.

But (my Lord and Gentlemen) leaving these things which touch only upon your
worldly Interests and Concernments, we are bold to say, (though the jealousies
of weaker Brethren be great and many) we believe our selves to be sure of you,
because we have your Souls, as well as your personal Interests at pawn for your
fidelity to the Public. We remember your Declaration sent from Scotland to the
Churches; and other Declarations at the same time. We might mind you, if it
were needful, how you have called God to witness, That the ground of your l^te
undertaking in Scotland was, The Vindication os the Liberties of the People,
with the protection and encouragement of the Godly and the Faithful therein,
etc. and that you have no intention or purposes to return to our old Bondage;
but that the providence of God having made us free at the cost of so much
blood, you will never be found so unfaithful to God and his People, as to lose
so glorious a Cause; but to resolve, with God's assistance, to endeavor a
maintaining of our dear-purchased Liberties both Spiritual and Civil. But
seeing these Declarations made before God, Angels and Men, (as your selves have
said) do so much concern your Souls in the observation of them, that they
cannot but be much upon your hearts; therefore we mention them not, as doubting
you, or endeavoring to persuade you, but to ease our own minds, and to
comfort the hearts of our Brethren, who have need to be comforted; and do wait
for a good time when your Excellency shall break forth, and more visibly appear
(through all the Clouds of Fear and Jealousy) a Defense and Protection
(through the goodness of God) to all his people that fear him in these Nations;
and so their hearts universally will return unto you: in assurance whereof, and
that you will be very much confirmed and encouraged after the reading of the
Declaration, We remain,

(My LORD) Your Excellencies most faithful Friends and Servants in the Common
Cause.
March 22. 1659.

STill I perceive you're sure; and yet for your weak Brethrens sake, you mind
His Excellency of a Pawn he has engaged for his Fidelity to the Public (only
his Soul) in a Declaration before God, Angels, and Men, that he has no intent
to return to his old Bondage.

Why you Impudent Sots, does a Confederacy with a Pedling, Little, Sniv'ling
Faction, that would subvert Order and Government, amount to a Fidelity to the
Public? or does the avoiding the Old Bondage you keep such a Coil with, Imply
the setting up a New and more Tyrannical Imposition.

In sine; the mention of the King, proceeds from your own Guilt, and Fears,
that have so much abused him. The General meddles not at all to impose upon us;
but only stands betwixt Authority, and Violence. His Excellency refers all to
the Appo^ntment of such Persons as the People shall choose, to Act in their
behalf, and cannot in Honor side with a Party of Juglers, that only call
themselv^s our Representatives, and we disclaim.

This is enough said to convince you and the World, where the Abuse lies.

Now, having eased your minds (in your own Language) you may go ease your
bodies too; for I dismiss you: and all is but giving of the Rump a Purge.

Cursed is he that removes his Neighbors Landmark. April 2. 1660.

UPon this pinch of Time the Good Old Cause was hard put to it; as appears by
their more than ordinary earnestness toward all Parties: but chiefly, they
solicited the Army, in an Audacious Pamphlet, Entitled, An ALARVM to the
ARMIES of ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, and IRELAND; the substance whereof may be
collected from this ensuing Answer to it.

THis last Week, has brought to light, two Pamphlets, so exquisitely impious,
as if they had been framed in Hell, by OLIVER and BRADSHAW. They speak the
Language of the Damned, Horror, Despairs, and Desolation. These goodly pieces
are Christened, PLAIN ENGLISH, -- and AN ALARM. I suppose they are Twins, the
Issue of the same Brain, as they are related to the same main End. I had nigh
finished a Reply upon the ^^^mer, when the latter came to my hand: comparing
which with the other, I ^inde they correspond so aptly, and so universally, to
the same seditious Purpose, that there is not any Interest escapes their Malice
and Attempt. They advance their Dispute, and March, together; that what they
cannot gain by force of Argument, they may be ready to Essay by dint of Sword.
PLAIN ENGLISH is a reasoning of the case: first with the General, claiming,
from his Engaging for the Public Liberty, a title to his aid* in favor of a
private and enslaving Faction. It labors then, to puzzle the Presbyterian into
a jealousy of the Kings faith and honor, and consequently into a doubt of his
own safety, should His Majesty be restored: Nay, not content to blaspheme the
Kings Integrity by a bold censure of his secret thoughts; the shameless Beast
(the Author of it) proceeds to charge the secluded Members with the guilt of
the Kings blood, upon a senceless inference drawn from the Declaration of both
Houses in 1647, touching the Reasons of the Votes for non-Address. His aim is
here, to persuade them to accuse themselves.

How those Votes were obtained, I have showed at large, (in answer to PLAIN
ENGLISH) and it suffices: the whole Nation knows, that though the Plague was in
both Houses then, yet All were not infected; the Rumpers only had the Tokens,
(nor all these neither:) so that at last, the seclusion of so many as opposed
the Capital prosecution of the King, amounts to a clear Act of discrimination;
a separation of the clean from the unclean.

Having there set the Presbyterians at work, upon the Question of Interest, and
safety; and (after many a lame complement to his Excellency) he cuts out worse
employment for the Phanatick Soldiery: and at the same time, breathing Hot and
Cold -- Reason and Mutiny, he solicites the General into a Compliance, and the
Army into a Tumult.

To disabuse the multitude, (if any should be mad enough to be deluded by so
gross a cheat) I Will lay the juggle open, in as few and familiar words as
posssible.

The Title speaks the business of the Pamphlet: ('It Is AN ALARM;) and the
Application -- (To the OFFICERS and SOLDIERY, etc.) the malice; there is Treason
in the very Face on it. If the first two words cost not the Nation a hundred
thousand lives, it is not the Authors fault.

His second page places the Legislative power in the Army, challenging their
promise; That before they would SVFFER themselves to be disbanded, or divided,
they would see the Government of these Nations established upon the just and
secure fundamentals, and constitutions of Freedom and Safety to the People, in
relation as Men, and Christians, and that in the way of a Commonwealth, or
Free-state-Government, without a King, single Person, or House of Lords.

These Gentlemen, I see, resolve to be their own Carvers; not SVFFER themselves
to be disbanded? This RUMP would be a perpetual ARMY, as well as a perpetual
PARLIAMENT. Let the Nation observe now the Quality of this suggestion.

First, By the Law of Arms, it is Death, that which these Fellows would engage
the Army in; that mutiny against their General: (for they give him for lost.)

Next, It Is TREASON, by the Law of the Land; the VSVRPATION.

Thirdly, It Is MVRTHER, Murder intentional, in the bare conception of it; and
actual, sure enough, so soon as that intention is but known. Now let us weigh
the Benefits it brings, against the Crimes and dangers that attend it. FREEDOM
and SAFETY to the People, both as MEN and CHRISTIANS; there is the Proposition.

FREEDOM, there can be none to the People, where a Particular and Little party
pretends to impose upon a number forty times greater, and enslave them.

Nor SAFETY, where in that Dispropo^tion the Nation is engaged against a
Faction: and every Sword that is raised against it, carries damnation upon the
point on it.

Neither do they act as Men. Man is a Reasonable and Sociable Creature. Here Is
a Design that breaks the Bond of Order: and betrays a manifest Folly, by a
contrivance so impracticable and mischievous at once; Idly to labor the saving
of a few guilty persons, at the price of an universal Desolation.

For Christianity; either my Bible's false, or their Opinion, that shall
pretend to raise a Christian Government upon a Basis of Rebellion and Bloodshed.

From hence the terible Trifle proceeds to the distribution of his Design into
three Heads.

First, what the CAVALIER says. Secondly, what the PRESBYTERIAN thinks.
Thirdly, what the Armies best Friends (scornfully called COMMON-WEALTH-MEN and
PHANATICKS) do foresee, concerning the present transactions in the three
Nations. And lastly, his own Observations, and seasonable Advice.

He tells us, The CAVALIER's OPINION, that the Generals intention is to bring in
the King: and grounded upon t^e^e ^easons.

First, ^ha^ upon the 11 th of February last, he sent an imposing Le^ter to the
Parliament, (in scorn called the R^M^) and thereupon, without any Order from
them, marched with their Army into LONDON, then esteemed and made by Him ( in
destroying their Gates, etc.) their implacable enemies; and at night suffered
so many Bonfires, and ^inging of Bells, and publicly drinking healths to the
KING, and a FREE-PARLIAMENT; Roasting and burning of Rumps; hearing and seeing
his MASTERS in open Street declared MURDERERS and TRAITORS, etc. -- Feasted
and associated with the Kings Friends, etc.

This is a grievous charge, assuredly; and by the license of our Observator,
This I Reply.

The General's Commission expired upon the Tenth of February, so he was free
the Eleventh. Again, it was the design of the Rump to make the General odious,
and therefore they imposed on him such barbarous Orders, as probably might
leave him to retreat. While he professed to Act by any Derivation from Them:
malice it self cannot but say His Excellency stood firm to every point of
Military obedience: at last, when they proceeded so severely against the City,
he interposed; but his Mediation was rejected, and more imperious commands sent
to him: this is enough to prove, 'twas not the General that made London the
Rumps implacable Enemies; but 'twas the sordid Insolences of the Members that
made the Conventicle hateful to the whole Kingdom; and this appeared by the
Universal Joy that followed upon their disappointment. If the Rump at
Westminster did by a Sympathy fellow-feel the suffering Rumps in the City, the
Case indeed was hard; but for the rest, the Murderers and Rebels they were
called, -- methinks it should not trouble folks to be called by their Names;
(that is only Liberty of Conscience; and I dare say, the people spoke as they
thought) Are these Gentlemen's Ears so tender, and their Hearts so hard? Is the
Sound of Treason and Murder so dreadful, and the Exercise of it so Trivial? --
I must confess, to stay away Ten days together, (from the 11th. of Feb. til
the 21th. as that his Masters charge him with) was something a long Errand. But
seriously Gentlemen, considering 'twas his first fault, forgive him.

The second motive to the Cavaliers Discourse (that his Excellency will restore
the King;) is, that notwithstanding his engagement by Letter, and Verbal
promise to His MASTERS (that had ventured their All, to secure him from being
ruined by Lamberts Army, he yet admi^s the Secluded Members to sit, (most of
whom he absolutely knew to be for the Restoration of CHARLES STUART,) etc.

To this; it is notorious, that Designs were laid to murder the General; That
the Rump Received, and Kept in Members impeached: That they promoted, and gave
Thanks for BAREBONES Petition, containing matters of direct contradiction to
their Professions. In the next place; instead of the Rumpers saving the General
from being ruined by Lambert, the General saved them; and touching their
Opinions concerning ( CHARLES STVART, as this Villain prates) the King. The
Noble General regarded their Trust, not their Opinions, nor did he enquire what
they were.

Thirdly, (say they) ^he General will bring the King in; for he has suffered
^he secluded Members to release Sir GEORGE BOOTH, and his Party, etc. -- Again,
they have (de novo) voted the COVENANT to be Printed, Read, and set up, etc. --
acknowledging the late King's Posterity: -- as likewise suffering to be
maintained in the House, that none but Jesuits and Priests are for Free-Sate
Government. -- Observe yet further, (says the CAVALIER) that he imprisons
Common-wealth-men, and releases Royalists, etc.

These Rumpers have gotten such a trick of breaking Parliaments, that it is
their public Profession now become to enforce them to the bent of the ARMY.
SUFFER, still is the word. The General SUFFERED the secluded Members to Release
Sir GEORGE BOOTH. -- The next point is yet more remarkable: These very
COVENANTERS ABJURE the COVENANT. -- As for the SUFFERING (there it is again) to
be maintained, that only Jesuits, etc. -- the General is not properly to take
cognizance of what passes in the House; (the King was chidden for it, see Exact
Collections, the Petition of both Houses December. 14. 1641.) -- now for
imprisoning and releasing. If it so happen that some Commonwealth-men deserve
to be laid up, and some Royalists to be enlarged (not as such) it is but
^u^tice to do the one, and the other; for at the rate of this subtle Argument,
Free-state-men shall be Protected against the L^w, and Royalists so Persecuted
likewise.

Lastly, the Cavaliers conclude as much from the Generals countenancing the
Militia; being raised and formed to murder, and destroy the Army -- and that
the same thing was done long since in Scotland: -- besides, the Irish Army have
proceeded answerable to himself. -- And diverse Officers that served the late
King have had fair promises from him, -- and several of the Kings sriends are
peaceably returned from exile, etc. -- and again, there is a Proviso in the ACT
of DISSOLUTION, concerning the LORDS being a part of the PARLIAMENT, etc.

To be short, -- the General encourages the Militia to Save the Countries, not
to Ruin the Army, -- next, if long since done in Scotland, the better done,
the sooner; for England has been only Rump-ridden, for want of it. To this,
the conform motion of Ireland proceeds from their Commune Concern with England
in delivering themselves from the Tyranny of the Rump; for the Generals
promises; I am glad to hear it, but truly I know nothing of it. In truth, it is
a sad business, Alderman Bunce his return: and the Proviso in the Act of
dissolution, (for certainly, by the known Law, the Lords are no part of the
Parliament.) To speak my thoughts freely; I am very glad to hear that the
Cavaliers are of Opinion that the King will come in, but I believe it never the
more for your saying it.

Now to the SOBER PRESBYTERIANS: they (says our Phanatick) begin to suspect
the General: for the Cavaliers are at this instant arming themselves in all the
three Nations, and if CHARLES STUART comes, he will bring with him Archbishops,
Bishops, etc. -- and then in comes his Mother -- with her Jesuits, Priests,
etc. -- and this will make little difference betwixt us and the Sectaries.

Now do I dote upon the sincerity of this Bubble; had he pretended to Religion
himself, h'ad been ridiculous; but putting that scruple upon the Sober
Presbyterian, it is well enough. The story of the Cavaliers Arming themselves,
is a Phanatick, not a Presbyterian conceit. As to the Queens bringing in
Jesuits, etc. It needs not, the Independents have enough for her Majesty and
themselves too. (How the changeable Buttersly flutters from Party to Party, and
wherever he seizes, he stains.) As to his concluding Opinion, that the King
will put no difference, he may live yet to change that opinion.

He comes next to the Armies BEST FRIENDS, (as he terms them) and they preach
nothing but Fire and Sword, if ever the King come. Oh this pestilent MILITIA!
Alas poor Wretch! Away with your Improbable Lies: The Secluded Members threaten
the Army, Yes, it is a likely matter. Come Gentlemen, you are safe, if you
continue honest, and lost without it. Do not you know, that these very persons
that now Flatter you, are the people that have taken your meat out of your
mouths; that have received sufficient for six Armies from the Nation, and yet
have left you monilesse, and ready to perish for want of Bread? Nay, suppose
their Arguments were more rational than they are, and that the King were a
Person as famous for Cruelty, as he is for Clemency, you were still safe. You
are below the stroke of Revenge. They are fearful for their own Heads, and
pretend to concern themselves for you. They talk of Treachery, in case you
should recede from their Designs: They tell you of Engagements, Promises, etc.
-- and so do I. Remember but your Oaths and Covenants; and if you do, you will
not mix with them; they promise you the glory of after-Ages: yes, you shall be
Renown d, if you engage with these Desperadoes.

Look back into old Stories; enquire into the different reputation of the Brave
Mayor that killed the Rebel-Patriot, and of the Libertine himself that fell; (a
MARTYR your hot headed Councellor would call him) Are you ambitious to be
Chronicled with JACK OF LEYDEN, KNIPPERDOLLING, CADE, TYLER, RAVILLAC, BALTAZAR
GERARD* etc. Desire your brainsick Illuminates to tell you Muncer's Story, go
to, beware of separating. Remember them that cried* You take too much upon you
ye Sons of Levi, the Congregation is holy every one of them, and the Lord is
among them. To come a little nearer home. Reflect upon the deceased Patrons of
their Frantic Zeal; their very slesh is not more putrid than their memories.
Come nearer yet, and look impartially among your living Partisans, (I speak of
such as our Pamphleter styles Patriots) do not you find them clothed with the
Spoils of Widows, and of Orphans? Nay, look into their Morals, even toward
those, that with the loss of Blood and Peace, have raised them: how Thanklesse
and how A varicious are they? Examine now their Principles of Courage, and
their Military Virtues: do they not sneak into Committees, and there dispose of
all the Advantages of your Unchristian Hazzards? YOU kill the HEIR, but THEY
divide the INHERITANCE.

Having abundantly perplexed the minds of his weak Brethren, he is as intent,
now, how to entangle the Interests of the Nation. The man is willing to do any
thing that may help on the work of undoing All; and here he is ballancing
Accounts: -- casting up how many millions will pay the Court-debts, and repair
the Losses of His Majesty's Friends. For that I think the next Parliament may
as well compose the Difference, as either he or I: this only I may say, it is
not the care of the Public which imploys him so much. His sins are greater
than he can bear.

All this is nothing, compared with what he has yet to tell you. Observe him
well, and ask him, how he looks when he lies? Upon his knowledge, the Militiaes
are resolved to cut the Soldiers throats in their beds. Why does he not
discover who they are? Still the bloody 11th. and 21th. of Febr. runs in his
Head; The Villainies of that night, how hardly does he digest them! and then the
Catalogue of Saints (the Holy-ones of the Rump) that nettles the Bum terribly.
That marks them out for a Massacre, he says. The Worthies have behaved
themselves well the mean while, that call themselves the People. Why, at the
worst, if the People have a mind to destroy themselves, they cannot begin
better than at the Breech; that is a good way from the Heart.

The Story of your Governor is every bodies tale. I Will only take the Applicable
part; We love the TREASON, but we hate the TRAITOR. 'Twas you Betrayed your
Countrey's trust to the Army. They love the Treason, but they hate the Traitor.
('It Is as fit as if it had been made for you.)

Now your Advice, which is scarce worth a Fee; for -- you propose things
Impossible: Rendezvous first, you say: why you Fancy, sure, that the General
is of the Plot; and that his Officers are all mad; and then you propose a
Confederacy, as 'twas at NEW MARKET: your little Agitators, etc. -- Fie, Fie!
Gentlemen, here is the difference of the Case; the Nation then was with the
revolted Party against the Great ones: Now, they are Unanimously against you, in
any such Design. Your General is a Gentleman and a Soldier; and every Man that
is either, (in the Kingdom) will die at's Feet: His Officers are Persons that
understand Honor, and the Discipline of War. There Is not a man among them, but
when he comes to pass a Sober Thought upon so base an action as a Mutiny,
would rather Perish than promote it.

Beside, you are discovered with the first breath that utters the least
Syllable, tending to Conspiracy. Could I believe, the Conscience of that
Traitor that advises you to this, would let him Sleep, I should believe his
Council but a Dream, it is so remote from any due Coherence of right Reason.
Come, shall I Counsel you a little? Be obedient to your Superiors;
Compassionate to your Country; Just to your Equals: In fine, serve God, and
honor those whom he has set over you for your Good.

It Is not the Fool's Reviling of his Betters, that mends your Cause, or makes
ours worse. There are (as he says) Ropes twisting, I believed, but they are
for such Imps as himself. He tells you, Gallows are setting up for the
executions of your friends; (and he accounts himself one of your friends) who
knows what may come on it? He concludes with a Proverb; Men ARMED are seldom
HARMED. Take mine too, and so shall I conclude: Save a THIEF from the Gallows,
and he will CVT your THROAT.

April 4. 1660. Libido Dominandi, Causa Belli.




THe Militia of the Nation, being at present in good forwardness toward a
settlement, was yet quickened by Lambert's escape out of the Tower, which was
understood to signify more than his particular Freedom and Safety, by reason
that he had already refused Liberty upon engagement to be quiet. Hereupon the
General placed four Companies of his own Regiment in the Tower; and the Council
of State issued forth a Proclamation against Lambert and his Accomplices,
requiring all persons whatsoever to be assistant to the Suppression of them.
The Citizens repaired their Posts and Chains, strengthened their Guards; and
(in short) the whole Nation was as vigilant as possible to disappoint the Grand
Conspiracy of the Phanaticks. About this time they made several Attempts in
order to a general rising; but by the care and Conduct of the Council, the
General, and the Militia, all came to nothing; the heart of the Design was
almost broken: and yet they would not leave their Pamphleting. Particularly
Milton put forth a bawling piece against Dr. Griffith and somebody else another
scurrilous Libel, entitled, EYE SALVE: I did not think it much material to
reply upon these, the people being already convinced of the Right; but however,
being excited to it by a private Friend, I returned these following Answers.


