DISCOVERY UPON DISCOVERY,

In Defense of Doctor OATS against B. W's Libellous Vindication of him, in his
Additional Discovery; and in Justification of L'Estrange against the same
Libell.

In a Letter to Doctor TITUS OATS, By ROGER L'ESTRANGE.

The Second Edition.

Latrant, non Loquuntur. LONDON,

Printed for Henry Brom at the Gun in S. Paul's Churchyard, 1680.

SIR,
THere is a horrible Libell come out against you, under Pretense of a
Vindication; and it is so much the worse, for endeavoring to turn another
Discourse written in Vindication of you into a Libell; and such a Libell too,
as will not allow any Good that is spoken of you, to be True, nor any man that
speaks it, to be Honest: But the most spiteful and audacious Circumstance of
all, is the Dedicating of the affront to your self; and in such a style and Way
too, that a man had better be half-Gibbetted then so commended; it is in such an
Abject, Beastly, Dawbing way of Flattery. He says, you are bespattered; and he
goes such a way to work, as if he should wash you with the Reversion of a
Glister, to make you clean again.

This Libell is Entitled, An Additional Discovery of Mr. Roger L'Estranges his
Further Discovery of the Popish Plot; Wherein Dr. Titus Oats, and the rest of
the Kings Evidences are Vindicated, from the aspersions cast upon them in that
Pamphlet, etc. In a Letter to Dr. Titus Oats, by B. W.

This Letter to a man in a Fever might be pertinent enough, for it is so
drowsy a piece, so arrant an Opiate, that if it had but come out time enough,
the Old Poets should never have needed a Mercurial Rod for the Charming of
Argus: And who knows but that this same B. W. may be Hired to write the Three
Kingdoms asleep; and a Foreign Enemy, in the mean while, to come in, and catch
us Napping. And yet this very Pamphlet, Doctor, has had the Honor of Your
Countenance: I would you had Read it before you had recommended it: For, as the
Case Stands, I have no other way of delivering either You or my Self from the
Dint of this Venomous Paper but by exposing Some Remarks upon it, in a Second
Dedication, to the Doctor. You Will say perhaps, that I Am a Sawce-Box, for
Presuming to Dedicate any thing to You, without Your Leave. But it is all a case
to Me, whether With it, or Without it; for I have a Common Right with my
Adversary, to the Liberty of this Application, as well the One way as the
Other. Upon the Perusal of it, you will find it to be Miserably Weak, and
Silly; and yet Insufferably Abusive; Iesuitically False; Scurrilously Rude, and
most Diabolically Malicious.

He tells you Sir, Page 3. That you told L'Estrange, he was a Papist, and that
he reported You for a Fanatic; whereas neither is L'Estrange a Papist, neither
did You Say he was one but only by Hearsay, and that you had been told he was
a Papist. So that he charges you with speaking a false thing, to the
Disadvantage of your Evidence in greater matters. But for This abuse, he makes
you amends in the same Page, by Comparing L'Estrange and the Doctor to the
Devil and our Savior.

I am sure (says he a little after) the Unerring Rule is, he that is not With,
is Against.

Now This Gentleman, (under favor) is not Sure*; neither is That Rule
Unerring; for there are Deliberations, Suspensions, Neutralities, in which
Cases, we are neither With, nor Against. If This hold for a Maxim, it is but a
Natural Conclusion from B. W' s premises, that Those that are not For the
Legal Order of the Church and State, are Enemies to it, and to be looked upon
as Cankers in the Bowels of the Government. And again.

He Cites this Passage out of My further Discovery, Page 2. He tells you as a
friend; (says he) I have more Charity for One Moral Pagan, then twenty
Hypocritical Christians. And in Reflection upon it ( Page 4.) he has These
Words. Indeed I have not learned this Distinction of a Christian before; but
allways from the Woes pronounced against Hypocrites, in the Scripture, I took
them not to be Christians. Now the meaning of it upon the whole, is This. That
L'Estrange has more Charity for Tully, and Seneca, then for Peter's, and
Bradshaw. But see his Goodly Criticism now upon Hypocrite: The Scribes and
Pharisees, in Propriety of Speech, were not Hypocrites; and Figuratively
Speaking, we have but too many Christians that are Hypocrites; for Hypocrites
in Religion, are only Spiritual Stage Players. His next Citation is This: I
have a Natural Veneration for the Government, and all that Love it; the Kings
Loyal Witnesses, and Preservers of his Life. Now he has thought fit to leave
out these words [ in the First place; with an Equal Horror, and Detestation
for all his Enemies, under what Masque or Form soever.] And then he falls in
again, That I believe the Plot; as much of it as every Good Subject ought;
leaving out, [ or as any man in his Right Wits can believe.] Nay (Says he
again) and pawns his Conscience (which doubtless is Large.) You do not believe
more of it.

Observe, First, that whereas L'Estrange says, he has Naturally a Veneration
for the Government, He makes it a Natural Veneration, which in Nicety of
Acceptance differs from the Other, as a Common Principle differs from a
Particular Bent, or Inclination: As I have Naturally a Love for Music: This
Sounds much stronger then I have a Natural Love for it. And so to say, I have
Naturally a Veneration for the Presbyterian Discipline, is quite another thing,
then to Say I have a Natural Veneration for it. He tells you a little after,
that the Plot is in a great measure one of the things of God; and not rightly
to be understood by mere Natural men: Which is the grossest Affront, perhaps,
to the Kings Evidence, that has been yet Attempted. You will take notice, in
his First Omission, that his Conscience flew in his face, upon that Latitude,
of the Kings Enemies, under what Masque soever; And so he left it out. And then
for the Second Omission of the Words, As any man in his right Wits can believe,
he says nothing on it, for'tis enough in all Conscience to believe so much of
the Plot as none but a Mad man can believe more. Good Doctor observe him now in
his Descant upon the Quotation abovementioned.

I am (says he) of a quite Contrary Opinion; for I know you are of a sharper
sight, Doctor, then to have your Judgment eclipsed with a Fogg. So that your
sharpness of Sight, is made the Cause of his Contrary Opinion. I do assure
you, Sir, if you will be so kind as to Read it, I Will put you up a Bill for him,
when you preach next; for no Flesh is able to hold out long, at this Ridiculous
rate. And yet when Sense, and Grammar fail, the Malice goes on still. Now
here is Another Iesuitism for you Doctor. He tells you that L'Estrange cannot
believe what he does not, nor cannot: which Expression, together with the
learned Instance (as he calls it) of Buttered Turnips, he makes use of as a
Reflection upon You; because it plainly intimates your Evidence is as little to
be credited, as that Assertion. Now L'Estranges Words are these. The whole
Earth (says he, Page 2. and 3.) can never bring me to believe, or to say that I
believe, That which I neither do, nor can believe: As the business of
Bedingfields being alive again, or that I my Self am in the Conspiracy. See,
first, how he has Falsify'd the Quotation it self; and then let any body show
me the Reflection. Why does he not point to it with his Fools finger, and say,
There it is. But for a man to be hookt within the Statute of dangerous
Reflections, for not believing things Incredible, or for not saying that he Does
believe that which he does Not believe; deal frankly with me, Doctor, Is it
reasonable or not? But the Reader has the matter here before him, and let him
try what he can make on it, beyonda Loyal Affection to the Government, and the
Inculcating of a Necessary Caution, in dubious, and Improbable Cases, in order
to a fuller Discovery, and Eviction of the Truth: For otherwise B. W. shall
cram me with Tennis-Balls and make me Swear they are Sugar-Plumbs, under pain of
being Arraigned by every little Schismatic Setter, as a Blaster of the Kings
Evidence; which is L'Estranges Case in this very Paragraph; where he is charged
with Affronting King, Lords, and Commons, the Lord Chancellor, the Bench, Jury,
and Evidence, in his unworthy Reflections, not to be forgiven or forgotten. This
is a Teizer, and probably of the Old stamp, he flies at the Throat so; and
nothing but Blood will Content him. You see here Doctor what a Deduction he has
made, and the Ground of it: And your Candor cannot but acknowledge the
Inference to be Folly, Rudeness, and Malignity to a very High degree.

Mark now what another fling (as he calls it) at the Doctor, this Wizzard has
found out. L'Estrange has a Value for him, and believes him as far as he OUGHT;
now B. W's Quarrel is; that L'Estrange has not a higher Value for him, and
that he does not believe him further then he ought. He pretends to be
Scandalized at L'Estranges Equivocall meaning; but the thing that troubles Him
in Truth, is, that L'Estrange has Worded the matter so cautiously, that a
Republican Spy can lay no hold on it. But pray'e read the Context to This
Citation, Page 4. It was never my Humor ( as a French-droll has it) to commend
an Orator, for an Excellent Head of Hair; or a man of State, and Business, for
the Government of his Beard; or to spend three or four Pages, upon such an
Occasion as This, in Flattery, and Panegyric. So that L'Estrange (ye see) did
purposely avoid the Temptation of falling into a Vein of Servile Flattery, by
any pompous Recital of your Good Qualities: And rather chose to tell you, like
a Gentleman, (Short and Round) that he valued ye as he OUGHT. But this is
Heathen Greek now to Him that is not verst in the true Air and Style of Good
manners. L'Estrange values the Doctors Function and Character too as he ought,
as well as his Employment. Why does he not complain to the Bishops, that he
mocks the Ecclesiastical Order, as well as to the Doctor, that he Abuses Him;
for they are both equally concerned in the same Period?

He Cites L'Estrange, Saying, Page 5. that he is a Friend to Downright Dealing;
to Liberty of Speech; an Easy Glass, and an Easy Companion. The First, he does
not believe, he says, but the rest he does; (with a Bobb at the end on it.) And
yet to many peoples thinking L'Estrange deals as plainly with Himself, and his
Brethren, as a body would wish. And for the Rest, it is so far True, that
L'Estrange had much rather drink his Majesty's Health in a Glass of Wine, then
his Confusion in a Dish of Association-Coffee; and that he is a Professed Enemy to
all sorts of Sniveling Formalities whatsoever.

B. W. Proceeds now to certain Scholasticall Distinctions betwixt Rogue, and
Rogue; and has found out an Admirable Invention for the bringing of You, and
Me, Doctor, to call one another Rogues by Consent; and to show you Sir, how
far you may call any man Rogue, without danger of the Law. His words are These,

He tells you, Doctor, of your calling him Rogue twenty times; for which he
thanks you, and Forgives you; but this is but a Copy of his Countenance, and
used as a mere shooing-horn, to draw on the Like likewise, of calling you
Rogue. I know its a word you often use, and its Twenty to one you were Right,
Nineteen of the Twenty, if not all: But it is not to be taken in the Common
sense of the Vulgar Usage to a man of vile and base Actions; but as a differing
Character of an Adversary to yours and Others Evidence in the great matter in
question. So that he has here made L'Estrange to be precisely Nineteen Rogues,
and Nineteen Twentieth Parts of another. But then to make me amends, they are
Rogues, you see, of Quality; that is to say, they are ' Plot-Rogues,
Sham-Rogues, or some other of the more Creditable sort of Rogues. This Fellow
has no Commission, I hope, to treat men of our Condition at this Course rate.

And a little further, he says, that because Currs hunt Me, I take the Freedom
to reflect upon You; slighting your Favors, and setting you at Defiance (Page
4. of my Further Discovery.) Pray'e mind the Shifting, and Shuffling of this
Fanatical Jesuit My words are These. There is no Design in this Paper, Sir, to
bespeak your Favor, in case of any Imputation upon me, either for my Words,
Actions, or Writings; for I defy Malice it self to charge me with any sort of
Malevolence, toward the Church or State. Now from my Defying of Malice in the
Abstract, does he most abusively infer my defying of the Doctor under that
Notion: whereas any man that runs, may read my Intention to be This. Here am I
threatened, Doctor, with Articles, and Impeachments, by a Pack of Rascals; and
here am I at the same time, making Court to You. Do not imagine Sir, that This
is to curry favor with you for your Protection against these Bloodhounds; for
my Innocence will support me against the very Devil and his Angels. Now this is
so far from being a Reflection upon you, that it would imply a High Confidence
in your Integrity, even if I should have so little Reveence as to defy you. For
it would be as who should say; The Doctor can do me no Hurt upon the Square,
and I Will trust his Conscience, for setting false Dice upon me. And now what is
the ground of all This Exception? Nothing in the world but L'Estranges saying,
that he has a great value for your Function, Employment and Character.

He picks another Quarrel with me for calling the Detestable Plot, a MYSTERY;
as if it were a denial of the Fact: whereas I speak only of the Project or
Contrivance, *not of the Fact; though after all this Discovery there is a great
deal in matter of Fact, that lies yet in the Dark. And then he has a Bout with
me for saying, that it is no New thing, for a Popular Outcry in the matter of
Religion, to have a State-Faction in the belly on it. Whereupon he modestly
acknowledges that he cannot understand how Religion is concerned in the least:
Especially the difference betwixt the Church of England, and the Dissenters
from it. Now as to the Plot, We are told that Religion is the very Root of it:
and for the Dissenters, they have almost all Sorts of Heresies among them;
which I take to be matter of Religion. Besides that we have our Agenda, as well
as our Credenda; and our Practical Cases relating to Civil Obedience,
Brotherly Charity, Peace, Order, etc. wherein the Dissenters do exceedingly
differ from the Church of England in matters also of Religion. He has Another
Touch at me, for arraigning the Judgments of the Representatives of the Nation
in Parliament, in saying, that nothing was ever more narrowly Sifted, or more
vigorously Discouraged then This Conspiracy. And yet (says he) the neglect of
it was one part of the Earl of Danby's Charge, which was not (again) without
due Consideration of Authentic Proofs, to make it good. But bare Charges are
no Proofs; and it is well for me that they are not; for if they were, B. W's
Libell would have hanged me Twenty times over. But I am glad to hear the
Dignity, and Prudence of That Assembly, so well supported; for the world is
well amended, since the House of Commons was Libelled for an Unanimous Clubb of
Voters; an Infernal Regiment of Pensioners: Since they were called a
Treacherous, and a Lewd Parliament; and since a Reverend Divine told some of
the Members to their Teeth, that they were a pack of as Arrant Rascals as ever
laid their Heads together: And every day some Pamphlet or other to the same
Tune.

There Is a long Paragraph (Page 6.) which is only a Huddle of words, and not
three Lines in the whole, for a man to make either Earnest, or Sport of. The
man is willing, Sir. to do you a Civil Office; but then he goes so Awkwardly
to work, and with such a deal of Nauseous, Fulsom Flattery, it is half a Vomit
to think on it. But at last, after mighty pains taken to no end, he passes
sentence upon Intents and purposes; and has found it out at the long Run, that
the getting of a small Reward for my Pamphlet, the vindicating of the Papists,
and crushing of the Fanatiques, are the three Ends of my Scribbling. All which
(do assure you Dr.) he speaks by Revelation; but gives you, in the Conclusion
the hopes of making it out by Demonstrations to come: By my Troth, Sir, this is
a strange Mortification for a man to be tied in good manners to bear all this
Impertinence as if he were obliged to his Persecutor.

He begins his 7th Page with a Flower; and pray'e intend it. But now warmly
clad with These wonderfully Erroneous Considerations, that incumbered his
Disturbed Brains, with the help of taking your Works to pieces; he had now
fallen under such a Conception, from which the world might expect such a
Product, as was expected from the Mountain; but you know that proved a Mouse.
This is nothing in the world but the water-Poets Nonsense turned into Prose:
One Line more on it would make me call for a Basin.

In the next Paragraph, I am arraigned over again, for a Dishonourer of the
Nation, the Governors or Government, the Protestant Religion, and the Kings
Witnesses: and all This for calling it the almost Inextricable Labyrinth of
the Plot. At the next word he makes half a Jesuit of me: and says I vilisie the
Doctor, under a Disguise of Friendship: And I think (Says he) he has cause to
rejoice that he is not questioned for a Seditious Pamphleteer. This Charge is
founded, Doctor, upon my saying, that none can fall foul upon my Further
Discovery, without wounding Your Evidence. This gives him occasion to deny your
Swearing that the Priests and Jesuits herd with Nonconformists; and yet you
tell us, how they contrived the late War, by inslaming Parties; that they had
their Instruments in Scotland, expressly to Preach to the Disaffected; and that
Blundel did actually teach the youth in the City of London, Treasonable, and
Seditious Doctrine* He says, I Am in Wrath, and speaks as if I doubted your
Evidence concerning the Pilgrims, and the Forty thousand Black-bilts; when my
business is to set before the People the Danger of that defigne taking effect,
if the Priests be still suffered to lurk among the Fanatiques. And then when I
speak of Infidells, as of those that will not believe this Mixture; he turns
the word Infidells, into Dissenters; and so makes a Slander of the Propriety
only of the Term, Page 8.

Take notice, I beg of you Sir, how he poisons all my Respects toward you;
when I tell you that I have Read, Considered, and Studied you; and the Sense I
have of the Roundnesse of your Periods, the Luxuriancy of Your Invention,
(where there is Scope for it) the Franknesse of your Style, and the Harmony of
Your Conceptions. What is it that makes him call These Expressions Ironies? but
that he undervalues you, as if you were a person that had no sort of Title to
these Civilities. Nay, he will not so much as allow you the Common Faculty that
Distinguishes Men from Brutes; that is to say, CONCEPTIONS: For I know not
(says he) of any Conceptions in all your Works. He says, indeed, that if you
had made your Trade of Living, and getting Dinners by Scribbling; or had you
employed your Genius That way, if it had been in making a Play against your own
Mother, what work you would have made with your Syllogisms and Coherences, etc.
This is some devilish Wipe, Doctor, if a body could but hit the drift on it:
But for the Trade of getting Dinners by Scribbling, it is the Honorable Trade of
the Nation, from the Prime Minister, to the Sub-Sizer. And truly, Doctor, as
the world goes, it is well if an Honest man can keep himself clear of the
Almesbasket, or turning Mendicant from door to door.

Now he whips me up again for Poisonous Principles, and Frothy Strains of Wit;
with Paper-Squibs, audaciously Traducing, and Flying in the Face of Governors,
and Government: and this is only for saying, that the present humor of France
runs upon Poisoning; the Enemies of our Government altogether upon the Vein of
Plotting. What Is your Opinion, Sir, of these Inferences? To the business now of
being a Papist.

I do not remember, (says he) Page 9. one Authentic Proof, nor any other
Rational Argument, yet produced by L'Estrange, that he is not a Papist. Now I
thought Sir, that One man's Oath might be as well taken for being no Papist, as
Another for being a Protestant: And That Proof I have given for it. There was
indeed a perjurious Race of men, that in despite of the Late Kings Piety, and
Practice; Declarations, Protestations, and Sacramental Professions to the
Contrary, brought him to the Block, under the Same Pretense, where at last he
delivered himself up a Martyr for the English Communion. But it is not with the
Sacraments of men of Consciences, as it is with the Oaths of Mercenaryes, and
the Covenants of Conspirators, that look one way and work another. But since my
hand is in, Doctor, I Will go a little farther with you.

I had the Honor in the late times, (and being Then in Exile) to pass a
matter of Eight months in the House of the Cardinal of Hesse; where I was as
kindly received, as if I had been at my own Fathers. I wanted neither
Invitations, nor Arguments, to carry me over to the Church of Rome; besides the
Private Temptations of a Hopeless Interest (as to the King) and a Broken
Fortune. Now if I had been so easily disposed to Truck my Religion, for Money;
(as the whole Litter of the Town-Scriblers will have it) I do assure you
Doctor, I could then have made my Market. But after this Assertion of the Faith
I was brought up in, I do declare to you, that I reckon my self yet bound, as a
Christian, to entertain a Tenderness for the whole Race of Mankind. I abhor
the thought of seeing men of any Persuasion Worried, for a bare Appellation: I
should reckon my self a Villain, if I were not Just, and Grateful, even to many
Papists; having in diverse Extremities, received Offices of great Honor,
Piety, and Humanity, from People of That Persuasion. Beside that Providence was
pleased to make Some Loyal Papists the Instruments of delivering my Sovereign
out of the hands of Other Protestant Rebels. And yet after all This; I am not
such a Noddy, as not to see the Plot; though You may look further perhaps into
a Millstone, then Another man: But still I discern enough on it, to make my
heart ache. Pray'e forgive me this Digression.

He blunders, in the next Paragraph, at something, as if he would hint to the
Reader that L'Estrange has played Jack on both sides: Now in good truth, Doctor,
I never had that shifting Faculty; and I dare Appeal to my most malicious
Enemies to say that ever I falter'd in my Duty to my Sovereign, in any kind, or
degree whatsoever. And I can safely affirm, that in Thought, Word, or Deed, I
did never so much as Countenance any disloyal Pretext toward his Majesty. From
This, he passes into a Rapture concerning the Christians of Antioch; and for a
matter of a Page and three quarters, Doll Common in her Fits was not half so
wise as his Worship.

He takes me to task again ( Page 11.) where I am commented upon, for saying
the Dissenters from the Church of England cannot any way be ayding in a
Reformation, but by their Prayers, and good Wishes, upon pain of Sedition. Now
certainly (says he) as men, and Subjects under his Majesty's Obeisance, the
Dissenters are as Capable, and Legally, of serving his Majesty in any such
Commands, as any other men, or Subjects whatsoever. Now my words are These. Put
the Case that the Design strikes at all that call themselves Protestants in
General; as well Non-Conformists, as Churchmen; The Dissenters must yet range
themselves under the Government, to Oppose it; and without intermedling any
other way too, then by their Prayers and Good Wishes, upon pain of Sedition. So
that the Dissenters are not excluded any Public Service, but subjected to the
Rules, and Orders of Authority, and not to Act beyond That Sphere, any
otherwise then by their Prayers, and good wishes; and the word REFORMATION not
so much as mentioned in the Case.

But now Sir let me look to my self, sor I think (says he) no man in his Right
wits will conceive L'Estrange knows what he says; and he wonders exceedingly
that I should dare to tell you Doctor, that Religion is a Spiritual Notion;
And for this Notion he would have me to be reputed, and legally judged,
SEDITIOUS. I am afraid that this worthy Gentleman takes Religion for a
Manufacture: You will now do me a kindness, Doctor, to give me a Hint, upon
what Statute I am to be Indicted for Notions.

To see now this Envious Creature again. I never give you a kind word, but I Am
sure to have a Lash for it. They are wonderful things (say I) that you have
done already; and I am persuaded that you are yet reserved for more wonderful
things. And This does the Malevolent spleen of B. W. interpret only a Ieer, and
Scoff, in contradiction to the Sense and Proof of the whole Nation: And so he
calls it a Flurt at your Name, to presage that Time shall render your Name as
Famous to Posterity (Pa. 21.) as your Virtue has made it to the present
Generation. Yes, yes Sir; I do predict it over again; that your Name shall be
so: For this grand Revolution, wherein you have supported so Eminent a part,
will transmit your Name to future Ages so long as there shall be any Memorialls
Extant of the present Government.

He is at me again for wounding and unworthily traducing the Wisdom, and
Justice of the Governors of this Nation, by turning their Transactions in this
affair, into mere Sophistical Ridicule. And this I get for saying (as he has
translated me Page 12.) that none in his Right wits should take you for no
Friend to the Church of England. And now Dr. it is your turn to be abused, for
he says that it was foreign, and remote from the Scope, and drift of your
Evidence, to give the Sectaries so great a blow, as I affirm that Evidence to
have done: Which truly I take, to be little less, then Actionable; for if a
man shall be condemned in damages only for saying of a Tailor, He Is but a
Botcher, because of the Loss it may cause him in his Trade; of much greater
Moment is it, to disparage a Divine, in so necessary a part of his
Qualification; to the hindrance of him in his Ecclesiastical Preferments. For
Fanaticism, and Church-Dignities will not stand together. Now see Sir, what
work he makes with my saying that It is a matter of absolute Necessity to fetch
these Plotters out of their Holds. From hence, he concludes, that I would have
all the Dissenters from the Church of England to be destroyed, as Plotters:
which is none of my Proposition; but only to put them to the Test, that we may
distinguish, and Separate the Priests, and Jesuits from Other People.

He comes now to pass Sentence upon me, as a Blaster of the Kings Evidence,
and a favourer of the Conspiracy, for supporting the Truth of Your Testimony,
and the Necessity of Proceeding Congruously upon it.

His next advance is to my Further Discovery of the Plot, from your Narrative,
and Depositions: He denies it to be a Further Discovery; but how and how, I am
not able to comprehend. His Latin, his French, and his Greek; his Nonsequiturs,
Sentiments and Katexochens; I can make a sh^ft withal; but I am plaguily
gravelled still at his English. Pray'e do me the favor to help me out with it;
And here it is.

But whatever there is further in that Pamphlet, but in truth its no further
Discovery of your Discovered Plot, but of his own it is, and what that is, what
I have by my Observations already made, to that of which part of this is in
matter but Repetition, and of that of which I shall make to that which is New;
I doubt not Doctor but will give you full and Evident Satisfaction. I should be
very glad, Sir, to see this Clause unriddled.

It will concern me now I perceive to look about me; for B. W. sticks close to
me for calling the just Proceedings of the Authority of the Nation a Havoc,
and saying, after all this Havoc made of the Papists. I pray'e take notice,
Doctor, that I have Solemnly expounded my self upon this point (Page 3.) where
Authority has past a Sentence there is no long* any place for Hesitation, or
Demurre. So that His meaning is out of doors: And now give me leave to tell you
mine: When Goods are taken away from one man, and either given, or Sold to
another; when Books, good and bad, are swept away together; or disposed of
contrary to the Direction of Law; This I call making Havoc, and I make use of
this word too with all possible Veneration to the Sacredness of Public
Justice. I must needs rectify one mistake in the next Paragraph, wherein B. W,
(not for want of Ignorance) follows my Printer, and instead of Indue says that
the Priests will Endure all Shapes: He gives me here a Lick by the By, for
Fiddling to Oliver, and then pronounces that without all peradventure a
Discovery must and does imply new Fact; otherwise it is no discovery: and so
infers that for want of New Fact, mine is not a Further Discovery. But by B.
W's. favor, one Discovery leads to Another; as several other Discoveries have
been superinduced upon the Circulation of the Blood; and yet the matter of Fact
still the same; as This Additional Discovery in a Pamphlet has produced a
Further Discovery of the Author.

Now bless your self Doctor, at B. W's Amasement (page 14.) with what
confidence L'Estrange dares write such things: that is to say, that That part
of the Design against his Majesty's Life is broken to all intents and
purposes, but we are beholden to you, for the Discovery of Other, and Further
Plots, in defaming the King and Government, subversion of our established
Religion, and Disturbance of the Peace, so that our Deliverance is but half
done. Observe now, how Iesuitically this Fanatique has guelt this Passage, by
leaving out These Words; so that [ unless the remaining and the still growing
Difficulties and Hazzards be encountered with Timely and Effectual Remedies,]
the work of our Deliverance is but half-done; Beside the maiming of the Period
throughout. Now am I to be questioned and punished over again, for my Dislike of
that which I call ( page 26.) a remote and undutiful Supposition of the Kings
Death. But I adhere to that Dislike; for it is our part to do all we can to
preserve his Sacred Life, and not by the supposal of his Majesty's Death to set
Parties and Factions a Fermenting. And for This, I Am fetched up again, for
giving the Lie to the Representative of the Commons of the Nation: This Fellow
calls for Justice, as if he went a snip with the Hangman, for an old Periwig.

You cannot imagine Doctor, how it comforts me that I am now entering upon the
16th Page; where he takes it very ill to have the Church-of-England-Members
cleared of any hand, or Interest in This Plot; and to palliate the matter,
neither he, nor any man (says he) can say, that there was not members of the
Church of England, on both sides, in those unhappy Wars. Now, Doctor, I am
Positive, that there was not one Church-of-England-man in the Parliaments Army
(as they called it:) For how should it be Otherwise? when the Order, the
Discipline, and the Service of the Church were wholly Extinguished among them;
the use of the Common Prayer made Penal; and the whole Mass of that Seditious
Body was only a Confederate Union of so many Schisms, to oppose the
Eeclesiastical Government. It will not yet down with B. W. Doctor, that you
have altogether cleared the Church of England, and her sons, from the calumny
of being either mediately, or immediately guilty of this horrid Plot; and his
Reason is, that you are Impartial. It is not said that you have Spared, but
cleared them, and so you have; in not accusing them.

He reflects (Page 7.) upon my Contradicting my self in my Computation of the
Numbers of Papists; One while not above One to three Thousand; but now (says
he) Tables must be turned upon Dissenters to the Church of England; Then
because of some of the Dissenters Scruplesomeness in swearing, his Opinion is
changed; for now there is a great deal of Danger he says. This man is no fair
Dealer, Doctor; for my expression is three thousand to one in Sight: and then,
the fewer they are that appear, the greater is the number, and consequently the
danger of them in their Retreats. This is not to press a Total Extirpation
neither, as B. W. weakly and maliciously suggests; but some such means of
distinction as may rationally secure the Peace of the Government. He values
himself much upon one Argument out of my own mouth. Because many of the
Dissenters will not take Oaths (says he) therefore There, the Jesuits may hide
themselves: And so also, many of the Jesuits will take the Oaths of Allegiance,
and Supremacy, and so will the Members of the Church of England. If so, then
what can hinder the Jesuits to herd, and hide There. The Answer to This,
Doctor, is Obvious; They have not the Means, in one Place, for the gaining
their ends, that they have in the Other; the Rule, and the Forms of the Church
are Stated, and Certain; and there is no Preaching, but under due Circumstances
and Qualifications: Whereas in Conventicles, they can take all Libertyes, and
vent what Doctrines they please: the People being already prepared by the
humor of Separation to entertain undutifull Impressions. All the remainder now
amounts to no more then the Fagg-end of a Narrative; and a great deal of pains
taken, Doctor, to tell you so particular a Story of Your own Transactions, as
no Mortal can honestly pretend to know, but your self.

You have had enough, Sir, I suppose, of the Style, and Faculties of the Author
of this Pamphlet, I should be glad now to learn something more particularly
concerning the man himself: For this same B. W. may be Cloven-Footed, for ought
I know; and the spirit of slander couched under those two Letters. The best way
to understand him, is to read him backward; as Enemy for Friend, and Friend for
Enemy; Truth for Falsehood, and Falsehood for Truth: And This Unciphers him. One
while I phansy him to be a Jesuit; for he is so damnably Cunning, that as he
carries it, a body would think he had no more Brains then a Dormouse. But then
methinks, on the Other side, if he were one, You should have met him at Madrid,
or Salamanca, Doctor, or somewhere else abroad in your Travels. I would you would
cast a Figure for him, Sir, for nothing but a Di-a-mond, you know, can cut a
Di-a-mond. And yet upon comparing this Additional Discoverer, with the Marks,
and Tokens of a Jesuit, as you have described him; I am half-perswaded that B.
W. may come to be found a Jesuit yet at last. Do the Jesuits change their
Shapes? So does he: Are they Cruel, and Sanguinary? So is he. Have they their
Equivocations, and Mental Reservations? So has he: And not only his Own
neither, but he pronounces upon the Mental Reservations of Other men, and
brings Thought against Thought, into Evidence. Are the Jesuits given to
Scandalize, and Undermine Societies? to add, and Substract, in the matter of
Truth? Are they Pragmaticall in affairs out of their own Province? Are they
Officious toward men of Interest, and Power? so is He you see. Are they men of
Address, plausible Behavior, Parts, Learning? So is Not he. Now That Is the
difference, I conceive, betwixt a Conventicle-Iesuit, and Another. He does all
he can in the world to possess you that he is Your friend, and my Enemy: And
yet, upou the Issue, in despite of his Hearts blood; he proves himself to be
Your Enemy, and my Friend. How can That man be Your Friend, that calls it
Abusing of you, to speak Well of you? His very Flatteryes, are as Childish, and
as Cloying as Suger-plumbs; there is no Air, no Grace, no Vigor in them; nay
his very Complements are Scandalls. He treats you with an Old-fashioned Leg to
a Queen-Elsabeth-Iustice; and he shall pay the same Homage to one of Your
Lacquays, if you should but send him to him of an Arrand. The poor wretch, in
fine, is as humble, as the Country fellow that asked my Lord Mayors Horse
Blessing. What work Sir, does he make with the Respect ^^ paid you in a Former
Letter? he calls That Letter a Mock; but give me leave to tell you Doctor that
his calling it so, is a Libell. I take upon me to affirm, that Dr. Oats is a
Canonical, Orthodox person; but he will have This to be an Abuse, and so makes
you a Fanatique. I stand up again, to advance the Authority of Your Evidence,
and to Improve the Use, and Reputation of Your Discoveries. Now This is all
Ieering, and Flouting with Him; as who should say, upon the whole matter:
There Is nothing in it. You Swear point blank that the Priests and Jesuits haunt
the Conventicles: and He, as audaciously on the Other side, denis it, and gives
the Ly, point blank to your Testimony. Pray'e tell me, Sir, if you should say
now that L'Estrange is a very Honest, Loyal Fellow; and B. W. cry out that the
Doctor Abuses him; what Construction could any man make of it, but that he
takes L'Estrange for a Disaffected Knave? Or suppose that any man should speak
of L'Estrange, as a man of Competent Sense; Is it not a clear case, that he
that thinks him Abused in it, takes him for a Fool? But the best way of finding
him out is to let him expound himself.

Wherefore I beseech you, Doctor, do but observe, when the smooth, Supple
Humor goes off with him, how Magisterially he behaves himself, and how he
Grows upon you: Under the Color of a Friend, how he takes upon him, and plays
the part of a Governor. He tells you what you are to Think, in This case, and
what you are to Do in That: How to understand One Point, and how, Another: Here
he Spells for you, and There, he puts Together: And all This, with the
Weakness of a Schoolboy, and the Arrogance of a Pedant. And what is his End;
but to have it thought in the World, that you are Ruled, and Influenced by His
Dictate? But This is not the First time that other people have laid Claim to
the Reward of Your Merits. I lost a Friend I Am sure, my self once, because I
would not License a Book for Another Person, as the First Discoverer of the
Plot. And it cannot be expected, that a man in your Post, and Station, should
live without Envy. But yet how far it may stand with your Credit, or Good
Liking to suffer your self to be Cokes'd, and thus Imposed upon by every Little
Sir-Politique Would-be, is submitted to your Consideration. In One word Sir,
can any man be Your (or indeed any bodies) Friend, that has neither Brains, nor
Shame, nor Good manners, nor Good Nature, nor Truth, nor Honor in him? This, I
do assure you, Doctor, is the just Character of my Antagonist, if a body may
measure the Man by his Discourses.

It will be objected perhaps; what does it concern L'Estrange, the vanity of
this man's setting up for the Doctors Friend, and Adviser; or how he behaves
himself, in the Execution of That Office? If what the One Does, the Other
thinks fit to permit, L'Estrange is but a Coxcomb for meddling. (Nay and it is
well if he escape so too) for he has been called Rogue, Rascal, Thief,
Turnspit, for much Less.) It must needs be acknowledged, Doctor, that what You
Two agree upon betwixt your selves, is nothing at all to me; but by my Faith,
Sir, when I come once to be represented to you as a Papist, Plotter, or Enemy
to the Government; and to the Kings Witnesses; This touches my Coppyhold; and
it is well for me that I Am fallen into Good hands; for such an nformation, given
to a man that would have ventured an Oath upon Hearsay, might have been as much
as my Neck's worth.

But it is a double Happiness to me, First, that You believe nothing of all
This; and Secondly, that he proves as little: for he cannot pitch upon any One
Line in the whole Pamphlet, and say, This is the point I le Charge him with.
But when he has fluttered, from One Surmise, to Another; Falsify'd my
Sentences, taken up here and there a word by Snaps, and left the Connection,
behind him; he is yet forced at last to fly from the plain, and Genuine Sense
of my Expressions, to the Mystical Possibility of Another Intention. Make it
your own case, Doctor: Suppose I should see you upon your knees at the
Sacrament, and tell some body, Look ye: now is that Damned Doctor making a
contract with the Devil: Or that you should see me (though with all the Devotion
imaginable) poring upon the Four Evangelists, and cry out, do ye see that dog
L'Estrange? Now is he turning the History of our Savior into Burlesque. Why
where is Christian Charity at This rate? what becomes of the Common Methods of
Intercourse, and the Faith of Human Society; If when a man's Words are Open, and
the Construction Obvious, his Heart shall be torn out of his Breast, for
Another Meaning? The Sun shines; that is to say, ' It Is Midnight: We Will make him
a Glorious King; that is to say, we will cut off his Head. This is a Fanaticall
figure Sir, and of no account among the Orthodox. And yet upon such grounds as
These, am I most zealously recommended, by B. W. to your Care Doctor, to see me
hanged, drawn and quartered, in time Convenient.

You will see at large, Sir, in this Angry Tract of his, that as the Gentleman
has rendered me to be Your Enemy, under the Masque of a Friend, he is no less
My Friend, in the Shape of an Enemy. First, he is an Incomparable Foil; such a
Setter-off, that when you come to compare us, I Will leave You to be the Judge,
(and I Am sure you will not spare me) if even L'Estrange himself be not an Angel
to him. Now and then, it is true, he stumbles upon a Right number, or Person;
but the Nominative Case and the Verb are Mortal Enemies with him. Secondly,
the whole piece is but One Grin, from End, to End; without ever fastening upon
any thing; and at last, he proves me to be Innocent, by proving, with much
labor, that he cannot prove me to be Guilty. Thirdly, his Frauds, and
Fallacies are as Palpable as Egyptian Foggs; so gross, they may be felt: Which
does but all serve to Illustrate My Integrity, and Credit. If These be not the
Offices of a Friend, pray what are? And then all is performed too, in such a
way of Gravity, Weighing (forsooth) Considering, Pondering, and Advising, at
such a Supercilious Rate; a body would have thought he had had the whole
Council of Trent in his Belly: And yet at length, when he comes to Open, out
comes just nothing but Gall, and Clamor. Pray'e advise him Sir, if he falls in
your way, to be modest, and Temperate, and not to bear so hard upon a poor
decayed Gentleman, (as a learned Author has it in his Courant) that lives by
his Fingers End. Consider, Sir, It has been your own Case; and yet you see the
Advantages that many times attend Resolution, and Industry, under the Blessing
of a Propitious Fate. We are all of us the Sport of Fortune. She Raises from
the Alms-Basket, and casts down into the Dungeon; She sets Beggars a
Horseback, and turns their Masters afoot; She brings Princes to the Block, and
advances Traitors to the Throne; She gives Money and Credit to those that
wanted it; and takes from those that had it in abundance. And thus the World
Rolls, as her slippery Ladyship pleases.

It is cast in my Teeth, I know, at every Turn, that I write for Bread; which
is either True, or False: If True, it is one of the fairest ^leas that a man
can have for Scribbling; Provided that he governs his Pen by the Measures of
Conscience, and Duty: And within That compass I have allways contained my
self. And yet I cannot admit that Pinch to be a Truth neither; without some
Reflection of Scandal, and Ingratitude upon the Government; As if after almost
Forty years inviolate Loyalty and Service to the Crown, I should live to see my
self thus deserted at last. Now if This Reflection be False, and groundless, it
is but a poisoned Arrow out of the Same Quiver that has already furnished
mischief abundantly against My Superiors: And This Calumny, or any other, that
Malice it self can invent, touches me no more then if they should report that
you and I, Doctor, had changed Heads.

But give me your Pardon, Sir, though I am not at all Disturbed, by the Common
Clamours of the Vulgar, that draw in Contagion with their very Breaths, and
then blow it about again, till the Disaffection, comes to be Epidemicall: I
cannot yet, but as a Friend to the Kings Evidence, (in despite of all
Unkindnesses) I cannot, I say, but be in some degree Sensible of Your Joining
with the Multitude in that Popular Contempt. And this is more for Your sake (I
assure you Sir) then for my Own; for it is not a Generous Return, toward a
Person that has rendered you those Offices which (without Vanity) I have done.
And truly I should take it very Ill from you, in your Personal, if it were not
for the Reverence I bear you, in your Political Capacity. And yet the case is
hard, at best; taken with the Aggravations; That is to say, from the Kings
Witness, and a Divine, to a Person of my Known Affections to the Church, and
State; from the Doctor, to his Countryman. But I Will carry it no further. The
Oates's, and the L'Estranges are two Names very well known in Norfolk. So that
I shall not need to tell you, Doctor (being your Countryman) that I am a
Gentleman; beside, that I am to presume You, Doctor, to be Read as well in the
Heralds, as the Schoolmen.

It is a long time, Sir, that you have done me the Honor to mention my Name;
and still with Rogue, Rascal, Villain, Papist, or some such Mark of your
displeasure along with it: Now These are Terms which B. W. distinguishes from
Reflections upon Persons, or Qualities, and imputes them only to an Impetuous
Fervor, of Zeal, that transports you, impartially, and without distinction into
those Freedoms; So often as difference of Opinion, upon the Main, happens to be
the thing in Question; Now I know very well that when a man's Tongue has got a
Habit of walking One way, he can no more forbear speaking what comes Next, then
spitting, for it is only matter of Course: And I do absolutely discharge you,
Sir, of any Malicious Intent toward me, in the Heat of That Language; upon this
presumption, that it was all grounded upon the Mistake of My Principle, and an
Opinion that I did not stand right, as to the matter of the Plot, without any
Malignity (as I said even now) either to my Quality, or Person. Nay I have
heard you my self (in Confirmation of B. W's. Remark) frankly, and openly
affirm that Laud (the Martyr) was a Rascal, and a Traitor; and that ere long
you would tell the World as much in Print. And what was all this, but still the
Impulse of a Transcendent Zeal, upon a full belief that the Archbishop was a
Papist? But who can tie up the Winds, or set Limits to the Dictates of a
Boundless Spirit? I have heard of a beyond-sea-Divine, (a Strenuous Asserter
of the Romish Communion) that would familiarly run thorough whole Royal
Families of Protestant Professors, by the Names of Rogues, and Bitches.

Well, Sir, let it be granted, (for Peace sake) that I am that wretched fellow,
that Pittyfull Rascal, that Scribbles for Bread, as you were pleased, in
Great, and Reverend Company, but upon Good-Fryday-last, to call me. (I could
wish This had rather fallen out upon a Shrove-Tuesday, for Good-Fryday is not a
proper day for such a piece of Masquerade.) Why faith, Sir, Bless your stars,
that you your self are struck into a better way; and leave me to the Liberty of
taking up what fair Employment I think fit for an Honest Livelihood. Where Is
the Hurt, or the Shame of This I beseech you; if I can make a shift by this
means to do my Duty, and my Business? I know there are more Expedite, and
Beneficial ways of Thriving in the World, if I could but bring my Conscience
to Bear; as Iuggling, Treppaning, Cross-biting, Canting, Swearing, etc. But
alas, Sir, I am Old; and for a man to begin late, and go to the Devil before he
has done his Jobb, would not do so well. Alack, alack, Sir! what can a man get
by a Snip in a poor Pamphlet of 4 or 5 sheets of Paper? No, no, Doctor, it is
your Narratives, that Sweep all. Those are the Swingeing Coppies. I heard you
say my self once, that you lost 500l. at One Bout, by having your Narrative
Printed upon you. Now your Narrative was precisely Nineteen sheets. And I am
assured that you have Six hundred more at this Instant, Ready for the Press;
which in Proportion will be worth to you, Sixteen Thousand seven hundred and
seventy pounds six shillings and eight pence, within a Fraction. Nay, it is
Forty Guinnyes, the bare signing a Narrative of Another man's Writing. But
Doctor, that I may not be behindhand with you, in Confidence, and Freedom, I do
really write for my Bread; and which is more, for my Head too, into the
Bargain: Nay, upon my Soul, according to my Estimat of the Case, I write My
Part for the very Bread of my Master; and to show the people the Snares that
are laid by Anabaptists, and that Brood, (as well as Papists) for the
Government. You see, Sir, what an Outcry this same Little Fanatical Faux makes
about my Further Discovery; which only advises the plucking of the Priests, and
Jesuits out by the Ears, from among the Conventicles; where your Testimony, and
Depositions have Lodged them. And this is done too with as much Respect, and
Honor to your self, as any man Can pay you, that Scorns to Flatter you: And
with a most Dutyfull Passion for the welfare of the Nation. But on the Other
hand; though every day brings forth Multitudes of Poisonous, Seditious, and
Schismatic Libells, that strike at the very Root, and Branches of the
Government; This Officious Zelote (I Will Warrant you Sir) is as blind on That
side, as a Beetle. The Kings Authority may be Invaded; his Person Lampoon'd;
the Clergymen Themselves affronted, as well as their Function: As at the
Essex-Election, and elsewhere: And here is no Libelling taken notice of in These
Cases. But if a man puts in a Sober, and a Moderate Word another way, presently
the Plot, and the Kings Witnesses are Topt upon him. The People may Remove
wicked Kings (says One) and what says the Author of the Freeholders Choice? I
believe (says he) Good Father Jacob had a Foresight of these Sons of Levi, when
in his Last Will and Testament he left them a Curse for a Legacy, instead of a
Blessing. And if the whole world were now to make their Wills, all but Knaves,
and Fools would do the like. Here Is no threatening of men with Parliaments, or
Arraigning of them for Traitors upon These points; which does evidently show a
Designing Partiality, and Disaffection. And after all* This, I am so far from
questioning the Plot, that it strikes me with horror, the Apprehension where it
will end. But still give me your pardon, Sir, if I reckon it to be worth the
care of the Government, to discourage and Suppress Treasonous Principles, as
well as to punish Treasonous Practices: For Thought is but the Root of Action.
I would have the Conspiracy sifted to the Last man; but yet that which is found
Criminal, on the One hand, I would not have it exposed to the Multitude, as
Lawful, as the Other: For it is much more dangerous to have the People
possessed, that such or such an Ill thing may be done, then Privately to contrive
the Doing of it.

We shall now Sir, if you please, put all the Rogues, Rascals, Villains,
Sauce-boxes, Papists, Turn-Spits, pitiful Fellows, and Scriblers for Bread,
upon the account of an Exuberant Zeal in matter of Conjectural Opinion. But
when you come to matter of Fact, (if I may be so bold Sir,) you should really
do well to be a little Tender: As when you were pleased to say Positively the
Other day, that L'Estrange was one of Nolls Fiddlers. The business was, He came
in once in the middle of a Consort, where I was playing a Part; and that was
all. Now This is a great Scandal to me, Sir; and you must allow me to tell you
in your Personal Capacity, that the Aspersion is as false as Hell; But I have
nothing to say to you in your Political Capacity but with Submission, and
Respect. For it is Doctor Titus Oats that defames Me in This Particular,
without aspersing the Kings Witness. So that the Falsehood of the Person does
not at all Invalidate the Strength of the Evidence. Pray'e Doctor take into
your Consideration how great a Sufferer I am rendered by This Slander: For it
will be understood, either that I went over to Cromwell, to betray the King: Or
else I must be taken to have pretended my self reconciled to his Interest, and
under That Color to Swear and Abjure to the Pit of Hell, for the gaining of
some other Point. As to the making of me a State-Rogue, That would have been
pardonable yet, if you had not made a Fiddling-Rogne of me; a Common
Statute-Rogne. Why, Doctor, how shall I have the face to show myself in
White Hall again, uuder This Character? What will: People think of L'Estrange
at This rate? especially having the Authority of the Great Witness of the
Nation, for the Credit of the Report. But Infallibility, Sir, in matter of
Fact, is a point that the Church of Rome it self could never yet be brought to
swallow; so that a man may contradict some of your Mistakes, without any
Offense at all, either to your Testimony, or Doctrine.

You were pleased at the same time Sir (according to your wont) to enlarge your
self upon some other Loose Topics too, concerning me; and with so little
regard, either to Candor or Caution in your Reports, that really, Doctor, I
should chide you, if I durst, for defaming the Kings Evidence: And, under
favor, it is not well done to take up Infamous Stories upon the Highway, and
vent them again presently for Pos^^^ve Truths: especially for a Person under
your Circumstances, the Credit of whose Testimony does so much import the
Nation. The Subject being Clamor, and Reviling, was in it self a very
unfitting Theme for a Churchman. But for a Divine, upon a Good-Fryday, after a
Passion-Sermon, and in his Preparatory for the Solemn Festival of Easter, to
abandon himself to such an Impotence of Outrage, without either Ground or
Provocation, and in so venerable a Presence too; (I need not tell you where
Sir) nor, as I am a Christian, did I come to the Knowledge of This directly or
indirectly from any Member of the Family.) Why will you suffer a violent
Passion to carry you thus beyond all bounds of Decency and Consideration? It
takes away your Reason, Doctor; and in these Fits rather then not do me a
Mischief, you care not what you say: For you do no more believe me to be as you
have represented me, then I believe you to be the Ghost of Thomas Aquinas. I
have not delivered one syllable here, without a due Respect, both to what I say
and to Whom I speak: and if every Particle in This paper should be put to the
Torture, to force an Evidence from it against the Author; it is no more then I
look for. But so secure am I in the Conscience of my own Integrity, and so well
satisfied in the Title I have to the Common Right of defending my self; that I
am not at all sollicitous about the Event of This Freedom. And to show you that
I have not entered rashly upon This Undertaking, I Will give you a clear prospect
of my Thoughts upon the Question, with submission to be better informed, where
I Am mistaken.

You cannot but observe, Doctor, that the stresse of B. W's. Charge upon
L'Estrange lies with its whole weight upon These Four Points, viz. that he
Favors the Papists, Lessens the Blot, Disparages the Witnesses, and Arraigns
the Government: And all this serves only as a Commonplace to work upon, when
any man is to be rendered Odious to the People: For it is a thing easily said,
greedily swallowed; of Violent Operation, and hard to be disproved; which is a
very great disadvantage, when a man comes to be arraigned for his Thoughts,
without any possibility of clearing himself. It is a thing that extremely
Confounds, and Misleads us in This Affair, the Governing of our selves by the
Common Forms of speaking, and according to the Vulgar understanding of the
matter in hand. As for the purpose; we make a Favourer of the Plot; a Favourer
of Popery, and a Favourer of Papists to signify, for the most part, one and the
same Thing: And it is no matter which comes out First, when we would throw Dirt
at a man: Whereas in Truth, and Equity, there is a great difference* betwixt
them; as will better appear by taking them apart, and distinguishing the One
from the Other.

By the Papists is properly intended the whole Party among us of That
Persuasion. By Popery, the Opinions, or Religion of That Party. By the Plot, is
to be understood, the Conspiracy; which is a Third Consideration, separate from
the Other Two. So that a man may be a Favourer of the Plot, against the King
and Government, and yet an Enemy to the Opinion of the Papists, and to the
Party; For we see, That the same Design has been formerly Carried on, and
Executed by men of Opposite Judgments. And likewise a man may have a Kindness
for the Opinion, and yet be an Enemy to the Plot* As (in Despite of Detraction)
we have seen many Instances. And Lastly, a man may have a Tenderness and
Charity for the Party, without Leaning at all to the Opinion, and with a
perfect detestation of the Execrable Confederacy. [Well Doctor, but you will
tell me that This Popish Plot is a Complicated Plot; and not barely a Plot upon
the Government, but a Plot also supported upon Popish Principles, and carried
on by a Popish Party, for the Extirpation of the Protestant Religion. It is not
Sir, to extenuate the Guilt, and the Foulness of This Plot, if I tell you,
that the Fanatical Revolution matched it in every point. There was, First, a
Confederacy; and then, a Design laid: a Change of Government resolved, the
Lawfullnesse of it Debated, and Asserted; and the Instruments that carried it
on, were the Fanatical Party: And all Terminated in the Snppression of the
Protestant Religion: That is to say, if the Church of England was Protestant:
Or if Otherwise, and if they that destroyed This Glorious Church were
Protestants Themselves, from such Protestants good Lord deliver us. But you
will say, Sir, that Prelacy, Ceremonies, Habits, and set Forms of Prayer are
not to be accounted matters of Religion. I beseech you, Sir, what Religion is
there in a Mess of Porridge; or in looking out at the Window to see what a
Clock it is? And yet I take it to be a very material Transgression in point of
Religion, to throw That Porridge in the face of my Father, in the One case, or
to resuse upon his command, to look out at the Window on the Other. For
Religion consists in Doing, as well as Believing, and in the Conservation of
Unity, and Order. The Resemblance betwixt the Face and the Glass, is scarce
liker then these Two Cases; and I do not know why the same way of Reasoning may
not hold as well too, upon things so agreeing betwixt Themselves. The Popish
Plot is Impious, for so much as concerns the destroying of the King, and the
laying of the Nation in Confusion, and blood; And so was the Schismatic Plot
too, And This is a point that all men, even of all Persuasions in Religion;
that have either Honor, or Brains will easily accord. But you will say that This
Plot is proved by Witnesses, and Judgments; and give me leave, Doctor, to tell
you, that the Other was also proved, by Fact, and the Final Execution of a
Fore-layd Design. Well, but you will say Sir, that the Jesuits Principles are
Bloody, and Dangerous: As That of Keeping no Faith wiih Heretics; and the
Doctrine of Absolving Subjects from their Obedience to such Princes. These are
Hellish Positions it is true; but in the History of our Late Troubles, and in
That of the Kirks Proceedings in Scotland, you I find these Maxims taught in
the very Schools, and Pulpits; Nay, and warranted too, by the most Eminent
Statesmen and Divines: and not only so; but authorized by General Assemblyes,
and the Votes, and Declarations of a Mock-Representative of the Commons of
England. Nay and it went further yet; for all these diabolical Illusions were
put in practice. They sought the Lord, for a Complement of the Wickedness;
they put the King to Death, as by a Revelation; and gloried in the thing done,
as a favorable Dispensation of Providence. Once again, Sir, There were none
but Papists (you will say) in This Plot: there were none but Schismatiques in the
Other; so that vou see the streights of the Church of England, betwixt these
two Extremes; and the Danger is as mortal on the Right hand as on the Left.
And give me leave to think Doctor, that as the Danger is Equal, so the
Affliction is much bitterer, from those of our Own Family, then from strangers;
the Prophet David himself seemed to stagger a little under the weight of it: If
it had been an Open Enemy, he could have born it, but to be wounded by Those,
with whom he had taken Counsel, and walked in the House of God as Friends; This
was the almost Insupportable Aggravation of his Calamity. In fine, both Plots,
and Partys were influenced alike by Fallacies, and Impostures both in Religion,
and State.

From This Parallel, if you please Sir, I will proceed to an Application of
what is Past, to our present Use, and purpose. I could wish that every man that
had any part whatsoever in the promoting, inflaming, or upholding of our Late
Troubles, would now upon This Occasion lay his hand upon his Heart, and tell
his Story: What a variety of Errors and Corruptions would This Tale, truly
told, afford us.

Alas, I was but young (says one) and merely drawn in; I meant no more Hurt to
the King (God knows) then to my own Heart, cries Another. They told me the King
was gotten into the Papists hands, and that they only intended to bring him
back to his Parliament: But when I was once In, there was no getting out again.
I never thought (says a Third) that it would have gone so far; but I should
have been well enough content to have seen some Grievances Redrest. One had a
Father, or a Son on the Kings side, and he took the Other, to save stakes. Some
were frighted into the Cause by Stories of German Horse, Massacres, etc. I was
in the Parliament-quarters, and my Estate must have gone for it, if I had not
complied. One had a good Office, a Benefice, or an Estate to lose; a Family to
provide for; Another had a Court-grudg, and took his Revenge, or fought only
for Pay, as a Soldier of Fortune: And at This rate people were hookt in, some
through weakness, but with good Intention; Others, by Interest, Fear, or
Misguided Conscience, and not one man of a Thousand that Acted Originally,
against the Government, either by Malice, or Design. I would have these people
that have been thus seduced themselves, soberly to reflect upon it. We are all
of us Flesh and Blood alike; why may not Other men be missed as well as we? Or
why should we grudg Others the same measures of Tenderness, and Remission,
that we our selves have received. Well, but those are Papists; and the Other
are Schismatiques. The Papists are men of dangerous Principles, and so are the
Fanatiques; but then some of the Dissemers are better then Other; and so are
some of the Papists. If the Papists lie under the Lash of the Law, so do the
Non-Conformists; and in short, This Plot (we hope) has miscarried, the Other
succeeded; and yet only the Express Murderers of the King were singled out for
Exemplary Justice, and all the rest of the Criminals, and Common Actors in the
Rebellion were pardon d in the Conspiracy that took effect. Now let me ask you,
Doctor, if you would have the Innocents, Men, Women, and Children promiscuouly
exposed to more Rigor in the case of a Plot that is disappointed, then the
Nocents were on the Other hand, where an Unparalleld Rebellion took place. Give
me leave now, Sir, to put a question; not to the Reason, and Equity of the
Thing, but to the Conscience, and Modesty of the Men: For let the Prosecution,
on the part of the Government, be never so necessary, there may yet be some
Regard had to the Circumstances of the Prosecutors. I would have those men, I
must confess, that have been so Frankly pardoned, Themselves, (even for the
Consummated Destruction of Three Kingdoms,) be a little Tender in pressing an
utter Extirpation of an Entire Party, because of a Conspiracy, among Some
Particulars of That Persuasion; and a Conspiracy too, that is crushed by
Providence, in the very Egg. What would you think on it, Sir, if you should see
a Company of fellows that have been in at a hundred Robberyes and Murders,
Themselves, and got their Pardons, and still keep their Bootyes; what would you
think, (I say) to see These men, of all Others, the fiercest sticklers for
Extremityes upon Other Felons that had only designed the Outrage which they
themselves had actually accomplished? Besides Sir, that it seems to Carry a very
suspicious Countenance to have Those men pretend the greatest zeal for the
Safety of the Government, that are most Notoriously known to be Disaffected to
it. And yet upon the Mayn, we find none so eager and prone, as some of these
people are, to Calumniate the Justice of the Nation by Remonstrances, and
Clamorous Addresses; and by Violent Importunities to Precipitate Councils, as
who should say, We are the Arbitrators of the great Affairs of the Government,
and take more care of it, then the Government does for it Self. Pray'e take
notice Doctor, that This is intended only of Licencious, and Illegal
Proceedings, with due Submission to all Forms, Orders, and Resolutions of
State: And that I do not speak of any sort of favor toward Criminals; and more
Especially in the matter of Sir Edmund Bury-Godfrey; and this late barbarous
Inhumanity upon the person of Mr. Arnold; which I look upon to be two
Instances, almost Unpardonable: And I do here protest before the Living God,
if I either knew or could make a farther Discovery, or if I ever can get the
means of doing it, I would, and I will, (though the nearest Friends I have in
the world) deliver them up into the hands of the Law.

Now as there appears some affinity betwixt the Case, and Danger of both the
Extremes, (as to the Government,) be pleased to enform me Sir, if there may not
be allowed some Proportion also of Compassion from the Government, in the
matter of Mitigation, and Redress, toward both these Parties. To which opinion
I find my self induced by these following Considerations, but with great
readynesse to be overrul'd by better Judgments.

In the First place, Doctor, we are all of us Christians, and cannot take a
surer Measure for the Government of our Lives, and actions, then the precepts,
and practices of Our blessed Savior. He commands us in the Gospel, to Bless
those that Curse us, to do good to them that Hate us. And These Precepts to his
Disciples, he made good upon the Cross; in praying for his very Crucifyers.
Our Savior reproved his Disciples for urging him to call for fire down from
Heaven: There was no calling Rogue, and Rascal, but the great work of our
Redemption was wrought out with Meekness, and Patience.

And there is a regard to be had likewise to the matter of Humanity, as we are
all of us Men, and liable to the same Infirmityes, and Errors. It is the
Condition of being forgiven Our selves, the forgiving of our Neighbors; and it
concerns those men, of all others, that do the most need and press for
Relaxation, and Mercy, Themselves, not to oppose it, in some degree to Others.
And it is another Consideration, as we are Fellow Subjects and Members of the
same Community; for all Dissenters from the Rule are equally liable to a Cheque
from the Government, and ly under the Same Ty, of Conformity, and Obedience. It
does not belong to me Sir, to speculate upon Political Expediences, one way or
another; I could otherwise tell you how much we are Underpeopl'd already, and
the greater the Depopulation the Deader, upon Necessity, must be our Trade; the
Circulation of Money must be Less; our Lands fall, our Commodityes ly upon our
Hands, and our Taxes still run higher: and Consequently, the less able shall
we be daily, to defend our selves, in case of a Foreign Invasion: For it is a
Foolery to talk of any more Holy Wars, the Hot Fit of that Unwarrantable and
Romantique Zeal is long since over, and out of the world; and the Bone of
Contention among Princes, is Empire, not Religion. If I have said any thing
here contrary to Law, Conscience, or Humanity, I shall submit my self to a Fair
Trial for it: But if I keep my self within the Terms of Christianity, Humanity,
and Civil respect to my Superiors, I do but discharge the part of an Honest
man, and a good Subject.

Here Is more work Sir, for B. W. to ground an action of Popery upon; and you
have a sure Card at a Dead Lift, when he stands at Your Elbow, to help you out
with an Enformation. But see Doctor, how far, (and no farther) I approve my
self in This Paper to be an Advocate for the Papists; and that is to say, just
so far as I am an Advocate for Fanatiques; I wish, with my Heart, that the
Government were Clear of all Plotters on Bothsides; and that the Peaceable,
Honest Mixture in Both Parties might have as much Ease, as may stand with the
Security of the State. Now having thus equally divided my Kindness; it shall
be Cross, or Pile (if you please, Doctor,) whether I am a Papist, or a
Fanatique, I must confess, I abhor the Thought, of Christians worrying one
another, worse than Wolves; and This, as well on the One side, as on the Other.
But where People of Either Persuasion, will be Vexatiously, and Pragmatically
Troublesome to the Public Peace, it is but Reason they should suffer for it.
But then there are several ways of Approach, or Advance toward the same End;
Seditious Positions are every jot as Ill, as Seditious Actions, but much
meaner: For the One is the Authorizing of a Villainy, as the Other is the
Executing of it. There is something of Bravery in him that Attempts it; but the
Setter on, is a Scandal, even to his own Party.

So that I have now Competently explained my self concerning the Plot, Popery,
and Papists. For the First, I have a perfect Abhorrence; and no sort of
Kindness for the Other Two, as Such. And yet as Papists are Christians, (and I
my self one) I cannot but have a Conscientious respect, in Common for all the
members of That Profession. Beside that as they are men too, there are
Indispensable Offices of Humanity due from One man to Another; and then there
are Certain Considerations of Alliances, Acquaintances, and Society, which we
cannot wholly divest our selves of, without a violence to the very Instincts of
Reasonable Nature, and degenerating into Beasts.

Now as to the point of Popery, so far as it is made use of as a Political
Engine to loosen Societyes, and to Authorize Disobedience; I look upon it as a
Plot upon the Peace of Mankind, in That way of applying it: As the
Disciplinarian Presbytery; (on the Other hand*) which is the very Counter-part
of it. But taking it nakedly, and Abstractedly as a Particular Scheme of Faith,
and Religion; without any relation to Temporal matters; my being of Another
Opinion will not hinder me yet from having the Same Charity for Another man in
that which appears Erroneous to me, which, in a thousand Cases, I my self may
stand in need of from Others. And This Softness has something in it of
Complexion, as well as Judgment. I cannot endure to see Children tormenting of
poor Birds and spitting of Flies: And it has cost me many a Six pence, the
redeeming of Puppyes, and Kitlins from the Cruelty of Boys in the Streets, that
were Tearing them to pieces. And This, Doctor, may be done, I hope, without
being of Pusses, or Ringwoods Religion. But here is more pains taken then needs,
to gratify John a Nokes, and John a Styles; for my Adversaryes have yet This
Modesty in them, that they are ashamed both of their Names, and Faces. These
Lihellers follow the Example of their Fellow Murderers; they ly in wait for
the Innocent; and it is the work of the One to Godfrey Honest men out of their
Reputation, as the Other did that worthy Gentleman Sir Edmundbury Godfrey out
of his Life. But It shall suffice that my Conscience as well as my
Acquaintances, will acquit me in the matter of Conformity to the Rites, as well
as the Doctrine of the Church of England; which I have ever asserted, both with
my Pen, and Practice; and fully answered all the Tests of my Profession, which
the Law requires.

It will be cast in my Dish, I know, that This pretended Moderation toward
Dissenters is only introduced in favor of a Common Indulgence, wherein the
Papists may come in for a share; and wholly Inconsistent with the Rigor I have
promoted in all my Writings, toward the Non-Conformists, But I must desire you,
Doctor, to observe, that I never opposed the Liberty of Thought in Disagreeing
Persuasions; for it is impossible to bring all men to the same apprehensions of
the same thing. But my business has been always, in This Case, to lay open the
danger of permitting a Liberty of Practice, which must of Necessity dissolve
the Order, and the Authority of the Government: For it is (effectually) a
Translation of the Power from the Magistracy to the People; and a Contradiction
to the Obligation and Intent of Laws; when the Rule prescribes to us the doing
of This, or That, and the License, on the Other side, says we may do what we
please.

Now I have wiped off all these Aspersious, of favoring either Plot, Popery,
or Papists; or of so much as Implying any Iniquity in the proceedings of the
Government: (nay, I have, on the Contrary, asserted the Justice of it, in This
matter;) It only rests, that I purge my self in the point of a becoming
Resignation, and Respect to the Kings Witnesses; which is the hardest thing in
the world to do, because there appears no Foundation for the Charge; and how
shall a man prove, or make any thing out of Nothing? at least, if Other people
can, I must confess that I have not yet the Faculty of doing it. But since
there is no substantial Ground for This Charge, Pray'e Doctor do but cast your
Eye upon the Pretense. I give you the Character of a Loyal, Orthodox man, a
Lover of your Country, and a Master of your Pen; I tell the Government, out of
your own Mouth, where they shall find the Priests and Jesuits; so that it is
but pursuing the way that you have chalkt out, for the Retriving of them. I
magnisie your Discoveries. I set a just value upon your Performances, I
prophesy that you will be famous to Posterity; and that the great things you
have already done will be followed with greater. How comes it now that those
Expressions which would be Panegyricks from another man, should be Libels from
me? Or how can any man call it a Scandal, to speak well of him that endeavors
to support the Government, without implying it to be matter of Reputation to
design the Overturning of it? And how again comes B. W. to lug into his
Title Page, by head and shoulders, a Vindication also of the Rest of the Kings
Evidences, without any Hint, or Mention, in the Book he pretends to answer, of
any other but your self? The Mystery is this. There are a sort of people that
will call a man a Defamer of the Kings Evidence, not as a Charge, but it is a
kind of giving the word to the Rabble. As we cry he sweats, to a Dog when we
would have him take a man by the Collar.

Now as the Offense ought to be punished, on the One hand, so the Scandal
methinks should not go Free, on the Other: and it were well if both Parts were
agreed, First, upon the Force, and Intend ^^nt of That which is called the
Kings Evidence; and Secondly, what it is, to defame it. Every body knows, what
it is to swear for the King; and that the Witness must be Famae Integrae, and
Probus. But now how far That Qualification extends, will be the Question. He
that gives Evidence for the King is no further the Kings Witness, then for so
much as concerns the subject matter of his Testimony; though there are some, I
know, that will have the WHOLE MAN to be swallowed up, in a manner, and
Transubstantiated into the Evidence; as, if every Word, or Act (for the
purpose) of L'Estrange were to be reputed as the Word, and Act of the Kings
Witness: (supposing Him so to be;) And that nothing could be spoken of him in
One Capacity, without affecting him in the Other. Now under favor, Sir, This
would be so dangerous a Mistake, that upon the Admittance of it, there would be
no longer any Security either for King, or I Pople. For if my speaking any
thing that is False of one of my Fellow Subjects, should invalidate the True
Evidence I have given for his Majesty; what becomes of our Sovereign? And
again, if my being an Evidence for the King, should entitle me to a privilege
of Abusing and Scandalizing other men at pleasure; what becomes then of the
Liberty of the People? So that though This Qualification gives me more Credit,
and Esteem in the world, according to the weight of the Cause in Question; it
gives me no more Power yet, or Advantage, over my Fellow Subjects, in Other
cases, then I had before. Yours ( I must Confess, Doctor,) is very Particular,
in regard of the Important Consequences that depend upon it: And yet This does
not hinder, but that the same Rule holds good throughout.

As for example Sir; supposing me now to be one of the Kings Witnesses, would
This Character Authorize me to place the Supreme Power in the People; to say
that the King is only as One of the Peers, and that the House of Commons made
him what he is; To give out, how I Will Order the matter of the Succession; and
what course I Will take with the Privy Council, when the Parliament meets? to
represent his Majesty to be Popishly Affected; (though a Praemunire by the
Statute;) to Garble the Bench as I please; and to say who shall Out, or who
Continue; to call Princes, Traitors, and Canary-Birds; To pronounce upon This
or That man; and say which Officer shall stand, and which, Fall; whose Offices
I Will shake, and what Lawn-steeves I Will Ruffle; to Inveigh against the Bishops,
as Popish; with their Antichristian Holy Days? to say I Will be the Death of
this man; or I Will have the Blood of the other, as the Toy takes me in the Crown:
And all This, as if my being the Kings Evidence had made me Controller of the
Government; and Subjected the Lives, Libertyes, and Reputations of his
Majestyes good Subjects to my Arbitration? These are Excesses that a man cannot
well-suppose: But however, This may suffice to show that all things are not
allowable, even to the Kings Evidences.

But still as the Witnesses are Limited, the One way; by the Rules of Good
Manners, and Law. So it is not sit for people to make Sport with them the
Other; and (as B. W. says) to turn the whole History into Ridicule. But then
Doctor, you must distinguish betwixt a man's Vindicating of Himself and Defaming
You: for otherwise men must sit down and confess themselves to be Rascals as
often as you are pleased to call them so, for fear of Blasting Your Evidence.
Now though you are pleased to call me ten Thousand Rogues, and Villains; (and
in very good Company too;) I am apt to think yet, that I Am never the Less
Honest for your calling me any thing to the Contrary; and in passing This
Reflection upon your Intemperance and Choler; What wrong is This to your
Evidence? Or if it be, you may thank your self for it. Must I stand upon Record
for a Villain, in a Compliment to your Testimony? You tell People that I was a
Common Fiddler to Oliver, which almost half the Nation knows to be False; And
from this Instance, you would infer my Truckling to that Usurper. You do not
imagine that I will yield my self to be a Rascal now, for fear of disobliging
any man by a Contradiction. I do here affirm to you, Doctor, that I never took
Oath, Covenant, or any Engagement whatsoever, from that Party; or in any sort
whatsoever complied with them. Do but you prove the Contrary, and I Will allow my
self to be all the Rascals you call me. Nay, it is publicly known, that when
I lay in Newgate, condemned to be Hanged for serving his Majesty, I had the
Intercessions offered me of very Powerful Men in the Party, if I would take
the Covenant, to endeavor to bring me off, and I refused it. And, in fine,
since I am forced upon it, I shall here annex Three Papers out of Twenty at
least, upon the same Occasion, which I published upon that bloody Crisis in
1659. here in the Town, (and honest Harry Brom got them Printed too, to his
very great Hazard) when I do assure you Doctor, I did not write for Bread.

You may perhaps take me to be a little Bolder in This Freedom, then becomes
me; but truly I did not think it safe to discourse this matter to you by word
of mouth, for fear of enflaming you further: And to deal Freely with you, Sir,
I had not gone thus far neither, if you had not most injuriously broken in upon
my Family, in a more Tender point: A Nicety, that I must entreat you not to
proceed any further upon, without advice of Counsel.

This Personal Unkindnesse of yours shall not at all lessen the Esteem I have
for you as you are the Kings Evidence: I shall go on advancing the Reputation
of your Services, celebrating the good Offices you have rendered the Church as
well as the State, in your plain-dealing with Fanatiques and Papists alike. But
yet I am afraid, Doctor, that you are a little too easy of Belief: It Is a
great wrong to me, and a greater yet to your self, This way of taking things
upon Trust; For Truth should be as Sacred in a Word, as in an Oath. I have at
This Instant before my Eyes all the Inconveniences that can possibly arise from
This way of Exposing my Vindication. First, I know that you are apt enough to
take Fire of your self, Sir, and that you do not want Malevolent Spirits
neither, to push you forward. I do know very well also your Power and Interest,
with all the Ill Consequences that can attend it. I know likewise the Rancour
of a Company of little Prostigate Wretches that will be forward enough to cover
their Malice under your Name, and Protection; and in my Conscience (to give the
men their due) will not stick out at any thing, to do my business: Fellows that
will make no more of Kissing a Book, then of Kissing a Backside. But Sir, I
shall oppose my single Honesty to all these Difficulties, and value their
Swearing, as little as I do their Lying, though I am well assured, that they are
conferring Notes upon That point already. And remember what I tell you, Sir; if
ever they come to Agree upon it, That Perjury will be found almost the fairest
part of their Practice.

There is another sort of Malignants, that please themselves mightily in the
Contemplation of having L'Estrange Run down, (as they call it) at the next
meeting of Parliament. I shall take my time likewise to vindicate That
Honorable Assembly from the Scandal of That Character which these People would
give them in the world: As if we were now coming to be Governed by Ordinances
again; and that Honest men, for discharging their Duties to their Prince, and
Country, were now a Second time to be Sacrificed to a Faction. No, no Sir; I
have no Apprehension of any hard measure from that Illustrious Assembly, to the
degree of Oppressing me Contrary to Law; and I have as little Apprehension from
the Dint of any Known Law that I have Transgrest.

Give me your favor, Doctor, but for One word more. My believing of the Plot,
under certain Restrictions, and Qualifications, is by B. W. exhibited against
me, as a great Enforcement of my Charge. Now upon my Faith, Sir, I am
persuaded, that I believe every Tittle of the Real Plot; but you must give me
leave yet to Suspend my Faith in many Cases, where there is a Plot pretended,
and Aggravated, and the supposed Principals not one jot concerned in it. What do
you think, Sir, of the quality of those Inflaming Papers that are published in
the Witnesses Names, and yet are only the Contrivances of a Knot of
Booksellers, for their own Advantage? Papers of manifest Scandal against the
Royal Family; some of the Loyal Protestant Nobility; and in General, against
his Majesty's most Faithful Subjects? Papers composed for the Tumultuating of
the Rabble; and if the Citizens had not been too Honest, and too Sober, to be
transported with those Libells, they had been sufficient to have engaged them
in Blood: Papers, that almost from One end to the Other of them are in effect
the very Coppies of two Libells which I had formerly seized my self. And shall
This now be called a dis-believing of the Plot, which is only the not giving
Credit to the most Shameless, and Insolent Impostures that ever were put upon
any Government? No, pardon me Doctor, Those Mercenaries are the Defamers of the
Kings Evidence, that publish Lies, and Scandalls in Their Names. And pray'e
take notice withal, that these pretended Asserters of Religion and Government,
are men of Notorious, and Pestilent Principles against both Church, and State.

I do not know, Sir, what Construction you may make of the good Office I have
done you, as the Kings Evidence, in This way of asserting you to be a Loyal
Subject, and a Good Churchman; or in my Freedom of telling you, that in your
Personal Capacity, you have not used me kindly. If you take the Latter amiss,
I Will leave it to Time, to reconcile me to your better Thoughts; But for the
Other part, Doctor, is you will needs misunderstand me, I shall however content
my self in This, as well as in Other Cases, that I have rendered a Duty, and a
Service to the Public, without any Profit, to

Sir, Your Disobliged, but Unchangeable Servant, Roger L'Estrange.
P. S. I shall here present you, Sir, with the Papers I promised you in my
Vindication from the mistake imposed upon you, as if I had gone over from the
King to Cromwell. In 1659. Lambert was upon his March toward Sir George Booth,
and Sir Henry Vane had listed the Separatists in and about London, to be in
Readiness At which time I Published This following Paper, under the Title of,



The Declaration of the City, to the Men at Westminster.
Gentlemen,
WE have waited for the good you have promised us; with a ridiculous Patience:
but we find you Men of the Original, and to be read backward. We are for the
Religion of the Heart, not that of the Nose; and for the Law of the Land, not
that of the Sword; we are likewise for the Charter of the City, and for the
Liberties of Freeborn Englishmen; with which we are resolved to Stand and
Fall. It is high time for us to look to our selves, when we are coming under a
Guard of your Choosing, and when we have only this Choice left us, whether we
will* Adventure to destroy You to Day, or be sure to be destroyed our Selves to
Morrow. That Is the short of the Case; for, a Massacre is not only the Design,
but the Profession of the Party you have Armed against us; it is their very
Exchange-talk at noon day; But the work will be either too hot, or too heavy:
for my Masters, we are determined to suffer these affronts no longer, we are
now come to understand one another, The Ruin of the Nation is Your Interest,
the Peace and Preservation of it, Ours, and the mischief of it is, your
destruction is as Easy, as it is Necessary: for every Creature which either
Loves God, or his Country, Hates You. You have not so few as 200000 Enemies in
This Town, to dispute the Quarrel with some half a dozen of you; not to
multiply words, your Practices are such as a Generous Nature cannot Brook, and
your Power so despicable, that a Coward needs not Fear it. You have made the
City but a Cage of Broken Merchants; Tradesmen are ready to Perish for want of
Business; and their Families for want of Bread; nor have the Poor any other
Employment than to Curse you. Those few amongst you that have any thing, are
but Covered with the Spoils of the Nation, and out of the Scum of the People
you have composed your inconsiderable Rest. Well Gentlemen, play your own Cards
your selves, We Will play Ours: you will have no Single Person in the State,
we will have none neither in the City; at least, we'll have no White-Hall-Major;
we will neither extend our Privileges an Inch, nor abate an Hair of them. And
in the matter of Bloodshed, so let Heaven prosper Us, as we shall proceed
tenderly: But if there be no other way left us than violence whereby to
preserve our selves in our Just Rights, what Power soever shall presume to
Invade the Privilege of a Citizen, shall find 20000 Brave Fellows in the Head
on it.

This we do Unanimously Remonstrate to You, and to the World, to be our Firm,
and Final Resolution.

After This, the Citizens presented a Petition to the Common Council, pressing
for a Free Parliament: But they were put off for the present, and upon Monday,
December 5. 1659. Horse and Foot were dispatched into the City, by violence, to
hinder the Re-inforcement of the Petition. But there was a great number of
brave young Fellows that opposed them: And if the Factious Magistracy (at That
time) had not by a Wile, persuaded them Home again, the Work had certainly been
done* That Bout. Upon This, after five or six days expectation what this
affront would produce, I Printed this following Paper, to quicken them;
Entitled,

The Engagement and Remonstrance of the City of London, Dec. 12. 1659.
ALthough, as Citizens we are reduced to a Necessity of Violence; and as
Christians, obliged to the Exercise of it; Unless we will rather prostitute
our Lives and Libertyes, Fortunes and Reputations; Nay our very Souls and
Altars, to the Lusts of a Barbarous and sacrilegious Enemy: We have yet so
great a tenderness for Christian blood, as to leave unattempted no means of
probability to save it. This is it which has prevayl'd with us to Declare,
First to the World, what we Propose, and Resolve, ere we proceed to further
Extremities: and to satisfy the Public, as well in the Reasons of our
Undertakings, as to Justify our selves, in the Menage and Event of them.

We find, in the Midst of us, the House of Prayer converted into a Den of
Thieves: Our Counsels Affronted by Armed Troops, our Fellow-Citizens knocked on
the head, like Dogs, at their own doors, for not so much as Barking: Nay, it is
become Death, now to desire to Live; and Adjudg'd Treason, but to Claim the
benefit of the Law against it. Witness those Infamous Murders committed but
Monday last, upon our uuarm'd friends: and the glorious Insolences of that
Rabble, toward such of the rest, as they seized, and carried away. But this is
nothing: to make us a Complete Sacrisice, we are to be Burnt too: a thing not
only threatened, in the Passion of the Tumult, but soberly intended; for they
have laid in their Materials for the work already: (a prodigious Quantity of
Fireballs in Paul's, and Gresham College) Briefly, We are designed for Fire,
and Sword, and Pillage: and it concerns us now, to look a little better to our
gracious Guards. (Not to insist upon the loss of Trade; how many thousand
Families have nothing now to do, but Beg, and Curse these wretches?) The Honor
and Safety of the City lies at stake: and God so bless us, as we'll fall
together. We will not live to see our Wives, and Daughters ravished: our Houses
Rifled, and our Children Beggars, that shall only live to Reproach their
cowardly Fathers: and all this done too by a People, which we can as easily
destroy, as mention: by a Party, so Barbarous, and so Inconsiderable together,
that, certainly, no creature can be mean enough, either to suffer the one, or
fear the other. In this Exigency of Affairs, we have found it both our Duty and
our Interests to Associate; and we desire a Blessing from Heaven upon us, no
otherwise, than as we do vigorously, and faithfully pursue what we here
Remonstrate.

First; We do engage our selves, in the presence of Almighty God, with our
lives and fortunes, to defend the Rights and Liberties of the City of LONDON;
and if any person that subscribes to this Engagement, shall be molested for so
doing; We will unanimously, and without delay, appear as one Man to his Rescue.

Next; we demand, that all such Troops and Companies, as do not properly belong
to the Guard of the City, nor receive Orders from the lawful Magistrates
thereof: -- that such Forces withdraw themselves from the Liberties, within 12.
hours after the Publication of This: upon pain of being deemed Conspirators,
and of being Proceeded against accordingly, (for to this extent, both of
Judgment, and Execution, is every Individual qualified in his own defense.)

We are next, to demand the Enlargement of our Fellow Citizens, which were
taken away by Force, and in a tumultuous manner, contrary to the known Laws of
the Place, and Nation.

This being performed, we shall acquiesce, in the Enjoyment of those Liberties,
which we will not lose but with our Lives. In Fine, to remove all Impediments
of the peace we desire: We do undertake, both as Men of Credit, and Justice;
that such of the Soldiers as will betake themselves to honester Employments,
shall receive their Arrears from the City, and such a further care of their
future well-being, as is suitable to the Necessitys of the One part, and the
Charity of the Other.

THis Paper was so well received, that it encouraged me to follow it with
Another, Entitled,

The Final Protest, and Sense of the City.
HAving diligently perused two Printed Papers, bearing date, the 14th. of this
instant December: The One, in form of a Proclamation concerning the summoning
of a Parliament: The Other as an Order of the Common Counsel, commanding the
City to acquiesce in expectation of That Parliament: We find therein contained,
matters, so contrary to the Honor of the Nation, and to the Freedom of the
City, that we stand obliged both as Englishmen, and as Citizens, to Protest
against the Impositions of the former, as Illegal, and the Concessions of the
Latter, as a direct Combination against us. These Two Papers are Seconded by a
Third: (for the Two are One, both in effect, and design,) and that is, a
Proclamation of Banishment, directing to the late Kings party, under the notion
of the Common Enemy: so that there is no love lost betwixt the Committee of
Safety, and the Common Council, when the General provides for the Peace of the
City, and the Mayor for the Safety of the Army; not to argue Acts of Oblivion,
and the violation of Public Faith in the case: that they Conditioned for
their Lives and Liberties, and Compounded for their Fortunes. This is not our
Concern, what they do suffer; but what we may, if we trust those, that Keep no
Faith with them: And that we will take a care of: When They are Gone, then We are
the Common Enemy; So are the Laws of God, and of the Nation, and such is every
Man that loves them. What this Malignant Party is, these People talk of, we
neither Know, nor Meddle; the Gentry it is we Live by, and by the Laws of
Gratitude, and Hospitality, we are bound to Protect them, and resolved to do
it, within our Walls, against any other Power, than that of the Known Law. The
short of the Design is This; a Danger is pretended to the City, from the late
Kings Party, and to prevent the mischief, the Kind Committee Banishes the
Gentlemen; with Order to the Mayor to make strict searches for Delinquents. Now
in pursuance of this precious Order, our Houses must be forced, and we
Disarmed, and then, our throats cut, to preserve the City. Let those that would
be Chronicled for Slaves, and Fools; submit to suffer this; and after that
Infamous Hour, may a Yellow Coat, and a Wooden Dagger, be the Badge and
Distinction of a Citizen. To conclude, We our selves are That City, so much the
Care and Cry of the Proclamation; and This is our Unanimous sense, and Resolve.
The Army proposes to Pillage, and Murder us, the Mayor, and his worthy
Advisers, Ireton, etc. -- are to hold our Hands, while They give the Blow; So,
that we are now to provide both against Force and Treason; having One Enemy
(...) in our Walls, and Another in our Counsels. But withal, we have our
Swords in our Hands, and our Brains in our Heads; and only to Strike the One,
and to Disbelieve the Other, is to Subdue, and Disappoint them Both.

We do therefore declare to the World, that we will by Violence oppose all
Violence whatsoever, which is not warranted by the Letter of the Established
Law: and that in pursuance of this Duty, both toward the Nation, and City, an
Insolent Soldier, and an Apostate Magistrate shall be to us as the same thing.
-- Not to Word it much further, as we will not be Baffled, by Affronts, so
neither will we be Fooled, by Flatieries. After the Loss of Trade and Liberty,
a vast expense of Blood, and Treasure; After many Injuries received, more
threatened, and none returned, We made a sober, and Regular Application, to the
Authority of the City, for Redress. This they Promised, and we Expected, till
at last, in stead of a Reparation for past Wrongs, or a Security against worse
to come; We are paid with an Expectation of a Parliament in January. This is a
Logique we understand not. It is in English, Lie still, till we cut your
Throats It would be well to commit the disposition of our Fortunes, co tho^
people, that are at this Instant designing an Execution upon our Persons; and
to requite those Worthies, that have already Robbed us of all we have Lost,
with the Offer of that little Rest they have Left. But this will not do our
Business; we will not have our Murderers, for our Judges: nor will we wait.
That Parliament they babble of so much, will scarce Vote up the City again out
of Ashes, nor all the Saints in that holy Assembly, bring the poor Cobbler into
the world again, that was Killed by order of his Brother Hewson. No, the Cheat
is too stale, and we are Determined to Redeem our selves; but with this
Caution, We do solemnly profess, that we will exercise all the Tenderness
which possibly the Case will bear: The Common Soldier is engaged rather out of
a Heedless, than Malicious Interest: We do therefore Protest, that such of
those as shall not evidence their Malice, by their Obstinacy, shall receive a
Fair Consideration: But, for such as Lead them, we do Resolve, not to allow
Quarter to any one of them, that draws his Sword in the Quarrel: And in order
to the Quicker, and Gentler Dispatch of the Business: We conclude with a Text,
Fight neither with Small nor Great, but with the King of Israel. And so God
give a Blessing to the Endeavors of all Honest Men.

It makes me blush to think how like Vanity, and Ostentation, this Appendix may
appear to any man that does not duly Consider the Occasion of Reprinting it.
The End.

