A DIALOGUE BETWEEN Sir R. L. Knight, AND T. O. D.

LONDON: Printed for Robert Waston, and are to be Sold by the Booksellers of
London. 1689.

A DIALOGUE.
Doctor O. HOld, Sir, why so fast? Should your Worship now be found scampering
again, and upon the Wing, (though not I hope for Holland) for all your
Pilloring of me, you may chance pass with some People for a Knight of the Post
too.


Sir R. Indeed Doctor you find me habited somewhat like a Man of Expedition,
but not, as you would maliciously insinuate, running away: I see you have none
of that distinguishing Faculty which has always attended my way of Writing:
Though I may look like one that is making a sort of Fashionable Retreat, and
have the Habitus of a Man in the Mode, yet I am not come to the Modality it
self, which is the very Actus that must denominate a man a Runaway.


Dr. O. So then, all this Rhetorical Circumlocution serves only to tell us, you
are only, what we call in our vulgar Tongue, Absconding.


Sir R. Truly I were, as they commonly call it, actually Absconded; but it was
my Fate to fare, as in the Business of your old Friend Sir Patience; when they
were hunting for one Knight, they stumbled in a Garret upon another, who gave
them the slip, left me in the lurch; and the greater Hypocrite of the Two had
the better luck; and so good night Sir Nicholas.


Dr. O. Why, methinks you might have taken warning by me too; I staid also a
little too long after the Tide was turned: Faelix quem faciunt, etc. was as
good a Lesson as ever you learnt on the Fiddle; and you know what followed,
Friend, from my Fool-hardiness; I was forced to follow the Cart for it; and
your fiddling Observators helped to lead me such a Dance, that you would be
loath to have such another to the same Tune.


Sir R. You had a little hard measure, I must confess, Doctor, and I were a
little too smart upon your misfortunes, when your Backside sufficiently
smarted; and when you were fast enough in the Pillory, I had so little
Conscience as to toss you from Pillar to Post in my Papers; but I hope, since
you have been so much Passive, and such a Gospeller, you have learnt somewhat
of that Christian Temper, the doing Good for Evil.


Dr. O. Why, Friend Roger, I must tell you t^^^ in Verbum Sacerdotis, if my
Passiveness would do thee any Good, I could suffer whipping once more to Tyburn
to see thee hanged.


Sir R. I must confess Dr. O. (for till now I could never call thee any thing
but plain Titus), I have been twice very near hanging: You remember when your
old Friend College had trussed me up in his Picture; but you know Towzer broke
the Rope, and left the Joyner to hang in his room: And I have not forgot when my
old Master Noll was like to have spoiled me for an Observator, but my Fiddle
brought me off, like Arion with his Harp, and so I weathered the Storm.


Dr. O. But there are some unlucky Sayings that may now spoil your Comfortable
Expectations; The Third Time is commonly fatal too; and the Pitcher that comes
often from the Well, may be broke at last.


Sir R. And so you think at last may my Neck too; but I hope better Times:
However, I must tell you, Titus, after all my Service to the King and
Government, and especially the Church of England, I am a little hardly used.


Dr. O. Hardly used, say you? Soft there, I pray, Hemp and Halter are hard
things, I confess; but yet they may be easily born with, for the Good of the
Public, for the Administration of Justice, and the giving every man his due.
But how comes the Church of England to be so much obliged to you? and the
Church of Rome not at all?


Sir R. Why truly, as I managed the matter, I writ for both Churches,
accordingly as they paid me, but still that of Rome I reserved to reap the
benefit of all that should be done or said for the good of any other; by the
Obligations of Honor and Gratitude I was retained to that Party; for though a
Counsel Learned in the Law, may allow himself to take Fees on both sides, yet
he is bound in Conscience to plead most strongly for that side which has feed
him most; and he that disciplined your Hide so to Tyburn, Titus, that Officer
of the Law being over-feed by the Adverse Party, did not spare you in the least
for all your Guineys that you gave.


Dr. O. So that, if I apprehend you a-right, there is some Honesty even in
playing the Knave; and that you had a constant Sallary for the Catholic Cause,
and but some poor Collections from the Church of England.


Sir R. Though you were once in my Opinion but a very bad Evidence, I see you
are very good at guessing: But for all this, though I designed to serve none
but the Popish Party, I had that jilting Trick to pretend with them too now and
then some Coyness, when I had a mind to screw up my Gallants to be more liberal.


Dr. O. Verily, Friend Roger, this looks like playing the Rogue, or picking
their Pockets, and instead of serving your King's Interest, it was only
cheating his Exchequer.


Sir R. I cared not for that, the most that could follow, was but being counted
a Knave by both sides, or being called so behind my back; and that will break
no Bones: And sure they will have more manners than to call a Man of Worship so to
his Face.


Dr. O. Why, this Worshipful Face of thine was never so graceful upon the
Sign-Post in Fleet Street, in any Print-shop or Coffee-house, as when it looks
through the Grates of Newgate: Nothing but a Gibbet can make it look with a
better Grace.


Sir R. Pray be not so severe, let us come to some Understanding; methinks that
Place and the King's Bench should have some Correspondence.


Dr. O. I scorn your Words, Sir, We keep there better Company than such
Observators; for that is only Latin for a Spy; and those, like the worst of
Villains, have never any Quarter given them any where.


Sir R. Come, come, bona verba precor; You don't know what Service I did you
when you were swearing up your Popish Plot: As I told you above, when the
Papists did not pay me well, I could leave them a little in the lurch. Don't
you remember a shrewd Book that would have baffled and burlesqu'd all your
Evidence in the very Bud, called the Compendium?


Dr. O. I, I, some Popish Rascal, as well as your self, had a mind, as he
thought, to run me down.


Sir. R. Hold there a little (but you are Scandalum Magnatum proof), it was
looked upon under the Rose, rather to come from some Popish Peer; a man of
Parts, and seemed to carry some weight with it; but I took care, for all he was
a Lord, because he had not consulted me in composing it, or let it all alone to
me and my Two Narratives; therefore, I say, I took care to get it suppressed;
besides, my pay was then behind, and my Pension not yet agreed on.


Dr. O. Yes, yes, Friend Roger, we know all that piece of Roguery of yours too:
Can you think such an Evidence as I was, can be ignorant of your Shams and
Devices; You informed against the Printer, got him prosecuted with the
Bookseller, and had the confidence to tell them afterward in Confession, that
it was only because they begun without your leave to ridicule the Popish Plot
too soon; that you had better Materials for that work ready cut out; but some
Encouragement was wanting, and then as soon as your mercinary Pen had
compounded for its Pension, you fall a Dialoguing and Observatoring it away,
with my Black Bills and Spanish Pilgrims, till you had spirited away (as you
thought) all my Plot.


Sir R. Prithee man, I believed more of that than you do imagine: But why may
not a man run down what he has Reason to believe, and what he is really
convinced of, when there is Ready Money going? Why, man, do not thee think I
believe the Apostles Creed? Yet I could have Observator'd that away for a good
Sum of Gold?


Dr. O. But why so dear? when their Master himself was sold for Thirty Pieces
of Silver?


Sir R. All things were cheaper in those days, and a Judas might then better
betray his God or Religion for those Thirty, than I can now for Five Hundred
Broad Pieces; I could not have kept my Coach upon it: But by the way, Titus, I
must tell thee, he was more Fool than Villain, for beating down the Market, and
doing such a desperate Jobb for so vile a Price; why that would have made me
hang my self too without Repentance.


Dr. O. Gad have mercy, Trusty Roger! I see Religion and the Observator shake
hands indeed; but it is to take leave of one another: Thy Precept is not,
Believe and be saved, but to Doubt, though thou art damned.


Sir R. Why, indeed, I have that Dexterity in Writing, that I can make the
World believe I am the only Great Grandson to Thomas a Didymus: Besides
Skepticism, even in Sacred Matters, is such a perfect Evidence in this Age, of
a man's being an Extraordinary Wit, such a Specimen of his Gentile Breeding and
Excellent Parts, that I might as well have walked abroad without my Sword,
after I was Knighted, as to be servilely bound to believe my Senses.


Dr. O. Indeed that Honor was bestowed in haste; but the Sun, you know,
indifferently shines on Dunghills* Yet some are of Opinion that your Dubbing
might have been better performed at Windsor, where there are many honester poor
Knights made out of decayed Old Gentlemen.


Sir R. Fie, fie, This is not fair: I Will tell you no more of Salamanca: Come,
come, You are a Doctor, and I a Knight.


Dr. O. Indeed you have done more Exercise for your Degree, than ever I did for
mine* but that is no matter.


Sir R. But do you not think, now after all, that I did very great Services to
your late King, and promoted, with my Excellent Papers, very much his coming to
the Crown?


Dr. O. Doubtless; and yet after all, some Honest Men are of Opinion, and ever
thought thee not so much to write for thy King as for thy Self for Bread, or
for those* Whores that would otherwise have brought thee to a morsel of it.
Ketch could as well have boasted of his Loyalty, when he was so well paid for
exercising my Hide, as the Observator for scourging the Dissenters only for his
Sallary.


Sir R. Oh! Oh! I see what you would be at; You would have had me acted like an
Honest Man, without Interest and Design: Gad, I was so far from that,
wherever I met with any Copies that came from such hands as seemed to have
nothing but Honesty for their Ends, and such as I was sure had no quarterly
payments with me and my Fellow Laborer, Johnson; (I don't mean thy
Fellow-Sufferer Julian, Titus, but his Namesake, and a Doctor of another
Faculty): Why then, though they were never so Learned, or what we called Loyal;
I first picked out the finest Paragraphs, and prettiest Periods, and then put
them into Observators, that were ready cut out for Contents: Tailors and
Fiddlers, you know, are allowed to be light fingered, and then why not
Observators too? Then I either kept the Papers and Writings, or else returned
them, after long keeping, as unseasonable; as I did by the Works of a worthy
Divine, and some others: For Faith, I having gotten into my Hands the whole
Monopoly of Observations, could no more suffer an Interloper, than the
Gentlemen of the East India Company; and I being Deputy Governor of all the
Province called Scribble, there was not a Tory Song, or Loyal Ballad, could
pass Muster without my leave.


Dr. O. Very likely: The poor Ballad singers had a very hard time of it, when
their Windpipe must be stopped, and the Wretches starved, unless they would first
spit in thy Mouth, or grease thy Fingers. I am informed, if it were a good
selling Ballad, you always went snacks for half. But how the Devil came the
Irish Ballad out?


Sir R. O Tempora! O Mores! The iniquity of the Times, Titus: This Liberty of
Conscience brought in Liberty of the Press again; and you know I never was for
any Liberty, but when I was in a Goal.


Dr. O. O! yes, Roger, for the Liberty of Scribbling, the Liberty of
Evil-speaking, the Liberty of Lying and Slandering, the Liberty of Whoring, or
any Christian Liberty, except Liberty of Conscience; and yet you would fain
have been nibbling at that Liberty too, in your Hocus Pocus Answer to the
Letter to the Dissenter: and by this thy confounded piece of Nonsense and
Contradiction, have quite baffled all thy Works that ever went before.


Sir R. IN Faith, now you have hit upon my Masterpiece: There were all Parties
concerned in that matchless, unparalleled, unimitable, incomprehensible Piece,
of Tergiversation, Calumniation, Equivocation, and Replication for Moderation.


Dr. O. Poo! this stuff is just of the same stamp with all that Nonsensical
Answer: Was there ever a Fellow that would set up for a Wit in a Coffee-house,
who did play the Fool so, as to write a Book that no body could tell what to
make of it? Like the Painter of the Sign-Posts, that was forced to put to his
Pictures, This is the Lion, This is the Bear, lest they should be taken for
Camels or Elephants: Why, had thou not put Answer in the Title Page, it might
have past for a Vindication.


Sir R. It Is all one to me: Pox, I could not answer it as it should be; but I
was obliged to say somewhat, Harry Care would have got away my Pension else,
for saying somewhat to the purpose, so I put upon my Masters the Papists, as
Workmen do when they are hired by the Whole, make slight work of it; besides, I
printed over the whole Letter (and that was as much as to say) let them answer
it that can for me: and there I was on the Protestants side again before I was
aware of it, for it spread the Letter all over the Kingdom, and was ten times
better than my License.


Dr. O. This indeed is excellent, Roger; and Roguery all over; if thee can
but cheat the Devil too, thy work is done: that Old Serpent is said to be full
of subtle Invention, and yet thy Distinguishing Faculty, thy playing Fast and
Loose, could almost revenge Mankind, and Beguile Him; it is said, there never
was but one word ever puzzel'd Him, and yet thy Answers, like his Oracles, are
as full of Amphibologies; thy Formal Quiddities, and Political Modalities are
indeed such nonsensical Nullities, that, in my conscience, the Devil himself
does not know what to make of them.


Sir R. So they said once of thy Plot too, Titus; but Time will show what I
have been.


Dr. O. The greatest Knave, I hope, that ever put Pen to Paper.


Sir R. Fie, fie, that is too broad a word for a Knight.


Dr. O. No, no, it was the old English word for it, and you have mightily
helped to restore it to its primitive signification.


Sir R. I must confess, Titus (as thy Friend Tom. Hunt has it in the Characters
he gives of thy Excellencies) I have been a little Incurious in what some men
call strict Honesty, and a little too Apert in my Prevarications; but I hope
that is not presently downright Knavery: I writ once a notable Piece against
Popery, but that did not take with the Court; then out comes my Book of
Toleration discust, and there I think I tickled off the Presbyterians, and laid
Liberty of Conscience, Scruple and Zeal, upon their backs as flat as a
Flounder; but as the Devil would have it, presently after out comes King
Charles his Indulgence, and then you know I was bound by my place to say
somewhat for that too; but as bad luck would have it again, soon after the
Parliament damned it, and then again my Cake was dough, so to work I went, and
Tantivy'd away the Toleration I had tickled up and down before. Then in came'st
thee, Titus, soon after, with thy Discoveries, which at first I was for
magnifying very much; for I had not received my Money, my Ready Rayno, for
running it down; so hesitating some time for the Title of my next Book, (for
you must know I have writ many a Book only for a Title sake, without
considering the subject) then I say, doubting whether I should make thy
Discovery, An Horrid Plot and Conspiracy of the Papists; or the History of
Titus and Tale of a Tub, out came the Geldt Man (for we must have a little
Dutch for these Times) and then I sell a Roguing of you, and you fell a
Rascalling of me: But I think I spoiled your Plot for you.


Dr. O. And I think, Roger, I made you run away for it too, as I remember.


Sir R. But when I returned again, you know best what work I made, I did you no
small mischief in the management of your Demetrius; made your Silver-smith,
Prance, pay you off in your own Coin; I managed his Retractation just as you
had done his Evidence; and as great a Maker of Shrines as he was for Diana's
Temple, I paid him off, I think, with the Brass Screws and Antipendiums. But
then, you know, I soon sanctified him again, when I had brought the poor
Penitent to Confession; and a little Pillory-penance, a better Expiation than
you put upon Pickering's Bum. But I did him some good offices for the durance
he underwent, and saved him from dancing the Courant you had led up but a
little before, since he was so civil and good natured as to depose upon Oath to
the Recantation I had ready, and make me famous for a Discoverer as well as
Observator.


Dr. O. He could never make thee worse than thou were before, Roger.


Sir R. You interrupt me now, Sir, as if you had me at the Old Baily, and none
to speak but the King's Evidence; I were giving you at large an History of the
Observator, all famous Authors write their own Lives, you know. After I had
thus Observator'd away a Volume or two for the Papists, and made the Churchmen
believe 'twas all for themselves, I got my Briefs to go about among the Clergy
for collecting their Eleemosynary Contributions; when I was thus farting full,
like Virgil's Harpys, I fell a squirting upon the Tables that fed me: I came to
my Modalities, my Court-Trimmers; from thence I advanced to my non Obstante,
Dernier Resort, Last Appeal; and were beforehand with the Judges in my
Suspending Power, Dispensing Power, Repealing Power; from my Richard against
Baxter, I came to Roger against L -- Str -- from my Dissenters Sayings, to my
Answer to a Letter to Dissenters; from Toleration Discust, to my taking away
Tests and Penal Laws, till these Dutch Devils came and cast me into this
Dungeon; but I see I must say somewhat for them too.


Dr. O. But it seems you have nothing to say for dealing thus Ungratefully with
the Reverend the Clergy, that so charitably supplied your Necessities.


Sir R. No matter for that, I had gratified them beforehand, my Politics
helped many of them to most excellent Notions in Divinity: You may talk of their
Metropolitans and Diocesans, I Gad! I was always The Guide of the Inferior
Clergy, I taught them at first the famed Passive Obedience and Non-Resistance
against Higher Powers, till the Reverend Gentlemen ran it up so high, that at
last, Gadsookers, we could get no one to make any Resistance at all for the
King: They went, I say, beyond the Copy I set them: Their Obedience was at last
too Passive, and we could not get them to exercise a little Active Valor for
their destruction, against those that came to preserve them.


Dr. O. Could any Confidence but Thine set up thus for a Dictator to such a
Learned Body, and defame the most Eminent of the London-Clergy, by pretending
to instruct them, only because some young Deacons would come to edify at the
delivery of thy Oracles over a dish of Coffee; and yet you find after all your
Knavery, you could infatuate but few of them to be such Fools, as to believe
all that was said in an Observator.


Sir R. I foresaw that too, and so was beforehand with them; I found, for all
their being posted for Papists in your Courantiers, Intelligences, Packets, and
the like, what would follow; I had a better Nose than your Cares and Curtises,
and knew, when it came to pinch, they would show themselves the stoutest
Opposers of Popery; and that it was to no purpose for me to think of wheadling
them into downright Converts: and therefore notwithstanding their kind
Collections, I gave them now and then some sharp Touches; I told them plainly,
I found even in my Church of England many Trimmers and Tekelites; That the
Court was full of them, who crossed my interest, and would have stopped my Pay;
then I singl'd out some of them, and Observator'd them to the purpose; and,
like a Deer that I had wounded, would not let them herd again with the Church.


Dr. O. Prithee with what countenance, but thy own, could thee offer, Roger,
to abuse so many Persons of more Quality, Honesty, and Loyalty than thy self?


Sir R. Why, Man? What do thee talk of Quality and Loyalty? I neither spared
the Loyal Parliament it self, that kept your Late King out of Monmouth's
Clutches; for thou know, Titus, they hung an Arse afterward, when it was
come to Qualify all Papists by an Act of Parliament; but you know I was for
it, with my Brother Member and Amaneunsis, both you know of B -- d H -- d's
making, and we were bound to do somewhat for our Benefactor; but though I could
not speak so much in the House, having not that gift of Tongues, I made it up
the next day in Observators, and there you would be sure to have my Speeches
and Answers of Parliament; insomuch, that, when a certain bold Gentleman (whom
perhaps an ordinary Capacity may respect and esteem, as of a noble Family, an
ingenuous Person and excellent Lawyer) did but venture to pass a little
Reflection upon me in the House of Commons, I answered him the next day in my
News-Book; and there I think I met with his Membership for all the Privilege
of Parliament: but I had my revenge at last, for I never left him till from a
Court-Trimmer, as he was, and for speaking against me, he was helped from
soliciting any more for the King*


Dr. O. Thy Answers and Orations in Parliament, Roger, I perceive were all like
that of Mr. Chaloner's, which was called A Speech without Doors; but did it not
deserve the Bar for abusing your Members out of door, for what they said in it?


Sir R. Look you now! a man cannot talk of his Prowess, but you must be
plucking down his Plumes with Bars and Imprisonments: I think they ought to
have spewed me out also; but I fear no Bar now but that of the Old Baily.
Prithee let me go on with my Narrative of my self; by those two I gave you of
your Plot, you may perceive I am as good at Narrative as you are: You see how I
served my Churchmen with a bit and a knock, that they hardly saw who hurted
them; and you know how I had har'd the Dissenters, till I had almost hunted
them into the Church, and when some grave and moderate Divines, by their
Mediation, had brought them quite in, and many began to come to Common Prayer:
This was like to make an Union among Protestants, and gain our Church of
England many Proselytes and much Reputation.


Dr. O. But I dare swear you were for none of such Converts.


Sir R. No, you may be sure of it: and so to work I went to spirit them out
again: I laid my self up a whole week from greater Concerns, to prove, That for
all they came to Confession, though they conformed to all the Ceremony of the
Liturgy, Responces, Postures, and received the very Sacraments in the Form the
Church requires, all this signified nothing, they longed still for the
Fleshpots of Egypt; their hearts were not with us, and therefore must be
against us. They Trimmed only with God Almighty, and so I put this Hook into
their Nostrils, and returned them to the place from whence they came; I
prosecuted them into the Church, and then persecuted them out again; that the
Church might not be the better for them, nor they the better for the Church.


Dr. O. But I think You were once about showing the Dissenters a scurvy Trick,
and worse than all the rest; and that was about Sir Edmondbury's business, only
some unlucky Circumstances would not let it hang together.


Sir R. I says, I had feagu'd them else; I had certainly made Him their Martyr
indeed, that is, I mean, Martyred by them. My two Books would have bid fair for
that too; for when my hand is in, I can prove any thing: but for some certain
Reasons I found Felo de se, and the killing of himself, to be the better way.
He fell upon his Sword, it is certain, and that upon Primrose-Hill, I say: which
I Have made out so plain in my two Treatises, on that Subject, that you may as
well disbelieve the Bible, or think Saul never fell so on Mount Gilboa.


Dr. O. But there was a plaguey Observation that a certain Surgeon made
against this, which seems to have some weight with it: When persons do destroy
themselves, fall voluntarily on their Swords; when they are thus run through,
the Orifice in the Back from the bent and position of the body, must be higher
than that before in the Breast; whereas the quite contrary appeared here, and
the Orifice behind, where the Sword came out, was lower than that before where
the Sword went in. But besides, Mr. Observator, if violent presumptions may
take place, and, which a great Lawyer called a plain Proof, Mr. Sp -- 's being
plucked in at the same Watergate only for resembling so much Sir Edm. and his
hearing Hill bidding them to let him go, and that they had mistook the Man;
this seems not so ridiculous a Connection as an Observator may be ready to make
it.


Sir R. All this I value not a rush: what is Spence to Godfrey? They are two
different Names, they were two different persons, and perhaps the one is alive,
and I am sure the other is dead.


Dr. O. But are not these a sort of Arguments which you use to call Trifling,
and Ribaldry?


Sir R. I, and so they are in any body but the Observator: pray have not I,
that have the Licensing of the Press, leave to call things as I please, and
make them what I please too? There were indeed two or three plaguey Affidavits
taken by Justice Dolb -- n about the business, of persons that saw this
unfortunate Gentleman parlying with some certain Fellows the same night at the
same Watergate, when and where he was sworn to be destroyed; and whatever was
the profligate Life of the Witness (whom you know I set forth with a Witness
too) some credulous men may think Bedloe might be believed on his Deathbed,
and his Testimony then taken by the Lord Chief Justice, and published under his
own Hand; These (I say) are mighty Matters with men of ordinary Capacities; but
what is all this to such a man of Wit and Parts as my self to confute? Why
prithee, had they not been things Unanswerable, it had been below my Pen to
give an Answer to them. You know it is one of my old Maxims, That Nothing but
Print can answer Print; so that if Judges take Affidavits and Trials, and the
like, and Print them; and the Parliament their Journals and Votes, and put them
into Print; I say, My Print is as good as Their Print, and I make no more to
put them all in an Observator, than I would a Spaniel Dog, or a stolen Horse in
an Advertisement.


Dr. O. Yes, yes, I remember when it was come to that, that honest Gentlemen
were posted up by your pestilent Papers, like so many Dogs and Horses; only a
man might be Observator'd cheaper than They Gazetted: Even Porters and Carmen,
instead of boxing it out, could threaten one another with an Observator.


Sir R. Why, you know an Old Saying, Better play at small Game than fit out:
And when I had drawn the General History of your Plot and Conspiracy quite dry;
then I came to my Minutes and Particulars; and every day my Mercuries and
Mirmidons brought me in a new Man, and more Matter.


Dr. O. THE OFFICE OF INTELLIGENCE for Lying and Slandering, should have been
writ in Capitals over they very Door. How many honester men have been Carted by
it to Tyburn, only for picking a Pocket, while you sat with Authority to rob
People of their Reputation that was dearer than Life? But what think you now,
Roger, of my Plot and Conspiracy you say you had drawn so to the Dreggs? I
think it begins to work again, and ferment a little upon the Lees: My Consult
at the White Horse Tavern, will appear now no Tale of a Tub.


Sir R. Prithee Titus, don't tell me that; why I tap't it so low, you may
remember, till it would run no longer.


Dr. O. But the Master of the House has broached a new Pipe not long since.
What do thee think, Roger, of the late Petition of the Vintner that drew then
the Reverend Fathers their Wine, representing, To the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, the great Service he had done him, in concealing and harboring in his
House the Jesuits, under all their Consultations, to the hazard of his Life,
and loss of his Trade; desiring humbly some Consideration, or some Office in
the Custom-house; and this notable Petition ordered to be referred to some
Persons you know, to consider of some Recompense for his Fidelity -- This
Instrument; for we will not call it Evidence, lest you should make it Perjury,
may be produced as occasion shall serve.


Sir R. Fie, this is not fair; now you come in with new matter, when I can
write no longer: You know the Late Rules of Court, There was never to be any
more speaking after the King's Council had summed up what they had to say,
though it was to save a man's Life. But you may talk of introducing Popery by
Plots and Secret Consults; I had a better way than all that: I undertook to
persuade the King to make it a Case of Conscience, to promote his Religion, and
declare openly, we must all be of it; for this purpose, you know, I spent
several Observators upon the Theologo-political Casuistical Thesis and Opinion,
That every Supreme Magistrate and Prince was bound in Conscience to answer to
God for the Religion of all his Subjects, and make them to conform to that
which he thought best.


Dr. O. But what if the Turk, by the help of the Most Christian, had overrun
all Christendom, and not met with that unlucky Rub at Vienna: Must he not have
been bound in Conscience too, to have made us all Mahometans?


Sir R. No matter for that: My Reasons will be Reasons still; and all the
Sayings of the Observator are like some Propositions in the Schools, Aeternae
Veritatis, and that in spite of Turk, Jew, Pope or Antichrist.


Dr. O. I think by this time we have had a fine and fair History of thy Life
and Conversation; and (but that I don't care for the word) I could call it a
Compendium of the Observator, or call it Compendium, or Antipendium, or what
you will; or what is more usual with us Evidence, A Narrative: In my Conscience
it is all a true Story. But we King's Witnesses are better acquainted with the
Nature of Testimony than some Justices that take it: You have told us the
Truth, and nothing but the Truth; but you have not told us the Whole Truth:
After all thy pumping for Evidence, to Dog that unhappy Gentleman out of his
Reputation, after he had been so barbarously Dogged out of his Life; after thy
Two Books for the making Sir Edmondbury but a Felo de se, did thee never say
or think thy self, Roger, that he was made away by Papists?


Sir R. Whatever I thought, I am sure I had more Wit than to say so.


Dr. O. Then once more upon my Verbum Sacerdotis; or what is more solemn, upon
my reassuming my Priesthood, and redintegrating my self again into my Canonical
Habit, which you would have divested me of, in spite of my Indelible
Character; By this good Delivery I have found, and by that Jail-delivery thee
do fear, I can prove this upon thee, and all that has been here offered, as
plain as Coleman's Letters, from thy Words and from thy Works, to thy Face at
Noonday (since you say, I cannot remember Faces so well by Candlelight): I
have some of thy Writings to show for it, besides a Letter under thy scrawling
Hand, to a Gentleman in the City, desiring him to lend you some assistance in
discovering this Barbarous Murder, which, say you, I am satisfied was committed
by some zealous and bloody Papists.


Sir R. Oddssookers! Hold thy Tongue; thou will spoil else Two of the best
Books I ever put out for the Government.


Dr. O. But do not the Brothers and Relations of that miserable Gentleman you
have so defamed for the worst of Felons, a Murderer of himself, stand bound by
the Ties of Blood, to pursue thee for thus Tainting of Theirs, as well as
arraigning all the Justice of the Nation, the Proceedings of Parliament that
were upon it, the Solemn and Judicial Process, Judgments and Executions that
followed in the Inferior Courts of Judicature.


Sir R. I can hold now no longer in good Language; I see, Titus, thou art still
the same malicious, lying, swearing Villain, and would hang me, if thou
could.


Dr. O. I am as good at that sort of Language as you are; and now no more Sir
Knight, but, Sirrah, you are a Rascal, and I shall live to see thee hanged
without my swearing: And when all Honest Men are rid of such a Knave, Then thus
I Will write thy Epitaph, and piss upon thy Grave.


The Epitaph.
M. S.
CAVE VIATOR!
His Mortuus mordet, Observator inclytus, Telescopus Astrologus Politicas suas
scripsit Ephemerides: Circulator Egregius Qui Crambe sua repetita Epycyclos,
Activitatis suae Sphaeram! Regibus Fides Hoc solum habuit Primum Mobile
Intelligentiam Angelicum illud, Aurum! Operam spectas Dictitator dogmaticus
Scriptitator perpetuus Observator sibi Contradictorius. Ecclesia Quam Vere
Catholicus; Omni, and Nulla, been Meritus: ROGERUS, Dissentiente suo cum
BAXTERUS, and LE'STRANGIO; Ultra quod Carmina possunt Annos, Libros. Virum
Integrum, haud Integerrimum; Non ultra est quod Quaera: operibus; Bissextiles

FINIS.

